CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES.
2018 MOHPPAKS3.18(6U)
MANAGEMENT OF
ATOPIC ECZEMA
Management of Atopic Eczema
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-29-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.dermatology.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Atopic Eczema
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2018 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2022) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Atopic Eczema
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations,
i
Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iii
Development Group
v
Review Committee
vi
External Reviewers
vii
Algorithm 1. Management of Atopic Eczema in
Primary Care
viii
Algorithm 2. Treatment of Atopic Eczema
ix
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
DIAGNOSIS
3
2.1 Diagnostic criteria
3
2.2 Supportive investigations
3
3.
SEVERITY ASSESSMENT
4
4.
CO-MORBIDITIES
4
5.
AGGRAVATING/TRIGGERING FACTORS
7
5.1 Aeroallergen
7
5.2 Physical Irritants
7
5.3 Environmental Factors
7
5.4 Food
8
5.5 Microbial Colonisation/Infection
8
5.6 Patient Factors
8
6.
TOPICAL THERAPY
9
6.1 Emollient/Moisturiser
9
6.2 Topical Corticosteroids
11
6.3 Topical Calcineurin Inhibitors
13
6.4 Wet Wrap Therapy
14
6.5 Other Topical Therapy
15
7.
PHOTOTHERAPY
Management of Atopic Eczema
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
SYSTEMIC THERAPY
17
8.1 Antihistamines
17
8.2 Immunomodulating Agents
17
8.3 Biologics
20
8.4 Other Systemic Agents
22
9.
ANTIMICROBIALS
23
9.1 Topical Antibiotics Combined with Corticosteroids
23
9.2 Systemic Antibiotics
23
9.3 Sodium Hypochlorite 0.005% (Bleach Bath)
23
9.4 Other Antiseptics
24
10.
SPECIFIC ALLERGEN IMMUNOTHERAPY
25
11.
NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
26
11.1 Bathing Practices
26
11.2 Dietary Interventions
26
11.3 Educational and Psychological Interventions
28
12.
TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
30
12.1 Herbal and Food Supplementation
30
12.2 Topical Oils and Massage Therapy
31
12.3 Acupuncture
31
12.4 Balneotherapy
31
12.5 Homeopathy
32
13.
REFERRAL
33
14.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
34
14.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
34
14.2 Potential Resource Implications
34
14.
REFERENCES
35
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
40
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
41
Appendix 3 Guidelines for the Diagnosis of
43
Atopic Dermatitis (Hanifin and Rajka
Criteria)
Appendix 4 Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA)
44
Appendix 5 Dermatology Life Quality Index
45
Appendix 6 Children Dernatology Life Quality Index
46
Appendix 7 Topical Corticosteroids Class & Potency
47
(UK Classification)
Management of Atopic Eczema
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Appendix 8 Fingertip Unit
48
Appendix 9 Six Steps of Wet Wrap Therapy
49
Appendix 10 Written Eczema Action Plan
50
Appendix 11 Recommended Medication Dosing,
51
Side Effects and Contraindications for
Commonly Used Medications in
Atopic Eczema
List of Abbreviations
56
Acknowledgement
57
Disclosure Statement
57
Source of Funding
Management of Atopic Eczema
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Atopic Eczema
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
• Serum immunoglobulin E levels, skin prick test, patch test and skin
biopsy, should not be used as diagnostic tools for atopic eczema.
• Assessment of disease severity and quality of life should be used in
the management of atopic eczema.
• Emollient therapy is the mainstay of management at any stage of
atopic eczema.
• Topical corticosteroids (TCS) should be used to treat flares in atopic
eczema (AE).
• The choice of TCS in AE depends on the:
 age of the patient
 location of skin lesions
 severity of skin inflammation
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors may be considered for atopic eczema
patients aged two years and above.
• Ultraviolet A1 may be used to control acute flares in atopic eczema
(AE).
• Narrow-band ultraviolet B may be offered in moderate to severe
chronic AE.
• Systemic corticosteroids may be considered for short-term control of
severe acute exacerbation of atopic eczema (AE).
• Azathioprine, cyclosporin A, methotrexate or mycophenolate may
be used in the treatment of severe AE after optimisation of topical
treatment.
• Educational interventions should be considered as part of the
management of atopic eczema.
Management of Atopic Eczema
iii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry
of Education. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary
Review Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the electronic
databases, mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database of Systemic
Reviews, and others e.g. Pubmed and Guidelines International Network
(refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The search
was limited to literature published in the last ten years, on humans and
in English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts
in the field were also contacted to identify further studies. All searches
were conducted from 22 September 2015 to 20 Jun 2017. Literature
searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG
development process allowing any relevant papers published before
31 December 2017 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider
evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of the search
strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on atopic eczema e.g.:
• Management of atopic eczema in primary care (Scottish Intercollegiate
Guidelines Network, 2011)
• Atopic eczema in children: management of atopic eczema in children
from birth up to the age of 12 years (National Collaborating Centre
for Women’s and Children’s Health, 2007)
• Guidelines of care for atopic dermatitis (Journal of American
Academy of Dermatology, 2014)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 13 clinical questions were developed under different sections.
Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within these
sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 19 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG is based largely
Management of Atopic Eczema
on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials,
with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/ index.php/pages/view/117).
Management of Atopic Eczema
v
OBJECTIVES
To provide evidence-based recommendations in the management of
atopic eczema on the following aspects:
• diagnosis and severity assessment
• treatment
• referral
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• All patients with atopic eczema
Exclusion Criteria
• Other types of endogenous and exogenous eczema
• Congenital syndromic disorders
• Immunodeficiency disorders
• Inborn errors of metabolism
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of atopic eczema at any healthcare level including:
i. Doctors
ii. Allied health professionals
iii. Trainees and medical students
iv. Patients and their advocates
v. Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
Management of Atopic Eczema
vi
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Noor Zalmy Azizan
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Ainol Haniza Kherul Anuwar
Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Putrajaya
Dr. Azura Mohd Affandi
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ch’ng Chin Chwen
Senior Lecturer & Dermatologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Dawn Ambrose
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Heah Sheau Szu
Paediatric Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Khor Yek Huan
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Lalitha Pillay B. Gopinathan
Paediatrician
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Mr. Leow Wooi Leong
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Putrajaya
Dr. Sabeera Begum
Consultant Paediatric Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Siti Mariam Tukimin
Dietitian
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Siti Shafiatun Mohsin
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Tan Wooi Chiang
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Tarita Taib
Lecturer & Consultant Dermatologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Teknologi Mara, Selangor
Dr. Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Zaridah Zainuri
Dietitian
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Atopic Eczema
vii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Datin Dr. Asmah Johar
Senior Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members
Associate Professor Dr. Adawiyah Jamil
Consultant Dermatologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Chang Choong Chor
Consultant Dermatologist
CC Chang Skin Specialist, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Nor Hasni Haron
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Pharmaceutical Services Programme, Ministry of Health
Associate Professor Dr. Hazreen Abdul Majid
Senior Consultant Dietitian
Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Henry Foong Boon Bee
Senior Consultant Dermatologist
Foong Skin Specialist Clinic, Perak
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Leong Kin Fon
Consultant Paediatric Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Vickneswary Ayadurai
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Taman Medan, Selangor
Management of Atopic Eczema
viii
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Fauziah Ab. Ghani
General Practitioner
Klinik Dr. Fauziah, Selangor
Ms. Kamarunnesa Mokhtar Ahmad
Chief Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Lee Kam Pong
Family Physician
Chye Clinic, Kuala Lumpur
Adjunct Associate Professor Dr. Mark Koh Jean Aan
Head & Senior Consultant, Dermatology Service
KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore
Dr. Rataporn Ungpakorn
Consultant Dermatologist
Bumrungard International Hospital, Thailand
Dr. Srie Prihianti Gondokaryono
Head of Indonesian Paediatric Dermatology Study Group
Indonesian Society of Dermatology and Venereology, Indonesia
Datin Dr. Zil Falillah Mohd Said
National Head of Service & Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Al-Muktafi Billah Shah, Terengganu
Management of Atopic Eczema
ix
ALGORITHM 1. MANAGEMENT OF ATOPIC ECZEMA
IN PRIMARY CARE
Investigator’s Global Assessment
IGA
: Investigators’ Global Assessment
QoL
: Quality of life
DLQI : Dermatology Life Quality Index
CDLQI: Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index
SEVERITY ASSESSMENT
CLEAR TO MILD
IGA score: 0 to 2
ATOPIC ECZEMA PATIENT PRESENTING TO
PRIMARY CARE
MODERATE
IGA score: 3
SEVERE TO VERY SEVERE
IGA score: 4 to 5
REFER
DERMATOLOGY
SERVICE
DLQI/CDLQI >10
DLQI/CDLQI ≤10
NO
YES
TREATMENT
Refer Algorithm 2
RESPONSE
QoL
CONTINUE
TREATMENT
Score
Description
0 = Clear
1 = Almost clear
2 = Mild disease
3 = Moderate disease
4 = Severe disease
5 = Very severe disease
No inflammatory signs of atopic eczema
Just perceptible erythema, and just perceptible
papulation/infiltration
Mild erythema, and mild papulation/infiltration
Moderate erythema, and moderate papulation/infiltration
Severe erythema, and severe papulation/infiltration
Severe erythema, and severe papulation/infiltration with
oozing/crusting
Management of Atopic Eczema
x
ALGORITHM 2. TREATMENT OF ATOPIC ECZEMA
Step 4
Step 3
Step 1
Step 2
Improvement of AE
Worsening of AE
• TCS (moderate to very
potent) or TCI
• Wet wrap therapy
• Phototherapy
• Systemic therapy:
o Oral corticosteroids
(short-term)
o Azathioprine
o Cyclosporin A
o Methotrexate
o Mycophenolate mofetil
• TCS (moderate)
or TCI
• Wet wrap
therapy
• Phototherapy
• TCS (mild) or
TCI
• Skin care
o Emollients
o Bathing practices
• Educational intervention
• Identification and management of aggravating factors
4 to 5
Severe to
Very severe
3
Moderate
2
Mild
0 to 1
Clear to
Almost clear
IGA score:
Severity:
Adjunct therapy:
• Topical/oral antibiotics/antiviral/antifungal
for bacterial, viral or fungal infections
• Oral sedating antihistamines for sleep
disturbance
• Topical antiseptics to reduce
Staphylococcus aureus colonisation
• Psychological intervention
IGA: Investigators’ Global Assessment; TCS: Topical corticosteroids; TCI: Topical calcineurin inhibitors
Management of Atopic Eczema
Management of Atopic Eczema
1. INTRODUCTION
Atopic eczema (AE) or atopic dermatitis is a complex, chronic and
recurrent inflammatory itchy skin disorder. This is the commonest type
of endogenous eczema. In majority of cases, AE starts to develop in
early childhood and may persist into adulthood. The prevalence of AE
can be as high as 20% in some countries and this continues to rise
affecting not only developed but also developing low-income countries.
According to International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood
(ISAAC), the 12-month prevalence of AE among Malaysian children
has risen from 9.5% in ISAAC-1 (1994 - 1995) to 12.6% in ISAAC-3
(2002 - 2003), with an increase of 0.49% yearly.1 AE can present with
various clinical manifestations according to different age groups. This
makes the diagnosis of AE a challenge, leading to misdiagnosis and
mistreatment. AE significantly impacts the financial and psychosocial
well-being of the patients and families. The direct healthcare cost
for a child with AE in developing countries (Malaysia, Indonesia
and Philippines) has been estimated to range from USD199 to
USD743.2 The psychosocial impact on the children with AE and their
families is as great as children with diabetes. Therefore, it is paramount
to have an effective and safe treatment of AE.3
AE is typically an episodic disease of flares and remission. However,
it may be continuous in some patients. A multicentre allergy study
done in Germany, involving 1314 children from birth to seven years
old, showed 43.2% of cases went into complete remission by three
years of age, 38.3% had an intermittent pattern of disease and
18.7% had symptoms of AE every year.4 The disease is caused by
complex interactions of genetic predispositions, environmental triggers
and immune dysregulation leading to epidermal barrier defect. The
defect in epidermal barrier may be caused by genetic alterations in
the filaggrin gene. Based on a study done in Singapore, 20.2% of AE
patients cohort carried at least one filaggrin-null mutation compared
with 7.3% of the control population.5 Besides genetic determination,
the epidermal barrier function also depends on the immune system. It
has been demonstrated that T-helper 2 cytokines such as interleukin-4
inhibit the expression of filaggrin and S100 proteins and thus impair
the epidermal barrier. Mechanical (e.g. scratching) or physical (e.g.
hot water, ultraviolet exposure, sweating) irritation further weakens
the epidermal barrier. With the breakdown of skin barrier, affected skin
is more susceptible to trigger factors including irritants and allergens,
which can further aggravate AE.6
Clinically, AE has both acute and chronic presentations. Acute eczema
is characterised by papulo-vesicular eruption with erythema, weeping,
oedema and excoriation. Whereas chronic eczema is characterised by
Management of Atopic Eczema
lichenification and dry skin (xerosis). The choice of treatment depends
on the clinical presentation of AE.
The aim of this CPG is to provide an evidence-based guidance for all
physicians and other healthcare providers in the management of AE.
Management of Atopic Eczema
2. DIAGNOSIS
2.1 Diagnostic Criteria
AE is diagnosed clinically. In a systematic review, the most extensively
validated diagnostic tools were ‘U.K. Working Party’s Diagnostic Criteria’
(refer to yellow box below) and ‘Hanifin and Rajka Diagnostic Criteria’
(refer to Appendix 3). The former had a sensitivity and specificity as
high as 100% and 99% respectively. While the later had a sensitivity
and specificity of 96% and 93.8% respectively.7, level Ill
In the local setting, the most commonly used diagnostic tool is U.K.
Working Party’s Diagnostic Criteria.
• The U.K. Working Party’s Diagnostic Criteria for Atopic
Dermatitis:8, level III
Patient must have an itchy skin condition (or parental report of
scratching or rubbing in a child) plus three or more of the following:
○ history of involvement of the skin creases such as folds of elbows,
behind the knees, fronts of ankles or around the neck (including
cheeks in children under 10 years old)
○ a personal history of asthma or hay fever (or history of atopic
disease in a first-degree relative in children under four years old)
○ a history of a general dry skin in the last year
○ visible flexural eczema (or eczema involving the cheeks/forehead
and outer limbs in children under four years old)
○ onset under the age of two (not used if child is under four years old)
2.2 Investigations
There is no specific laboratory investigation to confirm the diagnosis
of AE. A systematic review found lack of evidence to suggest the
use of specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) in supporting the diagnosis
of AE.9, level III Skin prick test and patch test are only useful to exclude
concomitant environmental and food allergies, and contact dermatitis
respectively. Skin biopsy is sometimes used to exclude other AE
mimickers.
Recommendation 1
• Serum immunoglobulin E levels, skin prick test, patch test and skin
biopsy, should not be used as diagnostic tools for AE.
Management of Atopic Eczema
3.
SEVERITY ASSESSMENT
There are numerous tools used to assess and score disease severity of AE.
A systematic review of 382 randomised control trials (RCTs) showed
the commonly used tools in descending order were:10, level I
• SCORing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD)
• Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI)
• Investigators’ Global Assessment (IGA)
• Six Area, Six Signs Atopic Dermatitis (SASSAD)
• Others [e.g. Patient-Orientated Eczema Measure (POEM)]
Scoring tools most extensively validated are SCORAD, EASI, SASSAD
and POEM11, level III Patient-oriented SCORAD (PO-SCORAD) is a
simplified version of SCORAD. It correlates well with SCORAD index
and POEM (r≥0.70).12, level II-2
The above-mentioned scoring tools are mainly used for research
purposes. For clinical purposes, the CPG development group advocates
the use of IGA to assess severity of AE (refer to Appendix 4).
Quality of Life (QoL) assessment is important in the management of
AE. The most commonly validated tools used are:10, level I
• Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) (refer to Appendix 5)
• Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index (CDLQI) (refer to
Appendix 6)
• Infant’s Dermatology Quality of Life Index (IDQOL)
• Dermatitis Family Impact (DFI).
Recommendation 2
• Assessment of disease severity and quality of life should be used in
the management of atopic eczema. The preferred tools are:
○ Investigator’s Global Assessment
○ Dermatology Life Quality Index/Children’s Dermatology Life
Quality Index
Management of Atopic Eczema
4.
CO-MORBIDITIES
The impact of AE often extends beyond the skin. Several co-morbidities
are found to be associated with AE.
4.1 Skin Infection
Eczematous skin is prone to secondary infection. A population-based
study of school children in Japan confirmed that children with AE had an
increased risk of developing impetigo. The risk due to staphylococcal
and streptococcal infection among them was 1.80 (95% CI 1.16 to 2.80)
compared with non-AE children. There was no association between
AE and molluscum or herpes infections.13, level III However, eczema
herpeticum should be suspected in patients with rapidly deteriorating
AE.14
4.2 Atopy
On average, one in three children with AE develop asthma at six years
and older.15, level II-2 There is an association with allergic rhinitis
(OR=3.4, 95% CI 1.3 to 9.0) especially in the early-onset persistent AE
patients.16, level II-2
4.3 Contact Dermatitis
In daily clinical practice, AE patients are observed to be susceptible
to develop contact dermatitis.17, level II-2 However, a recent metaanalysis showed no significant correlation between AE and contact
sensitisation.18, level I
4.4 Food Allergy
AE is also associated with food allergy (OR=13.4, 95% CI 2.9 to
61.4) especially in the early-onset persistent AE patients.16, level II-2 In
a systematic review of low quality on the association of AE and food
allergy in adolescence and adults, the prevalence of allergy to wheat
was only 4.5%, egg 6.1% and cow’s milk 0.6%.19, level II-2 Unpublished
local data on food sensitisation in children with AE showed similar
findings on egg, cow’s milk and peanut.20, level I
4.5 Cardiovascular Disease
A chronic inflammatory disease like AE is associated with cardiovascular
disease. There are modest associations between severe AE and angina
pectoris (RR=1.17, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.23), hypertension (RR=1.04,
95% CI 1.02 to 1.06) and peripheral arterial disease (RR=1.15, 95%
CI 1.11 to 1.19) but no association with myocardial infarction and
Management of Atopic Eczema
stroke.21, level II-2 There is also an increased risk of AE among the
overweight (OR=1.27, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.36) and obese (OR=1.42,
95% CI 1.34 to 1.50) compared with normal weight adults and
children.22, level III
4.6 Psychological and Psychosocial Dysfunction
Children with AE may demonstrate psychological and psychosocial
dysfunction. There is independent association between AE and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (OR=1.47, 95% CI 1.01 to
2.15). Prevalence of schizophrenia and affective disorders are also
higher in AE compared with control (1.2% vs 0.5% and 7.7% vs 4.5%
respectively).23, level II-2
Prevalence of AE is increased with exposure to active and passive
smoking. However, it is not associated with maternal smoking during
pregnancy.24, level II-2
• Co-morbidities e.g. skin infection, atopic disease, food allergy,
cardiovascular disease, psychological and psychosocial dysfunction
may co-exist in AE.
Management of Atopic Eczema
5.
AGGRAVATING/TRIGGERING FACTORS
There are many potential aggravating factors which can worsen flares
in AE, either independently or in combination. Potential aggravating/
triggering factors include the following:
• aeroallergen
• physical irritants
• environmental factors
• food
• microbial colonisation/infection
• patient factors (e.g. pregnancy)
5.1 Aeroallergen
House dust worsens itch in AE.25, level III
Severity of skin symptoms is associated with indoor house dust mites
levels (p<0.05).26, level III The association of HDM sensitisation and AE
severity is inconclusive.26 - 27, level III
Grass pollen does not worsen itch in AE.25, level III
Unfamiliar pets (not own pets) worsen itch in AE.25, level III
5.2 Physical Irritants
Nylon or wool clothing worsens itch in AE.25, level III
Irritants such as soaps, detergents, disinfectants and many chemical
reagents may worsen flares in AE. Chemicals (e.g. shampoo exposure)
and natural irritants (e.g. sweat) worsen itch.25, level III
5.3 Environmental Factors
Environmental factors such as climate and air pollution (indoor and
outdoor) can trigger AE.
Warm and high sun exposures are associated with poorly controlled
disease. There is no association with humidity.28, level III
There is an increased mean daily AE symptoms after moving into a
newly painted building with natural ventilation (p<0.001).29, level III
Outdoor air pollution is significantly associated with AE symptoms
(p<0.05).30, level II-2
Management of Atopic Eczema
5.4 Food
The influence of food allergy on the clinical course of AE remains
unclear.31 On the other hand, a diagnosis of food allergy should be
considered in children with AE who have reacted previously to a
food with immediate symptoms, or in infants and young children with
moderate to severe AE that has not been controlled by optimum
management.32 Food may worsen AE in children less than two years
old especially milk, egg and peanuts.
5.5 Microbial Colonisation/Infection
In AE patients, the combination of genetic predisposition for dysfunction
in skin barrier and immune responses lead to higher frequency of
bacterial and viral infections such as eczema herpeticum, eczema
coxsackium and eczema vaccinatum. Studies have shown that the
skin in AE is heavily colonised with Staphylococcus aureus even when
the skin is not clinically infected. The degree of S. aureus colonisation
tends to increase the AE severity.33
A systematic review showed that the current regular childhood
vaccination did not increase the risk of atopic disorder including
AE.34, level II-2
5.6 Patient Factors
Pregnancy has an impact on women with history of AE. Approximately
25% of patients have their pre-existing AE improve, >50% deteriorate
and 10% flare during post-partum period. The hormonal changes in
pregnancy results in predominant Th-2 response which is associated
with atopy.35, level III
There is no good quality evidence to show that stress aggravates AE.
• Identification and management of aggravating factors is important in
AE.
Management of Atopic Eczema
6.
TOPICAL THERAPY
Topical therapy is the mainstay of treatment in AE. This includes
emollient, topical anti-inflammatory agents and topical antiseptic/
antimicrobial agents. For further information on recommended
medication dosing, side effects and contraindications for commonly
used medications in AE, refer to Appendix 11.
6.1 Emollient/Moisturiser
Emollient therapy is the mainstay of management in AE. It improves the
epidermal barrier function and dryness leading to reduction in pruritus.
Emollients application decreases the usage of topical corticosteroids
(TCS).
Emollients are available in different formulations (ointments, creams,
lotions, gels and aerosol sprays). Ointments (e.g. petrolatum) are
greasy in nature whereas creams and lotions contain water and are
more user-friendly and acceptable cosmetically. Creams (e.g. aqueous
cream and urea cream), lotions and gels contain preservatives to
protect against microbial growth in the presence of water.
A Cochrane systematic review on 77 RCTs of moderate quality showed
that emollients was better than no emollient:36, level I
• improved SCORAD (MD= -2.42, 95% CI -4.55 to -0.28)
• reduced risk of flare (RR=0.40, 95% CI 0.23 to 0.70)
• reduced rate of flare (HR=3.74, 95% CI 1.86 to 7.50)
• reduced amount of corticosteroids used at 6 - 8 weeks (MD=-9.30,
95% CI -15.33 to -3.27)
There was no reliable evidence to show that one emollient is more
effective than another.
In the same systematic review, the types of emollients included
were:36, level I
a. Atopiclair vs vehicle (Unguentum leniens)
Atopiclair:
• lowered EASI score (MD=-4.00, 95% CI-5.42 to -2.57)
• reduced rate of flare (RR=0.18, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.31)
• decreased itch score (MD=-2.65, 95% CI-4.21 to -1.09)
• improved participant-assessed disease severity (RR=4.51, 95%
CI 2.19 to 9.29)
b. Urea (4 - 5%) containing moisturisers vs vehicle
Urea (4 - 5%) containing moisturisers:
• improved Dyshidrotic Eczema Area and Severity Index (DASI)
(RR=1.40, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.71)
Management of Atopic Eczema
• reduced rate of flare(RR=0.47, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.92)
• improved participant-assessed disease severity (RR=1.28, 95%
CI 1.06 to 1.53)
c. Glycerine/glycerol 20% containing moisturisers vs vehicle/placebo
Glycerine/glycerol containing moisturisers:
• improved SCORAD (MD= -2.20, 95% CI -3.44 to -0.96)
• improved participant-assessed disease severity (RR=1.22, 95%
CI 1.01 to 1.48)
d. Oat-containing moisturisers vs no treatment/vehicle
Oat-containing moisturisers:
• reduced rate of flare (RR=0.31, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.70)
• reduced amount of corticosteroids used (MD= -9.30, 95% CI
-15.3 to -3.27)
Emollients have been shown to enhance the effectiveness of TCS and
have steroid-sparing property. When compared topical active treatment
(e.g. fluocinonide 0.05%, hydrocortisone 1%) combined with moisturiser
with active treatment alone, topical active treatment combined with
moisturiser:36, level I
• reduced investigator-assessed disease severity (SMD=-0.87, 95%
CI -1.17 to -0.57)
• reduced rate of flare (RR=0.43, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.93)
There was no difference in SCORAD at 1 - 4 weeks between
licochalcone-containing moisturiser and hydrocortisone acetate 1%
cream with mean disease severity of 0.08 (95% CI -1.96 to 2.13).36, level I
In an RCT, ceramide-magnesium (Cer-Mg) treatment led to a
significantly greater decrease in SCORAD and pruritus from baseline
compared with unguentum leniens at three and six weeks. Similar
outcomes were seen between Cer-Mg and hydrocortisone at three
weeks but not at six weeks.37, level I
Emollients have been used in the prevention of AE in high risk infants.
Daily emollient use significantly reduced the risk of AE at six months
(RRR=0.50; 95% CI 0.28 to 0.90).38, level I
Generally, emollients/moisturisers were reported to be safe in
AE.36 - 38, level I
• Regular use of emollients improves AE and thus reduces usage of
topical corticosteroids.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Recommendation 3
• Emollient therapy is the mainstay of treatment at any stage of atopic
eczema in all age groups of patients.
○ The type/formulation of emollients depends on the patient’s
preference.
6.2 Topical Corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant
effects, as well as other actions relevant to their effects on skin including
inhibiting fibroblast proliferation and collagen synthesis, and local
vasoconstriction. The anti-inflammatory activity is through the following
mechanisms:
• alteration in leukocyte number and activity
• suppression of mediator release (e.g. histamine, prostaglandins)
• enhanced response to agents that increase cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (prostaglandin E2 and histamine via the
histamine-2 receptor)
• TCS are classified into four classes according to their potencies
(refer to Appendix 7):
○ Class I (very potent)
○ Class II (potent)
○ Class III (moderate)
○ Class IV (mild)
TCS is the first-line anti-inflammatory agent for AE in both children and
adults. It is an established treatment in many existing guidelines. There
are not many recent studies on TCS use in AE.
Fluocinonide 0.1% cream improves barrier function as measured by
basal transepidermal water loss (TEWL) in active moderate to severe
AE (p<0.001).39, level I It is significantly more effective than vehicle in
lesions clearing or almost clearing when applied once or twice daily
(57% - 59% vs 12% - 19%). Application frequency of once or twice daily
are equally effective.40, level I
Fluticasone propionate 0.05% cream or 0.005% ointment is more
effective than vehicle alone in preventing flares when applied twice
weekly for 16 weeks (RR=0.46, 95% CI 0.38 to 0.55). Methylprednisolone
aceponate 0.1% is also found to be more effective in similar comparison
(RR=0.36, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.62).41, level I However, fluocinonide 0.1%
and methylprednisolone aceponate 0.1% are not available in Malaysian
market as of this date. The available TCS of the same potency in
Malaysia are betamethasone valearate 0.1% and mometasone furoate.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Children have an increased absorption of TCS due to a greater body
surface area to weight ratio. Therefore, the least-potent but effective
TCS should be used. However, during acute flares, the use of short
courses of moderate to very potent TCS can be considered for rapid
control. For certain areas (i.e. face, neck, genitalia and skin folds),
caution should be exercised with regards to choice of TCS potency due
to greater penetration and higher likelihood for systemic absorption.31
Local adverse effects of TCS are secondary infection, skin
atrophy, striae, burning, itching, folliculitis, acne-like eruptions and
telangiectasia. They are related to the duration of use and potency of
TCS.42, level I The potential systemic side effects, including hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression, should be monitored
particularly in children with AE on long-term potent TCS.31 However,
HPA suppression is not observed in patients treated with mild-potency
TCS.43
Depending on the potency and site of application, patients being
treated with intermittent courses of TCS should be reviewed every
3 - 6 months to ascertain response to therapy and potentially reversible
atrophic changes.14
The fingertip unit (FTU) has been used as a method of determining the
amount of TCS to apply. It should be used to guide patients on TCS
quantities required.14 Refer to Appendix 8 on FTU.
• Practical guides for TCS application are as the following.41, level I
○ TCS should be used concomitantly with emollients.
○ FTU can be used as a guide to the amount of TCS required for
affected sites.
○ Choice of vehicle of TCS depends on the affected sites (i.e. gel for
scalp; cream for face, genital and flexural areas; ointment for palm
and sole).
○ Choice of potency of TCS depends on the clinical severity of
eczema (i.e. potent to very potent TCS ointment for thick lesions
and mild to moderate TCS cream for thin lesions).
○ After resolution of eczema flares, discontinuation of TCS
application should be done gradually to avoid rebound (i.e. twice
a day followed by once a day then 1 - 3 times a week before
complete discontinuation).
○ After resolution of eczema flares, proactive therapy (mild TCS
application intermittently once/twice a week) can be used to
maintain remission.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Recommendation 4
• Topical corticosteroids (TCS) should be used to treat flares in atopic
eczema (AE).
• The choice of TCS in AE depends on the:
○ age of the patient
○ site of skin lesions
○ chronicity of skin lesions
○ severity of skin inflammation
• The use of TCS should be monitored every 3 - 6 months to determine
response and potential side effects.
6.3 Topical Calcineurin Inhibitors
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCIs), e.g. tacrolimus and pimecrolimus,
are non-steroidal immune-modulating agents for the treatment of AE.
TCIs are currently licensed to be used in patients older than two years
old. More safety studies are needed before recommending the use of it
in patients younger than two years old.
Tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03% ointment monotherapy is more effective
than emollient in controlling pruritus in AE (MD=28.6, 95% CI 19.8 to
37.5). The median time to pruritus recurrence is longer in tacrolimus
compared with the emollient (>28 days vs three days).44, level I
Three systematic reviews (including a Cochrane’s) showed the efficacy
of tacrolimus and pimecrolimus compared with various controls in AE.
In the Cochrane systematic review, tacrolimus 0.1% ointment improved
physician’s assessment of global response, affected body surface area
(BSA), EASI score and QoL significantly compared with hydrocortisone
acetate 1% ointment and hydrocortisone butyrate 0.1% ointment in
moderate to severe AE at six months.45, level I
Tacrolimus 0.1% ointment was also more effective than pimecrolimus
1% cream in AE of different severity at six weeks in terms of:
• physician’s assessment of global response (RR=1.80, 95% CI 1.34
to 2.42)45, level I
• investigators’ global assessment (RR=0.58, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.74)
46, level I
• BSA and EASI (p< 0.001)45, level I
In another analysis, tacrolimus 0.03% ointment was more effective than
hydrocortisone acetate 1% in physician’s global assessment (RR=2.58,
95% CI 1.96 to 3.38). However, there was no difference between
tacrolimus 0.03% ointment and mid-potency corticosteroids (RR=0.45,
95% CI 0.13 to 1.57). There was insufficient data on the affected BSA
and EASI. When compared with pimecrolimus 1% cream, tacrolimus
Management of Atopic Eczema
0.03% ointment was also more effective in physician’s assessment of
global response (RR=1.42, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.98).45, level I
Between different concentrations, tacrolimus 0.1% was more effective
than tacrolimus 0.03% in improving:45, level I
• physician’s assessment of global response (RR=0.82, 95% CI 0.72
to 0.92)
• EASI (p=0.006 in children and p<0.001 in adults)
Proactive treatment with tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03% used 2 - 3 times
weekly for 40 - 52 weeks as maintenance therapy significantly prevented,
delayed and reduced mild to severe AE flares.41, level I
Pimecrolimus 1% cream was significantly more effective in improving
flares and QoL when compared with vehicle at six weeks. However, it was
less effective than triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% on similar outcomes
at six months (RR=0.89, 95% CI 0.83 to 0.96).46, level I
The most common adverse events in TCIs are burning, pruritus and
skin infection.44 - 46, level I
• Proactive treatment with TCIs 2 - 3 times weekly may be considered
for maintenance therapy in AE.
Recommendation 5
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors may be considered to treat flares in
atopic eczema for patients aged two years and above.
6.4 Wet Wrap Therapy
Wet wrap therapy (WWT) consists of two layers of tubular bandage or
garments with inner wet and outer dry layers, applied over moisturiser
alone or in combination with TCS (refer to Appendix 9). WWT can be
used continuously for 24 hours.
In a systematic review of six RCTs, four studies showed improvement
in AE clinical severity with WWT and TCS compared with TCS alone.
A non-significant tendency to increased risk of mild skin infections was
observed in WWT group. However, the studies used in the review were
of low quality and heterogenous.47, level I
WWT with TCS should only be used to treat AE in children for 7 - 14
days. However, WWT with emollients alone can be continued until
the AE is controlled.32 In the local setting, WWT in combination with
emollients and mild to moderate potency TCS has been used to treat
non-infected moderate to severe AE.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Recommendation 6
• Wet wrap therapy (WWT) with moisturiser alone or in combination
with mild to moderate potency topical corticosteroids (TCS) may be
used in non-infected moderate to severe atopic eczema.
○ The use of TCS in WWT should not exceed 14 days.
6.5 Other Topical Therapy
There is a new effective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory topical
treatment i.e. phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor (crisaborole
ointment).48, level I However, the cost is likely to be prohibitive and more
long-term safety study is required.
There are also other emerging topical therapies which are currently
undergoing clinical trials at the time of the CPG development (e.g.
Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors).
Management of Atopic Eczema
7.
PHOTOTHERAPY
Phototherapy is a therapeutic option for patients with severe AE who do
not respond or develop side effects to conventional treatment. It may
improve disease severity, pruritus and sleeplessness in these patients.
In a systematic review of moderate quality RCTs on phototherapy in
moderate to severe AE:49, level I
• narrow band ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) was more effective than visible
light (mean reduction in total disease activity score=9.4 points, 95%
CI 3.6 to 15.2) at 12 weeks
• ultraviolet A (UVA) showed non-significant improvement compared
with visible light (mean reduction in total disease activity score=4.4
points, 95% CI -1.0 to 9.8) at 12 weeks
• ultraviolet A1 (UVA1) was more effective than ultraviolet AB in
reducing SCORAD in acute flares of AE after 15 days (p<0.05)
• UVA1 was as effective as NB-UVB in improving disease activity at
6 - 8 weeks and persisted four weeks after cessation of treatment
Frequently reported adverse events were xerosis, treatment-induced
erythema and burning, pruritus, worsening of AE and folliculitis.
However, there was no documented short-term serious adverse
event.49, level I
In the local settings NB-UVB is widely available; hence it is more
commonly used.
There is no retrievable evidence on the effectiveness and safety of
light-emitting diode and laser therapies in the management of AE.
Recommendation 7
• Ultraviolet A1 may be used to control acute flares in atopic eczema
(AE).
• Narrow-band ultraviolet B may be offered in moderate to severe
chronic AE.
Management of Atopic Eczema
8.
SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Systemic therapy includes adjunctive treatment (e.g. antihistamines
and systemic antibiotics) and specific treatment of AE (e.g.
immunomodulating agent and biologics). Specific systemic treatments
should be used only in severe cases of AE in patients where other
management options have failed or are not appropriate, and where the
AE has a significant impact on quality of life. For further information on
recommended medication dosing, side effects and contraindications for
commonly used medications in atopic eczema, refer to Appendix 11.
8.1 Antihistamines
Itch is a common symptom in AE and antihistamines are frequently
prescribed to relieve it. Based on a Cochrane systematic review, there
was no high-level evidence to support the use of antihistamines as
monotherapy in AE.50, level I Antihistamines should not substitute topical
therapy in the management of AE.51
In AE patients with sleep disturbance due to itch, sedating
antihistamines should be considered as a short-term measure at
bedtime.14, 31 In the absence of urticaria and other atopic conditions,
non-sedating antihistamines are not recommended as a treatment for
AE.31
Recommendation 8
• Antihistamines should not be used as monotherapy or to substitute
topical therapy in atopic eczema (AE).
• Sedating antihistamines may be considered as a short-term measure
at bedtime in AE patients with sleep disturbance.
8.2 Immunomodulating Agents
Corticosteroids, cyclosporin A, methotrexate (MTX), azathioprine (AZA),
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and
interferon gamma (IFN-γ) are some of the immunomodulating agents
used in AE. These agents are used in moderate to severe AE which are
uncontrolled after optimisation of topical treatment and/or phototherapy.
They are also considered in chronic AE where QoL is substantially
impacted.51
a. Systemic Corticosteroids
Systemic corticosteroids is a common immunosuppressive agent used
in various inflammatory conditions. They have been shown to be rapidly
effective, but had unfavourable long-term risk/benefit ratio.52
Management of Atopic Eczema
In a systematic review on children with severe AE:53, level I
• combination of oral and intranasal beclomethasone diproprionate
was more effective than placebo at four weeks
• intranasal flunisolide was more effective than placebo at two weeks
Another systematic review showed that prednisolone was less effective
than cyclosporin A for adults with severe AE:54, level I
• less stable remission (≥SCORAD 50) (p=0.031) at six weeks
• higher incidence of relapse (p=0.04) at 12 weeks
Both systematic reviews showed no serious adverse event when
steroids were used for 2 - 4 weeks. Common adverse events
were hypertension and exacerbations of AE after termination of
treatment.53 - 54, level I
b. Azathioprine
AZA is a purine analogue that inhibits deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
production. It reduces inflammation by its antiproliferative effect on
B-lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes. Thiopurine methyltransferase
(TPMT) is an enzyme required in the metabolism of AZA. Monitoring
TPMT levels or genotyping can help to identify patients with low or absent
TPMT activity who are at increased risk for severe, life-threatening
myelosuppression from AZA. Overall concordance between genotype
and phenotype in healthy volunteers is 98.4%.55
AZA is more effective compared with placebo in the treatment of AE at
12 weeks:
• improved SASSAD (MD=5.4%, 95% CI 1.4 to 9.3)56, level I
• improved SASSAD ranged from 26% to 37%54, level I
• mean reduction of disease activity by 27%53, level I
• improved DLQI (MD=3.5, 95% CI 0.3 to 6.7)56, level I
When compared to MTX, AZA was equally effective in reduction of
disease activity and improvement in QoL at 12 and 24 weeks in AE.
54, level I
Adverse event was generally mild in AZA and common side effects
observed were nausea, minor haematological and biochemical
abnormalities.54, level I; 56, level I
• Baseline TPMT testing is advised prior to AZA initiation, with
avoidance of use in those with very low or absent enzyme activity.
c. Cyclosporin A
Cyclosporin A is an oral calcineurin inhibitor. It reduces inflammation
by immunosuppressive effect on T-lymphocytes and reduction of
interleukin-2 production. Cyclosporin A is the only approved systemic
treatment for adults with severe AE.52
Management of Atopic Eczema
In two systematic reviews of moderate quality RCTs, cyclosporin A
was more effective than placebo in moderate to severe AE in terms of:
53 - 54, level I
• reduction in SCORAD, Costa index, SASSAD after treatment with
doses ranging between 2.5 and 5 mg/kg body weight for 4 - 52
weeks
• reduction in AE severity of about 50% (range 29 - 90%) at 6 - 8
weeks
• improvement in disease severity in both short- and long-term
follow-up
• improvement in quality of life based on DLQI
In a meta-analysis, high dose cyclosporin A (4 - 5 mg/kg) was more
effective in reducing disease severity compared with low dose
cyclosporin A (2.5 - 3 mg/kg) at two weeks (mean relative change of
40% vs 20%). Relapse (increase in disease severity to >75% of the
patient’s baseline score) after discontinuation of cyclosporin A was
observed in 50% of patients within two weeks and up to 86% of patients
within six weeks to nine months.53, level I
An RCT showed that continuous therapy (one year) was more
effective than short intermittent therapy (12 weeks) of cyclosporin A in
improvement of:57, level I
• disease severity maintained beyond eight weeks
• QoL at 12 months (p=0·01).
In head-to-head comparison with other immunosuppressive agents:
• cyclosporin A is more effective than prednisolone in adults with
severe AE at six weeks and followed-up for another 12 weeks
(p=0.031)54, level I
• cyclosporin A and MMF are equally effective as maintenance treatment
of AE at 10 weeks (MD=0.8, 95% CI -4.4 to 6.0)54, level I
• cyclosporin A shows faster clinical improvement compared with
enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium (EC-MPS) at three weeks
(MD=6.6, 95% CI 1.5 to 11.7) and at six weeks (MD=7.1, 95% CI 2.1
to 12.2) in severe AE. However, clinical remission is longer in ECMPS after discontinuation of medication at 33 weeks.58, level I
• cyclosporin A and MTX are equally effective in reducing SCORAD
in children with severe AE at 12 and 24 weeks.59, level I
Adverse events reported are mild (57%), moderate (37%) and
severe (6%) at 1-year treatment.57, level I Common adverse events are
hypertension, gastrointestinal symptoms, hypertrichosis, fatigue, flu-like
symptoms, headache, paraesthesia, haematological and biochemical
abnormalities (increased creatinine level >30% from baseline).
53, level I Severe adverse events include infections, abdominal pain, acute
cholecystitis and basal cell carcinoma.53, level I; 57, level I
Management of Atopic Eczema
d. Methotrexate
MTX is an anti-folate metabolite that inhibits T-lymphocytes function by
blocking the synthesis of DNA, ribonucleic acid (RNA) and purine.
There was no retrievable placebo-controlled efficacy study for MTX. In
a systematic review of systemic therapies for management of AE, an
RCT showed MTX was as effective as AZA in reducing SCORAD at 12
and 24 weeks (p=0.89 and p=0.58 respectively) and improving QoL at
12 weeks (p=0.46).54, level I
MTX and cyclosporin A are equally effective in the reduction of
SCORAD in children with severe AE at 12 and 24 weeks (p=0.93 and
p=0.29 respectively).59, level I
Common adverse events observed in MTX are haematological
abnormalities, gastrointestinal disturbances and infection. However,
there is no severe and serious adverse events.54, level I; 59, level I
e. Mycophenolate Mofetil and Enteric-coated Mycophenolate
Sodium
MMF and EC-MPS contain active metabolite mycophenolic acid
(MPA). MPA arrests the synthesis of DNA and RNA in B- and T-cell
development via inhibition of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase,
and therefore prevents immune cell proliferation.58, level I
There is no retrievable evidence comparing MMF to placebo. A
systematic review showed that:54, level I
• MMF was as effective as cyclosporin A in maintenance treatment of
AE at 10 week (MD in SCORAD=0.8, 95% CI -4.4 to 6.0)
• EC-MPS had longer clinical remission compared with cyclosporin A
after discontinuation of medication at 33 weeks.
Commonly reported adverse events are fatigue, headache, gastrointestinal
disturbance, flu-like symptom and viral infection.58, level I
Recommendation 9
• Systemic corticosteroids may be considered for short-term control of
severe acute exacerbation of atopic eczema (AE).
• Azathioprine, cyclosporin A, methotrexate or mycophenolate may
be used in the treatment of severe AE after optimisation of topical
treatment.
8.3 Biologics
Biologics are therapeutic proteins specifically designed to block
the activity of bioactive mediators of immune responses. AE is an
inflammatory skin condition orchestrated by multiple cytokines,
Management of Atopic Eczema
chemokines and immunoglobulins. Therefore, usage of biologics is a
reasonable therapeutic option.
a. Dupilumab
Dupilumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks interleukin-4 (IL-4) and
interleukin-13 (IL-13) receptors.
In recent RCTs, dupilumab showed rapid improvement in AE severity
compared with placebo in adults with moderate to severe AE. It had
higher proportion of patients with an IGA score of zero or one (clear
or almost clear) or reduction from baseline of at least two points in the
score and improvement in EASI >75% at week 16 (p< 0.001)60 - 61, level I and
up to 52 weeks (p<0.001).61, level I
Adverse events commonly reported are nasopharyngitis, headache
and skin infection.60 - 61, level I
b. Omalizumab
Omalizumab is a recombinant human monoclonal antibody that binds
to free human IgE in the blood and IgE receptor on the surface of
B-lymphocytes.
In two RCTs, omalizumab showed no significant difference in EASI and
pruritic score at 20 weeks62, level I and comparable reduction in SCORAD
at 24 weeks63, level I when compared with placebo in AE.
Minor adverse events with omalizumab are injection site reaction, mild
infection, headache, vertigo, migraine and pruritus.62, level I
c. Infliximab
Infliximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody that works against Tumour
Necrosis Factor Alpha (TNF-α).
There is no strong retrievable evidence on the effectiveness of infliximab
in AE.53, level I
d. Intravenous Immunoglobulin
A systematic review showed IVIG was less effective in reduction of
SCORAD at 12 weeks compared with placebo and cyclosporin A in
AE.54, level I
Most common adverse effects reported are headache, nausea, vomiting
and low-grade fever. They are transient and self-limiting, and usually
happen during the first few hours after injection.54, level I
Management of Atopic Eczema
• Dupilumab is a potential biologic therapy in adult patients with
moderate to severe AE after optimisation of conventional therapy.
8.4 Other Systemic Agents
a. Leukotriene Antagonist
There is no significant difference in reduction of SASSAD in AE between
montelukast and placebo at eight weeks follow-up (MD=0.35, 95%
CI -6.1 to 6.8).53, level I
b. Interferon Gamma
There is no strong retrievable evidence on the effectiveness of IFN-γ
in AE.54, level I
Management of Atopic Eczema
9.
ANTIMICROBIALS
9.1 Topical Antibiotics Combined with Corticosteroids
A systematic review using a combination of TCS and topical antibiotics
(fusidic acid, mupirocin, neomycin, gentamicin or tetracycline) compared
with TCS alone showed no difference in global outcome for clinically
infected eczema (RR=0.52, 95% CI 0.23 to 1.16).64, level I
One RCT demonstrated improvement in SCORAD and EASI for both
hydrocortisone ointment with mupirocin and hydrocortisone ointment
alone by 74% (p=0.012) and 65% (p=0.019) respectively compared
with emollient at eight weeks but there was no significant difference
between the hydrocortisone groups.65, level I
9.2 Systemic Antibiotics
Staphylococcus aureus colonisation of the skin in patients with moderate
to severe AE is common. The degree of colonisation significantly
correlates with AE clinical severity and disease exacerbation. Antistaphylococcal treatment is widely practised in the management of AE.
In a Cochrane systematic review, oral antibiotics showed no longterm benefits in patients with non-infected AE. Improvement in global
outcome was observed among those treated with flucloxacillin at day
28 (RR=2.49, 95% CI 1.27 to 4.89), but no further improvement at day
56 post-treatment (MD= -0.10, 95% CI -0.59 to 0.39).66, level I
Routine use of systemic antimicrobials among patients with noninfected AE is not recommended. Systemic antimicrobial agents should
be reserved for patients with signs of secondary infections.14 Refer to
Malaysian National Antibiotic Guidelines 2014 for choices of antibiotic
in skin and soft tissue infection.
Recommendation 10
• Systemic antibiotics may be considered when there is clinical
evidence of infection in patients with atopic eczema.
9.3 Sodium Hypochlorite 0.005% (Bleach Bath)
Staphylococcus aureus infection is a common complication in AE and
can worsen the disease. Bleach bath has been used as an antiseptic
bath to reduce colonisation of bacteria including Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).31, 51
Management of Atopic Eczema
Bleach bath significantly reduces EASI score, affected BSA, itch score,
and the use of TCS and antibiotics compared with water bath at 1 - 3
months in AE.67 - 68, level I However, water bath results in better SCORAD
reduction.68, level I
Combined use of bleach bath and intranasal mupirocin ointment improves
EASI score and affected BSA at one and three months compared with
combination of water bath and intranasal petrolatum ointment in moderate
to severe AE (p<0.05).64, level I; 69, level I
A recent meta-analysis showed that bleach baths were effective
in decreasing AE severity, but not more effective than water baths
alone.70, level I
Bleach bath is well tolerated with similar incidence of mild adverse
events compared to water bath.68, level I Adverse events reported are
stinging, burning, itch, xerosis, erythema, urticaria and oozing.70, level I
9.4 Other Antiseptics
Antiseptics at appropriate dilutions, e.g. triclosan or chlorhexidine,
should be used as an adjunct therapy to decrease bacterial load in
children who have recurrent infected AE.32 In local setting, short-term
antiseptic agents may be used for weepy lesions in AE:
• diluted potassium permanganate solution as bath/soak over the limbs
and trunk
• normal saline daps/wash over the face
Long-term continuous use of antiseptics should be avoided.
A Cochrane review found no benefit of antibacterial soaps and bath
additives in AE.64, level I
• Bleach bath has been shown to improve severity of AE.
• Other antiseptic baths (e.g. potassium permanganate, triclosan,
chlorhexidine) may be helpful in reducing bacterial colonisation of
the skin.
Management of Atopic Eczema
10. SPECIFIC ALLERGEN IMMUNOTHERAPY
Specific allergen immunotherapy (SIT) is also known as desensitisation
or hyposensitisation which involves the administration (sublingual or
subcutaneous) of specifically relevant allergen(s) in the treatment
of IgE-mediated allergic disease. SIT works by inhibiting abnormal
immune responses to the relevant allergen thus reducing symptoms in
patients with AE.
A recent Cochrane meta-analysis did not show conclusive evidence
on the effectiveness of SIT in treating patients with AE. The allergens
included in the study were:71, level I
• Dermatophagoides pterionyssinus
• Dermatophagoides farinae
• Grass pollen
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend specific allergen
immunotherapy in the management of AE patients without other
atopic conditions.
Management of Atopic Eczema
11. NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
11.1 Bathing Practices
Longer duration of bathing (>10 minutes) may be associated with risk of
greater AE severity (p=0.0562).72, level III However, frequency of bathing
is not associated with the severity.73, level I There is no evidence on
clinical benefit of emollient bath additives in AE.
There is no retrievable evidence with regards to appropriate water
temperature. However, the CPG development group advices against
the use of extreme temperatures (too hot or too cold) during bathing to
avoid worsening of AE.
11.2 Dietary Interventions
a. Food Avoidance
• Maternal dietary avoidance
A Cochrane systematic review showed no significant protective effect
of maternal dietary antigen avoidance (e.g. cow’s milk, egg, peanuts,
fish and chocolate) during pregnancy and lactation on incidence of
AE during first 18 months of life. The review also found no significant
reduction in eczema severity in infants with established AE with
maternal dietary antigen avoidance during lactation.74, level I
• Food avoidance in established eczema
In another Cochrane systematic review, there was no significant
beneficial effect in elimination of food in mother’s diet (e.g. wheat, fish,
beef, chicken, nuts, chocolate, citrus food, colouring and preservatives)
or use of few foods diet which only includes 5 - 6 foods (lamb, potato,
rice, one of the brassicas, pear and tap water) and elemental diet in AE.
The RCTs in the review were of poor quality.75, level I
There may be some benefits in using an egg-free diet in infants with
positive specific IgE to eggs. However, there was little evidence to
support the use of various exclusion diets in unselected patients with
AE.75, level I
b. Breastfeeding
Exclusive breastfeeding for three months or more may help to prevent
the development of AE in infants with family history of atopy.14
However, a meta-analysis showed that there was no evidence on protective
effect of exclusive breastfeeding for at least 3 months against AE, even
among children with a positive family history.76, level II-2
Management of Atopic Eczema
A Cochrane systematic review on breastfeeding duration showed no
significant difference in the reduction of AE risk in the first 12 months of
life and at 5 - 7 years of age when infants exclusively breastfed for 3 - 4
months compared with 6 - 7 months.74, level I
c. Soy Formula
A Cochrane systematic review showed no significant difference
between soy and cow’s milk formulas in prevention of childhood AE.77, level I
d. Hydrolysed Formula
A systematic review showed some evidences that partially hydrolysed
100% whey protein infant formula (pHF-W) reduced risk of AE compared
with intact protein cow’s milk formula among infants with risk of
atopy.78, level I
This is supported by a recent meta-analysis of moderate quality RCTs
demonstrating a trend in reduction of eczema in infants with high
risk of developing allergy fed with pHF-W compared with cow’s milk
formula.79, level I
In the prevention of AE, hydrolysed formulas should not be offered to
infants in preference to breast milk.14
e. Complementary Feeding
The AE risk is reduced with early introduction of complementary food
at the age of four and/or five months compared to those on exclusive
breastfeeding (up to six months). However, stronger evidence is
required.80, level II-2
f.
Probiotic and Prebiotic
Probiotic and prebiotic are food supplements/food that modify and
reinstate the pre-existing intestinal flora. Probiotics are live ‘good’ bacteria
which include lactobacilli sp. and bifidobacteria. Prebiotics are dietary
fibre (non-digestible oligosaccharides and fructooligosaccharides)
which stimulates the growth or activity of bacteria in the colon.
• Probiotic
A meta-analysis on probiotics (e.g. non-spore lactobacillicus,
bifidobacterium and mixed lactobacilli) given to healthy infants (<2
years old) and pregnant women found a reduction in the incidence of
AE (RRR=0.69, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.78). However, the primary papers
used were of poor quality with significant heterogeneity.81, level I
• Prebiotic
Two systematic reviews on the prevention of AE using supplementation
of expressed breast milk or infant formula with prebiotics showed
reduction in incidence of AE but the results were not significant.81 - 82, level I
Management of Atopic Eczema
There is insufficient evidence to recommend probiotic and prebiotic in
the management of AE. Limitations of the included studies in the above
reviews are heterogeneity in the strains used, dose and duration of
intervention.
g. Other Dietary Intervention
• Fish Oil
Fish oils are rich in omega-3 fatty acids namely eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). These may reduce the
inflammatory components of AE. Two small studies in a Cochrane
systematic review showed that fish oil improved symptoms and quality
of life at 12 - 16 weeks when compared with placebo in adults with
AE.83, level I
• Mineral
Minerals such as zinc and selenium show no significant difference in
reducing disease severity in AE.83, level I
• Vitamins
There is insufficient evidence to suggest the use of vitamin B6, D and
E in AE.83, level I
• Maternal dietary supplementation
Two systematic reviews showed no significant association between
maternal intake of vitamins and nutrients during pregnancy, lactation or
both pregnancy and lactation, and reduction of incidence of childhood
AE.84 - 85, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend dietary supplements in
the management of AE.
11.3 Educational and Psychological Interventions
Educational and psychological interventions are used as an adjunct to
conventional therapy in the management of AE.
In a Cochrane systematic review of 10 RCTs, psychological techniques
are used to manage itching and scratching or sleep disturbance.
Educational interventions are also used to help parents and children
to understand the condition and their role in managing it successfully.
However, there was lack of rigorously designed trials on effectiveness
of educational and psychological interventions in the management of
AE in children.86, level I
In the guidelines of care for the management of AE, educational
programmes and eczema workshops are recommended as adjunct to
the conventional therapy in the management of AE.87
A major challenge in AE management is its complex treatment,
Management of Atopic Eczema
which must be tailored for both acute exacerbations and long-term
maintenance. Patient education plays an important role in the
self-management of AE. The addition of a written eczema action
plan (WEAP) to the routine verbal instruction may enhance patients’
understanding and empower patients/caregivers to better manage
their condition thus reducing the frequency and severity of flares, and
frequency of clinical encounters (refer to Appendix 10).
Recommendation 11
• Educational interventions should be considered as part of the
management of atopic eczema.
Management of Atopic Eczema
12. TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
Traditional and complementary medicine (TCM) refers to the broad set
of health practices that are not part of conventional medicine or practice
and are not fully integrated into the dominant health care system. In
some instances, TCM is often interchangeable with traditional medicine.
12.1 Herbal and Food Supplementation
a. Chinese Herbal Medicine
Based on a Cochrane systematic review of 28 RCTs of moderate
quality, topical or oral chinese herbal medicine (CHM) was found to be
better than placebo in AE for:88, level I
• overall severity score (EASI, SASSAD and SCORAD) (SMD=
-0.88, 95% CI -1.67 to -0.09)
• severity of itch score measured by Visual Analogue Score (VAS)
(SMD= -1.53, 95% CI -2.64 to -0.41)
• improvement of QoL at 12-week (MD= -2.50, 95% CI -4.77 to -0.23)
Two meta-analyses on RCTs of moderate quality showed that topical
or oral CHM was better compared with ‘conventional treatments’ (e.g.
econazole nitrate cream, calamine lotion, zinc oxide cream and topical
corticosteroids) in AE, for the following outcomes:
• erythema (SMD=-0.76; 95% CI -1.05 to -0.47) and surface damage
scores (SMD= -1.08; 95% CI, -1.59 to -0.56)89, level I
• total effectiveness rate (RR=1.19, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.36); However,
sub-group analysis showed no difference between topical CHM and
topical corticosteroids (RR=1.04, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.16)90, level I
CHM in combination with conventional therapy is more effective than
conventional therapy alone in AE for overall clinical score, MD= -2.56;
95% CI -3.46 to -1.66.89, level I
Topical or oral CHM is generally safe compared with placebo or
conventional therapy.89 - 91, level I
• It is important to note that the above-mentioned effectiveness of
CHM in AE is pertaining to specific preparations and hence, should
not be generalised to other CHM preparations.
• Some
traditional
medicine
(not
limited
to
CHM)
contain
prohibited substances (e.g. dexamethasone, mercury). Refer to
http://npra.moh.gov.my for further information.
b. Evening Primrose Oil
Evening primrose oil (EPO) is the oil from the seeds of evening primrose
plant and contains 8 - 10% gamma-linolenic acid (GLA).
Management of Atopic Eczema
In a Cochrane systematic review, EPO did not show significant
differences in improvement of symptoms and QoL compared with
placebo in AE.92, level I
c. Borage Oil
Borage oil is obtained from the seeds of Borago officinalis and contains
at least 23% GLA.
In a Cochrane systematic review, there was no significant differences
in improvement of symptoms in AE with borage oil 1500 mg twice a day
compared with placebo.92, level I
12.2 Topical Oils and Massage Therapy
Virgin coconut oil (VCO) applied topically is more effective than mineral
oil (paraffin oil) in improving mean SCORAD (p<0.001) in AE. There
is no difference in side effects when comparing between the two
(p=0.089).93, level I
Olive oil applied topically causes reduced stratum corneum integrity
and induces more erythema compared with sunflower seed oil in
AE.91, level I
Based on a systematic review, there was no difference in general
improvement at eight weeks between massage therapy alone and in
combination with essential oil in AE. However there was worsening of
symptoms in massage therapy with essential oil group beyond eight
weeks.91, level I
12.3 Acupuncture
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of acupuncture in
AE.89, level I; 91, level I;
12.4 Balneotherapy
Balneotherapy is the practice of full body immersion in mineral water
or mineral-laden mud (i.e. hot springs, cold springs or other sources of
such water like the Dead Sea).
An RCT showed synchronous balneophototherapy (immersion in
mineral water with phototherapy) was better than NBUVB monotherapy
in improving SCORAD (p<0.05) in AE.94, level I
Management of Atopic Eczema
12.5 Homeopathy
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of homeopathic
remedies in AE.95, level I
Recommendation 12
• Traditional and complementary medicine should not replace
conventional therapy in atopic eczema.
Management of Atopic Eczema
13. REFERRAL
Referral to a dermatology service may be needed in the management
of AE. The urgency of referral is dependent upon various factors. The
referral section is adapted from existing guidelines and expert opinions
of the CPG development group.14, 32, 96
The urgency for referral to a dermatologist is divided into the following
categories:
1. Urgent referral (within 24 hours)
• AE with clinical suspicion of eczema herpeticum (eczema with
widespread herpes simplex infection)
• AE with severe skin bacterial infection that requires intravenous
antibiotics
• AE with acute erythroderma where the eczema is affecting more
than 80% body surface area
2. Non-urgent referral
• Diagnostic uncertainty
• Severe or uncontrolled eczema:
○ requirement of potent and very potent TCS
○ frequent infections
○ poor sleep or excessive scratching
○ treatment failure with appropriate topical therapy regimen
• Parental concern
• Need for treatment demonstration/education
• Involvement of sites that are difficult to treat
• Psychological disturbance on the patient or family
Management of Atopic Eczema
14. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of AE should be guided by evidence-based approach
in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors may
affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
14.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to healthcare
providers
• regular training on common dermatoses
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited exposure on management of AE
• cost and availability of treatment
• variation in practice of healthcare providers
14.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
• ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
via printed and electronic copies
• reinforce regular trainings with adequate funding for healthcare
providers
• ensure widespread distribution of updated patient education
materials
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of AE:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage of
patients treated for AE
with improvement
(based on IGA)
(target ≥70%)
=
X 100%
Total number of patients treated for
AE in the same period
Number of patients treated for AE
with improvement (based on IGA)
in a period
Management of Atopic Eczema
References
1. Asher MI, Montefort S, Björkstén B, et al. Worldwide time trends in the prevalence
of symptoms of asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in childhood:
ISAAC Phases One and Three repeat multicountry cross-sectional surveys.
Lancet. 2006;368(9537):733-743.
2. Lee BW, Detzel PR. Treatment of childhood atopic dermatitis and economic
burden of illness in Asia Pacific countries. Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;66 Suppl 1:1824
3. Mooney E, Rademaker M, Dailey R, et al. Adverse effects of topical corticosteroids
in paediatric eczema: Australasian consensus statement. Australas J Dermatol.
2015;56(4):241-251.
4. Illi S, von Mutius E, Lau S, et al.; Multicenter Allergy Study Group. The natural
course of atopic dermatitis from birth to age 7 years and the association with
asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;113(5):925-931.
5. Chen H, Common JE, Haines RL, et al. Wide spectrum of filaggrin-null mutations
in atopic dermatitis highlights differences between Singaporean Chinese and
European populations. Br J Dermatol. 2011;165(1):106-114.
6. World Allergy Organization (WAO). Eczema Pathophysiology. 2013. (Available at:
http://www.worldallergy.org)
7. Brenninkmeijer EE, Schram ME, Leeflang MM, et al. Diagnostic criteria for atopic
dermatitis: a systematic review. Br J Dermatol. 2008;158(4):754-765.
8. Williams HC, Jburney PG, Pembroke AC, et al. The UK working party's diagnostic
criteria for atopic dermatitis. III. Independent hospital validation. Br J Dermatol.
1994;131(3):406-416.
9. Flohr C, Johansson SG, Wahlgren CF, et al. How atopic is atopic dermatitis? J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004; 114(1):150-158.
10. Rehal B, Armstrong AW. Health outcome measures in atopic dermatitis: a
systematic review of trends in disease severity and quality-of-life instruments
1985-2010. PLoS One. 2011;6(4):e17520.
11. Schmitt J, Langan S, Williams HC, et al. What are the best outcome
measurements for atopic eczema? A systematic review. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2007;120(6):1389-1398.
12. Coutanceau C, Stalder JF. Analysis of correlations between patient-oriented
SCORAD (PO-SCORAD) and other assessment scores of atopic dermatitis
severity and quality of life. Dermatology. 2014;229(3):248-255.
13. Hayashida S, Furusho N, Uchi H, et al. Are lifetime prevalence of impetigo,
molluscum and herpes infection really increased in children having atopic
dermatitis? J Dermatol Sci. 2010;60(3):173-178.
14. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of atopic eczema in
primary care. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2011.
15. van der Hulst AE, Klip H, Brand PL. Risk of developing asthma in young children
with atopic eczema: a systematic review. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(3):565569.
16. Carlsten C, Dimich-Ward H, Ferguson A, et al. Atopic dermatitis in a high-risk
cohort: natural history, associated allergic outcomes, and risk factors. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2013;110(1):24-28.
17. Herro EM, Matiz C, Sullivan K, et al. Frequency of contact allergens in pediatric
patients with atopic dermatitis. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2011;4(11):39-41.
18. Hamann CR, Hamann D, Egeberg A, et al. Association between atopic dermatitis
and contact sensitization: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2017;77(1):70-78.
19. Manam S, Tsakok T, Till S, et al. The association between atopic dermatitis and
food allergy in adults. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;14(5):423-429.
Management of Atopic Eczema
20. Wee AL, Leong KF, Sabeera BKI. Food and aero sensitization pattern among
atopic dermatitis children in Hospital Kuala Lumpur. Hospital Kuala Lumpur, 2015
(unpublished document).
21. Standl M, Tesch F, Baurecht H, et al. Association of Atopic Dermatitis with
Cardiovascular Risk Factors and Diseases. J Invest Dermatol. 2017;137(5):10741081.
22. Zhang A, Silverberg JI. Association of atopic dermatitis with being overweight
and obese: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2015;72(4):606-16.e4.
23. Schmitt J, Romanos M, Schmitt NM, et al. Atopic eczema and attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder in a population-based sample of children and adolescents.
JAMA. 2009;301(7):724-726.
24. Kantor R, Kim A, Thyssen JP, et al. Association of atopic dermatitis with smoking:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;75(6):11191125.e1.
25. Langan SM, Silcocks P, Williams HC. What causes flares of eczema in children?
Br J Dermatol. 2009;161(3):640-646.
26. Kim J, Lee S, Woo SY, et al. The indoor level of house dust mite allergen is
associated with severity of atopic dermatitis in children. J Korean Med Sci.
2013;28(1):74-79.
27. Hon KL, Leung TF, Lam MC et al. Which aeroallergens are associated with
eczema severity? Clin Exp Dermatol. 2007;32(4):401-404.
28. Sargen MR, Hoffstad O, Margolis DJ. Warm, humid, and high sun exposure
climates are associated with poorly controlled eczema: PEER (Pediatric Eczema
Elective Registry) cohort, 2004-2012. J Invest Dermatol. 2014;134(1):51-57.
29. Kim EH, Kim S, Lee JH, et al. Indoor air pollution aggravates symptoms of atopic
dermatitis in children. PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0119501.
30. Kim YM, Kim J, Han Y, et al. Short-term effects of weather and air pollution
on atopic dermatitis symptoms in children: A panel study in Korea. PLoS One.
2017;12(4):e0175229.
31. Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al. Guidelines of care for the management
of atopic dermatitis: Section 2. Management and treatment of atopic dermatitis
with topical therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(1):116-132.
32. National Collaborating Centre for Women's and Children's Health (UK). Atopic
Eczema in Children: Management of Atopic Eczema in Children from Birth up to
the Age of 12 Years. London: RCOG Press; 2007.
33. Wollenberg A, Räwer HC, Schauber J. Innate immunity in atopic dermatitis. Clin
Rev Allergy Immunol. 2011;41(3):272-281.
34. Jagelavičienė A, Usonis V. Relationship between vaccination and atopy. Acta
medica Lituanica. 2014;21(3).
35. Kemmett D, Tidman MJ. The influence of the menstrual cycle and pregnancy on
atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol. 1991;125(1):59-61.
36. van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, Christensen R et al. Emollients and moisturisers for
eczema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017; 2:CD012119.
37. Koppes SA, Charles F, Lammers L et al. Efficacy of a Cream Containing Ceramides
and Magnesium in the Treatment of Mild to Moderate Atopic Dermatitis: A
Randomized, Double-blind, Emollient- and Hydrocortisone-controlled Trial. Acta
Derm Venereol. 2016; 96(7):948-953.
38. Simpson EL, Chalmers JR, Hanifin JM et al. Emollient enhancement of the skin
barrier from birth offers effective atopic dermatitis prevention. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2014; 134(4):818-23.
39. Woods MT, Brown PA, Baig-Lewis SF, et al. Effects of a novel formulation of
fluocinonide 0.1% cream on skin barrier function in atopic dermatitis. J Drugs
Dermatol. 2011;10(2):171-176.
40. Del Rosso JQ, Bhambri S. Daily application of fluocinonide 0.1% cream for the
treatment of atopic dermatitis. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2009;2(9):24-32.
Management of Atopic Eczema
41. Schmitt J, von Kobyletzki L, Svensson A, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of
proactive treatment with topical corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors for atopic
eczema: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br
J Dermatol. 2011;164(2):415-428.
42. Callen J, Chamlin S, Eichenfield LF, et al. A systematic review of the safety of
topical therapies for atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol. 2007;156(2):203-221
43. Saeki H, Nakahara T, Tanaka A, et al.; Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines
for the Management of Atopic Dermatitis of Japanese Dermatological Association.
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Atopic Dermatitis 2016. J
Dermatol. 2016;43(10):1117-1145.
44. Takeuchi S, Saeki H, Tokunaga S, et al. A Randomized, Open-Label, Multicenter
Trial of Topical Tacrolimus for the Treatment of Pruritis in Patients with Atopic
Dermatitis. Ann Dermatol. 2012; 24(2):144-150.
45. Cury MJ, Martins C, Aoki V, et al. Topical tacrolimus for atopic dermatitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015; (7):CD009864.
46. Ashcroft DM, Chen LC, Garside R, et al. Topical pimecrolimus for eczema
(Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007; (4):CD005500.
47. González-López G, Ceballos-Rodríguez RM, González-López JJ, et al. Efficacy
and safety of wet wrap therapy for patients with atopic dermatitis: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol. 2017;177(3):688-695.
48. Paller AS, Tom WL, Lebwohl MG, et al. Efficacy and safety of crisaborole
ointment, a novel, nonsteroidal phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor for the
topical treatment of atopic dermatitis (AD) in children and adults. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2016;75(3):494-503.e6.
49. Garritsen FM, Brouwer MW, Limpens J, et al. Photo (chemo) therapy in the
management of atopic dermatitis: an updated systematic review with implications
for practice and research. Br J Dermatol. 2014;170(3):501-513.
50. Apfelbacher CJ, Van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, et al. Oral H1 antihistamines
as monotherapy for eczema (Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;
(2):CD007770.
51. Sidbury Ra, Davis DM, Cohen DE et al. Guidelines of care for the management
of atopic dermatitis: section 3. Management and treatment with phototherapy and
systemic agents.J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(2):327-349.
52. Ring J, Gutermuth J. 100 years of hyposensitization: history of allergen-specific
immunotherapy (ASIT). Allergy. 2011;66(6):713-724.
53. Schmitt J, Schmitt N, Meurer M. Cyclosporin in the treatment of patients with
atopic eczema – a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Eur Acad Dermatol
Venereol. 2007;21(5):606-619.
54. Roekevisch E, Spuls PI, Kuester D, et al. Efficacy and safety of systemic
treatments for moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis: a systematic review. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;133(2):429-438.
55. Schaeffeler E, Fischer C, Brockmeier D, et al. Comprehensive analysis of
thiopurine S-methyltransferase phenotype-genotype correlation in a large
population of German-Caucasians and identification of novel TPMT variants.
Pharmacogenetics. 2004;14(7):407-417.
56. Meggitt SJ, Gray JC, Reynolds NJ. Azathioprine dosed by thiopurine
methyltransferase activity for moderate-to-severe atopic eczema: a double-blind,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2006;367(9513):839-846.
57. Harper JI, Ahmed I, Barclay G, et al. Cyclosporin for severe childhood atopic
dermatitis: short course versus continuous therapy. Br J Dermatol. 2000;142(1):52-58
58. Haeck IM, Knol MJ, Ten BO, et al. Enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium
versus cyclosporin A as long-term treatment in adult patients with severe atopic
dermatitis: A randomized controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(6):10741084.
59. El-Khalawany MA, Hassan H, Shaaban D, et al. Methotrexate versus cyclosporine
in the treatment of severe atopic dermatitis in children: a multicenter experience
from Egypt. Eur J Pediatr. 2013;172(3):351-356
Management of Atopic Eczema
60. Simpson EL, Bieber T, Guttman-Yassky E, et al. Two Phase 3 Trials of Dupilumab
versus Placebo in Atopic Dermatitis. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(24):2335-2348.
61. Blauvelt A, de Bruin-Weller M, Gooderham M, et al. Long-term management of
moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis with dupilumab and concomitant topical
corticosteroids (LIBERTY AD CHRONOS): a 1-year, randomised, double-blinded,
placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2017;389(10086):2287-2303.
62. Heil PM, Maurer D, Klein B, et al. Omalizumab therapy in atopic dermatitis:
depletion of IgE does not improve the clinical course - a randomized, placebocontrolled and double blind pilot study. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2010;8(12):990998.
63. Iyengar SR, Hoyte EG, Loza A, et al. Immunologic effects of omalizumab in
children with severe refractory atopic dermatitis: a randomized, placebo-controlled
clinical trial. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;162(1):89-93.
64. Bath-Hextall FJ, Birnie AJ, Ravenscroft JC, et al. Interventions to reduce
Staphylococcus aureus in the management of atopic eczema: an updated
Cochrane review. Br J Dermatol. 2010;163(1):12-26.
65. Canpolat F, Erkoçoğlu M, Tezer H, et al. Hydrocortisone acetate alone or
combined with mupirocin for atopic dermatitis in infants under two years of age - a
randomized double blind pilot trial. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012;16(14):19891993.
66. Birnie AJ, Bath-Hextall FJ, Ravenscroft JC, et al. Interventions to reduce
Staphylococcus aureus in the management of atopic eczema. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2008;(3):CD003871.
67. Hon KL, Tsang YC, Lee VW, et al. Efficacy of sodium hypochlorite (bleach) baths
to reduce Staphylococcus aureus colonization in childhood onset moderate-tosevere eczema: A randomized, placebo-controlled cross-over trial. J Dermatolog
Treat. 2016;27(2):156-162.
68. Wong SM, Ng TG, Baba R. Efficacy and safety of sodium hypochlorite (bleach)
baths in patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis in Malaysia. J
Dermatol. 2013;40(11):874-880.
69. Huang JT, Abrams M, Tlougan B, et al. Treatment of Staphylococcus aureus
colonization in atopic dermatitis decreases disease severity. Pediatrics.
2009;123(5):e808-14.
70. Chopra R, Vakharia PP, Sacotte R, et al. Efficacy of bleach baths in reducing
severity of atopic dermatitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2017;119(5):435-440.
71. Tam HH, Calderon MA, Manikam L. Specific allergen immunotherapy for the
treatment of Atopic Eczema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016; 2:CD008774.
72. Koutroulis I, Pyle T, Kopylov D, et al. The Association between Bathing Habits and
Severity of Atopic Dermatitis in Children. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2016; 55(2):176181.
73. Koutroulis I, Petrova K, Kratimenos P, et al. Frequency of bathing in the
management of atopic dermatitis: to bathe or not to bathe? Clin Pediatr (Phila).
2014; 53(7):677-681.
74. Kramer MS, Kakuma R. Maternal dietary antigen avoidance during pregnancy or
lactation, or both, for preventing or treating atopic disease in the child. Evid Based
Child Health. 2014 Jun;9(2):484-485.
75. Bath-Hextall F, Delamere FM, Williams HC. Dietary exclusions for improving
established atopic eczema in adults and children: systematic review. Allergy.
2009;64(2):258-264.
76. Yang YW, Tsai CL, Lu CY. Exclusive breastfeeding and incident atopic dermatitis
in childhood: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.
Br J Dermatol. 2009;161(2):373-383.
77. Osborn DA, Sinn J. Soy formula for prevention of allergy and food intolerance in
infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(3):CD003741. Update in:Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2006;(4):CD003741.
Management of Atopic Eczema
78. Alexander DD, Schmitt DF, Tran NL, et al. Partially hydrolyzed 100% whey protein
infant formula and atopic dermatitis risk reduction: a systematic review of the
literature. Nutr Rev. 2010;68(4):232-245.
79. Szajewska H, Horvath A. A partially hydrolyzed 100% whey formula and the risk
of eczema and any allergy: an updated meta-analysis. World Allergy Organ J.
2017;10(1):27
80. Turati F, Bertuccio P, Galeone C, et al.; HYGIENE Study Group. Early weaning
is beneficial to prevent atopic dermatitis occurrence in young children. Allergy.
2016;71(6):878-888.
81. Dang D, Zhou W, Lun ZJ, et al. Meta-analysis of probiotics and/or prebiotics for
the prevention of eczema. J Int Med Res. 2013;41(5):1426-1436.
82. Osborn DA, Sinn JK. Prebiotics in infants for prevention of allergy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2013;(3):CD006474.
83. Bath-Hextall FJ, Jenkinson C, Humphreys R, et al. Dietary supplements for
established atopic eczema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(2):CD005205.
84. Beckhaus AA, Garcia-Marcos L, Forno E, et al. Maternal nutrition during
pregnancy and risk of asthma, wheeze, and atopic diseases during childhood: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Allergy. 2015;70(12):1588-1604.
85. Gunaratne AW, Makrides M, Collins CT. Maternal prenatal and/or postnatal n-3
long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA) supplementation for preventing
allergies in early childhood. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(7):CD010085.
86. Ersser SJ, Cowdell F, Latter S,et al. Psychological and educational interventions
for atopic eczema in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014; (1):CD004054.
87. Sidbury Rb, Tom WL, Bergman JN, et al. Guidelines of care for the management
of atopic dermatitis: Section 4. Prevention of disease flares and use of adjunctive
therapies and approaches. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(6):1218-1233.
88. Gu S, Yang AW, Xue CC, et al. Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) for atopic eczema
(Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(9):CD008642.
89. Tan HY, Zhang AL, Chen D, et al. Chinese herbal medicine for atopic dermatitis:
a systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;69(2):295-304.
90. Gu S, Yang AW, Li CG, et al. Topical application of Chinese herbal medicine for
atopic eczema: a systematic review with a meta-analysis. Dermatology. 2014;
228(4):294-302.
91. Vieira BL, Lim NR, Lohman ME, et al. Complementary and Alternative Medicine
for Atopic Dermatitis: An Evidence-Based Review. Am J Clin Dermatol.
2016;17(6):557-581.
92. Bamford JT, Ray S, Musekiwa A, et al. Oral evening primrose oil and borage oil
for eczema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(4):CD004416
93. Evangelista MT, Abad-Casintahan F, Lopez-Villafuerte L. The effect of topical
virgin coconut oil on SCORAD index, transepidermal water loss, and skin
capacitance in mild to moderate pediatric atopic dermatitis: a randomized, doubleblind, clinical trial. Int J Dermatol. 2014;53(1):100-108.
94. Heinlin J, Schiffner-Rohe J, Schiffner R, et al. A first prospective randomized
controlled trial on the efficacy and safety of synchronous balneophototherapy
vs. narrow-band UVB monotherapy for atopic dermatitis. J Eur Acad Dermatol
Venereol. 2011;25(7):765-773.
95. Ernst E. Homeopathy for eczema: a systematic review of controlled clinical trials.
Br J Dermatol. 2012;166(6):1170-1172.
96. Baron SE, Cohen SN, Archer CB, et al. Guidance on the diagnosis and clinical
management of atopic eczema. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2012;37 Suppl 1:7-12.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following Medical Subject Heading terms or free text terms were
used either singly or in combination, search was limit to English, human
and last 10 years:
Clinical Question: Is biologics effective and safe in atopic eczema?
1. ECZEMA/
2. eczema*.tw.
3. eczematous dermati*.tw.
4. DERMATITIS, ATOPIC/
5. (atopic adj1 (eczema or dermati*)).tw.
6. (infantile adj1 eczema).tw.
7. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS/
9. biologics.tw.
10. (product* adj1 (biologic* or natural)).tw.
11. OMALIZUMAB/
12. omalizumab.tw.
13. xolair.tw.
14. RITUXIMAB/
15. antibody, rituximab cd20.tw.
16. cd20 antibody, rituximab.tw.
17. gp2013.tw.
18. idec c2b8.tw.
19. idec-c2b8.tw.
20. idecc2b8.tw.
21. ((idec c2b8 or idec-c2b8 or idecc2b8) adj1 antibody).tw.
22. mabthera.tw.
23. rituxan.tw.
24. rituximab.tw.
25. rituximab cd20 antibody.tw.
26. RECOMBINANT FUSION PROTEINS/
27. ((chimeric or fusion or hybrid) adj1 proteins, recombinant).tw.
28. (recombinant adj1 (chimeric proteins or fusion proteins or hybrid
proteins)).tw.
29. 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or
20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27 or 28
30. 7 and 29
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the reliable diagnostic criteria of atopic eczema?
2. What are the supportive investigations in atopic eczema?
3. What are the effective scoring tools in the assessment of atopic
eczema?
4. What are the co-morbidities associated with atopic eczema?
5. What are the aggravating factors of atopic eczema?
6. Are the following topical treatments effective and safe in atopic
eczema?
• Emollient
• Topical corticosteroids
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors
• Topical antibiotics and antiseptics
• Dressing
• Others
7. Are the following photo/light therapies effective and safe in atopic
eczema?
• Ultraviolet A
• Ultraviolet B
• Light-emitting diode
• Laser
8. Are the following systemic therapies effective and safe in atopic
eczema?
• Systemic immunomodulators (e.g systemic corticosteroids,
methotrexate (MTX), azathioprine (AZA), cyclosporin (CsA),
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), leukotrine inhibitors, alitretonoin,
interferon gamma)
• Biologics
• Allergen specific immunotherapy
• Antimicrobials (e.g. antibiotics, antivirals, antifungals)
• Antihistamines
9. Is food antigen elimination diet during pregnancy and lactation
effective and safe to prevent atopic eczema in babies with family
history of atopy?
10. Are the following dietary interventions effective and safe in
treatment /prevention of atopic eczema?
• Food antigen elimination (e.g. cow's milk/partially hydrolysed/
elements formula/soy milk/goat's milk/egg/wheat/chicken/fish/
peanuts)
• Breastfeeding
• Prebiotics and probiotics
• Vitamins and minerals
• Delayed introduction of complementary foods
Management of Atopic Eczema
11. Are the following traditional and complementary medicines effective
and safe in the treatment of atopic eczema?
• Herbal supplement
• Acupuncture
• Aromatherapy
• Bath therapy
• Chromotherapy
• Autologous blood injection
• Massage
• Homeopathy
12. Are
psychosocial
and
counselling
interventions
(patient’s
education) effective in atopic eczema?
13. What are the referral criteria for atopic eczema?
• Urgent referral
• Non-urgent referral
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 3
GUIDELINES FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF ATOPIC DERMATITIS
(HANIFIN AND RAJKA CRITERIA)
Must have 3 or more basic features:
1. Pruritus
2. Typical morphology and distribution:
○ Flexural lichenification or linearity in adults
○ Facial and extensor involvement in infants and children
3. Chronic or chronically-relapsing dermatitis
4. Personal or family history of atopy (asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic
dermatitis)
Plus 3 or more minor features:
1. Xerosis
2. Ichthyosis/palmar hyperlinearity/keratosis pilaris
3. Immediate (type 1) skin test reactivity
4. Elevated serum IgE
5. Early age of onset
6. Tendency toward cutaneous infections (especially Staphylococcus
aureus and Herpes simplex)/impaired cell-mediated immunity
7. Tendency toward non-specific hand or foot dermatitis
8. Nipple eczema
9. Cheilitis
10. Recurrent conjunctivitis
11. Dennie-Morgan infraorbital fold
12. Keratoconus
13. Anterior subcapsular cataracts
14. Orbital darkening
15. Facial pallor/facial erythema
16. Pityriasis alba
17. Anterior neck folds
18. Itch when sweating
19. Intolerance to wool and lipid solvents
20. Perifollicular accentuation
21. Food intolerance
22. Course influenced by environmental/emotional factors
23. White dermographism/delayed blanch
Source: Hanifin JM. Diagnostic features of atopic dermatitis. Acta Derm Venereol (Suppl).
1980; 92:44-7.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 4
INVESTIGATOR’S GLOBAL ASSESSMENT (IGA)
Modified: Eichenfield LF, Lucky AW, Boguniewicz M, et al. Safety and efficacy of
pimecrolimus (ASM 981) cream 1% in the treatment of mild and moderate atopic
dermatitis in children and adolescents. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;46(4):495504.
Score
Description
= Clear
= Almost clear
= Mild disease
= Moderate disease
= Severe disease
= Very severe disease
No inflammatory signs of atopic eczema
Just perceptible erythema, and just perceptible
papulation/infiltration
Mild erythema, and mild papulation/infiltration
Moderate erythema, and moderate
papulation/infiltration
Severe erythema, and severe papulation/infiltration
Severe erythema, and severe papulation/infiltration
with oozing/crusting
0
1
2
3
4
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 5
DERMATOLOGY LIFE QUALITY INDEX
Source: Department of Dermatology, Cardiff University. Quality of Life Questionnaires. (Available
at: http://sites.cardiff.ac.uk/dermatology/quality-of-life/)
The aim of this questionnaire is to measure how much your skin problem has affected
your life OVER THE LAST WEEK. Please tick one box for each question.
Hospital:
Name:
Age:
Address:
Date:
Diagnosis:
Score:
DLQI
1. Over the last week, how itchy, sore,
painful or stinging has your skin been?
2. Over the last week, how embarrassed
or self-conscious have you been
because of your skin?
3. Over the last week, how much has your
skin interfered with you going shopping
or looking after your home or garden?
4. Over the last week, how much has your
skin influenced the clothes you wear?
5. Over the last week, how much has your
skin affected any social or leisure
activities?
6. Over the last week, how much has your
skin made it difficult for you to do any
sport?
7. Over the last week, has your skin
prevented
you
from
working
or
studying?
If "No", over the last week how much
has your skin been a problem at work or
studying?
8. Over the last week, how much has your
skin created problems with your partner or
any of your close friends or relatives?
9. Over the last week, how much has your
skin caused any sexual difficulties?
10. Over the last week, how much of a
Problem has the treatment for your skin
been, for example by making your home
messy, or by taking up time?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Please check you have answered EVERY question. Thank you.
©AY Finlay, GK Khan, April 1992 www.dermatology.org.uk, this must not be copied without the permission of the authors.
Not relevant
Not relevant
Not relevant
Not relevant
Not relevant
Not relevant
Not relevant
Not relevant
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 6
CHILDREN’S DERMATOLOGY LIFE QUALITY INDEX
Source: Department of Dermatology, Cardiff University. Quality of Life Questionnaires. (Available
at: http://sites.cardiff.ac.uk/dermatology/quality-of-life/)
The aim of this questionnaire is to measure how much your skin problem has affected
your life OVER THE LAST WEEK. Please tick one box for each question.
Hospital:
Name:
Age:
Address:
Date:
Diagnosis:
Score:
CDLQI
1. Over the last week, how itchy, "scratchy",
sore or painful has your skin been?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
2. Over the last week, how embarrassed or
self-conscious, upset or sad have you
been because of your skin?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
3. Over the last week, how much has your
skin affected your friendships?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
4. Over the last week, how much have you
changed or worn different or special
clothes/shoes because of your skin?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
5. Over the last week, how much has your
skin trouble affected going out, playing, or
doing hobbies?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
7. Last week
was it school time?
OR
was it holiday time?
6. Over the last week, how much have you
avoided
swimming or other sports
because of your skin trouble?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
8. Over the last week, how much trouble have you
had because of your skin with other people
calling you names, teasing, bullying, asking
questions or avoiding you?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
9. Over the last week, how much has your
sleep been affected by your skin problem?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
10. Over the last week, how much of a problem
has the treatment for your skin been?
Very much
A lot
A little
Not at all
If school time: Over the
last week, how much did
your skin problem affect
your school work?
If holiday time: How much
over the last week, has your
skin problem interfered with
your enjoyment of the holiday?
Please check you have answered EVERY question. Thank you.
©M.S. Lewis-Jones, A.Y. Finlay, May 1993, this must not be copied without the permission of the authors.
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 7
TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS CLASS AND POTENCY
(UK CLASSIFICATION)
Adapted: British National Formulary (BNF). 69th edition. London: British Medical
Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, 2015.
Class &
Potency
Drug (Generic Name)
Class I
(Very Potent)
Class II
(Potent)
Class III
(Moderate)
Class IV
(Mild)
• Clobetasol propionate 0.05% cream/ointment
• Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% cream/ointment
• Betamethasone valerate 0.1% cream/ointment
• Diflucortolone valerate 0.1% cream
• Fluocinolone acetonide 0.025% cream
• Fluticasone propionate 0.05% cream
• Mometasone furoate 0.1% cream/ointment
• Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% cream
• Betamethasone valerate 1 in 2 dilution (0.05%) cream/ointment
• Betamethasone valerate 1 in 4 dilution (0.025%) cream/ointment
• Clobetasone butyrate 0.05% cream/ointment
• Betamethasone valerate 1 in 8 dilution (0.0125%) cream/ointment
• Betamethasone valerate 1 in 10 dilution (0.01%) cream/ointment
• Hydrocortisone acetate 1% cream/ointment
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 8
FINGERTIP UNIT
HOW MUCH CREAM/OINTMENT SHOULD BE USED?
Use index finger (first finger) to measure. One fingertip unit
(FTU) is the amount of cream squeezed along index finger
from tip to the first joint (as shown in picture).
1 FTU = 0.5 g (covers the size of two palms of adult)
For adults
The diagram shows
the amount of cream
needed to cover
different areas of the
body (this is only a
general guide).
Face and neck: 2½ FTU
Back (including buttocks): 7 FTU
Front (chest and abdomen): 7 FTU
One arm (not including hand): 3 FTU
Both sides of one hand: 1 FTU
One leg (not including foot): 6 FTU
One foot: 2 FTU
For children
The amount of cream
needed depends on
the age of the child
(this is only a general
guide).
Modified: Bewley A; Dermatology Working Group. Expert consensus: time for a change
in the way we advise our patients to use topical corticosteroids. Br J Dermatol.
2008;158(5):917-920.
Mooney E, Rademaker M, Dailey R, et al. Adverse effects of topical corticosteroids
in paediatric eczema: Australasian consensus statement. Australas J Dermatol.
2015;56(4):241-251.
Face
and neck
Arm
and hand
Leg
and foot
Back
Front
Child’s Age
Number of FTU needed
3 - 12 months
1 - 3 years
1 - 6 years
6 - 10 years
>10 years
1
1½
1½
2
2½
1
1½
2
2½
2
1½
2
3
4½
7
1
2
3
3½
7
1½
3
3½
5
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 9
SIX STEPS OF WET WRAP THERAPY
STEP 1:
Prepare the wet wrap/garment by soaking it in luke warm water and wring dry
STEP 2:
After a bath, apply emollients all over the body
STEP 3:
Apply prescribed anti-inflammatory medications over affected sites
STEP 4:
Apply the wet wrap/garment over the affected sites
STEP 5:
Apply a second layer of dry wrap/garment over the wet one
STEP 6:
Periodically wet the inner layer to keep it moist
Source: Paediatric Dermatology Unit, Paediatric Department, Hospital Kuala Lumpur. Six
Steps of Wet Wrap Therapy. HKL. (unpublished document)
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 10
WRITTEN ECZEMA ACTION PLAN
Source: Paediatric Dermatology Unit, Paediatric Department, Hospital Kuala Lumpur.
Written Eczema Plan. HKL. (unpublished document)
GREEN = GO
: Use preventive measures
YELLOW = CAUTION: Use lower strength medications
RED
= FLARE
: Use higher strength medications
and consult your doctor
NAME:
REGULAR DAILY SKIN CARE
1. Bath twice a day with gentle cleanser less than 10 minutes.
2. Apply moisturiser to all body parts immediately after bath.
3. Apply moisturiser to all body parts minimum thrice a day.
4. Bath and moisturise your skin before bed.
5. Wear suitable cloth/pyjamas, preferably cotton, to bed.
SKIN CARE DURING WORSENING
1. Continue regular skin care from GREEN phase.
2. Apply anti-inflammatory creams till eczema clears.
2a. Face: Apply hydrocortisone 1% twice a day for 5 - 7 days,
then once a day for 5 - 7 days till eczema clears.
2b. Body: Apply betamethasone (1:4) twice a day for 5 - 7 days,
then once a day for 5 - 7 days till eczema clears.
3. Take antihistamine (anti-itch), prescribed by doctor, half an
hour before bed.
4. If eczema gets better, revert back to GREEN phase.
5. If eczema not responding within 3 days or eczema and itch
worsens, move to RED phase.
SKIN CARE DURING UNCONTROLLED ECZEMA
1. Continue regular skin care form GREEN phase.
2. Bath daily with antiseptic wash for 5 - 7 days.
3. Apply anti-inflammatory creams till eczema clears.
3a. Face: Apply betamethasone (1:8) twice a day for 5 - 7 days,
then once a day for 5 - 7 days till eczema clears.
3b. Body: Apply betamethasone (1:2) twice a day for 5 - 7 days,
then once a day for 5 - 7 days till eczema clears.
4. Take antihistamine (anti-itch), prescribed by doctor, half an
hour before bed.
5. If eczema gets better revert back to YELLOW phase, then
subsequently to GREEN phase.
6. If eczema not responding within 3 days or eczema and itch
worsens, consult your doctor.
ECZEMA UNDER CONTROL
ECZEMA WORSENING
UNCONTROLLED ECZEMA
GREEN
RED
YELLOW
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 11
RECOMMENDED MEDICATION DOSING, SIDE EFFECTS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR
COMMONLY USED MEDICATIONS IN ATOPIC ECZEMA
DRUG
RECOMMENDED
DOSAGE
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
CONTRAINDICATIONS
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS
TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS
Mild
Betamethasone Valerate
1 in 10 dilution (0.01%) Cream/Ointment
Betamethasone Valerate
1 in 8 dilution (0.0125%) Cream/Ointment
Hydrocortisone Acetate
1% Cream/Ointment
1 - 2 times daily
1 - 2 times daily
Worsening of untreated
infection, contact dermatitis,
perioral dermatitis, acne,
depigmentation, dryness,
hypertrichosis, secondary
infection, skin atrophy, pruritus,
tingling/stinging, rosacea,
folliculitis, photosensitivity
Moderate
Betamethasone Valerate
1 in 2 dilution (0.05%) Cream/Ointment
Betamethasone Valerate
1 in 4 dilution (0.025%) Cream/Ointment
Clobetasone Butyrate
0.05% Cream/Ointment
Untreated bacterial, fungal
or viral skin lesions in
rosacea and perioral
dermatitis
Avoid prolonged use
Caution when used on face or intertriginous
and flexor areas
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 11
RECOMMENDED MEDICATION DOSING, SIDE EFFECTS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR
COMMONLY USED MEDICATIONS IN ATOPIC ECZEMA (CONT.)
DRUG
RECOMMENDED
DOSAGE
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
CONTRAINDICATION
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS
TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS (continued)
Mometasone Furoate
0.1% Cream/Ointment
Potent
Betamethasone Dipropionate
0.05% Cream/Ointment
Betamethasone Valerate
0.1% Cream/Ointment
Fluocinolone Acetonide
0.025% Cream
Fluticasone Propionate
0.05% Cream
Triamcinolone Acetonide
0.1% Cream
1 - 2 times daily
1 - 2 times daily
Once daily
Worsening of untreated
infection, contact dermatitis,
perioral dermatitis, acne,
depigmentation, dryness,
hypertrichosis, secondary
infection, skin atrophy, pruritus,
tingling/stinging, rosacea,
folliculitis, photosensitivity
Untreated bacterial, fungal
or viral skin lesions,
in rosacea and perioral
dermatitis
Avoid prolonged use.
Caution when used on face or intertriginous
and flexor areas
Very Potent
Clobetasol Propionate
0.05% Cream/Ointment
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 11
RECOMMENDED MEDICATION DOSING, SIDE EFFECTS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR
COMMONLY USED MEDICATIONS IN ATOPIC ECZEMA (CONT.)
DRUG
RECOMMENDED
DOSAGE
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
CONTRAINDICATION
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS
Azathioprine
-
,
TOPICAL CALCINEURIN INHIBITORS
Tacrolimus 0.03% - 0.1% Ointment
-
Twice daily
Hypersensitivity to tacrolimus.
Pimecrolimus 1% Cream
Twice daily
Hypersensitivity to pimecrolimus.
Burning, stinging, soreness,
pruritus, skin disorders,
headache, flu-like symptoms
Application site reactions, risk
for infections, headache, fever
Use in patients with Netherton's
syndrome or other skin diseases
with barrier defect is not
recommended
Only to be used in children age two
years and older
1 - 3 mg/kg daily
(Off-label use)
Nausea, vomiting, pancreatitis,
pericarditis, bone marrow
depression (dose-related)
characterised by anaemia,
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia
and rarely, aplastic anaemia,
acute myeloid leukaemia,
hematological toxicity,
hypersensitivity reaction
(Stevens-Johnson’s syndrome,
toxic epidermal necrolysis),
hepatotoxicity
Hypersensitivity to azathioprine, history
of treatment with alkylating agents (e.g.
chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide)
Thiopurine methyltransferase
(TPMT) enzyme deficiency
Women of childbearing age
Screen for Hepatitis B, C and HIV
before commencement
Monitor FBC, RP and LFT two
weeks after commencement and as
needed subsequently
SYSTEMIC (ORAL) IMMUNOMODULATING AGENTS
Management of Atopic Eczema
Appendix 11
RECOMMENDED MEDICATION DOSING, SIDE EFFECTS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR
COMMONLY USED MEDICATIONS IN ATOPIC ECZEMA (CONT.)
DRUG
RECOMMENDED
DOSAGE
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
CONTRAINDICATION
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS
Cyclosporine A/Ciclosporin
Hypersensitivity to cyclosporine,
concomitant phototherapy
SYSTEMIC (ORAL) IMMUNOMODULATING AGENTS (continued)
Methotrexate
2.5 - 5 mg/kg daily
in two divided doses
Hypertension, hepatoxicity, tremor,
paraesthesia, hypertrichosis, oedema,
acne, gingival hypertrophy,
hyperkalaemia, increased
susceptibility to infections,
nephrotoxicity, seizures
Limit use to two years to prevent
increased risk of malignancy
Avoid excessive sunlight exposure
Pregnancy and breast feeding
Screen for Hepatitis B, C and HIV
before commencement
Monitor FBC, RP and LFT two
weeks after commencement and as
needed subsequently
10 - 25 mg weekly
(0.2 - 0.5 mg/kg);
not to exceed 30mg
weekly
(Off-label use)
Gastrointestinal disturbances (e.g.
diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting), bone
marrow depression, aplastic
anaemia, hepatotoxicity, renal
failure, skin reactions (e.g.
photosensitivity, toxic epidermal
necrolysis) alopecia, dizziness,
neurotoxicity, encephalopathy,
seizure, infections
Chronic liver disease, alcoholic
liver disease, breast-feeding,
hypersensitivity to methotrexate,
evidence of immunodeficiency
syndrome, pre-existing blood
dyscrasias, pregnancy in patients
with non-malignant disease
Pre-existing peptic ulcer disease or
ulcerative colitis
Nephrotoxicity may occur especially
at high doses
Monitoring and dose adjustment for
elderly
Screen for Hepatitis B, C and HIV
before commencement
Monitor FBC, RP and LFT two
weeks after commencement and as
needed subsequently
Management of Atopic Eczema
Source: MIMS Drug Monograph, MIMS Product Monograph, and Truven Health Analytics Micromedex® Solutions 2018 at MIMS Gateway (Available at: https://
online1.mimsgateway.com.my/)
Appendix 11
RECOMMENDED MEDICATION DOSING, SIDE EFFECTS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR
COMMONLY USED MEDICATIONS IN ATOPIC ECZEMA (CONT.)
DRUG
RECOMMENDED
DOSAGE
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
CONTRAINDICATION
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS
Mycophenolate Mofetil
Hypersensitivity to mycophenolate
Mycophenolate Sodium
SYSTEMIC (ORAL) IMMUNOMODULATING AGENTS (continued)
Prednisolone
1.5 - 2 g daily in two
divided doses
(Off-label use)
720 mg twice daily
in two divided doses
(Off-label use)
Diarrhoea, dyspepsia, vomiting,
abnormal liver function test, acne,
leukopenia, sepsis, certain infections
Avoid use of concomitant live
vaccines
Pregnancy and women of
childbearing age
Screen for Hepatitis B, C and HIV
before commencement
Monitor FBC, RP and LFT two
weeks after commencement and as
needed subsequently
Adults:
5 - 60 mg daily in
2 - 4 divided doses
Children:
1 - 2 mg/kg daily in
2 - 4 divided doses
Maximum: 60 mg
Fluid retention, hypertension, acne,
Cushing's syndrome and growth
retardation in children,
hyperglycaemia, increased appetite,
obesity, peptic ulcer, pancreatitis,
osteoporosis, headache, seizure,
psychotic disorder, glaucoma, druginduced myopathy, drug-induced
adrenocortical insufficiency,
superinfection
Systemic fungal infections
May exacerbate conditions of
patients with hypothyroidism,
cirrhosis, ulcerative colitis,
hypertension, diabetes, peptic ulcer,
osteoporosis, psychological
disturbances, on-going or latent
infection
Use lowest effective dose; taper
dose when necessary
Management of Atopic Eczema
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AE
atopic eczema
AZA
azathioprine
BSA
body surface area
CAM
complementary and alternatives medicine
Cer-Mg
ceramide-magnesium
CDLQI
Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index
CI
confidence interval
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
DASI
Dyshidrotic Eczema Area and Severity Index
DFI
Dermatitis Family Impact
DG
Development Group
DHA
docosahexaenoic acid
DLQI
Dermatology Life Quality Index
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
EASI
Eczema Area and Severity Index
EC-MPS
enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium
EPA
eicosapentaenoic acid
EPO
evening primrose oil
FTU
fingertip unit
GLA
gamma-linolenic acid
HPA
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
HR
hazard ratio
IDQOL
Infant’s Dermatology Quality of Life Index
IFN-γ
interferon gamma
IgE
immunoglobulin E
IGA
Investigators’ Global Assessment
IL-4
interleukin-4
IL-13
interleukin-13
ISAAC
International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood
IVIG
intravenous immunoglobulin
kg
kilogramme
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
MD
mean difference
mg
milligramme
MoH
Ministry of Health
MMF
mycophenolate mofetil
MRSA
Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus
MTX
methotrexate
NB-UVB
narrow band ultraviolet B
OR(s)
odds ratio(s)
pHF-W
partially-hydrolysed formula 100% whey
POEM
Patient-Orientated Eczema Measure
PO-SCORAD
Patient-Oriented Severity Scoring of Atopic Dermatitis
QoL
quality of life
RC
Review Committee
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RNA
ribonucleic acid
RR
relative risk
RRR
relative risk reduction
SASSAD
Six Area, Six Signs Atopic Dermatitis
Management of Atopic Eczema
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Dr. Ana Fizalinda Abdullah Sani, Senior Principal Assistant
Director, MaHTAS
• Mr. Mohd Tholib Ibrahim on retrieval of evidence and Ms. Noormah
Darus on critical appraisal in the CPG development
• Ms. Gan Yan Nee, Principal Assistant Director, MaHTAS for
illustrating the front cover of this CPG
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review
Committee had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in
pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. Details are
available upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Atopic Eczema was
supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia while the
printing was partially funded by the Persatuan Dermatologi Malaysia.
SCORAD
Severity Scoring of Atopic Dermatitis
SIT
specific allergen immunotherapy
SMD
standardised mean difference
TCIs
topical calcineurin inhibitors
TCM
traditional and complementary medicine
TCS
topical corticosteroids
TEWL
transepidermal water loss
TNF-α
Tumour Necrosis Factor Alpha
TPMT
thiopurine methyltransferase
UVA
ultraviolet A
UVA1
ultraviolet A1
VAS
Visual Analogue Score
VCO
virgin coconut oil
vs
versus
WEAP
Written Eczema Action Plan
WWT
wet wrap therapy
Management of Atopic Eczema
wil