CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2018 MOHIIPAKIG96.18(GU)
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
(SECOND EDITION)
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-39-7
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.msn.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2018 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2022) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations,
i
Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
v
Development Group
viii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm 1 Screening and Investigations for
xi
Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults
with Diabetes
Algorithm 2 Screening and Investigations for
xii
Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults
without Diabetes
Algorithm 3 Evaluation of Haematuria in
xiii
Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults
Algorithm 4 Treatment for Chronic Kidney Disease
xiv
in Adults
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
2
3
ASSESSMENT
4
3.1 Screening
4
3.2 Renal Function
6
3.3 Renal Ultrasound
7
3.4 Classification
8
4.
INTERVENTIONS IN DELAYING THE PROGRESSION
11
OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
4.1 Treatment of Hypertension and Proteinuria for
11
Renoprotection
4.2 Glycaemic Control for Renoprotection
16
4.3 Protein Restriction for Renoprotection
17
4.4 Lipid Lowering for Renoprotection
17
4.5 Uric Acid Reduction for Renoprotection
18
4.6 Miscellaneous Agents for Renoprotection
18
4.7 Special Precautions
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
5.
INTERVENTIONS IN REDUCING THE RISK OF
20
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE IN CHRONIC
KIDNEY DISEASE
5.1 Lipid Lowering Agents
20
5.2 Antiplatelet Agents
20
6.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE WITH PREGNANCY
22
7.
REFERRAL
24
8.
SCREENING FOR COMPLICATIONS
26
8.1 Anaemia
26
8.2 Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder
27
9.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
29
9.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
29
9.2 Potential Resource Implications
29
10.
REFERENCES
31
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
35
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
36
Appendix 3 Dosage Recommendation in CKD for
37
Commonly Prescribed Oral Medications
Appendix 4 United States Food and
45
Drug Administration (FDA)
Pharmaceutical Pregnancy Categories
List of Abbreviations
46
Acknowledgement
47
Disclosure Statement
47
Source of Funding
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Risk factors
• Patients with diabetes mellitus and/or hypertension should be
screened at least yearly for chronic kidney disease (CKD).
• Screening for CKD may be considered for patients with:
 age >65 years old
 obesity
 cardiovascular disease
 metabolic syndrome
 drugs e.g. nephrotoxic drugs, long-term use of proton-pump
inhibitors or analgesics
 family history of CKD or hereditary kidney disease
 gout
 multisystem diseases with potential kidney involvement e.g.
systemic lupus erythematosus
 structural renal tract disease, renal calculi or prostatic hypertrophy
 opportunistic (incidental) detection of haematuria or proteinuria
Assessment and classification
• Renal function should be assessed using estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) based on the 2009 CKD-epidemiology (CKDEPI) creatinine equation.
• Serum creatinine should not be used alone in the assessment of
renal function.
• Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) staging should
be used to classify chronic kidney disease.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Treatment
• Blood pressure target for chronic kidney disease (CKD) should be
aimed at*:
SBP=systolic blood pressure
*Blood pressure targets should be individualised according to co-morbidities and
age.
• Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme
Inhibitor
(ACEi)/Angiotensin
Receptor Blocker (ARB) should be used as first-line agent in:
 diabetic kidney disease (DKD) with albuminuria
 non-DKD when urinary protein excretion ≥1.0 g/day
 non-DKD with hypertension when urinary protein excretion ≥0.5
g/day
• The target HbA1c should be ≤7% in DKD but this should be
individualised according to co-morbidities and age.
• Statin should be offered to patients with CKD for primary and
secondary prevention of cardiovascular events.
• Aspirin should be used in patients with CKD for secondary prevention
of cardiovascular disease (CVD).
• Aspirin should not be used as primary prevention of CVD in CKD.
• Combination of clopidogrel with aspirin should be avoided in patients
with CKD unless compelling indications are present.
Pregnancy
• All female patients of reproductive age with chronic kidney disease
(CKD) should receive pre-pregnancy care.
• Pregnancy should be avoided in women with either:
 moderate to severe renal impairment
 poorly controlled hypertension
 heavy proteinuria
 active systemic disease
• All pregnant women with CKD should be co-managed by a
multidisciplinary team.
iii
Diabetic Kidney
Disease (DKD)
Non-DKD
Cause
≥1 g/day
<1 g/day
≤130/80 mmHg
(SBP 120 to 130 mmHg)
≤130/80 mmHg
(SBP 120 to 130 mmHg)
≤130/80 mmHg
(SBP 120 to 130 mmHg)
≤140/90 mmHg*
(SBP 120 to 140 mmHg)
Proteinuria
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Referral
• A patient with chronic kidney disease (CKD) with any of the following
criteria should be referred to a nephrologist/physician:
 persistent heavy proteinuria [urine protein ≥1 g/day or urine
protein: creatinine ratio (uPCR) ≥100 mg/mmol*] despite optimal
treatment
 persistent isolated microscopic haematuria after excluding
urogynaecological cause
 persistent haematuria with proteinuria (urine protein ≥0.5 g/day or
uPCR ≥50 mg/mmol*)
 rapidly declining renal function [loss of estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) >5 ml/min/1.73 m2 in one year or >10 ml/
min/1.73 m2 within five years]
 eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2 (eGFR categories G4 - G5)
 resistant hypertension (failure to achieve target blood pressure
despite three antihypertensive agents including a diuretic)
 suspected renal artery stenosis
 suspected hereditary kidney disease
 pregnant or when pregnancy is planned
 persistent abnormalities of serum potassium
 unexplained cause of CKD
*This is an estimation for practical purpose. The actual conversion of urine
protein 1 g/day=uPCR 113 mg/mmol.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH),
Ministry of Higher Education and private healthcare. There was active
involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the
process of the CPG development.
The CPG update was done based on the first edition of evidencebased CPG on Management of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) in
Adults, issued in 2011. In the update, certain methodology was used
e.g. GRADE principles, and the scope expanded/added on risk factors,
classification, treatment, pregnancy and complications (e.g. anaemia
and CKD-Mineral Bone Disease). Dietary interventions and lifestyle
modification were not included. A literature search was carried out
using the following electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and
Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed and
Guidelines International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of
Search Strategy). The search was limited to literature published in the
last four years, on humans and in English. In addition, the reference
lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to further
identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted to
identify further studies. All searches were conducted from 13 May 2016
to 10 October 2016. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31 December 2017 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
References were made to other CPGs on CKD e.g.
• KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease (Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes CKD Work Group, 2013)
• Chronic kidney disease in adults: assessment and management
(National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2014)
• Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) Management in General Practice
(3rd Edition) (Kidney Health Australia, 2015)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to being used as references.
A total of 11 main clinical questions were developed under four
different sections (screening, treatment, referral and CKD-related
complications). Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 19 times throughout the development of
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
these guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least
two DG members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist,
presented in evidence tables and further discussed in DG meetings.
All statements and recommendations subsequently formulated were
agreed upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient,
the recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC.
This CPG is based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, metaanalyses and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG strictly
follows the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website
for feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally
presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the
HTA and CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details
on the CPG development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained
from Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidencebased Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at
http://www.moh.gov.my/penerbitan/mymahtas/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide recommendations on the
following:
• Identification of risk in developing CKD
• Screening and early detection of CKD
• Treatment of early CKD to prevent progression
• Reduction in risk of cardiovascular disease in CKD
• Management of CKD in special populations
• Indications and timing for referral
• Screening for CKD-related complications
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
a. Inclusion Criteria
•
Adults at risk of/with CKD
b. Exclusion Criteria
•
CKD patients on dialysis and transplant
The CPG will also not address detail treatment for CKD-related
complications and specific renal diseases.
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care in the management
of CKD in adults including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. policy makers
v. patients and their advocates
vi. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
viii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Ching Chen Hua
Consultant Nephrologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Ang Hock Aun
Consultant Physician & Endocrinologist
Bagan Specialist Centre, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Anita Bhajan Manocha
Consultant Nephrologist
Hospital Seberang Jaya, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Iliza Idris
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Ampangan
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Kong Wei Yen
Lecturer & Consultant Nephrologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kow Fei Ping
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Baru Air Itam
Pulau Pinang
Associate Professor Dr. Lim Soo Kun
Lecturer & Consultant Nephrologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Manjulaa Devi Subramaniam
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head, Clinical Practices Guidelines Unit
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Sunita Bavanandan
Consultant Nephrologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
ix
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Tan Chwee Choon
Senior Consultant Nephrologist
Members
Dr. Baizury Bashah
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Datuk Dr. Ghazali Ahmad Kutty
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Nephrologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hooi Lai Seong
Senior Consultant Nephrologist
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Norkasihan Ibrahim
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Ong Loke Meng
Senior Consultant Nephrologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Mithra A/P Seganathirajah
Consultant General Physician
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dato’ Dr. Zaki Morad Mohamad Zaher
Consultant Nephrologist, KPJ Ampang Puteri Specialist Hospital &
Chairman, National Kidney Foundation
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
x
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Amir S. Khir
Foundation Professor Medicine,
Penang Medical College &
Consultant Endocrinologist,
Gleneagles Penang Hospital
Pulau Pinang
Dr. Bee Boon Cheak
Consultant Nephrologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Ms. Choong Chiau Ling
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Chuah Siew Kee
Consultant General Physician
Pantai Hospital, Kelang, Selangor
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Jimmy Teo Boon Wee
Head, Division of Nephrology
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Dr. Mohd. Fozi Kamarudin
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Beseri, Perlis
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nik Sherina Haidi Hanafi
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ong Hean Teik
Consultant Cardiologist
HT Ong Heart Clinic, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Philip Navaratnam Jeremiah
Consultant Physician & Nephrologist
Ampang Puteri Specialist Hospital
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sharmini Diana Parampalam
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Professor Dr. Sydney Tang Chi Wai
Chair of Renal Medicine &
Yu Professor in Nephrology
The University of Hong Kong, China
Professor Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee
Consultant Dietitian
International Medical University
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
xi
ALGORITHM 1. SCREENING AND INVESTIGATIONS FOR
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE IN ADULTS WITH DIABETES
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in
Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2011
Urine dipstick for protein
a) Type 1: After 5 years history of
diabetes or earlier in the presence of
other cardiovascular risk factors.
b) Type 2: At time of diagnosis
NEGATIVE
POSITIVE on 2 occasions
(Urine protein >0.3 mg/mol)
(exclude other causes e.g. urinary
tract infection (UTI), congestive
cardiac failure (CCF), others)
Overt nephropathy
Screen for
microalbuminuria
on early morning
spot urine
POSITIVE
NEGATIVE
Yearly test for
microalbuminuria
and renal function
Retest twice in 3 - 6 months
(exclude other causes e.g.
UTI, CCF, others)
• If 2 of 3 tests are
positive, diagnosis of
diabetic kidney
disease is established
• Quantify
microalbuminuria
• 3- to 6-monthly followup of microalbuminuria
• Check renal function
• Exclude other
nephropathies
• Perform renal
ultrasound scan if
indicated (refer to
Section 3.3)
Quantify
proteinuria
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
xii
ALGORITHM 2. SCREENING AND INVESTIGATIONS FOR
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE IN ADULTS WITHOUT DIABETES
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in
Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2011
Risk factors for Chronic Kidney Disease:
•
hypertension
•
age >65 years old
•
obesity
•
cardiovascular disease
•
metabolic syndrome
•
drugs e.g. nephrotoxic drugs, long-term use of
proton-pump inhibitors or analgesics
•
family history of CKD or hereditary kidney disease
•
gout
•
multisystem diseases with potential kidney
involvement e.g. systemic lupus
erythematosus
•
structural renal tract disease, renal calculi or
prostatic hypertrophy
•
opportunistic (incidental) detection of haematuria
Check urine using dipstick
(refer to Section 3.1)
Proteinuria on
2 out of 3 occasions
Yearly urine test
and renal function test
(refer to Section 3.2)
•
Quantify proteinuria
•
Check renal function
(refer to Section 3.2)
•
Perform renal ultrasound scan
if indicated (refer to Section 3.3)
NO
YES
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
xiii
ALGORITHM 3. EVALUATION OF HAEMATURIA IN CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE IN ADULTS
Presence of microscopic haematuria
Signs and
symptoms
of UTI
Yes
No
• Treat infection
• Confirm resolution of
microscopic
haematuria with
follow-up urinalysis
after six weeks
completion of
therapy
Yes
No
Stop
contributing
factors
Refer to
nephrologist
Refer to
urologist
*vigorous exercise, trauma to urethra,
menstruation, medications
**proteinuria, red cell casts, dysmorphic red
blood cells, elevated creatinine
Other
aetiologies*
Evidence of
glomerular
disease**
Yes
No
Re-test for
microscopic
haematuria
No
haematuria
Discharge
Presence of haematuria
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 4. TREATMENT FOR CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE IN ADULTS
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2011
Diabetic Kidney Disease
• Optimisation of glycaemic control
• Strict blood pressure (BP) control
• Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
Inhibitor (ACEi)/Angiotensin
Receptor Blocker (ARB)
Non-Diabetic Kidney Disease
Hypertension
(BP >140/90
mmHg)
Yes
No
Proteinuria
( 0.5 g/day)
Yes
Proteinuria
( 1.0 g/day)
Yes
No
No
Any antihypertensive to
achieve target BP
• ACEi/ARB (preferred)
• Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers
General measures in the management of CKD
•
Encourage exercise, weight reduction and Manage cardiovascular risks including
smoking cessation dyslipidaemia
•
•
•
Restrict sodium intake to <2,400 mg/day Monitor renal profile according to individual
(1 teaspoon of table salt) patient’s characteristics (baseline renal
•
Avoid excessive protein intake function, risk factors for CKD progression and
•
Identify other end-organ damage of diabetes specific treatment given)
and hypertension
Diagnosis of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) has emerged as a global public health
problem because of the increasing number of patients with CKD, risk of
progression to end-stage renal disease (ESRD), and high morbidity and
mortality.1 This growing figure will impose enormous socio-economic
burdens on the healthcare system.
CKD is a common but silent and often under-recognised condition.
The Malaysian National Health and Morbidity Survey 2011 showed a
prevalence of 9.07% in adults with CKD, and only 4% of respondents
were aware of the diagnosis.2 There were 37,183 patients on regular
dialysis in 2015, with 7,595 new patients entering dialysis.3 The number
of Malaysians with CKD is projected to significantly increase in the future
mainly due to the increasing prevalence of diabetes, hypertension and
the aging population.
CKD is a strong risk factor for mortality and coronary events.4, 5 However,
it is preventable and treatable. If CKD is detected early and managed
appropriately, the deterioration in kidney function can be reduced by as
much as 50%.6 Lifestyle changes, initiation of Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme Inhibitor (ACEi) or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (ARB) are
proven interventions to delay renal disease progression and also
reduce cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk.
In Taiwan, the prevalence of CKD was estimated to be 11.9% while
awareness was only 3.5%.7 After the introduction of a nationwide CKD
Preventive Project in 2001, consisting of screening high-risk populations,
patient education and multidisciplinary team care, the prevalence rate
was greatly reduced and the annual growth rate of patients requiring
dialysis decreased from 6% to 3%.8 This is a successful CKD prevention
programme that can be emulated in Malaysia.
Early detection at primary care and timely intervention are important
strategies in delaying CKD progression. Shared decision making and
close collaboration between different levels of healthcare should
be implemented in the management of CKD locally.
The aim of this CPG is to provide an evidence-based guidance
for healthcare providers to screen for CKD and commence early
interventions to ameliorate or even halt the progression of CKD. It can
also be used as a reference for the relevant stakeholders when forming
public health plans for comprehensive CKD management.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
2. RISK FACTORS
Early detection and intervention on patients at risk of CKD may prevent
the development and progression of the disease.
Recommendation 1
• Patients with diabetes mellitus and/or hypertension should be
screened at least yearly for chronic kidney disease (CKD).
• Screening for CKD may be considered for patients with:
○ age >65 years old
○ obesity
○ cardiovascular disease
○ metabolic syndrome
○ drugs e.g. nephrotoxic drugs, long-term use of proton-pump
inhibitors or analgesics
○ family history of CKD or hereditary kidney disease
○ gout
○ multisystem diseases with potential kidney involvement e.g.
systemic lupus erythematosus
○ structural renal tract disease, renal calculi or prostatic hypertrophy
○ opportunistic (incidental) detection of haematuria or proteinuria
The risk factors of CKD are as follows:
A. Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an established risk factor for CKD.
Patients with DM should be screened at least yearly for CKD.9
B. Hypertension
Hypertension may be a cause or consequence of CKD and may
accelerate the progression of renal disease leading to ESRD.
Patients with hypertension should also be screened at least yearly
for CKD.9
C. Age
Individual >65 years are at increased risk of CKD.9
D. Obesity
Obesity increases the risk of developing low estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) with RR of 1.18 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.28) and
albuminuria with RR of 1.51 (95% CI 1.36 to 1.67), independent of
metabolic syndrome.10, level II-2
E. Cardiovascular Disease
Patients with atherosclerotic vascular disease have 1.4 times
greater risk of developing CKD compared with those without the
disease in a 2-year follow-up.9
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
F. Metabolic Syndrome
Metabolic syndrome is a risk factor for CKD as shown by a large
meta-analysis of 11 cohort studies (OR=1.55, 95% CI 1.34 to
1.80). The strength of the association increases as the number of
components of metabolic syndrome increases (p=0.02).11, level II-2
G. Drugs
There is conflicting evidence in the association between chronic
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), aspirin and
paracetamol usage and the development of CKD.9 However, among
the most common risk factors for acute decline in GFR for patients
with established CKD is NSAIDs, including cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitors.12
Use of proton pump inhibitors (PPI) has been shown to
significantly increase the risk of developing CKD (RR/OR range
of 1.10 to 1.50)13 - 15, level II-2 and progression of CKD (HR between
1.26 to 1.32).15 - 16, level II-2 The risk correlates with cumulative dose
of exposure.14 - 16, level II-2 However, this association was not evident
with cumulative dose of H2-blocker.16, level II-2
• Certain herbal products including those containing aristolochic acid
are associated with CKD.9
H. Family history
Family history of kidney disease in first degree relatives increases
the risk of CKD by 40% in a 25-year follow-up.9
I.
Other risk factors
Gout17, level II-2 and asymptomatic hyperuricaemia18, level II-2 are
associated with CKD.
Individuals with incidental detection of proteinuria and/or haematuria
during opportunistic medical screening need to be investigated for
CKD.9
Other possible risk factors include autoimmune disease,
nephrolithiasis, structural renal tract disease, prostatic hypertrophy,
low birth weight of <2,500 g, smoking, low socioeconomic status,
anaemia, nocturia and physical inactivity.9
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
3. ASSESSMENT
3.1 Screening
CKD screening includes urinalysis and renal function.
3.1.1 Proteinuria
Recommendation 2
• Urine dipstick should be used to screen for proteinuria and
haematuria.
• In patients with diabetes, albumin: creatinine ratio on an early
morning spot urine sample should be performed to screen for
microalbuminuria if urine dipstick for protein is negative.
Proteinuria has both diagnostic and prognostic value in CKD. Presence
of proteinuria should be confirmed by a repeat test within three months.
Refer to Algorithm 1 and 2 on Screening and Investigations for CKD
in Adults with and without Diabetes.
Urine protein excretion may be influenced by factors as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Factors affecting urinary protein excretion
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in
Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2011
Albumin concentration should be reported as a ratio to urinary creatinine
concentration [urine albumin: creatinine ratio (ACR) in mg/mmol or
mg/g].12 Urine ACR is highly sensitive and specific for microalbuminuria.
An early morning urine sample is preferred to minimise the effect of
posture and exercise.9
Increases protein excretion
• Strenuous exercise
• Uncontrolled DM
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Heart failure
• UTI
• Acute febrile illness
• Haematuria
• Menstruation
• Pregnancy
Decreases protein excretion
• ACEi/ARB
• NSAIDs
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
The proposed albuminuria categories A1-3 are more clinically
meaningful than the term microalbuminuria. The term microalbuminuria
is discouraged as it can be misleading in suggesting that the albumin
may be small or different in some way.12
24-hour urine collection should be used for protein quantification.
However, an early morning urine protein: creatinine ratio (uPCR) can
be used as an alternative.12
The diagnosis of proteinuria is shown in Table 2.9
Table 2. Diagnosis of abnormal protein or albumin excretion
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in
Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2011
Refer to Algorithm 1 and 2 on screening and investigations in CKD.
3.1.2 Haematuria
Persistence microscopic haematuria may indicate significant pathology
such as infection, glomerulonephritis, renal calculi, malignancy and
other forms of kidney damage. A positive dipstick test for blood on two
out of three occasions warrant a full microscopic examination.
Urine microscopy (preferably phase contrast microscopy) on a fresh
specimen can be used to differentiate haematuria of glomerular or nonglomerular origin. Non-glomerular haematuria warrants a urological
evaluation. Refer to Algorithm 3 on Evaluation of Haematuria in
Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults.
Urine
dipstick
reading
Urine PCR
in
mg/mmol
Urine total
protein
excretion
in g/24
hour
Urine ACR
in
mg/mmol
Urine
albumin
excretion
in
µg/min
(mg/24 hour)
Class
Normal
Negative
<15
Microalbuminuria Negative
<15
Trace
15 - 44
Macroalbuminuria
1+
2+
3+
45 - 149
0.45 - 1.49
150 - 449 1.50 - 4.49
≥450
≥4.50
0.15 - 0.44
<0.15
<0.15
≥2.5 to 30
(male)
≥3.5 to 30
(female)
<2.5 (male)
<3.5
(female)
<20
(<30)
20 - 200
(30 - 300)
>200
(>300)
>30
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
3.2 Renal Function
Recommendation 3
• Renal function should be assessed using estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) based on the 2009 CKD-epidemiology (CKDEPI) creatinine equation.
• Serum creatinine should not be used alone in the assessment of
renal function.
Serum creatinine (SCr) is not sensitive to diagnose early CKD as it
is affected by age, gender, ethnicity, muscle mass and dietary protein
intake. It will only rise after a 50% decline of eGFR.9 (Refer to Figure 1)
Figure 1. The relationship between glomerular filtration rate and
serum creatinine concentration
Adapted: Investigation of renal function (1) (Available at https://clinicalgate.com/
investigation-of-renal-function-1/)
There are various formulae to evaluate eGFR. CKD-epidemiology
(CKD-EPI) creatinine equation validated in the Western population
has shown superiority over the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease
(MDRD) equation especially at higher eGFR (>60 ml/min/1.73 m2).19, level III
A study in Malaysian population showed that CKD-EPI creatinine
equation had better accuracy over MDRD in patients with eGFR
<60 ml/min/1.73 m2 and ≥90 ml/min/1.73 m2, using Cr-51-EDTA as
a reference. However, both formulae were comparable in those with
eGFR between 60 and 89 ml/min/1.73 m2.20, level III
In the elderly (age >65 years), there is no accurate method to assess
renal function. The Cockcroft-Gault Creatinine Clearance equation, MDRD
Serum creatinine
(µmol/L)
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160
GFR (mL/min)
Reference
interval
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
equation and cystatin C have the highest correlation to the gold
standards e.g. inulin, Cr-51-EDTA, Tc-DTPA or iohexol assays.21, level III More
studies are required to address the best formula for this age group.
The Cockcroft-Gault equation has been traditionally used for drug
dosing based on creatinine clearance. In recent practice, CKD-EPI
equation is used for drug dosing based on eGFR especially for newer
generation drugs. However drug dosing adjustment should be done
according to the United States Food and Drug Administrative- or
European Medicines Agency-approved product labelling.
Cystatin C is used for eGFR assessment and it is independent of
muscle mass, age, sex, weight, height or dietary protein intake.9
The combination of SCr and serum cystatin C is more accurate than
either marker alone for eGFR. Cystatin C is expensive and not widely
available. It may be used for confirmation of CKD in adults with eGFR of
45 - 59 ml/min/1.73 m2 with no other markers of kidney damage.22, level III
Equations for Estimation of Renal Function
i. 2009 CKD-EPI creatinine equation =
141 x min (Scr/κ,1)α x max (Scr/κ,1)-1.209 x 0.993Age [x 1.018 if female]
[x 1.159 if black], where Scr is serum creatinine (in mg/dl), κ is 0.7
for females and 0.9 for males, α is -0.329 for females and -0.411 for
males, min indicates the minimum of Scr/κ or 1, and max indicates
the maximum of Scr/κ or 1
ii. Cockcroft-Gault Creatinine Clearance =
CrCl (ml/min/1.73 m2) = (140 - age (yrs)) x body weight (kg)/SCr
(umol/l) x Constant where the constant is 1.23 in male or 1.04 in
female
When creatinine-based equations are used, calibration of SCr should
confer to the isotope dilution mass spectrophotometry method to
minimise variations in results.9
3.3 Renal Ultrasound
Ultrasound is a useful first-line test for renal tract imaging. It provides
information on:
• renal size and symmetry
• cortical thickness and echogenicity
• urinary tract obstruction
• solid or cystic lesions
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
• General indications for renal ultrasound:9
○ rapid deterioration of renal function (loss of eGFR >5 ml/min/1.73 m2
within one year or 10 ml/min/1.73 m2 within five years)
○ haematuria
○ symptoms or history of urinary tract obstruction
○ family history of polycystic kidney disease and age over 20 years
○ when a renal biopsy is indicated
3.4 Classification
Recommendation 4
• Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) staging should
be used to classify chronic kidney disease.
The current classification of CKD is based on KDIGO 2012 guidelines
which has health and prognostic implications.12
• CKD is defined as:
○ eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 that is present >3 months with or
without evidence of kidney damage*
OR
○ evidence of kidney damage* that is present >3 months with or
without eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2
*Markers of kidney damage are:
a. albuminuria (AER ≥30 mg/24 hours or ACR ≥3 mg/mmol)
b. urine sediment abnormalities
c. electrolyte and other abnormalities due to tubular disorders
d. abnormalities detected by histology
e. structural abnormalities detected by imaging
f. history of kidney transplantation
• CKD in itself is NOT a diagnosis. There should be attempts to identify
the underlying cause.
Classification of CKD should be based upon cause, GFR category and
albumin category (CGA).
a. Cause
The cause of CKD is based on the presence or absence of a systemic
disease and the location within the kidney of observed or presumed
histopathology findings.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
b. GFR category
GFR category is based upon the following table:
Table 3. GFR categories in CKD
c. Albuminuria category
Albuminuria category is based upon the following table:
Table 4. Albuminuria categories in CKD
Albuminuria is an independent CV risk factor at any stage of CKD.
Presence of albuminuria significantly increases the risk of CV events
by ≥85% in stage 1 and 2 diabetic kidney disease (DKD).9
Presence and the degree of proteinuria predicts progression of CKD
and development of ESRD. In a Japanese cohort study, proteinuria
significantly increased the risk of ESRD by more than four times.
Another study showed that presence of higher level of albuminuria
conferred a higher risk of developing ESRD compared with lower level
(HR of 47.2 vs 13.0).9
Stages of CKD
<3
>30
Severely increased
Category
AER
ACR
Terms
A1
A2
A3
3 - 30
<30
30 - 300
>300
<30
30 - 300
>300
Normal to mildly
increased
Moderately
increased
(mg/24 hours)
(mg/mmol)
(mg/g)
Term
Stages of CKD
GFR category
GFR (ml/min/1.73 m2)
G1
G2
G3a
G3b
G4
G5
≥90
60 - 89
45 - 59
30 - 44
15 - 29
≤15
Normal or high
Mildly decreased
Mildly to moderately
decreased
Moderately to severely
decreased
Severely decreased
Renal failure
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
The prognosis of CKD is based upon four factors (refer to Table 5):
a. cause of CKD
b. GFR category
c. albuminuria category
d. other risk factors and co-morbid conditions
Table 5. Prognosis of CKD by GFR and albuminuria category
Green - low risk, Yellow - moderate risk, Orange - high risk, Red and Deep Red - very
high risk
Modified: Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work
Group. KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney inter., Suppl. 2013; 3:
1-150
CKD-EPI creatinine equation is a better predictor of risk than the MDRD
study equation. Risk implications include:23, level III
• all-cause mortality
• CV mortality
• ESRD
• acute kidney injury (AKI)
• progressive CKD
Risks of ESRD and mortality are higher with larger eGFR decline
24 - 25, level III and higher albuminuria levels.25, level III
G1
G2
Normal to
mildly
increased
Moderately
increased
Severely
increased
<30 mg/g
<3 mg/mmol
30 - 300
mg/g
3 - 30
mg/mmol
>300 mg/g
>30 mg/mmol
Persistent albuminuria categories
Description and range
A1
A2
A3
Normal or high
Mildly decreased
Mildly to moderately
decreased
Moderately to
severely decreased
severely decreased
Renal failure
G5
G4
G3b
G3a
≥90
60 - 89
45 - 59
30 - 44
15 - 29
<15
GFR
categories
(ml/min/
1.73 m2)
Description
and range
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
4. INTERVENTIONS IN DELAYING THE PROGRESSION OF
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
The aim of CKD treatment is to delay its progression, reduce CV risk
and manage CKD-related complications.
Optimal blood pressure (BP) and blood glucose control and, use of
renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers in proteinuric-CKD are the
main strategies to delay CKD progression. Lifestyle modifications
(smoking cessation, reduction of weight, low salt diet and other dietary
interventions) and avoidance of potentially nephrotoxic agents are
additional measures that should be instituted.
Refer to Algorithm 4 for Treatment for Chronic Kidney Disease in
Adults.
4.1 Treatment of Hypertension and Proteinuria for Renoprotection
The majority of CKD patients (70 - 80%) have hypertension (usually
systolic) which is more severe than non-CKD patients.9 Control of
hypertension and proteinuria are the two most important interventions
in delaying renal disease progression.
Any class of antihypertensive agents can be used to control BP in
CKD.9 However, some antihypertensive agents have additional antiproteinuric effect.
ACEi/ARB should be the first-line therapy in DKD because they have
additional renoprotective effect apart from BP reduction. ACEi/ARB is
also the preferred antihypertensive agent in non-diabetic, hypertensive
CKD patients with proteinuria. However, in the absence of significant
proteinuria, there is no preferred class of antihypertensive agent as
long as the target blood pressure is achieved.
Proteinuria is an independent predictor for renal disease progression.
The magnitude of baseline proteinuria has a linear relationship with
progression of CKD and risk of CV events. The degree of proteinuria
reduction correlates with the degree of delaying CKD progress and
CVD mortality reduction.9
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
4.1.1
Blood Pressure Target
Recommendation 5
• Blood pressure target for chronic kidney disease should be aimed at:
SBP=systolic blood pressure
*Blood pressure targets should be individualised according to co-morbidities and
age.
*Based on SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial) study (median
follow-up of 3.3 years), lowering SBP towards 120 mmHg can be considered in
non-DKD patients with high CV risk, in whom BP lowering is well-tolerated.27, level I
BP lowering has an impact on all-cause mortality, CV events, stroke
risk and progression of kidney disease. A target BP of ≤140/90 mmHg
has been universally adopted since 2011 as there is no strong data
to support further benefits with more intensified therapy. On the other
hand, there have been concerns on harmful effects particularly on CV
outcomes with the more intensified approach.
In patients with DKD, a post-hoc analysis of the Reduction of Endpoints
in Non-insulin-dependent DM (RENAAL) study showed that patients
who achieved SBP <130 mmHg had a significantly lower risk of
reaching the combined endpoint of doubling of SCr, ESRD or mortality
compared with those achieving SBP 140 - 159 mmHg. However, there
was no difference in those with BP 130 - 139 mmHg.9 This is supported
by another recent post-hoc analysis in Olmesartan Reducing Incidence
of Endstage Renal Disease in Diabetic Nephropathy Trial (ORIENT)
where the renoprotection effect was significant in those with proteinuria
>1 g/day.26, level I
In SPRINT study that included hypertensive non-diabetic patients with
high CV risk, more intensified BP lowering had demonstrated significant
positive impact on CV outcomes and all-cause mortality.27, level I In
the CKD subgroup, more intensified BP lowering showed significant
reduction in all-cause mortality but not on CV and renal outcomes.
28, level I These findings were further confirmed by systematic reviews
and meta-analyses published later.15, level I; 29 - 30, level I
Diabetic Kidney
Disease (DKD)
Non-DKD
Cause
≥1 g/day
<1 g/day
≤130/80 mmHg
(SBP 120 to 130 mmHg)
≤130/80 mmHg
(SBP 120 to 130 mmHg)
≤130/80 mmHg
(SBP 120 to 130 mmHg)
≤140/90 mmHg*
(SBP 120 to 140 mmHg)
Proteinuria
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
In general, BP target for CKD patients should be tailored based on
diabetic status, level of proteinuria and CV risk profile. Recent data
demonstrated that lowering systolic BP towards 120 mmHg conferred
some CV benefits in non-DKD patients with high CV risk.27, level I However,
physicians need to be cautious on adverse effects from intensified BP
lowering e.g. symptomatic hypotension and AKI.
4.1.2
Pharmacological Agents
Recommendation 6
• Any class of antihypertensive agents may be used to treat
hypertension in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients without
proteinuria. The choice will depend on the patient’s co-morbidity.
• Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme
Inhibitor
(ACEi)/Angiotensin
Receptor Blocker (ARB) should be used as first-line agent in:
○ diabetic kidney disease (DKD) with albuminuria
○ non-DKD when urinary protein excretion ≥1.0 g/day
○ non-DKD with hypertension when urinary protein excretion ≥0.5 g/
day
• Renal profile should be carefully monitored following initiation or
dose escalation of ACEi/ARB.
• Dual renin-angiotensin system blockade should only be used in
carefully selected non-DKD patients with proteinuria* under close
supervision by nephrologists.
*Refer to text in Subchapter 4.1.2b.
a. Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme
Inhibitor/Angiotensin
Receptor Blocker
ACEi and ARB confer both renoprotective and cardioprotective effects.
A systematic review of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) on ACEi
in both type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM), and ARB in T2DM with kidney disease showed that the risk
of ESRD was significantly reduced by 40% with ACEi and 22% with
ARB when compared with placebo or no treatment. ACEi and ARB also
significantly reduced progression of micro- to macroalbuminuria and
induced regression from micro- to normoalbuminuria (RR of 3.1 and
1.4 respectively). This benefit was seen regardless of baseline BP.9
There was conflicting evidence on the use of ACEi or ARB in nonproteinuric DKD. In a meta-analysis of diabetes patients with
normoalbuminuria, ACEi reduced the development of DKD by 42%. In
a subsequent combined analysis of three RCTs, the use of candesartan
did not prevent microalbuminuria in normotensive normoalbuminuric
T1DM or T2DM.9
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
For proteinuric non-DKD, a meta-analysis of RCTs showed that after
adjustment for levels of systolic BP and urine protein excretion, the
risk for kidney disease progression was lower in patients assigned to
ACEi therapy (RR=0.67, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.84) compared with other
antihypertensive agents. However, there was no benefit of ACEi use for
non-DKD with hypertension if proteinuria <0.5 g/day.9
Good quality evidence on the beneficial effects of ACEi/ARB in
advanced CKD is lacking. There is difference in opinion as to whether
once a patient has advanced CKD, the potential gain of eGFR with
ACEi/ARB cessation could improve morbidity and mortality by
delaying the need for RRT or whether this would cause an increase in
adverse CV outcomes. Hence there is an on-going trial (STOP-ACEi)
that addresses the benefits and safety of these agents in advanced
progressive CKD (stage 4 - 5).31, level I
Health economic evidence has established that ACEi and ARB confer
both health gains and net cost savings compared with non-ACEi
therapy in CKD. While there is no evidence to support the superiority of
one ACEi over another or ARB over ACEi, health economic evidence
suggests increased cost-effectiveness for ACEi vs ARB. Hence ACEi
should be prescribed first and changed to an ARB only if there is nonrenal adverse drug reaction.9
• Renal profile should be reassessed within two weeks upon initiation
or dose escalation of ACEi/ARB therapy. The interval depends on
the baseline renal function.
• ACEi/ARB should be titrated to the maximum recommended dose to
achieve optimal BP and anti-proteinuric targets provided:
○ SCr levels remain <30% from the baseline (or eGFR reduces <25%) or
○ serum potassium <5.6 mmol/L
• Consider to reduce or discontinue ACEi/ARB within two months upon
commencement (after excluding other precipitating factors) when
○ SCr levels remain ≥30% from the baseline (or eGFR reduces
≥25%) or
○ serum potassium ≥5.6 mmol/L
b. Dual Renin-Angiotensin System Blockade
Dual RAS blockade has additional reduction in proteinuria and
hospitalisation for heart failure in both diabetes and non-diabetes
patients.32, level I However, it does not reduce mortality.32 - 33, level I There
are mixed results for hard end-points e.g. progression of CKD and
ESRD.33 - 34, level I Data for outcome of ESRD are restricted mainly to
patients who have macroalbuminuria and those with T2DM.34, level I Dual
RAS blockade has higher risk of adverse events e.g. hyperkalaemia,
hypotension and AKI compared with monotherapy.32 - 33, level I
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Hence, dual RAS blockade should not be prescribed routinely. However,
it may be considered in non-DKD patients who remain hypertensive
with persistent proteinuria >0.5 g/day provided that serum potassium
is within normal range. They should be under close supervision by
nephrologists.9
c. Calcium Channel Blockers
Calcium Channel Blockers (CCBs) are effective antihypertensive
agents but the evidence for its renoprotective effect is not conclusive.
Previous meta-analysis showed that non-dihydropyridine (NDHP)
CCBs such as verapamil and diltiazem had greater anti-proteinuric
effect than dihydropyridine (DHP) CCBs in both DKD and non-DKD.
However, the evidence on long-term renal outcomes is lacking.9
Recent meta-analysis addressing different subtypes of DHP CCBs
reported that L/T- and L/N-type CCBs, as add-on therapy to RAS
blockers, offered better renal outcome. The eGFR was lower
(MD=0.23 ml/min/1.73 m2, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.35), in addition to decrease
in albuminuria and proteinuria (net change= -1.01 g, 95% CI -1.78
to -0.23). Common T-type and N-type CCBs include lercanidipine,
azelnidipine, efonidipine, benidipine and cilnidipine. However, most
studies included in the meta-analysis had small sample size with short
study duration.35, level I
In clinical practice, CCBs as an add-on therapy to RAS blockers in the
management of CKD is a reasonable and safe approach to optimise
blood pressure control. NDHP CCBs and certain subtypes of DHP
CCBs may have additional anti-proteinuric effect. However, effect on
CKD progression and ESRD cannot be ascertained based on current
evidence.
d. Aldosterone Antagonists
Evidence has shown that aldosterone antagonists (AA) reduced
proteinuria and BP in CKD patients on RAS blockers. The main adverse
effects of non-selective AA are hyperkalaemia and/or gynaecomastia,
which occur less in selective AA e.g. eplerenone and finerenone.9; 36, level I In
DKD patients on RAS blockade, additional finerenone reduces urine
ACR in dose-dependent manner compared with placebo. However
there is a drop in eGFR at higher doses.37, level I There is no long-term
data on renal outcomes and mortality.9; 36, level I
e. Direct Renin Inhibitors
Direct renin inhibitors were developed to provide an alternative for RAS
blockade. However in several RCTs [Veterans Affairs Nephropathy in
Diabetes (VA Nephron D) and Aliskiren Trial in Type 2 Diabetes Using
Cardiorenal Endpoints (ALTITUDE)], the use of this agent in addition
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
to standard RAS blockade did not confer additional benefits but was
associated with more adverse events.9; 33, level I; 38, level I
4.2 Glycaemic Control for Renoprotection
Recommendation 7
• The target HbA1c should be ≤7% in diabetic kidney disease but this
should be individualised according to co-morbidities and age.
Optimal glycaemic control should be attained to reduce the complications
of diabetes. Lowering HbA1c to approximately 6.5% to 7% reduces the
development of micro- and macroalbuminuria. However, aggressive
glycaemic control in patients with established CVD increase the risks of
hypoglycaemia and death due to impaired drug metabolism.9
Regular blood glucose measurements are advised for more accurate
assessment of diabetic control as HbA1c maybe falsely low in CKD due
to anaemia.9
For the appropriate choice and dosing adjustment of oral anti-diabetic
agents in CKD, refer to Appendix 3 on Dosage Recommendation in
CKD for Commonly Prescribed Oral Medications.
Recent trials on sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors
have been shown to reduce CV outcomes and may have renoprotective
effect.
• In Empagliflozin Cardiovascular Outcome Event Trial in Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus Patients–Removing Excess Glucose (EMPA-REG
Outcome) trial on patients with T2DM at high CV risk and eGFR of
≥30 ml/min/1.73 m2, empagliflozin reduced incident or worsening
nephropathy by 39% at four years (HR=0.61, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.70).39, level I
• There was also a possible benefit of canagliflozin in reducing the
progression of albuminuria (HR=0.73, 95% CI 0.67 to 0.79). It also
reduced the composite outcome of a sustained 40% reduction in
eGFR, need for renal replacement therapy (RRT) or death from
renal causes (HR=0.60, 95% CI 0.47 to 0.77) in Canagliflozin
Cardiovascular Assessment Study (CANVAS) and CANVAS-R
studies. However, there was an increased risk of amputation
primarily at the level of the toe or metatarsal (HR=1.97, 95% CI 1.41
to 2.75).40, level I
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
4.3 Protein Restriction for Renoprotection
Recommendation 8
• Low protein diet (0.6 - 0.8 g/kg/day) with adequate energy intake (30
- 35 kcal/kg/day) may be given in chronic kidney disease stage 3 - 5.
• Dietary protein restriction should be supervised by a dietitian.
Protein restriction is one of the supportive measures to delay CKD
progression. Low protein diet of 0.8 g/kg/day is recommended in DKD
vs 0.6 - 0.8 g/kg/day in non-DKD. The benefits in slowing down the
progression should be weighed against the risks of protein-calorie
malnutrition and death. Low protein diet (0.6 g/kg/day) is not advised in
overt DKD due to the risk of malnutrition.9; 41, level III
Very low protein diet (VLPD) with keto-acid supplementation
may be considered in patients with non-DKD stage 4 - 5 (pre-dialysis).
Earlier evidence shows conflicting results on VLPD of 0.3 g/kg/day
supplemented with keto-acid in CKD.9 However, in a recent RCT,
vegetarian VLPD supplemented with keto-acid among non-DKD
deferred dialysis initiation in patients with Unit eGFR <20 ml/min/1.73 m2
and was also nutritionally safe. Over the 18 months period of the study,
RRT initiation was required in a lower proportion in the keto-acid diet
group compared with control (11% vs 30%, p<0.001).42, level I
• Only patients who adhere to VLPD may benefit from keto-acid
supplements at the recommended dose (1 tablet for every 5 kg
body weight/day). They should be carefully supervised by a dietitian
(preferably renal-trained) to monitor nutritional status and ensure
compliance.
4.4 Lipid Lowering for Renoprotection
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of statin therapy for
delaying CKD progression or proteinuria reduction.
In a Cochrane systematic review, statin therapy [median dose equivalent
to simvastatin 20 mg (ranged from 5 to 80 mg/day)] had uncertain
effects on kidney function or risk of progression to ESRD even though
it had some proteinuria reduction (MD= -0.47 g/24 h, 95% CI -0.75 to
-0.19) compared with control.43, level I
In another meta-analysis, high-intensity statin (atorvastatin 40 - 80 mg/day)
minimally improved eGFR (MD rate of eGFR was 0.10 ml/min/1.73 m2
per year, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.12). However, no safety concerns were
addressed.44, level I
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
4.5 Uric Acid Reduction for Renoprotection
There is emerging evidence to suggest uric acid reduction is a potential
strategy to delay CKD progression. However, more RCTs are needed
to confirm the renoprotective effect.
One meta-analysis which included publications of all languages reported
that uric acid reduction mainly by allopurinol led to higher eGFR and
lower SCr compared with control in CKD.45, level I Another meta-analysis
that included only English papers showed non-significant difference in
GFR change between allopurinol and control in patients with various
baseline kidney function.46, level I
An RCT reported that febuxostat potentially improved renal outcome of
CKD with asymptomatic hyperuricemia. However, the duration of the
study is short i.e. six months.47, level I
4.6 Miscellaneous Agents for Renoprotection
There is no conclusive evidence on pentoxifylline, vitamin D analogues
and traditional medications in improving renal outcomes.
In two meta-analyses, pentoxifylline reduced proteinuria and improved
eGFR minimally.48 - 49, level I However, the primary papers used were of
low to moderate quality, generally small sample sizes and short duration
of follow-up.
Although vitamin D analogues were found to reduce proteinuria against
the background of RAS blockade,50 - 51, level I there was a trend towards
hypercalcemia.51 - 52, level I More RCTs are needed to address its efficacy
and safety on hard end-points e.g. mortality, CV events, doubling of
SCr and ESRD.
There were many studies on traditional medications for renoprotection.
In a Cochrane systematic review, Cordyceps preparations (Cordyceps
sinensis), used as adjuvant therapy to conventional medicine, decreased
SCr levels and reduced 24-hour proteinuria.53, level I A meta-analysis
of eight trials in China demonstrated that puerarin (Pueraria lobate)
decreased the urinary AER in DKD with few adverse effects.54, level I
However, definitive conclusions could not be made as most studies in
these reviews were of low methodological quality.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
4.7 Special Precautions
CKD patients often have multiple co-morbidities, thus may be exposed
to potentially nephrotoxic agents. Therefore, the following precautions
should be taken:9
i. Review all prescribed medications regularly to ensure the dose
is appropriate to current renal function (refer to Appendix 3 on
Dosage Recommendation in CKD for Commonly Prescribed
Oral Medications).
ii. Avoid
NSAIDs
including
cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitors
[e.g.
mefenamic acid, diclofenac acid, ibuprofen, naproxen, indomethacin,
ketoprofen, salicylic acid (high dose), meloxicam, celecoxib and
etoricoxib]
iii. Avoid long-term PPI use unless with clear indication.
iv. Adhere to risk mitigation strategies to avoid contrast-induced AKI.
• Avoid radio-contrast agents in high risk patients if possible. They
are those with pre-existing renal impairment (SCr ≥132 μmol/L
or an eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2), DM, volume depletion, CCF,
nephrotic syndrome, decompensated liver cirrhosis or concurrent
NSAIDs/diuretic use.
• Consider an alternative imaging study e.g. ultrasound, noncontrasted computerised tomography scan or magnetic resonance
imaging.
• Use isotonic saline peri-procedure.
• There is insufficient evidence to support the use of N-acetylcysteine
and sodium bicarbonate.
• Use non-ionic contrast media with low osmolarity (e.g. ioversol
and iopamidol) or iso-osmolarity (e.g. iodixanol).
• Use the lowest dose of contrast possible and avoid repeated
studies within 48 hours.
v. Gadolinium should be avoided in patients with impaired renal
function (eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2) due to increased risk of
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis.
vi. Avoid using oral sodium phosphate (FLEET®) in bowel preparation
for colonoscopy in CKD with eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 due to
increased risk of acute hyperphosphataemia.12 Use alternative
preparations e.g. macrogol (FORTRANS®).
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
5. INTERVENTIONS IN REDUCING THE RISK OF CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE IN CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Patients with CKD are at high risk for CV morbidity and mortality. The
risk factors e.g. high BP and hyperlipidaemia should be appropriately
controlled and anti-platelet agents should be used for the secondary
prevention of CVD.
5.1 Lipid Lowering Agents
Recommendation 9
• Statin should be offered to patients with chronic kidney disease for
primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular events.
Beneficial effects of statin in primary and secondary prevention of CV
events (total mortality, CV mortality and non-fatal CV events) were
significant in patients with CKD:9
• In the primary prevention of CV event, the SHARP (Study
of Heart and Renal Protection) study supported the use of
lipid-lowering therapy in CKD stages 3 - 5. In this large study,
patients on ezetimibe/simvastatin had a 17% reduction of major
atherosclerotic events compared with placebo.
• In the secondary prevention of CV event, post-hoc analyses of
three studies [ALLIANCE (Aggressive Lipid-Lowering Initiation
Abates New Cardiac Events)-LDL, TNT (Treating to New Targets)
and 4S (Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study)] showed that
patients with and without CKD had reduction of CV events with
statin treatment.
• Statin use was not associated with an increased incidence of
adverse events or drug discontinuation in patients with CKD.
5.2 Antiplatelet Agents
Recommendation 10
• Aspirin should be used in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD)
for secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD).
• Aspirin should not be used as primary prevention of CVD in CKD.
• Combination of clopidogrel with aspirin should be avoided in patients
with CKD unless compelling indications are present.
Aspirin is beneficial for secondary prevention of CVD in both general
and CKD population. In a meta-analysis on secondary prevention trials,
aspirin lowered the risk of major coronary events by 20%, ischaemic
strokes by 22% and total mortality by 10%. In a cohort with renal
disease, heart failure and coronary artery disease, aspirin significantly
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
reduced 1-year mortality by 16% in patients with CrCl 30 - 59 ml/min
compared with non-use of aspirin but non-significant in those with CrCl
<30 ml/min.9
CKD patients are at increased risk of bleeding compared with the
general population. The UKHARP (United Kingdom Heart and Renal
Protection)-1 study showed that aspirin 100 mg daily in CKD patients
was associated with a 3-fold increase in minor bleeding but not
significant in major bleeding.9
A recent meta-analysis of three low-to-moderate quality RCTs concluded
that there was no clear benefit of aspirin in primary prevention of CV
events in CKD and no statistically significant reduction in mortality.
Aspirin is likely to increase the risk of major bleeding events.55, level I
Post-hoc analysis of CHARISMA (Clopidogrel for High Atherothrombotic
Risk and Ischemic Stabilization, Management, and Avoidance) trial
showed that the combination of aspirin and clopidogrel was associated
with significant increase in overall mortality by 60% compared with
aspirin alone in DKD. In post-hoc analysis of CREDO (Clopidogrel for
the Reduction of Events During Observation) trial on CKD patients
scheduled for elective percutaneous coronary intervention, this
combination was associated with a slight increase in major or minor
bleeding.9
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
6. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE WITH PREGNANCY
Recommendation 11
• All female patients of reproductive age with chronic kidney disease
(CKD) should receive pre-pregnancy care*.
• Pregnancy may be considered in women with mild renal impairment
(serum creatinine <124 µmol/L), well controlled blood pressure and
without significant proteinuria (<1 g/day).
• Pregnancy should be avoided in women with either:
○ moderate to severe renal impairment
○ poorly controlled hypertension
○ heavy proteinuria
○ active systemic disease
• All pregnant women with CKD should be co-managed by a
multidisciplinary team.
*Pre-Pregnancy Care (PPC) is a set of healthcare and interventions given to women
in their reproductive age before conception occur. Components of pre-pregnancy
care:56
• screening for medical conditions and medical risk factors
• management and optimisation of medical conditions and risk factors
• nutrition and supplementations
• family planning
Pregnancy in CKD is associated with increased risk of adverse maternal
outcomes (gestational hypertension, pre-eclampsia, eclampsia and
maternal death) and foetal outcomes (premature birth, intra-uterine
growth retardation, small-for-gestational age, low birth weight, still birth
and neonatal mortality). The risks begin at CKD stage I and increased
with more advanced stage of CKD. Baseline hypertension, baseline
proteinuria (>1 g/day), and presence of systemic disease are significant
predictors of adverse maternal-foetal outcomes.57, level III
Rate of renal function deterioration and worsening of proteinuria during
pregnancy correlates significantly with CKD stages.
• Renal function deteriorates more in CKD stage 3/4 compared with
stage 2 (60% vs 14.3%).58, level III
• Doubling of proteinuria as CKD stage progresses are 20.5%,
86.5% and 70% in stage 1, 3 and 4 - 5 respectively.57, level III
Adverse maternal outcomes (pre-eclampsia, hypertension and
caesarean delivery) are significantly higher as CKD stage advances.
Risks of pre-term delivery and IUGR correlate with maternal renal
function and level of proteinuria.58 - 59, level III Thus, the decision to
continue with pregnancy should be individualised.
Pregnancy may be considered in women with CKD having mild
renal impairment (SCr <124 µmol/L) and blood pressure well
controlled.9; 57 - 60, level III
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
• Pregnancy in patients with CKD should be planned, taking into
consideration the clinical status of the woman, with pre-conception
review of medication and early referral for combined specialist care.
• ACEi and ARB should be avoided in pregnancy. Refer to Appendix
4 on United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Pharmaceutical Pregnancy Categories.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
7. REFERRAL
Recommendation 12
• A patient with chronic kidney disease (CKD) with any of the following
criteria should be referred to a nephrologist/physician:
○ persistent heavy proteinuria [urine protein ≥1 g/day or urine
protein: creatinine ratio (uPCR) ≥100 mg/mmol*] despite optimal
treatment
○ persistent isolated microscopic haematuria after excluding
urogynaecological cause
○ persistent haematuria with proteinuria (urine protein ≥0.5 g/day or
uPCR ≥50 mg/mmol*)
○ rapidly declining renal function [loss of estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) >5 ml/min/1.73 m2 in one year or >10 ml/
min/1.73 m2 within five years]
○ eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2 (eGFR categories G4 - G5)
○ resistant hypertension (failure to achieve target blood pressure
despite three antihypertensive agents including a diuretic)
○ suspected renal artery stenosis
○ suspected hereditary kidney disease
○ pregnant or when pregnancy is planned
○ persistent abnormalities of serum potassium
○ unexplained cause of CKD
*This is an estimation for practical purpose. The actual conversion of urine protein 1
g/day=uPCR 113 mg/mmol.
Referral to nephrologist is indicated when a healthcare provider feels
that additional expert input is required for patient’s management. The
aim may be:
• to rule out AKI
• to delay CKD progression
• to prepare for RRT
There is no clear evidence to recommend indications of referral
to nephrologist. However, several published guidelines have
recommended referral criteria as listed in the recommendation box
above.9, 12, 61, 62, 63
Early referral to nephrologist has the benefit in reducing mortality and
hospital stay, achieving higher haemoglobin (Hb) levels and better
dialysis preparation compared with late referral.64, level II-2 Shared-care
with effective communication between the nephrologist and primary
healthcare provider is strongly encouraged.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
• It is important to look at the trend of SCr and eGFR when deciding
on the urgency of referral. The optimal time depends on the aim of
referral which must always be individualised, taking into consideration
the patient’s co-morbidities, functional status and life expectancy.
• Immediate discussion with nephrologist is indicated in patients with:9
○ AKI superimposed on CKD
○ newly detected ESRD
○ accelerated or malignant hypertension
○ life-threatening hyperkalaemia
○ suspected rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
• Patients with CKD and renal outflow obstruction should be referred
to urological services.9
• When referring to a nephrologist, ensure patient has:9
○ serial blood chemistry and urine analysis
○ preferably a recent renal ultrasound report
Special issues in elderly
• An eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 is common in elderly people which
may be physiological or age-appropriate.
• Elderly patients with stable eGFR and low risk of CKD progression
(proteinuria ≤1 g/day, optimal BP and glycaemic control) can be
managed in primary care setting in collaboration with a nephrologist.
• In elderly patients with advanced CKD, referral with the aim of RRT
initiation should take into consideration the co-morbidity, functional
status, life expectancy, family support and patient’s wishes because
RRT may not confer better quality of life and survival.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
8. SCREENING FOR COMPLICATIONS
CKD patients are prone to develop a host of complications, reflecting
the loss of exocrine and endocrine function of the kidneys.
The two most common complications i.e. anaemia and Chronic Kidney
Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD) are discussed here.
The evidence on the screening and monitoring of these complications
are scarce. Thus, the recommendations in this CPG are mainly adapted
from pre-existing international CPGs.
Recommendation 13
• In chronic kidney disease (CKD), screening for:
○ anaemia should be done when estimated Glomerular Flitration
Rate (eGFR) <60 ml/min/1.73 m2
○ CKD-mineral and bone disorder when eGFR <45 ml/min/1.73 m2
8.1 Anaemia
Anaemia is defined as a Hb concentration of <13 g/dL in adult males
and <12 g/dL in adult females.12, 65
Renal anaemia is a common complication of CKD due to reduced
erythropoietin production by the kidney and reduced absorption of iron.
It usually starts to develop when the eGFR is <60 ml/min/1.73 m2. The
prevalence of anaemia increases markedly with decreasing eGFR.61
When the eGFR is ≥60 ml/min/1.73 m2, the anaemia is more likely to be
related to other causes.66
Iron deficiency and other causes of anaemia e.g. vitamin B12 and
folate deficiency, bone marrow suppression, hypothyroidism and
haemoglobinopathies should be excluded during the work-up for renal
anaemia.12, 61, 67
The frequency of Hb monitoring is influenced by kidney function (refer
to Table 6), underlying disease process, initial Hb concentration and
rate of change in Hb concentration.12, 65
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Table 6. Suggested Hb monitoring in CKD
*ND=non-dialysis
Treatment with ESA must be commenced by or in consultation with a
nephrologist.61
The optimal Hb target in CKD is 10.0 - 12.0 g/dL. However, it should be
individualised based on symptoms and co-morbidities.66
8.2 Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder
CKD-MBD is a common complication of CKD. Changes in the
metabolism of calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) typically start to occur when eGFR <60 ml/
min/1.73 m2.61
KDIGO recommends to start monitoring serum levels of corrected
calcium, phosphate and ALP at CKD stage G3a.68 However it may be
more relevant to initiate the monitoring when eGFR <45 ml/min/1.73 m2
in local setting.
Frequency of monitoring of the above parameters depends on stage of
CKD, its treatment, presence and magnitude of abnormalities, and rate
of progression of CKD.68, 69
The suggested frequency of monitoring for CKD-MBD is outlined in
Table 7.
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 5 ND*
CKD without anaemia
CKD with anaemia
(not treated with
erythropoiesisstimulating agent (ESA)
At least annually
At least every
3 months
At least twice a year
At least every
3 months
At least twice a year
At least every
3 months
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Table 7. Suggested frequency of monitoring for CKD-MBD
Elevated phosphate level should be lowered towards the normal range
and hypercalcaemia should be avoided in most stages of CKD.68
In
hyperphosphataemia,
dietary
restriction
of
phosphate
is
recommended.61, 68, 69 In persistent hyperphosphataemia, patient’s
compliance to dietary phosphate restriction should be re-assessed
before considering the use of phosphate binders.
Excess calcium administration (in the form of calcium-based phosphate
binders) and vitamin D analogue should be avoided as this may be
associated with increased risk of vascular calcification in CKD.61, 68
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 5 non-dialysis
Calcium and
phosphate
ALP
6 - 12 monthly
3 - 6 monthly
3-monthly,
more frequent
if indicated
6 - 12 monthly
3 - 6 monthly
3-monthly,
more frequent
if indicated
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
9. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of CKD in adults should be guided by evidencebased approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several
factors may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
9.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a. National Healthy Kidneys Action plan (2017 - 2025) - upcoming
b. extensive networking of nephrologists nationwide
c. collaboration between primary and secondary/tertiary health care
d. availability of CPGs in hardcopy and softcopy (online)
e. active involvement of local NGOs in screening and educational
activities
Existing barriers for application are:
a. inadequate support or attention on CKD prevention programme
from various stakeholders
b. inadequate human resources to form dedicated CKD teams to
focus on CKD management
c. lack of CKD database for planning of services
9.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to health care
personnel via printed copies, electronic websites, etc.
b. reinforce training of health care personnel by regular seminars or
workshops to ensure information is made available
c. develop multidisciplinary teams at hospital and community level to
include involvement of specialists, primary care doctors, medical
officers, pharmacists, dietitians and nurse educators
d. ensure screening and monitoring facilities are available at all sites
e. ensure availability of the drugs mentioned in the CPG
f. develop coordinated linkage between specialists and primary
health care teams to facilitate referral and management
g. have a national database on CKD
h. ensure widespread distribution of patient education materials
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of CKD:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
• Percentage of diabetes
patients screened
for proteinuria/
microalbuminuria
=
X 100%
Total number of diabetes patients
on follow up in the same period
Number of diabetes patients screened for
proteinuria/microalbuminuria within a year
• Percentage of
hypertensive
patients screened for
proteinuria
=
X 100%
Total number of hypertensive patients
on follow up in the same period
Number of hypertensive patients
screened for proteinuria within a year
• Percentage of
diabetic CKD patients
with BP ≤130/80
=
X 100%
Total number of diabetic CKD patients
in the same period
Number of diabetic CKD patients
with BP ≤130/80 within a year
• Percentage of nondiabetic CKD patients
with BP ≤140/90
=
X 100%
Total number of non-diabetic CKD
patients in the same period
Number of non-diabetic CKD patients
with BP ≤140/90 within a year
• Percentage of patients
with hypertension and
proteinuria receiving
treatment with ACEi or
ARB
=
X 100%
Total number of hypertension and proteinuria
in the same period without
contraindications to ACEi or ARB
Number of patients with hypertension and
proteinuria receiving treatment with
ACEi or ARB within a year
• Percentage of patients
with diabetes and
proteinuria receiving
treatment with ACEi or
ARB
=
X 100%
Total number of diabetes and proteinuria
in the same period without contraindications
to ACEi or ARB
Number of patients with diabetes and
proteinuria receiving treatment with
ACEi or ARB within a year
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
References
1. Levey AS, Atkins R, Coresh J, et al. Chronic kidney disease as a global public
health problem: approaches and initiatives - a position statement from Kidney
Disease Improving Global Outcomes. Kidney Int. 2007;72(3):247-59.
2. Hooi LS, Ong LM, Ahmad G, et al. A population-based study measuring the
prevalence of chronic kidney disease among adults in West Malaysia. Kidney Int.
2013;84(5):1034-40.
3. 23rd Report of the Malaysian Dialysis and Transplant Registry 2015 (Available at
https://www.msn.org.my/nrr/mdtr2015.jsp).
4. Briasoulis A, Bakris GL. Chronic kidney disease as a coronary artery disease risk
equivalent. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2013;15(3):340.
5. Tonelli M, Muntner P, Lloyd A, et al. Risk of coronary events in people with chronic
kidney disease compared with those with diabetes: a population-level cohort
study. Lancet. 2012;380(9844):807-14.
6. Johnson DW, Atai E, Chan M, et al. KHA-CARI guideline: Early chronic kidney
disease: detection, prevention and management. Nephrology (Carlton).
2013;18(5):340-50.
7. Wen CP, Cheng TY, Tsai MK, et al. All-cause mortality attributable to chronic
kidney disease: a prospective cohort study based on 462 293 adults in Taiwan.
Lancet. 2008;371(9631):2173-82.
8. Chen YP, Lu YW, Yang CC. Outcome of the Five-Year-Plan for Chronic Kidney
Disease Prevention in Taiwan. Ann Urol Res. 2017;1(2):1007.
9. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2011.
10. Garofalo C, Borrelli S, Minutolo R, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis
suggests obesity predicts onset of chronic kidney disease in the general
population. Kidney Int. 2017;91(5):1224-35.
11. Thomas G, Sehgal AR, Kashyap SR, et al. Metabolic syndrome and kidney
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2011;6(10):2364-73.
12. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO
2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic
Kidney Disease. Kidney Inter, Suppl. 2013;3:1-150.
13. Arora P, Gupta A, Golzy M, et al. Proton pump inhibitors are associated with
increased risk of development of chronic kidney disease. BMC Nephrol.
2016;17(1):112.
14. Lazarus B, Chen Y, Wilson FP, et al. Proton Pump Inhibitor Use and the Risk of
Chronic Kidney Disease. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176(2):238-46.
15. Xie X, Atkins E, Lv J, et al. Effects of intensive blood pressure lowering on
cardiovascular and renal outcomes: updated systematic review and metaanalysis. Lancet. 2016;387(10017):435-43.
16. Klatte DCF, Gasparini A, Xu H, et al. Association Between Proton Pump Inhibitor
Use and Risk of Progression of Chronic Kidney Disease. Gastroenterology.
2017;153(3):702-10.
17. Roughley MJ, Belcher J, Mallen CD, et al. Gout and risk of chronic kidney disease
and nephrolithiasis: meta-analysis of observational studies. Arthritis Res Ther.
2015;17:90.
18. Zhu P, Liu Y, Han L, et al. Serum uric acid is associated with incident chronic
kidney disease in middle-aged populations: a meta-analysis of 15 cohort studies.
PLoS One. 2014;9(6):e100801.
19. Levey AS, Stevens LA, Schimd CH, et al. A New Equation to estimate Glomerular
Filtration Rate. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150 (9):604-12.
20. Jalalonmuhali M, Lim SK, Md Shah MN, et al. MDRD vs. CKD-EPI in comparison
to (51)Chromium EDTA: a cross sectional study of Malaysian CKD cohort. BMC
Nephrol. 2017;18(1):363.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
21. Van Pottelbergh G, Van Heden L, Matheï C, et al. Methods to evaluate renal
function in elderly patients: a systematic literature review. Age Ageing.
2010;39(5):542-8.
22. Inker LA, Schmid CH, Tighiouart H, et al. Estimating glomerular filtration rate from
serum creatinine and cystatin C. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(1):20-9. Erratum in: N
Engl J Med. 2012;367(7):681. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(21):2060.
23. Matsushita K, Mahmoodi BK, Woodward M, et al. Comparison of risk prediction
using the CKD-EPI equation and the MDRD study equation for estimated
glomerular filtration rate. JAMA. 2012;307(18):1941-51.
24. Coresh J, Turin TC, Matsushita K, et al. Decline in estimated glomerular filtration
rate and subsequent risk of end-stage renal disease and mortality. JAMA.
2014;311(24):2518-31.
25. Hallan SI, Matsushita K, Sang Y, et al. Age and association of kidney measures
with mortality and end-stage renal disease. AMA. 2012;308(22):2349-60.
26. Imai E, Ito S, Haneda M, et al. Effects of blood pressure on renal and cardiovascular
outcomes in Asian patients with type 2 diabetes and overt nephropathy: a post
hoc analysis (ORIENT-blood pressure). Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016;31(3):44754.
27. SPRINT Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al. A Randomized
Trial of Intensive versus Standard Blood-Pressure Control. N Engl J Med.
2015;373(22):2103-16.
28. Cheung AK, Rahman M, Reboussin DM, et al. Effects of Intensive BP Control in
CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28(9):2812-23.
29. Tsai WC, Wu HY, Peng YS, et al. Association of Intensive Blood Pressure
Control and Kidney Disease Progression in Nondiabetic Patients with Chronic
Kidney Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med.
2017;177(6):792-9.
30. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al. Blood pressure lowering for prevention
of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet. 2016;387(10022):957-67.
31. Bhandari S, Ives N, Brettell EA, et al. Multicentre randomized controlled trial of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker withdrawal
in advanced renal disease: the STOP-ACEi trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2016;31(2):255-61.
32. Makani H, Bangalore S, Desouza KA, et al. Efficacy and safety of dual blockade
of the renin-angiotensin system: meta-analysis of randomized trials BMJ.
2013;346:f360.
33. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al. Combined angiotensin inhibition for the
treatment of diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(20):1892-903.
34. Palmer SC, Mavridis D, Navarese E, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of
blood pressure-lowering agents in adults with diabetes and kidney disease: a
network meta-analysis. Lancet. 2015;385(9982):2047-56.
35. Thamcharoen N, Susantitaphong P, Wongrakpanich S, et al. Effect of N- and
T-type calcium channel blocker on proteinuria, blood pressure and kidney function
in hypertensive patients: a meta-analysis. Hypertens Res. 2015;38(12):847-55.
36. Bolignano D, Palmer SC, Navaneethan SD, et al. Aldosterone antagonists for
preventing the progression of chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 4 Art No: CD007004.
37. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Chan JC, et al. Effect of Finerenone on Albuminuria
in Patients With Diabetic Nephropathy: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA.
2015;314(9):884-94.
38. Parving HH, Brenner BM, McMurray JJ, et al. Cardiorenal end points in a trial of
aliskiren for type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(23):2204-13.
39. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin and Progression of Kidney
Disease in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(4):323-34.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
40. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagliflozin and Cardiovascular and
Renal Events in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(7):644-57.
41. American Diabetes Association. 4. Lifestyle Management. Diabetes Care.
2017;40(Suppl 1):S33-S43.
42. Garneata L, Stancu A, Dragomir D, et al. Ketoanalogue-Supplemented Vegetarian
Very Low-Protein Diet and CKD Progression. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016;27(7):216476.
43. Palmer SC, Navaneethan SD, Craig JC, et al. HMG CoA reductase inhibitors
(statins) for people with chronic kidney disease not requiring dialysis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2014;(5):CD007784.
44. Sanguankeo A, Upala S, Cheungpasitporn W, et al. Effects of Statins on Renal
Outcome in Chronic Kidney Disease Patients: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0132970.
45. Kanji T, Gandhi M, Clase CM, et al. Urate lowering therapy to improve renal
outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease: systematic review and metaanalysis. BMC Nephrol. 2015;16:58.
46. Bose B, Badve SV, Hiremath SS, et al. Effects of uric acid-lowering therapy on
renal outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2014;29(2):406-13.
47. Sircar D, Chatterjee S, Waikhom R, et al. Efficacy of Febuxostat for Slowing
the GFR Decline in Patients With CKD and Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia: A
6-Month, Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Am J Kidney Dis.
2015;66(6):945-50.
48. Liu D, Wang LN, Li HX, et al. Pentoxifylline plus ACEIs/ARBs for proteinuria
and kidney function in chronic kidney disease: a meta-analysis. J Int Med Res.
2017;45(2):383-98.
49. Leporini C, Pisano A, Russo E, et al. Effect of pentoxifylline on renal outcomes
in chronic kidney disease patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Pharmacol Res. 2016;107:315-32.
50. de Borst MH, Hajhosseiny R, Tamez H, et al. Active vitamin D treatment for
reduction of residual proteinuria: a systematic review. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2013;24(11):1863-71.
51. Cheng J, Zhang W, Zhang X, et al. Efficacy and safety of paricalcitol therapy for
chronic kidney disease: a meta-analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7(3):391400. Erratum in: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7(6):1053.
52. Han T, Rong G, Quan D, et al. Meta-analysis: the efficacy and safety of paricalcitol
for the treatment of secondary hyperparathyroidism and proteinuria in chronic
kidney disease. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:320560.
53. Zhang HW, Lin ZX, Tung YS, et al. Cordyceps sinensis (a traditional Chinese
medicine) for treating chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2014;(12):CD008353.
54. Wang B, Chen S, Yan X, et al. The therapeutic effect and possible harm of
puerarin for treatment of stage III diabetic nephropathy: a meta-analysis. Altern
Ther Health Med. 2015;21(1):36-44.
55. Major RW, Oozeerally I, Dawson S, et al. Aspirin and cardiovascular primary
prevention in non-endstage chronic kidney disease: A meta-analysis.
Atherosclerosis. 2016;251:177-82.
56. Pre Pregnancy Care (PPC) (Available at www.myhealth.gov.my/en/prepregnancy-care-ppc/).
57. Piccoli GB, Cabiddu G, Attini R, et al. Risk of Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in
Women with CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;26(8):2011-22.
58. Alsuwaida A, Mousa D, Al-Harbi A, et al. Impact of early chronic kidney disease
on maternal and fetal outcomes of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med.
2011;24(12):1432-6.
59. Wang F, Xing T, Wang N, et al. A clinical study of pregnancy-associated renal
insufficiency. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2011;34(1):34-40.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
60. Piccoli GB, Attini R, Vasario E, et al. Pregnancy and chronic kidney disease: a
challenge in all CKD stages. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5(5):844-55.
61. Kidney Health Australia. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) Management in General
Practice (3rd Edition). Melbourne: . Melbourne: Kidney Health Australia; 2015.
62. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Chronic kidney disease in
adults: assessment and management. London: NICE; 2014.
63. Kidney Health Australia. When to refer for specialist renal care. Melbourne:
Kidney Health Australia; 2012.
64. Smart NA, Titus TT. Outcomes of early versus late nephrology referral in chronic
kidney disease: a systematic review. Am J Med. 2011;124(11):1073-80.e2.
65. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Anemia Work Group.
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney
Inter, Suppl. 2012;2:279-335.
66. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Chronic kidney disease:
managing anaemia. London: NICE; 2015.
67. KDOQI; National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines and
Clinical Practice Recommendations for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease.
Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;47(5 Suppl 3):S11-145. Erratum in: Am J Kidney Dis.
2006;48(3):518.
68. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD-MBD Update Work
Group. KDIGO 2017 Clinical Practice Guideline Update for the Diagnosis,
Evaluation, Prevention, and Treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease–Mineral and
Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD). Kidney Int Suppl. 2017;7:1-59.
69. National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for bone
metabolism and disease in chronic kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42(4
Suppl 3):S1-201.
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the blood pressure targets in chronic kidney
disease?
1.
Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/
2.
Kidney Failure, Chronic/
3.
(chronic adj1 (kidney disease* or kidney insufficienc* or renal
disease* or renal insufficienc*)).tw.
4.
ckd.tw.
5.
Renal Insufficiency/
6.
((kidney or renal) adj1 (failure* or insufficienc*)).tw.
7.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8.
Blood Pressure/
9.
(blood adj1 pressure*).tw.
10. (systolic adj1 pressure*).tw.
11. (diastolic adj1 pressure).tw.
12. or/8-11
13. reduc*.tw.
14. aim*.tw.
15. target*.tw.
16. control*.tw.
17. or/13-16
18. 12 and 17
19. 7 and 18
20. limit 19 to (english language and humans and yr="2010 -Current"
and "all adult (19 plus years)")
21. limit 20 to systematic reviews
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
A. Screening
1. Who are at high risk of developing chronic kidney disease?
2. Who should be screened for chronic kidney disease?
3. What methods should be used for screening chronic kidney disease?
• urine dipstick
• urine protein/albumin-creatinine ratio
• time urine collection
4. What methods should be used to assess renal function?
• serum creatinine
• 24-hour urine creatinine clearance
• prediction equation e.g. MDRD, Cockcroft-Gault, CKD-epi (in
elderly, stages of CKD)
• serum and urine cystatin C
*Classification of CKD
B. Treatment
5. What are the effective and safe interventions in slowing down the
progression of chronic kidney disease?
• reduction in blood pressure and proteinuria
○ ACEi/ARB
○ calcium channel blockers
○ combined Renin-Angiotensin
System Blockade
○ aldosterone antagonists
○ direct renin inhibitors
• glycaemic control
• lipid lowering
• uric acid reduction
6. What are the blood pressure targets in chronic kidney disease?
7. What are the effective interventions in reducing the risk of
cardiovascular disease in CKD?
• as above
• aspirin
8. How should pregnancy with chronic kidney disease be managed?
C. Referral
9. When should a patient with chronic kidney disease be referred to a
nephrologist?
D. CKD-related Complications
10. When to screen complications in chronic kidney disease (anaemia
and mineral bone disease)?
11. How to screen complications in chronic kidney disease?
• miscellaneous agents
○ pentoxifylline
○ protein restriction (ketoacid)
○ supplement agents
○ traditional medication
• smoking cessation
• salt restriction
• weight reduction
• exercise
• sulodexide
• sodium bicarbonate
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
DOSAGE RECOMMENDATION IN CKD FOR COMMONLY PRESCRIBED ORAL MEDICATIONS
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
Statin should be started at low dose and titrated upwards in order to minimise the adverse effects (e.g.myopathy)
^HI
Rosuvastatin
20 - 40 mg OD
+MI
Rosuvastatin
5 - 10 mg OD
^HI
40 - 80 mg OD
+MI
10 - 20 mg OD
~LI
Simvastatin
10 mg OD
+MI
20 - 40 mg OD
+MI
40 - 80 mg OD
~LI
10 - 20 mg OD
+MI
20 - 80 mg OD
~LI
20 - 40 mg OD
+MI
40 mg OD
~LI
20 mg OD
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
15 - 29: 5 - 10 mg OD
<15: Avoid (no data)
10 - 20 mg OD
(Initial dose: 5 mg OD)
10 - 40 mg OD
10 - 40 mg OD
10 - 20 mg OD
10 - 80 mg OD
10 - 40 mg OD
25%
50%
50%
Severe impairment:
10 mg OD
May increase
serum creatinine
No dosage adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Fibric acid derivatives
Cholesterol absorption inhibitor
145 mg OD
600 mg BD
Fenofibrate
Gemfibrozil
10 mg OD
Ezetimibe
15 - 30: 25%
<15: Avoid
15 - 30: 50%
<15: Avoid
X
X
X
X
X
X
C
C
C
Atorvastatin
Atorvastatin
Simvastatin
Pravastatin
Pravastatin
Fluvastatin
Fluvastatin
Lovastatin
Lovastatin
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Thiazide diuretics
Chlorthalidone
Chlorothiazide
Hydrochlorothiazide
Indapamide
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
Loop diuretics
Potassium sparing diuretics
0.5 - 4 mg/day
in 2 - 3 doses
C
C
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
12.5 - 50 mg OD
12.5 - 50 mg OD
12.5 - 5 mg OD
500 - 1000
mg/day
in 1 - 2 doses
<10: Avoid
<10: Avoid
30 - 49: 12.5 mg
OD/EOD
<30: Avoid
<10: Avoid
1.25 - 2.5 mg
<10: Avoid
Thiazide diuretics
are unlikely to be of
use once GFR
<30 ml/min
#
B
C
B
B
Bumetanide
Frusemide
40 - 240 mg/day
in 2 - 3 doses
5 - 10 mg/day
in 1 - 2 doses
C
C
*ADEC - C
C
No dosage adjustment
necessary
≥50: 12.5 - 25 mg OD/ BD
Amiloride
Spironolactone
25 - 100 mg/day
in 1 - 2 doses
Sulfonylureas
Sulfonylureas should be used cautiously due to increased risk of hypoglycaemia.
First-generation sulfonylureas generally should be avoided due to increased half-life and risk of hypoglycaemia in patients with CKD.
Glipizide and gliclazide are the preferred agents among the second-generation sulfonylureas as they do not have active metabolites and have
lower risk of hypoglycaemia in CKD patients.
No dosage adjustment necessary
Contraindicated
80 - 160 mg BD
5 - 10 mg OD
Gliclazide
Glibenclamide
#
Use with caution
Avoid
15 - 30: Initiate at low dose, 1 mg OD
<15: Avoid
Glimepiride
1 - 4 mg OD
C
No dosage adjustment necessary
Glipizide
2.5 - 15 mg OD
Initiate at low dose:
1 mg OD
50%
10 - 30: 50%
<10: Avoid
B
Serum potassium
needs to be monitored
#
Serum potassium
needs to be monitored
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
Biguanide
Metformin is eliminated via kidney and may accumulate in body as kidney function deteriorates - increased risk of lactic acidosis.
Meglitinides
Thiazolidinediones
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
Acarbose
25 - 100 mg TDS
50 - 100%
Avoid
Avoid
Avoid
#
#
B
Metformin
500 - 1,000 mg BD
No adjustment
30 - 45: 50%
B
Repaglinide
0.5 - 4 mg TDS
No dosage adjustment
necessary
20 - 40: 0. 5 mg with meal
<20: Avoid
C
C
Nateglinide
120 mg TDS
4 - 8 mg OD
15 - 30 mg OD
No dosage adjustment necessary
#
C
Rosiglitazone
No dosage adjustment necessary
C
Pioglitazone
No dosage adjustment necessary
May worsen fluid
retention
May worsen fluid
retention
GLP-1 receptor agonists
Exenatide Immediate
Release (Byetta)
Exenatide Extended
Release (Bydureon)
2 mg SC once
weekly
Use with caution
50 - 100%
Dose escalation from
5 - 10 µg should
proceed conservatively
Avoid
(increase frequency
and severity of GI
side effects)
#
C
C
5 - 10 µg BD
100%
Liraglutide (Victoza)
C
-
Starting dose:
0.6 mg SC OD x
1 week
Maintenance
dose:
1.2 - 1.8 mg SC
OD
100%
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Use with caution when
initiating or
escalating dose
Avoid
#
(limited data)
(limited data)
Lixisenatide
(Lyxumia)
10 µg SC OD for
14 days followed
by 20 µg OD
No dosage adjustment necessary
(monitor changes in renal function and
GI adverse effects)
15-<30: (limited data)
<15: Not
recommended
Not indicated for
Type 1 DM
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Insulin
Doses should be adjusted based on frequent monitoring to balance goals of glycaemic control and avoidance of hypoglycaemia
Sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors
Sitagliptin
100 mg OD
Vildagliptin
Saxagliptin
Linagliptin
Alogliptin
50 mg OD - BD
2.5 - 5 mg OD
5 - 10 mg OD
2.5 - 5 mg OD
25 mg OD
100%
100%
100%
30 - 50: 50%
50 - 59: 100%
<50: limited data
2.5 mg OD
2.5 mg OD
25%
50%
50%
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
B
-
B
B
-
C
#
#
#
B
#
#
No dosage adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
necessary
12.5 mg OD
15 - 30: 6.25 mg OD
Dapagliflozin
Avoid
Avoid
100 - 300 mg OD
200 - 400 mg
q8 - 12h
200 - 400 mg
q8 - 12h
-
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Canagliflozin
45 - 60: 100 mg OD
<45: Avoid
Avoid
10 - 25 mg OD
-
No dosage adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Empagliflozin
<45: Avoid
Antiamoebic
Antifungal
Metronidazole
Fluconazole
C (single
dose for
vaginal
candidiasis)
D (all other
indications)
(limited data)
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
Antiviral
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
C
B
B
C
Ketoconazole
200 mg q24h
C
Cephalosporin
100 - 200 mg
q12h
200 mg q4h
(herpes simplex)
Itraconazole
Acyclovir
15 - 30: No dosage
adjustment necessary
<15: 50% (use with
caution)
100%
100%
250 - 500 mg q8h
Cefaclor
<10: 50%
B
100%
50%
400 mg q24h
Ceftibuten
5 - 29: 25%
B
q8h
10 - 50: 500 mg q12 - 24h
<10: 250 - 500 mg q12 - 24h
250 - 500 mg q6h
Cephalexin
B
250 - 500 mg
q12h
Cefuroxime axetil
No dosage adjustment necessary
75 mg q12h
Oseltamivir
10 - 30: 75 mg q24h
<10: No
recommendation
15 - 30: No dosage
adjustment necessary
<15: 50% (use with
caution)
>25: No dosage
adjustment necessary
10 - 25: 800 mg q8h
<10: 800 mg q12h
800 mg q4h
(herpes zoster)
High doses can
cause
encephalopathy
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Nitrofuran
Fluoroquinolone
C
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
No dosage adjustment necessary
B
Macrolide
Azithromycin
No dosage adjustment necessary
B
Clarithromycin
100%
100%
50%
C
Erythromycin
100%
100%
100%
B
B
15 - 30: 50 - 75%
<15: 50%
Ciprofloxacin
500 - 750 mg
q12h
100%
50 - 75%
C
<20: 50% q24h
Ofloxacin
200 - 400 mg
q12h
100%
20 - 50: q24h
Avoid
Nitrofurantoin
50 - 100 mg q6h
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Avoid
C
<20: 500 mg for
initial dose,
then 250 mg q48h
Levofloxacin
500 mg q24h
100%
20 - 50: 500 mg
for initial dose,
then 250 mg q24h
Moxifloxacin
400 mg q24h
No dosage adjustment necessary
C
Norfloxacin
400 mg q12h
q12h
C
15 - 30: q12 - 24h
<15: q24h
q12 - 24h
150 - 300 mg q6h
250 - 500 mg
q24h
500 - 1,000 mg
q12h
(ethylsuccinate)
400 mg q6h or
800 mg q12h
(stearate)
250 mg q6h or
500 mg q12h
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Penicillin
B
Trimethoprim
No dosage adjustment necessary
C
10 - 30: q8 - 12h
<10: q24h
Amoxicillin
250 - 500 mg q8h
q8h
q8 - 12h
q6h
q6 - 12h
B
B
B
B
10 - 30: q12h
<10: q24h
Amoxicillin +
Clavulanic Acid
(Augmentin)
625 mg q8h
Ampicillin
250 mg - 2 g q6h
Cloxacillin
250 - 500 mg q6h
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
B
Sultamicillin/
Ampicillin +
Sulbactam (Unasyn)
375 - 750 mg
q12h
<15: q24h
100 mg q12h
960 mg q12h or
15 - 20 mg
TMP/kg/day in
divided doses q6h
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
15 - 30: q6 - 12h
<15: q12 - 24h
No dosage adjustment necessary
No dosage adjustment necessary
Penicillin V/
Phenoxymethylpenicillin
250 - 500 mg
q6h
CrCl <10 ml/minute:
250 mg q6h
Sulfonamide + Trimethoprim
15 - 30: 50 mg q12H
<15: q24h
<30 ml/min: Close
monitoring of blood
counts
Sulfamethoxazole +
Trimethoprim (TMP)
No dosage adjustment necessary
C
15 - 30: 50%
<15: 50% q12 - 24h
Dose to be
optimised based on
diagnosis
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
^HI=High Intensity, +MI=Moderate Intensity, ~LI=Low Intensity, OD=once daily, BD= twice daily, TDS=thrice daily, SC=subcutaneous, q=every, h=hourly
*ADEC = Australian Drug Evaluation Committee Pregnancy Category
Disclaimer:
The list of medication dosage adjustment should be used as a general guides only and is not intended to be comprehensive.
The dosing guide for GFR <10 ml/min does not provide information on dosing in haemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis or continuous RRT patients.
The Cockcroft-Gault equation was used to estimate the renal function for drug dosing unless otherwise indicated.
#Drug dosing calculated using MDRD or CKD-Epi
Source:
1. George RA, William MB, Jeffrey SB, et al. Drug Prescribing in Renal Failure. Dosing Guidelines for Adults and Children, 5th Ed. Philadelphia: American
College of Physicians; 2007
2. Drug information handbook. Lexicomp drug reference handbooks, 22nd Ed. American Pharmacists Association; 2013
3. Matzke GR, Aronoff GR, Atkinson AJ Jr, et al. Drug dosing consideration in patients with acute and chronic kidney disease-a clinical update from Kidney
Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int. 2011;80(11):1122-3
4. Medication package insert
Tetracycline
D
Doxycycline
100 mg q24h
q8 - 12h
q12 - 24h
D
Tetracycline
250 - 500 mg q6h
No dosage adjustment necessary
Minocycline
100 mg q12h
No dosage adjustment necessary
D
US FDA
Pregnancy
Category
Note
Severe
(GFR <30 ml/min)
Moderate
(GFR 30 - 59 ml/min)
Mild
(GFR 60 - 90 ml/min)
Usual Dose
Medication
Dose Adjustment in Renal Failure
10 - 30: q12 - 24h
<10: q24h
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
UNITED STATES FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)
PHARMACEUTICAL PREGNANCY CATEGORIES
Modified: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in
Adults. MoH: Putrajaya: 2011
DESCRIPTION
Controlled studies in women fail to demonstrate a
risk to fetus in the first trimester, and the possibility
of fetal harm appears remote.
Animal studies do not indicate a risk to the fetus and
there are no controlled human studies, or animal
studies do show an adverse effect on the fetus but
well-controlled studies in pregnant women have
failed to demonstrate a risk to the fetus.
Studies have shown that the drug exerts animal
teratogenic or embryocidal effects, but there are
no controlled studies in women, or no studies are
available in either animals or women.
Positive evidence of human fetal risk exists, but
benefits in certain situations (e.g. life-threatening
situations or serious diseases for which safer drugs
cannot be used or are ineffective) may make use of
the drug acceptable despite its risks.
Studies in animals or human have demonstrated
fetal abnormalities or there is evidence of fetal risk
based on human experience, or both, and the risk
clearly outweighs any possible benefit.
CATEGORY
A
B
C
D
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
µg
microgramme
µm
micrometre
µmol/L
micromole/litre
AA
Aldosterone Antagonists
ACEi
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitor
ACR
albumin: creatinine ratio
AER
albumin excretion rate
AKI
acute kidney injury
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
ARB
Angiotensin Receptor Blocker
BP
blood pressure
CCBs
calcium channel blockers
CCF
congestive cardiac failure
CKD
chronic kidney disease
CKD-MBD
chronic kidney disease-mineral and bone disorder
CKD-epi
CKD-epidemiology
CI
confidence interval
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CV(D)
cardiovascular disease
DHP
dihydropyridine
DKD
diabetic kidney disease
DM
diabetes mellitus
(e)GFR
(estimated) glomerular filtration rate
ESA
erythropoiesis-stimulating agent
ESRD
end-stage renal disease
dL
desilitre
g
gramme
Hb
haemoglobin
HR
hazard ratio
iPTH
intact parathyroid hormone
MD
mean difference
kg
kilogramme
MDRD
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease
m2
metre square
mg
milligramme
min
minute
ml
millilitre
mol/L
millimole/litre
mmHg
millimetre mercury
MoH
Ministry of Health
NDHP
non-dihydropyridine
NSAIDS
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
OR
odds ratio
PPI
proton pump inhibitors
PTH
parathyroid hormone
RAS
renin-angiotensin system
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RR
relative risk
RRT
renal replacement therapy
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Rosnani Abdul Latip on retrieval of evidence and Ms. Noormah
Darus on critical appraisal in the CPG development
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. (Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Chronic Kidney
Disease in Adults (Second Edition) was supported financially mainly
by the MoH Malaysia and to some extent by the Malaysian Nephrology
Society. The printing was funded by the MoH Malaysia.
SBP
systolic blood pressure
SCr
serum creatinine
SGLT2
sodium-glucose co-transporter-2
T1DM
type 1 diabetes mellitus
T2DM
type 2 diabetes mellitus
(u)PCR
(urine) protein: creatinine ratio
UTI
urinary tract infection
VLPD
very low protein diet
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults (Second Edition)