CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
WITHHOLDING AND WITHDRAWING
OF LIFE SUPPORT IN CHILDREN
MINISTRY OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
B
E
RS
AT
U•
BE
R
U
SA
HA
•B
ER
BA
KT
I•
December 2005
MOH/P/PAK/102.05(GU)
ACADEMY OF MEDICINE
Statement of Intent
This clinical practice guideline is meant to be a guide for clinical practice,
based on the best available evidence at the time of development.
Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily ensure the best
outcome in every case. Every health care provider is responsible for the
management of his/her unique patient based on the clinical picture
presented by the patient and the management options available locally.
Review of the Guidelines
This guideline was issued in 2005 and will be reviewed if new evidence
becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
c/o Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Parcel E,
Government Office Complex,
62250, Putrajaya.
Available on the following website : http//www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
Guideline Development
The working group for the development of this guideline comprised of
paediatricians, a paediatric anaesthesiologist and a legal advisor from the Ministry
of Health and the Ministry of Education, as well as a legal personnel from the
private sector. This guideline is based on the findings of a systematic review of
current medical literature, taking into consideration local paediatric practices.
The grading of evidence is based on a modified version of that suggested by the
Catalonian Agency for Health Technology Assessment & Research, Spain. The
draft guidelines were sent to various paediatricians for comment and feedback.
These guidelines have also been presented to the Technical Advisory Committee
for Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Health Technology Assessment and
Clinical Practice Guidelines Council, Ministry of Health Malaysia for review and
approval.
Objectives
The aim of this guideline is to aid paediatricians and intensivists in clinical decision
making by providing well-balanced evidence based information and expert advice
on management of withholding and withdrawing of life support in children.
Clinical Questions
The clinical questions for this guidelines are:
(i)
When should withholding or withdrawal of life support be considered
in children?
(ii)
What are the legal implications of withholding or withdrawal of life
support?
(iii)
What are the economic implications of withholding or withdrawal of
life support?
(iv)
How should withholding or withdrawal of life support be carried out?
Target Population
This guideline is applicable to children under the age of 18 years old who are
critically ill and require life support or are on life support.
Target Group
This guideline is meant for all healthcare professionals who are involved in
providing clinical management of withholding and withdrawing of life support in
children.
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
Dr Wong Swee Lan (Chairperson)
Consultant Paediatrician
(General Paediatrics and Child Health)
and Head Department of Paediatrics
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr Lim Nyok Lin
Consultant Paediatrician
(Neonatology)
and Head Department of Paediatrics
Selayang Hospital
Dr Lim Yam Ngoh
Consultant Paediatrician
(Nephrology)
Department of Paediatrics
Kuala Lumpur Hospital
Dr Thavaranjitham
Consultant Paediatric Anesthesiologist
Paediatric Institute
Kuala Lumpur Hospital
Prof. Ong Lye Choo
Consultant Paediatrician ( Neurology)
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Hospital
Prof. Madya Dr Lucy Lam
Consultant Paediatrician
(Intensive Care)
University Malaya Medical Center
Ms Miriam George
Advocate & Solicitor
Shearn Delamore & Co
7th Floor, Wisma Hamzah–Kwong Hing,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr Hussien Imam
Consultant Paediatrician
(Neurology)
and Head Department of Paediatrics
Penang Hospital
Dr Amar Singh HSS
Consultant Paediatrician
(Community Paediatrics)
and Head Department of Paediatrics
Ipoh Hospital
Dr Teh Keng Hwang
Consultant Paediatrician
(Intensive Care)
and Head Department of Paediatrics
Alor Setar Hospital
Dr Hasmawati Hassan
Consultant Paediatrician
(Neonatology)
Kota Bharu Hospital
Prof Boo Nem Yun
Consultant Paediatrician (Neonatology)
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Hospital
Prof. Jackie Ho
Consultant Paediatrician (Neonatology)
Head, Department of Paediatrics
Perak Medical College
Miss Farahnini Dusuki
Lecturer
Law Faculty
International Islamic University
Guidelines Coordinator
Dr S Sheamini
Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Puan Nik Jah bin Mat
Scientific Officer
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Reviewed and edited by
Dr S Sivalal
Head, Health Technology Assessment
Deputy Director, Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
i
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iv
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
METHODOLOGY
1
3.
REASONS FOR WITHDRAWAL/WITHOLDING LIFE SUPPORT
2
3.1
NEONATES
2
3.1.1
Labour room / operation theatre
2
3.1.2
Neonatal Intensive Care Units
2
a. No chance for survival
3
b. Quality of life issues
3
3.1.3
Disorders or Specific Structural Defects Incompatible
with Life
4
3.2
CHILDREN
5
3.2.1 Medical Factors
5
3.2.2 Futility of Care
5
4.
INTENSIVE CARE IN THE CRITICALLY ILL CHILD
6
5.
LEGAL IMPLICATIONS
7
6.
ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS
7
6.1
Cost Implications of End-of-Life Care
7
6.2
Care of Extremely Low Birth Weight Babies
7
7.
WITHRAWAL OR WITHOLDING LIFE SUPPORT IN PRACTICE
8
7.1
The decision to withdraw life support
8
7.2
Pre-Withdrawal Preparation
8
7.3
Withdrawal Procedure
9
7.4
Post-Withdrawal Management (After Death)
10
7.5
Emotional Health of Staff
10
8.
REFERENCES
11
9.
APPENDIX 1 - DEFINITION OF TERMS
15
10.
APPENDIX 2 - UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS
19
OF THE CHILD
11.
APPENDIX 3 - LEVELS OF EVIDENCE SCALE
20
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES ON
WITHHOLDING AND WITHDRAWING OF LIFE SUPPORT IN CHILDREN
1.
INTRODUCTION
Technological advances in modern medicine have had a great impact on the care of
critically ill patients, saving many children’s lives, but also leaving others with chronic
diseases and disabilities. The increased ability to sustain life with intensive care
may lead, unfortunately, sometimes only to prolonging suffering when treatment is
unsuccessful, and prolonging the dying process, attached to technology, instead of
dying with dignity in the company of loved ones. Thus, with these new technologies
also comes the responsibility to understand how, when, and why these technologies
are applied, and when technology should not be used or withdrawn.
Professionals have a duty to act in their patients’ best interests, to sustain life and
restore health to an acceptable standard (Chantler & Doyal, 2000, Level 9). However,
it is important both from an ethical as well as an economic viewpoint, for these
professionals to recognise the limits of unnecessary prolongation of life. Furthermore,
recognition that resources are finite, limit the provision of care that is deemed futile.
The decision by a doctor to withhold or withdraw treatment, but not care, (please
see Appendix 1 for definition of terms) from a patient may result in a serious conflict
with a parent who insists otherwise. However, this may be ethically justifiable and
legally defensible under certain circumstances, since doctors are morally obliged to
question if providing treatment is inconsistent with his professional ethics. The
decision to withhold or withdraw treatment can be made on the basis that treatment
is contrary to the child’s best interests, disproportionately burdensome, futile, or
even harmful (Larcher & Hird 2002, Level 9; Schneiderman et al, 1996, Level 9).
2.
METHODOLOGY
A systematic search of the literature using PubMed, Proquest, Ovid, and Ebsco was
carried out. The key words used included withdrawal, withholding, limitation, lifesustaining therapy, life support, treatment, children, neonate, intensive care, paediatric
intensive care, ethical, cost, and financial implication, used singly or in combination.
The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and Evidence Based Medicine
Database of Abstracts of Reviews (DARE) were also searched. Additional literature
search was carried out using the words nutrition and hydration.
3.
REASONS FOR WITHDRAWAL/WITHOLDING LIFE SUPPORT
3.1.
Neonates
Decisions relating to the withholding and withdrawal of life-sustaining medical
treatments are a necessary part of a neonatal unit’s practice (Larcher & Hird
2002, Level 9). Many decisions regarding life support call for the use of ‘best
interests’ standard, involving weighing the benefits and burdens of lifesustaining medical treatment (please see Appendix 1 for the range of LSMT).
The benefits include the following:
•
Prolongation of life (understanding that the continuation of biological
existence without consciousness may not be a benefit)
•
Improved quality of life (including reduction of pain or disability)
•
Increased physical pleasure, emotional enjoyment and intellectual
satisfaction.
The burden of life sustaining medical treatment (LSMT) may include the
following
•
Intractable pain
•
Irremediable disability or helplessness
•
Emotional, psychosocial and economic suffering
•
Invasive and/or inhumane interventions that severely detract from the
patient’s quality of life (i.e. experience of life as viewed by the patient,
and not social worth as judged by others) (Meisel, 1989, Level 9)
3.1.1. Labour room/ operation theatre
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the labour room presents clinicians with
significant ethical issues. The resuscitation of critically ill infants is a difficult
choice and decision of whether to resuscitate or not must often be made
rapidly. Generally, it is recommended that if there is any doubt, resuscitative
efforts should be provided, since it allows time for increased prognostic
certainty and opportunity for joint decision-making (Meadow et al, 1996, Level 8).
Resuscitation may be inappropriate for the following:
•
Extremely low birth weight - gestation <23 weeks or birth weight
<400gm
•
Neonate with severe congenital defects e.g. anencephaly
•
Severe perinatal asphyxia e.g. persistent asystole for >15 min.
(Niermeyer et al 2000 Level 9; Goldsmith et al, 1996, Level 8)
3.1.2. Neonatal Intensive Care Units
In UK, withdrawal of treatment accounts for up to 30% of neonatal intensive
care deaths (Wall & Partridge, 1997, Level 8). In USA, according to the Baby
Doe regulations (1985) doctors must treat all infants with life-threatening
conditions, except in the following situations (Lantos et al 1994, Level 8):
•
Infant is chronically and irreversibly comatose
•
Provision of treatment would merely prolong dying, not be effective in
relieving or correcting all the infant’s life-threatening conditions, or otherwise
be futile in terms of survival of the infant (Lantos et al, 1994, Level 8)
•
Treatment under such circumstances would be inhumane (Department
of Health and Human Services, 1985, Level 9)
Decisions to withhold or withdraw life-sustaining medical treatment have to
be based on careful assessments of the infant’s clinical condition. The longterm implications of clinical findings such as the following:
•
bilateral cerebral intraparenchymal haemorrhage
•
diffuse periventricular leukomalacia
•
severe perinatal asphyxia with grade III hypoxic-ischaemic
encephalopathy have been established as having poor prognosis, the
neurodevelopmental outlook in many other situations is often not clear
(Larcher & Hird 2002, Level 9). Thus, while reasons for withholding or
withdrawal may vary, these will fall into the following 2 categories:
a.
No chance for survival (Cook & Watchko, 1996, Level 8; Caniano et
al 1995, Level 8) or continued treatment futile in the face of
imminent death (Cuttini et al 2000, Level 8; Caniano et al 1995, Level 8)
•
Limited life expectancy
-
End of treatment line-death inevitable (Kelly et al 1994, Level 8)
-
Lesion incompatible with life (Kelly et al 1994, Level 8)
-
Poor chance of survival (Hazebroek et al 1993, Level
8; Whitelaw,1986, Level 8)
•
Inevitable dependency on life-sustaining treatment
-
Lesion will not allow meaningful survival (Kelly et al 1994, Level
8) or poor prognosis for later life (Hazebroek et al 1993, Level 8)
•
Impossibility that the infant would ever go home
(daCosta et al 2002, Level 8 ; Van der Heide et al 1998, Level 9;
Wall & Partridge 1997, Level 8; Van der Heide et al. 1997,de
Leeuw et al 1996, Level 8 ; Level 8 ; Lantos et al 1994, Level 8 )
b.
Quality of life issues (Cook & Watchko et al 1996, Level 8; Hazebroek
et al 1993, Level 8)
Expected poor quality of life/severe disabilities or severely
deforming and incapacitating condition with little or no hope of
achieving meaningful ‘humanhood’ (Cuttini et al 1999, Level 9; Fost
1999, Level 9)
•
Severe brain damage when death may be preferable to life (Kelly
et al 1994, Level 8)
•
No prospects for improvement
•
A high degree of suffering or unnecessary suffering - neonate’s
burden of pain and suffering with treatment does not outweigh
the benefits of life even if the infant is not in a terminal state (Cuttini
et al 1999, Level 8; Ryan et al 1993, Level 8)
•
An expected poor developmental outcome (Fost 1999, Level 9)
•
Poor social support for disabled (Fost 1999, Level 9)
•
A very high burden of treatment (Van der Heide et al 1998, Level
9; Wall & Partridge 1997; Level 8; Whitelaw 1996, Level 9; Doyal
& Wilsher. 1994, Level 9; Lantos et al. 1994, Level 8;Airede 1991,
Level 8)
Causes of these may include the following:
•
Extremely Low Birth Weight infants

gestational age <26 weeks with intrauterine infection

gestational age <26 weeks with severe complications
•
Prematurity with severe complications
•
Respiratory distress syndrome with complications
•
Severe intracranial haemorrhage
•
Perinatal asphyxia with hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy
•
Severe intractable septicaemia
•
Intractable respiratory failure
•
Severe/multiple congenital malformations
3.1.3. Disorders or Specific Structural Defects Incompatible with Life
•
Cephalic disorders

Hydranencephaly

Anencephaly

Holoprosencephaly

Sirenomelia
•
Genetic defects

13 trisomy syndrome

18 trisomy syndrome

Triploidy
•
Short-limb dwarfing syndromes

Achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis

Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis

Fibrochondrogenesis

Atelosteogenesis

Short-rib polydactyly syndrome, Saldinonoonan type

Thanatophoric dysplasia

Osteogenesis imperfecta type II
•
Miscellaneous syndromes

Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome

Neu-Laxova syndrome

Meckel-Gruber syndromes (Goldsmith et al 1996, Level 8)
3.2.
CHILDREN
Most deaths (65%) occur in paediatric intensive care unit (PICU), and these
deaths are mostly in children less than one year, with up to 50% having
underlying chronic disease (Martinot et al, 1995, Level 8; Levetown et al;
1994, Level 7; Vernon et al, 1993, Level 8; Mink & Pollack, 1992)
3.2.1. Medical factors

Clinical assessments should be based on whether each potentially
available treatment would benefit the patient, taking into account the
residual effect of any remaining medication or treatment on the patient.

Treatment decisions must be based on the best available clinical
evidence - guidelines should be consulted as part of the clinical
assessment (where available), additional advice being sought where
necessary.

Active treatment may be withheld or withdrawn, if unable to achieve
its intended clinical goal, or the patient’s imminent death is inevitable,

Where the patient has an existing condition, a management plan should
be formulated to anticipate progression of the disorder or cardiac arrest

Where the patient presents with a sudden or unexpected medical event,
the condition should be stabilized to allow proper assessment
3.2.2. Futility of care
With patient autonomy, some patients and their families claim the right to receive
any aggressive high tech medical interventions on a chance of improving
survival, even if the medical provider judges the treatment to be futile.
Futility refers to whether treatment will benefit an individual patient
(Schneiderman et al, 1996, Level 9), and is an increasingly common
justification for refusing to provide treatment requested (Prendergast 1995,
Level 9). Nelson (1995, Level 9) suggest that futile be restricted to judgments
of “strict futility” and to use disproportionate burden when a doctor judges
that the burden of continued treatment for the child far outweighs any expected
benefit.
Strict futility or physiologic futility is when a certain treatment fails to preserve
a physiologic function vital for survival, resulting in imminent death e.g. the
administration of vasopressors that fails to maintain an adequate blood
pressure following a cardiac arrest. The doctor is not ethically or legally bound
to offer or provide it, regardless of patient or parental wishes.
Disproportionate burden involves value judgment about the benefits and
burdens of continued treatment. Treatment will not benefit the patient, causes
pain and suffering, and does not contribute to restoring acceptable quality of
life, although the patient may survive for years. The doctor may be justified in
refusing to provide that treatment despite parental disagreement, but foregoing
treatment should not be the doctor’s decision alone unless death is imminent.
However, it has been shown that few paediatric intensive care beds were used
for futile care (Goh & Mok, 2001, Level 8; Sachdeva et al, 1996, Level 8).
4.
INTENSIVE CARE IN THE CRITICALLY ILL CHILD
Injudicious application of intensive care i.e. mechanical ventilation, dialysis and
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) may create a clinical scenario in which a patient
can be maintained alive in an ICU setting with burdensome therapy, never entering
a conscious state, survive and be discharged home with an unacceptable quality of
life, or when therapy is failing, deprive another patient who has a chance of a more
meaningful survival if given access to the ICU.
Some questions one should consider when making decisions on whether to admit a
critically ill patient with cancer to the ICU or to institute CPR are:
1.
Is there a chance of the disease being cured, controlled or put into remission,
and a meaningful life?
2.
Is autonomy of patient respected?
3.
Is there distributive justice? Patient with the best chance of benefiting from
intensive therapy should receive priority for admission.
Australian Classification system for cancer provides a framework to discuss goals
of care relative to cancer status (Meadow et al 1996, Level 9)
As healthcare costs continue to increase economic analysis will be necessary to
guide resource allocation decisions. Cost effectiveness analysis is the most popular
and it evaluates the effectiveness of one treatment versus another. In end-of-life
issues the perspective needs to be broad and include all those who gain as well as
those who pay (ATS Bioethics Task Force 1997; Level 9).
The value of the health consequence is usually reported as a quality of adjusted life
year (QALY). QALY is simply the weighted average of the value of a health related
quality of life where death is 0 and optimum health is 1. This assumption may not
hold true when considering terminally ill patients.
5.
LEGAL IMPLICATIONS
Legally and ethically, the decision to treat or not to treat is justifiable only when it is
in the best interests of the child (please see Appendix 2 for details of rights of a
child). However, perceptions about the child’s best interest may differ, and ‘best
interest’ may not be synonymous with prolongation of life.
Those with parental responsibility for a child are legally and morally entitled to give
or withhold consent to treatment, unless they conflict seriously with the interpretation
of those providing care in the child’s best interests. According to the Child Act 2001,
parents can lose their rights and the child taken into protection, if parents object to
the child’s needs to be examined, investigated or treated for the purpose of restoring
or preserving his health. Although a child under 18 years of age with a sufficient
level of competence and understanding can give valid consent to treatment, he/she
however cannot refuse to have life saving treatment.
In general, doctors judge the clinical factors, and parents determine best interests
of the child. If there is a disagreement that cannot be resolved, a Court may determine
whether the provision of life-prolonging treatment would benefit the child.
6.
ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS
6.1.
Cost Implications of End-of-Life Care
It has been shown that end-of-life care consumes 10-12% of all health care
expenditures. For terminally ill patients, significant cost savings can be achieved
with the use of hospice, and the lower use of high technology interventions.
Initiation of renal support such as dialysis as well as CPR in critically ill patients
has been found not to be cost effective. The cost effectiveness of palliative
therapies is difficult to calculate since there is no good measure for valuing
the quality of death.
6.2.
Care of Extremely Low Birth Weight Babies
Extremely low birth weight (ELBW) babies require expensive and scarce
resources, having poor prognosis for survival should they require intensive
care. Intensive care is costly and outcomes are often uncertain, and hence,
rationing of these resources is inevitable. Neonatal intensive care mortality
decreases as the birth weight increases, so that most NICU deaths occur
during the first few days leaving a relatively healthier population with greater
likelihood of survival (Meadow et al 1996, Level 9). Since premature ELBW
babies result in early deaths, the policy is to initiate treatment on most babies
to see who will do well and who will develop life-threatening complications
(Peabody 1996, Level 9). However, many studies have shown aggressive
treatment and surgical management of ELBW babies has poor outcome and
is not cost effective (Young & Stevenenson 1990, Level 9; Civetta 1996, Level
9; ATS Bioethics Task Force 1997, Level 9). Treating them over-vigorously
violates the moral principles of non-maleficence and distributive justice.
Similarly, failing to treat vigorously due to concerns regarding non-maleficence
and distributive justice could violate the principle of patient-centered
beneficence. Distributive justice compels the doctor to allocate finite resources
equitably (Young & Stevenson 1990, Level 9; Pronovost & Angus 2001, Level 9).
7.
WITHDRAWAL OR WITHHOLDING LIFE SUPPORT IN PRACTICE
The practical issues for withdrawal in neonates and children are similar in many
respects and will be discussed together, unless indicated otherwise! The term “child”
designates both neonates and children.
7.1
The decision to withdraw life support
In principle the decision on when to withdraw life support is made by the attending
consultant paediatrician with the assistance of the whole team (colleagues,
medical officers, nursing personnel) and in consultation with parents.
7.2
Pre-Withdrawal Preparation
1.
It is important that the decision to withdraw life support is a team effort
in which the parents are fully involved. The decision should first be
discussed with personnel involved in the care of the child. It should
then be discussed with the parents before a final decision is made.
2.
If a parent (e.g. mother post LSCS) has not seen the child since
admission, attempts should be made for that parent to see the child
before the actual withdrawal is done.
3.
For continuity and trust, it is important that the attending team -
consultant paediatrician, medical officer and nurse be present to see
the parents through the whole process: pre-withdrawal, withdrawal
and post-withdrawal counseling.
4.
The attending consultant paediatrician (or most senior member of the team),
medical officer and nurse should discuss the following with the parents:
a.
The timing of the procedure - the date and time of the actual withdrawal
should be decided by the parents (within reasonable limits).
b. What the procedure entails - care should be taken to indicate how
long the breathing might continue, that the child may have gasping
respiration, that sedation may be used if the child in anyway
appears to suffer.
c.
Who, if any, of the family members will be present with the child,
during the preparation of the child, during the switching off, and
after switching off. It may be meaningful in the grieving process for
siblings and grandparents to be present.
d.
Religious needs - at times parents may request a religious person
to be present to pray for the child, or this spiritual role can be
undertaken by anyone else like a staff member.
5.
Establish the parents’ preferences for the following:
a. Naming the child.
b. Photographs - parents may wish to take photographs of the child
(these can be taken at the time of withdrawal when the child is
fully clothed or earlier).
c.
Hand and footprints, hair clippings etc (may be taken by the parents
later if they prefer).
d. Holding the child during the dying process.
e. Clothing the child.
f.
Post-mortem
7.3
Withdrawal Procedure
1.
The attending nurse prepares an empty cot, child’s clothes, any
prescribed sedation or analgesia. Photograph child before stopping
ventilator if desired.
2.
Place screens around child and ask visitors to other babies to leave
the ventilation area.
3.
The attending nurse prepares the child in the following manner:
a. Removing all invasive lines except the endotracheal tube. Just
prior to this it may be wise to give sedation (e.g. a morphine purge
to limit the trauma of gasping). Alternatively, it is possible to keep
one heparinised IV line in case of need for sedation.
b. Cleaning any blood or fluid stains on skin if necessary.
c. Changing nappy and dressing child in selected clothes.
4.
Parents and designated family members can be present for this
process or be waiting in a designated room.
5.
Allow for time to pray – formal prayers by person designated by parents
or by ward staff.
6.
Designated person (preferably attending paediatrician or medical
officer) to stop ventilator and withdraw endotracheal tube.
7.
The attending nurse to hand over the child to parents and family. At
times it may be appropriate to wrap the newborn in a shawl so as to
cover birth defects and present the child as best as possible. Place in
cot and wheel to a private room with family (this may be a designated
“bereavement room”, a counselling room or the room used for breast
milk expression)
8.
The attending nurse and doctor should do the following during the
dying process:
a. Encourage parents to hold the child.
b. Standby with parents if requested but it is generally preferred to
allow them to be alone with child during the dying process.
c. Check child and parents intermittently.
d. Leave family with child for as long as they want but not for too long
a period.
e. Provide tissues and refreshments as necessary.
7.4
Post-Withdrawal Management (After Death)
1.
The attending nurse and doctor should express sympathy to parents. Some
physical contact may be meaningful (e.g. a hug or holding the hand).
2.
The attending doctor to certify the death.
3.
The attending nurse should explain the process of releasing the child’s
dead body.
4.
Before the parents leave, the attending doctor should arrange a one
week appointment for parents with the attending consultant paediatrician
(or neonatologist) to facilitate the grieving process. The primary focus
of the follow- up is to help parents with the decision for withdrawal and
assess/discuss any guilt feelings. In addition, there may be a need to
re-discuss the diagnosis or provide more information from tests.
7.5
Emotional Health of Staff
The withdrawal of life support is an emotionally traumatic experience. This is
true even for local paediatric departments which have been practising this for
years. It is important that the nursing staff and doctors caring for these children
have opportunities to express their own pain and grief. This can be done
informally or having formal staff meetings for the purpose.
7.
REFERENCES
Airede KI (1991). Should we resuscitate? Ethical dilemmas. Ann Trop Paediatr.;
11(2):169-74.
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Bioethics: Guidelines on foregoing
life-sustaining medical treatment (1994). Pediatrics. Mar; 93(3):532-6.
ATS Bioethics Task Force (1997). Fair allocation of intensive care unit resources.
Am. J Respir Crit Care Med, 156:1282–1301
Caniano DA, Hazebroek FW, DenBesten KE, Tibboel D (1995). End-of-life decisions
for surgical neonates: experience in The Netherlands and United States. J Pediatr
Surg. Oct;30(10):1420-4.
Chantler C, Doyal L. Medical ethics; the duties of care in principle and practice. In
Powers M, Harris (eds). Clinical Negligence London: Butterworths 2000
Child Act 2001 (Act 611); Part I Section 2(1)
Civetta, Joseph (1996). Another point of view. Futile care or caregiver frustration? A
practical approach, Critical Care Medicine Vol. 24 Number 2 February
Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989. Adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations on 20th November 1989; Article 1
Cook LA, Watchko JF (1996). Decision making for the critically ill neonate near the
end of life. J Perinatol. Mar-Apr;16(2 Pt 1):133-6.
Cuttini M, Rebagliato M, Bortoli P, Hansen G, de Leeuw R, Lenoir S, Persson J, Reid M,
Schroell M, de Vonderweid U, Kaminski M, Lenard H, Orzalesi M, Saracci R
(1999).Parental visiting, communication, and participation in ethical decisions: a
comparison of neonatal unit policies in Europe. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. Sep;
81(2):F84-91.
Cuttini M, Nadai M, Kaminski M, Hansen G, de Leeuw R, Lenoir S, Persson J,
Rebagliato M, Reid M, de Vonderweid U, Lenard HG, Orzalesi M, Saracci R (2000).
End-of-life decisions in neonatal intensive care: physicians’ self-reported practices
in seven European countries. EURONIC Study Group. Lancet. Jun 17;
355(9221):2112-8.
da Costa DE, Ghazal H, Al Khusaiby S (2002). Do Not Resuscitate orders and
ethical decisions in a neonatal intensive care unit in a Muslim community. Arch Dis
Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. Mar; 86(2):F115-9.
de Leeuw R, de Beaufort AJ, de Kleine MJ, van Harrewijn K, Kollee LA (1996). Foregoing
intensive care treatment in newborn infants with extremely poor prognosis. A study in
four neonatal intensive care units in The Netherlands. J Pediatr; 129 (5):661-666
Department of Health and Human Services. Child abuse and neglect prevention
and treatment program: Final rule. Federal Register. 1985; 50:1478-92
Doyal L, Wilsher D (1994). Towards guidelines for withholding and withdrawal of life
prolonging treatment in neonatal medicine. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. Jan;
70(1):F66-70.
Fost N (1999). Decisions regarding treatment of seriously ill newborns. JAMA. Jun
2; 281(21):2041-2043
Goh AY, Mok Q (2001). Identifying futility in a paediatric critical care setting: a
prospective observational study. Arch Dis Child. Mar; 84(3):265-8
Goh AY, Lum LCS, Chan PWK, Bakar F, Chong BO (1999). Withdrawal and limitation
of life support in paediatric intensive care. Arch Dis Child; 80:424-428
Goldsmith JP, Ginsberg HG, McGettigan MC (1996). Ethical decisions in the delivery
room. Clin Perinatol. Sep; 23(3):529-550
Hazebroek FW, Tibboel D, Mourik M, Bos AP, Molenaar JC (1993). Withholding and
withdrawal of life support from surgical neonates with life-threatening congenital
anomalies. J Pediatr Surg. Sep; 28(9):1093-1097
Kelly NP, Rowley SR, Harding JE (1994). Death in neonatal intensive care. J Paediatr
Child Health. Oct; 30(5):419-422
Lantos JD, Tyson JE, Allen A, Frader J, Hack M, Korones S, Merenstein G, Paneth
N, Poland RL, Saigal S, et al(1994). Withholding and withdrawing life-sustaining
treatment in neonatal intensive care: issues for the 1990s. Arch Dis Child Fetal
Neonatal Ed. Nov; 71(3):F218-223.
Larcher V, Hird MF (2002). Withholding and withdrawing neonatal intensive care.
Current Pediatrics; 12: 470-475
Levetown M, Pollack MM, Cuerdon TT, Ruttimann UE, Glover JJ (1994). Limitations
and withdrawals of medical intervention in pediatric critical care. JAMA. Oct
26;272(16):1271-1275
Maillet JO, Potter RL, Heller L (2002). Position of the American Dietetic Association:
ethical and legal issues in nutrition, hydration, and feeding. J Am Diet Assoc.
May;102(5):716-26.
Martinot A, Lejeune C, Hue V, Fourier C, Beyaert C, Diependaele JF, Deschildre A,
Leclerc F (1995). [Modality and causes of 259 deaths in a pediatric intensive care
unit] Arch Pediatr. Aug;2(8):735-41. French.
Meadow W, Lantos JD, Mokalla M, Reimshisel T (1996). Distributive justice across
generations. Epidemiology of ICU care for the very young and the very old. Clin
Perinatol. Sep; 23(3):597-608.
Meisel A (1989). The care of the dying: a symposium on the case of Betty Wright –
Refusing treatment, refusing to talk, and refusing to let go: on whose terms will
death occur? Law Med Health Care. Fall; 17(3):221-226.
Mink RB, Pollack MM (1992). Resuscitation and withdrawal of therapy in pediatric
intensive care. Pediatrics. May; 89(5):961-3
Nelson LJ, Rushton CH, Cranford RE, Nelson RM, Glover JJ, Truog RD (1995). Forgoing
medically provided nutrition and hydration in paediatrics patients. J Law Med Ethics;
23: 33-46.
Niermeyer S, Kattwinkel J, Van Reempts P, Nadkarni V, Phillips B, Zideman
D,Azzopardi D, Berg R, Boyle D, Boyle R, Burchfield D, Carlo W, Chameides L,
Denson S, Fallat M, Gerardi M, Gunn A, Hazinski MF, Keenan W, Knaebel S, Milner
A, Perlman J, Saugstad OD, Schleien C, Solimano A, Speer M, Toce S, Wiswell T,
Zaritsky A (2000). International Guidelines for Neonatal Resuscitation: An excerpt
from the Guidelines 2000 for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency
Cardiovascular. Contributors and Reviewers for the Neonatal Resuscitation
Guidelines. Pediatrics. Sep; 106(3):E29.
Peabody JL, Martin GI (1996). From how small is too small to how much is too
much. Clinics in Perinatology; Sep: 23(3): 473-489
Prendergast TJ (1995). Futility and the common cold. How requests for antibiotics
can illuminate care at the end of life. Chest; 107 (3):836-844
Pronovost P, Angus DC (2001). Economics of end-of-life care in the intensive care
unit. Crit Care Med. Feb; 29(2 Suppl):N46-51
Report of Special Task Force (1987). Guidelines for the determination of brain death
in children. American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on Brain Death in Children.
Pediatrics. Aug; 80(2):298-300.
Ryan CA, Byrne P, Kuhn S, Tyebkhan J (1993). No resuscitation and withdrawal of
therapy in a neonatal and a pediatric intensive care unit in Canada. J Pediatr. Oct;
123(4):534-8.
Sachdeva RC, Jefferson LS, Coss-Bu J, Brody BA (1996). Resource consumption
and the extent of futile care among patients in a pediatric intensive care unit setting.
J Pediatr. Jun; 128(6):742-747.
Schneiderman LJ, Jecker NS, Jonsen AR (1996). Medical futility: its meaning and
ethical implications. Ann Intern Med. Jun 15; 112(12):949-54
Truog RD, Cist AF, Brackett SE, Burns JP, Curley MA, Danis M, DeVita MA, Rosenbaum
SH, Rothenberg DM, Sprung CL, Webb SA, Wlody GS, Hurford WE (2001).
Recommendations for end-of-life care in the intensive care unit: The Ethics Committee
of the Society of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med. Dec; 29(12):2332-2348
Van der Heide A, van der Maas PJ, van der Wal G, de Graaff CL, Kester JG, Kollee
LA, de Leeuw R, Holl RA l (1997) Medical end-of-life decisions made for neonates
and infants in the Netherlands. Lancet; 350(9073): 251-255
Van der Heide A. van der Maas PJ, van der Wal G, Kollee LA, de Leeuw R, Holl
(1998). The role of parents in end-of-life decisions in neonatology: Physicians’ views
and practices. Pediatrics Mar; 101: 413-418
Vernon DD, Dean JM, Timmons OD, Banner W Jr, Allen-Webb EM (1993). Modes of
death in the pediatric intensive care unit: withdrawal and limitation
of supportive care. Crit Care Med. Nov; 21(11):1798-802
Wall SN, Partridge JC (1997). Death in the Intensive care Nursery: Physician Practice
of Withdrawing and Withholding Life Support. Pediatrics 99:64-70
Whitelaw A (1986). Death as an option in neonatal intensive care. Lancet. Aug
9;2(8502):328-31.
Young EW, Stevenson DK (1990). Limiting treatment for the extremely premature,
Low Birth weight infants (500 – 700g). Am J Dis. Child. May 144(5):549-52.
Appendix 1
DEFINITION OF TERMS
1.
Benefit versus burden of care: The primary goal of medical treatment is to
benefit the patient by restoring and maintaining the patient’s health as far as
possible, maximising benefit and minimising harm. However, sometimes the
course of the disease may cause health professionals and the child’s family
to consider whether continued treatment truly represents the best option. If
treatment fails to provide a net benefit to the patient, it no longer becomes
appropriate to prolong life at all costs, with no regard to its quality or the
burdens of treatment. In such circumstances there is justification, ethically
and legally, for withholding or withdrawing treatment. The goal of medicine
should then shift to palliative care.
2.
Withholding and withdrawing: The term “forgo” is synonymously used for
both stopping a treatment already begun (“withdraw”) as well as not starting
a treatment (“withhold”). Other terms include “limitation of treatment” (Goh et
al 1999). There is no important ethical or legal difference between withholding
or withdrawing treatment when making decisions about an individual patient
(AAP guidelines 1994). Yet, many health care professionals, as well as
families, feel an emotional difference between the two, largely due to the
impression that withdrawing treatment can be interpreted as “giving up on
the patient”. Some health professionals may be reluctant to start treatment in
the mistaken belief that once started the treatment cannot be withdrawn.
Treatment should never be withheld, especially when there is a chance the
patient may benefit, simply because withholding is considered easier than
withdrawing. When great uncertainty prevails, a better course would be to
initiate treatment to ascertain whether it is able to benefit the patient, and
subsequently withdraw it if it proves unhelpful.
3.
Life-sustaining medical treatment (LSMT): Other terms commonly used
include “life prolonging treatment” and “life support”. It encompasses ALL
interventions that may prolong the life of the patient and postpone death.
There is evidence that if these interventions are withdrawn or withheld, death
usually ensues (Goh et al, 1999; and Wall et al, 1997) There is no difference
between “extraordinary” (technically demanding and often scarce) and
“ordinary” interventions. However, in reality, health care professionals have
many preferences and biases regarding the type and order of withdrawal of
such treatment. In light of these subconscious biases, it is useful to review
the wide range of LSMT and work towards an approach focusing on the unique
situation and needs of the patient rather than physician preferences.
Table 1 Illustrates the range of LSMTs that may be withheld or withdrawn
(Recommendations for end of life care, Troug et al, 2001)
Therapeutic goal
Circulatory
haemostasis
Respiratory
haemostasis
Renal
haemostasis
Neurologic
haemostasis
Treatment of
infection,
inflammation
or neoplasm
Nutritional
haemostasis
(artificial hydration
and nutrition)
“Routine”
measures
Therapy
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
Vasopressors & inotropic medication
Transfusion of blood products, albumin, crystalloids
Invasive pressure monitoring
Mechanical ventilation
Supplemental oxygen
Artificial airway (endotracheal or tracheostomy tube,
oropharyngeal airway)
Extra Corporeal Membrane Oxygenation
Haemodialysis
Peritoneal dialysis
Haemofiltration
Cerebrospinal fluid drainage
Intracranial pressure monitoring
Hyperventilation techniques
Steroids/mannitol
Antibiotics, antifungal, antiviral medication
Immunosuppressive/ anti-inflammatory medication
Cytotoxic medication
Radiation therapy
Total parenteral nutrition
Enteral (tube/ gastrostomy) feeding
Intravenous fluids
Frequent phlebotomy for laboratory tests
Frequent vital sign measurements
Radiologic examinations
Aggressive chest physiotherapy and endotracheal
suctioning
Placement of intravenous and intra-arterial lines,
urinary catheters
4.
Artificial nutrition and hydration: refers specifically to those techniques for
providing nutrition or hydration that bypass the normal swallowing process. It
is now accepted that providing nutrition and hydration via tube or intravenously
constitutes a medical treatment (AAP guidelines, 1994). Evidence suggests
that neither nutrition nor hydration in terminally ill patients increases the
comfort or quality of life, and may in fact exacerbate discomfort and suffering
(American Dietetic Association, 2002). In these situations the goal is to provide
comfort, not adequate nutrition. Good practice should include moistening
their mouths as necessary to keep them comfortable. There are three major
categories in which it is ethically permissible to forgo artificial nutrition in
children: neurological devastation, irreversible total intestinal failure and
imminent death from any cause (Nelson, 1995). However, it is recognized
that many health professionals and families are emotionally uncomfortable
with forgoing artificial nutrition and hydration, on the premise that feeding
children is the most basic aspect of care. Discussions with the family about
the consequences of forgoing artificial nutrition and their beliefs and
preferences are necessary. Informed and shared decision making is the best
ethical practice, but respect for the opinion of the family is paramount.
5.
Brain death: Denotes the irreversible cessation of all functions of the brain,
including the brain stem. There should be no confusion over the concept and
definition of brain death - a child who is brain dead is dead. It is a legally
defined state that does not require agreement or consent from the family
(Report of Special Task Force (1987). Discontinuing technologic support for
a brain dead patient is not an issue, and is distinctly different from the issues
of withdrawing or withholding LMST in a patient who has an extremely poor
prognosis for survival but does not meet the criteria for brain death.
6.
Palliative care: sometimes referred to as “end of life care”. When cure or
recovery is no longer possible, the focus must shift to ensuring that the patient
has a “good death”, with relief from pain and suffering. Both humanistic and
technical skills are required to ensure that the needs of the child and family
are met. However, patients and their families do not suddenly switch from the
hope of survival to the acceptance of death and pursuit of comfort. This process
occurs gradually over varying periods of time, ranging from hours to weeks,
depending on the clinical situation. Similarly, forgoing LSMTs rarely happens
all at once and is likewise a gradual process that parallels the shift in goals.
It should be emphasized that palliative care and LSMT are not mutually
exclusive options but rather coexistent.
7.
Futility: comes from the Latin word futilis meaning leaky. In Greek mythology,
Aegyptus and Danaus were brothers. Aegyptus decided that his fifty sons
would marry Danaus’ fifty daughters. Danaus, king of Argos, did not like the
idea, so he told his daughters to kill their husbands on their wedding nights
and supplied them with ruby tipped poisoned pins to stick into their hearts. All
of the Danaides did so except one, who fell in love with her husband. The
daughters who obeyed their father were condemned by Hades to draw water
in leaky sieves. Needless to say, their labours went for naught. The story
carries in all its fullness the meaning of the term, useless or incapable of
being achieved, no matter how often repeated.
8.
‘Forego’ refers to both stopping a treatment already begun as well as not
starting a treatment. There is no important ethical or legal distinction between
not instituting a treatment and discontinuing treatment already initiated
although many health care professionals feel reluctant to discontinue lifesustaining treatments (AAP guidelines, 1994).
Appendix 2
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Malaysian Child
Act 2001 defines a child as a person under the age of 18 years.
Article 3 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child states that “all actions
concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare
institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best
interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.” The child shall be provided
the opportunity to be heard in any judicial and administrative proceedings affecting
the child and his/her views be given due weight in accordance with the age and
maturity of the child. Malaysia signed this convention on 28 December 1994 and
ratified it with 12 reservations in February 1995.
Appendix 3
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE SCALE
Study Design
Level
Strength of
Evidence
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Good
Good
Good to Fair
Good to Fair
Fair
Fair
Poor
Poor
Poor
Meta-analysis of RCT, Systematic review
Large sample RCT
Small sample RCT
Non-randomised controlled prospective trial
Non-randomised controlled prospective trial
with historical control
Cohort studies
Case-control studies
Non-controlled clinical series, descriptive
studies multi-centre
Expert committees, consensus, case reports
anecdotes
Adapted from Catalonian Agency for Health Technology Assessment & Research,
(CAHTAR) Spain