CLINICAL PRACTICE biel
‘AUGUST 2004 HIPIPAKIB5.04 (GU)
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT
OF
CHRONIC MYELOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Statement of Intent
These guidelines are meant to be a guide for clinical practice, based on the best available
evidence at the time of development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
ensure the best outcome in every case. Every health care provider is responsible for the
management of his/her unique patient based on the clinical picture presented by the patient
and the management options available locally.
Review of the Guidelines
These guidelines were issued in August 2004 and will be reviewed in August 2006 or sooner
if newer evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
c/o Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
21st Floor, Bangunan PERKIM
Jalan Ipoh
51200 Kuala Lumpur.
Available on the following website : http:// www.moh.gov. .my
http:// www.acadmed.org.my
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
FOREWORD
Clinicians and general practitioners will encounter patients with a high white cell, red cell
or platelet counts during their clinical practice. There are many causes for elevated cell
counts and one of them is chronic myeloproliferative disorders (MPD). It is important not
to miss the diagnosis of MPD because of the thrombotic and bleeding complications that
are not uncommonly seen as well as the small risk of leukaemic transformation.
As the diagnosis of MPD is one of exclusion, a guideline is urgently needed to assist clinicians
and haematologists alike in making a definitive diagnosis.
With the development of this guideline, we hope to create a better understanding of the
MPDs among physicians such that appropriate management and referral to the haematologists
are undertaken.
Jameela Sathar
President
Malaysian MPD Group
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders (MPD) are a closely related group of haematologic
disorders in which there is inappropriate proliferation of myeloid precursors in the bone
marrow. The MPDs are further classified into four groups: Polycythaemia Rubra Vera(PRV),
Essential Thrombocythaemia(ET), Myelofibrosis with Myeloid Metaplasia(MMM) and the
unclassified MPDs.
There is no specific test to diagnose MPD; the diagnosis is one of exclusion. It is important
not to miss the diagnosis as delay in treatment may lead to thrombotic complications with
increased morbidity and mortality.
The clinical practice guideline on “ Diagnosis & Management of Myeloproliferative
Disorders in Malaysia” was prepared by a group of haematologists based on a systematic
review of evidence and clinical practices. The Malaysian MPD group is affiliated to the
Asia Pacific MPD Study Group comprising countries from Taiwan, Korea, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Australia, Thailand and Indonesia.
Objectives
The aim of the guideline is to provide diagnostic criteria and proper management for patients
with MPD.
Target Population
This guideline is targeted to patients with high cell counts where no obvious cause is found.
Target Group
This guideline is developed for clinicians and haematologists.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
DESIGN AND METHODS.
-
The Malaysian MPD Group consisting of Consultant Haematologists from both
teaching and government institutions & hospitals systematically reviewed the
published literature from 1980 to August 2002.
-
From September 2002 to Dec 2004, four Consensus Discussion Group were held
with the goal of solving residual disagreement on recommendations.
-
The drafted guidelines were then sent to an expert panel consisting of senior
Haematologists.
-
Systematic review of clinical evidence: a list of clinical papers were made available
to the expert panel for review and a consensus was reached by the panel of expert. A
search was done for Myeloproliferative Diseases, Essential Thrombocythaemia,
Thrombocythaemia, Thrombocytosis, Erythrocytosis, Polycythaemia Vera,
Polycythaemia Rubra Vera, Polycythaemia, Myelofibrosis and Myeloid Metaplasia
with Myelofibrosis in the following journals :
o
NEJM
o
PUB-Med
o
Blood
o
Annals of Haematology
o
European Journal of Haematology
o
American Journal of Haematology
o
British Medical Journal
o
Journal of Clinical Oncology
o
Leukemia
o
Cancer
o
LeukemiaLymphoma
Results. The Malaysian MPD Group provided recommendations on when to start plateletlowering therapy, the most appropriate platelet-lowering agent, the use of anti-platelet
therapy, and the management in women of childbearing age and pregnant women. The
management includes risk stratification, therapy options, efficacy & side-effects of various
drugs.
Conclusions. By using evidence and consensus, recommendations for the treatment of key
problems in MPDs have been agreed upon. The guideline is then drafted according to the
strength of the supporting evidence and uncertainty is explicitly declared.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
(MALAYSIAN MPD GROUP)
Dr Jameela Sathar
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr Leong Chooi Fun
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia
Dr Padmini Menon
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Ipoh
Dr Tan Sen Mui
Haematology Specialist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr Vijaya Sangkar Jaganathan
Clinical Specialist / Lecturer
Haematologist
Universiti Of Malaya Medical Centre
Dr Sinari Salleh
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Sultan Aminah
Johore Bharu
CONSULTANT REVIEWERS
1.
Dr Abu Dzarr
Clinical Specialist, Haematology
Hospital USMKubang Kerian
2.
Dr Agnes Yong
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
3.
Professor Cheong Soon Keong
Head of Department
Consultant Pathologist & Haematologist
Hospital UKM
4.
Dr Chang Kian Meng
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
5.
Dr Ng Soo Chin
Consultant Haematologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre
6.
Dr Visalachy Purushothaman
Head of Department
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Malaysian MPD committee would like to express their gratitude and appreciation to
the following person / society for their contributions;
·
The Malaysia Society of Haematology for accepting Malaysian MPD
group as part of the society.
·
Dr Goh Ai Sim who has also contributed her input to the guideline
development.
The committee is also grateful and extends its sincere thanks to
·
Dr Ong Tee Chuan for providing input, designing the MPD registry
format.
The committee would also like to express their sincere thanks to the Hospital Kuala
Lumpur Senior Consultants for their valuable input & review of the guideline:
·
Dr Ng Kok Ying,
Head of Department
Department of Obstetric and Gynaecology
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
·
Dato Dr Hajjah Azizah Ahmad Mahayiddin,
Head of Department
Department of Medicine, Hospital Kuala Lumpur
·
Dr Haji Yusoff Hj Ahmad,
Head of Department
Outpatient Department, Hospital Kuala Lumpur
·
Mr Zainal Arrifin,
Head of Department,
Surgical Department, Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Guideline Development and Objectives iii
Design and Methods
iv
Clinical Practice Guideline Development Group
v
Specialist Reviewers
Acknowledgements
Page
1.
INTRODUCTION 1
2.
POLYCYTHAEMIA RUBRA VERA 2
a.
Definition 2
b.
Pathogenesis 3
c.
Diagnosis 3
d.
Clinical Features 4
e.
Prognosis 4
f.
Risk Stratification 4
g.
Treatment modalities and algorithm 5
3.
ESSENTIAL THROMBOCYTHAEMIA 6
a.
Definition 6
b.
Pathogenesis 6
c.
Diagnosis 6
d.
Clinical Features 7
e.
Prognostic Factors 8
f.
Risk Stratification 8
g.
Treatment Stratigies and algorithm 10
4.
MYELOFIBROSIS WITH MYELOID METAPLASIA 11
a.
Definition 11
b.
Pathogenesis 11
c.
Diagnosis 12
d.
Clinical Features 12
e.
Prognosis 12
f.
Risk factors 13
g.
Treatment Stratigies and algorithm 14
5.
UNCLASSIFIED 15
6.
REFERENCES 16 - 20
7.
Appendix 1 : Grades of Recommendation 21
8.
Levels of Evidence 21
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
INTRODUCTION
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS (MPD)
Myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) are chronic diseases caused by clonal proliferation of
bone marrow stem cells leading to excess production of one or more haemopoietic lineages.
The current classification of the MPD includes the following:
Polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV)
Essential thrombocythaemia (ET)
Myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia (MMM)
Unclassified
These four disorders are considered separate from chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) and
the myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with variable propensity to evolve into acute
leukaemia. PRV and ET are associated with an increased risk of thrombosis.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) had been traditionally considered as part of chronic
myeloproliferative disorder. As the emphasis on Philadelphia Chromosome became more
prominent, CML evolved into its own entity defined by the translocation t(9:22) whereas
the remaining disorders not associated with the translocation remain as part of MPD.
The combined overall incidence of MPD is 100-150 cases/year/million population in Europe.
The respective incidences of PRV, ET, MMM are approximately 2.3, 2.5 and 1.3 per 100,000
population1 . Median age at diagnosis is similar among the MPD, about 60 years. There is a
slight preponderance of males in PRV and MMM and of females in ET.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
POLYCYTHAEMIA RUBRA VERA (PRV)2
Definition
Polycythaemia (erythrocytosis) is defined as an increase in haemoglobin concentration above
normal i.e.[raised packed cell volume (PCV) in male>0.51 and female>0.48]. True
polycythaemia exists when the total red cell mass(RCM), measured by dilutional method
with radio-isotopic red cells, is increased above normal. Spurious or relative (pseudo or
stress) polycythaemia exists when an elevated haemoglobin concentration is caused by a
reduction in plasma volume as measured by dilutional method with radio-isotopically labeled
albumin (Figure below).
Table 1. Causes of polycythaemia
True polycythaemia
Primary
Polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV)
Congenital truncation of erythropoietin receptor
Secondary
Erythropoietin appropriately increased
High altitude
Cyanotic congenital heart disease
Chronic lung disease
Haemoglobin variant with increased oxygen affinity
Erythropoietin inappropriately increased
Renal disease: hypernephroma, renal cyst, hydronephrosis
Uterine myoma
Other tumours, e.g. hepatocellular carcinoma, bronchial carcinoma
Idiopathic erythrocytosis
Plasma
Haematocrit
35%
Haematocrit
55%
Plasma
Haematocrit
55%
Plasma
Normal
True Polycythaemia
Relative
Polycythaemia
Fig. showing graphic representation of various types of polycythaemia
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Relative (spurious) polycythaemia
Plasma volume depletion
Stress (‘pseudo- polycythaemia’)
Dehydration
Diuretic therapy
Pathogenesis
Based on X chromosome-associated enzyme and DNA analysis, PRV have shown clonal
myeloproliferation involving multiple lineages. Erythrocytosis is independent of
erythropoietin (EPO) with presence of the intact structure and function of EPO. EPOindependent erythroid viability in PRV may be facilitated by an abnormal expression of
apoptosis-inhibiting oncoproteins or augmented stimulatory signal transduction as evidence
by hypersensitivity of some erythroid progenitors to a variety of cytokines, including insulinlike and myeloid growth factors (stem cell factors, granulocyte-monocyte colony stimulating
factor, interleukin-3).
Diagnosis
Causes of secondary erythrocytosis should be considered prior to making the diagnosis of
PRV.
Criteria for the diagnosis of PRV3
A1
Raised red cell mass
(>25% above mean normal predicted value) or
PCV >0.60 in males and >0.56 in females
A2
Absence of causes of secondary erythrocytosis*
(*Normal arterial O2 saturation >92%)
(*Leucocyte alkaline phophatase >100; no fever or infection)
A3
Palpable splenomegaly
A4
Clonality marker, i.e acquired abnormal marrow karyotype
A5
Endogenous erythroid colony formation
B1
Thrombocytosis ( platelet count >400 x109/L )
B2
Neutrophil leucocytosis ( neutrophil count >10 x 109/L; >12.5 x 109/L
in smokers )
B3
Splenomegaly demonstrated on ultrasound or isotope scanning
B4
Low serum erythropoeitin
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Required Diagnostic Criteria
A1 + A2 plus any other A establishes PRV
A1 + A2 + two of B establishes PRV
Clinical features
The major symptoms are related to hyperviscosity caused by the increased red cell mass. In
nearly 25% of patients, an episode of venous or arterial thrombosis, such as deep vein
thrombosis, myocardial ischaemia or stroke, is the first manifestation. Mesenteric and portal
or splenic vein thrombosis should always lead to consideration of PRV as a possible cause,
and may even precede the onset of an overt polycythaemic stage. Vasomotor symptoms
such as headache, dizziness, visual disturbances and paresthesias are also major complaints.
Other findings may include pruritus, erythromelalgia and gout. Haemorrhage, particularly
from the gastrointestinal tract, may also occur.
Physical findings include phlethora in 70% of patients, palpable splenomegaly in 70%, and
hepatomegaly in 40%.
Prognosis4
Age and the history of previous thrombosis are the most powerful predictors of recurrent
thrombosis. Patients with PRV and ET may be stratified into defined risk groups that are
managed differently. (Table 2)
Table 2. Risk stratification in PRV
Low risk
Age < 60 years, and
No history of thrombosis, and / or vasomotor symptoms
Platelet count < 600 x 10 9 /L and
No cardiovascular risk factors (smoking, obesity)
High risk
Age > 60 years, or
A previous history of thrombosis, and or vasomotor symptoms
Treatment modalities (Level of Evidence III or B)
Thrombosis is the main cause of morbidity and mortality. Its incidence can be reduced by
maintaining the PCV <0.45 in men and <0.42 in women as well as keeping the platelets
<600x109/L. The beneficial role of low-dose aspirin in PRV was shown in a large prospective
European Collaboration on Low-dose Aspirin in Polycythaemia Vera(ECLAP) study in
significantly reducing the number of cardiovascular death and major thrombosis with minimal
bleeding complications.5 Table 3 shows a treatment algorithm for PRV according to risk
groups.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Treatment A Phlebotomy* + Low Dose Aspirin**
Treatment B Phlebotomy + Interferon-a 8,9,10,11 + Low Dose Aspirin
Treatment C Phlebotomy + Hydroxyurea 6, 7 + /or Interferon-a + Low Dose Aspirin
Treatment D Phlebotomy + Hydroxyurea + Low Dose Aspirin
* Phlebotomy : First line management of an erythrocythemic individual. Ideal PCV
( < 0.45 for men and < 0.42 for women. )
Phlebotomy (400mls red cells) is performed every other day for the first week, twice
weekly for the second week and weekly thereafter until the ideal PCV is achieved. Each
venesection is replaced with 500ml of normal saline. For patients who are not able to
comply with the venesection or there is failure to achieve ideal PCV by the third week,
cytoreduction with hydroxyurea or interferon-a is started for the low risk group.
** Low-dose aspirin: 75-100mg daily
***Consider anagrelide for control of symptomatic thrombocytosis.
Treatment A
Low Risk
Treatment B
High Risk
Age
Women of Child Bearing Age
Treatment A
Low Risk
Traetment C
High Risk***
Age
< 60 years old
Treatment D
High Risk***
Age
> 60 years old
Treatment Modalities
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
ESSENTIAL THROMBOCYTHAEMIA (ET)
Definition
ET is a chronic non-reactive thrombocythaemic state that is not accounted for by another
chronic myeloid disorder.
Pathogenesis
X-linked enzyme and genetic analysis have shown that patients with ET have clonal
haematopoeisis that originates in stem cells. Serum thrombopoeitin (TPO) levels are usually
elevated or normal despite an increased megakaryocyte mass and this has been attributed
to ineffective TPO clearance because of the markedly reduced TPO-receptor (c-Mpl)
expression in platelets and megakaryocytes, rather than an overproduction of TPO.12
Diagnosis
A diagnosis of ET is made by excluding both reactive thrombocytosis and thrombocytosis
associated with another myeloid disorder (Table 4) & (Table 5). All cases of thrombocytosis
from automated counter should be counter checked by blood smear to exclude
pseudothrombocytosis secondary to cellular fragments.
Table 4. Causes of thrombocytosis13, 14
I. Non-clonal
·
Iron deficiency
·
Splenectomy
·
Haemolysis or bleeding
·
Infection or inflammation (connective tissue disease, vasculitis)
·
Tissue damage (surgery, myocardial infarction, pancreatitis, trauma)
·
Malignancy
II. Clonal
·
Essential Thrombocythaemia
·
Polycythaemia Vera
·
Myelofibrosis
·
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
·
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Table 5. Diagnostic Criteria for ET13,14
A
Diagnostic criteria
A1
Platelet count in excess of 400 x109/L and no known cause of reactive
thrombocytosis
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
A2
Increase and clustering of enlarged and mature megakaryocytes with
hyperploid nuclei in marrow biopsy material
B
Confirmative criteria
B1
Normal or elevated leukocyte alkaline phosphatase score, normal ESR,
and no fever or infection
B2
Normal or increased cellularity of the bone marrow with or without the
presence of reticulin fibers in biopsy material
B3
Splenomegaly on palpation, isotope or ultrasound scan, or computer
tomogram
B4
No Philadelphia chromosome or bcr-abl rearrangement
Required Diagnostic Criteria
A1 + A2 establishes ET
A1 + B1 plus any one of B2 to B4 establishes ET
Clinical Features 15
Approximately 25% of patients with ET are asymptomatic at presentation. The rest may
present with:
1.
vasomotor symptoms (incidence 40%)
a.
headaches
b.
transient neurologic or ocular symptoms
c.
distal paraesthesias
d.
erythromelalgia (burning pain of the hands or feet associated with erythema
and warmth)
2.
thrombosis (incidence 18%)
a.
strokes
b.
transient ischaemic attacks
c.
retinal artery or venous occlusion
d.
myocardial infarction
e.
pulmonary embolism
f.
hepatic or portal vein thrombosis
g.
deep vein thrombosis
h.
digital ischaemia
3.
bleeding (incidence 26%)
a.
gastrointestinal haemorrhage mainly associated with the use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
b.
mucocutaneous bleeding
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Four different studies have failed to define a relationship between the frequency of thrombotic
complications and platelet numbers. Instead, thrombotic events occurred at a wide range of
platelet counts.16,17,18,19 In two studies, patients with extreme thrombocytosis (>1000x109/L)
were reported to have a much higher incidence of haemorrhagic events. This may be due to
the acquired von Willebrand syndrome.
Leukaemic transformation occurs in less than 5% of all patients with ET. Among 74 young
women with ET observed for up to 26 years, only 1 developed acute leukaemia and 3
developed post-thrombocythaemic myelofibrosis.20
Spontaneous first trimester abortions occur in up to 45% of pregnancies in ET. 21
Prognostic Factors
Age and a history of previous thrombosis are the most powerful predictors of recurrent
thrombosis in ET. In one study, the estimated annual risk of thrombosis was 30% for patients
with a history of thrombosis and only 3% for those without. Similarly, the annual thrombotic
risk was 15% in patients older than 60 years but less than 2% among patients younger than
40 years.18
Risk Stratification22
Patients with ET may be categorized into different risk groups similar to PRV with different
treatment strategies (Table 6).
Table 6. Risk stratification in ET
Low risk
Age < 60 years, and
No history of thrombosis, and or vasomotor symptoms
Platelet count < 600 x 10 9 /L and
No cardiovascular risk factors (smoking, obesity)
High risk
Age > 60 years, or
A previous history of thrombosis, and or vasomotor symptoms
Treatment Strategies ( Level of Evidence III or B)
The benefit of treatment for high risk ET patients was demonstrated by Cortelazzo et al.23 in
a study of 114 high-risk patients. After a median follow-up of 27 months, 24% of the untreated
group had experienced a thrombotic event, in contrast to only 3.6% of the treated group.
Maintenance of the platelet count under 400x109/L may be associated with further reduction
in thrombotic risk.24
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
The issue of treatment for low risk patients has been more controversial. Although the study
by Ruggeri et al 25 concluded that low-risk ET patients do not require treatment, aspirin use
was not controlled in this study. The use of low-dose aspirin in this patient group can be
extrapolated from the ECLAP study.5
A.
General measures
i. Stop smoking
ii.Avoid NSAIDs
iii.Avoid OCPs, HRTs or Hormonal Therapy
B.
Specific measures
a.
Platelet-lowering agents
i. Hydroxyurea
ii.Anagrelide
iii.Interferon alpha
iv.Others (busulphan)
b.
Anti-Platelet agents (i.e. Aspirin)
c.
Plateletpharesis in the acute setting where life-threatening complications
are present
In a randomized study, the use of hydroxyurea reduced the risk of thrombosis in high-risk
patients with ET from 24% to <4% compared with no treatment23. To date, there is no
randomized study that directly implicates hydroxyurea as being more leukemogenic. Some
long term studies found that a proportion of ET patients treated with hydroxyurea developed
acute leukaemia.26,27 In other studies, this drug was not associated with an increase risk of
leukaemic transformation.28,29 As the leukaemogenecity of hydroxyurea is still being debated,
it is recommended that this drug is reserved for the elderly (>60 years). Initial starting dose
is 15-20 mg/kg/day or 500mg daily or bd. Side effects are neutropenia, anaemia, oral ulcers,
hyperpigmentation, rash and nail changes.
Anagrelide is an oral imidazoquinazoline derivative that has a platelet lowering effect. It
can control thrombocytosis in > 80% of patients regardless of previous treatments30,31. The
drug may interfere with megakaryocyte maturation, resulting in the underproduction of
platelets. The mode of action is unclear but it could be that anagrelide blocks the c-mpl
receptor on the surface of the megakaryocyte, thereby interfering with the action of
thrombopoeitin on the cell. As there is no risk of leukaemogenecity with the use of anagrelide,
this drug is preferred for younger patients. Initial dose is 0.5mg three to four times a day
(maximum tolerable daily dose is 8 mg). Side effects are headache, forceful heart beats,
palpitations, diarrhoea and fluid retention. It is contraindicated in patients with congestive
heart failure and pregnancy.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Interferon alpha controls the thrombocytosis associated with any myeloproliferative disorder
including ET. An overview of the literature indicates that treatment with 3 to 5 million units
subcutaneously three times a week give an 86% haematologic response rate and a 32%
reduction in spleen size. However, 20% of patients did not tolerate the treatment because of
side effects.32 The common side effects are flu-like symptoms, fatigue, anorexia, weight
loss, alopecia and depression. The use of interferon alpha is restricted to high-risk women
of childbearing age and to those who are pregnant.
Thromboxane is a potent stimulator of platelet aggregation leading to thrombosis. Thromboxane
synthesis is increased in patients with ET and can be suppressed with low dose aspirin (75150 mg/day). Low dose aspirin is used to control vasomotor symptoms in the absence of
bleeding or when the platelet counts have been brought to below 1000x109/L.
Treatment algorithm in ET
Treatment A
Low Risk
Treatment D
High Risk
Age
Women of Child Bearing Age
No Treatment
Low Risk
Treatment B
High Risk***
Age
< 60 years old
Treatment C
High Risk***
Age
> 60 years old
High Risk***
Age
> 60 years old
Treatment Modalities
With Risk Category
Treatment A #Low dose Aspirin
Treatment B Anagrelide (1st Choice) or Hydroxyurea + Low Dose Aspirin
Treatment C Hydroxyurea (1st Choice) or Anagrelide (2nd Choice) + Low Dose Aspirin
Treatment D Interferon Alpha + Low Dose Aspirin
·
Target platelet count < 400x109/L
·
Aspirin started only when platelet counts reduced to < 1000x109/L to prevent
bleeding complications
·
# If no contraindication. Regular life-long follow-up.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
MYELOFIBROSIS WITH MYELOID METAPLASIA (MMM)
Definition
Myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia (idiopathic myelofibrosis, agnogenic myeloid
metaplasia) is characterized by progressive anaemia, marked splenomegaly, extramedullary
haemopoiesis and prominent bone marrow stromal reaction including collagen fibrosis,
neo-angiogenesis and osteosclerosis.
Pathogenesis
Primary defect is within the haemopoietic stem cell with trilineage myeloproliferation as
evident by analysis of X chromosome inactivation patterns at both the enzyme and the
DNA levels. There is also increased stromal reaction including collagen fibrosis, neoangiogenesis, and osteosclerosis which was thought to be a reactive process mediated by
fibrogenic and angiogenic cytokines that may be abnormally secreted by clonal
megakaryocytes or monocytes. One third of patients have a preceding history of PRV or
ET.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of MMM is suspected if the peripheral blood film shows teardrop-shaped
red blood cells and leukoerythroblastic picture. The bone marrow aspiration is usually dry
and trephine biopsy shows marrow fibrosis associated with atypical megakaryocytic
hyperplasia and thickening with distortion of the bony trabeculae (osteosclerosis). The
diagnosis is made after ruling out other causes of marrow fibrosis (Table 7).
Table 7 : Causes of bone marrow fibrosis
Myeloid disorders
Chronic myeloproliferative diseases
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Mast cell disease
Malignant histiocytosis
Lymphoid disorders
Lymphoma
Hairy cell leukaemia
Multiple myeloma
Nonhaematologic disorders
Metastatic cancer
Connective tissue disease
Infections e.g. tuberculosis
Vitamin D deficiency / rickets
Renal osteodystrophy
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for MMM33
Necessary criteria
1.
Diffuse bone marrow fibrosis
2.
Absence of Philadelphia chromosome or bcr-abl in peripheral blood
Optional criteria
1.
Splenomegaly of any grade
2.
Anisopoikilocytosis with teardrop erythrocytes
3.
Presence of circulating immature myeloid cells
4.
Presence of circulating erythroblasts
5.
Presence of clusters of megakaryocytes and anomalous megakaryocytes in
bone marrow biopsy sections
6.
Myeloid metaplasia
Required Diagnostic Criteria
1.
Two necessary criteria plus two optional criteria when splenomegaly is
present;
2.
Two necessary criteria plus any four optional criteria when splenomegaly
is absent
Clinical features
20% of patients are asymptomatic and detected incidentally with splenomegaly or from routine
blood smear. The rest may present with:
1.
Hypercatabolic symptoms
·
Severe fatigue
·
Low grade fever
·
Night sweats
·
Weight loss
2.
Extramedullary haemopoeisis
·
Hepatomegaly
·
Splenomegaly with left hypochondrium pain
·
Lymphadenopathy
·
Ascites
·
Pleural effusion
·
Cord compression secondary to paraspinal and epidural masses
3.
Portal hypertension
4.
Bone pains
Prognosis
The overall prognosis of MMM is poor with the median survival between 3 to 5 years. The
prognostic factors and risk stratification are summarized in Table 8.34,35,36 Low-risk patients
may expect a median survival of 8 to 10 years whereas the high-risk group may survive less
than 3 years.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Table 8:
Independent prognostic factors and risk stratification in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia33
Adverse prognostic features in MMM*
·
Age > 60 years
·
Haemoglobin < 10 g/dL
·
Presence of hypercatabolic symptoms (eg. weight loss, profound fatigue, night sweat,
low grade fever)
·
White blood cell count > 30,000/uL
·
White blood cell count < 4,000/uL
·
Circulating blasts > 1%
·
Presence of +8 or 12pRisk Stratification for MMM33
Number of Adverse Prognostic factors * Risk Group
0
Low
1
Intermediate
2
High
Treatment strategies ( Level of Evidence IV or C )
Low Risk Patients
Low-risk patients with MMM may not benefit from currently available specific therapy.
Intermediate & High Risk Patients
High-risk patients should be offered haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) if the
service is available. Myeloablative allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the
treatment of choice for young patients who are less than 45 years old.37,38 For patients older
than 45 years, alternative transplant options including non-myeloablative allogeneic and
autologous haematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be considered.39,40
The management in a center with no transplant option mainly focus in symptomatic relief for
anaemia, cytoreduction for thrombocytosis and leukocytosis as well as alleviation of
splenomegaly-associated complications such as mechanical discomfort, refractory anaemia,
hypercatabolic symptoms and portal hypertension.
Anaemia is the most frequent reason for treatment among patients with MMM. Many patients
become transfusion-dependent and iron chelation may be needed. Only a small proportion of
patients respond to drug therapy including androgen preparations as a single agent like
Oxymethalone ( 2mg/kg/day) or Danazol (600 to 800 mg/day). All patients treated with androgen
preparations should have liver functions monitored periodically.41,42 Recently, combination
therapy with low dose Thalidomide (50 mg/day) and a tapering dose of prednisolone (0.5 mg/
kg/day) has been associated with higher response in anaemia (62%).43,44,45 Erythropoietin ( s/c
EPO 40,000 U/wk ) has been proven for a subset of patients with endogenous EPO level
<100 mU/mL.46
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
Hydroxyurea (starting dose 500 mg orally twice a day) is the drug of choice for cytoreduction and
controlling splenomegaly.47 However, anaemia may worsen and some authors advocate combination
therapy with Erythropoietin. Interferon-alfa has been used in the similar setting with favorable results
reported.48 Lately, Anagrelide may be used for cases with problematic thrombocytosis.
Splenectomy is the option for patients who are drug-refractory to alleviate splenomegaly-associated
complications. Operative mortality was about 9% with a post operative median survival of 27 months.
Post surgical complications include intra-abdominal haemorrhage, subphrenic abscess, sepsis, largevessel thrombosis, extreme thrombocytosis and progressive hepatomegaly.49
The role of radiotherapy is mainly for nonhepatosplenic extramedullary haemopoiesis (EMH). This
includes paraspinal/ epidural mass ( 1,000 cGy in 5 to 10 fractions), pleural and peritoneal effusions
(100 to 500 cGy in 5 to 10 fractions), and pulmonary hypertension from diffuse pulmonary EMH
(100 cGy in a single-fraction to the whole lung). In poor risk patients for splenectomy, splenic
irradiation (200-300 cGy in 10 to 15 fractions) may provide transient symptomatic relief for
3-6 months.50,51
Treatment Algorithm in MMM
Continue Follow Up
No Therapy
Low Risk Patients
< 45 years old
Allogenic HSCT
45 - 60 years old
Non Myeloablative HSCT
or
Autologous HSCT
YES
Erythropoietin
Thalidomide
+ / -
Steroid
Androgen - Danazol
or Oxymethalone
+ / -
Steroid
Supportive
Transfusion
+ / -
Chelation
Anemia
Anagrelide
IFN alpha
or
Hydroxyurea
or
Cytoreduction
Splenic
Irradiation
Splenectomy
or
Symptomatic
Splenomegaly
Radiotherapy
EMH
NO
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Intermediate & High Risk Patients
Risk Stratification
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
UNCLASSIFIED
This category applies to cases with an overlap of clinical, laboratory and morphologic features
that support a diagnosis of a myeloproliferative disease (MPD), but do not meet the criteria
for any of the other specific entities. The treatment modalities follow as for the specific
MPD entities depending on which are the more prominent features.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
REFERENCES
1.
Mesa, R. A, Silverstein, M. N., Jacobson, S. J., Wollan, P. C., and Tefferi, A.
Population-based incidence and survival figures in essential thrombocythemia and
agnogenic myeloid metaplasia: An Olmsted Country study, 1976-1995, American
Journal of Haematology. 61:10-15, 1999.
2.
Streiff MB, Smith B, Spivak JL: The diagnosis and management of polycythaemia
vera in the era since the Polycythemia Vera Study Group: A survey of American
Society of Haematology members’ practice patterns. Blood 99: 1144-1149, 2002.
3.
Elaine S. Jaffe, Nancy Lee Ham, Harold Stein, James W. Vardiman. WHO
Classification of Tumors of Haematopoeitic and Lymphoid Tissues. IARC Press,
Lyon,2001.
4.
Harriet S. Gilbert: Modern treatment strategies in polycythemia vera. Seminar in
Haematology:26-29, 2003 (suppl).
5.
Landolfi R. Marchioli R. Efficacy and Safety of Low-dose Aspirin in Polycythaemia
Vera : N Eng J Med 2004;350:114-24.
6.
Tatarsky I, Sharon R: Management of polycythaemia vera with hydroxyurea. Semin
Hematol 34:24-28, 1997.
7.
Fruchtman SM, Mack K, Kaplan ME, e al: From efficacy to safety: A Polycythaemia
Vera Study Group report on hydroxyurea in patients with polycythaemia vera.
Semin Hematol 34: 17-23, 1997.
8.
Silver RT: A new treatment for Polycythemia Vera: Recombinant interferon alfa.
Blood 76:664-665, 1990.
9.
Silver RT: Interferon alfa: Effects of long-term treatment for Polycythemia Vera.
Semin Hematol 34:40-50, 1997.
10.
Tefferi A, Elliott MA, Solberg LA Jr, et al: New drugs in essential thrombocythemia
and polycythemia vera. Blood Rev 11: 1-7,1997.
11.
Elliott MA, Tefferi A: Interferon-alfa therapy in polycythemia vera and essential
thrombocythemia. Semin Thromb Hemost 23:463-472, 1997.
12.
Cerutti, A. et al. Thrombopoietin levels in patients with primary and reactive
thrombocytosis, Br J Haematol. 99:281-284, 1997.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
13.
Stefano Sacchi, Giovanni Vinci, et al. Diagnosis of Essential thrombocythemia at
platelet counts between 400 and 600 x 10 9 / L. Haematological 2000;85:492 –
495.
14.
Modified from Michiels JJ, Juvonen E. Proposal for revised diagnostic criteria of
essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera by the Thrombocythemia Vera
Study Group. Semin Thromb Hemost. 1997;23:339-347.
15.
Murphy S, Iland H, Rosenthal DS, Laszlo J. Essential Thrombocythemia: an interim
report from the Polycythemia Vera Study Group. Semin Hematol 1986;23:177-82.
16.
Regeu A. Thrombotic complications in essential thrombocythemia with relatively
low platelet counts. Am J Hematol 1997;56:168.
17.
Barbui T, Cortelazzo S, Viero P, et al: Thrombohaemorrhagic complications in
101 cases of myeloproliferative disorders: Relationship to platelet number and
function. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 9:1593-1599,1983
18.
Cortelazzo S, Viero P, Finazzi G, et al: Incidence and risk factors for thrombotic
complications in a historical cohort of 100 patients with essential thrombocythemia.
J Clin Oncol 8:556-562,1990.
19.
Colombi M, Radaelli F, Zocci L,et al: Thrombotic and haemorrhagic complications
in thrombocythemia. A retrospective study of 103 patients.
Cancer 67:29262930,1991
20.
Fenaux P, Simon M, Caulier MT, et al. Clinical course of essential thrombocythemia
in 147 cases. Cancer. 1990:66:549-556.
21.
Beressi AH, Tefferi A, Silverstein MN et al. Outcome analysis of 34 pregnancies
in women with essential thrombocythemia. Arch intern Med. 1995;155:1217-1222.
22.
Tefferi A. Risk-based management in essential thrombocythemia. Haematology
1999. Washington, DC: American Society of Haematology; 1999:172-177.
23.
Cortelazzo S, Finazzi G, Ruggeri M, et al. Hydroxyurea for patients with essential
thrombocythemia and high risk of thrombosis. N Engl Med. 1995;332:1132-1136.
24.
Regev A, Stark P, Blickstein D, Lahav M. Thrombotic complications in essential
thrombocythemia with relatively low platelet counts. Am J Hematol. 1997;56:168172.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
25.
Ruggeri M, Finazzi G, Tosetto A et al. No treatment for low risk thrombocythemia:
results from a perspective study. Br J Haematology. 1998;103:772 – 777.
26.
Sterkers Y, Prendhomme C, Lai J-L et al. Acute myeloid leukaemia and
myelodysplastic syndromes following essential thrombocythaemia treated with
hydroxyurea: high proportion of cases with 17p deletion. Blood 1998;91: 616622.
27.
Iben Nielsen, Hans Carl Hasselbalch. Acute Leukaemia and Myelodysplasia in
Patients with a Philadelphia Chromosome Negative Chronic Myeloproliferative
Disorder treated with Hydroxyurea alone or with Hydroxyurea after Busulphan.
Am. J. Hematol.74:26-31,2003.
28.
Finazzi G. Ruggeri M, Rodeghiero F, Barbui T. Efficacy and safety of long-term
use of hydroxyurea in young patients with essential thrombocythemia and a high
risk of thrombosis[letter]. Blood 2003;101:3749.
29.
Gugliotta L, Marchioli R, Fiacchini M. et al. Epidemiological, Diagnostic,
Therapeutic and Prognostic Aspects of Essential Thrombocythemia in a
retrospective study of the GIMMC group in two thousand patients[abstract].Blood
1997; 90(suppl):348a.
30.
Anagrelide Study Group. Anagrelide, a therapy for thrombocythemic states:
experience in 577 patients. Am J Med. 1992;92:69-76.
31.
Petitt RM, Silverstein MN, Petrone ME: Anagrelide for control of thrombocytemia
in polycythemia and other myeloproliferative disorders. Semin Hematol 34:5154, 1997.
32.
Long term treatment of myeloproliferative disease with interferon-alfa-2b:
Feasibility and efficacy. Cancer 83: 1205-1213, 1998.
33.
Barosi G, Ambrosetti A, Finelli C, et al. The Italian Consensus Conference on
Diagnostic Criteria for Myelofibrosis with Myeloid Metaplasia. Br J Haematol
104: 730-737, 1999.
34.
Cervantes F, Pereira A, Esteve J,et al. Identification of ‘short-lived’ and ‘longlived’ patients at presentation of idiopathic myelofibrosis. Br J Haematol 97;635640, 1997.
35.
Dupriez B, Morel P, Demory JL, et al. Prognostic factors in agnogenic myeloid
metaplasia: A report on 195 cases with a new scoring system. Blood 88:10131018, 1996.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
36.
Tefferi A, Mesa RA, Schroeder G, et al: Cytogenetic findings and their clinical
relevance in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Br J Haematol 113; 763-771,
2001.
37.
Deeg HJ, Appelbaum FR. Stem-cell transplantation for myelofibrosis. N Eng J
Med 344: 775-776, 2001.
38.
Guardiola P, Anderson JE, Bandini G, et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation
for agnogenic myeloid metaplasia : A European Group for Blood and Marrow
Transplantation, Societe Francaise de Greffe de Moelle, Gruppo Italiano per il
Trapianto del Midollo Osseo, and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
collaborative study. Blood 93:2831-2838, 1999.
39.
Devine SM, Hoffman R, Verma A, et al. Allogeneic blood cell transplantation
following reduced-intensity conditioning is effective therapy for older patients
with myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Blood 99: 2255-2258, 2002.
40.
Anderson JE, Tefferi A, Craig F, et al: Myeloablation and autologous peripheral
blood stem cell rescue results in hematologic and clinical responses in patients
with myeloid metaplasia with myelofibrosis. Blood 98:586-593, 2001.
41.
Tefferi A : Treatment approaches in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia: the
old and the new. Seminar in Haematology: 18-21, 2003 (suppl).
42.
Cervantes F, Hernandez-Boluda JC, Alvarez A, et al: Danazol treatment of
idiopathic myelofibrosis with severe anaemia. Haematologica 85:595-599, 2000.
43.
Mesa RA, Steensma DP, Pardanani A, et al: A phase II trial of combination lowdose thalidomide and prednisone for the treatment of myelofibrosis with myeloid
metaplasia. Blood 1 April 2003; Volume 101, Number 7.
44.
Elliott MA, Mesa RA, Li CY, et al: Thalidomide treatment in myelofibrosis with
myeloid metaplasia. Br J Haematol 117: 288-296, 2002.
45.
Barosi G, Grossi A, Comotti B, et al: Safety and efficacy of thalidomide in patients
with myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Br J Haematol 114: 78-83, 2001.
46.
Hasselbalch HC, Clausen NT, Jensen BA: Successful treatment of anaemia in
idiopathic myelofibrosis with recombinant human erythropoietin. Am J Hematol
70:92-99, 2002.
47.
Lofvenberg E, Wahlin A: Management of polycythaemia vera, essential
thrombocythaemia and myelofibrosis with hydroxyurea. Eur J Haematol 41: 375381, 1988.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
48.
Barosi G, Liberato LN, Costa A, et al: Induction and maintenance alpha-interferon
therapy in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Eur J Haematol 52: 12-14,
1990 (suppl).
49.
Tefferi A, Mesa RA, Nagorney DM, et al: Splenectomy in myelofibrosis with
myeloid metaplasia: A single-institution experience with 223 patients. Blood 95:
2226-2233, 2000.
50.
Elliott MA, Chen MG, Silverstein MN, et al: Splenic irradiation for symptomatic
splenomegaly associated with myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Br J Haematol
103:505-511, 1998.
51.
Tefferi A, Jimenez T, Gray LA, et al: Radiation therapy for symptomatic
hepatomegaly in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Eur J Haematol 66: 3742, 2001.
Diagnosis and Management Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders
APENDIX 1
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS
A
Requires at least one randomized controlled trial as part of a body of literature of
overall good quality and consistency addressing the specific recommendation
B
Requires the availability of well conducted clinical studies but no randomized
clinical trials on the topic of recommendation
C
Requires evidence obtained from expert committee reports or opinions and /or
clinical experiences of respected authorities. Indicates an absence of directly
applicable clinical studies of good quality.
Levels of evidence
Ia
Evidence obtained from meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Ib
Evidence obtained from at least one randomized controlled trial
IIa Evidence obtained from at least one wel-designed, non-randomized study,
including phase II trials and case-controlled studies.
IIb
Evidence obtained from at least one other type of well-designed, quasiexperimental study, i.e. studies without planned intervention, including
observational studies.
III
Evidence obtained from well-designed, non-experimental descriptive studies.
Evidence obtained from meta-analysis or randomized controlled trials or phase II
studies that is published only in abstrct form.
IV
Evidence obtained from expert committee reports or opinions and / or clinical
experience of respected authorities.