CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2017 MOHIPIPAKI352,17(GU)
MANAGEMENT, OF
\
¥ y
COLORECTAL
CARCINOMA
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-16-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.colorectalmy.org
http://www.msgh.org.my
http://www.malaysiaoncology.org
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2017 and will be reviewed in a minimum period of four years (2021) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope
of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this document,
which is the definitive version at all times. This version can be found on
the websites mentioned above.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
vi
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm A : Screening for Colorectal Carcinoma
xi
Algorithm B : Primary Care Referral for Symptoms of
xii
Colorectal Carcinoma
Algorithm C : Treatment for Colon Carcinoma
xiii
Algorithm D : Treatment for Rectal Carcinoma
xiv
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
SCREENING AND SURVEILLANCE
1
2.1 Screening in Average Risk Population
1
2.2 Screening Modalities
2
2.3 Screening/Surveillance in Moderate and High Risk Groups 5
2.4 Genetic Counselling and Testing
11
3.
PRIMARY CARE AND REFERRAL
12
4.
DIAGNOSTIC AND RADIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
13
FOR STAGING
4.1 Diagnostic Investigations
13
4.2 Radiological Investigations for Staging
14
4.3 Histopathological Examinations
17
5.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
21
5.1 Pre-operative Preparations
21
5.2 Techniques in Colorectal Surgery
22
5.3 Surgical Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal Carcinoma 24
5.4 Cancer-Related Emergencies
26
6.
CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIOTHERAPY
28
6.1 Colon Carcinoma
28
6.2 Rectal Carcinoma
30
6.3 Metastatic or Locally Advanced Colorectal Carcinoma
32
7.
FOLLOW-UP AND SURVEILLANCE
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
PREVENTION OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMA
36
IN GENERAL POPULATION
9.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
37
10. REFERENCES
38
Appendix 1 Examples of Search Strategy
46
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
47
Appendix 3 Radiological Images of Colorectal Carcinoma
48
Appendix 4 WHO Classification of Colorectal Carcinoma 2010 50
and TNM Classification of Tumours of the Colon
and Rectum (7th Edition)
Appendix 5 Histopathology Proforma for Colorectal Carcinoma 51
Appendix 6 Chemotherapy Drugs and Common/Important 54
Side Effects
Appendix 7 Potential Indications for Post-operative CCRT
55
if Pre-operative CCRT Not Given
List of Abbreviations
56
Acknowledgement
57
Disclosure Statement
57
Source of Funding
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the guidelines
Development Group as the key clinical recommendations that should
be prioritised for implementation.
Screening in Average Risk Population
• Screening of colorectal carcinoma (CRC) should be offered at the
age of 50 years and continues until 75 years old for average risk
population.
• Immunochemical faecal occult blood test (iFOBT) is the preferred
method to screen for CRC in average risk population.
 If iFOBT is positive, an early colonoscopy is necessary.
 If iFOBT is negative, yearly test should be performed.
Screening/Surveillance in Moderate and High Risk Groups
• Asymptomatic individuals with positive family history should be
screened for colorectal carcinoma.
• All individuals whose family history is suggestive of a hereditary
colorectal cancer syndrome should be referred to a clinical genetics
service for genetic risk assessment, where accessible.
Diagnostic and Radiological Investigations for Staging
• Computed tomography scan should be used for staging and
surveillance of colorectal carcinoma.
• Magnetic resonance imaging is the modality of choice in diagnosing
and staging of rectal carcinoma.
• In colorectal carcinoma, standardised histopathology reporting
proforma incorporating tumour-node-metastasis (TNM) staging
system should be used.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
iii
Surgical Management
• Patients undergoing colorectal carcinoma surgery should have:
 antibiotic prophylaxis
 venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
• A thorough surgical exploration should be performed at the time of
resection in colorectal carcinoma.
• Low rectal surgery should be performed by surgeons credentialed in
the management of rectal carcinoma.
• Total mesorectal excision should be performed for middle and low
rectal carcinoma.
• If abdominoperineal resection (APR) is required, it should be
performed as cylindrical APR.
Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
• Adjuvant chemotherapy may be considered for stage II colon
carcinoma with high risk features. Patient should be carefully selected
and counselled.
• Fluorouracil/leucovorin (5-FU/LV) with oxaliplatin should be given in
stage III colon carcinoma.
• Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy should be offered to T3-T4 or node
positive rectal carcinoma.
• Palliative chemotherapy may be considered in metastatic colorectal
carcinoma.
 Combination chemotherapy is the preferred regime.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these CPG were
from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Higher Education
(MoHE). There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review
Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platforms: Guidelines International Network
(G-I-N), Medline via Ovid, Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews
(CDSR) and Pubmed. Refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy. The inclusion criteria are all patients with colorectal
carcinoma regardless of study design. The search was limited to
literature published in the last 20 years and on humans and in English.
In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines
were searched and experts in the field contacted to identify relevant
studies. All searches were conducted from 7 May 2015 to 28 January
2016. Literature search was repeated for all clinical questions at the
end of the CPG development process allowing any relevant papers
published before 30 April 2017 to be included. Future CPG updates
will consider evidence published after this cut-off date. The details
of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other guidelines as listed below:
• Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) - Diagnosis and
Management of Colorectal Cancer (December 2011)
• New Zealand Guideline Group (NZGG) - Management of Early
Colorectal Cancer (May 2011)
• National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) - The
Diagnosis and Management of Colorectal Cancer (November 2011)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to it being used as reference.
A total of 14 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions.
The DG members met 23 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literatures retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was based
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
v
largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council MoH
Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG development
by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual on Development and
Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines
published in 2015 (available at: http://www.moh.gov.my/penerbitan/
mymahtas/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
vi
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on colorectal carcinoma (CRC) on these aspects:
• Screening in average risk population
• Surveillance of moderate and high risk groups
• Diagnosis and staging
• Treatment and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Healthy population for screening programme
• High risk population for surveillance
• Lynch
syndrome/Hereditary
non-polyposis
colorectal
cancer
(HNPCC)
• Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Peutz-Jegher syndrome
• MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP)
• Juvenile polyposis
• All patients with CRC
Exclusion criteria
CRC other than adenocarcinoma such as gastrointestinal stromal
tumour (GIST), neuroendocrine tumour (NET) and lymphoma
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management
of CRC either in primary or secondary/tertiary care (all in public and
private practice) namely:
• Medical officers and specialists
• Trainees and medical students
• Patients and their advocates
• Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Co-chairperson
Members (alphabetical order)
vii
Assoc. Professor Dr. Ahmad Najib Azmi
Lecturer & Gastroenterologist
Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Ahmad Shanwani Mohamed Sidek
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II,
Kelantan
Dr. Ch’ng Gaik Siew
Consultant Clinical Geneticist &
Paediatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Fauziah Jaya
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Hafizah Zaharah Ahmad
Clinical Oncologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Hanin Farhana Kamaruzaman
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dr. Ibtisam Muhamad Nor
Clinical Oncologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dr. Noraini Abdul Rahim
Consultant Radiologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Ms. Nik Nuradlina Nik Adnan
Pharmacist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Salahudin Baharom
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Salmi Abdullah
Pathologist (Anatomic Pathology)
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Siti Aminah Akbar Merican
Consultant Family Medicine
Klinik Kesihatan Batu Rakit, Terengganu
Dr. Tee Hoi Poh
Consultant Gastroenterologist
KPJ Pahang Specialist Hospital,
Pahang
Dr. Tengku Norita Tengku Yazid
Consultant Pathologist
(Chemical Pathology)
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Zalwani Zainuddin
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Nil Amri Mohamed Kamil
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Hjh. Rosaida Hj. Md. Said
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Fitjerald Henry
Senior Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
(National Head of Clinical Service Colorectal Surgery)
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Members (alphabetical order)
viii
Dato’ Dr. Abdul Jamil Abdullah
Senior Consultant General Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah, Terengganu
Dr. Akhtar Qureshi
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Sunway Medical Centre, Selangor
Professor Dr. Azmi Md. Nor
Dean & Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Kulliyyah of Medicine
International Islamic University Malaysia
Mr. Hamzan Arshad
Patient Advocate
(Survivor of Colorectal Carcinoma)
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dato’ Dr. Mahendra Raj
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Hospital Pantai Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Manisekar Subramaniam
Consultant Hepatobiliary Surgeon
(National Head of Clinical Service Hepatobiliary Surgery)
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Dato’ Dr. Mohamed Yusof Abdul Wahab
Senior Consultant General Surgeon
(National Head of Clinical Service General Surgery)
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah, Selangor
Dr. Mohd Roslan Haron
Senior Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Dato’ Dr. Muhammad Radzi Abu Hassan
Senior Consultant Gastroenterologist
(National Head of Clinical Service Gastroenterology & Hepatology)
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Datin Dr. Nik Raihan Nik Mustapha
Consultant Pathologist (Histopathology)
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Ros Suzanna Ahmad Bustamam
Consultant Clinical Oncologist
(National Head of Clinical Service Oncology)
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Mdm. Rosminah Din
Deputy Director
Formulary & Pharmacoeconomics
Pharmacy Practice & Development
Ministry of Health, Selangor
Professor Dr. Tong Seng Fah
Lecturer & Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Wan Khamizar Wan Khazim
Senior Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Yun Sii Ing
Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Angelo Vanzulli
Consultant Radiologist
University of Milan, Italy
Professor Dr. Aw Tar Choon
Senior Consultant in Laboratory Medicine
Changi General Hospital, Singapore
Dr. Azura Deniel
Consultant Oncologist
KPJ Ampang Puteri Specialist Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Baizury Bashah
Consultant Family Medicine
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Adj. Assoc. Professor Dr. Charles Tsang Bih-Shiou
Senior Consultant General Surgeon
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine
National University of Singapore &
Medical Director
Colorectal Clinic Associates International, Singapore
Professor Dr. Chucheep Sahakitrungruang
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Bumrungrad International Hospital, Thailand
Dr. Clement Edward A/L Thaumanavar
Head of Department & Consultant General Surgeon
Hospital Tuanku Fauziah, Perlis
Professor Dato’ Dr. Fuad Ismail
Senior Consultant Oncologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Leow Voon Meng
Consultant Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary & General Surgeon & Lecturer
Advanced Medical and Dental Institute
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Associate Professor Dr. Lim Kiat Hon
Senior Consultant Pathologist
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
Dato’ Dr. Meheshinder Singh
President of Malaysian Society of Colorectal Surgeons &
Consultant General & Colorectal Surgeon
Pantai Medical Centre Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Narasimman Sathiamurthy
Consultant Thoracic Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nazrila Hairizan Nasir
Consultant Family Medicine
Family Health Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr. Raja Affendi Raja Ali
Consultant Physician & Gastroenterologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Rajvinder Singh
Professor of Medicine
The University of Adelaide &
Director of Gastroenterology
The Lyell McEwin & The Modbury Hospitals, Australia
Professor Dr. Roger Barton
Provost & CEO, Professor of Clinical Medicine &
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Newcastle University Medicine Malaysia, Johor
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
ALGORITHM A: SCREENING FOR COLORECTAL CARCINOMA
*Symptoms as outlined in Algorithm B.
**Refer to Table 4 on Risk Categories for Family History with
Colorectal Carcinoma.
xi
ASSESS PATIENT FOR SYMPTOMS OF CRC*
PRESENCE
OF
SYMPTOM(S)
STRATIFY RISK FOR FAMILY HISTORY
REFER ALGORITHM B
CATEGORY 1 -
AVERAGE RISK**
CATEGORY 2 -
MODERATE RISK**
CATEGORY 3 -
HIGH RISK**
IMMUNOFAECAL
OCCULT BLOOD
TESTING (IFOBT)
REFER FOR COLONOSCOPY
POSITIVE
NEGATIVE
REPEAT IFOBT
YEARLY
NO
YES
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
xii
ALGORITHM B: PRIMARY CARE REFERRAL
FOR SYMPTOMS OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMA
Presence of any of the following signs or symptoms:
• per rectal bleeding
• mucoid stool
• loss of weight or appetite
• abdominal discomfort
• altered bowel habits
• perianal symptoms
• tenesmus
• constipation
• anaemia
• palpable abdominal mass
• palpable anorectal mass
• Age and sex
• Rectal bleeding (colour)
• Altered bowel habit (alternating constipation
and diarrhoea)
• Perianal symptoms (lump, pruritus, pain,
discharge)
• Symptoms of anaemia (look for causes)
• Personal history of colorectal polyps or
inflammatory bowel disease, or family
history of CRC
Focused history
• Weight
• Look for signs of anaemia
• Abdominal examination
• Digital rectal examination and proctoscopy
• Full blood count
Focused physical examination and tests
Unexplained rectal bleeding with
≥1 of the following:
• fresh blood
• blood mixed with stool
• with altered bowel habits
• with significant weight loss
AND/OR
Unexplained iron deficiency
anaemia
AND/OR
Palpable abdominal or rectal mass
All other unexplained signs and symptoms
that do not meet criteria for urgent referral
Treat signs or symptoms accordingly
REFER FOR ELECTIVE
COLONOSCOPY
URGENT REFERRAL FOR
COLONOSCOPY WITHIN TWO WEEKS
Signs and symptoms not
resolved in 4-6 weeks
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
xiii
ALGORITHM C: TREATMENT FOR COLON CARCINOMA
Yes
No
Determine disease stage
T1-T2 N0 M0
T3-T4 N0 M0
T1-T4 N1-N2 M0
T1-T4 Any N M1
Surgery
Surgery
Surgery
High risk
features*
Adjuvant
chemotherapy
SURVEILLANCE
Adjuvant
chemotherapy
Options include:
• Curative or
palliative surgery
• Palliative
chemotherapy
• Best supportive
care
*High risk features for stage II colon carcinoma are presence of any of the
following:
• obstruction
• perforation
• T4 disease
• poorly differentiated tumour
• lymphovascular invasion
• perineural invasion
• inadequate lymph node sampling (<12)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
ALGORITHM D: TREATMENT FOR RECTAL CARCINOMA
Determine disease stage
Surgery
Adjuvant CCRT
SURVEILLANCE
T1-T2 N0 M0
T1-T4 Any N M1
Surgery
Surgery
Neoadjuvant CCRT
T3-T4 N0 M0 OR T1-T4 N1-N2 M0
Preferred option
Options include:
• Surgery
• Palliative
radiotherapy
• Palliative
chemotherapy
• Best supportive
care
CCRT = Concurrent chemoradiotherapy
CRM = Circumferential resection margins
*High risk features for stage II rectal carcinoma are presence of any of the
following:
• obstruction
• perforation
• T4 disease
• positive CRM
• poorly differentiated tumour
• lymphovascular invasion
• perineural invasion
• inadequate lymph node sampling (<12)
• incomplete mesorectum
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
1. INTRODUCTION
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is the second most common cancer in
Malaysia (13.2%) as reported in Malaysian National Cancer Registry
Report 2007-2011.1, level III According to National Cancer Patient Registry
on Colorectal Cancer 2008-2013, the overall incidence rate for CRC
was 21.3 cases per 100,000 population. Age-adjusted incidence rate
was 1.33 times higher among male than female. The incidence was
highest in Chinese followed by Malay and Indian. Overall mortality rate
was 9.8 cases per 100,000 population and age-adjusted mortality rate
was 1.42 times higher in male than female.2, level III
The most common presenting symptoms of CRC are altered bowel
habit (41.7%) followed by blood in stool (35.5%), abdominal pain
(31.5%), weight loss (31.0%), anaemia (9.8%) and intestinal obstruction
(9.3%).2, level III
Left-sided carcinoma is the commonest form and constitutes 81.8% of
all notified cases. Majority of patients are at stage III and IV (54.36%)
while only 8.4% are diagnosed at stage I according to the tumour-nodemetastasis (TNM) staging.2, level III
The estimated societal cost of CRC management in government
hospitals in Malaysia using conventional chemotherapy ranges between
RM13,622 to RM27,163 based on different stages, with an average of
RM21,377 per patient. The cost of treatment is higher when combined
conventional chemotherapy and monoclonal antibody is used.3 With
increasing number of new cases detected every year, the economic
burden of CRC management is escalating especially if the patients
present in advanced stage.
Management of patients with CRC consists of a comprehensive strategy
of screening, diagnosis, staging, appropriate treatment and follow-up.
Hence, this first national CPG on CRC is developed to assist healthcare
providers in the management of CRC.
2. SCREENING AND SURVEILLANCE
2.1 Screening in Average Risk Population
Average risk population is defined as population with no known risk
for CRC. There is no retrievable evidence on the age to start CRC
screening for average risk population. This section is written based on
recommendation by existing guidelines on CRC and unpublished data
from international and local cancer registries.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Most of the major CRC guidelines recommend screening of CRC to
start at the age of 50 years old.4-5, level III
Depending on the method used, the following screening intervals for
CRC among average risk population recommended by major guidelines
are shown in the following Table 1.5, level III; 6, level II-2; 7-8, level III
Table 1. Screening Intervals for CRC Based on Methods
The US Preventive Task Force recommends screening for CRC to start
at the age of 50 years and continues until age 75 years. The decision to
screen for CRC in adults aged 76 to 85 years should be individualised,
taking into account the patient’s overall health and prior screening
history.9, level III
2.2 Screening Modalities
Most CRC arise from adenomatous polyps that progress from small
to large polyps and later to cancer. The slow transition from polyps to
cancers in most patients gives the window of opportunity for screening
and early cancer detection.
Multiple tests are available for CRC screening. Each test has its own
strength and weakness in the attributes of an ideal screening tool.
a. Faecal Tests
Faecal test is a non-invasive tool for screening CRC in general
population. It can detect presence of blood, proteins e.g. enzyme M2PK and DNA.
Faecal occult blood test (FOBT) has qualitative and quantitative testing
methods. In a meta-analysis of fair to high quality evidence, the pooled
sensitivity to detect CRC was 74% (95% CI 62 to 83) for quantitative test
methods and 79% (95% CI 61 to 90) for qualitative test methods.9, level III
Immunochemical FOBT (iFOBT) and guaiac-based FOBT (gFOBT)
are two methods of qualitative FOBT. The sensitivities of iFOBT and
gFOBT are 0.67 (95% CI 0.61 to 0.73) and 0.54 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.60)
respectively. The specificities of iFOBT and gFOBT are comparable
at 0.85 (95% CI 0.83 to 0.87) and 0.80 (95% CI 0.78 to 0.82)
Methodology
Faecal occult blood
Stool DNA test
CT colonography
Colonoscopy
Minimum interval
Yearly
3-yearly
5-yearly
10-yearly
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
respectively.10, level I Screening with FOBT has a 16% reduction in the
risk of CRC mortality (RR=0.84, 95% CI 0.78 to 0.90).11, level I
Faecal M2-PK test has a pooled sensitivity and specificity of 79% (95%
CI 73 to 83) and 80% (95% CI 73 to 86) respectively.12, level I On the
other hand, quantitative faecal DNA test has a higher sensitivity at 92%
(95% CI 84 to 97) to detect CRC.9, level III These two faecal tests for CRC
screening are, however, not widely used locally in screening for general
population due to high cost incurred.
In a health technology assessment (HTA) report by MaHTAS, screening
programme using iFOBT can be effective for prevention of advanced
CRC (risk of developing advanced CRC was reduced by 28-46%) and
reduced mortality by 23-60%. Regular iFOBT can detect pre-cancerous
lesions and CRC in early stages and thus reduce mortality from
CRC.13, level II-2
b. Sigmoidoscopy
Flexible sigmoidoscopy needs less rigorous bowel preparation and can
be performed as a clinic-based procedure without the need for sedation.
Small polyps can be biopsied during procedure but excision of larger
lesions (>1 cm) may be performed during subsequent colonoscopy.
Sigmoidoscopy reduces the CRC incidence by 18-32% and mortality
by 26-38% in general population. There is low incidence of bowel
perforations associated with it.14-17, level I
c. Colonoscopy
Colonoscopy is the screening modality that has the ability to visualise
the colonic mucosa directly, perform biopsy and excise polyps. It
can detect proximal lesions that would be missed by screening
sigmoidoscopy and has been shown to reduce risk of cancer in the
right colon.18, level II-2; 19, level II-3
Screening colonoscopy reduces overall CRC incidence significantly by
56% and death by 68%.20, level II-2 For those who has had colonoscopy
especially for screening, the risk of CRC is strongly reduced by 91% up
to 10 years.18, level II-2
Colonoscopy is a safe modality for colorectal screening in general
population with low incidence of gastrointestinal bleeding (0.29 to
1.59 per 1000 colonoscopies) and perforations (0.19 to 0.89 per 1000
colonoscopies).21-22, level II-2
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
• A good quality colonoscopy should be practised to ensure effective
and safe screening of CRC.
d. Colon Capsule Endoscopy
Colon capsule endoscopy (CCE) is used to obtain images of the
colon by using video cameras embedded in an ingested capsule. The
technique is less invasive but does not allow biopsy or polyp removal.
CCE has a sensitivity of 71% (95% CI 66 to 76) and specificity of 75%
(95% CI 66 to 83) for polyps of any size. It is a safe screening modality
for CRC with low rate (4.1%) of mild to moderate side effects such as
nausea and abdominal pain.23, level II-2
e. Computed Tomographic Colonography/Virtual Colonoscopy
Computed Tomographic Colonography (CTC) uses multiple thin slice
computed tomographic data to construct images of the bowel mucosa
in two or three dimensions in detecting polyps.
CTC requires bowel preparation similar to conventional colonoscopy
(CC) and during the procedure, air or carbon dioxide is introduced into
the rectum via a rubber catheter. No sedation is required and patient is
usually able to return to work post procedure.
The sensitivity and specificity of CTC for the detection of adenomas
≥6 mm are 82.9% (95% CI 74 to 89) and 91.4% (95% CI 84 to 96)
respectively. For adenomas ≥10 mm, the sensitivity and specificity
are higher at 87.9% (95% CI 82 to 92) and 97.6% (95% CI 95 to 99)
respectively.24, level II-2
The drawbacks of CTC include radiation exposure and the need for
colonoscopy after the identification of polyps for excision and tissue
diagnosis, while smaller lesions need to be followed up by surveillance
CTC. Flat adenomas are more likely to be missed by CTC than
colonoscopy.24, level II-2
f. Carcinoembryonic Antigen
There is no recommendation made by the US Preventive Services
Task Force, NICE guidelines and SIGN guidelines on the use of serum
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test for CRC screening.25-26; 27, level III
Hence, it should not be relied on as a screening tool.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
• Based on a local economic evaluation conducted by MaHTAS,
iFOBT followed by colonoscopy shown to be the most cost-effective
screening strategy compared with no screening or colonoscopy
alone with an estimated incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of
RM9,377.65.28
Recommendation 1
• Screening of colorectal carcinoma (CRC) should be offered at age of
50 years and continues until age 75 years for average risk population.
• Immunochemical faecal occult blood test (iFOBT) is the preferred
method to screen for CRC in average risk population.
• If iFOBT is positive, an early colonoscopy is necessary.
• If iFOBT is negative, yearly test should be performed.
2.3 Screening/Surveillance in Moderate and High Risk Groups
2.3.1 Family History
Family history is a well-established risk factor for CRC. It is affected
by first-, second- and third-degree relatives, and might include positive
family history from both parents.
a. First-Degree Relatives (FDRs)
Familial Relative Risk (FRR) of developing CRC increases with greater
number of affected FDRs irrespective of second-degree relatives
(SDRs) or third-degree relatives (TDRs) as shown in Table 2.29, level III
Table 2. Selected FRR Estimates for Probands Considering
Only FDR Family History
Besides CRC, asymptomatic patients with one FDR of CRC have
greater risk of developing pre-cancerous condition i.e. severely
dysplastic lesions (OR=2.9, 95% CI 1.0 to 7.8).30, level III
No. of affected FDRs
0
1
≥1
2
3
4
5
FRR (95% CI)
0.89 (0.87 to 0.91)
1.91 (1.82 to 2.00)
2.05 (1.96 to 2.14)
3.01 (2.66 to 3.38)
4.43 (3.24 to 5.90)
7.74 (3.71 to 14.24)
19.86 (7.26 to 43.24)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Compared with those without family history, the relative risks (RR) for
those with family history (≥1 affected FDRs) of CRC are:31, level II-2
• 1.64 (95% CI 1.26 to 2.14) for 1 affected relative and 2.83 (95% CI
1.33 to 6.02) for ≥2 affected relatives
• 1.99 (95% CI 1.51 to 2.61) for colon carcinoma but not significant for
rectal carcinoma
b. FRR is affected by FDRs when combined with SDRs and TDRs
Combination of a positive family history of FDRs, SDRs and TDRs
significantly increases risk of CRC as shown in Table 3.30, level III
Table 3. Selected FRR for Probands with 0 or 1 Affected FDRs
and Various Combinations of Affected SDRs and TDRs
Those with positive family history who were diagnosed at younger age
have a higher risk of developing CRC with FRR of:
• 4.63 (95% CI 1.43 to 15.0) at age of diagnosis <45 years31, level II-2
• 3.31 (95% CI 2.79 to 3.89) at age of diagnosis <50 years29, level III
Based on preceding evidences, those with family history of CRC can be
categorised by risk stratifications as outlined in Table 4.
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
No. of affected
FDRs
0
0
1
1
2
≥3
0
0
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
≥3
≥3
≥3
No. of affected
SDRs
0
≥3
2
≥3
≥3
≥3
0
2
≥3
0
2
≥3
0
1
2
≥3
0
2
≥3
No. of affected
TDRs
0.83 (0.81 to 0.86)
1.08 (0.97 to 1.20)
1.33 (1.13 to 1.55)
1.21 (0.98 to 1.48)
1.48 (0.98 to 2.16)
1.02 (0.41 to 2.09)
1.76 (1.63 to 1.89)
1.90 (1.59 to 2.25)
2.10 (1.61 to 2.47)
1.88 (1.59 to 2.20)
2.50 (1.87 to 3.28)
3.28 (2.44 to 4.31)
2.37 (1.58 to 3.43)
1.98 (1.15 to 3.17)
2.70 (1.44 to 4.62)
2.38 (1.19 to 4.26)
2.79 (1.12 to 5.76)
5.32 (2.14 to 10.96)
5.20 (2.24 to 10.24)
FRR (95% CI)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Table 4. Risk Categories for Family History with CRC
Recommendation 2
• Asymptomatic individuals with positive family history should be
screened for colorectal carcinoma.
• Colonoscopy should be performed according to risk category*.
*Refer to Table 4.
2.3.2 Post-Adenomatous Polypectomy
Colonoscopy screening with removal of adenomas is an effective
strategy in reducing CRC incidence and mortality.32, level III However,
periodic surveillance with colonoscopy is necessary to identify recurrent
adenomas after polypectomy.
Advanced adenomas are typically defined as adenomas >10 mm,
villous components (villous/tubulo-villous), or with high-grade/severe
dysplasia. The risk factors associated with recurrence of advanced
adenoma are:
Category
Category 1
Average risk
Category 2
Moderate
risk
Category 3
High risk
Screening recommendation
• Perform IFOBT (refer to
Algorithm A).
• Stop screening at age 75.9, level III
• FDR with CRC diagnosed at age
<60 years, colonoscopy should
be performed at age 40 or 10
years younger than affected
relative (whichever is younger).
If normal, repeat every 3-5 years.
• FDR with CRC diagnosed at ≥60
years, colonoscopy should be
performed at age 40 years. If
normal, repeat every 10 years.
• Stop screening at age 75.9, level III
• For family history of CRC
diagnosed at age <50 years,
colonoscopy should be performed
at age 40 or 10 years younger
than affected relative (whichever
is younger). If normal, repeat
every 3-5 years. Stop screening
at age 75.
• For hereditary colorectal cancer
syndromes, refer to Table 5.
Description
No family history and age
>50 years
Family history of CRC
either:
• ≥1 FDR
• 1 FDR and >1 SDR
• >3 and one of them
must be FDR
Family history of:
• CRC at age <50 years
• FAP
• HNPCC
(Lynch Syndrome)
• Peutz-Jegher Syndrome
• Juvenile polyposis
• MAP
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
i. number of adenomas (1-2 vs 3) (pooled RR=2.52, 95% CI 1.07 to
5.97)33, level I
ii. size (<1 cm vs ≥1 cm) (pooled RR=1.39, 95% CI 0.86 to 2.26)33, level I
iii. villous histology (pooled RR=1.26, 95% CI 0.95 to 1.66)33, level I
iv. high-grade dysplasia (pooled RR=1.84, 95% CI 1.06 to 3.19)33, level I
v. proximal location (significantly two times higher risk)34, level II-2
vi. male gender with large adenomas (RR=1.81, 95% CI 1.42 to 2.31)35, level II-2
vii. parental history of CRC (RR=2.32, 95% CI 1.77 to 3.04)35, level II-2
The risk of recurrent advanced adenoma during surveillance
colonoscopy following polypectomy is 2-3 times significantly higher
among those with advanced adenoma compared with low risk group.
33, level I; 36, level II-2; 37, level III
Surveillance colonoscopy intervals can be scheduled every 10 years for
low risk and every three years for high risk patients after initial clearing.
This is because it is estimated that 10% of low risk patients will develop
advanced metachronous adenomas after 10 years and 10% of high risk
patients will develop it after three years.35, level II-2 This is supported by
a consensus update by the US Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal
Cancer 2008.27, level III
Recommendation 3
• Surveillance colonoscopy should be offered to patients after removal
of adenomatous polyps every 10 years for low risk and every three
years for high risk patients for colorectal carcinoma.
2.3.3 Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Syndromes
Hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes or defined as genetic
susceptibility syndromes includes HNPCC, FAP, MAP, juvenile polyposis
and Peutz-Jegher Syndrome. The risk and surveillance strategies are
shown in Table 5.
2.3.4 Inflammatory Bowel Diseases
The risk of CRC in ulcerative colitis (UC) was found to be 2% at 10
years, 8% at 20 years and 18% at 30 years, irrespective of disease
extent.38, level II-2 Surveillance colonoscopy is performed annually in UC
patients seven to eight years after onset of symptoms.39, level III; 40, level II-2
The risk of cancer in colonic Crohn’s disease is similar to that in UC.
Patients with colonic Crohn’s disease should therefore be offered entry
into a similar surveillance programme to those with UC.40, level II-2
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Table 5. Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Syndromes Risk
and Surveillance of CRC
Colonoscopy
interval of 1-2
yearly until
surgery is
performed
42-44,level III
In FDR without
identified APC
mutation,
2-yearly
interval until
age 40. After
age 40,
intervals may
be longer (i.e.
3-5 years) and
surveillance
may
discontinue at
age 5044, level III
Initial
screening by
sigmoidoscopy.
Once adenoma
detected,
colonoscopy
has to be
performed.
In attenuated
FAP,
colonoscopy is
recommended
42-44, level III
FAP gene
carriers: 10-14
years old
42-44, level III
Attenuated
FAP: 18-20
years old
42-44, level III
Risk increased
by 2.4 times for
every 10 years
41, level III
1-2 yearly
42-43, level III;
47-48, level III
Colonoscopy
42-43, level III;
46, level II-2; 47, level III
20-25 years old
or 5 years
before the
earliest age of
cancer
diagnosed in
the family
42-43, level III;
46, level II-2; 47, level III
Lifetime
cumulative risk
to develop
CRC is 78%
45, level III
Lynch
syndrome/
Hereditary
non-polyposis
colorectal
cancer
(HNPCC)
If polyps are
found,
examination is
repeated every
3 years. If no
polyp, repeat
at age 18
years and then
every 3 years
thereafter
49, level III
Colonoscopy
49, level III
8 years old
49, level III
Cumulative risk:
39%49, level III
Peutz-Jeghers
Syndrome
2-yearly
50, level III
Colonoscopy
47, level III
15 years old or
earlier if
symptoms
occur
especially
rectal bleeding
47, level III;
50, level III
Cumulative risk:
38%47, level III
Juvenile
Polyposis
1-2 yearly
51, level II-2
Colonoscopy
51, level II-2
18-20 years old
51, level II-2
Cumulative risk:
63% at age 60
years51, level II-2
MUTYH-
Associated
Polyposis (MAP)
Familial
Adenomatous
Polyps (FAP)
High risk
condition
Risk (preferably
life time risk)
Initial
screening age
Surveillance
procedures
Surveillance
interval
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Recommendation 4
• All hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes should be referred and
managed by colorectal surgeons.
• Surveillance of moderate and high risk group populations for
hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes should be based on the risk
conditions*.
*Refer to Table 5 and subchapter on Inflammatory Bowel Diseases.
2.3.5 Other Risk Factors
Smoking attributes to 16% greater risk of developing CRC compared
with those who had never smoke. The risk of developing CRC is higher
if the duration of smoking is more than 25 years (RR=1.23, 95% CI 1.07
to 1.41).52, level II-2
Diabetes mellitus is one of the common chronic diseases in general
population. Besides its own vascular complications, diabetic individuals
have an increased risk of CRC with RR of 1.27 (95% CI 1.21 to 1.34).53, level II-2
In relation to body mass index, there is a signiﬁcant positive association
between overweight or obese and CRC among males.54-55, level II-2
Alcohol consumption greater than 30 gram/day (g/d) is positively
associated with risk for CRC (RR=1.23, 95% CI 1.07 to 1.12).56, level II-2
Meat consumption has received a growing interest in its association
with CRC. A systematic review on Caucasian population showed that
increased intake of 100 g/d red meat (OR=1.17, 95% CI 1.05 to 1.31)
and 25 g/d of processed meat (OR=1.49, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.81) were risk
factors for CRC.57, level II-2 However, a systematic review on Japanese
population showed no association between CRC and high intake of red
meat or high intake of processed meat. The amount of red meat was
not quantified.58, level II-2 SIGN recommends to keep consumption of red
meat to less than 500 g (18 ounces) per week and avoid processed
meat.25 Thus, further evidence is needed before a specific advice can
be given to general population.
• It is advisable to avoid processed meat and minimise red meat
consumption as it may be a risk factor for CRC based on current but
limited evidence.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
2.4 Genetic Counselling and Testing
In the range of 65-75%, CRC are sporadic in nature. Familial CRC
contributes to 25-30% whereas hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes
only constitute between 5-8% of all CRCs. Familial CRC is defined as
having one or more relatives diagnosed with CRC and is related to a
combination of genetic and environmental factors.
The hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes are attributed to highly
penetrant genes and associated with life-time CRC risk that may
approach 70-90%, whereas familial CRC is associated with a twothreefold increase in the individual’s risk of CRC compared to general
population.59, level III
Family history and appropriate genetic testing can provide estimates of
cancer risk that inform appropriate cancer screening, surveillance and/
or preventative interventions. Molecular tumour screening, prediction
models and clinical selection strategies such as Amsterdam Criteria (to
find a mutation in one of the MMR genes) and Bethesda Guidelines
(to find microsatellite instability in a tumour) are modalities to identify
patients with Lynch syndrome.60, level I
There are limitations in sensitivity and specificity in using Amsterdam
Criteria and Bethesda Guidelines in identification of patients with Lynch
syndrome.60, level I Prediction models for the identification of Lynch
syndrome have been developed to quantify an individual’s risk of
carrying a mismatch repair gene mutation and help clinicians decide
for whom further risk assessment and genetic testing is necessary.
MMRPredict, MMRPro and PREMM1,2,6 models all provide a
quantitative assessment of the risk of being a MMR gene mutation
carrier and have superior performance over existing clinical guidelines.
These models are yet to be used locally.61, level III
All individuals whose family history is suggestive of a hereditary
colorectal cancer syndrome should be referred to a clinical genetics
service for genetic counselling, genetic risk assessment and consideration
of genetic testing to clarify the risk.25
Targeting genetic services for patients with a strong family history of
cancer rather than screening the entire population proved to be costeffective. Predictive or pre-symptomatic testing and identification of
cancer-predisposing mutations in carriers have shown that surveillance,
prophylactic and chemoprevention techniques extend survival and are
cost-effective.62, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
• Refer patients with any of the following to a clinical genetics service for
further genetic risk evaluation/assessment for hereditary colorectal
cancer syndromes:25; 63, level III
○ Personal history of CRC before age 50
○ Personal history of CRC and endometrial cancer at any age
○ Personal history of CRC and ovarian cancer at any age
○ Personal history of CRC and stomach, small bowel, biliary or
urinary tract cancer at any age
○ Personal history of CRC and two first-degree relatives with history
of colorectal, endometrial, or ovarian cancer at any age
○ Family history of inherited syndromes such as Lynch, FAP or
familial diffuse gastric cancer
○ Personal history of 10 or more adenomatous polyps
○ Personal history of multiple primary colon cancers at any age
○ Cumulative >5 proximal serrated polyps, at least two >10 mm
○ Cumulative >20 serrated polyps
○ ≥2 juvenile or Peutz-Jeghers polyps
Recommendation 5
• All individuals whose family history is suggestive of a hereditary
colorectal cancer syndrome* should be referred to a clinical genetics
service for genetic risk assessment, where accessible.
* Refer to yellow box on hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes.
3. PRIMARY CARE AND REFERRAL
In Malaysia, CRC screening is done mainly in primary care. Most of
the patients with symptomatic CRC often present at later stages of
the disease. In an attempt to improve early detection of CRC, various
efforts have been done to establish CRC screening programme in
primary care setting.
Therefore, one of the objectives of this CPG is to assist Family Medicine
Specialists and other primary care providers in providing structured
screening and referral programme according to the symptoms and risk
stratification (refer to Algorithm A and B).
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
4. DIAGNOSTIC AND RADIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS FOR
STAGING
4.1 Diagnostic Investigations
a. Colonoscopy
Complete endoscopic colonoscopy is required in all suspected CRC
cases in order to detect synchronous lesion and obtain biopsy specimen.
b. Barium Enema
Barium enema (BE) is the established radiological method to investigate
patients with symptoms suggestive of CRC or large polyps in clinical
practice although its utilisation is declining.
Recent advent of virtual colonoscopy (VC) has shown to have a higher
sensitivity than BE and patients prefer VC to BE. Detection rate of CRC
or large polyps is significantly higher with VC than BE group (RR=1.31,
95% CI 1.01 to 1.68). The rate is higher in large polyps (p=0.0098).64, level I
c. Computed Tomographic Colonography/Virtual Colonoscopy
An evidence showed that CTC or VC is effective and safe in identifying
carcinoma and polyps >10 mm when compared with CC with high
sensitivity and specificity.65, level II-2
However, a more recent and larger evidence showed that CTC required
additional colonic investigation compared with colonoscopy (RR=3.65,
95% CI 2.87 to 4.65). Almost half of the referrals after CTC were for
small (<10 mm) polyps or clinical uncertainty. Detection rates of CRC or
large polyps were 11% for both procedures. CTC missed 1 of 29 CRC
and colonoscopy missed none (of 55). Serious adverse events were
rare.66, level I
Advantages for CTC over CC are the ability to evaluate the whole
colon, particularly in the presence of a stenosing lesion, detect and
stage CRC, and identify incidental pathology which may have a bearing
upon management.
• CTC is an alternative modality in diagnosing CRC in symptomatic
patients at high risk of the disease.
• Radiation exposure from CTC is approximately 20% lower than the
typical dose for double-contrast BE.
• CTC is a more sensitive test than BE. It can be the preferred
radiological test for patients with symptoms suggestive of CRC.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
d. Carcinoembryonic Antigen
CEA is a glycoprotein present in normal mucosal cells and elevated
amount of CEA is associated with adenocarcinoma, especially in CRC.
Therefore, it has a role as a tumour marker. However, normal level of
CEA does not indicate absence of CRC.
• The use of CEA is exclusively confined for monitoring and followup. It is performed pre-operatively in patients with CRC for baseline
investigation and surveillance.
4.2 Radiological Investigations for Staging
Although practice varies between treatment centres, evidence suggests
that the best method for diagnosing CRC or polyps is direct visualisation
of bowel mucosa by CC followed by histopathological examination
(HPE).
a. Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is routinely used and remains the mainstay
technique for primary staging and disease surveillance in patients with
CRC. It is used for identification of the location and size of the lesion,
demonstration of local extension, and detection of distant metastases
or complications such as perforation, obstruction or pericolic abscess
formation.67, level III
Although CT shows only 75% accuracy in identifying both T1 and T2
carcinoma, it has poor agreement between pre-operative CT staging
with the histopathology for individual T stages (κ=0.208).67, level III
For T3 or more, the accuracy is higher at 86%. The accuracy for N stage
has been reported as high as 80%. Overall, CT scan has a sensitivity
of 70.2% and specificity of 79.2% for T- and N-staging when compared
with histopathology staging.67, level III
• CT accuracy in identifying CRC and nodal metastases depends on
the stages of the tumour. It is not the best modality for the assessment
of early CRC.
• Radiological staging for CRC must include contrasted CT thorax.
• Radiological report must include pertinent findings for patient's
optimal management including TNM classification.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
b. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The optimal management of rectal carcinoma requires detailed preoperative planning that includes the assessment of the relation of
tumour to the mesorectal fascia. Normal anatomy of rectum on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is as shown in Appendix 3. The presence
or absence of tumour within 1 mm of the surgical circumferential
resection margins (CRM) of the excised surgical specimen strongly
influences outcome and is an independent predictor of survival and
local recurrence.68, level III
High resolution MRI consistently shows the mesorectal fascia. It could
predict tumour at the potential CRM with an accuracy of 94% (95%
CI 91 to 96) if the tumour is within 1 mm of the mesorectal fascia on
the scan. Thus, pre-operatively, MRI accurately predicts whether the
surgical resection margins will be clear or affected by tumour. It is also
feasible, reproducible and reliable for pre-operative staging.68, level III
MRI also provides an accurate assessment of cancer local spread preoperatively.
• MRI staging provides an accurate assessment of rectal carcinoma
local spread pre-operatively.
• MRI is the best modality in assessing the relation of the rectal
carcinoma with the potential CRM. MRI predicts whether the surgical
resection margins will be clear or affected by the carcinoma.
MRI in Colorectal Carcinoma with Liver Metastasis
Accurate assessment of the size, location and segmental distribution
of liver metastases is critical for selection of patients to undergo
radical surgery or minimally invasive therapy such as radiofrequency
ablation (RFA), cryoablation, chemoembolisation or radioembolisation.
Although practice varies between treatment centres, the best methods
for detection of liver metastases from CRC are CT and MRI. MRI can
be used for characterisation of focal liver lesions. For small metastases
to the liver, MRI with hepatocyte-specific contrast medium will facilitate
detection because of the high contrast between the avidly enhancing
normal liver parenchyma and the non-enhancing metastases in the
hepatocellular phase of contrast uptake.69, level II-2
In performing the study, combined reading of images from both
techniques i.e. diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI) with hepatocyte-
specific MR contrast medium such as gadolinium-ethoxybenzyldiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced MRI
significantly improve the accuracy of colorectal liver metastasis
detection compared with parenchymal phase Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
imaging or DW-MRI images alone. Combining DW-MRI with Gd-EOBDTPA-enhanced imaging set significantly improves the identification
of liver metastases (AUC=0.96, 0.97) compared with reading of the
Gd-EOB-DTPA image set (AUC=0.86, 0.89) or the DW-MRI image set
alone (p<0.016) (AUC=0.93, 0.92).69, level II-2
• In MRI study, combined reading of DW-MRI images with hepatocytespecific contrast medium in the hepatocellular phase images are
highly suggested in detecting liver metastasis.
c. Endorectal Ultrasound
Two meta-analyses showed that endorectal ultrasound is comparable
to MRI in rectal carcinoma on:
• T-staging (sensitivity of 0.88 vs 0.89, specificity of 0.79 vs 0.76)70, level I
• N-staging (sensitivity of 0.63 vs 0.76, specificity of 0.80 vs 0.77)71, level I
Endorectal ultrasound has high accuracy (pooled sensitivity of 0.97
and specificity of 0.96) in assessing early rectal carcinoma and may be
used with MRI in identifying patients who may benefit from endoscopic
resection.72, level II-2
However, endorectal ultrasound use is limited to non-stenosing tumours
and its accuracy is significantly reduced in T- and N-staging among
patients who have had neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy
(RT). Thus, MRI of pelvis is still the preferred choice of staging
investigation of rectal carcinoma.70-71, level I
d. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography CT
For detection of extrahepatic metastases and local recurrence of CRC,
CT and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography CT
(FDG PET-CT) are commonly used. FDG PET-CT is more accurate
in T4 disease, distant metastases and recurrence when compared with
CT alone.73, level II-2
PET-CT should not be used routinely for initial staging and surveillance.
It can be used in conjunction with liver MRI and contrast-enhanced
CT of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis in patients with high risk of
metastases.74, level III
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
• Contrast-enhanced FDG PET-CT is preferred as it will provide more
detailed information as compared with uncontrasted FDG PET-CT
study.
• FDG PET-CT has a role in the evaluation of recurrent CRC with
elevated CEA and often with equivocal/negative CT.
• In utilising an imaging modality with ionising radiation, the indication
must be justified in which benefits from the diagnostic information
obtained outweigh the risks associated with radiation.
• Basic radiation safety principle “As Low as Reasonably Achievable”
to minimise radiation doses and employ “reasonable methods”
to patients must be adhered to at all times. This helps to prevent
unnecessary exposure and overexposure.
Recommendation 6
• Computed tomography scan should be used for staging and
surveillance of colorectal carcinoma.
• Magnetic resonance imaging is the modality of choice in diagnosing
and staging of rectal carcinoma.
4.3 Histopathological Examination
HPE of the resected colorectal specimen is essential for patient’s
management, including the estimation of post-operative outcome and
the rationale for adjuvant therapy.
a. Important Pathological Parameters
Royal College of Pathologists Minimum Pathology Dataset identifies
significant prognostic factors for 5-year survival in surgically resected
CRC as follows:75, level III
• local invasion
• total number of lymph nodes retrieved
• nodal stage (number of lymph nodes involved by cancer)
• extramural vascular invasion
• peritoneal involvement
• tumour perforation
• distance of invasion beyond the muscularis propria
• CRM involvement and distance to this margin (for rectal carcinoma)
The World Health Organisation (WHO) Classification of CRC has been
widely used because of its consistency and uniformity in pathologic
reporting of colorectal histologic tumour type (refer to Appendix 4).76, level III
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Most CRC are adenocarcinoma. Some other histologic subtypes such
as signet-ring and mucin-producing carcinoma have significantly poor
prognostic features.77-78, level III
Patients with >12 nodes retrieved have significantly higher survival rate
compared with those lower nodal yield (53.0% vs 45.4%; p<0.01).75, level III
Evaluation for Lynch syndrome may include tumour screening for
mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency. MMR-deficient (or microsatellite
instability-high)
carcinoma
frequently
demonstrates
mucinous
differentiation or medullary features in the form of a solid architecture
with prominent tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes. MMR status can be
readily evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). However, given the
resource implications of implementing this, it is not considered a core
data item for reporting CRC resection specimen.77, level III
Tumour differentiation is important for prognosis.77, level III The prognostic
validity of grade is highly significant, showing a better survival for the
well-differentiated carcinomas compared with poorly differentiated
type.79, level III
In a systematic review, perineural invasion remained an independent
prognostic factor for five-year disease-free survival (DFS), five-year
overall survival (OS) and five-year cancer-specific survival.118, level I
Prognostic factors for local recurrence in rectal carcinoma are:
• location below the peritoneal reflection and completeness of the
plane of mesorectal excision77, level III
• histologic grade of regression after pre-operative therapy77, level III
• CRM77, level III
• distal resection margin (DRM) (Hazard ratio (HR) for 5-year local
recurrence in DRM ≤10 mm=2.33, 95% CI 1.28 to 4.25)80, level III
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
• Histopathological reports of CRC should include core histological
data, which are:75, level III; 77, level III
i. Macroscopic core items
○ Nature of specimen and type of operation
○ Site of tumour
○ Maximum tumour diameter
○ Distance to nearer longitudinal resection margin
○ Relation of tumour to the peritoneal reflection (rectal tumours
only)
○ Grade of plane(s) of surgical excision (total mesorectal excision
(TME) for anterior resection and abdominoperineal resection
(APR) specimens)
ii. Microscopic core items
○ Histological tumour type
○ Histological differentiation
○ Maximum extent of local invasion (pT stage) and maximum
distance of extramural spread
○ Grade
of
tumour
regression
following
pre-operative
(neoadjuvant) therapy
○ Resection margins (longitudinal and circumferential margins)
○ Lymph nodes status (number present, number involved, highest
lymph node status)
○ Venous invasion
○ Perineural invasion
Clinical pathological stage is the most significant independent prognostic
factor in CRC either classified according to the Astler and Coller system
(with stage D proposed by Turnbull) or pTNM.79, level III
CRC staging according to TNM is widely used internationally (refer to
Appendix 4). Major changes between the 5th and 7th editions are in
the definitions of lymph node involvement. Such changes destabilise
historical staging data and longitudinal analyses. For these reasons,
the criteria used in the 5th edition of TNM are retained for colorectal
reporting.77, level III In local setting, the pathology report include both the
5th and 7th editions of TNM staging, as well as Dukes’ staging.
b. Reporting
Complete and accurate histopathology reports are fundamental in
providing quality cancer care. A randomised controlled trial (RCT)
showed that the use of pre-defined forms led to a 24.5% (95% CI 11.0
to 38.0) increase in complete reporting of a minimum required data for
patient management.81, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
National electronic template reporting improves the inclusion of important
key parameters for CRC resection specimen compared with reporting
by checklists, locally developed electronic templates or free text
(p<0.05).82, level III
In view of the importance of high quality reporting of CRC resection
specimen, Pathology Service of MoH has developed a standardised
histopathology reporting proforma for this purpose (refer to Appendix 5).
Recommendation 7
• In colorectal carcinoma,
○ reporting of resection surgical specimens should contain core
macroscopic and microscopic histological items*
○ standardised histopathology reporting proforma incorporating
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system should be used
○ a minimum of 12 lymph nodes should be aimed for proper
histopathological examination
*Refer to yellow box on histopathological report of CRC.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
5. SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
• The mainstay of treatment for CRC is surgical resection, which
offers the best curative outcome. Chemotherapy and RT are used
to downstage, as adjuvant therapy and for palliative purposes. The
treatments for colon and rectal carcinoma are outlined in Algorithm C
and Algorithm D.
5.1 Pre-Operative Preparation
Pre-operative preparation is important to reduce peri-operative morbidity
and mortality.
a. Antibiotic Prophylaxis
In a Cochrane systematic review, antibiotic prophylaxis reduced wound
infections in colorectal surgery by 66% (RR=0.34, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.41).
Combination of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria coverage showed better
outcomes compared with the use of aerobic or anaerobic antibiotics
alone. There was no difference in terms of duration of antibiotic
prophylaxis.83, level I
b. Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) Prophylaxis
Colorectal surgery has a high risk of post-operative thromboembolic
complications. Heparin significantly prevented deep vein thrombosis
and/or pulmonary embolism (OR=0.32, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.53). There
was no difference between unfractionated heparin and low molecular
weight heparin in the outcomes (OR=1.01, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.52).84, level I
Combined prophylactic modalities (intermittent pneumatic compression
and anticoagulants) reduced the incidence of VTE significantly by 61%
to 84% when compared with single method.85, level I
c. Bowel Preparation
A Cochrane systematic review of 15 trials showed no significant difference
between mechanical bowel preparation and no bowel preparation in
terms of:86, level I
• anastomotic leakage
• peritonitis
• mortality
• wound infection
• re-operation
In another sub-analysis on rectal surgery, there was no difference
between mechanical bowel preparation and rectal enema for the above
outcomes.86, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Even though there was no difference in post-operative complications
between mechanical bowel preparation and no bowel preparation,
consensus among RC and DG agreed that bowel preparation prior to
rectal carcinoma surgery resulted in lesser morbidity.
Recommendation 8
• Patients undergoing colorectal carcinoma surgery should have:
○ antibiotic prophylaxis
○ venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
• Mechanical bowel preparation:
○ should be performed in rectal carcinoma surgery
○ may be performed in colon carcinoma surgery
5.2 Techniques in Colorectal Surgery
Surgery in CRC involves en-bloc removal of the cancer with clear
margins and its associated regional lymphatic drainage. The aim is to
achieve complete resection (R0) of the cancer.
a. Colon Carcinoma
A thorough surgical exploration of the abdomen should be performed
at the time of resection. This is to exclude any possible synchronous
lesion, assess the extent of primary disease and if there are any distant
metastases and to exclude any other coexisting pathology.
The extent of bowel resection for colon carcinoma depends on the
site of the primary lesion, blood supply and lymphatics to the affected
segment. Complete mesocolic excision and flush ligation of the colonic
vessels has demonstrated reduced risk of local recurrence (6.5% vs
3.6%) and improved five-year survival rate (89.1% vs 82.1%) compared
with earlier techniques.87, level II-2
Total number of lymph nodes evaluated at the time of resection has
been associated with survival.88, level I It is recommended that at least
12 lymph nodes to be evaluated to assign N0 stage.89 Thus, surgery
performed should ensure at least 12 lymph nodes are harvested.
Synchronous colon carcinoma can be treated by two separate
resections or subtotal colectomy.88, level I
b. Rectal Carcinoma
Survival in rectal cancer improves and complication rates decrease
when credentialed surgeons are involved in the care of CRC patients.
The surgeons are more likely to perform restorative procedures, leading
to fewer permanent ostomies.90, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Treatment of rectal carcinoma is based on clinical disease stage. Patients
with early stage disease are treated with primary surgery. Treatment of
locally advanced disease requires a multidisciplinary approach which
includes neoadjuvant RT or concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT)
followed by surgery.90, level I
For cancer of the upper rectum, the mesorectal excision should extend
5 cm below the distal edge of the cancer, whereas a TME is required for
cancer of the middle and lower rectum.90, level I
A positive CRM is an independent predictor of local recurrence and
decreased survival. Thus, it is critical to obtain an adequate CRM for
local control.90, level I
In most rectal carcinoma, resection of 2 cm distal mural margin is
adequate when combined with a TME. For cancers located at or below
the mesorectal margin, 1 cm distal mural margin is acceptable.90, level I
A meta-analysis showed that defunctioning stoma decreased clinical
anastomotic leak rate and re-operation rate in rectal carcinoma
(p<0.001).91, level I Thus, it should be considered after low anterior
resection.
Loop ileostomy is preferred over loop colostomy because of the ease in
reversal although the former is associated with an increased incidence
of high stoma output and dehydration.90, level I
Currently there is no strong evidence to support the practice of rectal
washout before an anastomosis in preventing local recurrence in rectal
carcinoma.92, level II-1 However, it may be performed as it is relatively riskfree and does not prolong the operative time.
In low rectal carcinoma, cylindrical APR reduced the rate of CRM
involvement (p<0.013) and intra-operative perforations (p<0.0255)
compared with traditional APR.93, level III This may help to reduce local
recurrence of the cancer.
Choice of procedure would depend largely upon the surgeon’s
preference and expertise. Options include - TEO (transanal endoscopic
operation), TEMS (transanal endoscopic microsurgery), TAMIS
(transanal minimally invasive surgery). Locally advanced rectal
cancers with involvement of adjacent pelvic organs may require a
multidisciplinary approach with a multivisceral resection such as pelvic
exenteration.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
c. Laparoscopic Surgery in Colorectal Carcinoma
The same surgical principles applied in both open surgical resection and
laparoscopy. Two Cochrane systematic reviews showed no significant
difference in operative mortality or recurrence at primary site between
laparoscopic and open colorectal resection.94-95, level I
Significant short-term benefits from laparoscopic procedures compared
with conventional colorectal surgery were:95-96, level I
• lesser blood loss
• lower post-operative ileus rate
• shorter post-operative hospital
• lower post-operative wound
stay
infections
• Resection margins of CRC specimens must be tagged for orientation.
Recommendation 9
• A thorough surgical exploration should be performed at the time of
resection in colorectal carcinoma.
• Low rectal surgery should be performed by surgeons credentialed in
the management of rectal carcinoma.
• Total mesorectal excision should be performed for middle and low
rectal carcinoma.
• If abdominoperineal resection (APR) is required, it should be
performed as cylindrical APR.
5.3 Surgical Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal Carcinoma
a. Liver Metastases
Treatment options for liver metastasis consist of hepatectomy, systemic
chemotherapy, hepatic arterial infusion therapy and thermal coagulation
therapy. Liver resection comprises of systematic and non-systematic
(non-anatomical) resection.97, level III
A Cochrane systematic review on resection of colorectal liver
metastases (CRLMs) showed insufﬁcient high level evidence to support
the effectiveness or otherwise of a single approach, either surgical or
non-surgical, for the management of the condition.98, level I Liver resection
however has been the mainstay of treatment of resectable colorectal
liver metastases. Treatment should be individualised and guided by a
team approach.
Criteria for liver resection are listed below:97, level III; 99-100, level III
i. The patient is fit for surgery. Overall health status, organ/liver
function, and concomitant non-malignant disease must be assessed.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
ii. The primary cancer has been controlled or can be controlled.
iii. There are no extrahepatic metastases or they can be controlled.
iv. The metastatic liver cancer can be completely resected.
• Resectability includes the expectation that a margin-negative
resection (R0) of ≥1 mm can be achieved.99-100, level III
v. The function of the remaining liver will be adequate. This includes:
• the anticipated ability to preserve two contiguous segments
• the anticipated ability to preserve adequate vascular inﬂow,
outﬂow and biliary drainage
• the anticipated ability to preserve adequate future liver remnant
volume (25% in normal liver and 35-40% in pre-treated liver with
chemotherapy, or pre-existing liver damage)101, level III
RFA has been shown to have a role in the treatment of unresectable
metastases, sometimes in conjunction with the surgical removal of
resectable metastases.99, level III However, a Cochrane systematic review
showed insufficient evidence on the effectiveness of RFA alone as a
curative treatment of CRLMs.102, level I
Selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) has limited evidence to
demonstrate improvement in clinical response rates, longer median
time to liver progression and OS when used in combination with first-,
second- or third-line chemotherapy as well as salvage treatment.
Selection of patients should be based on a strict criteria.103, level I
b. Pulmonary Metastases
A systematic review of observational studies showed that resection
of colorectal pulmonary metastases can be performed safely with a
low mortality rate in selected patients. Overall five-year survival rate
of patients with resection of colorectal pulmonary metastases ranged
between 41% and 56%.104, level III
The following conditions should be considered for potentially curative
resection of pulmonary colorectal metastases:97, level III; 104, level III
• technically resectable pulmonary metastases
• patient is fit for surgery
• primary cancer has been controlled or can be controlled
• no extrathoracic metastases detected with the exception of
resectable hepatic lesions
• remaining lung function is adequate for good quality of life
c. Hepatopulmonary Metastases
CRC patients presenting with simultaneous hepatic and pulmonary
metastases without extrahepatic and extra-pulmonary disease should
be offered curative resection if physiologically capable, and the primary
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
cancer is controlled. The median survival is 54.2 months with a fiveyear survival rate of 43%.97, level III; 105, level III
Recommendation 10
• Treatment for metastatic colorectal carcinoma should be individualised
and guided by a multidisciplinary approach.
5.4 Cancer-Related Emergencies
CRC complications such as bleeding, perforation and obstruction are
serious and potentially life-threatening conditions. The aims of treatment
for these conditions are to prevent sepsis and/or shock, to achieve
the best possible cancer control and to allow initiation of appropriate
adjuvant or systemic treatment.88, level I
a. Bleeding
Surgical resection to stop bleeding from localised colon carcinoma
should follow the same principles as in elective resection. Chronic blood
loss is more common than acute massive lower gastrointestinal bleeding
in this condition. Selective embolisation may play a role in controlling
acute bleeding, but surgical resection is the definitive treatment. Preoperative or intra-operative efforts should be made to localise the site of
bleeding. If the bleeding site cannot be determined but a colonic cancer
is suspected, a subtotal colectomy may be considered.88, level I
b. Perforation
The overall prognosis of colon perforation due to a colon carcinoma is
worse than perforation from other causes due to its association with
advanced cancer or sepsis. If perforation occurs:88, level I
• proximal to an obstructing cancer, resection of the cancer should
be performed whenever possible, in addition to resection of the
perforated segment
• at the cancer site but contained by adjacent structures, resection
should ideally incorporate the adjacent structures en-bloc
Primary anastomosis (with/without proximal diversion) may be
considered in patients with minimal contamination, healthy tissue
quality and clinical stability.88, level I
c. Obstruction
The management of patients with an obstructing cancer should be
individualised but may include a definitive surgical resection. Options
for treatment of obstructing cancer depend on the site of obstruction
and presence of proximal colonic distention. It is either:88, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
• resection with/without anastomosis (e.g. right hemicolectomy,
Hartmann's procedure, etc.)
• resection of the distended bowel (e.g. subtotal/total colectomy)
• temporary relief of obstruction (e.g. stoma or stenting)
Hartmann's procedure offers no survival benefit compared to segmental
colonic resection with primary anastomosis. It should be considered in
patients with high surgical risks.106, level III
Colonic stenting can be considered for those who are not fit for
immediate resection or in those with advanced disease. In a Cochrane
systematic review, colonic stenting in malignant colorectal obstruction
had no advantage over emergency surgery.107, level I
The prognosis among patients with obstructing cancers may be worse
than among those without obstruction because of the inherently more
advanced nature of their disease. However, this does not preclude the
potential for curative resection.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
6. CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIOTHERAPY
While surgery remained the primary treatment for CRC, the roles
of chemotherapy and RT are mainly as neoadjuvant, adjuvant and
palliative options. The treatments for colon and rectal carcinoma are
outlined in Algorithm C and Algorithm D.
6.1 Colon Carcinoma
a. Stage I and II Colon Carcinoma
In colon carcinoma without lymph node involvement (stage I and II),
the prognosis is good with surgical intervention alone. Stage II colon
carcinoma patients have a relatively favourable prognosis. However,
some patients with high risk stage II disease have a relapse rate
approaching that of stage III colon carcinoma patients.108, level I
In a Cochrane systematic review of adjuvant therapy for completely
resected stage II colon carcinoma, there was no improvement in OS
(RRR=0.96, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.05). However, the DFS in patients who
received adjuvant therapy was significantly better than without adjuvant
therapy (RRR=0.83, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.92). Most trials included in the
review used the combination of fluorouracil (5-FU) plus folinic acid, with
or without levamisole.108, level I
Prognostic indicators correlated with high risk for subsequent failure
in stage II colon carcinoma include obstruction, poorly differentiated
tumour, perforation, venous invasion, inadequate lymph node sampling
(<12) or T4 disease. The benefit of adjuvant systemic chemotherapy in
patients with high risk features is not well established. The co-morbidities
and likelihood of tolerating adjuvant systemic chemotherapy should be
considered as well.108, level I Patients should be counselled carefully on
the risk of chemotherapy vs a potential small benefit of treatment.
The addition of oxaliplatin to 5-FU based chemotherapy also failed
to show benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II patients. In the
MOSAIC trial (Multicenter International Study of Oxaliplatin/5-FU/LV in
the Adjuvant Treatment of Colon Cancer), six months of 5-FU/leucovorin
(LV) was compared with six months of 5-FU/LV with oxaliplatin (FOLFOX
regimen). There was no statistically significant improvement in five-year
DFS and six-year OS in stage II colon carcinoma. In an exploratory
analysis, the probabilities of DFS at five years and OS at six years in
high-risk stage II patients were also not statistically significant but there
was a trend toward improved DFS at five years in this group of patients
treated with FOLFOX4 compared with 5-FU/LV. Thus, the role of adjuvant
therapy for stage II colon carcinoma remains controversial.109, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Similar results from another trial demonstrated an overall benefit in
DFS (HR=0.8, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.93) for the addition of oxaliplatin to
5-FU/LV but failed to demonstrate a significant difference in the stage
II subset.110, level I In both trials above that used oxaliplatin, the relative
positive effect of adjuvant treatment on DFS was similar for stage II and III
patients, as denoted by comparable HRs for the subgroups.
• High risk features for stage II colon carcinoma are presence of any of
the following:
○ obstruction
○ perforation
○ T4 disease
○ poorly differentiated tumour
○ lymphovascular invasion
○ inadequate lymph node sampling (<12)
b. Stage III Colon Carcinoma
For stage III disease, the recurrence rate can exceed 50% and adjuvant
chemotherapy may have a role to reduce the risk of recurrence.
The role of 5-FU based chemotherapy in stage III colon carcinoma is
well established in improving OS. Several 5-FU regimens are available
either as infusion or bolus regimes, with different side effect profile but
similar efficacy.
QUASAR was a large trial of adjuvant chemotherapy for CRC using a
standard adjuvant cytotoxic chemotherapy regimen, 5-FU and folinic
acid with or without levamisole, in either a once-weekly or five-day
course at four-weekly intervals. Both schedules were for six months
duration. There was no difference in recurrence rates and survival at
three years as well as mortality rate between the weekly and four-weekly
schedules. However, four-weekly schedule had higher toxicity with
more frequent diarrhoea, stomatitis and neutropaenia (p<0.001).111, level I
The combination of 5-FU and oxaliplatin improved OS even further.
In MOSAIC trial, FOLFOX4 was more effective than 5-FU/LV in sixyear OS (p=0.023) and five-year DFS (p=0.005) among stage III colon
carcinoma patients. However, there were more grade 3 side effects in the
oxaliplatin group including neutropaenia and sensory neuropathy.109, level I
Oral chemotherapy using capecitabine have been shown to be
equivalent to 5-FU with a favourable side effect profile. In a large RCT
comparing oral capecitabine with bolus 5-FU/LV as adjuvant treatment
for resected stage III colon carcinoma over a period of 24 weeks, the
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
DFS was equivalent between capecitabine and 5-FU/LV. Capecitabine
improved relapse-free survival (p=0.04) and was associated with
significantly fewer adverse events compared with 5-FU/LV (p<0.001).112, level I
In a Cochrane systematic review of adjuvant chemotherapy, there
was no significant difference in relapse-free survival and OS between
shorter (three to six months) and longer (nine to 12 months) duration
chemotherapy. This finding confirmed that adjuvant chemotherapy for
CRC should not last for more than six months. Prolonged duration
would result in lower benefit-to-risk ratio.113, level I
Recommendation 11
• Adjuvant chemotherapy may be considered for stage II colon
carcinoma with high risk features. Patient should be carefully
selected and counselled.
• Fluorouracil/leucovorin (5-FU/LV) with oxaliplatin should be given in
stage III colon carcinoma.
6.2 Rectal Carcinoma
Adjuvant treatment for low risk rectal cancer (T1-T2 N0) is not indicated
unless surgical margin is compromised. Locoregional recurrence after
resection of rectal carcinoma is difficult to treat and associated with
severe debilitating symptoms. Local recurrence rates were reported to
be as high as 50% for patients with T3-T4 and/or node positive rectal
carcinoma before the advent of standard CCRT and TME.114-116, level III
RT to pelvis with or without chemotherapy plays an important role in
the management of rectal carcinoma. It may be given as short or long
course schedule.
TME has led to improvements in morbidity and survival in rectal
carcinoma. Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group investigated the value of
pre-operative short course RT of 25 Gy in five fractions in combination
with TME in rectal carcinoma. The 10-year cumulative incidence of
local recurrence was 5% in RT and TME group compared with 11%
in the TME alone group (p<0.0001). However, there was no difference
in OS. For patients with TNM stage III cancer with negative CRM, the
10-year survival was 50% in the pre-operative RT group vs 40% in the
surgery alone group (p=0.032).117, level I
• A short course pre-operative RT is a treatment option for rectal
carcinoma.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
A large, landmark Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial also showed that when
compared with surgery alone, the addition of a short course of pelvic
radiation (25 Gy in five fractions) pre-operatively resulted in a significant
reduction in local recurrence rate (11% vs 27%) and improvement in OS
(58% vs 48%) at five-year follow-up in rectal carcinoma.119, level I
The timing of adjuvant therapy pre- or post-operatively was addressed
in a large German RCT on stage II to III rectal carcinoma. Patients were
given either pre-operative CCRT 50.4 Gy with concurrent 5-FU, TME
and four cycles of adjuvant 5-FU chemotherapy, or the same schedule
of CCRT used post-operatively except for the delivery of a boost of
5.4 Gy. The surgery was scheduled six weeks after completion of
CCRT. The benefits of pre-operative CCRT were:
• decrease in local failure (6% vs 13%; p=0.006)
• higher sphincter preservation (39% vs 19%) although not significant
• lower grade 3 or 4 acute toxicity (27% vs 40%; p=0.001) and lower
long-term toxicity (14% vs 24%; p=0.01)
However, there was no significant improvement in OS between the two
arms.120, level I
The role of adjuvant chemotherapy in rectal cancer is not well
established. In two large RCTs on resectable rectal cancer T3 or T4,
adjuvant chemotherapy after pre-operative CCRT/RT and TME surgery
alone did not improve DFS and OS.121-122, level I
Pre-operative CCRT (45 Gy + bolus 5-FU/LV) increases pathological
complete response (pCR) compared with pre-operative RT alone
(11.4% vs 3.6%; p<0.05) in addition to receiving four cycles of 5-FU/LV
adjuvant chemotherapy. CCRT has lower five-year incidence of local
recurrence (8.1% vs 16.5%; p<0.05) but higher grade 3 or 4 acute
toxicity (14.6% vs 2.7%; p<0.05). There is no difference in sphincter
preservation and five-year OS.123, level I In a systematic review of 10
RCTs, tumour shrinkage after pre-operative RT or CCRT did not result
in a statistically significant higher anterior resection with sphincter
preservation rate.124, level I
• Pre-operative chemoradiotherapy resulted in lower incidence of local
recurrence compared with RT alone.
• Long course CCRT may be given pre- or post-operatively.
• Neoadjuvant CCRT has become the preferred option.
• Multidisciplinary approach and CRM assessment prior to deciding
therapy is important.
T4 cancer with deep local invasion into adjacent structures requires a
more extensive surgical resection at the expense of major morbidity.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Pre-operative RT results in good clinical response and may allow
potentially curative resection.125-126, level III
The European Society for Medical Oncology guidelines 2017
recommend post-operative CCRT if pre-operative CCRT not given in
selected patients. Refer to Appendix 7 on Potential Indications for
Post-operative CCRT if Pre-operative CCRT Not Given.
• High risk features for stage II rectal carcinoma are presence of any of
the following:26; 75, level III; 77, level III
○ obstruction
○ perforation
○ T4 disease
○ positive CRM
○ poorly differentiated tumour
○ lymphovascular invasion
○ inadequate lymph node sampling (<12)
○ incomplete mesorectum
Recommendation 12
• Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy should be offered to T3-T4 or node
positive rectal carcinoma.
6.3 Metastatic or Locally Advanced Colorectal Carcinoma
Stage IV CRC accounts for a third of total CRC cases in Malaysia.1, level III The
optimal treatment strategy for metastatic colorectal carcinoma (mCRC)
involves a multidisciplinary team approach. Management centres
around palliation and control of symptoms, lengthening progressionfree survival (PFS) and OS. Patients with good performance status,
marrow reserve and organ functions have a potential for benefits from
chemotherapy. Patients with poor performance status and significant
co-morbidities should be considered for supportive care only.127, level III
Palliative chemotherapy to mCRC patients is effective in prolonging
time to disease progression (TTP) at 12 months (RR=0.86, 95% CI 0.77
to 0.96) and OS at 18 months (RR=0.88, 95% CI 0.82 to 0.96).128, level I
5-FU/LV is used clinically since 1957 and is the standard cytostatic
agents in CRC. A two-weekly regime which combines 5-FU/LV bolus
and infusion has longer PFS (p=0.001) and lower grade 3 and 4 toxicity
(p=0.0004) compared with five-days 5-FU/LV bolus. However, there is
no significant difference in OS.129, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
The use of combination regime as first-line chemotherapy improves
response rate and TTP compared with 5-FU/LV alone. A two-weekly
regime 5-FU/LV bolus and infusion (46 hours) plus irinotecan (FOLFIRI)
regime has a response rate of 49% (p=0.001) and an improvement of
3.3 months in OS compared with 5-FU/LV alone (p=0.031).130, level I In
comparison, a two-weekly regime 5-FU/LV bolus and infusion (day one
and two) plus oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4) regime has a 50.7% response
rate (p=0.0001) but with no survival benefit.131, level I Generally, additional
grade 3 and 4 toxicity are more significantly frequent in the combination
regimes.130-131, level I
There is no statistical difference in PFS and OS between FOLFOX6
and FOLFIRI as first-line chemotherapy in mCRC. However, their
toxicity profiles are different. Grade 3 sensory neurotoxicity, grade 3 or
4 neutropaenia and thrombocytopaenia are significantly more frequent
with FOLFOX6 while grade 3 or 4 febrile neutropaenia, nausea,
vomiting, mucositis and fatigue are significantly more frequent with
FOLFIRI. More patients have serious adverse events with FOLFIRI
than with FOLFOX6 (14% vs 5%, p=0.03).132, level I
In a large RCT on CRC patients with potentially resectable liver
metastases, peri-operative chemotherapy with FOLFOX4 (six cycles
before and six cycles after surgery) improved PFS of resected patients
(HR=0.73, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.97) compared with surgery alone.133, level I
Capecitabine, an oral fluoropyrimidine carbamate, results in superior
response rate, equivalent TTP and OS compared with intravenous
5-FU/LV.134, level I It also has significantly improved safety profile and
conveniently used as first-line treatment for mCRC.136, level I Therefore,
capecitabine offers an alternative to 5-FU/LV. However, compliance
towards medication is an important factor to obtain the similar results.
• In potentially resectable liver metastatasis, peri-operative chemotherapy
with FOLFOX (six cycles before and six cycles after surgery)
improves PFS.
a. Targeted Therapy
Monoclonal antibodies against vascular endothelial growth factor
(bevacizumab) and against epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
(cetuximab) have been used in combination with chemotherapy for mCRC.
Adding bevacizumab to FOLFIRI compared with FOLFIRI alone
resulted in a significant difference in median PFS (10.6 months vs 6.2
months) and OS (20.3 months vs 15.6 months).137, level I The survival
advantage was not evident when bevacizumab was combined with
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy. Bevacizumab plus oxaliplatin-based
chemotherapy as first-line treatment in mCRC resulted in modest
improvement of PFS compared with chemotherapy alone (9.4 months
vs 8 months, p=0.0023). There was no significant difference in OS.135, level I
KRAS is a protein which involved in cell signalling pathways that control
cell growth, cell maturation, and cell death. The natural, unchanged
form of the gene is also called the wild-type KRAS. Patients with wildtype KRAS are likely to response to anti-EGFR therapy. In wild-type
KRAS mCRC patients, cetuximab plus FOLFIRI and FOLFIRI alone
showed significant difference in median PFS of 9.9 months and 8.7
months respectively. However, there was no difference in median
OS.138, level I
A HTA report in 2007 concluded that the use of bevacizumab in firstline setting and cetuximab in second-line setting mCRC was not costeffective.139, level I This is supported by an economic evaluation published
in USA whereby bevacizumab in addition to chemotherapy was not
cost-effective in both the first- and second-line treatment in mCRC.140, level I
b. Palliative Pelvic Radiotherapy
Palliative pelvic RT for symptomatic rectal carcinoma appears to
provide relief for a variety of pelvic symptoms. A systematic review has
shown that palliative RT has 75% pooled overall symptom response
rate among 1084 cases and positive responses were reported for pain
(78%), bleeding and discharge (81%), mass effect (71%) and other
pelvic symptoms (72%).141 level I
Recommendation 13
• Palliative chemotherapy may be considered in metastatic colorectal
carcinoma.
○ Combination chemotherapy is the preferred regime.
○ Oral chemotherapy may be considered as an alternative.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
7. FOLLOW-UP AND SURVEILLANCE
Surveillance should be guided by presumed risk of recurrence and
functional status of the patient (important within the first two to four
years). Any new, persistent or worsening symptoms warrant the
consideration of a recurrence.
• Follow-up strategies in post-surgery and/or adjuvant treatment
are:142, level III
i. History, physical examination and CEA levels every three to six
months for five years.
ii. Surveillance colonoscopy at year one and every three to five years
thereafter, dictated by the findings of the previous investigation.
○ If a colonoscopy has not been performed before diagnosis, it
should be done after completion of adjuvant therapy (before
one year).
iii. CT scan of thorax, abdomen and pelvis is performed annually for
three years. For high-risk patients, it is reasonable to consider
imaging every six to 12 months for the first three years.
In a cohort study on stage III colon carcinoma, patients treated with
surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy, and survived without recurrence
six months after treatments, those who continued to engage in at least
18-metabolic equivalent task-hours per week of activity (equivalent
of walking ≥6 hours per week at an average pace) had significant
improvement in DFS compared with inactive patients at a median
follow-up of 3.8 years.143, level II-2
Survivors of CRC should be encouraged to:144, level III
• maintain an ideal body weight throughout life
• adopt a physically active lifestyle
• consume a healthy diet
• limit alcohol consumption and quit smoking
• CRC survivors are encouraged to maintain an ideal body weight,
participate in regular physical activity and consume a well-balanced
diet.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
8. PREVENTION OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMA IN GENERAL
POPULATION
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) such as aspirin and non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may have protective effect against CRC
mainly due to reduction in prostaglandin production and induction of
apoptosis.
Aspirin had mixed results in prevention of CRC in general population. It
was not significant in primary prevention145, level I but significant in secondary
prevention with a reduction of 23 to 28% risk of CRC.145-146, level I There
was no difference in adverse events including serious ones between
the treatment and control groups.145, level I
In a systematic review of observational studies, CRC incidence was
reduced with non-aspirin NSAIDs. However, the review also reported
an increased risk of peptic ulceration and gastrointestinal haemorrhage
with non-ASA NSAIDs use.147, level I
Even though aspirin and NSAIDs have shown some benefits in the
prevention of CRC, long-term safety profiles are warranted before any
recommendation can be made on their use.
There was no significant benefit from daily consumption of calcium,
flavanoids or increased dietary fiber in prevention of CRC in general
population.148-150, level I
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
9. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of CPG is important as it helps in providing quality
healthcare services based on best available evidence applied to local
scenario and expertise. Various factors and resource implications should
be considered for the success of the uptake in the CPG recommendations.
9.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing the CPG are:
1. availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and softcopies)
2. conferences and updates on management of CRC involving
professional societies or bodies (Malaysian Society of Colorectal
Surgeons, Malaysian Society of Gastroenterology & Hepatology,
Malaysian Oncological Society)
3. public awareness CRC campaign such as World Digestive Day, etc.
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
1. limited awareness and knowledge in management of CRC among
healthcare providers
2. different levels of CRC care due to expertise, facilities and financial
constraints
9.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitments to:
1. ensure widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare providers via
printed copies and online accessibility
2. reinforce training of healthcare providers via regular seminars and
workshops
3. involve multidisciplinary team at all levels of health care
4. improve the diagnostic and therapeutic facilities
5. train more experts in the field of CRC
6. strengthen the cancer registry
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed as
the clinical audit indicator for quality management:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
=
X 100%
Percentage of
patients with
positive iFOBT or
with symptoms of
CRC undergoing
urgent colonoscopy
within 2 weeks
Total number of patients with positive iFOBT
or with symptoms of CRC
referred for urgent colonoscopy in
the same period
Number of patients with positive iFOBT
or with symptoms of CRC undergoing
urgent colonoscopy
within 2 weeks in a period
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
REFERENCES
1.
Zainal Ariffin O, Nor Saleha IT. National cancer registry report 2007. Malaysia:
Ministry of Health. 2011.
2.
Hassan MR, Khazim WK, Othman Z, et al. 2nd Annual Report of the National
Cancer Patient Registry - Colorectal Cancer. 2008-2013.
3.
Ezat SW, Natrah MS, Aljunid S, et al. Economic evaluation of monoclonal
antibody in the management of colorectal cancer. J Cancer Res Ther. 2013;1:34-9.
4.
Sung JJ, Ng SC, Chan FK, et al; Asia Pacific Working Group. An updated Asia
Pacific Consensus Recommendations on colorectal cancer screening. Gut.
2015;64(1):121-32.
5.
European Colorectal Cancer Screening Guidelines Working Group: von Karsa
L, Patnick J, Segnan N, et al. European guidelines for quality assurance in
colorectal cancer screening and diagnosis: overview and introduction to the full
supplement publication. Endoscopy. 2013;45(1):51-9.
6.
Whitlock EP, Lin JS, Liles E, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer: a targeted,
updated systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann
Intern Med. 2008;149(9):638-58.
7.
Qaseem A, Denberg TD, Hopkins RH Jr, et al; Clinical Guidelines Committee
of the American College of Physicians. Screening for colorectal cancer: a
guidance statement from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med.
2012;156(5):378-86.
8.
Rex DK, Johnson DA, Anderson JC, et al; American College of Gastroenterology.
American College of Gastroenterology guidelines for colorectal cancer screening
2009 [corrected]. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104(3):739-50.
9.
Lin JS, Piper MA, Perdue LA, et al. Screening for Colorectal Cancer: Updated
Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task
Force. JAMA. 2016;315(23):2576-94.
10. Zhu MM, Xu XT, Nie F, et al. Comparison of immunochemical and guaiac-based
fecal occult blood test in screening and surveillance for advanced colorectal
neoplasms: a meta-analysis. J Dig Dis. 2010;11(3):148-60.
11. Hewitson P, Glasziou P, Irwig L, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer using
the faecal occult blood test, Hemoccult. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2007;(1):CD001216.
12. Uppara M, Adaba F, Askari A, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the
diagnostic accuracy of pyruvate kinase M2 isoenzymatic assay in diagnosing
colorectal cancer. World J Surg Oncol. 2015;13:48.
13. Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) MDD, Ministry of Health
Malaysia. Immunochemical Faecal Occult Blood Test (IFOBT) For Colorectal
Cancer (CRC) Screening. 2011. MOH/P/PAK/233.12(TR).
14. Holme Ø, Løberg M, Kalager M, et al. Effect of flexible sigmoidoscopy screening
on colorectal cancer incidence and mortality: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA.
2014;312(6):606-15.
15. Schoen RE, Pinsky PF, Weissfeld JL, et al; PLCO Project Team. Colorectalcancer incidence and mortality with screening flexible sigmoidoscopy. N Engl J
Med. 2012;366(25):2345-57.
16. Segnan N, Armaroli P, Bonelli L, et al; SCORE Working Group. Once-only
sigmoidoscopy in colorectal cancer screening: follow-up findings of the Italian
Randomized Controlled Trial--SCORE. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;103(17):1310-22.
17. Atkin WS, Edwards R, Kralj-Hans I, et al; UK Flexible Sigmoidoscopy Trial
Investigators. Once-only flexible sigmoidoscopy screening in prevention
of colorectal cancer: a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2010;375(9726):1624-33.
18. Brenner H, Chang-Claude J, Jansen L, et al. Reduced risk of colorectal
cancer up to 10 years after screening, surveillance, or diagnostic colonoscopy.
Gastroenterology. 2014;146(3):709-17
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
19. Lieberman DA, Weiss DG, Bond JH, et al. Use of colonoscopy to screen
asymptomatic adults for colorectal cancer. Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study
Group 380. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(3):162-8.
20. Nishihara R, Wu K, Lochhead P, et al. Long-term colorectal-cancer incidence
and mortality after lower endoscopy. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(12):1095-105.
21. Castro G, Azrak MF, Seeff LC, et al. Outpatient colonoscopy complications in
the CDC's Colorectal Cancer Screening Demonstration Program: a prospective
analysis. Cancer. 2013;119 Suppl 15:2849-54.
22. Ko CW, Riffle S, Michaels L, et al. Serious complications within 30 days of
screening and surveillance colonoscopy are uncommon. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2010;8(2):166-73.
23. Spada C, Hassan C, Marmo R, et al. Meta-analysis shows colon capsule
endoscopy is effective in detecting colorectal polyps. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2010;8(6):516-22.
24. de Haan MC, van Gelder RE, Graser A, et al. Diagnostic value of CT-colonography
as compared to colonoscopy in an asymptomatic screening population: a metaanalysis. Eur Radiol. 2011;21(8):1747-63.
25. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). Diagnosis and management
of colorectal cancer. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2011. (SIGN publication no. 126).
[December 2011]. Available from URL: http://www.sign.ac.uk
26. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). The diagnosis and
management of colorectal cancer: United Kingdom: NICE; 2011. (CG131).
[November 2011]. Available from URL: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg131/
evidence/full-guideline-pdf-183509677
27. Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al. Screening and surveillance for
the early detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps, 2008: a joint
guideline from the American Cancer Society, the US Multi-Society Task Force on
Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology. CA Cancer J Clin.
2008;58(3):130-60.
28. Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) MDD, Ministry of Health
Malaysia. Colorectal Cancer Screening Using Colonoscopy And Economic
Evaluation. 2016. (Technology Review) 010/2016.
29. Taylor DP, Burt RW, Williams MS, et al. Population-based family historyspecific risks for colorectal cancer: a constellation approach. Gastroenterology.
2010;138(3):877-85.
30. Bazzoli F, Fossi S, Sottili S, et al. The risk of adenomatous polyps in asymptomatic
first-degree relatives of persons with colon cancer. Gastroenterology.
1995;109(3):783-8.
31. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of family
history and the risk of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(25):1669-74.
32. Winawer S, Fletcher R, Rex D, et al; Gastrointestinal Consortium Panel.
Colorectal cancer screening and surveillance: clinical guidelines and rationaleUpdate based on new evidence. Gastroenterology. 2003;124(2):544-60.
33. Saini SD, Kim HM, Schoenfeld P. Incidence of advanced adenomas at
surveillance colonoscopy in patients with a personal history of colon adenomas:
a meta-analysis and systematic review. Gastrointest Endosc. 2006;64(4):614-26.
34. Laiyemo AO, Murphy G, Albert PS, et al. Postpolypectomy colonoscopy
surveillance guidelines: predictive accuracy for advanced adenoma at 4 years.
Ann Intern Med. 2008;148(6):419-26.
35. Laiyemo AO, Pinsky PF, Marcus PM, et al. Utilization and yield of surveillance
colonoscopy in the continued follow-up study of the polyp prevention trial. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;7(5):562-7; quiz 497.
36. Nusko G, Mansmann U, Kirchner T, et al. Risk related surveillance following
colorectal polypectomy. Gut. 2002;51(3):424-8.
37. Morelli MS, Glowinski EA, Juluri R, et al. Yield of the second surveillance
colonoscopy based on the results of the index and first surveillance
colonoscopies. Endoscopy. 2013;45(10):821-6
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
38. Eaden JA, Abrams KR, Mayberry JF. The risk of colorectal cancer in ulcerative
colitis: a meta-analysis. Gut. 2001;48(4):526-35.
39. Hata K, Watanabe T, Kazama S, et al. Earlier surveillance colonoscopy
programme improves survival in patients with ulcerative colitis associated
colorectal cancer: results of a 23-year surveillance programme in the Japanese
population. Br J Cancer. 2003;89(7):1232-6.
40. Mpofu C, Watson AJ, Rhodes JM. Strategies for detecting colon cancer and/or
dysplasia in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2004;(2):CD000279. Review. Update in: Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2006;(2):CD000279.
41. Debinski HS, Love S, Spigelman AD, et al. Colorectal polyp counts and cancer
risk in familial adenomatous polyposis. Gastroenterology. 1996;110(4):1028-30.
42. Stoffel EM, Mangu PB, Limburg PJ. Hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes:
American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline endorsement
of the familial risk-colorectal cancer: European Society for Medical Oncology
clinical practice guidelines. J Oncol Pract. 2015;11(3):e437-41.
43. Balmaña J, Balaguer F, Cervantes A, et al; ESMO Guidelines Working Group.
Familial risk-colorectal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol.
2013;24 Suppl 6:vi73-80.
44. Vasen HF, Moeslein G, Alonso A, et al. Guidelines for the clinical management of
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Gut. 2008;57(5):704-13.
45. Aarnio M, Mecklin JP, Aaltonen LA, et al. Life-time risk of different cancers in
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. Int J Cancer.
1995;64(6):430-3.
46. Järvinen HJ, Aarnio M, Mustonen H, et al. Controlled 15-year trial on screening
for colorectal cancer in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
Gastroenterology. 2000;118(5):829-34.
47. Cairns SR, Scholefield JH, Steele RJ, et al; British Society of Gastroenterology;
Association of Coloproctology for Great Britain and Ireland. Guidelines for
colorectal cancer screening and surveillance in moderate and high risk groups
(update from 2002). Gut. 2010;59(5):666-89.
48. Australian Cancer Network Colorectal Cancer Guidelines Revision Committee.
Guidelines for the prevention, early detection and management of colorectal
cancer. The Cancer Council Australia and Australian Cancer Network, Sydney.
2005;71.
49. Beggs AD, Latchford AR, Vasen HF, et al. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: a systematic
review and recommendations for management. Gut. 2010;59(7):975-86.
50. Brosens LA, van Hattem A, Hylind LM, et al. Risk of colorectal cancer in juvenile
polyposis. Gut. 2007;56(7):965-7.
51. Nieuwenhuis MH, Vogt S, Jones N, et al. Evidence for accelerated colorectal
adenoma--carcinoma progression in MUTYH-associated polyposis? Gut.
2012;61(5):734-8.
52. Huxley RR, Ansary-Moghaddam A, Clifton P, et al. The impact of dietary and
lifestyle risk factors on risk of colorectal cancer: a quantitative overview of the
epidemiological evidence. Int J Cancer. 2009;125(1):171-80.
53. Jiang Y, Ben Q, Shen H, et al. Diabetes mellitus and incidence and mortality of
colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Eur
J Epidemiol. 2011;26(11):863-76.
54. Dai Z, Xu YC, Niu L. Obesity and colorectal cancer risk: a meta-analysis of
cohort studies. World J Gastroenterol. 2007;13(31):4199-206.
55. Matsuo K, Mizoue T, Tanaka K, et al. Association between body mass index and
the colorectal cancer risk in Japan: pooled analysis of population-based cohort
studies in Japan. Ann Oncol. 2012;23(2):479-90.
56. Cho E, Smith-Warner SA, Ritz J, et al. Alcohol intake and colorectal cancer: a
pooled analysis of 8 cohort studies. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(8):603-13.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
57. Sandhu MS, White IR, McPherson K. Systematic review of the prospective
cohort studies on meat consumption and colorectal cancer risk: a meta-analytical
approach. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2001;10(5):439-46.
58. Pham NM, Mizoue T, Tanaka K, et al. Meat consumption and colorectal cancer
risk: an evaluation based on a systematic review of epidemiologic evidence
among the Japanese population. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2014;44(7):641-50.
59. Samadder NJ, Jasperson K, Burt RW. Hereditary and common familial colorectal
cancer: evidence for colorectal screening. Dig Dis Sci. 2015;60(3):734-47.
60. Kievit W, de Bruin JH, Adang EM, et al. Current clinical selection strategies
for identification of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer families are
inadequate: a meta-analysis. Clin Genet. 2004;65(4):308-16.
61. Kastrinos F, Balmaña J, Syngal S. Prediction models in Lynch syndrome. Fam
Cancer. 2013;12(2):217-28.
62. Griffith GL, Edwards RT, Gray J. Cancer genetics services: a systematic review
of the economic evidence and issues. Br J Cancer. 2004;90(9):1697-703.
63. Giardiello FM, Allen JI, Axilbund JE, et al. Guidelines on genetic evaluation
and management of Lynch syndrome: a consensus statement by the US Multisociety Task Force on colorectal cancer. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014;109(8):1159-79.
64. Halligan S, Wooldrage K, Dadswell E, et al. Computed tomographic
colonography versus barium enema for diagnosis of colorectal cancer or large
polyps in symptomatic patients (SIGGAR): a multicentre randomised trial.
Lancet. 2013;381(9873):1185-93.
65. White TJ, Avery GR, Kennan N, et al. Virtual colonoscopy vs conventional
colonoscopy in patients at high risk of colorectal cancer--a prospective trial of
150 patients. Colorectal Dis. 2009;11(2):138-45.
66. Atkin W, Dadswell E, Wooldrage K, et al. Computed tomographic colonography
versus colonoscopy for investigation of patients with symptoms suggestive
of colorectal cancer (SIGGAR): a multicentre randomised trial. Lancet.
2013;381(9873):1194-202.
67. Lao IH, Chao H, Wang YJ, et al. Computed tomography has low sensitivity for
the diagnosis of early colon cancer. Colorectal Dis. 2013;15(7):807-11.
68. MERCURY Study Group. Diagnostic accuracy of preoperative magnetic
resonance imaging in predicting curative resection of rectal cancer: prospective
observational study. BMJ. 2006;333(7572):779.
69. Koh DM, Collins DJ, Wallace T, et al. Combining diffusion-weighted MRI with GdEOB-DTPA-enhanced MRI improves the detection of colorectal liver metastases.
Br J Radiol. 2012;85(1015):980-9.
70. Li XT, Zhang XY, Sun YS, et al. Evaluating rectal tumor staging with magnetic
resonance imaging, computed tomography, and endoluminal ultrasound: A
meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(44):e5333.
71. Li XT, Sun YS, Tang L, et al. Evaluating local lymph node metastasis with magnetic
resonance imaging, endoluminal ultrasound and computed tomography in rectal
cancer: a meta-analysis. Colorectal Dis. 2015;17(6):O129-35.
72. Puli SR, Bechtold ML, Reddy JB, et al. Can endoscopic ultrasound predict
early rectal cancers that can be resected endoscopically? A meta-analysis and
systematic review. Dig Dis Sci. 2010;55(5):1221-9.
73. Engelmann BE, Loft A, Kjær A, et al. Positron emission tomography/computed
tomography for optimized colon cancer staging and follow up. Scand J
Gastroenterol. 2014;49(2):191-201.
74. Glynne-Jones R, Wyrwicz L, Tiret E, et al; ESMO Guidelines Committee. Rectal
cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and followup. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(suppl_4):iv22-iv40.
75. Maughan NJ, Morris E, Forman D, et al. The validity of the Royal College of
Pathologists' colorectal cancer minimum dataset within a population. Br J
Cancer. 2007;97(10):1393-8.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
76. Bosman FT, Carneiro F, Hruban RH, et al. WHO classification of tumours of the
digestive system. World Health Organization; 2010.
77. Loughrey MB, Quirke P, Shepherd NA. Dataset for colorectal cancer
histopathology reports. The Royal College of Pathologists. 2014 Jul.
78. Mulcahy HE, Skelly MM, Husain A, et al. Long-term outcome following curative
surgery for malignant large bowel obstruction. Br J Surg. 1996;83(1):46-50.
79. D'Eredita G, Serio G, Neri V, et al. A survival regression analysis of prognostic
factors in colorectal cancer. Aust N Z J Surg. 1996;66(7):445-51.
80. Bernstein TE, Endreseth BH, Romundstad P, et al. What is a safe distal resection
margin in rectal cancer patients treated by low anterior resection without
preoperative radiotherapy? Colorectal Dis. 2012;14(2):e48-55.
81. Branston LK, Greening S, Newcombe RG, et al. The implementation of guidelines
and computerised forms improves the completeness of cancer pathology
reporting. The CROPS project: a randomised controlled trial in pathology. Eur J
Cancer. 2002;38(6):764-72.
82. Haugland HK, Casati B, Dørum LM, et al. Template reporting matters—a
nationwide study on histopathology reporting on colorectal carcinoma resections.
Hum Pathol. 2011;42(1):36-40.
83. Nelson RL, Gladman E, Barbateskovic M. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for colorectal
surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;5:CD001181.
84. Borly L, Wille-Jørgensen P, Rasmussen MS. Systematic review of
thromboprophylaxis in colorectal surgery -- an update. Colorectal Dis.
2005;7(2):122-7.
85. Kakkos SK, Caprini JA, Geroulakos G, et al. Combined intermittent pneumatic
leg compression and pharmacological prophylaxis for prevention of venous
thromboembolism in high-risk patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2008;(4):CD005258.
86. Güenaga KF, Matos D, Wille-Jørgensen P. Mechanical bowel preparation for
elective colorectal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(9):CD001544.
87. Hohenberger W, Weber K, Matzel K, et al. Standardized surgery for colonic
cancer: complete mesocolic excision and central ligation–technical notes and
outcome. Colorectal Dis. 2009;11(4):354-64.
88. Chang GJ, Kaiser AM, Mills S, et al. Practice parameters for the management of
colon cancer. Dis Colon Rectum. 2012;55(8):831-43.
89. Benson A, Bekaii-Saab T, Chan E, et al. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in
oncology: colon cancer. Fort Washington, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer
Network. 2013.
90. Monson JR, Weiser MR, Buie WD, et al. Practice parameters for the management
of rectal cancer (revised). Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56(5):535-50.
91. Tan WS, Tang CL, Shi L, et al. Meta-analysis of defunctioning stomas in low
anterior resection for rectal cancer. British Journal of Surgery. 2009;96(5):462-72.
92. Constantinides VA, Cheetham D, Nicholls RJ, et al. Is rectal washout effective
for preventing localized recurrence after anterior resection for rectal cancer? Dis
Colon Rectum. 2008;51(9):1339-44.
93. West NP, Finan PJ, Anderin C, et al. Evidence of the oncologic superiority
of cylindrical abdominoperineal excision for low rectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(21):3517-22.
94. Vennix S, Pelzers L, Bouvy N, et al. Laparoscopic versus open total mesorectal
excision for rectal cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;(4):CD005200.
95. Kuhry E, Schwenk WF, Gaupset R, et al. Long-term results of laparoscopic
colorectal cancer resection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;(2):CD003432.
96. Schwenk W, Haase O, Neudecker J, et al. Short term benefits for laparoscopic
colorectal resection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;(3):CD003145. Review
97. Watanabe T, Itabashi M, Shimada Y, et al. Japanese Society for Cancer of the
Colon and Rectum (JSCCR) Guidelines 2014 for treatment of colorectal cancer.
Int J Clin Oncol. 2015;20(2):207-39.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
98. Al-Asfoor A, Fedorowicz Z, Lodge M. Resection versus no intervention or other
surgical interventions for colorectal cancer liver metastases. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2008;(2):CD006039.
99. Tinmouth J, Kennedy E, Baron D, et al. A Quality Initiative of the Program in
Evidence-Based Care (PEBC), Cancer Care Ontario (CCO) Guideline for
Colonoscopy Quality Assurance in Ontario. 1966:21.
100. Adams RB, Aloia TA, Loyer E, et al. Selection for hepatic resection of colorectal
liver metastases: expert consensus statement. HPB (Oxford). 2013;15(2):91-103.
101. van Mierlo KM, Schaap FG, Dejong CH, et al. Liver resection for cancer: New
developments in prediction, prevention and management of postresectional liver
failure. J Hepatol. 2016;65(6):1217-31.
102. Cirocchi R, Trastulli S, Boselli C, et al. Radiofrequency ablation in the treatment
of liver metastases from colorectal cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012;6:CD006317.
103. Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) MDD, Ministry of Health
Malaysia. Selective Internal Radiation Therapy (SIRT) Using Yttrium-90
Microspheres for Hepatocellular Carcinoma. 2016. (Technology Review)
004/2016.
104. Pfannschmidt J, Dienemann H, Hoffmann H. Surgical resection of pulmonary
metastases from colorectal cancer: a systematic review of published series. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2007;84(1):324-38.
105. Dave RV, Pathak S, White AD, et al. Outcome after liver resection in patients
presenting with simultaneous hepatopulmonary colorectal metastases. Br J
Surg. 2015;102(3):261-8.
106. Ansaloni L, Andersson RE, Bazzoli F, et al. Guidelines in the management of
obstructing cancer of the left colon: consensus conference of the world society
of emergency surgery (WSES) and peritoneum and surgery (PnS) society. World
J Emerg Surg. 2010;5:29.
107. Sagar J. Colorectal stents for the management of malignant colonic obstructions.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(11):CD007378.
108. Figueredo A, Coombes ME, Mukherjee S. Adjuvant therapy for completely
resected stage II colon cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;(3):CD005390.
109. André T, Boni C, Navarro M, et al. Improved overall survival with oxaliplatin,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin as adjuvant treatment in stage II or III colon cancer
in the MOSAIC trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(19):3109-16.
110. Kuebler JP, Wieand HS, O'Connell MJ, et al. Oxaliplatin combined with weekly
bolus fluorouracil and leucovorin as surgical adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II
and III colon cancer: results from NSABP C-07. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(16):2198-204.
111. Kerr DJ, Gray R, McConkey C, et al. QUASAR Colorectal Cancer Study Group.
Adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, L-folinic acid and levamisole for
patients with colorectal cancer: non-randomised comparison of weekly versus
four-weekly schedules—less pain, same gain. Ann Oncol. 2000;11(8):947-55.
112. Twelves C, Wong A, Nowacki MP, et al. Capecitabine as adjuvant treatment for
stage III colon cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(26):2696-704.
113. Des Guetz G, Uzzan B, Morere JF, et al. Duration of adjuvant chemotherapy for
patients with non-metastatic colorectal cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2010;(1):CD007046.
114. Gunderson LL, Sosin H. Areas of failure found at reoperation (second or
symptomatic look) following “curative surgery” for adenocarcinoma of the
rectum. Cancer. 1974;34:1278.
115. Rich T, Gunderson LL, Lew R, et al. Patterns of recurrence of rectal cancer after
potentially curative surgery. Cancer. 1983;52(7):1317-29.
116. Mendenhall MW, Million RR, Pfaff WW. Patterns of recurrence in adenocarcinoma
of the rectum and rectosigmoid treated with surgery alone: implications in
treatment planning with adjuvant radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1983;9(7):977-85.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
117. van Gijn W, Marijnen CA, Nagtegaal ID, et al: Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group.
Preoperative radiotherapy combined with total mesorectal excision for resectable
rectal cancer: 12-year follow-up of the multicentre, randomised controlled TME
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(6):575-82.
118. Knijn N, Mogk SC, Teerenstra S, et al. Perineural Invasion is a Strong
Prognostic Factor in Colorectal Cancer: A Systematic Review. Am J Surg Pathol.
2016;40(1):103-12.
119. Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial, Cedermark B, Dahlberg M, et al. Improved survival
with preoperative radiotherapy in resectable rectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
1997;336(14):980-7.
120. Sauer R, Becker H, Hohenberger W, et al. Preoperative versus postoperative
chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(17):1731-40.
121. Breugom AJ, van Gijn W, Muller EW, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for rectal
cancer patients treated with preoperative (chemo) radiotherapy and total
mesorectal excision: a Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group (DCCG) randomized
phase III trial. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(4):696-701.
122. Bosset JF, Calais G, Mineur L, et al. Fluorouracil-based adjuvant chemotherapy
after preoperative chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer: long-term results of the
EORTC 22921 randomised study. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(2):184-90.
123. Gérard JP, Conroy T, Bonnetain F, et al. Preoperative radiotherapy with or
without concurrent fluorouracil and leucovorin in T3-4 rectal cancers: results of
FFCD 9203. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(28):4620-4625-5.
124. Bujko K, Kepka L, Michalski W, et al. Does rectal cancer shrinkage induced by
preoperative radio(chemo)therapy increase the likelihood of anterior resection?
A systematic review of randomised trials. Radiother Oncol. 2006;80(1):4-12.
125. Dosoretz DE, Gunderson LL, Hedberg S, et al. Preoperative irradiation for
unresectable rectal and rectosigmoid carcinomas. Cancer. 1983;52(5):814
126. Emami B, Miller E, Pilepich M, et al. Effect of preoperative irradiation on
resectability of colorectal carcinomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1982;(8):1295
127. Van Cutsem E, Cervantes A, Nordlinger B, et al. Metastatic colorectal cancer:
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann
Oncol. 2014;25 Suppl 3:iii1-9.
128. Palliative chemotherapy for advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer. Colorectal
Meta-analysis Collaboration. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD001545.
129. de Gramont A, Bosset JF, Milan C, et al. Randomized trial comparing monthly
low-dose leucovorin and fluorouracil bolus with bimonthly high-dose leucovorin
and fluorouracil bolus plus continuous infusion for advanced colorectal cancer: a
French intergroup study. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15(2):808-15.
130. Douillard J, Cunningham D, Roth AD, et al. Irinotecan combined with fluorouracil
compared with fluorouracil alone as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer: a multicentre randomised trial. Lancet. 2000;355(9209):1041-7.
131. de Gramont AD, Figer A, Seymour M, et al. Leucovorin and fluorouracil with or
without oxaliplatin as first-line treatment in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2000;18(16):2938-47.
132. Tournigand C, André T, Achille E, et al. FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX6 or the
reverse sequence in advanced colorectal cancer: a randomized GERCOR study.
J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(2):229-37.
133. Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy with
FOLFOX4 and surgery versus surgery alone for resectable liver metastases
from colorectal cancer (EORTC Intergroup trial 40983): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9617):1007-16.
134. Van Cutsem E, Hoff PM, Harper P, et al. Oral capecitabine vs intravenous
5-fluorouracil and leucovorin: integrated efficacy data and novel analyses from
two large, randomised, phase III trials. Br J Cancer. 2004;90(6):1190-97.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
135. Saltz LB, Clarke S, Díaz-Rubio E, et al. Bevacizumab in combination with
oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as first-line therapy in metastatic colorectal
cancer: a randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(12):2013-9.
136. Cassidy J, Twelves C, Van Cutsem E, et al. First-line oral capecitabine therapy
in metastatic colorectal cancer: a favorable safety profile compared with
intravenous 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin. Ann Oncol. 2002;13(4):566-75.
137. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2004;350(23):2335-42
138. Van Cutsem E, Köhne CH, Hitre E et al. Cetuximab and chemotherapy as initial
treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(14):1408-17.
139. Tappenden P, Jones R, Paisley S, et al. Systematic review and economic
evaluation of bevacizumab and cetuximab for the treatment of metastatic
colorectal cancer. Health Technol Assess 2007;11(12):1-128, iii-iv.
140. Goldstein DA, Chen Q, Ayer T, et al. First- and second-line bevacizumab in
addition to chemotherapy for metastatic colorectal cancer: A United States–
based cost-effectiveness analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(10):1112-8.
141. Cameron MG, Kersten C, Vistad I, et al. Palliative pelvic radiotherapy of
symptomatic incurable rectal cancer - a systematic review. Acta Oncol.
2014;53(2):164-73.
142. Meyerhardt JA, Mangu PB, Flynn PJ, et al. Follow-up care, surveillance protocol,
and secondary prevention measures for survivors of colorectal cancer: American
Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline endorsement. J Clin
Oncol. 2013;31(35):4465-70.
143. Meyerhardt JA, Heseltine D, Niedzwiecki D, et al. Impact of physical activity on
cancer recurrence and survival in patients with stage III colon cancer: findings
from CALGB 89803. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(22):3535-41.
144. Rock CL, Doyle C, Demark-Wahnefried W, et al. Nutrition and physical activity
guidelines for cancer survivors. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62(4):243-74.
145. Asano TK, McLeod RS. Non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) and
Aspirin for preventing colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2008;(2):CD004079.
146. Cole BF, Logan RF, Halabi S, et al. Aspirin for the chemoprevention of
colorectal adenomas: meta-analysis of the randomized trials. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2009;101(4):256-66.
147. Rostom A, Dubé C, Lewin G, et al; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors for
primary prevention of colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(5):376-89.
148. Jin H, Leng Q, Li C. Dietary flavonoid for preventing colorectal neoplasms.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;8:CD009350.
149. Weingarten MA, Zalmanovici A, Yaphe J. Dietary calcium supplementation for
preventing colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2010;(1):CD003548.
150. Asano T, McLeod RS. Dietary fibre for the prevention of colorectal adenomas
and carcinomas. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(2):CD003430. Review.
Update in: Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;1:CD003430.
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
1.
COLORECTAL CANCER/
2.
(colorectal or colon* or rect*) adj1 (carcinoma* or tumo?r* or
cancer* or neoplasm*)).tw.
3.
1 or 2
4.
MASS SCREENING/
5.
(screen* adj1 mass).tw.
6.
screen*.tw.
7.
EARLY DETECTION OF CANCER/
8.
(cancer adj2 (early detection or early diagnosis)).tw.
9.
(cancer adj1 (screening or screening test*)).tw.
10. ((early detection or early diagnosis) adj2 cancer).tw.
11. (test* adj2 cancer screening).tw.
12. 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
13. OCCULT BLOOD/
14. (occult adj1 blood).tw.
15. ((Stool or f?ecal or f?eces) adj1 test*).tw.
16. GUAIAC/
17. Guaiac.tw.
18. IMMUNOLOGIC TESTS/
19. (diagnos* adj1 immunologic*).tw.
20. immunodiagnos*.tw.
21. (test* adj1 immunologic*).tw.
22. 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21
23. 3 and 12 and 22
24. limit 23 to (English language and humans and "all adult (19 plus
years)" and last 20 years)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the appropriate age to start screening for CRC in healthy/
general population?
2.
What is the appropriate interval for screening for CRC in healthy/
general population?
3.
What are the effective and safe screening modalities for CRC in
general population and risk group?
4.
Who are at risk of developing CRC and what are the effective
surveillance methods for moderate and high risk groups?
5.
Who should be offered genetic counselling and/or genetic testing
in CRC?
6.
What are the safe and effective imaging techniques in diagnosing
and staging investigations for CRC?
7.
Does inclusion of pathological parameters in histopathological
report important in determining the prognosis of CRC?
8.
Does template proforma increase the rate of inclusion of minimum
criteria needed to ensure completeness of the CRC resection
specimen reporting?
9.
What are the effective and safe pre-operative preparations of
patients with CRC?
10. What are the safe and effective surgical techniques in CRC?
11. What
are
the
safe
and
effective
neoadjuvant/adjuvant
chemoradiotherapy in rectal and colon cancer and its indications?
12. What are the safe and effective chemotherapy in CRC?
13. What are the safe and effective measures to prevent CRC in
general population?
14. What is the optimum strategy for follow up of CRC patients?
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 3
RADIOLOGICAL IMAGES OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMA
Figure 1. Normal anatomy of rectum on MRI. The mesorectal fat has high signal
intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images. The mesorectal fat is surrounded by
the mesorectal fascia, which is seen as a fine line of low signal intensity (arrows).
High resolution T2-images are needed to clearly identify the mesorectal fat. (Source:
Rectal Cancer - MR staging 2.0, available at http://www.radiologyassistant.nl/en/
p56195b237699d/rectal-cancer-mr-staging-20.html)
Figure 2. At initial diagnosis of CRC, sagittal (A) and coronal (B) PET/CT images
indicate increased metabolic activity of malignant primary (arrows); transaxial
CT (C) and PET/CT (D) images indicate synchronous bone and liver metastases
(arrows), leading to change from curative resection to systemic chemotherapy; and
transaxial CT (E) and PET/CT (F) images at another level indicate primary tumour.
(Source: Buck AK, Herrmann K, Stargardt T, et al. Economic evaluation of PET and
PET/CT in oncology: evidence and methodologic approaches. J Nucl Med Technol.
2010;38(1):6-17)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Figure 3. A case of carcinoma rectum post APR, nine months post-surgery with
increasing CEA. (A) MIP image of the PET scan shows a hypermetabolic focus in
the pelvis (arrow) (B) Fused PET/CT image shows FDG-avid pre-sacral mass (arrow)
suspicious for recurrent disease (C) CT image shows a pre-sacral mass. Indeterminate
whether it is benign fibrosis or disease recurrence. Biopsy confirmed recurrence of
adenocarcinoma. (Source: Agrawal A, Rangarajan V. Appropriateness criteria of FDG
PET/CT in oncology. Indian J Radiol Imaging. 2015;25(2):88.)
Figure 4. Solitary 16 mm pedunculated caecal polyp in a 55-year-old man at average risk
for colorectal neoplasia. Panel A shows a schematic map of the air-filled colon generated
from the computed tomographic (CT) scan obtained with the patient in the prone position.
The green line is the center line that is automatically generated for virtual navigation; the
red dot is a “bookmark” indicating the location of the polyp within the caecum. Panel
B, a 3D view from the endoluminal “fly-through” generated from the same CT scan,
shows the caecal polyp (P) and the appendiceal orifice (arrow) in the background.
This display was used for the primary detection of polyps. Panel C is an axial, twodimensional CT image obtained with the patient in the prone position; it shows the polyp
(arrow) on a stalk within the air-filled caecum. The residual luminal fluid is opacified by
oral contrast agent, which enables the software program to “cleanse” the 3D image.
This 2D display was used for the confirmation of suspected findings on the 3D view.
Panel D is a digital photograph from optical colonoscopy performed immediately after CT
virtual colonoscopy; it shows the caecal polyp (P) and the appendiceal orifice (arrow).
Histologic examination revealed that the polyp was adenomatous. (Source: Pickhardt
PJ, Choi JR, Hwang I, et al. Computed tomographic virtual colonoscopy to screen for
colorectal neoplasia in asymptomatic adults. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(23):2191-200)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 4
WHO CLASSIFICATION OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMA 2010 AND
TNM CLASSIFICATION OF TUMOURS OF THE
COLON AND RECTUM (7TH EDITION)
Source: Edge SB, Compton CC. The American Joint Committee on Cancer: the 7th
edition of the AJCC cancer staging manual and the future of TNM. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2010;17(6):1471-4.
WHO Classification of Colorectal Carcinoma 201072
•
Adenocarcinoma
o
Cribriform comedo-type adenocarcinoma
o
Medullary carcinoma
o
Micropapillary carcinoma
o
Mucinous adenocarcicoma
o
Serrated adenocarcinoma
o
Signet ring cell carcinoma
•
Adenosquamous carcinoma
•
Spindle cell carcinoma
•
Squamous cell carcinoma
•
Undifferentiated carcinoma
TNM Classification of Tumours of the Colon and Rectum (7th Edition)
T - Primary tumour
M - Distant metastasis
TX
Primary tumour cannot be assessed
M0
No distant metastasis
T0
No evidence of primary tumour
M1
Distant metastasis
Tis
Carcinoma in situ: intraepithelial or invasion
of lamina propria
M1a
Metastasis confined to one organ
M1b
Metastasis in more than one organ or
T1
Tumour invades submucosa
the peritoneum
T2
Tumour invades muscularis propria
T3
Tumour invades subserosa or into nonperitonealized pericolic or perirectal tissues
Stage Grouping
T4
Tumour perforates visceral peritoneum
and/or directly invades other organs or
structures
Stage
T
N
M
Stage 0
Tis
N0
M0
Stage I
T1, T2
N0
M0
Stage II
T3, T4
N0
M0
Stage IIA
T3
N0
M0
N - Regional lymph nodes
Stage IIB
T4a
N0
M0
NX
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
Stage IIC
T4b
N0
M0
Stage III
Any T
N1, N2
M0
Stage IIIA
T1, T2
N1
M0
T1
N2a
M0
Stage IIIB
T3, T4a
N1
M0
T2, T3
N2a
M0
T1, T2
N2b
M0
Stage IIIC
T4a
N2a
M0
T3, T4a
N2b
M0
T4b
N1, N2
M0
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Any T
Any T
Any N
Any N
M1a
M1b
T4a
Tumour perforates visceral peritoneum
T4b
Tumour directly invades other organ or
structures
N0
No regional lymph-node metastasis
N1
Metastasis in 1 to 3 regional lymph nodes
N1a
Metastasis in 1 regional lymph node
N1b
Metastasis in 2 to 3 regional lymph nodes
N1c
Tumour deposit (s), i.e. satellites, in the
subserosa, or in non-peritonealized pericolic
or perirectal soft tissue without regional
lymph-node metastasis
N2
N2a
Metastasis in 4 or more regional lymph
nodes
Metastasis in 4 to 6 regional lymph nodes
N2b
Metastasis in 7 or more regional lymph
nodes
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 5
HISTOPATHOLOGY PROFORMA FOR COLORECTAL CARCINOMA
PERKHIDMATAN PATOLOGI
HOSPITAL ___________________________________
COLORECTAL CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY WORKSHEET
Name:
HPE No:
Specimen container labelled as:
1.
GROSS DESCRIPTION
1.1 Type of specimen:
Total colectomy
Subtotal colectomy
Right hemicolectomy
Anterior resection (AR)
Left hemicolectomy
Hartman's procedure
Sigmoid colectomy
Abdominoperineal excision (APE)
Other (specify): …..................
1.2 Bowel length:
1.3 Site of tumour:
Caecum
Asc. colon
Hepatic
flexure
Transv.
colon
Splenic
flexure
Desc. colon
Sigmoid
colon
Rectosigmoid
Rectum
Other comment(s):
1.4 Maximum tumour diameter:
1.5 Gross subtype (optional):
Fungating
Ulcerative
Infiltrative
Ulcero-fungating
1.6 Margins: - Tumour to proximal / nearer (if untagged) longitudinal margin: …………... mm.
-
Tumour to distal / opposite (if untagged) longitudinal margin: ……………. mm.
1.7 Tumour perforation (pT4):
No
Yes
1.8 For rectal tumour:
•
Relation to peritoneal reflection:
above
astride
below
•
Plane of surgical excision (Total mesorectal excision (TME) for AR and APE):
Mesorectal fascia (Complete)
Intramesorectal (Partially Complete)
Muscularis propria (Incomplete)
•
Distance from dentate line (APE specimens): ………………… mm
•
Plane of resection of the sphincters (APE specimens):
Extralevator
Sphincteric
Intrasphincteric
1.9 Polyps:
No
Yes (specify number, site, sessile or pedunculated)
1.10 No. of lymph nodes retrieved: …………. (...….. mm to ……... mm in diameter).
1.11 Additional comments:
1.12 Tissue sampling:
Grossed by:
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
2. HISTOLOGY
2.1 Microscopic description:
2.2 Type:
Adenocarcinoma (NOS/usual-type);
wellmod-
poorly-differentiated
Other (specify e.g. mucinous): _____________________
2.3 Additional features (optional/non-core data items):
• Lymphatic invasion
No
Yes
• Perineural invasion
No
Yes
• Leading edge of tumour
Expansile
Infiltrative
Mixed
• Extracellular mucin (>10% but <50%)*
No
Yes
• Intratumoural lymphocytic infiltrate**
None
Yes: (Mild / Marked)
• Peritumoural lymphoid aggregates***
None
Yes: (Mild / Marked)
Note (guide for pathologist; not included in final report):
*Not applicable if tumour is mucinous carcinoma
**Tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes: Mild: 3-15/h.p.f (40x)
Marked: >15/h.p.f (40x)
***Peritumoural lymphoid aggregates: Mild: Occasional lymphoid aggregates
Marked: 2 aggregates with germinal centers per tissue section
2.4 Local invasion (TNM 7th edition)
Submucosa (pT1)
Muscularis propria (pT2)
Beyond muscularis propria (pT3)
Tumour penetrates the visceral peritoneal surface (pT4a)
Tumour directly invades or is adherent to other organs/structures (pT4b)
Minimal or no regression (extensive residual tumour)
2.5 Maximum distance of spread beyond muscularis propria (NA if intramural tumour): ………… mm
2.6 Response to pre-operative (neoadjuvant) therapy:
Not applicable (pre-op therapy not given/not known to be given)
No viable tumour cells (fibrosis or mucus lakes only)
(Entire tumour site and/or scarred area had been submitted for histology)
Single cells or scattered small groups of cancer cells
Residual cancer outgrown by fibrosis
2.7 Tumour involvement of margins:
• Proximal doughnut
No
Yes
NA
NS
• Distal doughnut
No
Yes
NA
NS
• Proximal / Nearer longitudinal margin
No (………mm)
Yes
• Distal / Opposite longitudinal margin
No (………mm)
Yes
• Circumferential margin
No (………mm)
Yes
NA
Note: Circumferential margin of 1 mm is considered involved
NS – Not submitted by pathologist
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
2.8 Metastatic spread:
No. of lymph nodes identified: ……………
• No. of involved lymph nodes: …………..... (pN …………. )
[pN1a: 1 node; pN1b: 2-3 nodes; pN2a: 4-6 nodes; pN2b: 7+ nodes involved]
• Highest
node involved:
No
Yes (Dukes C2)
• Tumour deposits
No
Yes (No: ……..)
[pN1c: Tumour deposits in subserosa/mesentery/pericolic/perirectal tissues without nodal metastasis]
• Biopsy-confirmed distant metastasis
NA
No
Yes - Site(s)
[pM1a: Single site; pM1b: Multiple sites or peritoneal surface]
2.9 Deepest level of venous invasion:
None
Submucosal
Intramural
Extramural
2.10 Separate abnormalities:
No
Yes : - Polyps (types(s), number, size) / polyposis (specify type) / UC / CD/ Diverticulosis
- Synchronous carcinoma (separate proforma for each carcinoma)
2.11 Complete resection (by >1 mm) at all surgical margins:
Yes (R0)
No (R1 - microscopic margin involvement)
No (R2 - macroscopic margin involvement)
2.12 TNM (7th Edition 2009): pT…… pN…….. pM……..
OR
ypT…… ypN…….. ypM……..
Note: 1. pMX does not exist
2. pM0 does not exist (except at autopsy)
3. pM1: Distant metastasis proven microscopically (if suspected metastatic site is negative on biopsy, then it becomes cM0 and NOT pM0)
For Malaysian National Cancer Patient Registry - Colorectal Cancer:
- TNM (5th Edition):
pT…… pN…….. pM……..
OR ypT…… ypN…….. ypM……..
2.13 Modified Dukes stage:
A (Growth limited to wall/muscularis propria, nodes negative)
B (Growth beyond muscularis propria, nodes negative)
C1 (Nodes positive, highest node negative)
C2 (Highest node positive)
D (Histology-proven distant metastasis)
NA (No tumour or no lymph nodes identified)
2.14 Mismatch repair (MMR) immunohistochemistry (if applicable/available)
Not performed
Performed:
MLH 1:
Normal
Equivocal
Loss of protein expression
MLH 2:
Normal
Equivocal
Loss of protein expression
MLH 6:
Normal
Equivocal
Loss of protein expression
PMS 2:
Normal
Equivocal
Loss of protein expression
3. DIAGNOSTIC SUMMARY
(Tumour type, differentiation, staging, margins and if present, venous invasion)
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 6
CHEMOTHERAPY DRUGS AND COMMON/IMPORTANT SIDE EFFECTS
Sources:
• Xeloda® (capecitabine) [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Hoffman-La Roche, Inc; 2015.
• Micromedex Solutions, Truven Health Analytics Inc. MIMS Gateway Service Portal (Available at http://www.mimsgateway.com/Malaysia/Online.as)
• Camptosar ® (irinotecan) [package insert]. New York, NY: Pfizer Inc; 2014.
• Eloxatin ® (oxaliplatin) [package insert]. Bridgewater, NJ: Sanofi-Aventis U.S. LLC; 2011.
• Ministry of Health & Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia. Systemic Therapy Protocol. Putrajaya: MoH & MoHE; 2016
Hand-foot syndrome=the palms of the hands and soles of the feet become dry, red, numb, tingling, with/without swelling, blistering, moist desquamation
or pain
Medication
Common and important side effects
Comments
Capecitabine
• Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, mucositis, abdominal pain
• Hand-foot syndrome
• Fatigue/weakness
• Hyperbilirubinaemia
• Cardiotoxicity - uncommon but can be fatal
• Use cautiously in patients with history of heart disease
• Dose reduction is required in patients with moderate renal
dysfunction
• Monitor for hand-foot syndrome
Fluorouracil (5-FU)
• Gastrointestinal (diarrhoea, stomatitis, oesophagitis, heart burn)
• Blood (anaemia, thrombocytopaenia, neutropaenia)
• Cardiovascular (angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, acute
pulmonary oedema)
• Dermatological (alopecia, dermatitis, hand-foot syndrome)
• Prophylactic anti-emetics and corticosteroids should be given
• Use cautiously in patients with history of heart disease
• Monitor for hand-foot syndrome
Irinotecan
• Gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, anorexia,
mucositis)
• Blood (anaemia, thrombocytopaenia, neutropaenia)
•
Fatigue/weakness
• Prophylactic anti-emetics for moderate emetic risk should be given
• In early onset diarrhoea and cholinergic symptoms, subcutaneous
atropine can be used (prophylactic atropine is required in
subsequent cycles)
Leucovorin (LV)/calcium
folinate/folinic acid
• Allergic reaction, rash, pruritus, erythema, urticarial, nausea, vomiting, pyrexia
Oxaliplatin
• Gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, mucositis, diarrhoea, hiccup)
• Blood (anaemia, thrombocytopaenia, neutropaenia)
• Peripheral sensory neuropathy
• Pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia (difficulty in breathing or swallowing seen shortly
after drug infusion)
• Liver (increase in transaminases, alkaline phosphatase)
• Allergic reaction
• Prophylactic anti-emetics for moderate emetic risk should be given
• Allergic reactions: Monitor for development of rash, urticaria,
erythema, pruritis, bronchospasm and hypotension
• Neuropathy: Reduce the dose or discontinue if necessary
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
Appendix 7
POTENTIAL INDICATIONS FOR POST-OPERATIVE CCRT IF
PRE-OPERATIVE CCRT NOT GIVEN
CRM=circumferential
resection
margin;
LPLN=lateral
pelvic
lymph
node;
MRF=mesorectal fascia
Source: Glynne-Jones R, Wyrwicz L, Tiret E, et al. Rectal cancer: ESMO Clinical
Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol.
2017;28(suppl_4):iv22-iv40.
Sufficient
• CRM ≤1 mm
• pT4b
• pN2 extracapsular spread close to MRF
• Extranodal deposits (N1c)
• pN2 if poor mesorectal quality/defects
• pN2 low tumours within 4 cm of anal verge
(risk of involved LPLN)
• Extensive extramural vascular
invasion/perineural invasion close to MRF
• pN2 low tumours within 4 cm of anal verge
(risk of involved LPLN)
• CRM 1-2 mm
• Circumferential obstructing tumours
Borderline sufficient
• pT1/pT2
• pT3
• CRM >2 mm
• pT4a above peritoneal reflection
• pN1
• If good quality smooth intact mesorectum
Insufficient and
unnecessary
Sufficient and necessary
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
APR
abdominoperineal resection
ASA
acetylsalicylic acid
AUC
area under the curve
BE
barium enema
CEA
carcinoembryonic antigen
CC
conventional colonoscopy
CCE
colon capsule endoscopy
CCRT
concurrent chemoradiotherapy
CI
confidence interval
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CRC
colorectal carcinoma
CRM
circumferential resection margins
CRLMs
colorectal liver metastases
CT
computed tomography
CTC
computed tomographic colonoscopy
DFS
disease-free survival
DG
Development Group
DRM
distal resection margin
EGFR
epidermal growth factor receptor
FAP
familial adenomatous polyposis
FDG PET/CT
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography CT
FDR
first-degree relatives
FRR
familial relative risk
Gd-EOB-DTPA
gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
Gy
gray
HNPCC
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer
HPE
histopathological examination
HR
hazard ratio
HTA
health technology assessment
IBD
inflammatory bowel disease
iFOBT/IFOBT
immunofaecal occult blood test
IHC
immunohistochemistry
LV
leucovorin
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
MAP
MUTYH-associated polyposis
mCRC
metastatic colorectal carcinoma
MoH
Ministry of Health
MMR
mismatch repair
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NSAIDs
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NICE
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
OR
odds ratio
OS
overall survival
PFS
progression-free survival
RC
Review Committee
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RFA
radiofrequency ablation
RR
relative risk
RRR
relative risk ratio
RT
radiotherapy
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Dr. Noor Aishah Mohd Yussof, Medical Officer
• Mr. Mohd. Tholib Ibrahim, Information Specialist of MaHTAS
• Ms. Noormah Darus, Pharmacist of MaHTAS
• Dr. Umarani Ann Ranjini A/P Sivarajan, Clinical Radiologist
• Dr. Vaishnavi A/P Jayasingam, Clinical Oncologist, Hospital
Kuala Lumpur
• Dr. Prabhu Ramasamy, General & Colorectal Surgeon, LohGuanLye
Specialists Centre, Pulau Pinang
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Colorectal Carcinoma
was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH and the printing of
the CPG is sponsored by the Malaysian Society of Colorectal Surgeons,
Malaysian Oncological Society and Digestive Health Malaysia.
SDR
second-degree relatives
SIGN
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
TDR
third-degree relatives
TME
total mesorectal excision
TNM
Tumour-Node-Metastasis
UC
ulcerative colitis
VC
virtual colonoscopy
vs
versus
VTE
venous thromboembolism
WHO
World Health Organization
5-FU
fluorouracil
Management of Colorectal Carcinoma