STATEMENT OF INTENT
This guideline was developed to be a guide for best clinical practice in the
management of cardiovascular diseases in women, based on the best
available evidence at the time of development. Specific attempts were made
to use local data and publications to ensure local relevance. Adherence to this
guideline does not necessarily lead to the best clinical outcome in individual
patient care. Every health care provider is responsible for the management of
his/her unique patient based on the clinical presentation and management
options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINE
This guideline is issued in 2016 and will be reviewed in 2021 or earlier if
important new evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Level 4, Block EI, Parcel E
Government Offices Complex
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
This is an update to the Clinical Practice Guidelines on Prevention of Heart
Disease in Women published in 2008. This CPG supersedes the previous
CPG.
FOREWORD BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE
MINISTRY OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
2
Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah
Director-General of Health Malaysia
Cardiovascular disease, till this day, remains the primary cause
of mortality globally. Although it affects both genders, a greater
emphasis appears to be placed on male patients, who appear
to develop the disease at an earlier age compared to females.
However, it is also known the incidence of cardiovascular
disease in females rapidly rises to match males after
menopause. From the National Cardiovascular Disease
Registry in Malaysia (2011-2013), it was demonstrated that
female patients had a higher in-hospital and 30-day mortality
for acute coronary syndrome compared to male patients.
Such statistics demand a greater focus being placed, not only on the diagnosis and
treatment, but critically on the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women in our
country.
Malaysia has a rising prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in the population.
Diabetes, hypertension and dyslipidaemia afflict both gender groups. Coupled with
smoking and other non-communicable cardiovascular risk factors, it is important to place
equal emphasis on both gender groups in the effort to prevent cardiovascular disease.
The Ministry of Health is committed towards reducing the rates of non-communicable
diseases, including those leading to cardiovascular disease, and these Guidelines form
an important reference point to all stakeholders.
The advent of newer diagnostic and therapeutic strategies has also provided the
opportunity to improve prevention of cardiovascular disease, including in women.
Techniques such as multislice computed tomography of the coronary arteries and
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging provide the clinician greater options for disease
detection, yet each has its limitations. Contemporary strategies such as these will
enhance the capacity of the clinician to improve both primary and secondary prevention
of cardiovascular disease, augmenting established strategies such as the exercise
stress test. Research in cardiovascular medicine has accelerated in recent years, and
with such a rapidly expanding evidence base, these updated Guidelines are timely.
I am therefore grateful to the writing committee chaired by Tan Sri Dato’ Seri Robaayah,
who has no doubt put countless hours into the preparation of this Clinical Practice
Guidelines, which is now in its second edition. While publication becomes a useful
companion for clinicians, I hope it inspires more women to the field of cardiovascular
medicine.
3
Dr Mohd Rahal Yusoﬀ
Secretary
Dr Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Dr Robaayah Zambahari
Senior Consultant Cardiologist
Institut Jantung Negara, KL
Consultant Cardiologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr Chan Siew Pheng
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr Emily Tan
Lay Koon
Consultant Cardiologist
Institut Jantung Negara, KL
Dr Nor Hanim Mohd Amin
Consultant Cardiologist
Sarawak Heart Centre
Physician
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Dr Ong Mei Lin
Consultant Cardiologist
Gleneagles Penang
Dr Santha Kumari
Senior Consultant Physician
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Selangor
Dr Sim Kui Hian
Visiting Senior Consultant Cardiologist
Sarawak Heart Centre
Dr Zanariah Hussein
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Wilayah Persekutuan Putrajaya
Chairperson
Expert Panel Members (in alphabetical order)
MEMBERS OF THE EXPERT PANEL
External Reviewers (in aplhabetical order):
Consultant Family Physician
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr Chia Yook Chin
Dr Faridah Abu Bakar
Senior Consultant Physician
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Ipoh, Perak
Dr G R Letchuman Ramanathan
Dr Nazrila Hairizan Nazir
Dr J Ravichandran R Jeganathan
Dr Rotina Abu Bakar
General Physician
Borneo Medical Centre, Kuching,
Sarawak
Dr Wong Jin Shan
Deputy Director
Family Health Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Precinct 9 Health Clinic
Putrajaya
Consultant Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Johor Bahru
Public Health Physician
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Disease Control Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Ms Jagdish Bhain
Facilitator/ Trainer
Hallmark Access
Ms Mary Easaw
Chief Dietitian
Institut Jantung Negara
Kuala Lumpur
Puan Che Zuraini Sulaiman
Chief Pharmacist
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
International Reviewers
“Let me congratulate you and your colleagues both on the initial Clinical Practice
Guideline and on undertaking a very ambitious and extensive revision. This is a scholarly
document, well referenced, and a major strength is the inclusion of Malaysian data –
highly relevant to the clinical practice in your country as it derives from your population.”
Nanette K. Wenger, MD, MACC, MACP, FAHA
Professor of Medicine (Cardiology) Emeritus
Emory University School of Medicine
Consultant, Emory Heart and Vascular Center
6
SUMMARY
•
Cardiovascular disease (CVD), heart disease and strokes, is the main
cause of death among women in Malaysia. It is 2 ½ times more common
as a cause of death than all cancers combined.
•
The pathophysiological mechanisms contributing to myocardial ischemia
in women are varied and maybe multiple. Women with angina may have:
 Atherosclerotic obstructive Coronary Heart Disease (CHD)-
(coronary lesions > 50% luminal narrowing)
 Non-obstructive CHD (≥ 20% and < 50% luminal narrowing). The
prognosis of these patients is not benign. It is worse if myocardial
ischemia is documented.
 Normal coronary arteries (Cardiac Syndrome X) - (< 20% luminal
narrowing)
•
Other unique gender specific cardiac issues include:
 Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy
 Spontaneous coronary artery dissections
•
Presenting symptoms for CHD and stroke in women may be both typical
and sometimes atypical.
•
Prognosis for women following a myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke is
poorer than in men.
•
Other diseases that are associated with increased cardiovascular (CV)
risk in women include:
 connective tissue diseases (especially rheumatoid arthritis, systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic vasculitis) and the drugs
that are used to treat these diseases
 chemotherapy and radiation induced cardio toxicity
 infections such as influenza, periodontal disease and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
 obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
•
Increased awareness, early detection with appropriate investigations and
management is important.
•
All women above the age of 40 years should know their CVD risk.
•
Assessment of CVD risk involves:
 History: Looking for symptoms suggestive of CHD or CHD
Equivalents, family history of premature CHD, smoking status,
physical activity
 Physical Examination: Height, weight, body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference, pulses, blood pressure (BP)
 Investigations: Blood glucose, lipid profile
•
Risk Classification helps to identify High Risk women and to guide
intensity of risk reduction efforts and the need for pharmacotherapy.
Women may be classified according to their CVD risk (Table 1, pg 8) as:
 High Risk
 At Risk
 Optimal Risk
•
Risk classification can also be done using the The Framingham Risk
Score (FRS) in Table 2 (pg 9 & 10). The AHA/ACC pooled Risk
Equations may also be used although in 2 retrospective studies, the
FRS was a better estimate of CV risk in our local population. The 2013
ACC/AHA Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD) Risk
calculator (Table 3, pg 11) is also available at www.cvriskcalculator.com.
•
Prevention of CVD involves a healthy lifestyle and risk factor reduction –
the targets of risk factor reduction will depend on the individual’s CVD
risk. (Tables 4 & 5, pg 12 & 14)
 High Risk: Intensive risk factor reduction with lifestyle and
pharmacological measures to achieve target levels.
 At Risk: Non pharmacological intervention with diet and physical
activity. If targets not achieved, pharmacological therapy is indicated.
 Optimal Risk: Continue with healthy lifestyle measures
•
To ensure compliance to the guidelines, periodic audit of simple
parameters should be done. Suggested audit parameters are
documentation in the medical records of the individual’s:
 CVD risk
 Height, weight, waist circumference and BMI and the desirable
values.
 BP
 Lipid values
 Fasting glucose and glycated haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels
•
The Audit of Clinical Diabetes (Green Book) by the Unit Penyakit
Kardiovaskular dan Diabetes may be used as a guide.
Table 1: Classification of CVD Risk in Women*
High
Risk
Established CHD and/or CHD Equivalents which are :
•
Cerebrovascular disease
•
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)
•
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
•
Diabetes mellitus (DM)
•
End stage or chronic kidney disease
•
Multiple risk factors that confer a 10 year CVD risk of
> 20%
using FRS
(Table 2, pg 9 & 10)
At
Risk
1 major risk factor for CVD including:
•
Family history of premature CVD (CVD at age < 55 years
in male relative and < 65 years in female relative)
•
Total cholesterol
≥ 5.2 mmol/L, HDL-C < 1.2 mmol/l, or
treated for dyslipidaemia
•
Systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≥ 120 mmHg, diastolic blood
pressure (DBP) ≥ 80 mmHg, or treated hypertension
•
Cigarette smoking
•
Physical inactivity
•
Obesity especially central obesity
•
Metabolic syndrome
•
Evidence of advanced subclinical atherosclerosis
(e.g. coronary calciﬁcation, carotid plaque, or thickened
Intima Medial Thickness (IMT))
•
History of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, or
pregnancy-induced hypertension
•
Systemic autoimmune collagen-vascular disease (e.g.
lupus or rheumatoid arthritis)
Optimal
Risk
10 year CVD risk of < 10% using FRS. Having a healthy lifestyle with
no risk factors
•
Total cholesterol (TC) < 5.2 mmol/L (untreated)
•
BP < 120/< 80 mmHg (untreated)
•
Fasting blood glucose <6.1 mmol/L (untreated)
•
BMI < 23 kg/m2
•
Abstinence from smoking
•
Physical activity at goal for adults > 20 years of age:

≥ 150 min/week moderate intensity,

≥ 75 min/week vigorous intensity, or combination
*Adapted from the Effectiveness-Based Guidelines for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in
Women-2011 Update A Guideline From the American Heart Association
9
Table 2: Framingham Risk Score for Asessment of CVD Risk*
Points
Age,y
HDL-C
TC
SBP (not
treated)
SBP
(treated)
Smoker
Diabetes
-3
<120
-2
1.6+
-1
1.3-1.6
<120
0
30-34
1.2-<1.3
<4.2
120-129
No
No
1
0.9-<1.2
4.2-<5.2
130-139
2
35-39
<0.9
140-149
120-129
3
5.2-<6.3
130-139
Yes
4
40-44
6.3-<7.4
150-159
Yes
5
45-49
>7.4
160+
140-149
6
150-159
7
50-54
160+
8
55-59
9
60-64
10
65-69
11
70-74
12
75+
Points
allotted
Table 2A: CVD Points for Women
Grand Total: ______________ points
* D'Agostino RB Sr, Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, Wolf PA, Cobain M, Massaro JM, Kannel WB.General
cardiovascular risk profile for use in primary care: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation.
2008;117(6):743.
Table 2B: CVD Risk for Women*
Total Points
10 year Risk %
Total Points
10 year Risk %
< -2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
< 1
1.0
1.2
1.5
1.7
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.3
3.9
4.5
5.3
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21+
6.3
7.3
8.6
10.0
11.7
13.7
15.9
18.5
21.5
24.8
28.5
> 30
Points
Heart age, y
< 1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15+
<30
31
34
36
39
42
45
48
51
55
59
64
68
73
79
> 80
Table 2C: Heart Age/ Vascular Age for Women*
To determine a women’s 10 year CVD risk, calculate in order:
• Grand Total CVD points (Table 2A)
• 10 year Risk of CVD (Table 2B)
• Heart Age/ Vascular Age for Women (Table 2C)
*D'Agostino RB Sr, Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, Wolf PA, Cobain M, Massaro JM, Kannel WB.General
cardiovascular risk profile for use in primary care: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation.
2008;117(6):743.
Table 3: 2013 ACC/AHA Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Calculator
Risk Factor
Units
Patient’s
Value
Acceptable
range of
values
Optimal
Values
Sex
M(males) or F(females)
M or F
Age
years
20-79
Race
AA(African Americans)
WH(Whites and others)
AA or WH
Total Cholesterol
mg/dL
130-320
170
HDL cholesterol
mg/dL
20-100
50
Systolic BP
mmHg
90-200
110
Treatment for BP
Y (Yes);
N (For No)
Y or N
N
Diabetes
Y (Yes);
N (For No)
Y (Yes);
N (For No)
N
Smoker
Y (Yes);
N (For No)
Y (Yes);
N (For No)
N
The 2013 ACC/AHA Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD) Risk calculator is available at
www.cvriskcalculator.com. It gives the 10 year risk of developing ASCVD (non fatal MI, cardiac death, fatal
and non fatal stroke) as well as the lifetime risk of developing ASCVD of an individual at age 50 years
with the same risk factors.
Table 4: General Recommendations for Prevention of CVD in Women
Recommendations
Grade of
Recommendation/
Level of Evidence
• Know one’s daily calorie requirements.
• Home cooked meals are preferable.
• Diet should encompass all food groups.
Eat more fruits, vegetables, whole grain
cereals and bread, fish especially oily fish
rich in omega-3 fatty acids (such as ikan
tenggiri, carp), lean meat, nuts and
legumes, low fat milk and cheese, skinless
poultry, non-tropical vegetable oils.
• A high fiber diet: 20-30 gm/day
• Eat more complex carbohydrates-whole
grains, peas, beans, lentils. Whole grains
should form 50% of total grain intake.
• Naturally occurring sugars are preferred.
Avoid sweets and sucrose -sweetened
beverages.
• Reduce daily salt intake to approximately
1-1¼ teaspoon salt.
• Replace saturated and trans-fats with
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated
fats.
Nutrition
Physical
Activity
• Exercise for at least 30 - 45 minutes, 5
times a week. Women who need to lose
weight or sustain weight loss should
exercise more.
Weight
maintenance
/reduction
• Ideal BMI for Asian women is 18.5 -
< 23 kg/m2 and ideal waist circumference
is ≤ 80 cm (31.5 inches).
 Assess BMI and waist circumference
at each visit.
 Encourage a weight reduction of 0.5 -
1 kg/week in the overweight and
obese. The initial goal should be
to reduce body weight to < 10% of
baseline within 6 months.
I, B
I, B
I, C
I, B
I, B
I, A
I, A
* CHA2DS2-VASc score: Table 15, pg 86
** Novel Oral Anti-Coagulants: dabigratan, rivaroxaban, apixaban. These agents do not require
monitoring of INR but the antidote for reversal may become available locally in future.
I, A
I, B
IIa, C
IIa, B
I, B
Cigarette
Smoking
• Women should abstain/stop smoking
Drug Therapy
Aspirin (75100mg daily)
• For secondary prevention
• For primary prevention, aspirin use
should be individualized weighing the
benefit versus the risk of bleeding
Anticoagulation for
Atrial
Fibrillation
(AF)
• Non valvular AF and CHA2DS2-VASC
score*:
 ≥ 2 - anticoagulate with
 warfarin or
 Novel Oral Anti-Coagulants (NOAC)**
 1 - consideration for anticoagulation
should be individualized (either no
anti thrombotics, oral anticoagulants
or aspirin alone)
• < 65 years of age with lone AF and those
with CHA2DS2-VASc of 0, anti thrombotics
may be omitted
• Valvular AF: anticoagulate with warfain
to maintain INR 2.0-3.0
Recommendations
Grade of
Recommendation/
Level of Evidence
Table 5: Targets of Treatment of Specific Risk Factors
* Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed 2013. Available at www.acadmed.com.my
** Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, 5th Ed 2015. Available at www.acadmed.org.my
***Glycaemic target should be individualised depending on the patient’s profile to minimise risk of hypoglycaemia
Grade of
Recommendation/
Level of Evidence
Targets of Speciﬁc Risk Factors
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C): This
should be the target of therapy.
Treatment targets will depend on a woman’s CVD
Risk Classification (Table 1, pg 8):
High Risk: Patients with established CHD or CHD
Equivalents
LDL-C Goal:
< 2.6 mmol/L (the lower the better)
(or a reduction of at least 50% if the baseline
LDL-C is between 2.6-5.1 mmol/L)
< 1.8 mmol/L in diabetics with CVD
(or a reduction of at least 50% if the baseline
LDL-C is between 1.8 and 3.5 mmol/L)
At Risk & Optimal Risk < 3.0 mmol/L
< 140/90 mmHg in most women < 80 years
of age
< 150/90 mmHg in most women > 80 years
of age
In the presence of the following co-morbidity,
target BP should be:
 renal impairment (CKD): < 140/90 mmHg
 secondary prevention of lacunar stroke:
< 130/80 mmHg
Pre-prandial blood sugar or fasting: 4.4 – 7.0
mmol/L***
Post prandial blood sugar (90 mins after a
meal): 4.4 – 8.5 mmol/L***
HbA1c: ≤ 6.5%***
Blood Pressure: ≤ 135/75 mmHg
LDL-cholesterol:
< 2.6 mmol/L (the lower the better)
< 1.8 mmol/L in diabetics with CVD
HDL-cholesterol: > 1.2 mmol/L
Triglycerides: < 1.7 mmol/L
Dyslipidemia
Blood
Pressure*
Diabetes **
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, A
 proteinuria of < 1 g/24 hr: < 140/90 mmHg
I, A
 proteinuria of > 1 g/24 hr: < 130/80 mmHg
I, A
 post MI and heart failure: < 130/80 mmHg
I, C
IIa, B
I, C
I, C
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, B
-
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINE
DEVELOPMENT
Rationale:
CVD is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in Malaysian women.
Unfortunately many women and most healthcare professionals have the
misconception that CVD is not a woman’s disease and that it is a disease that
only affects men.
This Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on the Prevention of Cardiovascular
Disease in Women is the second edition. The first edition was published in
2008. This CPG has been drawn up by a committee appointed by the
National Heart Association of Malaysia, Ministry of Health and the Academy
of Medicine. It comprises of cardiologists, endocrinologists and general
physicians from the government and private sectors and the Universities.
Objectives:
The objectives of these guidelines is to:
• Increase awareness regarding cardiovascular disease in women among
healthcare providers
• Improve the detection and management of women with cardiovascular
disease
• Update healthcare providers on women’s cardiovascular health
• Develop a preventive strategy for cardiovascular disease in women
Process:
The previous CPG published in 2008 was used as a base. In addition to the
previous clinical questions that needed to be updated, the Expert Panel
formulated new questions that needed to be addressed. These clinical
questions were then divided into sections and each member was assigned
one or more topics.
A review of current medical literature on Cardiovascular Disease in Women
and Women’s Heart Health from 2008 (the date of the last CPG) till 30th
August 2015 was performed. Literature search was carried out using the
following electronic databases – PubMed and Cochrane Database of
Systemic Reviews.
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or in
combination:
“Cardiovascular disease in women”, “Heart disease in women”, “Myocardial
infarction in women”, “Coronary heart disease in women”, “Stroke in women”,
“Hypertension in women”, “Dyslipidaemia in women”, “Combined oral
contraceptives”, “Hormone replacement therapy”.
The search was filtered to clinical trials and reviews, involving humans and
published in the English language. The relevant articles were carefully
selected from this huge list. In addition, the reference lists of all relevant
articles retrieved were searched to identify further studies. Experts in the field
were also contacted to obtain further information. International guidelines -
the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC)
and European Society of Cardiology - were also studied. All literature
retrieved were appraised by members of the Expert Panel and all statements
and recommendations made were collectively agreed by the group. The
grading of evidence and the level of recommendation used in this CPG was
adapted from the AHA/ACC and the European Society of Cardiology (pg. 18).
After much discussion, the draft was then drawn up and submitted to the
Technical Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines, Ministry of
Health Malaysia and key health personnel in the major hospitals of the
Ministry of Health and the private sector for review and feedback.
Clinical Questions Addressed:
Are there gender specific differences in the;
•
epidemiology of cardiovascular disease?
•
risk factors for cardiovascular disease?
•
clinical presentation of cardiovascular disease (ie heart disease and
strokes) resulting in diagnostic difficulties?
•
management of women with cardiovascular disease (ie heart disease
and strokes)?
•
prevention (both primary and secondary) of cardiovascular disease?
Target Group:
These guideline are directed at all healthcare providers treating women –
general practitioners, general and family physicians, cardiologists,
endocrinologists and gynaecologists.
Target Population:
It is developed to prevent cardiovascular disease (heart disease and strokes)
in women of all ages.
Period of Validity of the Guidelines:
These guidelines need to be revised at least every 5 years to keep abreast
with recent developments and knowledge that is being learnt regarding
women’s health.
Implementation of the Guidelines:
The implementation of the recommendations of a CPG is part of good clinical
governance. To ensure successful implementation of this CPG we suggest:
• Increasing public awareness of cardiovascular disease in general and
educating them on the importance of knowing their individual
cardiovascular risk
• Continuous medical education and training of healthcare providers on
methods of cardiovascular risk assessment and the implementation of
appropriate preventative strategies depending on each individual’s risk
status
• Clinical audit by individual hospitals, units and general practices to
ensure compliance. (see Section 7, pg 87 & 88)
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
I
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general
agreement that a given procedure/therapy is beneficial,
useful and/or effective.
II
II-a
II-b
III
Conditions for
which there is conflicting evidence and/or
divergence of opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of a
procedure/therapy.
Weight of evidence/opinion is in favour of its
usefulness/efficacy.
Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by
evidence/opinion.
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general
agreement that a procedure/therapy is not useful/
effective and in some cases may be harmful.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
A
Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or
meta analyses.
B
Data derived from a
single randomized clinical trial or
large non randomized studies.
C
Only consensus of opinions of experts, case studies or
standard of care.
Adapted from the American College of Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart Association and the
European Society of Cardiology
(Available at: http://assets.cardiosource.com/Methodology_Manual_for_ACC_AHA_Writing-_Committees
and at http://www.escardio.org/guidelines-surveys/escguidelines/about/Pages/rules-writing.aspx).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Summary
Table of Contents
Abbreviation
1. The Scope of The Problem
2. Types of Cardiovascular Disease
2.1. Coronary Heart Disease
2.1.1.
Presenting Symptoms
2.1.2.
Risk Factors
2.1.3.
Diagnosis and Investigations
2.1.4.
Management
2.1.5.
Unique Gender Specific Cardiac Issues
2.2. Cerebrovascular disease
2.2.1.
Epidemiology
2.2.2.
Presenting Symptoms
2.2.3.
Risk Factors
2.2.4.
Diagnosis and Management
2.3. Peripheral Arterial Disease
2.3.1.
Presenting Symptoms
2.3.2.
Diagnosis
2.3.3.
Management
2.4. Aortic Atherosclerosis and Thoracic or Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
2.4.1.
Presenting Symptoms
2.4.2.
Diagnosis
2.4.3.
Management
3. Other Diseases with Increased Risk for Cardiovascular Disease
3.1. Connective Tissue Disease and the Heart
3.2. Cancer and the Heart
3.3. Infections and the Heart
3.3.1.
Influenza
3.3.2.
Periodontal Disease
3.3.3.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
3.4. Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
6
19
22
24
27
27
27
28
28
31
32
40
40
41
41
44
44
44
44
45
46
46
46
46
48
48
48
49
49
49
50
50
Rationale and Process of Guideline Development
4. Cardiovascular Risk Factors
4.1. Personal History of CHD and/or CHD equivalents
4.2. Age (and Menopause)
4.3. Family History of Premature CVD
4.6.1.
Diabetes Mellitus
4.4. Dyslipidaemia
4.5. Hypertension
4.6. Diabetes Mellitus/Pre-diabetes
4.6.2.
Pre-diabetes/Gestational
4.7. Metabolic Syndrome
4.8. Overweight/Obesity
4.9. Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome
4.10 . Smoking
4.11. Physical Activity
4.12 . Others
4.12.1. Combined Oral Contraceptives
4.12.2. Oestrogen Therapy/ Oestrogen Progesterone Therapy
4.12.3. Pre-eclampsia/Pregnancy
4.12.4. Alcohol
4.12.5. Depression
5. Total Cardiovascular Risk Assessment
6. Recommendations for Prevention of CVD in Women
6.1. General Recommendations
6.1.1.
Nutrition
6.1.2.
Physical activity
6.1.3.
Weight maintenance/ reduction
6.1.4.
Cigarette smoking
6.1.5.
Aspirin
52
52
52
54
55
56
57
57
58
60
61
63
64
65
67
67
68
69
70
71
72
76
76
76
78
79
79
6.2. Treatment of Specific Risk Factors
6.2.1.
Dyslipidaemia
6.2.2.
Hypertension
6.2.3.
Diabetes
6.2.4.
Overweight and Obesity
6.2.5.
Others
7. Adherence, Compliance and Quality Assurance
Appendix
References
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
80
80
81
84
84
85
87
89
101
ABBREVIATION
AAA
ABI
ACEI
ACS
AF
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Ankle brachial index
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Acute coronary syndrome
Atrial fibrillation
AMI
ARB
Acute myocardial infarction
Angiotensin receptor blocker
BMI
BP
CAST
Blood pressure
Body mass index
Cardiac arrhythmia suppression trial
CHD
CMR
COC
CPAP
CPG
CT
CV
CVD
DM
DVT
ECG
ET/EPT
FRS
GTT
HbA1c
HDL-C
HF
HIV
HR
HRT
IDF
IFG
IGT
Cardiac magnetic resonance
Combined oral contraceptive
Continuous positive airway pressure
Clinical practice guideline
Computed tomographic
Coronary heart disease
Cardiovascular
Diabetes mellitus
Electrocardiogram
Deep vein thrombosis
Menopausal hormone therapy
Framingham risk score
Glucose tolerance test
Glycated haemoglobin A1c
Cardiovascular disease
Hormone replacement therapy
International Diabetes Federation
Impaired fasting glycaemia
Impaired glucose tolerance
Hazard ratio
Heart failure
Human immunodeficiency virus
High density lipoprotein cholesterol
AHA/ACC
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology
ASCVD
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
CAD
Coronary artery disease
CTA
Computed tomographic angiography
DBP
Diastolic blood pressure
IHD
Ischemic heart disease
IMT
Intima medial thickness
LBBB
Left bundle branch block
ABBREVIATION
SCD
SLE
SPECT
STEMI
T2DM
TC
TG
TIA
VLCD
VT
VTE
WHO
WISE
Sudden cardiac death
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Single-photon emission computed tomography
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Triglyceride
Total cholesterol
Transient ischemic attack
Very low-calorie diet
Ventricular tachycardia
Venous thromboembolism
ST elevation myocardial infarction
US
United States
Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation
World Health Organization
PD
PET
RR
Periodontal disease
Positron emission tomography
Relative risk
SBP
Systolic blood pressure
PCOS
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
MI
MRA
MSSM
NAFLD
NASH
NCEP-ATPIII
NHMS
NOAC
NVCD-ACS
OSA
PAD
Myocardial infarction
Magnetic resonance angiogram
Metabolic Syndrome Study of Malaysia
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
National Health and Morbidity Survey
National Cardiovascular Disease Database-Acute Coronary Syndrome
Novel oral anti-coagulant therapy
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Peripheral arterial disease
OGTT
Oral glucose tolerance test
Met S
Metabolic syndrome
LCD
LDL-C
Lp(a)
LVEF
Low-calorie diet
Left ventricular ejection fraction
Lipoprotein a
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol
LVH
Left ventricular hypertrophy
PCI
Percutaneous coronary intervention
SCAD
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection
TCM
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
1.
THE SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM
CVD is the main cause of death among women worldwide including South East
Asia and Malaysia.1 It is 2 ½ times more common as a cause of death in
Malaysian women than all cancers combined.1,2 (Figure 1)
The Malaysian National Cardiovascular Disease Database—Acute Coronary
Syndrome (NCVD-ACS) Registry showed that Malaysian women presenting
with Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) were older and more likely to have
co-morbidity such as diabetes, hypertension, previous heart failure, and strokes
than men.3 They were less likely to receive evidence based medications-
aspirin, β-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI), or
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB)- and undergo coronary angiography and
percutaneous coronary intervention. There were no gender differences in the
in-hospital mortality in all spectrums of ACS but following ST Elevation
Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) women had almost twice the in-hospital mortality
when compared to men (15.0% vs. 8.1%, respectively, p< 0.0001).3
Figure 1: Age-standardised death rates among women due to
Cardiovascular Disease and all Cancers Combined in Malaysia (2000 –
2012)
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Cardiovascular Diseases
Cancers
age-standardized death rate per 100,000
From : World Health Organization. Noncommunicable diseases country profiles 2014. July 2014. WHO
Document Production Services, Geneva, Switzerland
A similar trend has also been observed in other countries where the
in-hospital and early post MI mortality was shown to be greater in women than
in men.4-11 Even after one year, the mortality rate after an MI was higher in
women than in men.5
Similarly, following a stroke, women are more likely to die than men.12 Those
who survive have a poorer long term outcome and a lower quality of life.13
Stroke is the most important cause of death in women worldwide.14 It is the
most important cause of disability and the second most common cause of
dementia after Alzheimer’s disease.12,15 At age 65, women have a higher
lifetime risk of Alzheimer’s than men.15
These facts are not well appreciated by both the general public and health
care professionals who often regard CVD as a problem that only affect men.
In 2 surveys carried out 2 years apart among middle-aged urban Malaysian
female office workers and other professionals, more than two thirds of women
surveyed said that cancer was the main cause of death among women.16 A
contemporary study done in Spain and the United States (US) found that only
35% and 55% of women respectively below the age of 55 years perceived
themselves at risk of heart disease before their index MI.17
This lack of awareness has contributed to:
• failure in providing adequate information and health promotion to the
public regarding CVD in women. Only about 25% and 48% of women in
Spain and the US respectively, were told by their healthcare providers
before their index MI that they were at risk and less than 50% of them
were told about heart disease and how to modify their risk17
• less screening for risk factors that contribute to CVD in women
• high threshold for diagnosis and management of these risk factors
• lower rates of diagnosis of CVD in women
• lower usage of appropriate medications and interventions for treating
women with CVD
Women with heart disease often present atypically and tend to have less
chest pain.18 Typical symptoms of an ACS however, are as important in
women as in men.18,19 General feelings of illness, fearfulness and nausea were
more common in women.18,20 Other atypical presentations include
breathlessness and fatigue. Due to their atypical presentations, women are
often not appropriately triaged in the emergency room resulting in a delay in
the diagnosis and treatment.18,20 This has adverse consequences on their
prognosis.
This CPG highlights the important gender differences in CVD. There are
differences in the clinical presentation, predisposing risk factors and the
presence of co-morbidity in women. The accuracy of diagnostic tests and
physiologic responses to exercise differ. Cultural norms, socioeconomic and
psychological factors all affect the way women respond to their illness. All
these factors have an impact on the management of CVD in women.
This CPG provides evidence based recommendations focusing on preventing
CVD in women. Cardiovascular disease often strikes without warning,
underscoring the importance of prevention. The impact of the different risk
factors on CVD in women, the role of lifestyle changes and the use of
appropriate drug therapies in the prevention of CVD are discussed. Decision
making however, should be individualized and based on sound clinical
judgment.
2.
TYPES OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
Men and women have similar lifetime risks of CVD at age 55 years. There are
however, considerable differences in the first manifestation.21 Men are more
likely to develop CHD as a first event, while women are more likely to have a
stroke or heart failure (HF) as their first event, although these manifestations
tend to appear when they are older.21
2.1. Coronary Heart Disease
2.1.1.
Presenting Symptoms
In general, women present with CHD 10 to 20 years later than men.22-26 Before
menopause, the prevalence of CHD is low.25
There are gender differences in the symptoms at presentation.18,20,22 Angina
pectoris is an earlier and more common presentation in women as compared
to men who more often present with MI.27 Women often have atypical
presentations.27 In addition to chest pain or discomfort, women also have a lot
of non chest related pain symptoms. Compared to men, women’s symptoms
are more often precipitated by mental or emotional stress and less frequently
by exertion.27
The prodromal symptoms of an MI may also be atypical e.g. shortness of
breath, sleep disturbances, diaphoresis, epigastric pain and fatigue.28,29
However, when presenting as an ACS, there are no gender differences where
women may also have typical symptoms (acute chest pain associated with
sweating).18,19
Women presenting with an MI tend to have more atherosclerotic plaque
erosions than plaque rupture.30 In autopsy studies, plaque erosions accounted
for about 25% of MI.30 Most of these erosive lesions have a thick fibrous cap
and do not have a necrotic core. In a series of patients who presented with MI
and underwent aspiration thromboectomy followed by optical coherence
studies, the residual lesion showed relatively minor luminal narrowing.31 Most
of these patients were younger individuals including premenopausal women
and smokers.31
Following an MI, women have worse outcomes irrespective of age.,11,32,33
More women had sudden cardiac death (SCD) before their arrival in hospital
and almost two thirds of women who died suddenly had no previous
symptoms.26,34
Paradoxically, women tend to have lower prevalence of obstructive coronary
disease but more symptoms, ischemia and adverse outcomes.26,35,36 It has
been postulated that this could be due to abnormal coronary vasomotor
reactivity, microvascular dysfunction, distal coronary erosion/embolization
and non obstructive coronary disease.26,37 In view of the varied
pathophysiology of heart disease in women, a more appropriate term would
be Ischemic Heart Disease (IHD) rather than CHD.
Studies seem to suggest that the adverse outcomes seen in women could be
due to their baseline risk and clinical characteristics rather than to gender
dependent factors or to bias in therapies.38
2.1.2.
Risk Factors
The lifetime risk for CHD is generally lower in females and depends on their
risk profile. At age of 55 years, with an optimal risk factor profile, lifetime risk
for CHD is 3.6% for men and < 1% in women; with ≥ 2 risk factors, it is 37.5%
in men and 18.3% for women.39 In one study, women were found to
experience the combined end point of CV death, MI, stroke and HF
hospitalization, an average of 5.7 years later than men of similar risk profiles.
For MI there was a delay of 10.7 years.23
There are important gender-related differences in the prevalence and
outcome of cardiac risk factors (section 4, pg 52). Generally, women with CHD
are more likely to be obese and have type 2 diabetes when compared to
men.17,18,26 Elderly hypertensive women and young female smokers are
especially at risk for CHD.
Risk assessment can be used to raise awareness of CVD, educate patients
about their CV risk, prompt lifestyle changes, guide therapy, and predict both
10-year and lifetime risk of CVD.40 (section 5, pg 72)
2.1.3.
Diagnosis and Investigations
Women with chest pain are less likely to be referred for appropriate
investigations due to the following:
• patient factors
- differences in presenting symptoms27-29
- cultural norms – passive nature, fearfulness, anxiety, denial,
self-sacrifice and care giver roles
- co-morbidity e.g. arthritis, obesity
- age
• physician factors
- lack of awareness and misconceptions
Investigations for diagnosing CHD include non-invasive and invasive tests.
There are important gender differences in the sensitivity and specificity of the
various non-invasive tests.
2.1.3.1. Functional tests for ischemia
Conventional exercise stress testing has a lower diagnostic accuracy in
women for obstructive CHD. The sensitivity is 31-71% and specificity is about
66 to 78% in women and about 80% for both in men.18,41,42 This is partly due
to:
•
lower CHD prevalence in pre-menopausal women and thus a lower
pre-test probability of disease
• poor exercise tolerance resulting in failure to achieve an adequate level
of stress
• presence of baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities making
interpretation difficult
Despite these limitations, a normal stress ECG at adequate workloads in
women with intermediate probability of CHD is a good indication that there is
no significant obstructive lesion.41,41 An exercise stress test, however, does not
detect myocardial ischemia in women with non- obstructive coronary lesions.
Due to the limitations of exercise stress testing, stress echocardiography
(exercise or dobutamine) and stress Single-Photon Emission Computed
Tomography (SPECT) have been recommended in women. Both these tests
can detect myocardial ischemia in the presence of obstructive and
non-obstructive coronary lesions.42 They also have higher specificity.43 The
diagnostic accuracy of SPECT however, can be reduced in women by both
breast tissue and obesity, resulting in false-positives, especially in the anterior
myocardial segments.
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance (CMR) is a newer imaging tool to investigate
CHD in women. It has superior spatial resolution and does not use ionizing
radiation unlike SPECT.44 The prognostic implications of stress CMR using
either adenosine or dobutamine is being investigated in women. A negative
stress CMR study is associated with very low risk of CV death and MI.45
2.1.3.2. Other Imaging Modalities
Computed tomographic (CT) Coronary Calcium scoring and CT coronary
angiography are increasingly being utilized in the diagnosis of CHD in women.
Calcium scoring has been shown to improve CV risk prediction.46-49
The presence of coronary calcium redefined a group of women improperly
labelled as low risk by Framingham criteria.46,47
A calcium score of ≥300 was associated with a 6.7% and 8.6% absolute risk
of CHD and CVD respectively over a 3.75 year period as compared to women
with undetectable calcium.46 However, a more recent analysis showed that the
presence
of
any
calcium
together
with
traditional
risk
factors
(MESA-Score) provided a better estimate of 10 year CHD risk50
(for MESA-Score see www.mesa-nhlbi.org/MESACHDRisk/MesaRiskScore/
RiskScore.aspx).
In symptomatic patients with low or intermediate pre-test probability and low
or zero calcium score, CT angiography accurately rules out obstructive CHD.
Care should be taken to adhere to radiation safety guidelines.
However, in patients with known CHD and/or extensive coronary calcification
and/or high pre-test probability of CHD, an invasive coronary angiogram is
superior for diagnostic accuracy.47
2.1.3.3. Conventional/Invasive Coronary Angiography
Women are less likely to be offered invasive coronary angiography in view of
their
atypical
symptoms.
When
performed
appropriately,
coronary
angiography is associated with a similar low complication rate in both gender.
Its underutilization in women results in under-diagnosis, suboptimal treatment
and poorer long term outcome.
In women, atheromatous plaques tend to be distributed diffusely, rather than
in clumps. As such, coronary angiographic studies in women tend to be
misinterpreted as “normal”.26 Autopsy studies in young people who were
certified as having ischemic heart disease as a cause of death, showed that
fewer women had obstructive CHD despite pathological evidence of an MI
(obstructive CHD in this study, was defined as ≥ 75% cross-sectional area
stenosis in an epicardial vessel or ≥ 50% left main).35
In a substudy of the WISE registry, intravascular coronary ultrasound showed
that almost 80% of women who had “normal” coronary arteries by
conventional coronary angiogram, had evidence of atherosclerosis involving
more than 40% of the interrogated vessel length and 73% had positive
remodeling with preserved lumen size.51 These patients were classified as
having non-obstructive CHD.
2.1.4.
Management
Evidence based data on the management of CHD in women are limited
because they are generally under-represented in the randomized controlled
trials. Available data however, suggests that most of the benefits seen in men
can be extrapolated to women.
Women with CHD should be treated in the same manner as in men.
Figure 2: Algorithm for the investigation of women suspected of CHD
Symptomatic women with intermediate – high* pre-test likelihood of CHD
Equivocal
Normal ECG,
Good exercise tolerance
Abnormal ECG,
Limited exercise tolerance
Exercise stress test
• Exercise/ Dobutamine
Stress Echo
• Myocardial perfusion
scan (radionuclear or
Cardiac MR)
• Calcium score and/or CT
coronary angiogram
Positive
Equivocal/Positive Test
Negative Test
Risk Factor Reduction ±
Medical Therapy for
CHD
Invasive Coronary
Angiogram*
Symptomatic women with low pre-test probability of CHD should undergo a
clinical examination, screening for CV risk factors, resting ECG, and if
necessary, an exercise stress test may be considered.
*In individuals with typical symptoms and a high pre-test likelihood of CHD, an invasive coronary
angiogram may be the initial investigation of choice (please refer to Appropriate Use Criteria for
Investigations and Revascularization in CAD 2015 (1st edition): available at www.acadmed.org.my)
2.1.5.
Unique Gender Specific Cardiac Issues
2.1.5.1. Non-obstructive CHD
Definitions for non obstructive CHD differ. According to the Veteran Affairs
Clinical Assessment Reporting, and Tracking (CART) Program, based on the
coronary angiographic findings, non-obstructive CHD may be defined as:52
•
coronary artery stenosis ≥ 20% but < 50% in the left main coronary artery
•
a stenosis ≥ 20% but < 70% in any other epicardial coronary artery
In the WISE study, non-obstructive CHD was defined as at least one coronary
stenosis ≥ 20% but < 50% luminal narrowing while obstructive CHD was
coronary stenosis ≥ 50%.37 A < 20% luminal narrowing was defined as
“Normal”. Persons with non-obstructive CHD may have atheromatous
plaques occurring in “clumps” with positive remodelling or as diffuse
involvement of the vessel wall.35,51
Non-obstructive CHD is more common in women.37,53 Patients with non-
obstructive CHD may present as stable angina, ACS and sudden death.37
The prognosis of this condition is not benign. Compared to persons with no
apparent coronary lesions (< 20% luminal narrowing) non-obstructive CHD
was associated with significantly higher risk of MI and all cause mortality in
both gender.37,54
In the WISE study, symptomatic women with non-obstructive CHD but who
had exercise induced myocardial ischemia documented by MRI had a 3 year
event rate of 43% when compared to 13% in symptomatic women with no
demonstrable myocardial ischemia.55
In a systemic review, 7% of patients presenting with MI had non-obstructive
coronary arteries.56 A third of patients presented with STEMI and two-thirds
with NSTEMI. About 40% of the patients were women with a mean age of 54
years. Compared with MI due to obstructive coronary artery disease, these
patients tended to be younger, females and have less hyperlipidemia. The
one-year all-cause mortality in patients with MI due to non-obstructive disease
was 4.7% compared to 6.7% for those with MI and obstructive coronary
arteries.56
Non-obstructive CHD is associated with limitations in flow reserve at the
coronary microvascular level.
However, little is known about the pathophysiological mechanisms
contributing to myocardial ischemia in these subjects. The etiology appears
diverse, multifactorial and may involve more than one mechanism.57,58
2.1.5.1.1. Management
There are no randomized trials on optimal prevention and treatment strategies
for non obstructive CHD. In patients with evidence of atherosclerosis, statins
and ACE-I have been beneficial against progression of disease in short term
trials.37 β-blockers have been shown to give more relief of angina compared to
calcium channel blockers. Imipramine has also been shown to provide
symptom relief.37
2.1.5.2.
Cardiac Syndrome X
Cardiac Syndrome X is angina in the absence of obstructive CHD (< 20%
luminal narrowing). There is however, a wide variation and lack of consensus
on its definition.59 There is also considerable overlap with non-obstructive
CHD.59
A proposed more precise definition of Cardiac Syndrome X entails the
following criteria:60-62
•
Exercise-induced, angina-like chest discomfort
•
ST-segment depression during spontaneous or stress-induced typical
chest pain
•
Normal epicardial coronary arteries at angiography
•
No spontaneous or inducible epicardial coronary artery spasm upon
egonovine or acetylcholine provocation
•
Absence of cardiac or systemic diseases associated with microvascular
dysfunction such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or diabetes
Recently a modified definition that includes evidence of ischemia in any form
of functional testing (exercise stress test, stress echocardiography, SPECT,
CMR, positron emission tomography, [PET] or intracoronary Doppler
ultrasound) has been proposed.60,61
There are several groups of patients who have angina-like chest pain and
normal coronary arteries at angiography but fail to meet one of the above
criteria. Examples include those with angina predominantly at rest, those with
diabetes or hypertension, or those with lack of ST depression on ECG during
angina.
It remains unclear whether the pathogenesis of angina in these patients is the
same as in patients who fall under the strict definition of Cardiac Syndrome
X.60
Cardiac Syndrome X is more common in women than men; about 70% of
patients are women who are approaching or are post-menopausal.60,62,63
About 50% of women undergoing coronary angiography for chest pain do not
have major obstructive CHD.64 In early CHD, men have higher degrees of
atheroma and epicardial endothelial dysfunction, whereas women have more
disease of the microvasculature.65
In symptomatic patients with “normal” coronary arteries, further tests for
myocardial ischemia (stress contrast echocardiogram or preferably
myocardial perfusion scans such as CMR/SPECT) may be warranted.
There are several theories on the aetiology of Cardiac Syndrome X. Two
factors that may be involved are:
•
Microvascular dysfunction. About 50% of women with chest pain have
evidence of microvascular dysfunction,66-68 but only about 20% to 25%
showed signs of ischaemia55,67,69
•
Enhanced pain perception70,71
A recent study however, found that there were no gender differences in the
prevalence of coronary microvascular dysfunction.72 An accompanying
editorial questioned if the fundamental pathophysiology of ischemic heart
disease is different between the sexes.73 It raised the hypothesis that
sex-based disparities in the prevalence and combination of known risk factors
may be the cause for the different manifestations of disease in women
compared with men.73
Patients with Cardiac Syndrome X generally have a good prognosis - overall
major cardiac event rate of MI and CVD death 0-3.8% over 5 years.74 As many
as 55% of patients however, often continue to suffer recurrent chest pain even
with treatment.74
It is important to distinguish between women with angina and normal
coronaries- luminal narrowing of < 20% - (Cardiac Syndrome X) and those
with non- obstructive CHD.
The WISE study showed that the 5 -year cardiac event rate for MI and CVD
death were significantly different (P ≤ 0.002) in the 3 subgroups:75
•
16% for women with angina and non-obstructive CHD (stenosis < 50%)
•
7.9% for women with angina and normal coronary arteries (Cardiac
Syndrome X)
•
2.4% for the asymptomatic control group
Women with non-obstructive CHD and documented myocardial ischemia
have a poorer prognosis.55,76 Women with Syndrome X and severe endothelial
dysfunction have a 30% increased risk of developing CHD at 10 years.63,77-80
2.1.5.2.1. Management
Patients with Cardiac Syndrome X are at increased CV risk.77-80 Thus,
emphasis should be towards prevention by modification of CV risk factors and
control of chest pain.
Management of patients with chest pain includes:
•
Nitrates – only half of all Cardiac Syndrome X patients respond to
nitrates.64 Occasionally, the chest pain may be GTN resistant.
•
Calcium channel blockers such as verapamil and nifedipine64,81
•
β-blockers61,64,81
•
Ranolazine82
Although there have been a number of other different treatment strategies that
have been studied in coronary microvascular angina such as ACEI (quinapril),
phosphodiesterase inhibitors (sildenafil), statins and calcium channel
blockers (diltiazem), a recent systemic review found little data to support any
of these therapies.83 These were however very small short term studies.
2.1.5.3.
Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (TCM) is a transient cardiac syndrome that is
characterized by left ventricular apical akinesis, electrocardiographic changes
of MI, minimal rise in cardiac biomarkers and absence of significant
obstructive coronary artery disease. Almost 90% of cases occur in women
with the mean age of 67 years.84
Common presenting symptoms are acute chest pain and dyspnoea almost
always (85% of cases) precitated by an emotionally or physically stressful
event. These symptoms are often indistinguishable from an ACS.
The modified Mayo Clinic criteria for the diagnosis of TCM includes:85,86
•
Transient hypokinesis, dyskinesis, or akinesis of the left ventricular
midsegments, with or without apical involvement; the regional
wall-motion abnormalities extend beyond a single epicardial vascular
distribution, and a stressful trigger is often, but not always, present
•
Absence of obstructive coronary disease or angiographic evidence of
acute plaque rupture
•
New electrocardiographic abnormalities (either ST-segment elevation
and/or T-wave inversion) or modest elevation in cardiac troponin level
•
Absence of pheochromocytoma or myocarditis
The underlying etiology is unknown but is likely related to release of
catecholamines, both locally in the myocardium and in the circulation.
2.1.5.3.1. Management
Treatment is mainly supportive. About 5% of patients may develop LV
thrombus and require anticoagulation.87
The prognosis is excellent with almost 95% having complete recovery within
4-8 weeks.84 The most common complication is heart failure. Treatment of
heart failure is as outlined in section 2.1.5.6.1, pg 41. About 3.5% of patients
however, suffer a recurrence of TCM.84
2.1.5.4.
Spontaneous Coronary Dissection
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection (SCAD) is a very rare condition with
an incidence of 0.07-1.1% of all coronary angiograms performed.88 The
prevalence may be as high as 24% in women < 50 years of age who present
with MI.89 It affects predominantly young females - 70-80% are women and the
mean age at presentation was 42 years.88,90 In one series however,
62.3% of women who had SCAD were post menopausal.91
They usually present as an ACS – almost 50% as STEMI. Some may present
as Sudden Cardiac Death. The left anterior descending artery is the
commonest vessel affected in women and the right coronary artery in men.88
In about 25% of patients, there may be multivessel involvement.88
Classically,
patients
with
SCAD
fall
into
the
following
groups:90
•
Peripartum- about a third of cases occur in the third trimester or early
post partum period92
•
Atherosclerotic – about a third have underlying atherosclerotic plaque
rupture
•
Others – vasculitis, Ehler’s Danlos, Fibromuscular dysplasia, connective
tissue disease such as systemic lupus erythematosis and certain
conditions such as vigorous exercise, prolonged sneezing or cocaine
abuse.
•
Idiopathic
The diagnosis is often difficult and made only after coronary angiography. The
index of suspicion should be high if a young woman without the traditional risk
factors presents with an MI.
2.1.5.4.1. Management
There are no guidelines available on treatment of SCAD. In patients
presenting with MI:
•
Fibrinolytic therapy is contraindicated.
•
A conservative approach is the treatment of choice if the patient is stable,
without chest pains and the coronary vessel is open with TIMI 3 flow.
•
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI) should be considered
if the patient has ongoing pain, hemodynamic instability and/or flow
limitation in a large epicardial vessel with a large area of myocardium at
risk. The technical success of PCI and the long term results in patients
with SCAD are much lower than in patients with atherosclerotic
disease.88,91
•
Coronary artery bypass grafting maybe more appropriate if the SCAD
involves the left main coronary artery or multiple coronary arteries.
The in hospital and 1 year mortality is about 1-4%.91 Predictors of poor
prognosis include female sex and late treatment. Patients presenting in the
post partum period had the worst prognosis.91
2.1.5.5.
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Women tend to have a higher prevalence of sick sinus syndrome,
inappropriate sinus tachycardia, atrioventricular nodal re-entry tachycardia,
idiopathic right ventricular tachycardia and arrhythmic events in the long QT
syndrome.93
Atrial Fibrillation (AF) is the most common supraventricular arrhythmia. It is
1.5 more frequent in men than women but in those over 70 years old, the
prevalence is similar in both gender probably because of the longer average
lifetime of women.94,95 Women are more likely to experience an impaired
quality of life with longer and more symptomatic episodes and frequent
recurrences.96,97 In subjects older than 75 years of age, female sex has been
associated with an additional risk of stroke.98 A recent study found that
patients with non valvular AF had a high prevalence of left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH), which was related to female gender, older age,
hypertension, and previous MI.99 There is also a strong association between
AF and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA).100
Women have a lower propensity to ventricular arrhythmias. However, women
with CHD have been noted to have more easily inducible ventricular
arrhythmias101,102 and those with congestive heart failure have a higher
frequency of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT).103
Women have faster resting heart rates yet longer QTc intervals.94,104,105 They
are more prone to develop torsades de pointes during administration of
cardiovascular drugs that prolong cardiac repolarization (QT interval).106,107
In the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial (CAST) study108 two factors
significantly increased the hazard ratio (HR) for arrhythmic death or
resuscitated cardiac arrest in non-randomized patients given anti-arrhythmic
drugs. These were:
•
Female gender (HR 4.7, p < 0.05) and
•
Electrocardiographic abnormalities (such as VT, proarrhythmia, widened
QRS complex, heart block, bradycardia)
The incidence of SCD is lower in women than in men.109-112 Female survivors
of cardiac arrest are less likely to have underlying CHD and more likely to
have other forms of heart disease or structurally normal hearts.109,111,113
However, in women with a previous MI, the risk of SCD is 2-fold higher and in
those with heart failure, it is 5 times higher than in men.111,113,114 Women who
do suffer SCD are less likely to have a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)
< 35% documented prior to SCD.111
2.1.5.5.1. Management
Women should be treated in a similar manner as men. Women with AF benefit
from both rate and rhythm control and anticoagulants for prophylaxis against
thrombo-embolism. Anticoagulants are however underused in older women.96
There are a number of safety issues with the use of warfarin in women
necessitating close monitoring. These include:
•
higher risk of major bleeding96
•
female gender being an independent risk factor for not being in the
therapeutic range of warfarin115
•
even within the therapeutic range of warfarin, women remain at a higher
risk of stroke115
The newer novel oral anticoagulants appear to be more efficacious and safer
in women.116 (Section 6.2.5.1, pg 85)
Catheter ablation for AF appears to have similar results in both gender
although few women have been recruited in the trials.
Caution should be exercised in the use of anti-arrhythmic drug therapy in
women because of the danger of pro-arrhythmia.106-108 Registry data indicate
that women benefit from implantable cardioverter defibrillator similar to men117
although several previous meta-analysis suggest that the survival benefit in
women in the primary prevention trials did not reach statistically significant
levels. Women however were under-represented in these trials only
constituting about 15-30% of the study population. This may have contributed
to bias.118,119
2.1.5.6.
Heart failure
Common aetiologies of HF in women include hypertension, CHD and valvular
heart disease. Hypertension increases the risk of developing HF almost 3-fold
in women as compared to 2-fold in men.120,121 Women developing HF are
more likely to be older, hypertensive and have preserved left ventricular
systolic function and less CHD.122-124 Women with prior MI are at a higher risk
of developing HF than men.125 The risk of death is also higher in women who
develop HF post MI.125
The risk of HF in diabetic women is also much higher - almost 3-fold – when
compared to non-diabetics.126 Obesity is also a risk factor for HF conferring a
risk that is twice that of subjects of normal weight.
Obese women are at higher risk of developing HF than obese men. (HR: 2.12
vs 1.90).127 However, in patients with established systolic HF, there appears to
be an obesity paradox – survival appears better in patients with higher
BMI.128-131
Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction is more common in women due to the
effects of prolonged hypertension and diabetes. In addition, women develop
CHD and HF later in life and have more age-related changes in the heart,
such as poor diastolic performance at that time.122-124
The prognosis of women with HF is generally better than that of men.124,132-134
However if the aetiology of HF is ischaemia related, the prognosis is
similar.124,125
2.1.5.6.1. Management
Women with HF have similar benefits as men with evidence based therapy
such as ACEI/ ARB, β-blockers and mineralocorticoid inhibitors. Registry data
show that women with HF and left bundle branch block (LBBB) requiring
cardiac resynchronisation therapy benefit as much as men although few
women have been enrolled in the randomized clinical trials.135
Women who are overweight and obese should reduce weight although there
is limited data to support its benefit in HF.131
2.2. Cerebrovascular disease
2.2.1.
Epidemiology
Stroke is now the leading cause of death in women worldwide and has been
projected to remain an important cause of mortality till 2030.14,136 However in
the US and UK, it is the second most important cause of death after CHD.22,137
Women have a higher lifetime risk of stroke than men and are on average
about 4 years older at stroke onset than men.23,138,139 (≈ 75 years compared
with 71 years) In younger and middle-aged groups, age-specific incidence
rates of stroke in women are much lower than men but in the older age groups
(> 75 years), incidence rates are approximately equal or even higher than in
men.140,141 Women are more likely to die or have disability following a stroke
than men.12,13 This could be due to their older age at presentation and their
pre-stroke disability which is greater than that of men.13
2.2.2.
Presenting Symptoms
In general, there are no gender differences in the clinical presentation of
stroke although women report a higher frequency of headache and facial
sensory deficits and men have more prodromal symptoms and gait
disturbances.142-144
2.2.3.
Risk Factors
Women and men share many common risk factors for stroke although there
are gender differences in the prevalence of the different risk factors.145 (Table
6, pg 43) Women are more likely to have AF and hypertension, whereas men
are more likely to have a history of CHD, MI, peripheral arterial disease,
diabetes, alcohol and tobacco use.146,147 Diabetes and metabolic syndrome
(Met S) have a greater effect on stroke risk in women.148,149
Other stroke risk factors include:-
•
AF
•
Carotid artery disease
•
Transient ischaemic attacks
•
Family history of premature stroke- Ischemic strokes tend to occur in
families.150,151 A meta – analysis found that female probands were
more likely to have a positive family history of stroke in any parent than
were male probands and were also more likely to have a history of stroke
in their mothers than fathers152,153
•
Previous history of stroke154,155
2.2.3.1. Special Issues for Stroke in Women
Women also face additional gender specific risk factors. (Table 6, pg 43)
These include:
•
Oal contraceptive use156,157
•
Oestrogen therapy/ Oestrogen Progesterone Therapy (ET/ EPT)158
•
Pregnancy159,160
•
Migraine161-163
2.2.3.1.1.
Oral Contraceptive Use (Section 4.12.1, pg 67)
2.2.3.1.2.
Hormone Replacement Therapy (Section 4.12.2 pg 68)
2.2.3.1.3.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy increases the risk of a stroke in women due to:
•
Pregnancy-induced hypertension
•
increased blood coagulability
•
postpartum haemorrhage with hypotension
The incidence of stroke, both ischaemic and haemorrhagic, is markedly
increased in the postpartum period.159,160
Table 6: Sex Specific Stroke Risk Factors*
Risk Factor
Sex-Specific
Risk Factors
Risk Factors That Are
Stronger or More
Prevalent in Women
Risk Factors With Similar
Prevalence in Men and
Women but Unknown
Difference in Impact
Pregnancy
X
Preeclampsia
X
Gestational diabetes
X
Oral contraceptive use
X
Postmenopausal
hormone use
X
Changes in hormonal
status
X
Migraine with aura
X
Atrial fibrillation
X
Diabetes mellitus
X
Hypertension
X
Physical inactivity
X
Age
X
Prior CVD
X
Obesity
X
Diet
X
Smoking
X
Metabolic syndrome
X
Depression
X
Psychosocial stress
X
*Adapted from Bushnell C et al. AHA/ASA Guideline. Guidelines for the Prevention of Stroke in Women. A
Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke 2014; 45: 1545-1588.
2.2.3.1.4.
Migraine
Women are more likely to suffer from migraine. Migraine with visual aura
increases the risk of stroke.161-163 This risk is higher in current cigarette
smokers and current users of oral contraceptives.163
2.2.4.
Diagnosis and Management
Most studies have found no gender differences in terms of stroke types,
although some studies have found an increase in subarachnoid and
cardio-embolic strokes in females.13
There are no gender differences in the way strokes are diagnosed and
managed. Please refer to Malaysian CPG on Management of Ischemic Stroke
(2012).
2.3.
Peripheral Arterial Disease
The prevalence of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is lower in women under
50 years of age but it increases with age and in those over 80 years, the
prevalence is as high as in men. Even for the same disease states, women
have poorer prognosis with event rates that are higher than men especially
when the ankle brachial index (ABI) is low.164-167 Women have an increased
risk of MI, cardiovascular and total mortality.165-167 They also have faster
functional decline and greater mobility loss than men with PAD.168
2.3.1.
Presenting Symptoms
The classical symptom of PAD is intermittent claudication. Women with PAD
however, tend to be asymptomatic or present with atypical symptoms.164,166
2.3.2.
Diagnosis
The ABI is an independent and significant indicator of mortality.166
Measurement of the ABI index using a Doppler ultrasound, detects about 3-5
times more cases than history alone.166 In patients, especially in those with
diabetes, the hardened arterial wall may lead to incompressibility of the vessel
and cause erroneous readings.
The following women, symptomatic and asymptomatic, should be screened
for PAD.164,169
•
Those with exertional leg symptoms
•
The elderly (above the age of 70 years)
•
Those above the age of 50 years with any atherosclerotic risk factor
(smoking, diabetes, hypertension, elevated cholesterols)
•
Diabetics who are 49 years old or younger or who have any of these
atherosclerotic risk factors
•
Subjects with a 10 year CVD risk of 10-20% (FRS, Table 2, pg 9 & 10)
These women should be screened by history and clinical examination of the
foot pulses. The diagnosis of PAD may be objectively confirmed by the
measurement of the ABI by Doppler ultrasound. The presence of PAD
indicates a high risk individual and alters the intensity of risk factor
modification.
2.3.3.
Management
Patients with intermittent claudication should undergo a supervised exercise
program to improve symptoms of claudication and exercise performance.164
Women however, respond less well to exercise training.
Treatment options include medical therapy, angioplasty and surgery. Patients
with PAD whether symptomatic or not, should be treated as aggressively as
patients with CHD with risk factor modification, anti-platelet agents (aspirin or
clopidogrel) statins, β-blockers and ACEI.170-181
After adjusting for risk factors, the following drugs have been found to be
beneficial in reducing mortality:170
•
Statins HR; 0.46
•
β-blockers HR = 0. 68
•
Aspirin HR = 0.72
•
ACEI HR = 0.80
A phosphodiesterase III inhibitor (cilostazol) has been shown to improve
exercise performance and quality of life in symptomatic patients but there is
no data that it results in a reduction of adverse cardiovascular events.182,183
The use of β-blockers has previously been discouraged in the presence of
PAD because of the possibility of worsening limb ischaemia.
However a meta-analysis has shown that these drugs can be safely used in
stable patients with mild to moderate symptoms of PAD.180 A more recent
review showed that β-blockers do not adversely affect walking distance, calf
blood flow, calf vascular resistance and skin temperature in persons with
intermittent claudication although most of the trials done were small, of poor
quality and done more than 20 years ago.180 Thus the presence of stable PAD
is not a contraindication for the use of β-blockers in patients with CHD.
Symptomatic patients should be considered for intervention – angioplasty or
surgery. The diagnosis can be confirmed with either a magnetic resonance
angiogram (MRA) or CT angiography (CTA) prior to intervention. Women tend
to have higher morbidity and mortality after open surgical procedures.184,185
2.4. Aortic Atherosclerosis and Thoracic or Abdominal Aortic
Aneurysm
2.4.1.
Presenting Symptoms
Aortic atherosclerosis is usually asymptomatic and was noted in 38% of
women.186 Aortic aneurysms are uncommon in women. The prevalence
ranges from 0.6 to 1.4% which is about 15% of that seen in men. Women
present seven to ten years later than men.187 Most AAA- related deaths occur
before 80 years of age in men and after 80 years of age in women.187
2.4.2.
Diagnosis
There is no evidence that routine screening is beneficial in women. If an aortic
aneurysm is suspected diagnostic tests include ultrasound, CTA and/or
MRA.187
2.4.3.
Management
The goal of management of aortic aneurysms is to prevent rupture. This
involves aggressive risk factor control, adequate β-blockade and serial
imaging for progression.
The general guidelines for the management of AAA are:187
•
Small aneurysm (4 cm or smaller)

Conservative therapy with periodic ultrasound examinations to
assess progression
•
Medium sized aneurysm (between 4 cm and 5.5 cm)
 Treatment of this condition is still unclear. Closer and more frequent
monitoring for progression is recommended
•
Large (5.5 cm or larger), fast-growing aneurysm (more than 0.5 cm
over six months) or symptomatic (leaking, tender or painful)
 Surgical or endovascular repair is recommended
Key Messages:
•
CVD (heart disease and strokes) is the main cause of death among
women in Malaysia.
•
The pathophysiological mechanisms contributing to myocardial
ischemia in women are varied and maybe multiple.
•
Women with angina may have :

Obstructive CHD (coronary lesions > 50% luminal narrowing)

Non-obstructive CHD (≥ 20% and < 50% luminal narrowing).The
prognosis is worse if myocardial ischemia is documented.

Normal coronary arteries- (< 20% luminal narrowing)- (Cardiac
Syndrome X)
•
Presenting symptoms for CHD and stroke in women may be both
typical and sometimes atypical.
•
Prognosis for women following an MI and stroke is poorer than men.
•
Increased awareness, early detection with appropriate investigations
and management is important.
3.
OTHER DISEASES WITH INCREASED RISK FOR
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
3.1. Connective Tissue Disease and the Heart
Patients with connective tissue disease especially SLE, rheumatoid arthritis
and systemic vasculitis are at increased risk for CVD.188-193 This excess risk of
premature CVD is seen most commonly in SLE where CVD is the third most
common cause of death.188 The CVD risk is 5-6 times greater in women
especially in those aged 35-44 years where the risk may be as high as 50
times the general population.189,190 The causes are multifactorial and include
increased prevalence of the traditional risk factors, impaired endothelial
function, systemic inflammation and the presence of autoantibodies such as
anti-phospholipid antibodies and lupus anticoagulant which are associated
with increased thrombotic risk.188,191
Cardiovascular manifestations of rheumatological diseases include:
•
Myocardial- congestive heart failure, LVH, diastolic dysfunction,
myocardial fibrosis, amyloidosis
•
Pericardial – pericardial effusion, pericarditis
•
Valvular – Libman-Sacks vegetation, valvular regurgitation, valvular
nodules
•
Arrhythmic – SCD, ventricular arrhythmias, supraventricular arrhythmias,
atrioventricular block
•
Vascular – atherosclerosis, arterial stiffness, vasculitis, thrombosis
Patients with connective tissue disease should have their CV risk assessed
and have their CV risk factors addressed according to guidelines. Some of the
drugs used for the treatment of these rheumatological disorders may have
cardiac effects which also have to be addressed.194-197
3.2. Cancer and the Heart
Chemotherapeutic agents have potential cardiotoxicity. In symptomatic
patients, chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity is defined as a decrease in
LVEF by ≥ 5% to < 55%. In asymptomatic individuals, it is defined as a
decrease in LVEF by ≥ 10% to < 55%.198 Cardiotoxicity may be:
•
Irreversible – type 1 (e.g. anthracycline induced toxicity)
•
Reversible – type 2 (e.g. herceptin induced toxicity)
Vascular toxicity is a recognized side-effect of some chemotherapeutic agents
especially the tyrosine kinase inhibitor. This includes serious arterial
thrombotic events such as acute MI, stroke and acute ischemic limb.199
Radiation also causes significant cardiac toxicity after a long latent period
even more so if the doses exceed 30 Gy.200 Radiation-induced heart disease,
to date, remains significant as most patients currently seen are those who had
higher exposures 20-30 years ago.201 Radiation also induces and accelerates
atherosclerosis on top of traditional risk factors.202,203
For the management of patients on potentially cardiotoxic chemotherapeutic
agents, see Appendix 1, pg 89. Women who had chemotherapy or radiation
therapy in the past and who are now pregnant or planning to get pregnant
should be evaluated by a cardiologist, as the pregnancy can unmask a
cardiomyopathy.199
3.3.
Infections and the Heart
3.3.1.
Influenza
Clinical trials have shown an association between a recent respiratory
infection and acute MI.204 In a recent study done in UK and Hong Kong, there
was strong evidence for a link between influenza and MI associated deaths
and hospitalizations in both regions.205 A meta-analysis of 5 published
randomized clinical trials of 6735 patients showed that influenza vaccination
was associated with a lower risk of composite cardiovascular events.206 The
greatest treatment effect was seen among the highest-risk patients with more
active coronary disease. In a case-control study done in Australia, influenza
did not predict MI but vaccination was found to be protective.207 This protective
effect is comparable to that of currently accepted therapies for secondary
prevention of MI.
It is advisable that high risk CVD patients receive annual influenza
vaccination. However, to date, there is no supportive epidemiological data
from tropical regions.
3.3.2.
Periodontal Disease
A number of observational studies have shown that there is an association
between periodontal disease (PD) and CVD although the evidence for a
causal relationship is still controversial.
Treatment of PD has been shown to result in improvement in surrogate
markers of inflammation and endothelial function but there is no data that it
can prevent CVD.208-210
Maintaining good dental hygiene and regular dental visits are recommended.
3.3.3.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Studies have shown that HIV infected individuals of both gender, are at
increased risk of premature CVD.211-214 Atherosclerosis tends to be diffuse,
circumferential and is often accelerated.215-219 The reasons for this increased
CVD risk are multifactorial and includes systemic immune activation resulting
in endothelial activation and atherosclerosis, metabolic derangements due to
anti-retroviral therapy and also the high prevalence of traditional risk factors
such as smoking and obesity in these patients.220-222 This increased CVD risk
persists even after adjustment for Framingham risk factors, other co
morbidities and substance use.
All HIV infected individuals should be encouraged to adopt a healthy lifestyle
with CV risk factor modifications.
3.4.
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea (OSA)
OSA is a sleep disorder associated with high blood pressure, CVD, and/or
obesity. Observational studies seem to suggest a causal relationship between
OSA and CVD although the data is not conclusive.223,224
It occurs more frequently in men than women - due to differences in obesity
and the distribution of adipose tissue, upper-airway anatomy and muscle
function, control of ventilation, and the effect of sex hormones and leptin.224-226
It is likely that OSA may be underdiagnosed in women.227 Observational
studies indicate that untreated severe OSA is an independent predictor of
cardiovascular mortality in women.228 However, there are no randomised
controlled trials to support this.
Management of OSA includes general measures such as weight reduction,
avoidance of alcohol and sedative drugs in the evening.224 The use of
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) improves quality of life, reduces
apnoeic spells, daytime somnolence, and blood pressure. The benefits of
CPAP in preventing CVD remains unresolved.224,227,229
Registry data indicate that CPAP is associated with reduced all-cause
mortality in middle-aged and elderly men but there was no significant effect in
women.228 However, a recent randomized trial in patients with systolic heart
failure found that adaptive servo-ventilation actually increased all cause and
cardiovascular mortality.230
Key Messages:
Other diseases that that are associated with an increased CV Risk in
women include:
•
Connective tissue diseases (especially rheumatoid arthritis, SLE and
systemic vasculitis) and the drugs that are used to treat these
diseases
•
Chemotherapy and radiation induced cardio toxicity
•
Infections such as influenza, peridontal disease and HIV
•
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
4.
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS
4.1. Personal History of CHD and/or CHD equivalents
Persons with established CVD are at high risk for recurrent vascular events.
In the GRACE registry, the 6 month risk of CV death and major CV event rate
after an ACS, was 5-8% and 15-20% respectively.231 A study done in England
showed that following the first MI, the risk of a recurrent MI was highest during
the first year and the cumulative risk increased gradually thereafter. For
women, the 1 and 7 year cumulative risk was 7.2% and 16.2% respectively
which were higher than that in men (5.6% and 13.9% respectively).30 Older
age, no revascularization procedures, and the presence of comorbidities were
associated with a higher recurrence risk.30
In patients with stable CHD, the 1 year rate of CV death was 1.9% and the rate
of CV death, MI or stroke was 4.5%.232 Following a stroke, the risk of a
recurrent stroke was 8% and the risk of death 4.5%. The rates continued to
increase steadily up to 4 years.154,155
Persons with CHD Equivalents are also at high risk for CV events. This
includes:
•
Cerebrovascular disease
•
Peripheral arterial disease
•
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
•
Multiple risk factors that confer a 10 year FRS of > 20%233
The presence of vascular disease in any one of the vascular beds usually
indicates co-existing disease in other parts of the vascular tree. Hence it is
imperative to assess all vascular beds.
4.2. Age (and Menopause)
The age-specific incidence rates for CHD in women are lower than in men at
every age.22,234-237 The onset of CHD may be delayed by about 10 years in
women.23,24,25
Atherosclerosis starts in early adolescence and progresses throughout a
woman’s lifetime, the rate of progression depending upon the presence and
severity of the risk factors. In mid-life, a woman’s risk for CVD increases
dramatically. This is due to:-
•
the effect of increasing age, an effect that is also similarly observed in
men
•
the hormonal imbalances that occur with the menopause, and
•
an increase in the prevalence of risk factors for heart disease often seen
in mid-life such as:-
-
obesity and changes in body fat distribution and storage from the
hips to the waist- gynaecoid (subcutaneous fat) to an android
(abdominal obesity) pattern
-
physical inactivity
-
dyslipidaemia
-
hypertension
-
worsening glucose tolerance/ insulin resistance
-
lifestyle change associated with an increase in risk factors
It is still not clear if this increase in the prevalence of risk factors is due to
oestrogen deficiency or part of the “ageing” process.
Women who experience early menopause are at increased CVD risk. When
compared to those with a natural menopause, women with:
•
early menopause--before their 46th birthday--are twice as likely to suffer
from CHD and stroke. This finding is independent of age, race/ethnicity
and traditional risk factors.238
•
endogenous oestrogen deficiency had more than 7-fold increase in
coronary artery disease (CAD) risk in the Women’s Ischemia Syndrome
Evaluation (WISE) study.239
Other studies have also shown that menopause before the age of 50, either
spontaneous or surgically induced, is associated with an increased risk of
CVD.240,241 This risk is mainly for CHD and not stroke. This increased risk was
significant even after controlling for age and smoking.240
The incidence rates of CHD are 2-3 times higher in postmenopausal women
than for those women of the same age who have not yet undergone
menopause.25 In the Nurse’s Health Study though, this risk associated with
natural menopause disappeared after adjusting for age and cigarette
smoking.240 At present, it is still unclear if the postmenopausal state per se is
a risk factor for CVD.242,243
The association between menopause and the risk of stroke is conflicting. In
the Framingham Heart study, women with natural menopause before 42 years
of age had twice the risk of ischemic stroke when compared to women who
attained natural menopause after 42 years of age.244 However, in the Nurse’s
Health Study, there was no association between age at natural menopause
and risk of ischemic or haemorrhagic stroke.245
Another finding that is consistent with the theory that the menopausal state
per se may not be directly responsible for the increase in CVD risk is the lack
of benefit of HRT in both primary246,247 and secondary prevention trials.248-250 A
recent randomized trial however, found that HRT given early after menopause
and continued for 10 years had beneficial cardiac effects without any apparent
increase in cancer, venous thromboembolism (VTE) or stroke.251
The current recommendation supports the use of HRT at the lowest oestrogen
dose and for the shortest duration in women with vasomotor symptoms (hot
flushes/flashes/night sweats) and genitourinary symptoms (vaginal dryness or
discharge, pain, burning or itching, urinary frequency, recurrent urinary tract
infections) up to the age of 60 years.252
HRT is not recommended for the prevention of any chronic illness.
4.3. Family History of Premature CVD
The presence of CVD (CHD and stroke) in first degree relatives (parent or
sibling) before 55 years in men and 65 years in women is an independent risk
factor for future CVD.253-257 This risk is increased:
•
when the affected individual is a first degree relative
•
the higher the number of family members with CVD
•
the younger the age at which family members develop CVD
•
if the affected individual is an identical twin
In one study, the odds ratio of developing a future MI was:258
•
1.67 when one parent had MI after age 50
•
2.36 when one parent had MI before age 50
•
2.90 when both parents had MI after age 50
•
6.56 when both parents had MI before age 50
Some studies found that maternal history of MI at any age was more strongly
associated with MI in the offspring than was paternal history of MI.259,260
History of MI in second degree relatives also increases an individual’s risk of
a future MI.261 Parental history of premature stroke also increases the risk of
stroke in the offspring.150,151
Individuals with a family history of premature CHD or stroke should have their
global CVD risk assessed and the appropriate preventive strategies
implemented.262,263
4.4. Dyslipidaemia
Lipoprotein levels are similar in pre-pubertal girls and boys. After puberty,264
•
HDL-C levels remain higher in women compared to men
•
LDL-C and non HDL-C levels are lower in young and middle-aged
women
After the menopause,264
•
TC levels increase
•
LDL-C levels rise and may exceed that of age-matched men
•
LDL-C particle size shifts towards smaller dense particles
•
HDL-C levels remain constant
•
greater postprandial rises in lipoprotein levels after standardized fat
meals
•
lipoprotein a [Lp(a)] also increases with age
The effect of HRT on lipids will depend on the hormone composition and route
of administration. Generally when given orally HRT tends to:
•
decrease LDL-C
•
decrease Lp(a)
•
increase HDL-C
•
increase TG
When compared to men:
•
low HDL-C rather than high LDL-C is more predictive of CVD
risk.265,266 This suggest that the protective effect of HDL may be
diminished as women transition in menopause267
•
high TG is important as a CVD risk factor in older women especially at
levels above 4.5 mmol/L268-271
•
TC appears to be associated with CVD only in premenopausal women or
at very high levels (> 6.9 mmol/L)271
•
Lp(a) is a determinant of CVD in both premenopausal and post-
menopausal women under the age of 66 years272
Women with increasing obesity, metabolic syndrome and/or diabetes tend to
have lower HDL-C, higher TG and a greater proportion of LDL phenotype B
(small dense LDL particles). This atherogenic lipoprotein profile associated
with diabetes is more pronounced in women than men and may contribute to
their increased CVD risk.273,274
In Malaysia, the prevalence of hypercholesterolemia (defined as total
cholesterol ≥ 5.2 mmol/L) has been on a rising trend. It has increased from
20.7% (2006) in the National Health and Morbidity Survey III (NHMS III) to
32.6% in 2011 (NHMS IV) with a further increase to 47.7% in 2015 (NHMS V).
275 In both NHMS IV and NHMS V, the prevalence was significantly higher
among females (40.2% and 52.2% respectively).275
4.5. Hypertension
In Malaysia, according to the NHMS V (2015) 29.7% of women above the age
of 18 have hypertension.275 The prevalence rises with increasing age,
reaching a prevalence of 75.4% in those aged 70-74 years. There was no
significant gender difference.275
In both men and women, BP tends to increase with age. Epidemiological
studies from the US have shown that before the age of 60, women have lower
systolic and diastolic BP than men.276 After the age of 60 years, women have
a much steeper rise in SBP.277 At the age of 60 years, over 80% of women are
hypertensive.278
Isolated systolic hypertension is more common in older women than men.279
This age-related rise in BP, particularly systolic BP and pulse pressure,
contributes substantially to the age-related increase in CVD and HF in
middle-aged and elderly women.277
Hypertension is more common after the menopause. Postmenopausal
women are more than twice as likely to have hypertension as premenopausal
women even after adjustment for age and BMI.280
Hypertension and LVH are both stronger predictors for CVD, HF, CHD and
stroke mortality in women than in men.281-283
Hypertension is a leading risk factor for stroke in both men and women, with a
relative risk (RR) ratio of 4. For every 7.5 mmHg increase in diastolic BP, the
stroke risk increases by 46%.284 In the elderly, SBP is a more important CVD
risk factor than DBP and should be the principal target of therapy.285 An
increase in SBP by 20 mmHg is associated with a two fold increase in the rate
of death from stroke, CHD and other vascular causes.286
The cause of hypertension in both men and women is usually primary. Some
causes of secondary hypertension are more common in women e.g.
fibromuscular renal artery stenosis.287
Women tend to have more labile BP and a higher prevalence of white coat
hypertension than men.288 Women are also more likely to be salt sensitive and
have low renin, high volume hypertension than men.289
Combined oral contraceptive (COC) use may cause a small but detectable
increase in BP.290 A small percentage of women develop frank hypertension. A
family history of hypertension, pre-existing pregnancy-induced hypertension,
occult renal disease, obesity, age > 35 years, COC dosage, composition and
duration of use increase susceptibility to COC-induced hypertension.290 This
usually resolves within 3 months of the withdrawal of the COC.291 COC
induced hypertension appears to be related to the progesterogenic, not the
estrogenic, potency of the preparation.292 Hypertension due to COC is likely
the most frequent cause of secondary hypertension in young women.293
Women on COC should have their BP monitored periodically.
In contrast, HRT as either oral or transdermal oestrogen alone or in
combination with a progestin, has neutral effects or may lower the BP in
normotensive and in hypertensive women.290
Factors that predispose to pregnancy-induced hypertension also predispose
to CVD in later life. Thus long term follow-up of these patients is advisable.294
(section 4.12.3, pg 69)
4.6. Diabetes Mellitus/Pre-diabetes
4.6.1.
Diabetes Mellitus
The most recent NHMS V 2015 found that the prevalence of DM among adults
18 years and above was 17.5%.275 The prevalence increases with increasing
age, from 5.5% in the 18-19 years age group to 39.1% among the 70-74 years
age group. In adults age 30 years and above the prevalence had increased
from 8.3% in 1996295 (NHMS II) to 20.8% (NHMS IV).297 (Table 7, pg 58)
Among adults above the age of 18 years old, the prevalence was highest in
the Indians (22.1%) followed by Malays (14.6%) and Chinese (12.0%).275
There remains no gender difference observed. (Women 18.3% vs men
16.7%)244 T2DM accounts for > 95% of the local diabetic population.298
DM eliminates the “female advantage” of a lower CHD prevalence.299
Women with diabetes are at increased risk for all-cause, cardiac and CHD
mortality.300,301 The CHD mortality in diabetic women is 2 - 5 times that of
non-diabetic women.302-304 Even in insulin treated diabetics < 30 years of age,
the CVD mortality in women is higher than that of diabetic men.301,304
A recent large analysis showed that women with diabetes are 44% more likely
to develop CHD than men.305-307 This increased incidence cannot be explained
by sex differences in pharmacotherapy alone. The overall relative risk of fatal
CHD was significantly greater among diabetic women (RR: 3.50) than among
diabetic men (RR: 2.06).308 The relative risk for fatal CHD associated with
diabetes was 50% higher in women than it was in men.308
In the last 3 decades, CV deaths have remained unchanged for diabetic
women while outcomes for non-diabetic women and men (non-diabetic as
well as diabetic) have improved. This has been shown to be due to disparities
in preventive care and intensity of risk reduction.309
4.6.2.
Pre-diabetes/Gestational
Pre-diabetes includes:
•
Impaired Fasting Glycaemia (IFG)
•
Impaired Glucose Tolerance (IGT)
•
Combined IFG and IGT
DM and pre-diabetes can be diagnosed by using fasting or random plasma
glucose, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) or HbA1c (Table 8 & 9, pg 59).
In asymptomatic individuals, any 2 abnormal values performed on 2 different
days are required to make the diagnosis of diabetes. In symptomatic
individuals, a single abnormal value is adequate.
National Health & Morbidity
Survey
Prevalence of Diabetes Mellitus
in Adults 30 Years and Above
NHMS II295
1996
NHMS III296
2006
NHMS IV297
2011
8.3%
14.9%
20.8%
Table 7: Prevalence of diabetes in adults 30 years and above*
*NHMS V not included because data only available for adults 18 years and above. There
was no significant gender differences in the prevalence of diabetes noted in all 3 surveys.
International guidelines recommend the use of an HbA1c of ≥ 6.5% for the
diagnosis of diabetes.310,311 Based on the Metabolic Syndrome Study of
Malaysia (MSSM) 2009, an HbA1c level of 6.3% was found to give the
maximal acceptable sum of specificity and sensitivity of 97% and 42.5%
respectively in diagnosing diabetes.311,312 Using an HbA1c of 6.5% for
diagnosing diabetes in the local population however, leads to a lower
unacceptable sensitivity of 36.7%.312,313
Pre-diabetes (dysglycaemia) is also associated with increased CVD risk and
events.315,316
Women with a prior history of gestational DM, a big baby (birth weight > 4 kg)
or a diagnosis of polycystic ovarian syndrome are at high risk of developing
glucose intolerance/ T2DM and Metabolic Syndrome (Met S). They should be
screened at regular intervals for diabetes as well as other CVD risk factors.
Table 8: Diagnosis of Pre-Diabetes and T2DM*
Plasma glucose
(mmol/L)
Fasting
Prediabetes
T2DM
≥ 7.0
≥ 6.1 – 6.9
IFG
IGT
2 hr post-OGTT
≥ 11.1
-
-
7.8 - 11.0
*Diagnosis of DM: for symptomatic patients, a single abnormal value is adequate; for
asymptomatic individuals, 2 abnormal values are required
Normal
Pre-diabetes
(ADA/WHO)
T2DM
(ADA310/
WHO)311
T2DM
(Malaysian CPG
2015)312-314
HbA1c%
mmol/mol278,279,280,281,282
< 5.6
5.6-6.4**
38-48***
< 38
≥ 6.5
≥ 48
≥ 45
≥ 6.3
* Diagnosis of DM: for symptomatic patients, a single abnormal value is adequate; for
asymptomatic individuals, 2 abnormal values are required
** < 6.3% according to Malaysian CPG for Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 5th Ed, 2015314
*** < 45mmol/mol according to Malaysian CPG for Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 5th
Ed, 2015314
Table 9: Diagnosis of Pre-diabetes and T2DM* based on HbA1c
4.7. Metabolic Syndrome
Met S is a constellation of risk factors that includes the following criteria:
•
abdominal obesity (waist circumference ≥ 80 cm / 31.5 inches)
•
elevated fasting TG (≥ 1.7 mmol/L)
•
low HDL-C (≤ 1.29 mmol/L) ;
•
hypertension (BP ≥ 130 and/or ≥ 85 mmHg)
•
T2DM/ IFG/ IGT
There are 2 main definitions for the Met S:
•
International Diabetes Federation (IDF) 2005317
•
National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III
(NCEP-ATPIII-Harmonized Criteria)233,318
The difference is that in the IDF definition, abdominal obesity is the mandatory
parameter with presence of 2 other criteria for the diagnosis, whereas for the
NCEP/ ATP III, any ≥ 3 out of 5 criteria are adequate.
In Malaysia, Met S is higher in urban areas, females, Indians and with
increasing age.319,320 In general, the risk for Met S rises with increasing age.
This effect is more marked in women than men, particularly after the
menopause. Menopause causes an increase in total adiposity and a
redistribution of fat to the abdominal region.321,322 In a prospective clinical study
of older women followed up for more than 6 years, it was found that Met S and
high waist-to-hip ratio were associated with increased risk of CV events.323
The ‘clustering’ of metabolic abnormalities that occur in the same individual
appears to confer increased risk of future development of CVD and T2DM.
The presence of any one of the components should trigger further screening
for the other associated CV risk factors.
Unfortunately, the value of Met S as a scientific concept remains controversial.
Although several epidemiologic studies have identified an increased risk of
CVD in individuals with Met S,324-330 the presence of Met S does not predict an
elevated CHD risk beyond the sum of its components.327,331
The traditional risk assessment algorithms are recommended to quantify
global CVD risk.
Excess abdominal adipose tissue is associated with insulin resistance,
creating an atherogenic inflammatory milieu, characterized by high levels of
C-reactive protein and other inflammatory markers (e.g., fibrinogen,
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, cytokines, and adhesion molecules).323-332
Epidemiologic studies have shown a positive correlation between levels of
these biomarkers and CVD risk.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), in particular, NASH (non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis), is considered the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic
syndrome.333 Recent data suggest that NAFLD is linked to increased CV risk
and is an independent CV risk predictor.334,335
4.8. Overweight/ Obesity
Overweight/ obesity increases CVD risk. With increasing body mass, both
CHD mortality and all-cause mortality are increased.336,337 A recent study
showed a higher BMI, particularly ≥ 30, is also associated with a greater risk
of SCD and it appeared to be a stronger risk factor in middle aged rather than
older women.338 Many CVD risk factors (such as dyslipidaemia, glucose
intolerance and hypertension) are associated with obesity. With increasing
degrees of overweight/ obesity, there is an increased likelihood of developing
these risk factors.
In Malaysia, in just 9 years from 2006 to 2015, there was a further increase
in the prevalence of obese and overweight males and females (Table 10, pg
61 and Figure 3A and B, pg 62).296,339 The prevalence of obesity is higher in
Malaysian women than men.275
Table 10: Prevalence of Overweight/Obesity in NHMS III296 (2006) and
NHMS V275 (2015)
Adults
Overweight
BMI 25 – 29.9 kg/m2
Obese
BMI > 30kg/m2
NHMS III296
NHMS V275
NHMS III296
Males
29.7%
31.6%
10.0%
15.0%
Females
28.6%
28.3%
17.4%
20.6%
Overall
29.1%
30.0%
14.0%
17.7%
NHMS V275
The prevalence shown above uses the international definition of overweight/
obesity. This is to allow comparison between the NHMS III and NHMS V. The
Asia Pacific definition340 for overweight/ obesity uses different cut-off points i.e.
overweight > 23 to < 25 kgm2; obese > 25 kgm2. The reason for this lower
cut-off points is because Asians have a higher CVD risk at lower BMI.341,342
Furthermore, Asians also have a higher abdominal adiposity compared to
Caucasians for the same BMI.343
With increasing age, there is an increased prevalence of overweight and
obese individuals especially in females. For any given BMI, women have
more total body fat.
Waist circumference correlates better with abdominal fat content than BMI.
Gender specific waist circumference cut-off points for CVD risk have been
established. In Asians, a waist circumference of ≥ 80 cm in women raises
CVD risk.317
Weight gain during adulthood is associated with a significantly increased risk
of CHD, independent of physical activity level.344 In a large prospective study
in women, those who gained substantial weight after age 18 were at
significantly increased risk of CHD, T2DM and total mortality compared with
women who remained within 2.3 kg (5 lbs) of weight at age 18.345 For each
increase in body weight of approximately 1 kg, the risk of CHD mortality
increases by 1-1.5%.346
Figure 3A: Prevalence of Obesity
according to Gender in NHMS III
(2006)296 vs NHMS V (2015)275
Figure 3B: Prevalence of Overweight
according to Gender in NHMS III
(2006)296 vs NHMS V (2015)275
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Male
Female
Overall
10
17.4
14
15
20.6
17.7
NHMS III
NHMS IV
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Male
Female
Overall
29.7
28.6
29.1
31.6
28.3
30
NHMS III
NHMS IV
Although obesity is associated with CHD risk and weight loss has been shown
to be beneficial, studies regarding weight cycling (repeated weight loss and
weight gain of 5 to 10 lbs) have been equivocal, and this remains
controversial.347-350 For benefits of weight loss, see Table 11, pg 63. These are
seen in addition to psychological, physical and other metabolic benefits.
4.9. Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS) is a common hormonal disorder
affecting women in the reproductive age, with features of androgen excess,
ovulatory dysfunction and polycystic changes in the ovaries.352 This condition
is often associated with insulin resistance and CV risk factors such as central
adiposity, glucose intolerance (prediabetes and diabetes), hypertension and
dyslipidaemia.
Mood disturbances, mostly severe depression, are prevalent in women with
PCOS and contribute to impaired quality of life, fatigue, sleep disturbances,
phobia, appetite changes, and binge eating resulting in higher BMI and
greater insulin resistance and CVD risk factors than non-depressed women
with PCOS.353
Women with PCOS often have subclinical, early coronary and other vascular
disease documented by coronary angiography, carotid artery scanning and
coronary artery calcium measurement.354-356 Echocardiographic abnormalities
include increased left atrial size and left ventricular mass index, lower left
ventricular ejection fraction and diastolic dysfunction.357,358
Table 11: Beneficial effects of a 10% weight loss in the obese individual351
Mortality
>20% ↓ total
>30% ↓ diabetes related
>40% ↓ obesity related cancer
Blood Pressure
10 mmHg ↓ systolic
20 mmHg ↓ diastolic
Diabetes
30-50% ↓ in fasting glucose
50% ↓ in developing diabetes
15% ↓ in HBA1c
Lipids
10% ↓ total cholesterol
15% ↓ LDL-cholesterol
30% ↓ triglycerides
8% ↑ HDL-cholesterol
The WISE Study found that women with PCOS have higher CV event rates,
multivessel CVD and lower survival compared with non-PCOS women.359
All women with PCOS should have CV risk assessed as follows360
•
Family history of early CVD
•
Cigarette smoking
•
Waist circumference and BMI at each clinic visit
•
Complete lipid profile every 2 years or sooner if weight gain occurs
•
OGTT every 2 years or sooner if additional risk factors are identified
•
BP check at each clinic visit
•
Assess for OSA
•
Assess for depression, anxiety, and quality of life
Women with PCOS with obesity, cigarette smoking, dyslipidaemia,
hypertension, impaired glucose tolerance, and subclinical vascular disease
are at risk, whereas those with Met S and/or T2DM are at high risk for CVD.360
For overweight/ obese women with PCOS, a 5–10% weight loss should be
targeted. This can be achieved with lifestyle modification and behavioural
techniques.361 The long-term goal should be a 10 to 20% weight loss and a
waist circumference of < 80 cm.362
4.10. Smoking
Smoking is a very important cardiac risk factor in both men and women. This
risk is dose related. In women, even with minimal use, CVD risk is elevated
(RR: 2.4 for 1.4 cigarettes/ day).363,364 The risks associated with smoking are
consistently higher in women than in men and are not age dependent.365 The
risk of CHD begins to decline within months of smoking cessation and
reaches the level of persons who have never smoked within 3 to 5 years.363
Cigarettes can induce an unfavourable lipid profile, increase inflammation,
thrombosis
and
oxidative
stress. As
a
result
women,
especially
premenopausal women, lose their “natural” protection against atherosclerotic
vascular disease.
In Malaysia, only about 1% of women smoke.366 In NHMS V there was
however a small but significant increase to 1.4%.275
Young women who smoke and use COC have a very high CVD risk. They
have more than 5-fold increase in the risk of MI when compared to COC users
who do not smoke.367,368 Women smokers above the age of 34 years who use
COC are at especially high risk.369
Women switching to “low yield” cigarettes with reduced tar, nicotine, and
carbon monoxide have the same CVD risk as those who smoke higher-yield
brands.370
Smoking also increases the risk of developing diabetes by 30–40%. There is
a positive dose-response relationship between the number of cigarettes
smoked and the risk of developing diabetes.340
Non smokers exposed to secondhand smoke increase their risk of
developing:371,372
•
CHD by 25-30%
•
Stroke by 20-30%
•
Lung cancer by 20-30%
The scientific evidence indicates that there is no risk-free level of exposure to
secondhand smoke.372
4.11. Physical Activity
Epidemiological studies have shown that low physical activity is a strong and
independent risk factor for both CVD (both CHD and stroke) and all-cause
mortality.373-375
Physical activity includes:
•
Leisure-time physical activity defined as:
-
high: participation in recreational sports (e.g. running, jogging,
gymnastics, swimming or heavy gardening) or in intense training or
sports competitions for at least 3 hours a week
-
moderate: walking, cycling or practicing some other form of light
exercise (gardening) at least 4 hours per week
-
low: reading, watching TV or working in the household without much
physical activity
•
Occupational physical activity defined as:
-
high: lots of walking and lifting at work, taking the stairs or walking
uphill (e.g. industrial work and farm work)
-
moderate: walking quite a lot at work without lifting or carrying heavy
objects (e.g. store assistant, light industrial worker)
-
low: mostly sedentary work without much walking (e.g. secretary,
working in an office)
•
Commuting activity defined as:
-
high: more than 30 min physical exercise (e.g. walking every day
while getting to work and back home)
-
moderate: exercising (e.g. walking between 15 and 30 min daily on
the way to work and back home)
-
low: exercising less than 15 min daily (e.g. motorized transport, no
walking or cycling)
Moderate and high levels of leisure-time and/ or occupational physical activity
or high levels of commuting activity in women are associated with reduced
CVD (CHD and stroke) and all-cause mortality376-379 and 10 year risk of
CHD.380
However even light-to-moderate activity is associated with lower cardiac risk
in women. Walking for at least 1 hour per week predicted lower CHD risk.
Time spent walking was more important than walking pace.381 A recent large
study showed that any physical activity was beneficial compared to inactivity
in reducing CV risk.381 Among active women, moderate physical activity 4-6
times per week had the best CV risk reduction compared to those who
exercised daily.382
These benefits of physical activity were seen in all women irrespective of the
baseline CHD risk.383,384 A structured, moderate-intensity physical activity
program was found to be beneficial even in sedentary men and women aged
70 to 89 years.385
Obesity is often associated with physical inactivity and both independently
contribute to the development of CHD in women. Being physically active
attenuates moderately but does not eliminate the adverse effects of obesity on
cardiac risk. Being lean does not counteract the increased risk of CHD
associated with physical inactivity. The lowest risk of CHD is observed among
physically active, lean women.344
When compared to women who had a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m2 and were
physically active (exercise ≥ 3.5 hours/week), the RR of CHD were386:
•
3.44 for women who were obese (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) and sedentary
(exercise < 1 hour/week)
•
2.48 for women who were active but obese
•
1.48 for women who had a healthy weight but were sedentary
A BMI of > 25 kg/m2 and < 3.5 hours of exercise per week accounts for 59%
deaths due to CVD.386
Overweight/obese is associated with far greater increases in the risk of
developing T2DM than being unfit or inactive. Higher levels of physical activity
does not ameliorate this risk.387
Women who are physically active tend to have a more favourable CVD risk
profile. Physical fitness is independently associated with lower TG, higher
HDL-C, lower TC/HDL-C ratio, lower BP and lower cigarette smoking.383
4.12. Others
4.12.1. Combined Oral Contraceptives
Observational studies have shown that COC are associated with an increased
risk of VTE, stroke and MI.369,388,389 The CV risk was greater in smokers.369,390
These early studies however, had numerous potential biases.391
Second (2nd) and 3rd generation pills seem to have slightly different risk
profiles. VTE seems to be somewhat more prevalent with 3rd generation pills,
the risk of non-fatal VTE being increased by about 2 fold (or about 3 cases for
every 10,000 users).392,393 (Appendix 2, pg 91)
The risk of stroke and MI appears higher among 2nd generation COC
pills.369,389,393-395 The overall incidence of MI was found to be increased at least
2-fold, the risk of ischemic stroke by approximately 2-fold and that of
haemorrhagic stroke by about 1.5-fold among current users of COCs.388,393,396
Studies comparing the stroke risk of users of 2nd and 3rd generation COCs
however, are not consistent and have shown mixed results.157,391,397 Currently,
1st generation pills are hardly used.
There is however, no data available for the newest generation COC (4th
generation) as well as for the non-oral routes (topical and vaginal).388
Current or prior use of low-dose COC is not associated with a significant
increased risk of MI in healthy non-smokers. Women who smoke heavily
however, are at high risk of MI.395,398,399 This risk was independent of the
formulation or dose of oestrogen used.
The CV risk of COCs is increased if the women is diabetic, obese, smokes, or
has hypertension. Before prescribing COCs, it is important to screen for CV
risk factors and have them optimally controlled.
The WHO have published a medical eligibility criteria for COC use. They have
advised against the use of COCs in persons with:400
•
Breast feeding < 6 weeks post-partum
•
< 21 days post-partum with other risk factors for VTE
•
Smoking ≥ 15 cigarettes a day
•
Uncontrolled BP (systolic ≥ 160 or diastolic ≥ 100 mmHg)
•
Any vascular disease
•
Prior or current history of pulmonary embolism or VTE
•
Known thrombogenic factors
•
Recent surgery with prolonged immobilization
•
History of CHD or stroke
•
Valvular heart disease complicated by pulmonary hypertension, atrial
fibrillation and/or infective endocarditis
•
SLE with positive (or unknown) anti-phospholipid antibodies
•
Migraine with aura
Use of COC is not usually recommended unless other more appropriate
methods are not available or not acceptable in persons:400
•
> 6 weeks < 6 months post-partum
•
> 21 days < 42 days with other risk factors for VTE
•
With multiple risk factors for CVD
•
With hypertension
•
With migraine without aura but age ≥ 35 years
4.12.2. Oestrogen Therapy/ Oestrogen Progesterone Therapy
Menopausal hormone therapy (ET/ EPT) does not protect post-menopausal
women against CVD, and may even cause an increased risk of stroke.250,252
There is no evidence that ET/ EPT has any protective effects against death
from any cause, and specifically death from CVD, non-fatal MI or angina,
either in healthy women or women with pre-existing heart disease. Instead
there a small increased risk of stroke in post-menopausal women.250
There is some evidence that women who start treatment within the first 10
years of their menopause, seemed to have a small protection against death
and MI, with no increased risk of stroke.251 However, even in this group, the
risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is increased. This apparent benefit in
preventing CVD in younger women should be considered alongside other
possible benefits and emerging evidence of harm, including the risk of breast
cancer, ovarian cancer, and DVT.
Absolute excess risk per 10,000 women treated with an ET/EPT combination
for a year, were:246
•
5 fewer hip fractures
•
6 fewer colorectal cancers
•
7 more CHD events
•
8 more strokes
•
8 more pulmonary emboli
•
8 more invasive breast cancers.
There was a trend that women who initiated hormone therapy closer to
menopause tended to have reduced CHD risk and total mortality compared
with those more distant from menopause.401 For the ET only pill, per 10 000
person-years, there was an absolute:402
•
excess risk of 12 additional strokes
•
risk reduction of 6 fewer hip fractures
Earlier studies showed that the risk of stroke was elevated regardless of years
since menopause.401
Menopausal hormone therapy is not recommended either for primary or
secondary prevention of CVD.403,404 It should only be used for symptomatic
relief of bothersome vasomotor symptoms using the lowest oestrogen dose
and for the shortest duration of time up to age 60.252
In women with high CV risk, non-hormonal therapy is recommended. For
women with moderate risk of CVD, transdermal estradiol alone is
recommended as 1st line in women without a uterus or combined with
micronized progesterone for women with uterus.252
4.12.3. Pre-eclampsia/Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a cardiovascular and metabolic “stress test”. A history of
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes or pregnancy-induced hypertension puts a
woman “at risk” of CVD.294
Women with preeclampsia have 2 times the risk of subsequent ischemic heart
disease, stroke and venous thromboembolic events in the next 5 - 15 years.294
Following pre-eclampsia, women are at an increased risk of CVD.294 The RR
for the following are increased:
•
hypertension by 3.70
•
CHD by 2.16
•
stroke by 1.81
•
VTE by 1.79
•
overall mortality by 1.49
It is not known if this association is due to a common cause for pre-eclampsia
and CVD, an effect of pre-eclampsia on disease development, or both.
It is important that such women be referred for risk factor monitoring and
control in the years after pregnancy.
4.12.4. Alcohol
There is J shaped curve between alcohol intake and a variety of adverse
health outcomes.405 Low levels of alcohol intake have been found to reduce
all-cause mortality in both men and women. In non-pregnant women this
should not exceed 1 drink (10 g/day) per day.405-407 At moderate to high levels,
the risk of death is higher in women than in men, probably owing to increasing
risk of cancer and both haemorrhagic and ischemic strokes.408,409 Heavy
consumption of alcohol (3 or more drinks a day) is also related to
hypertriglyceridemia, uncontrolled hypertension, congestive heart failure and
liver disease.
When men and women consume the same amount of alcohol, women
experience higher blood alcohol concentrations. This is because women
metabolize
ethanol
differently
and
have
a
lower
gastric
alcohol
dehydrogenase activity, resulting in higher blood ethanol levels. Pregnant
women are advised to refrain from alcohol consumption. (Appendix 3, pg 93).
The benefits of alcohol appear to be related to its antithrombotic properties
and its ability to increase HDL levels.410 Wine (ethanol with antioxidants)
exhibits significantly higher anti-inflammatory effects than gin (ethanol without
polyphenols), and thus in general, wine should be preferred to liquor or beer.
Regular drinking is associated with better outcomes than occasional
(binge)/weekly drinking.410
4.12.5. Depression
CVD and depression often co-exist. Patients with CVD have more depression
than the general population and persons with depression are also more likely
to eventually develop CVD and have a higher mortality rate than the general
population.411 Clinical depression/depressive symptoms are associated with
adverse CV outcomes.412-414
Depression is more common in women than men.415 Depressive symptoms in
women ≤ 55 years predicted the presence of CHD and increased risk of death
when compared to men and older women.416 Patients with depression are 6
times more likely to die within 6 months post MI and this increased risk
persists for at least 18 months.416 In this study, depression was more common
in women than men.417 Major depression is also a risk factor for HF in older
women but not men.418
Coronary patients with clinically significant depression can be safely and
effectively treated with psychotherapy411,419-421 or selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitors,422,423 although evidence for a beneficial effect on cardiac endpoints
is inconclusive. Care must be taken with the use of the older anti-depressants
as they may cause arrhythmias. A prudent approach at present is to offer
patients with clinically significant depression or anxiety, treatment with
psychotherapy and antidepressant/ anxiolytic medication. Those not
accepting treatment should be followed closely, and treatment offered again if
symptoms persist for 4 – 6 weeks.
Key Messages:
CV risk factors in women include:
•
Non-modifiable factors – increasing age, family history of premature
CVD
•
Modifiable factors:

hypertension – especially systolic blood pressure

dyslipidemia – high LDL-C, low HDL-C, high fasting TG

diabetes mellitus and pre-diabetes

metabolic syndrome

obesity

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome

Smoking

Physical inactivity

Others–Combined Oral Contraceptives, Oestrogen Therapy/
Oestrogen Progesterone Therapy, pre-eclampsia, alcohol,
depression
5.
TOTAL CARDIOVASCULAR RISK ASSESSMENT
All asymptomatic apparently healthy women ≥ 40 years of age should have
their CV risk assessed. Women with established CV risk factors or family
history of premature CVD can be assessed at a younger age. This should be
an integral component of periodic health examinations of all women in
addition to their regular gynaecological and breast examinations. Women can
do this CV risk assessment in government clinics for a nominal fee.
CV risk refers to the likelihood of a woman developing a CV event, fatal or
non-fatal, over a defined period of time. Determining an individual’s CVD risk
would help:
•
identify high risk women
•
guide the intensity of preventive strategies. Women at high risk should
undergo intensive lifestyle interventions and where appropriate, drug
therapies
•
improve physician recognition, detection and treatment of risk factors
Ideally, the CV risk model should be based on data derived from the local
population. Currently, we do not have such a CV risk score. The risk score that
is widely used in Malaysia is the Framingham general CVD risk score tool for
primary care that assesses the 10 year risk of developing CVD.424 (Table 2, pg
9 & 10) It provides sex-specific CVD risk scores and allows for the calculation
of an individual’s heart/vascular age.
The FRS has the advantage of being derived from a population that had
received no or little treatment at the start and during the study.425 It is also
simple and easy to use – an important feature if healthcare providers are to
use it routinely.426 It may however underestimate risk in women. The FRS has
been validated in a multi ethnic local population in 2 retrospective
studies.427,428
Other risk models include:
•
Framingham Risk Score - by The National Cholesterol Education
Program Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High
Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III)233-This assesses
the 10 year risk of developing CHD (cardiac death, MI) only.
•
SCORE system developed by the European Society of Cardiology.429
This system predicts the occurrence of a first fatal CVD event and allows
the estimation of total CVD risk projected to age 60.
•
WHO/ ISH Cardiovascular Risk Prediction Charts- these predict fatal
and non fatal CVD430
•
QRISK1 & QRISK2 (risk score using the QRESEARCH database) is a
CVD risk prediction algorithm formulated in the United Kingdom (UK)-
this predicts fatal and non fatal CVD events431,432
•
ASSIGN (Assessing cardiovascular risk using SIGN guidelines) based
on a Scottish population433
•
2013 ACC/ AHA risk calculator (Table 3, pg 11)434 - this risk model
assesses the 10 year risk of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease
(ASCVD)–both cardiac death, non fatal MI and fatal and non fatal
strokes–in adults 40-79 years of age. It has the advantage that it is
gender specific. In a local study, however, this risk model overestimated
risk in the Malaysian population.435
The FRS has been validated in white and black American men and women but
may not be that predictive in other populations.436,437 It also has its limitations
in women because it focuses on short term (10 year) risk of MI and CHD
mortality.438 Although women have a low absolute risk of CVD, due to their
longer life expectancy, the average lifetime risk in women is substantial
(approaching 1 in 2)439
For these reasons, in women, we advocate the risk classification in Table 1,
pg 8. It is adapted from the American guidelines and incorporates the
Framingham general CVD risk score tool.440 It provides a more holistic
approach to CV risk assessment in women. Sometimes, however, it may be
necessary to juggle multiple guidelines and risk models to evaluate CVD risk
and decide on the intensity of primary prevention strategies in women.441
The risk model outlined in Table 1, pg 8 does not include newer risk factors
such as hs-CRP and other biomarkers. In addition, it does not include
investigations such as resting ECG, calcium scoring, ABI etc.
These newer risk factors may provide incremental information to traditional
risk factor assessment in certain asymptomatic individuals at intermediate
CVD risk. Their presence would elevate the individual to a higher CVD risk,
indicating the need for more aggressive preventive strategies. Studies done to
date, however, have failed to show an improvement in the accuracy of CV risk
prediction when these parameters are added to the traditional risk factors.
Routine screening for these risk factors is thus not recommended.442
From an early age, all women should know their levels and significance of
their risk factors.
All women above the age of 40 years should know their global CVD risk.
(Table 1, pg 8)
Assessment of CVD risk involves:
•
History: Looking for symptoms suggestive of CHD or CHD Equivalents,
family history of premature CHD, smoking status, physical activity
•
Physical Examination: Height, weight, BMI, waist circumference,
pulses, BP
•
Investigations: Blood glucose, lipid profile
The following additional investigations may be reasonable in “At Risk”
(intermediate risk) women to risk stratify them further:
•
Microalbuminuria in the presence of hypertension and diabetes442
•
Resting ECG in the presence of hypertension and diabetes
Women with established CVD (CHD and CHD Equivalents) are at High Risk
of a future vascular event. They have a risk of a recurrence of their angina or
the occurrence of death that is 1.5 to 15 times that of the general
population.231,232 These High Risk women should have the most intensive
lifestyle intervention and appropriate drug therapies.
Women At Risk should have their global risk for CVD reduced by lifestyle
modification and drug treatment, where appropriate. If CVD is suspected, they
should undergo the relevant diagnostic tests and treatment.
Women at Optimal Risk should be encouraged to continue their healthy
lifestyle and to maintain their ideal weight.
IIa, C
IIa, B
Key Messages:
•
All women above the age of 40 years should know their CVD risk.
•
Assessment of CVD risk involves: (Table 1, pg 8)

History: Looking for symptoms suggestive of CHD or CHD
Equivalents, family history of premature CHD, smoking status,
physical activity.

Physical Examination: Height, weight, BMI, waist
circumference, pulses, BP.

Investigations: Blood sugar, lipid profile.
•
Prevention of CVD involves: (Table 2 & 3, pg 9-11)

High Risk: Intensive risk factor reduction with lifestyle and
pharmacological measures to achieve target levels.

At Risk: non pharmacological intervention with diet and physical
activity. If targets not achieved, pharmacological therapy is
indicated.

Optimal Risk: Continue with healthy lifestyle measures.
6.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREVENTION OF CVD
IN WOMEN
The INTERHEART study found that 9 potentially modifiable factors accounted
for 96% of the population attributable risk of a first MI in women compared to
93% among men.24,443 These 9 modifiable risk factors include dyslipidaemia,
hypertension, diabetes, smoking, abdominal obesity, psychosocial factors,
regular physical exercise, daily consumption of fruits and vegetables and
regular alcohol consumption.24 Hypertension, diabetes, alcohol intake, and
physical activity were more strongly associated with MI in women compared to
men.24 Generally risk factors were more strongly associated with acute MI in
younger (< 60 years) compared to older (≥ 60 years) women and men.24
In Malaysia, according to the NHMS IV (2011), almost half of women > 30
years are hypertensive, a third are obese and have high cholesterols and a
fifth have diabetes.296 An earlier survey (NHMS III 2006) showed that women
displayed a higher prevalence and a younger age shift in CV risk factor
clustering.444
It was estimated that 90% of CHD events occurred in people with at least 1 CV
risk factor.445 Borderline CV risk factors contribute incrementally to this CVD
risk.445 As the number of risk factors increase, the CV risk also increases and
survival decreases.440
Thus it is important to assess the global CVD risk since mildly raised levels of
several risk factors, in the long term, will result in increased global CVD risk.
All CVD risk factors should be identified and managed aggressively according
to guidelines.
6.1. General Recommendations
The following healthy lifestyle measures are important in all women. By
adopting a healthy lifestyle, women can reduce their CVD risk by as much as
55%.440 A healthy life style has been shown to reduce the risk of heart failure in
post-menopausal women even in the absence of antecedent CAD,
hypertension and diabetes.446
6.1.1.
Nutrition
Knowing how much calories one needs a day is a good start for healthy living.
IIa, C
I, B
This depends on several factors such as age, gender, BMI and level of
physical activity. Home cooked meals are preferable to eating out.
A diet encompassing food from all the food groups is recommended. Healthy
food choices that reduce CVD risk should be encouraged.446-454
General recommendations should fit in with the local culture. Energy intake
should be adjusted to avoid overweight/ obesity.
Encourage:455
•
fruits
•
vegetables
•
whole grain cereals and bread
•
fish especially oily fish rich in omega-3 fatty acids (such as ikan tenggiri,
carp)
•
lean meat
•
nuts and legumes
•
low fat milk and cheese
•
skinless poultry
•
non-tropical vegetable oils – canola oil, olive oil, peanut oil, sesame oil,
vegetable oils (combination of corn/soybeans and/or sunflower
seeds)455
Limit the intake of saturated fats and trans-fat as it increases the LDL-C.
Replace saturated fats with monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats whilst
still maintaining a nutritionally calorie adjusted diet. Reduce total fat < 30% of
energy, of which < 1/3 should be saturated.456,457
Carbohydrates are either refined or complex. Complex carbohydrates (e.g.
whole grains, peas, beans, lentils) are the preferred choice as they are
digested more slowly and supply a steady release of energy.455 Refined grains,
such as white rice and white flour that have been processed, are deficient in
many nutrients and fibre unless enriched. Fibre makes one feel full and
satisfied longer and discourages over-eating.
The effect of dietary soluble fiber on serum cholesterol levels has been
extensively studied. Intakes of 9 to 16.5 g/day of a variety of soluble fibers
(mostly psyllium and guar) produced net reductions in serum total and LDL
cholesterol levels of 5.5% to 11% and 3.2% to 12.1%, respectively.458
I, B
I, B
I, B
Sweets and sucrose-sweetened beverages should be discouraged. Naturally
occurring sugars are preferable. A Mediterranean type diet which is rich in
fruits, vegetables and nuts is encouraged.
Nutritional recommendations should be individualized depending on risk
factors – dyslipidaemia, hypertension, diabetes and obesity. It is
recommended that a qualified dietitian be involved in dietary counselling and
education.
All high risk patients should be referred to a registered dietitian for further
nutrition assessment, diagnosis, intervention, monitoring and evaluation.
Dietitians are also available through the Malaysian Dietitians Association
(MDA) website: www.dietitians.org.my
Some hypertensive patients (especially the elderly) are sensitive to salt. In
general, reduce daily salt intake to approximately 1- 1¼ tsp salt.459,460 This can
be achieved by reducing salt in cooking and by not adding table salt or soy
sauce. Choose fresh or frozen unsalted foods as processed food is generally
high in salt.
In women with CHD, omega-3-fatty-acid (>1 gm/day) has been found to be
beneficial.452,454
Healthy eating focuses on filling:
•
½ the plate with fruits and vegetables
•
¼ the plate with lean protein prepared with healthy cooking methods
•
the remaining ¼ with grains and starches preferably whole grains.
6.1.2.
Physical activity
Women should be encouraged to exercise for at least 30 minutes on most
days of the week.344,373,374,381,461 Women who need to lose weight or sustain
weight loss should exercise more.
I, A
IIa, B
I, B
Before engaging on an exercise program, women should be assessed by
qualified trainers/healthcare providers. However even small increases in
physical activity is beneficial.381 This will include activities such as:
•
walking 1 hour per week (about 10-15 minutes a day)
•
using stairs instead of the lift or escalator
•
parking some distance away and walking
6.1.3.
Weight maintenance/ reduction
Ideal BMI for Asian women is 18.5 - < 23 kg/m2 and ideal waist circumference
is ≤ 80 cm (31.5 inches).317,340
Weight control can be achieved by restriction of total calorie intake and regular
physical activity.
6.1.4.
Cigarette smoking
Women should not smoke and should avoid secondhand smoke.462 There is no
data at present on the secondhand effects of e-cigarettes.
6.1.5.
Aspirin
Aspirin (75 mg-150 mg OD) is indicated for secondary prevention in all women
with CVD.463,464
For primary prevention, in a large study, aspirin was found to be beneficial in
women > 65 years.465 Aspirin lowered the risk of stroke without affecting the
risk of non-fatal MI and CV death.465
However a more recent meta-analysis found that aspirin was of uncertain net
value in primary prevention in both gender. The reduction in occlusive events
needs to be weighed against the risk of major bleeding.466-468
For patients with diabetes, the recommendations of the AHA/ACC are:469
•
Low-dose (75–162 mg/d) aspirin use for prevention is reasonable for
adults with diabetes and no previous history of vascular disease who are
at increased CVD risk (10 year risk of CVD events over 10%) and who
are not at increased risk for bleeding. These include women over age 60
years who have 1 or more of the following additional major risk factors:
smoking, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, family history of premature CVD,
and albuminuria
I, B
I, B
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, C
•
Aspirin should not be recommended for CVD prevention for adults with
diabetes at low CVD risk (women < 60 years with no major additional
CVD risk factors; 10-year CVD risk < 5%) as the potential adverse effects
from bleeding offset the potential benefits
•
Low-dose (75–162 mg/d) aspirin use for prevention might be considered
for those with diabetes at intermediate CVD risk (younger patients with 1
or more risk factors, or older patients with no risk factors, or patients with
10-year CVD risk of 5–10%) until further research is available.
6.2. Treatment of Specific Risk Factors
Aggressive risk factor reduction should be instituted in all High Risk patients.
6.2.1.
Dyslipidaemia
The primary target of therapy is LDL-C.470-479
In women especially in diabetics, low HDL-C and high TG are also important
risk factors and are the secondary targets of therapy.471,480
6.2.1.1. Targets of therapy
6.2.1.2. Management of Dyslipidaemia: Primary Prevention
The cornerstone of management of women At Risk and Optimal Risk is
lifestyle modification with advice on a healthy diet and physical activity.
Women at risk who do not achieve their target levels should be considered for
pharmacological intervention.
Table 12: Targets of Therapy in Dyslipidaemia
High Risk
At Risk & Optimal Risk
LDL-C
<3.0 mmol/L
**the lower the better
I, C
High Risk: Patients with established
CHD or CHD Equivalents
LDL-C Goal:
< 2.6 mmol/L**
(or a reduction of at least 50% if
the baseline LDL-C is between
2.6-5.1mmol/L)
< 1.8 mmol/l in diabetics with CVD
(or a reduction of at least 50% if the
baseline LDL-C is between 1.8 and
3.5 mmol/L)
Meta-analysis consistently show that primary prevention with statin therapy
improves survival and reduces CV events in both gender.479-482
Women with genetic dyslipidaemias such as familial hypercholesterolemia
with very high levels of TC or LDL-C may be considered for lipid lowering
therapy from the outset.
6.2.1.3. Management of Dyslipidaemia: Secondary Prevention
Numerous studies on secondary prevention have shown that women have
similar benefits on CVD outcomes as men.470,471,473,481
These High Risk women should have statin therapy.470,472,473,481
Statins should not be used in women who are pregnant, intend to become
pregnant or who are breast feeding.
6.2.2. Hypertension
6.2.2.1. Targets of Therapy
The target BP in most patients < 80 years of age, should be < 140/90
mmHg.482 In patients > 80 years, the target should be < 150/90 mmHg.482 In the
presence of target organ damage, a lower BP maybe considered especially in
younger patients.482 (Table 13, pg 82)
In diabetics, the target BP is < 135/75 mmHg.314
In the presence of microalbuminuria/proteinuria, ACEI/ARBs are the first
choice.314
The guidelines recognize that the risk of target organ damage extends to BP
below this level and the true threshold for CVD risk should be flexible and
dependent on the total risk of the individual. A recent study showed that in
persons over the age of 50 years and without diabetes, a lower BP of 120/80
mmHG was associated with improved survival and cardiac outcomes. A lower
BP target was however, associated with an increase in adverse effects
(syncope, hypotension, electrolyte problems and acute kidney injury or
failure).483
I, C
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, B
Table 13: Blood Pressure Targets in the Different Risk Groups *
< 140/90 mmHg in most women < 80 years of age
I,A
< 150/90 mmHg in women > 80 years of age
I,A
In the presence of the following co-morbidity, target BP should be:
 renal impairment (CKD): < 140/90 mmHg
I,A
 proteinuria of <1g/24hr: < 140/90 mmHg
I,A
 proteinuria of >1g/24hr: < 130/80 mmHg
I,A
 post MI and heart failure: < 130/< 80 mmHg
I,C
 secondary prevention of lacunar stroke: < 130/80 mmHG
II a, B
Blood Pressure control in women may be challenging. In the Women’s Health
Initiative, 64% of hypertensive women were treated with drugs but BP control
was only achieved in 36% with the lowest rates of control in the oldest
groups.484 This was mainly because of the difficulty of controlling systolic
BP.484 Women are also more sensitive to a number of anti-hypertensive
medications.
For recommended pharmacotherapy refer Appendix 4C, pg 95.
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed 2013. available at www.acadmed.com.my
6.2.2.2. Gender Specific issues
The benefits of treating hypertension has been shown in both gender although
some gender specific differences have been seen in the clinical trials. An
earlier subgroup meta-analysis showed that in men, antihypertensive
treatment reduced all categories of events while in women it was statistically
significant only for stroke and major CV events. In absolute terms, the benefit
in women was seen primarily for strokes; in men, treatment prevented as
many coronary events as strokes.485-487
However, a more recent large meta- analysis found that there were no gender
differences on the primary outcome of total major cardiovascular events.
There was also no evidence that different anti-hypertensive regimens based
on ACEI, calcium antagonists, ARBs, or diuretics/β-blockers were more
effective in one gender than the other.488
Current guidelines for the treatment of hypertension are not gender specific.
There are however some gender differences. Diuretics were associated with
better blood pressure control than any of the other drug classes as
monotherapy.489,490 Women are:
•
less likely than men to have BP controlled with lifestyle interventions
alone488,489
•
less successful in losing weight 489,490
•
more sensitive and more likely to respond to salt restriction491,492
•
more likely to develop hyponatraemia and/or hypokalaemia associated
with diuretic therapy493
•
less likely to respond to β-blockers490
•
more likely to develop pedal oedema with calcium channel blockers490
•
twice as likely as men to develop ACEI induced cough494
Special issues in women:
•
pre-conception counselling is important in young women with
hypertension
•
women in the reproductive age should preferably avoid ACEI and ARBs
•
in pregnancy, the drugs of choice are methyldopa, nifedipine and
labetolol
•
weight loss and reduced sodium intake is beneficial in reducing blood
pressure in older women488
6.2.3.
Diabetes
6.2.3.1. Targets of therapy
Table 14: Targets of Therapy in Diabetes*
Specific local guidelines for the management of diabetic complications (CPGs
on Diabetes Nephropathy 2006, Diabetes Retinopathy and Diabetic Foot
2004) are also available at the website – www.acadmed.org.my.
6.2.4.
Overweight and Obesity
Treatment of overweight and obesity can be achieved through a variety of
modalities which include:
•
changes in dietary composition
•
low-calorie diet (LCD)
•
very low-calorie diet (VLCD)
•
physical activity
Unit
Target
Grade,
Level
Glycemic
Control
HbA1c
≤ 6.5%**
I, A
Fasting or Pre-prandial blood sugar 4.4 - 7.0 mmol/L**
-
Post prandial blood sugar (90 mins
after a meal)
4.4 - 8.5 mmol/L**
-
BP
≤ 135/75 mmHg
I, B
Lipids
LDL-C
≤ 2.6 mmol/L
≤ 1.8 mmol/L in the
presence of CVD
or a reduction of at
least 50% if the
baseline LDL-C is
between
2.6-5.1mmol/L
I, A
I, A
-
TG
≤ 1.7 mmol/L
HDL-C
> 1.2 mmol/L
*Malaysian CPG for Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus,5th Ed 2015.314
**Glycemic targets needs to be individualised depending on the patient’s profile
•
behaviour therapy
•
drug therapy
•
bariatric surgery
Certain weight loss therapies may be inappropriate in the following
circumstances:
•
serious, acute psychiatric illness
•
pregnancy or lactation
6.2.4.1. Overall Goals for Weight Loss Management
•
10% loss of the initial body weight is associated with significant health
benefits (Table 3, pg 11)350,495
•
Overweight/ obese women who lose weight intentionally over a year,
have been shown to have significantly reduced mortality rates496
•
Maintain lower weight over the long-term. It is better to maintain a
moderate loss over the long-term than it is to achieve a greater weight
loss that cannot be maintained
•
Prevent weight regain
6.2.5.
Others
6.2.5.1. Anticoagulant
Patients with non valvular AF irrespective of whether the pattern is
paroxysmal,
persistent
or
permanent
should
be
considered
for
anticoagulation depending on their CHA2DS2-VASc score.497
The CHA2DS2-VASc score is calculated as in Table 15, pg 86.
The rate of stroke is 0.2, 1.3, and 2.2% per year for CHA2DS2-VASc scores of
0, 1, and 2 respectively.497 Patients with a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 2 or more,
should be considered for anticoagulation with:
•
warfarin or
•
NOAC497
In those with a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 1, consideration for anticoagulant
therapy should be individualized.497,498
I, B
I, A
I, A
I, B
IIa, C
Patients who are < 65 years of age with lone AF (strictly defined, irrespective
of gender) and those with CHA2DS2-VASc of 0, have very low absolute stroke
risk. It may be reasonable not to consider these group of individuals for
antithrombotic treatment.497,498
The NOAC’s have been shown to be safer and more efficacious in women.116
The risk of bleeding, renal function and patient preferences must however be
taken into consideration before initiating therapy.
In patients with AF secondary to valvular heart disease, warfarin is the agent
of choice.497
Table 15: CHA2DS2-VASc score
6.2.5.2. Supplements
There is no evidence that the following supplements are useful in preventing
CVD in women:
1.
Antioxidant
vitamin
supplements
(e.g.
vitamin
E,C
&
beta
carotene)499-502
2.
Folic acid503,504
Omega-3 fatty acid consumption in the form of fish or in capsule form (e.g.
EPA 1800 mg/day) may be helpful in women with hypercholesterolemia and/or
triglyceridaemia.505 It has not been shown to be helpful in the primary
prevention of CHD.506-508
IIa, B
I, B
CHA2DS2-VASc SCORE
Congestive Heart Failure
1
Hypertension
1
Age > 75 years
2
Diabetes Mellitus
1
Prior Stroke or TIA or
thromboembolism
2
Vascular Disease
1
Age 64-74 years
1
Female gender
1
III, A
III, A
II, B
7.
ADHERENCE,
COMPLIANCE
AND
QUALITY
ASSURANCE
It has been well documented that there is a lack of adherence to
cardiovascular preventive therapy. This is due to:
•
Healthcare providers not:
 counselling patients on healthy dietary practices, weight
management and regular exercise
 risk stratifying patients
 initiating appropriate treatment when necessary
 achieving treatment goals
 checking on drug compliance
•
Patient - non compliance to medical advice and drug therapy
Lack of adherence threatens the success of the guideline recommendation
and implementation. More importantly, lack of adherence leads to missed
opportunity for the risk reducing benefits of the treatment, thus creating
enormous costs to the health system for treating CV events that could have
been prevented.
To improve adherence and compliance the following are recommended:
•
Patient:
 Simplify medication regimens using wherever possible drugs with a
single daily or twice daily dosing
 Give clear instructions
 Encourage the support of the family
 Involve patients in their care through self-monitoring
•
Healthcare providers:
 Practise effective preventive strategies in accordance with clinical
guidelines
 Educate patients to participate in their preventive care
 Use mass media for patient education
 Standardize reference values in all laboratories to recommended
Malaysian guidelines
 Where available, the patient should be referred to the Medication
Therapy Adherence Clinic (MTAC) to improve compliance to therapy.
Adherence to therapy should be checked periodically. Some suggested audit
parameters are as in the Audit of Clinical Diabetes (Green Book) by the Unit
Penyakit Kardiovaskular dan Diabetes (Appendix 6, pg 100). In addition
documentation of the following:
• CVD risk of the women (any CV risk score but the Framingham general
CVD risk score tool for primary care is encouraged)

Numerator: number of women with CVD risk score documented

Denominator: number of women seen at that clinic session
•
Patient’s weight, waist circumference and BMI and the desirable values.

Numerator: number of women with these values documented

Denominator: number of women seen at that clinic session
•
Blood pressure

Numerator: number of women with BP target achieved

Denominator: number of women with hypertension seen at that
clinic session
•
Lipid values

Numerator: number of women with LDL-C (or total cholesterol)
target achieved

Denominator: number of women seen at that clinic session whose
LDL-C (or total cholesterol) were measured
•
Fasting glucose and HbA1c levels

Numerator: number of women with HbA1c (or fasting glucose) target
achieved

Denominator: number of women with diabetes seen at that clinic
session
Target: more than 70% of the medical records should have these data
documented.
APPENDIX
APPENDIX 1: CANCER AND THE HEART
Appendix 1A: Cardiotoxicity risk assessment199
Medicationrelated risk
High risk score 4
Anthracyclines, Cyclophosphamide,
Ifosfamide, Clofarabine, Herceptin
Intermediate risk
score 2
Docetaxel, Pertuzumab, Sunitinib,
Sorafinib
Low risk score 1
Bevacizumab, Dasatinib, Imatinib,
Lapatinib
Rare risk score 0
Etoposide, Rituximab, Thalidomide
Risk score 1 each
•
Heart failure or cardiomyopathy
•
CHD or equivalent (PAD)
•
Hypertension
•
Diabetes Mellitus
•
Prior or recurrent anthracyclines
•
Prior of recurrent chest radiation
•
Age < 15, > 65 years
•
Female gender
Patientrelated risk
Appendix 1B: Cardiotoxicity risk score199
Cardiotoxicity Risk Score
> 6
5-6
3-4
1-2
0
Risk Categories
Very high
High
Intermediate
Low
Very low
Appendix 1C: Monitoring recommendations during/after chemotherapy*
Appendix 1D: Treatment recommendations509-514
Risk Category
Recommendation
Very high risk
TTE with strain before every (other) cycle, end, 3-6
months and 1 year, optional ECG, cTn with TTE during
chemotherapy
High risk
TTE with strain every 3 cycles, end, 3-6 months and 1 year
after chemotherapy, optional ECG, cTn with TTE during
chemotherapy
Intermediate
risk
Discuss risk and benefit of medication
Low risk
None, monitoring only
Very low risk
None, monitoring only
Risk Category
Management
Very high cardiotoxicity
risk
Initiate ACEI/ARB, carvedilol and statins, one
week prior to chemotherapy and up-titre as
tolerated
High cardiotoxicity risk
Initiate ACEI/ARB, carvedilol/nebivolol and
statins
Intermediate
cardiotoxicity risk
Discuss risk and benefit of medication
Low cardiotoxicity risk
None, monitoring only
Very low cardiotoxicity
None, monitoring only
TTE: trans-thoracic echocardiography, cTn: cardiac troponins
*Adapted from:
•
Bovelli D, Plataniotis G, Roila F on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Working Group. Cardiotoxicity of
chemotherapeutic agents and radiotherapy-related heart disease: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Ann Oncol 2010; 21(suppl 5): v277-v282.
•
Hermann J, Lerman A, Sandhu N et al. Evaluation and management of patients with heart disease and
cancer: Cardio-oncology. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 2014; 89(9): 1287-1306.
APPENDIX 2: COMBINED ORAL CONTRACEPTIVE (COC)
Appendix 2A: Combined Oral Contraceptive (COC)
Class of COC*
Progesterone content
Estrogen content
Firstgeneration
Secondgeneration
Thirdgeneration
Fourthgeneration
Norethynodrel, norethindrone**,
norethindrone acetate, or ethynodiol
diacetate
Norgestrel or levonorgestrel,
norethindrone, norethindrone
acetate, ethynodiol diacetate, norgestrel,
levonorgestrel, or norgestimate
Desogestrel, gestodene, or norgestimate
Drospirenone, dienogest, or nomegestrol
acetate
containing ≥ 50 µg
ethinyl estradiol
< 50 µg ethinyl
estradiol
< 50 µg ethinyl
estradiol
< 50 µg ethinyl
estradiol
*These terms sometimes refer to the:
• timing of the introduction of a product (given both the dose of estrogen and the type of progestin),
• timing of the market introduction of the progestin,
• structure of the carbon ring from which the progestin is derived (estrane or gonane),
**also known as norethisterone
Appendix 2B: Age-Specific Estimates of the Excess Rates of Myocardial
Infarcation,
Ischemic
Stroke,
and
Venous
Thromboembolism
Attributable to the Use of Low-Estrogen Oral Contraceptive and
Pregnancy-Related Mortality*515
Variable
Age
0.4
20-24
Yr
30-34
Yr
40-44
Yr
No. of excess cases of myocardial infarction
and ischemic stroke attributable to oral-
contraceptive use (per 100,000 woman-yr
of use)**
Among non-smokers
0.6
2
Among smokers
1
2
20
Among women with hypertension
4
7
29
No. of pregnancy-related death
(per 100,000 live births)
10
12
45
No of excess cases of venous thromboembolism
attributable to oral-contraceptive use
(per 100,000 woman-yr of use)
With norethindrone, norethindrone acetate,
levonorgestrel, or ethynodiol diacetate
6
9
12
With desogestrel or gestodene
16
23
30
* Low estrogen was defined as less than 50 µg.
**Data are from Farley et al.
From: Farley TM, Collins J, Schlesselman JJ. Hormonal contraception and risk of cardiovascular disease:
an international perspective. Contraception 1998;57:211-230
APPENDIX 3: ALCOHOL CONTENT OF COMMON SPIRITS
Wine
125ml (small glass)
12%
2.1 units
14%
1.75 units
175ml
(standard glass)
1.5 units
2.45 units
Beer
Half Pint
330ml bottle
Pint
4%
5%
1.1 units
1.4 units
1.7 units
2.2 units
2.8 units
Spirits
25ml (single)
50ml (double)
40%
1 unit
2 units
Adapted from the UK government guidelines on alcohol consumption
Co-existing
Condition
BP Levels
(mmHg)
No RF
No TOD
No TOC
TOD
or
RF (1-2)
No TOC
TOC or
RF (≥ 3) or
Clinical
atherosclerosis
Previous MI
or Previous
stroke or
Diabetes
SBP 130 - 139
and/or
DBP 80 - 89
SBP 140 - 159
and/or
DBP 90 - 99
SBP 160 - 179
and/or
DBP 100 - 109
SBP > 180
and/or
DBP> 110
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
High
High
Very high
Very high
Medium
High
Very high
Very high
Very high
Very high
High
Very high
APPENDIX 4: MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSION
Appendix 4A: Risk Stratification*
TOD = Target organ damage (LVH, retinopathy, proteinuria)
TOC = Target organ complication (heart failure, renal failure)
RF = additional risk factors (smoking, TC > 6.5 mmol/L, family history of premature vascular disease)
Clinical atherosclerosis (CHD, carotid stenosis, peripheral vascular disease, transient ischaemic attack,
stroke)
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed. 2013482
Appendix 4B: Recommendation for Follow-up Visit based on Initial
Blood Pressure Measurements for Adults*
Initial BP (mmHg)
Follow-up recommendation
to conﬁrm diagnosis
Systolic
Diastolic
< 130 and < 85
130 - 139 and 85 - 89
40 - 159 and/or 90 - 99
160 - 179 and/or 100 - 109
180 - 209 and/or 110 - 119
≥ 210 and/or ≥ 120
Recheck in one year
Recheck within 3 - 6 months
Conﬁrm within two months
Evaluate within one month and
treat it conﬁrmed
Evaluate within one week and
treat it conﬁrmed
Initiate drug treatment
immediately
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed. 2013482
Appendix 4C: Choice of Anti-Hypertensive Drugs in Patients with
Concomitant Conditions*
Diabetes mellitus
(without
nephropathy)
+
+/-
+++
+
+/-
++
Diabetes mellitus
(with
nephropathy)
++
+/-
+++
++*
+/-
+++
Gout
+/-
+
+
+
+
++
Dyslipidaemia
+/-
+/-
+
+
+
+
Coronary heart
disease
+
+++
+++
++
+
+++
Heart failure
+++
+++
+++
#
+
@
+
+++
Peripheral
vascular disease
+
+/-
+
+
+
+
Asthma
+
-
+
+
+
+
Non-diabetic
renal impairment
++
+
+++
+*
+
++
Renal artery
stenosis
+
+
++
$
+
+
++
$
Elderly with no
co-morbid
conditions
+++
+
+
+++
+/-
+
Very elderly (>80
yrs) with no comorbid
conditions
+++
+
+++
++
+/-
++
The grading recommendation from (+) to (+++) is based on increasing levels of
evidence and/or current widely accepted practice
+/- Use with care
- Contraindicated
* Only non-dihydropyridine CCB
# Metoprolol, bisoprolol, carvedilol, nebivolol – dose needs to be gradually
titrated
@ Current evidence available for amlodipine and felodipine only
$ Contraindicated in bilateral renal artery stenosis
Concomitant
Condition
Diuretics
βblockers
ACEIs
CCBs
Peripheral
α-blockers
ARBs
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed. 2013482
Effective combination
Patients studied
ACEI + thiazide-like diuretics516
ARB + thiazide517
CCB + ACEIs or β-blocker + thiazide518
ARB + thiazide or CCb + thiazide 519
CCB + ACEI520
ACEI + thiazide-like diuretics521
ACEI + CCB522
thiazide-like diuretics + ACEI523
Post stroke
Hypertensive with LVH
Patients with CAD
High risk hypertensives
Medium risk hypertensives with no
overt vascular diseases
High risk hypertensives with diabetes
High risk hypertensives
Very elderly (> 80 years old)
Appendix 4D: Effective Anti-Hypertensive Combinations Used in
Outcome Trials*
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed. 2013482
Appendix 5A: Treatment Algorithm for Newly Diagnosed T2DM*
Appendix 5: MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
+ The agents above are based on historical order
Upon Diagnosis of Type 2 Diabetes LIFESTYLE Modification
A1c < 6.5% AND
FPG < 6 mmol/L
If postprandial is > 11.0
mmol/L,consider one of
the following:
Metformin
DPP-4i
DPP-4i
DPP-4i
DPP-4i
Follow-up with A1c
after 3 months
If A1c ≤ 6.5% continue
with Lifestyle Approach
If A1c > 6.5%
refer to table 21
If A1c ≤ 6.5%, continue
therapy
If A1c ≤ 6.5%, continue
therapy
If A1c ≤ 6.5%, continue
therapy
A1c 6.5% - < 7.5% OR
FPG 6 - < 8 mmol/L
OAD MONOTHERAPY
Metformin
OR
SU
Glinides
SU
Glinides
SU
Glinides
Glinides
AGI
AGI
AGI
AGI
TZD
TZD
TZD
GLP-1 RA
GLP-1 RA
GLP-1 RA
SGLT-2i
SGLT-2i
SGLT-2i
Optimise dose of OAD
agent in the subsequent
3 months
Follow-up with A1c after
3 months
A1c 7.5% - < 8.5% OR
FPG 8 - < 10 mmol/L
Any two combination of:
Insulin
Insulin
Optimise dose of OAD
agents in the subsequent
3 months
Follow-up with A1c after
3 months
Optimise dose of OAD
agents in the subsequent
3 months
Follow-up with A1c after
3 months
A1c 8.5% - 10% OR
FPG 10 - 13 mmol/L
Any three combination of:
A1c > 10.0% OR
FPG > 13 mmol/L
OR
LIFESTYLE APPROACH
DUAL COMBINATION
THERAPY
TRIPLE COMBINATION
THERAPY
COMBINATION
THERAPY + BASAL/
PREMIXED INSULIN
THERAPY
INTENSIVE INSULIN
THERAPY
+ OAD
Metformin
Metformin
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, 5th ed, 2015314
Footnote:
Metformin
SU, Glinides, Insulin
GLP-1 RA, SGLT-2i
Efficacious, low risk of hypoglycaemia and weight neutral
Efficacious, risk of hypoglycaemia and weight gain
Moderate efficacy, low risk of hypoglycaemia and weight neutral
Moderate efficacy, low risk of hypoglycaemia and weight loss
Moderate efficacy, low risk of hypoglycaemia and weight gain
Modest efficacy, low risk of hypoglycaemia and weight neutral
DPP-4i
TZD
AGI
Glycaemic
Control
Current
Treatment
Lifestyle
Treatment
Monotherapy
(Metformin
preferred)
A1c
6.5 -< 7.5%
or FPG
6 -< 8 mmol/L
Add Metformin
(or if metformin
cannot be
tolerated add
either SU/
Glinides/AGI/
TZD/ DPP-4i/
GLP-1 RA/ SGLT2i
Add another
agent
(Dual therapy)
A1c
7.5 -< 8.5%
or FPG
8-< 10 mmol/L
Add Metformin
and another
agent
(Dual therapy)
Add 2 agents
not used for
the dual
therapy
(Triple therapy)
A1c
8.5-10.0%
or FPG
10-13 mmol/L
Dual Therapy
Triple Therapy
Add another
agent not used
for the dual
therapy
(Triple therapy)
Dual or Triple
therapy +
insulin (basal or
premixed)
Dual or Triple
therapy +
insulin
(basal or
premixed)
Optimise insulin
(basal plus/
multiple
premixed)
± OAD
Optimise
insulin
(basal plus/
multiple
premixed)
± OAD
Intensify insulin
(basal bolus/
multiple
premixed)
± OAD
Add Metformin
and another
2 agents
not used for the
dual therapy
(Triple therapy)
Dual or Triple
therapy +
insulin
(basal or
premixed)
Optimise
insulin
(basal plus/
multiple
premixed) ±
OAD
Intensify
insulin
(basal bolus/
multiple
premixed)
± OAD
Intensify
insulin
(basal bolus/
multiple
premixed)
± OAD
Dual or Triple
therapy +
insulin
(basal or
premixed)
A1c
> 10.0%
or FPG
> 13 mmol/L
Appendix 5B: Treatment Recommendations for Patients on Clinic
Follow-up
Footnote:
1. If symptomatic (weight loss, polyuria, etc) at any A1c and FPG level, consider insulin therapy
2. Glycaemic target should be individualized however try to achieve as near normal glycaemia
without causing hypoglycaemia
3. May consider 4th agent (OAD or GLP-1 RA) if A1c ≤ 10%.
+ intensify involve changing the regimen
+ optimise involve increasing the dose
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, 5th ed, 2015314
98
Appendix 5C: Recommended Algorithm for Specific Patient Profiles
Normal weight
Overweight
Obese
Increased Risk
of Hypoglycaemia
CKD stage 3
onwards
If not to target (generally A1c < 6.5%)
Consider ﬁrst line Consider ﬁrst line Consider ﬁrst line
Consider ﬁrst line
Consider ﬁrst line
Metformin
Metformin
Metformin
Metformin
Half Dose
Metformin*
(Contraindicated
in stage 4&5)
Consider second
line
Consider second
line
Consider second
line
Consider second
line
Consider second
line
DPP-4 inhibitor
SGLT2 inhibitor
SGLT2 inhibitor
SGLT2 inhibitor
SGLT2 inhibitor
DPP-4 inhibitor
DPP-4 inhibitor
GLP-1 Receptor
Agonist (RA)
3rd Gen
Sulfonylurea
(Not advisable
stages 4&5)
DPP-4 inhibitor
Consider third
line
Consider third
line
Consider third
line
Consider third
line
Consider third
line
Consider fourth
line
Consider fourth
line
Consider fourth
line
Consider fourth
line
Consider fourth
line
Sulfonylurea
GLP-1 agonist
(stop DPP-4
Inhibitor)
Basal insulin
Thiazolidinedione
Prandial Insulin
Consider
Consider
Consider
Consider
or
GLP-1 RA
(stop DPP-4
inhibitor)
Basal insulin or
Pre-mix insulin
or
Consider
Insulin
intensiﬁcation
GLP-1 RA
(stop DPPIV
inhibitor)
Insulin
intensiﬁcation
Basal insulin
analogue
or
Basal insulin
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
Basal insulin or
Pre-mix insulin
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
*Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, 5th ed, 2015314
99
100
Hospital/ Health Clinic: ________________ Type of practice: FMS/ MO/ AMO
Name of patient: ____________________ IC No: ___________________
D.O.B:_____________________
Sex: Male/ Female
Date when diabetes was diagnosed:________ Ethnic group: _____________
estimated/ presumed**
Criteria
Result of the most
recent examination
Date of the most
recent examination Not done
Height
Weight
Waist circumference
Body Mass Index (BMI)
Blood Pressure
FBS, RBS or 2HPP
HbA1C
TC:
TG:
HDL:
LDL:
Creatinine
Urine microalbumin
Urine protein
Fundoscopy
Examination of feet
ECG
cm
kg
cm
kg/m2
mmHg
mmol/L
mmol/L
mmol/L
mmol/L
mmol/L
µmol/L
%
Normal/ Abnormal
Normal/ Abnormal
Normal/ Abnormal
Normal/ Abnormal
Present/ Absent
Appendix 6: AUDIT OF CLINICAL DIABETES
*This audit form contains only some of the parameters recorded in the Buku Rawatan NCD
**Estimate/presumed: If date not known, enter 30/06/yyyy and mark the box.
Buku Rekod Rawatan NCD*
Lipid proﬁle
REFERENCES
1.
Rajadurai J, Lopez EA, Rahajoe AU, Goh PP, Uboldejpracharak Y, Zambahari R. Women’s
cardiovascular health: perspectives from South-East Asia. Nat. Rev. Cardiol 2012: 9,
464–477.
2.
World Health Organization. Noncommunicable diseases country profiles 2014. July 2014.
WHO Document Production Services, Geneva, Switzerland.
3.
Hou TL, Nordin R, Wan Ahmad WA, Chuey YL, Zambahari R, Ismail O, Houng BL, Kui HS
on behalf of the NVCD Investigator. Sex Differences in Acute Coronary Syndrome in a
Multiethnic Asian Population. Results of the Malaysian National Cardiovascular Disease
Database - Acute Coronary Syndrome (NCVD-ACS) Registry. Global Heart 2014; 9(4):
381-390.
4.
Vaccarino V, Parsons L, Every NR, et al. Sex based differences in early mortality after
myocardial infarction. National Registry of Myocardial Infarction 2 participants. N Engl J
Med 1999; 341: 217-25.
5.
Benamer H, Tafflet M, Bataille S, et al; CARDIO-ARHIF Registry Investigators. Female
gender is an independent predictor of in-hospital mortality after STEMI in the era of
primary PCI: insights from the greater Paris area PCI Registry. EuroIntervention 2011;
6(9): 1073-9.
6.
Sadowski M, Gasior M, Gierlotka M, et al. Gender-related differences in mortality after
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a large multicentre national registry.
EuroIntervention 2011; 6(9): 1068-72.
7.
Kim L. "Trends in myocardial infarction and in-hospital outcomes in women <55 years old
in the United States, 2007-2011"Presented at: the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions Scientific Sessions; May 28-31, 2014; Las Vegas. Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions 2014; Abstract A-042.
8.
Tomassini F. Women face higher mortality risk after PCI for STEMI. Presented at: the
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions Scientific Sessions; May 28-31,
2014; Las Vegas. Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions 2014.
Abstract A-021.
9.
Patel T, Pancholy S. Gender differences in in-hospital and long-term mortality in patients
undergoing primary PCI for ST-elevation myocardial infarction: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Presented at: the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions Scientific Sessions; May 28-31, 2014; Las Vegas. Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions 2014. Abstract A-067.
10. Park JS, Kim YJ, Shin DG, Jeong MH, Ahn YK, Chung WS, Seung KB, Kim CJ, Cho MC,
Jang YS, Park SJ, Seong IW, Chae SC, Hur SH, Choi DH, Hong TJ;Korean Acute
Myocardial Infarction Registry (KAMIR) Group. Gender differences in clinical features and
in-hospital outcomes in ST-segment elevation acute myocardial infarction: from the
Korean Acute Myocardial Infarction Registry (KAMIR) study. Clin Cardiol 2010; 33(8):
E1-6.
11. Khera S, Kolte D, Gupta T, et al. Temporal Trends and sex differences in revascularization
and outcomes of ST Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction in younger adults in the
United States. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015; 66: 1961-72.
12. Lewsey JD, Gillies M, Jhund PS, et al. Sex differences in incidence, mortality, and survival
in individuals with stroke in Scotland, 1986 to 2005. Stroke 2009; 40: 1038–43.
13. Di Carlo A, Lamassa M, Baldereschi M, Pracucci G, Basile AM et al for the European
BIOMED Study of Stroke Care Group. Sex Differences in the Clinical Presentation,
Resource Use, and 3-Month Outcome of Acute Stroke in Europe. Data from a Multicenter
Multinational Hospital-Based Registry. Stroke 2003; 34: 1114-9.
14. World Health Organization. Global Health Observatory Data Repository. Ten leading
causes
of
death.
Available
at:
http://apps.who.int/gho/data
/view.wrapper.
MGHEMORTCAUSE 10-2012?lang=en&menu=hide
15. Alzheimer’s Association. 2014 Alzheimer’s Disease. Facts and Figures. Women and
Alzheimer’s Disease. Alzheimer’s & Dementia 2014; 10(2): 54-66.
16.
Women’s Heart Health Organization. National Heart Association of Malaysia. Women’s
Heart Health Awareness Survey 1(2011) and 2 (2014). Data on File.
17.
Leifheit-Limson EC, D’Onofrio G, Daneshvar M et al. Sex differences in cardiac risk
factors, perceived risk and health care provider discussion of risk and risk modification
among young patients with acute Myocardial Infarction. The VIRGO study. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2015; 66:1949-57
18.
Shaw LJ, Bairey Merz CN, Pepine CJ et al. Insights from the NHLBI-sponsored Women’s
Ischaemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 47: 3s1: 4S-20S.
19.
Milner KA, Funk M, Arnold A et al. Typical symptoms are predictive of acute coronary
symptoms in women. Am Heart J 2002; 143: 283-8
20.
Swahn E. New Findings in Women and Men Regarding Symptoms and Delay Times in
Stemi. Circulation 2014; 130: A 14029.
21.
Leening MJG, Ferket BS, Steyerberg EW et al. Sex Differences in Lifetime Risk and First
Manifestation of Cardiovascular Disease. A Prospective Population Based Cohort Study.
Br Med J 2014; 349: g5992
22.
Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ et al on behalf of the American
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee Heart
Disease and Stroke Statistics—2015 Update A Report From the American Heart
Association. Circulation 2015; 131: e29-e322.
23.
Kappert K, Böhm M, Schmieder R, Schumacher H, Teo K, Yusuf S, Sleight P, Unger T;
ONTARGET/TRANSCEND Investigators. Impact of sex on cardiovascular outcome in
patients at high cardiovascular risk: Analysis of the Telmisartan Randomized Assessment
Study in ACE-Intolerant Subjects with Cardiovascular Disease (TRANSCEND) and the
Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination with Ramipril Global End Point Trial
(ONTARGET). Circulation 2012;126: 934–941
24.
Anand SS, Islam S, Rosengren A, Franzosi MG, Steyn K, Yusufali AH, Keltai M, Diaz R,
Rangarajan S, Yusuf S. Risk factors for myocardial infarction in women and men: insights
from the INTERHEART study. Eur Heart J 2008; 29: 932–940.
25.
Lerner DJ, Kannel WB. Patterns of coronary heart disease morbidity and mortality in the
sexes: a 26-year follow-up of the Framingham population. Am Heart J 1986; 111(2):
383-90.
26.
Shaw LJ, Bugiardi R, Bairey Merz N. Women and ischemic heart disease: evolving
knowledge. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 54(17): 1561-75.
27.
Douglas PS, Ginsburg GS. The evaluation of chest pain in women. N Engl J Med 1996;
334: 1311-5
28.
Canto JG, Goldberg RJ, Hand MM et al. Symptom presentation of women with acute
coronary syndromes: myth vs reality. Arch Intern Med 2007; 167(22): 2405-13.
29.
Kudenchuk PJ, Maynard C, Martin JS, Wirkus M, Weaver D. Comparison of presentation,
treatment, and outcome of acute myocardial infarction in men versus women (the
Myocardial Infarction Triage and Intervention Registry). Am J Cardiol 1996; 78(1): 9-14.
30.
Arbustini E,Dal Bello B, MoRbini P, Burke AP,Bocciareli M, Specchia G, Virmani R.
Plaque erosion is a major substrate for coronary thrombosis in acute myocardial
infarction. Heart 1999; 82: 269-272
31.
Prati F, Uemura S, Souteyrand G, Virmani R, Motreff P et al. OCT –based diagnosis and
management of STEMI associated with intact fibrous cap. J Am Coll Cardiol Img 2013; 6
: 283-287.
32.
Smolina K, Wright FL, Rayner M, Goldacre MJ. Long-term survival and recurrence after
acute myocardial infarction in England, 2004 to 2010. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes
2012; 5: 532-540
33.
Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2012
update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2012; 125(1): e2–220.
34.
Shaw LJ, Shaw RE, Bairey Merz N. Impact of ethnicity and gender differences on
angiographic coronary artery disease prevalence and in hospital mortality in the
American College of Cardiology-National Cardiovascular Data Registry (ACC-NCDR).
Circulation 2008; 117: 1787-1801.
35. Smilowitz NR, Sampson BA, Abrecht CR, Siegfried JS, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR.
Women have less severe and extensive coronary atherosclerosis in fatal cases of
ischemic heart disease: an autopsy study. Am Heart J 2011; 161(4): 681-8.
36. Otten AM, Maas AH, Ottervanger JP, et al. Is the difference in outcome between men and
women treated by primary percutaneous coronary intervention age dependent? Gender
difference in STEMI stratified on age. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care 2013; 2(4):
334–341.
37. Pepine CJ, Ferdinand KC, Shaw LJ, Light-McGroary KA, Shah RU et al. Emergence of
nonobstructive coronary artery disease. A woman’s problem and need for change in
definition of angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015; 66: 1918-330
38. Eitel I, Desch S, de Waha S, Fuernau G, Gutberlet M, Schuler G, Thiele H. Sex Differences
in Myocardial Salvage and Clinical Outcome in Patients With Acute Reperfused
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2012; 5: 119-126.
39. Berry JD, Dyer A, Cai X et al. Lifetime risks of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 2012;
366: 321–9.
40. Lloyd-Jones DM. Cardiovascular risk prediction: basic concepts, current status, and future
directions. Circulation 2010; 121(15): 1768-77.
41. Mora S, Redberg RF, Cui Y et al. Ability of exercise testing to predict cardiovascular and
all-cause death in asymptomatic women. 20-Year Follow-up of the Lipid Research Clinics
Prevalence Study. JAMA 2003; 290: 1600-07.
42. Mieres JH, Gulati M, Bairey Merz N, Berman DS, Gerber TC et al. American Heart
Associatoin Cardiac Imaging Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and the
Cardiovascular Imaging and Intervention Committee, Council on Cardiovascular
Radiology and Intervention. Role of noninvasive testing in the clinical evaluation of women
with suspected ischemic heart disease: A concensus statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 2014; 130: 350-379.
43. Mieres JH, Shaw LJ, Hendel RC et al. Am Society of Nuclear Cardiology: task force on
women and coronary artery disease. J Nuc Cardiol 2003; 10: 95-101.
44. Nagel E, Klein C, Paetsch I et al. Magnetic resonance perfusion measurements for the
noninvasive detection of coronary artery disease. Circulation 2003; 108: 432–7.
45. Lipinski MJ, McVey CM, Berger JS, Kramer CM, Salerno M. Prognostic value of stress
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in patients with known or suspected coronary artery
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013; 62: 826–38.
46. Lakoski SG, Greenland P, Wong ND et al. Coronary artery calcium scores and risk for
cardiovascular events in women classified as “low risk” based on Framingham risk score:
the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Arch Intern Med 2007; 167: 2437–4.
47. Arbab-Zadeh A, Miller JM, Rochitte CE et al. Diagnostic accuracy of computed
tomography coronary angiography according to pre-test probability of coronary artery
disease and severity of coronary arterial calcification. The CORE-64 (Coronary Artery
Evaluation Using 64-Row Multidetector Computed Tomography Angiography) International
Multicenter Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012; 59(4): 379-87.
48. McClelland RL, Jorgensen NW, Budoff M et al. 10 year coronary heart disease risk
prediction using coronary artery calcium and traditional risk factors. J Am Coll Cardiol
2015; 66: 1643-53.
49. Chang SM, Nabi F, Xu J et al. Value of CACS compared with ETT and Myocardial
Perfusion Imaging for predicting long term cardiac outcome in asymptomatic and
symptomatic patients at low risk for coronary disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img 2015; 8:
134-44.
50. McClellan R, Jorgensen N, Budoff M et al. 10-year coronary heart disease risk prediction
using coronary artery calcium and traditional risk factors: deviation in the MESA
(Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) with validation in the HNR (Heinz Nixdorf Recall)
study and the DHS (Dallas Heart Study). J Am Coll Cardiol 2015; 66(15): 1643-1653.
51. Khuddus MA, Pepine CJ, Handberg EM, Bairey Merz CN, Sopko G et al. An intravascular
ultrasound analysis in women experiencing chest pain in the absence of obstructive
coronary artery disease: a substudy from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute-sponsored Women's Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). J Interv Cardiol
2010; 23: 511–519.
52. Maddox TM, Plomondon ME, Petrich M, Tsai TT, Gethoffer H, Noonan G, Gillespie B, Box
T, Fihn SD, Jesse RL, Rumsfeld JS. A national clinical quality program for Veterans Affairs
catheterization laboratories (from the Veterans Affairs clinical assessment, reporting, and
tracking program). Am J Cardiol 2014; 114: 1750–1757.
53. Davis MB, Maddox TM, Langnar P, Plomondon ME, Rumsfeld JS, Duvernoy CS.
Characteristics and Outcomes of Women Veterans Undergoing Cardiac Catheterization in
the Veterans Affairs Healthcare System Insights from the VA CART Program. Circ
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2015; 8: S39-S47.
54. Maddox TM, Stanislawski MA, Grunwald GK, Bradley SM,Ho M et al. Nonobstructive
Coronary Artery Disease and Risk of Myocardial Infarction. JAMA 2014; 312(17):
1754-1763.
55. Johnson BD, Shaw LJ, Buchthal SD, Bairey Merz CN, Kim HW, Scott KN, Doyle M, Olson
MB, Pepine CJ, den Hollander J, Sharaf B, Rogers WJ, Mankad S, Forder JR, Kelsey SF,
Pohost GM, National Institutes of Health-National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
Prognosis in women with myocardial ischemia in the absence of obstructive coronary
disease: results from the National Institutes of Health-National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute-Sponsored Women's Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). Circulation 2004
Jun 22; 109(24): 2993-9.
56. Pasupathy S, Air T, Dreyer RP, Tavella R, Beltrame JF. Systemic Review of patients
presenting with suspected Myocardail Infarction and non obstructive coronary arteries
(MINOCA) . Circulation 2015; 131: 861-870.
57. Lee BK, Lim HS, Fearon WF, et al. Invasive evaluation of patients with angina in the
absence of obstructive coronary artery disease. Circulation 2015; 131: 1054–60
58. Pepine CJ. Multiple causes for ischemia without obstructive coronary artery disease. Not a
short list. Circulation 2015; 131; 1044-1046.
59. Vermeltfoort IA, Raijmakers PG, Riphagen II, et al. Definitions and incidence of cardiac
syndrome X: review and analysis of clinical data. Clin Res Cardiol. 2010; 99: 475–481.
60. Agrawal S, Mehta PK, Bairey Merz CN. Cardiac Syndrome X – Update 2014. Cardiol Clin
2014; 32(3): 463–78.
61. Lanza GA. Cardiac syndrome X: a critical overview and future perspectives. Heart 2007;
93: 159–66.
62. Asbury EA, Collins P. Cardiac syndrome X. Int J Clin Pract 2005; 59: 1063-9.
63. Parsyan A, Pilote L. Cardiac syndrome X: mystery continues. Can J Cardiol 2012; 28(2
Suppl): S3–6.
64. Kaski JC, Rosano GM, Collins P et al. Cardiac syndrome X: clinical characteristics and left
ventricular function. Long-term follow-up study. J Am Coll Cardiol 1995; 25: 807-14.
65. Han SH, Bae JH, Holmes DR Jr et al. Sex differences in atheroma burden and endothelial
function in patients with early coronary atherosclerosis. Eur Heart J 2008; 29: 1359–69.
66. Reis SE, Holubkov R, Conrad Smith AJ et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunction is highly
prevalent in women with chest pain in the absence of coronary artery disease: results from
the NHLBI WISE study. Am Heart J 2001; 141: 735-41.
67. Buchthal SD, den Hollander JA, Merz CN et al. Abnormal myocardial phosphorus-31
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy in women with chest pain but normal coronary
angiograms. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 829-35.
68. Doyle M, Weinberg N, Pohost GM et al. Prognostic value of global myocardial perfusion
imaging in women with suspected myocardial ischemia and no obstructive coronary
disease. (Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img 2010; 3:
1030–6.
69. Cannon RO III. Microvascular angina and the continuing dilemma of chest pain with
normal coronary angiograms. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 54: 877– 85.
70. Chauhan A, Mullins PA, Thuraisingham SI et al. Abnormal cardiac pain perception in
syndrome X. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994; 24: 329-35.
71. Cannon RO III, Quyyumi AA, Schenke WH et al. Abnormal cardiac sensitivity in patients
with chest pain and normal coronary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol 1990; 16 : 1359-66.
72. Kobayashi Y., Fearon W.F., Honda Y., et al; Effect of sex differences on invasive
measures of coronary microvascular dysfunction in patients with angina in the absence of
obstructive coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2015; 8: 1433-1441.
73. Lansky A, Pietras C.Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction: Does Sex Matter? J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv 2015; 8: 1442-1444.
74. Vermeltfoort IAC, Teule GJJ, van Dijk AB, Muntinga, Raijmakers PGHM. Long-term
prognosis of patients with cardiac syndrome X: a review. Neth Heart J 2012 Sep; 20(9):
365–371.
75. Gulati M, Cooper-DeHoff RM, McClure C, et al. Adverse cardiovascular outcomes in
women with nonobstructive coronary artery disease: a report from the Women’s Ischemia
Syndrome Evaluation study and the St James Women Take Heart project. Arch Intern
Med 2009; 169: 843–850.
76. Sicari R, Palinkas A, Pasanisi EG, et al. Long-term survival of patients with chest pain
syndrome and angiographically normal or near-normal coronary arteries: the additional
prognostic value of dipyridamole echocardiography test (DET) Eur Heart J 2005; 26(20):
2136–2141.
77. Bugiardini R, Manfrini O, Pizzi C, Fontana F, Morgagni G. Endothelial function predicts
future development of coronary artery disease: a study of women with chest pain and
normal coronary angiograms. Circulation 2004; 109: 2518-23.
78. Gulati M, Cooper-DeHoff RM, McClure C et al. Adverse cardiovascular outcomes in
women with nonobstructive coronary artery disease: a report from the Women’s Ischemia
Syndrome Evaluation Study and the St James Women Take Heart Project. Arch Intern
Med 2009; 169(9): 843–50.
79. Jespersen L, Hvelplund A, Abildstrom SZ et al. Stable angina pectoris with no obstructive
coronary artery disease is associated with increased risks of major adverse
cardiovascular events. Eur Heart J 2012; 33(6): 734–44.
80. Sedlak TL, Lee M, Izadnegahdar M, Merz CN, Gao M, Humphries KH. Sex differences in
clinical outcomes in patients with stable angina and no obstructive coronary artery
disease. Am Heart J 2013; 166(1): 38–44.
81. Bugiardini R, Borghi A, Biagetti L, Puddu P. Comparison of verapamil versus propranolol
therapy in syndrome X. Am J Cardiol 1989; 63(5): 286–90.
82. Mehta P, Goykhman P, Thomson L et al. Ranolazine improves angina in women with
evidence of myocardial ischemia but no obstructive coronary artery disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2011; 4(5): 514-522.
83. Marinescu MA, Löffler AI, Ouellette M, Smith L, Kramer CM, Bourque JM. Coronary
microvascular dysfunction, microvascular angina, and treatment strategies. JACC
Cardiovasc Imaging 2015; 8(2): 210-20.
84. Gianni M, Dentali F, Grandi AM, Sumner G, Hiralal R, Lonn E. Apical ballooning syndrome
or takotsubo cardiomyopathy: a systematic review. Eur Heart J. 2006 Jul. 27(13):1523-9
85. Kawai S, Kitabatake A, Tomoike H. Guidelines for diagnosis of takotsubo (ampulla)
cardiomyopathy. Circ J 2007 Jun. 71(6): 990-2.
86. Bybee KA, Kara T, Prasad A, Lerman A, Barsness GW, Wright RS, Rihal CS. Systematic
review: transient left ventricular apical ballooning: a syndrome that mimics ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med 2004; 141: 858–865.
87. Kurisu S, Inoue I, Kawagoe T, Ishihara M, Shimatani Y, Nakama Y. Incidence and
treatment of left ventricular apical thrombosis in Tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy. Int J Cardiol
2011; 146: e58-60.
88. Tweet MS, Hayes SN, Pitta SR, Simari RD, Lerman A et al. Clinical Features,
Management,
and
Prognosis
of
Spontaneous
Coronary Artery
Dissection.
Circulation 2012; 126: 579-588.
89. Saw J, Aymong E, Mancini GB, et al. Nonatherosclerotic coronary artery disease in young
women. Can J Cardiol 2014; 30: 814-9.
90. Tanis W, Stella PR, Kirkels JH, Pijlman AH, Peters RHJ, de Man FH. Spontaneous
coronary artery dissection: current insights and therapy. Neth Heart J 2008 Oct; 16(10):
344–349.
91. Yip A, Saw J. Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissections. A review. Cardiovasc Diagn
Ther 2015; 5(1): 37-48.
92. Sabatine MS, Jaffer FA, Staats PN, Stone JR. Case records of the Massachusetts General
Hospital. Case 28–2010. A 32-year-old woman, 3 weeks post partum, with substernal
chest pain. N Engl J Med 2010; 363(12): 1164-1173.
93. Gowd BM, Thompson PD. Effect of female sex on cardiac arrhythmias. Cardiol Rev 2012;
20(6): 297-303.
94. Benjamin EJ, Wolf PA, d'Agostino RB, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB, Levy D. Impact of atrial
fibrillation on the risk of death: the Framingham heart study. Circulation 1998; 98: 946-52.
95. Feinberg WM, Blackshear JL, Laupacis A, Kronmol R, Hart RG. Prevalence, age
distribution and gender of patients with atrial fibrillation. Arch Intern Med 1995; 155:
469-73.
96. Humphries KH, Kerr CR, Connolly SJ et al. New-onset atrial fibrillation: sex differences in
presentation, treatment, and outcome. Circulation 2001; 103: 2365–70.
97. Paquette M, Roy D, Talajic M et al. Role of gender and personality on quality-of-life
impairment in intermittent atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol 2000; 86: 764–68.
98. Hart RG, Pearce LA, McBride R et al. Factors associated with ischemic stroke during
aspirin therapy in atrial fibrillation: analysis of 2012 participants in the SPAF I– III Clinical
Trials. Stroke 1999; 30: 1223–29.
99. Proietti M, Marra AM, Tassone EJ, De Vuono S, Corrao S, Gobbi P, Perticone F,
Corazza GR, Basili S, Lip GY, Violi F, Raparelli V; ARAPACIS Study Investigators; GIS
Group. Frequency of Left Ventricular Hypertrophy in Non-Valvular Atrial Fibrillation. Am J
Cardiol 2015; 116(6): 877-82.
100. Digby GC, Baranchuk A. Sleep apnea and atrial fibrillation; 2012 update. Curr Cardiol Rev.
2012 Nov; 8(4): 265-72.
101. Buxton A, Hafley G, Lehmann M et al. Prediction of sustained ventricular tachycardia
inducible by programmed stimulation in patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation
1999; 99: 1843–50.
102. Vaitkus P, Kindwall K, Miller J et al. Influence of gender on inducibility of ventricular
arrhythmias in survivors of cardiac arrest with coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol 1991;
67: 537-39.
103. Aronson D, Burger A. The effect of sex on ventricular arrhythmic events in patients with
congestive heart failure. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2002; 25: 1206–11.
104. Lehmann MH, Timothy KW, Frankovich D et al. Age-gender influence on the
rate-corrected QT interval and the QT-heart rate relation in families with genotypically
characterized long QT syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997; 29: 93–99.
105. Bernal O, Moro C. Cardiac Arrhythmias in Women. Rev Esp Cardiol 2006; 59: 609-18.
106. V R. R. Makkar, B. S. Fromm, R. T. Steinman et al. Female gender as a risk factor for
torsades de pointes associated with cardiovascular drugs. JAMA 1993; 270: 2590-97.
107. Wolbrette DL. Risk of proarrhythmia with class III antiarrhythmic agents: sex-based
differences and other issues. Am J Cardiol 2003; 91: 39D–44D.
108. DG Wyse, A Hallstrom, R McBride et al Events in the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression
Trial (CAST): mortality in patients surviving open label titration but not randomized to
double-blind therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 1991; 18: 20-28.
109. Simmons A, Pimentel R, Lakkireddy D. Sudden cardiac death in women. Rev Cardiovasc
Med 2012; 13(1): e37-42.
110. Bertoia ML, Allison MA, Manson JE et al. Risk Factors for sudden cardiac death in post
menopausal women. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012; 60: 2674-82.
111. Chugh SS, Uy-Evanado A, Teodorescu C, Reinier K, Mariani R, Gunson K, Jui J. Women
have a lower prevalence of structural heart disease as a precursor to sudden cardiac
arrest: The Ore-SUDS (Oregon Sudden Unexpected Death Study). J Am Coll Cardiol
2009; 54(22): 2006-11.
112. Kannel WB, Wilson PWF, D’Agostino RB, Cobb J. Sudden coronary death in women. Am
Heart J 1998; 136: 205–12.
113. Albert CM, McGovern BA, Newell JB, Ruskin JN. Sex differences in cardiac arrest
survivors. Circulation 1996; 93: 1170-76.
114. Albert CM, Chae CU, Grodstein F et al. Prospective study of sudden cardiac death among
women in the United States. Circulation 2003; 107(16): 2096-101.
115. Apostolakis S, Sullivan RM, Olshansky B, Lip GYH. Factors affecting quality of
anticoagulation control among patients with atrial fibrillation on warfarin The SAMe-TT 2R
2 Score. CHEST 2013; 144(5): 1555–63.
116. Vallurupalli S, Deshmukh A, Paydak H. Gender based differences in benefit from novel oral
anticoagulant drugs compared to warfarin in atrial fibrillation: an analysis of published
studies. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014; 63: A320.
117. Zeitler EP, Hellkamp AS, Fonarow GC et al. Primary prevention implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators and survival in older women. J Am Coll Cardiol Heart Fail 2015
Feb; 3(2): 159-67.
118. Ghanbari H, Dalloul G, Hasan R et al. Effectiveness of implantable cardioverter
defibrillators for the primary prevention of sudden cardiac death in women with advanced
heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med 2009; 169:
1500–6.
119. Santangeli P, Pelargonio G, Dello Russo A et al. Gender differences in clinical outcome
and primary prevention defibrillator benefit in patients with severe left ventricular
dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart Rhythm 2010; 7: 876–82.
120. Cleland JG, Swedberg K, Follath F et al part of Study Group on Diagnosis of the Working
Group on Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology. The EuroHeart Failure
Survey programme - a survey on the quality of care among patients with heart failure in
Europe. Part 1: patient characteristics and diagnosis. Eur Heart J 2003; 24: 442-463.
121. Levy D, Larson M, Vasan R, Kannel W, Ho K. The progression from hypertension to
congestive heart failure. JAMA 1996; 275: 1557-62.
122. Masoudi FA, Havranek EP, Smith G et al. Gender, age, and heart failure with preserved left
ventricular systolic function. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003; 41: 217-23.
123. Kitzman DW, Gardin JM, Gottdiener JS et al, for the Cardiovascular Health Study
Research Group. Importance of heart failure with preserved systolic function in patients>
or = 65 years of age. CHS Research Group. Cardiovascular Health Study. Am J Cardiol.
2001; 87: 413–19.
124. Stramba-Badiale M, Fox KM, Priori SG et al. Cardiovascular diseases in women: a
statement from the policy conference of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J
2006; 27: 994-1005.
125. Ezekowitz JA, Kaul P, Bakal JA, Armstrong PW, Welsh RC, McAlister FA. Declining
in-hospital mortality and increasing heart failure incidence in elderly patients with first
myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53: 13-20.
126. Bibbins-Domingo K, Lin F, Vittinghoff E et al. Predictors of heart failure among women with
coronary disease. Circulation 2004; 110: 1424-30.
127. Kenchaiah S, Evans J, Levy D et al. Obesity and the risk of heart failure. N Engl J Med
2002; 347: 305-13.
128. Oreopoulos A, Padwal R, Kalantar-Zadeh K. Body mass index and mortality in heart
failure: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J 2008; 156: 13-22.
129. Fonarow GC, Srikanthan P, Costanzo MR. An obesity paradox in acute heart failure:
analysis of body mass index and in hospital mortality for 108,927 patients in the acute
decompensated heart failure national registry. Am Heart J 2007; 153: 74-81.
130. Kenchaiah S, Pocock SJ, Wang D. Body mass index and prognosis in patients with chronic
heart failure: insights from the Candesartan in Heart failure: Assessment of Reduction in
Mortality and morbidity (CHARM) program. Circulation 2007; 116: 627-36.
131. Lavie CJ, Martin AA, Ross A, Mehra MR, Milani RV, Ventura HO. Impact of obesity and the
obesity paradox on prevalence and prognosis in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol HF 2013;
1: 93-102.
132. Roger VL, Weston SA, Redfield MM et al. Trends in heart failure incidence and survival in
a community-based population. JAMA 2004; 292: 344-50.
133. Ho KK, Anderson KM, Kannel WB, Grossman W, Levy D. Survival after the onset of
congestive heart failure in Framingham Heart Study subjects. Circulation 1993; 88:
107-15.
134. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ et al. Congestive heart failure in subjects with normal
versus reduced left ventricular ejection fraction: prevalence and mortality in a
population-based cohort. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999; 33: 1948–55.
135. Zusterzeel R, Spatz ES, Curtis JP et al. Cardiac resynchronization therapy in women
versus men: observational comparative effectiveness study from the national
cardiovascular data registry. Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes 2015; 8:
S4-11.
136. World Health Organization. Global Health Observatory Data Repository. Projections for
2015-2030 . Available at :
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.PROJNUMWORLD?lang=en
137. Bhatnagar P, Wickramasinghe K, Williams J, Rayner M, Townsend N. The epidemiology of
cardiovascular disease in the UK 2014. Heart 2015; 0: 1-8.
138. Petrea RE, Beiser AS, Seshadri S, Kelly-Hayes M, Kase CS Wolf PA. Stroke in women -
Gender Differences in Stroke Incidence and Post-stroke Disability in the Framingham
Heart Study. Stroke 2009 Apr; 40(4): 1032–1037.
139. Kissela BM, Khoury JC, Alwell K et al. Age at stroke: temporal trends in stroke incidence in
a large, biracial population. Neurology 2012; 79: 1781–87.
140. Sealy-Jefferson S, Wing JJ, Sánchez BN et al. Age- and ethnic-specific sex differences in
stroke risk. Gend Med 2012; 9: 121–8.
141. Rothwell PM, Coull AJ, Silver LE et al, for the Oxford Vascular Study. Population-based
study of event-rate, incidence, case fatality, and mortality for all acute vascular events in all
arterial
territories
(oxford
vascular
study).
Lancet
2005;
366:1773–83.
142. Rathore SS, Hinn AR, Cooper LS, Tyroler HA, Rosamond WD. Characterization of incident
stroke signs and symptoms: findings from the atherosclerosis risk in communities study.
Stroke 2002; 33(11): 2718–21.
143. Stuart-Shor EM, Wellenius GA, Lacono DD, Mittleman MA. Gender differences in
presenting
and
prodromal
stroke
symptom.
Stroke
2009;
40(4):
1121–26.
144. Gargano JW, Wehner S, Reeves MJ. Go Red for Women. Do presenting symptoms
explain sex differences in emergency department delays among patients with acute
stroke? Stroke 2009; 40: 1114-20.
145. Bushnell C, McCullough LD,Awad IA, Chireua MV,Fedder WN et al. AHA/ASA Guideline.
Guidelines for the Prevention of Stroke in Women. A Statement for Healthcare
Professionals From the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke
2014; 45 : 1545-1588.
146. Reeves MJ, Bushnell CD, Howard G et al. Sex differences in stroke: epidemiology, clinical
presentation, medical care, and outcomes. Lancet Neurol 2008; 7(10): 915–26.
147. Roquer J, Campello AR, Gomis M. Sex differences in first-ever acute stroke. Stroke 2003;
34: 1581–85.
148. Almdal T, Scharling H, Jensen JS, Vestergaard H. The independent effect of type 2
diabetes mellitus on ischemic heart disease, stroke, and death: a population-based study
of 13,000 men and women with 20 years of follow-up. Arch Intern Med 2004; 164:
1422–26.
149. Boden-Albala B, Sacco RL, Lee HS et al. Metabolic syndrome and ischemic stroke risk:
Northern Manhattan Study. Stroke 2008; 39(1): 30-5.
150. Touze E, Rothwell PM. Sex differences in heritability of ischemic stroke: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Stroke 2008; 39: 16–23.
151. Seshadri S, Beiser A, Pikula A et al. Parental occurrence of stroke and risk of stroke in
their children: The Framingham Study. Circulation 2010; 121(11): 1304–12.
152. Flossmann E, Schulz UG, Rothwell PM. Systematic review of methods and results of
studies of the genetic epidemiology of ischemic stroke. Stroke 2004; 35: 212–27.
153. Touze E, Rothwell PM. Heritability of ischaemic stroke in women compared with men: a
genetic epidemiological study. Lancet Neurol 2007; 6: 125–33.
154. Burn J, Dennis M, Bamford J, Sandercock P, Wade D, Warlow C. Long-term risk of
recurrent stroke after a first-ever stroke. The Oxfordshire Community Stroke Project.
Stroke 1994; 25(2): 333-7.
155. Feng W, Hendry RM, Adams RJ. Risk of recurrent stroke, myocardial infarction, or death
in hospitalized stroke patients. Neurology 2010; 74: 588-93.
156. Gillum LA, Mamidipudi SK, Johnston SC. Ischemic stroke risk with oral contraceptives: a
metaanalysis. JAMA 2000; 284: 72–78.
157. Baillargeon J-P, McClish DK, Paulina A et al. Association between the current use of
low-dose oral contraceptives and cardiovascular arterial disease: a meta-analysis. J Clin
Endo & Metabolism 2005; 90: 3863-70.
158. Viscoli CM, Brass LM, Kernan WN et al. A clinical trial of estrogen-replacement therapy
after ischaemic stroke. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1243–49.
159. James AH, Bushnell CD, Jamison MG, Myers ER. Incidence and risk factors for stroke in
pregnancy and the puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 2005; 106: 509–16.
160. Tate J, Bushnell C. Pregnancy and stroke risk in women. Womens Health (Lond Engl)
2011; 7(3): 363-74.
161. Etminan M, Takkouche B, Isorna FC, Samii A. Risk of ischaemic stroke in people with
migraine: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Br Med J 2005;
330: 63-64.
162. Kurth T, Kase CS, Shurks M et al. Migraine and risk of haemorrhagic stroke in women:
prospective cohort study. Br Med J 2010; 341: c3659.
163. MacClellan LR, Giles W, Cole J et al. Probable migraine with visual aura and risk of
ischaemic stroke. The Stroke Prevention in Young Women Study. Stroke 2007; 38:
2438-45.
164. Hirsch AT, Allison MA, Gomes AS et al on behalf of the American Heart Association
Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on
Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and
Anesthesia, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention.
A Call to Action: Women and Peripheral Artery Disease A Scientific Statement From the
American Heart Association Endorsed by the Vascular Disease Foundation and its
Peripheral Artery Disease Coalition. Circulation 2012; 125: 1449-72.
165. Higgins JP, Higgins JA. Epidemiology of Peripheral arterial disease in women. J Epidemiol
2003; 13: 1-14.
166. Diehm C, Lange S, Darius H et al for the getABI (German epidemiological study on ankle
brachial index) Study Group. Association of low ankle brachial index with high mortality in
primary care. Eur Heart J 2006; 27: 1743–49.
167. Lamina C, Meisinger C, Heid IM et al for the KORA Study Group. Association of
ankle-brachial index and plaques in the carotid and femoral arteries with cardiovascular
events and total mortality in a population-based study with 13 years of follow-up. Eur Heart
J 2006; 27: 2580–87.
168. Mcdermott MM, Ferrucci L, Liu K et al. Women with peripheral arterial disease experience
faster functional decline than men with peripheral arterial disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;
57: 707-14.
169.Rooke TW, Hirsch AT, Misra S et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA focused update of the guideline for
the management of patients with peripheral artery disease (updating the 2005 guideline):
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2011; 124: 2020 –45.
170. Feringa HH, van Waning VH, Bax JJ et al. Cardioprotective medication is associated with
improved survival in patients with peripheral arterial disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 47:
1182-7.
171. CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomized, blinded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in
patients at risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet 1996; 348: 1329–39.
172. Novo S, Strano A. Lipid lowering drugs in the treatment of peripheral arterial disease of
the lower limbs: results of the SISOPAD (Simvastatin Italian Study on Peripheral Arterial
Disease). Proceedings of the 7th Annual Meeting of the Mediterranean League of
Angiology and Vascular Surgery, March 22-25 1996, Limassol, Cyprus, N.S. Angelides
Ed. Ariston Philis Printers 1996; p.73-4.
173. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA et al on behalf of the TASC II Working Group.
Inter-Society Consensus for the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease (TASC II) ;J
Vasc Surg 2007; 45(Suppl): S5-67.
174. Mondillo S, Ballo P, Barbati R et al. Effects of simvastatin on walking performance and
symptoms of intermittent claudication in hypercholesterolemic patients with peripheral
vascular disease. Am J Med 2003; 114: 359-64.
175. Aung PP, Maxwell HG, Jepson RG, Price JF, Leng GC. Lipid-lowering for peripheral
arterial disease of the lower limb. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; (4): CD000123.
176. Aronow WS, Nayak D, Woodworth S, Ahn C. Effect of simvastatin versus placebo on
treadmill exercise time until the onset of intermittent claudication in older patients with
peripheral arterial disease at six months and at one year after treatment. Am J Cardiol
2003; 92: 711-2.
177. Schillinger M, Exner M, Mlekusch W et al. Statin therapy improves cardiovascular
outcome of patients with peripheral artery disease. Eur Heart J 2004; 25: 742–48.
178. Aronow WS, Ahn C. Frequency of new coronary events in older persons with PAD and
serum LDL-C >125 mg/dl treated with statins versus no lipid-lowering drug. Am J Cardiol
2002; 90: 789-79.
179. Radack K, Deck C. Beta-adrenergic blocker therapy does not worsen intermittent
claudication in subjects with peripheral arterial disease. A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Arch Intern Med 1991; 151: 1769-76.
180. Paravastu SC, Mendonca DA, Da Silva A. Beta blockers for peripheral arterial disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 9: CD005508.
181. Ahimastos AA, Lawler A, Reid CM, Blombery PA, Kingwell BA. Brief communication:
ramipril markedly improves walking ability in patients with peripheral arterial disease: a
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2006; 144: 660–4.
182. Regensteiner J, Ware JJ, McCarthy W et al. Effect of cilostazol on treadmill walking,
community- based walking ability, and health related quality of life in patients with
intermittent claudication due to peripheral arterial disease: meta-analysis of 6 randomized
controlled trials. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002; 50: 1939-46.
183. Robless P, Mikhailidis DP, Stansby GP. Cilostazol for peripheral arterial disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2007 Jan; (1): CD003748.
184. Hernandez-Villa EA. Peripheral Arterial Disease in Women.The Effect of Gender on
Diagnosis and Treatment. Tex Heart Inst J. 2011; 38(2): 154–156.
185. Vouyouka AG, Egorova NN, Salloum A, Kleinman L, Marin M, Faries PL, Moscowitz A.
Lessons learned from the analysis of gender effect on risk factors and procedural
outcomes of lower extremity arterial disease. J Vasc Surg 2010; 52(5): 1196–202.
186. Jaffer FA, O’Donnell CJ, Larson MG et al. Age and sex distribution of subclinical aortic
atherosclerosis. A magnetic resonance imaging examination of the Framingham Heart
Study. Arterioscl Thromb Vasc Bio 2002; 22: 849-54.
187. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm: Final
Recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 198-202.
188. Roldan CA, Connective Tissue Diseases and the Heart. Chapter 33. In Current Diagnosis
& Treatment: Cardiology. 3rd Ed. Crawford MH. 2009. McGraw-Hill Companies.
189. Manzi S, Meilahn EN, Rairie JE et al. Age-specific incidence rates of myocardial infarction
and angina in women with systemic lupus erythematosus: comparison with the
Framingham Study. Am J Epidemiol 1997; 145: 408-15.
190. Bernatsky S, Boivin JF, Joseph L, et al. Mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis
Rheum 2006; 54: 2550-7.
191. Wang X-B, Lou M-N, Li Y et al. Cardiovascular involvement in connective tissue disease:
the role of interstitial lung disease. Available at PLoS ONE 10(3): e0121976.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0121976.
192. Peters MJ. Does rheumatoid arthritis equal diabetes mellitus as an independent risk factor
for cardiovascular disease? A prospective study. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 61: 1571-79.
193. Mackey RH, Kuller LH, Deane KD, Wallit BT, Chang YF et al. Rheumatoid Arthritis,
Anti-Cyclic Citrullinated Peptide Positivity and Cardiovascular Disease Risk In the
Women’s Health Initiative. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015; 67(9): 2311-22.
194. Everett BM, Pradhan AD, Solomon DH. Rationale and design of the cardiovascular
inflammation reduction trial: a test of the inflammatory hypothesis of artherothrombosis.
Am Heart J 2013; 166(2): 199-207e5.
195. Mercer E, Rekedal L, Garg R. Hydroxychloroquine improves insulin sensitivity in obese
non-diabetic individuals. Arthritis Res Ther 2012; 14(3): R135.
196. Rozman B, Praprotnik S, Logar D et al. Leflunamide and hypertension. Ann Rheum Dis
2002; 61(6): 567-9.
197. Girod JP, Brotman DJ. Does altered glucocorticoid homeostasis increase cardiovascular
risk? Cardiovasc res 2004; 64(2): 217-26.
198. Curigliano G, Cardinale D, Suter T et al. ESMO Guidelines Working Group. Cardiovascular
toxicity induced by chemotherapy, targeted agents and radiotherapy: ESMO Clinical
Practise Guidelines. Ann Oncol 2012; 23(suppl 7): vii I55-vii I66.
199. Hermann J, Lerman A, Sandhu N et al. Evaluation and management of patients with heart
disease and cancer: Cardio-oncology. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 2014; 89(9): 1287-1306.
200. Groarke JD, Nguyen PL, Nohria A et al. Cardiovascular complications of radiation therapy
for thoracic malignancies: role for non-invasive imaging for detection of cardiovascular
disease. Eur Heart J 2014; 35(10): 612-23.
201. Wu W, Masri A, Popovic ZB. Long term survival of patients with radiation heart disease
undergoing heart surgery. A cohort study. Circulation 2013; 127(14): 1476-85.
202. Ordavas KG, Higgins CB. Delayed contrast enhancement on MR images of myocardium,
past, present and future. Radiology 2011; 261(2): 358-74.
203. Veinot JP, Edwards WD. Pathology of radiation-induced heart disease: a surgical and
autopsy study of 27 cases. Human Pathol 1996; 27(8): 766-73.
204. Madjid M, Aboshady I, Awan I, Litovsky S, Casscells SW. Influenza and Cardiovascular
Disease: Is There a Causal Relationship? Tex Heart Inst J 2004; 31: 4-13.
205. Warren-Gash C, Bhaskaran K, Hayward A et al. Circulating influenza virus, climatic factors,
and acute myocardial infarction: a time series study in England and Wales and Hong Kong.
JID 2011; 203: 1710-18.
206. Udell JA, Zawi R, Bhatt DL et al. Association between influenza vaccination and
cardiovascular outcomes in high-risk patients. A meta-analysis. JAMA 2013; 310(16):
1711-20.
207. MacIntyre CR, E Heywood AE, Kovoor P et al. Ischaemic heart disease, influenza and
influenza vaccination: a prospective case control study. Heart 2013; 0: 1–6.
doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2013-304320y.
208. Lockhart PB, Bolger AF, Papapanou PN, Osinbowale O, Trevisan M et al on behalf of the
American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease
Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on
Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease, and Council on
Clinical Cardiology. AHA Scientific Statement. Periodontal Disease and Atherosclerotic
Vascular Disease: Does the Evidence Support an Independent Association? A Scientific
Statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2012; 125: 2520-44.
209. Tonetti MS, Van Dyke TE and on behalf of working group 1 of the joint EFP/AAP Workshop
on Periodontitis and Systemic Diseases. Periodontitis and atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease: Consensus report of the Joint EFP/AAP Workshop on Periodontitis and Systemic
Diseases. J Clin Periodontol 2013; 40(Suppl. 14): S24–S29.
210. Friedewald VE, Kornman KS, Beck JD, et al. American Journal of Cardiology and Journal
of Periodontology. Editors' Consensus: Periodontitis and Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular
Disease. Am J Cardiol 2009; 104: 59–68.
211. Lang S, Mary–Krause M, Cotte L. Increased risk of myocardial infarction in HIV infected
patients in France, relative to the general population. AIDS 2010; 24: 1228-30.
212. Triant VA, Lee H, Hadigan C, Grinspoon SK. Increased acute myocardial infarction rates
and cardiovascular risk factors among patients with human immunodeficiency virus
disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007; 92: 2506-12.
213. Womack JA, Chang C-CH, So-Armah KA et al. HIV infection and cardiovascular disease
in women. J Am Heart Assoc 2014; 3(5): e001035.
214. Hemkens LG, Bucher HC. HIV infection and cardiovascular disease. Eur Heart J 2014;
35(21): 1373-81.
215. Klein D, Hurley LB, Quesenberry CP Jr, Sidney S. Do protease inhibitors increase the risk
for coronary heart disease in patients with HIV-1 infection? J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
2002; 30: 471-7.
216. Durand M, Sheehy O, Baril JG, Lelorier J, Tremblay CL. Association between HIV
infection, antiretroviral therapy, and risk of acute myocardial infarction: a cohort and nested
case-control study using Quebec's public health insurance database. J Acquir Immune
Defic Syndr 2011; 57: 245-53.
217. Tabib A, Leroux C, Mornex JF et al. Accelerated coronary atherosclerosis and
arteriosclerosis in young human-immunodeficiency-virus positive patients. Coron Artery
Dis 2000; 11: 41–6.
218. Mehta NJ, Khan IA. HIV-associated coronary artery disease. Angiology 2003; 54: 269 –75.
219. Matetzky S, Domingo M, Kar S et al. Acute myocardial infarction in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected patients. Arch Intern Med 2003; 163: 457– 60.
220. Friis-Moller N, Reiss P, Sabin CA et al. Class of antiretroviral drugs and the risk of
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 1723–35.
221. Riddler SA, Smit E, Cole SR et al. Impact of HIV infection and HAART on serum lipids in
men. JAMA 2003; 289: 2978–82.
222. Dube MP, Stein JH, Aberg JA et al. Guidelines for the evaluation and management of
dyslipidemia in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected adults receiving
antiretroviral therapy: recommendations of the HIV Medical Association of the Infectious
Disease Society of America and the Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group. Clin Infect Dis 2003;
37: 613–27.
223. Kasai T, Floras JS, Bradley TD. Sleep Apnea and Cardiovascular Disease: A Bidirectional
Relationship. Circulation 2012; 126: 1495-510.
224. Somers VK, White DP, Amin R et al. An American Heart Association/American College of
Cardiology Foundation Scientific Statement. From the American Heart Association Council
for High Blood Pressure Research Professional Education Committee, Council on Clinical
cardiology, Stroke Council and Council on Cardiovascular Nursing In Collaboration with
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute National Center on Sleep Disorders
Research. Sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 52:
686–717.
225. Kapsimalis F, Kryger MH. Gender and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, Part 2:
Mechanisms. SLEEP 2002; 25(5): 497-504.
226. McKinney J, Ortiz-Young D, Jefferson F. Gender differences in obstructive sleep apnea
and the associated public health burden. Sleep and Biological Rhythms 2015; 13(3):
196–209.
227. Quintana-Gallego
E,
Carmona-Bernal
C,
Capote
F,
Sánchez-Armengol
A,
Botebol-Benhamou G, Polo-Padillo J, Castillo-Gómez . Gender differences in obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome: a clinical study of 1166 patients. J Respir Med 2004; 98(10):
984-9.
228. Jennum P, Tønnesen P, Ibsen R, Kjellberg J. All-cause mortality from obstructive sleep
apnea in male and female patients with and without continuous positive airway pressure
treatment: A registry study with 10 years of follow-up. Nat Sci Sleep 2015; 7: 43–50.
229. Campos-Rodriguez F, Martinez-Garcia MA, de la Cruz-Moron I, Almeida-Gonzalez C,
Catalan-Serra P, Montserrat JM. Cardiovascular mortality in women with obstructive sleep
apnea with or without continuous positive airway pressure treatment. Ann Intern Med
2012; 156: 115-22.
230. Cowie M, Woehrle H, Wegscheider K, Angermann C, d’Ortho MP, Erdmann E, et al.
Adaptive Servo-Ventilation for Central Sleep Apnea in Systolic Heart Failure. N Engl J Med
2015; 373: 1095-105.
231. Goldberg RJ, Currie K, White K, Brieger D, Steg PG, Goodman SG, Dabbous O, Fox KA,
Gore JM. Six-month outcomes in a multinational registry of patients hospitalized with an
acute coronary syndrome (the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events [GRACE]). Am J
Cardiol 2004; 93: 288-93.
232. Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Wilson PW et al. One-year cardiovascular event rates in outpatients
with atherothrombosis. JAMA 2007; 297: 1197–206.
233. National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP). Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation,
and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). Third Report
of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection,
Education and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III)
final report. Circulation 2002; 106: 3143-421.
234. Tunstall-Pedoe H, Kuulasmaa K, Amouyel P, Arveiler D, Rajakangas AM, Pajak A.
Myocardial infarction and coronary deaths in the World Health Organization MONICA
Project. Registration procedures, event rates, and case-fatality rates in 38 populations
from 21 countries in four continents. Circulation 1994; 90(1): 583-612.
235. British Heart Foundation Health Promotion Research Group. Department of Public Health,
University of Oxford. Coronary heart disease statistics 2012. Available at:
www.bhf.org.uk/~/media/files/publications/research/2012_chd_statistics_compendium.pdf
236. Nedkoff LJ, Briffa TJ, Preen DB et al. Age- and sex-specific trends in the incidence of
hospitalized acute coronary syndromes in Western Australia Circulation: Cardiovascular
Quality and Outcomes 2011; 4: 557-64.
237. Briffa TJ, Nedkoff LJ, Peeters A et al. Discordant age and sex-specific trends in the
incidence of a first coronary heart disease event in Western Australia from 1996 to 2007.
Heart 2011; 97: 400e-404e.
238. Wellons M, Ouyang P, Schreiner PJ, et al. Early menopause predicts future coronary heart
disease and stroke: The Multi-Ethnic Study of therosclerosis. Menopause 2012; 19(10):
1081-7.
239. Bairey Merz CN, Johnson BD, Sharaf BL, et al. Hypoestrogenemia of hypothalamic origin
and coronary artery disease in premenopausal women: a report from the
NHLBI-sponsored WISE study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003; 41: 413-9.
240. Colditz GA , Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Rosner B, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH. Menopause
and the risk of coronary heart disease in women. N Engl J Med 1987; 316: 1105-10.
241. Lobo RA. Surgical menopause and cardiovascular risks. Menopause 2007; 14(3): 562-66.
242. Crawford SL, Johannes CB.The Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease in
Postmenopausal
Women.
J
Clin
Endocrinol
Metab
2013;
84;
1803-6.
243. Atsma, F; Bartelink, MLEL; Grobbee, DE et al. Postmenopausal status and early
menopause as independent risk factors for cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis.
Menopause 2006; 13: 265-79.
244. Lisabeth LD, Beiser AS, Brown DL, Murabito JM, Kelly-Hayes M, Wolf PA. Age at natural
menopause and risk of ischemic stroke: the Framingham Heart Study. Stroke 2009; 40:
1044–49.
245. Hu FB, Grodstein F, Hennekens CH et al. Age at natural menopause and risk of
cardiovascular disease. Arch Intern Med 1999; 159: 1061–66.
246. Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL et al. Risks and benefits of estrogen plus
progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results From the Women’s Health
Initiative randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002; 288: 321-33.
247. Mohandas B, Mehta JL. Lessons from hormone replacement therapy trials for primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease. Curr Opin Cardiol 2007; 22: 434-42.
248. Hulley S, Grady D, Bush T et al. for the Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study
Research Group. Randomized trial of estrogen plus progestin for secondary prevention of
coronary heart disease in postmenopausal women. JAMA 1998; 280: 605 –13.
249. Grady D, Herrington D, Bittner V et al. Cardiovascular disease outcomes during 6.8 years
of hormone therapy. Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study follow-up (HERS
II). JAMA 2002; 288: 49-57.
250. Boardman HMP, Hartley L, Eisinga A et al. Hormone therapy for preventing cardiovascular
disease in post-menopausal women. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015; 2:
CD002229. dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858. CD002229.pub4
251. Schierbeck LL, Rejnmark L, Tofteng CL et al. Effect of hormone replacement therapy on
cardiovascular events in recently postmenopausal women: randomised trial. Br Med J
2012; 345: e6409.
252. Stuenkel CA, Davis SR, Gompel A et al. Treatment of symptoms of the menopause: an
endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015; 100(1):
3975-4011.
253. Colditz GA, Rimm EB, Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, Rosner B, Willett WC. A prospective
study of parental history of myocardial infarction and coronary artery disease in men. Am J
Cardiol 1991; 67(11): 933-38.
254. Lloyd-Jones DM, Nam BH, D'Agostino RB Sr et al. Parental cardiovascular disease as a
risk factor for cardiovascular disease in middle-aged adults: a prospective study of parents
and offspring. JAMA 2004; 291(18): 2204-11.
255. Murabito JM, Pencina MJ, Nam BH et al. Sibling cardiovascular disease as a risk factor for
cardiovascular disease in middle-aged adults. JAMA 2005; 294(24): 3117-23.
256. Jousilahti P, Puska P, Vartiainen E, Pekkanen J, Tuomilehto J. Parental history of
premature coronary heart disease: an independent risk factor of myocardial infarction. J
Clin Epidemiol 1996; 49(5): 497-503.
257. Marenberg ME, Risch N, Berkman LF et al. Genetic susceptibility to death from coronary
heart disease in a study of twins. N Engl J Med 1994; 330: 1041-6.
258. Chow CK, Islam S, Bautista L et al. Parental history and myocardial infarction risk across
the world: the INTERHEART study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011; 57(5): 619-27.
259. Sesso HD, Lee I-M, Gaziano M et al. Maternal and paternal history of myocardial infarction
and risk of cardiovascular disease in men and women. Circulation 2001; 104: 393–8.
260. van Dis I, Kromhout D, Boer JMA, Geleijnse JM, Verschuren WMM. Paternal and maternal
history of myocardial infarction and cardiovascular diseases incidence in a dutch cohort of
middle-aged persons. PLoS One 2011; 6(12): e28697.
261. Ranthe MF, Petersen JA, Bundgaard H, Wohlfahrt J, Melbye M, Boyd HA. A detailed family
history of myocardial infarction and risk of myocardial infarction--a nationwide cohort study.
PLoS One 2015; 10(5): e0125896.
262. Arnett DK, Baird AE, Barkley RA et al. Relevance of genetics and genomics for
prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the
American heart association council on epidemiology and prevention, the stroke council,
and the functional genomics and translational biology interdisciplinary working group.
Circulation 2007; 115: 2878 - 2901.
263. Chow K, Pell ACH, Walker A et al. Families of patients with premature coronary heart
disease: an obvious but neglected target for primary prevention. Br Med J 2007; 335: 481
- 85.
264. Bittner V. Perspectives on Dyslipidemia and coronary heart disease in women. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2005; 46: 1628-35.
265. Jacobs DR Jr, Meban IL, Bangdiwala SI, Criqui MH, Tyroler HA. High density lipoprotein
cholesterol as a predictor of cardiovascular mortality in men and women: the follow-up
study of the Lipid Research Clinics Prevalence Study. Am J Epidemiol 1990; 131: 32-47.
266. Livshits G, Weisbort J, Meshulam N, Brunner D. Multivariate analysis of the twenty-year
follow-up of the Donolo-Tel Aviv Prospective Coronary Artery Disease Study and the
usefulness of high density lipoprotein cholesterol percentage. Am J Cardiol 1989; 63:
676-81.
267. Woodard GA, Brooks MM, Barinas-Mitchell E, Mackey RH, Matthews KA, Sutton-Tyrrell
K, Lipids, menopause, and early atherosclerosis in Study of Women’s Health Across the
Nation Heart women. Menopause 2010; 18(4): 1-9.
268. Castelli WP. Epidemiology of triglycerides: a view from Framingham. Am J Cardiol 1992;
70: 3H–9H.
269. Hokanson JE, Austin MA. Plasma triglyceride level is a risk factor for cardiovascular
disease independent of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level: a meta-analysis of
population based prospective studies. J Cardiovasc Risk 1996; 3: 213–19.
270. Criqui MH, Heiss G, Cohn R et al. Plasma triglyceride level and mortality from coronary
heart disease. N Engl J Med 1993; 328: 1220-25.
271. Stangl V, Baumann G, Stangl K.Coronary atherogenic risk factors in women Eur Heart J
2002; 23 :1738-52.
272. Orth-Gomer K, Mittleman MA, Schenck-Gustafsson K et al. Lipoprotein (a) as a
determinant of coronary heart disease in young women. Circulation 1997; 95: 329–34.
273. Goldschmid MG, Barrett-Connor E, Edelstein SL, Wingard DL, Cohn BA, Herman WH.
Dyslipidemia and ischemic heart disease mortality among men and women with
diabetes. Circulation 1994; 89: 991-97.
274. Juutilainen A, Kortelainen S, Lehto S, Rönnemaa T, Pyörälä K, Laakso M. Gender
difference in the impact of type 2 diabetes on coronary heart disease risk. Diabetes Care
2004; 27: 2898-904.
275. Institute of Public Health. Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Health & Morbidity survey
V 2015. Non Communicable Diseases, Risk Factors and other Health Problems. Vol II.
276. Kotchen JM, Mackean HE, Kotchen TA. Blood pressure trends with ageing. Hypertension
1982; 4: III-128-III-134.
277. Robitaille NM. Hypertension in women. Can J Cardiol 1996; 12(suppl D): 6D-8D.
278. Hajjar I, Kotchen TA. Trends in prevalence, awareness, treatment and control of
hypertension
in
the
United
States,1988-2000.
JAMA
2003;
290:
199-206.
279. Saltzberg S, Stroh JA, Frishman WH. Isolated systolic hypertension in the elderly:
pathophysiology
and
treatment.
Med
Clin
North
Am
1988;
72:
523-47.
280. Staessen JA, Ginocchio G et al. Conventional and ambulatory blood pressure and
menopause in a prospective population study. J Hum Hypertens 1997; 11: 507-14.
281. Levy D, Garrison RJ, Savage DD, Kannel WB, Castelli WP. Prognostic implications of
echocardiographically determined LV mass in the Framingham heart study. N Engl J Med
1990; 322:1561–66.
282. Liao Y, Cooper RS, Mensah GA et al. Left Ventricular Hypertrophy has a greater impact
on survival in women than in men. Circulation 1995; 92: 805-10.
283. Antikainen RL, Grodzicki T, Beevers DG et al for the Department of Health and Social
Security Hypertension Care Computer Project ( DHCCP). Left ventricular hypertrophy
determined by Sokolow–Lyon criteria: a different predictor in women than in men? J Hum
Hypertens 2006; 20: 451-9.
284. MacMahon S, Peto R, Cutler J et al. Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease,
part I: prolonged differences in blood pressure: prospective observational studies
corrected for the regression dilution bias. Lancet 1990; 335: 765–74.
285. Izzo JL Jr, Levy D, Black HR. Clinical Advisory Statement. Importance of systolic blood
pressure in older Americans. Hypertens 2000; 35: 1021-24.
286. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N et al. Age specific relevance of usual blood pressure
to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61
prospective studies. Lancet 2002; 360: 1903-13.
287. Prisant LM, Szerlip HM, Mulloy LL. Fibromuscular Dysplasia: An uncommon cause of
secondary hypertension. J Clin Hypertens 2006; 8: 894–98.
288. Myers MG,Reeves RA. White coat effect in treated hypertensive patients: sex differences.
J Hum Hypertens 1995; 9: 729-33.
289. Hanes DS. Strategies for the treatment of hypertension in postmenopausal women. J Clin
Hypertens 1999; 1: 62-71.
290. Rosenthal T, Oparil S. Hypertension in women. J Hum Hypertens 2000; 14: 691-704.
291. Weir RJ, Briggs E, Mack A et al. Blood Pressure in women taking oral contraceptives Br
Med J 1974; 5907: 533–35.
292. Oparil S, Miller AP. Gender and blood pressure. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2005; 7:
300-9.
293. Calhoun DA, Oparil S. Gender and Blood Pressure. Hypertension Primer. In : Izzo JL Jr,
Black HR (eds). The Essentials of High Blood Pressure. 2nd Ed. American Heart
Association: Baltimore Md. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999; 229-32.
294. Bellamy L, Casas J-P, Hingorani A-D et al. Pre-eclampsia and risk of cardiovascular
disease and cancer in later life: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br Med J 2007; 335:
974-77.
295. National Health & Morbidity Survey II Report 1996, Public Health Institute, Ministry of
Health Malaysia.
296. Institute for Public Health. The Third National Health and Morbidity Survey 2006:
Nutritional Survey (NHMS III). Kuala Lumpur: Ministry of Health.
297. National Health & Morbidity Survey IV Report 2011, Public Health Institute, Ministry of
Health Malaysia.
298. Mustaffa E, Bebakar WMW, SP Chan et al. Current status of Diabetic Management in
Malaysia. J Asean Fed Endocrine Soc 1998; 16(2) (Suppl): 1-13.
299. Kannel WB, McGee DL. Diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The Framingham study.
JAMA 1979; 241: 2035–38.
300. Roche MM, Wang PP. Sex differences in all-cause and cardiovascular mortality,
hospitalization for individuals with and without diabetes, and patients with diabetes
diagnosed early and late. Diabetes Care 2013; 36(9): 2582–90.
301. Huxley RR, Peters SA, Mishra GD, Woodward M. Risk of all-cause mortality and vascular
events in women versus men with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015; 3(3): 198-206.
302. Lee WL, Cheung AM, Cape D, Zinman B. Impact of diabetes on coronary artery disease in
women and men: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Diabetes Care 2000; 23: 962-8.
303. Orchard TJ. The impact of gender and general risk factors on the occurrence of
atherosclerotic vascular disease in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Ann Med
1996; 28: 323-33.
304. Laing SP, Swerdlow AJ, Slater SD et al. The British Diabetic Association Cohort Study II:
cause specific mortality in patients with insulin treated diabetes. Diabet Med 1999; 16:
466-71.
305. Peters SAE, Huxley RR, Woodward M. Diabetes as risk factor for incident coronary heart
disease in women compared with men: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 64
cohorts including 858,507 individuals and 28,203 coronary events. Diabetologia 2014;
57(8): 1542-51.
306. Seghieri G, Policardo L, Anichini R, Francesconi P. Gender differences in diabetes related
excess risk of cardiovascular events: When does the “risk window” open? Presented at
the 51st EASD Annual Meeting. September 14-18, 2015; Stockholm, Sweden. E-Poster
#265.
307. Dong X, Cai R, Sun J, et al. Diabetes as a risk factor for acute coronary syndrome in
women compared with men: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Presented at the
51st EASD Annual Meeting. September 14-18, 2015; Stockholm, Sweden. E-Poster #269.
308. Huxley R, Barzi F, Woodward M. Excess risk of fatal coronary heart disease associated
with diabetes in men and women: meta-analysis of 37 prospective cohort studies. Br Med
J 2006; 332: 73-78.
309. Gregg EW, Gu Q, Cheng YJ et al. Mortality Trends in Men and Women with Diabetes,
1971 to 2000. Ann Intern Med 2007; 147: 149-57.
310. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes 2015; 3(Suppl 1):
S1-S93.
311. World Health Organization.Use of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) in diagnosis of diabetes
mellitus 2011. Abbreviated Report of a WHO Consultation 2011; WHO Press.
312. Wan Nazaimoon WM, Md Isa SH, Wan Mohamad WB, et al. Prevalence of diabetes in
Malaysia and usefulness of HbA1c as a diagnostic criterion. Diabet Med 2013; 30(7):
825-28.
313. Sabanayagam C, Khoo EY, Lye WK, et al. Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus Using HbA1c in
Asians: Relationship Between HbA1c and Retinopathy in a Multiethnic Asian Population.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015; 100(2): 689-96.
314. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, 5th
Ed 2015. Available at www.acadmed.org.my
315. The DECODE Study Group Consequences of the new diagnostic criteria for diabetes in
older men and women. DECODE Study (Diabetes Epidemiology: Collaborative Analysis
of Diagnostic Criteria in Europe). Diabetes Care 1999; 22: 1667–71.
316. Barr ELM, Zimmet PZ, Welborn TA et al. Risk of Cardiovascular and All-Cause Mortality in
Individuals With Diabetes Mellitus, Impaired Fasting Glucose, and Impaired Glucose
Tolerance. The Australian Diabetes, Obesity, and Lifestyle Study (AusDiab). Circulation
2007; 116 :151-57.
317. Alberti KG, Zimmet P, Shaw J. IDF Epidemiology Task Force Consensus Group. The
metabolic syndrome-a new world-wide definition. Lancet 2005; 366: 1059-62.
318. Alberti KGMM, Eckel R, Grundy S, et al. Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome. Circulation
2009; 120: 1640-45.
319. Ramli AS, Daher AM, Nor-Ashikin MNK et al. Definition identified more Malaysian adults
with metabolic syndrome compared to the NCEP-ATP III and IDF criteria. BioMed
Research International 2013; 2013: 1-10.
320. Mohamud WN, Ismail AA, Sharifuddin A et al. Prevalence of metabolic syndrome and its
risk factors in adult Malaysians: Results of a nationwide survey. Diabetes Research and
Clinical Practice 2011; 91(2): 239–45.
321. Hildrum B, Mykletun A, Hole T, Midthjell K, Dahl AA. Age-specific prevalence of the
metabolic syndrome defined by the International Diabetes Federation and the National
Cholesterol Education Program: the Norwegian HUNT 2 study. BMC Public Health 2007;
7: 220.
322. Svendsen OL, Hassager C, Christiansen C. Age- and menopause associated variations in
body composition and fat distribution in healthy women as measured by dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry. Metabolism 1995; 44: 369–73.
323. Cabrera MA, Gebara OCE, Diament J, Nussbacher A, Rosano G, Wajngarten M.
Metabolic syndrome, abdominal obesity, and cardiovascular risk in elderly women. Int J
Cardiol 2007; 114(2): 224–29.
324. Lakka HM, Laaksonen DE, Lakka TA et al. The metabolic syndrome and total and
cardiovascular disease mortality in middle-aged men. JAMA 2002; 288: 2709–16.
325. Isomaa B, Almgren P, Tuomi T et al. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality associated
with the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Care 2001; 24: 683–89.
326. Hu G, Qiao Q, Tuomilehto J et al. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome and its relation
to all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in nondiabetic European men and women. Arch
Intern Med 2004; 164: 1066–76.
327. Alexander CM, Landsman PB, Teutsch SM et al. NCEP-defined metabolic syndrome,
diabetes, and prevalence of coronary heart disease among NHANES III participants age
50 years and older. Diabetes 2003; 52: 1210–14.
328. Ford ES. The metabolic syndrome and mortality from cardiovascular disease and
all-causes: findings from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey II Mortality
Study. Atherosclerosis 2004; 173: 309–14.
329. Hunt KJ, Resendez RG, Williams K et al. National Cholesterol Education Program versus
World Health Organization metabolic syndrome in relation to all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality in the San Antonio Heart Study. Circulation 2004; 110: 1251–57.
330. McNeill AM, Rosamond WD, Girman CJ et al. The metabolic syndrome and 11-year risk
of incident cardiovascular disease in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study.
Diabetes Care 2005; 28: 385–90.
331. Sundstrom J, Vallhagen E, Riserus U et al. Risk associated with the metabolic syndrome
versus the sum of its individual components. Diabetes Care 2006; 29: 1673–74.
332. Haffner SM. Abdominal adiposity and cardiometabolic risk: do we have all the answers?
Am J Med 2007; 120(9 Suppl 1): S10-6.
333. Musso G, Gambino R, Bo S et al. Should nonalcoholic fatty liver disease be included in the
definition of metabolic syndrome? A cross-sectional comparison with ATP III criteria in
nonobese nondiabetic subjects. Diabetes Care 2008: 31: 562-568
334. Targher G, Day CP, Bonora E. Risk of Cardiovascular disease in patients with nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med 2010; 363: 1341-50.
335. Fargion S, Porzio M, Francanzani AL. NAFLD and Vascular disease: state-of-the-art.
World J Gastroenterol 2014; 20: 13306-24.
336. Bogers RP, Bemelmans WJE, Hoogenveen RT et al for the BMI-CHD Collaboration
Investigators. Association of overweight with increased risk of Coronary Heart Disease
Partly independent of Blood Pressure and Cholesterol Levels: A Metaanalysis of 21 Cohort
Studies Including More than 300 000 Persons. Arch Intern Med 2007; 167: 1720–8.
337. Manson JE, Willet WC, Stampfer MJ et al. Body weight and mortality among women. N
Engl J Med 1995; 333: 677-85.
338. Chiuve SE, Sun Q, Sandhu RK et al. Adiposity throughout adulthood and risk of sudden
cardiac death in women. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2015; doi:10.1016/j.jacep.2015.07.011
339. Lim TO, Ding LM, Zaki M et al. Distribution of body weight, height and body mass index in
a national sample of Malaysian adults. Med J Mal 2000; 55: 108-28.
340. WHO Expert Consultation. Appropriate body-mass index for Asian populations and its
implications for policy and intervention strategies. Lancet 2004; 363: 157–63.
341. Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration. Body mass index and cardiovascular disease in
the Asia-Pacific Region: an overview of 33 cohorts involving 310 000 participants. Int J
Epidem 2004; 33: 751-58.
342. Jee SH, Pastor- Barriuso R, Appel LJ et al. Body Mass Index and Incident Ischaemic Heart
Disease in South Korean Men and Women. Am J Epidem 2005; 162: 42-48.
343. Deurenberg-Yap M, Schmidt G, van Staveren WA, Deurenberg P. The paradox of low body
mass index and high body fat percent among Chinese, Malays and Indians in Singapore.
Int J Obes 2000; 24: 1011-17.
344. Li TY, Rana JS, Manson JE et al. Obesity as compared with physical activity in predicting
risk of coronary heart disease in women. Circulation 2006; 113: 499–506.
345. Colditz GA, Willett WC, Rotnitzky A et al. Weight Gain as a Risk Factor for Clinical
Diabetes Mellitus in Women. Ann Intern Med 1995; 122: 481-6.
346. Jousilahti P, Tuomilehto J, Vartiainen E et al. Body weight, cardiovascular risk factors and
coronary mortality. 15 year follow-up of middle aged men and women in Eastern Finland.
Circulation 1996; 93: 1372-79.
347. Lissner L, Odell PM, D’Agostino RB et al. Variability of body weight and health outcomes
in the Framingham population. N Engl J Med 1991; 324: 1839–44.
348. Folsom AR, French SA, Zheng W et al. Weight variability and mortality: the Iowa Women’s
Health Study. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1996; 20: 704–9.
349. Field AE, Malspeis S, Willet WC. Weight cycling and mortality among middle-aged or older
women. Arch Intern Med 2009; 169(9): 881-6.
350. Montani JP, Schutz Y, Dulloo AG. Dieting and weight cycling as risk factors for
cardiometabolic diseases: who is really at risk? Obes Rev 2015; 16(Suppl 1): 7-18.
351. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. The benefits of weight loss. In: Network SIG,
ed. Obesity in Scotland: Integrating Prevention with Weight Management. Edinburgh:
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; 1996: 12-15.
352. Legro R, Arslanian S, Ehrmann D et al. Diagnosis and Treatment of Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2013; 98(12): 4565– 92.
353. Hollinrake E, Abreu A, Maifeld M et al. Increased risk of depressive disorders in women
with polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril 2007; 87: 1369–76.
354. Birdsall MA, Farquhar CM, White HD Association between polycystic ovaries and extent
of coronary artery disease in women having cardiac catheterization. Ann Intern Med 1997;
126: 32–35.
355. Guzick DS, Talbott EO, Sutton-Tyrrell K et al. Carotid atherosclerosis in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome: initial results from a case-control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1996; 174: 1224–32.
356. Christian RC, Dumesic DA et al. Prevalence and predictors of coronary artery calcification
in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003; 88: 2562–68.
357. Yarali H, Yildirir A, Aybar F et al. Diastolic dysfunction and increased serum homocysteine
concentrations may contribute to increased cardiovascular risk in patients with polycystic
ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril 2001; 76: 511–16.
358. Tíras MB, Yalcìn R, Noyan V et al. Alterations in cardiac flow parameters in patients with
polycystic ovarian syndrome. Hum Reprod 1999; 14: 1949–52.
359. Shaw LJ, Bairey Merz CN, Azziz R et al. Postmenopausal women with a history of
irregular menses and elevated androgen measurements at high risk for worsening
cardiovascular event-free survival: results from the National Institutes of Health–National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute sponsored Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008; 93: 1276–84.
360. Wild R, Carmina E, Diamanti-Kandarakis E et al. Assessment of Cardiovascular Risk and
Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Women with the Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A
Consensus Statement by the Androgen Excess and Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
(AE-PCOS) Society. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010; 95(5): 2038–49.
361. Norman RJ, Davies MJ, Lord J, Moran LJ. The role of lifestyle modification in polycystic
ovary syndrome. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2002; 13: 251–57.
362. Rosenzweig JL, Ferrannini E et al Endocrine Society. Primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes in patients at metabolic risk: an Endocrine
Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008; 93: 3671–89.
363. Rich-Edwards JW, Manson JE, Hennekens CH et al. The primary prevention of coronary
heart disease in women. N Engl J Med 1995; 332: 1758-66.
364. Willet WC, Green A, Stampfer MJ et al. Relative and absolute excess risks of coronary
heart disease among women who smoke cigarettes. N Engl J Med 1987; 317: 1303-9.
365. Prescott E, Hippe M, Schnohr P et al. Smoking and risk of myocardial infarction in women
and men: longitudinal population study. Br Med J 1998; 316: 1043-47.
366. Institute of Public Health. Report of the Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GTAS) Malaysia,
2011. Ministry of Health Malaysia.
367. Dunn NR, Faragher B, Thorogood M et al. Risk of myocardial infarction in young female
smokers. Heart 1999; 82: 581-3.
368. WHO
Collaborative
Study
of
Cardiovascular
Disease
and
Steroid
Hormone
Contraception. Acute myocardial infarction and combined oral contraceptives: results of
an international multicentre case-control study. Lancet 1997; 349: 1202–9.
369. Keeling D. Combined oral contraceptives and the risk of myocardial infarction. Ann Med
2003; 35: 413-8.
370. Palmer JR, Rosenberg L, Shapiro S. “Low yield” cigarettes and the risk of nonfatal
myocardial infarction in women. N Engl J Med 1989; 320: 1569-73.
371. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Atlanta: The Health Consequences of
smoking- 50 years of progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health,
2014.
372. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of
Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking
and Health, 2006.
373. Andersen LB, Schnohr P, Schroll M, Hein HO. All-cause mortality associated with physical
activity during leisure time, work, sports, and cycling to work. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160:
1621-28.
374. Lissner L, Bengtsson C, Björkelund C, Wedel H. Physical activity levels and changes in
relation to longevity: a prospective study of Swedish women. Am J Epidemiol 1996; 143:
54-62.
375. Barengoa NC, Hub GC, Lakkaa TA. Low physical activity as a predictor for total and
cardiovascular disease mortality in middle-aged men and women in Finland. Eur Heart J
2004; 25: 2204–11.
376. Oguma Y, Shinoda-Tagawa T. Physical activity decreases cardiovascular disease risk in
women: review and meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med 2004; 26: 407–41.
377. Sofi F, Capalbo A, Cesari F, Abbate R, Gensini GF. Physical activity during leisure time and
primary prevention of coronary heart disease: an updated meta-analysis of cohort studies.
Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2008; 15: 247–57.
378. Li J, Siegrist J. Physical activity and risk of cardiovascular disease–a meta-analysis of
prospective cohort studies. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2012; 9: 391–407.
379. Diep L, Kwagyan J, Kurantsin-Mills J, Weir R, Jayam-Trouth A. Association of physical
activity level and stroke outcomes in men and women: a meta-analysis. J Womens Health
(Larchmt) 2010; 19: 1815–22.
380. Hu G, Tuomilehto J, Borodulin K, Jousilahti P. The joint associations of occupational,
commuting, and leisure-time physical activity, and the Framingham risk score on the
10-year risk of coronary heart disease. Eur Heart J 2007; 28: 492-8.
381. I-Min Lee, Rexrode KM, Cook NR et al. Physical Activity and Coronary Heart Disease in
Women. Is “No Pain, No Gain” Passe´? JAMA 2001; 285: 1447-54.
382. M.E.G. Armstrong, J. Green, G.K. Reeves, V. Beral, and B.J. Cairns, on behalf of the
Million Women Study Collaborators (2015). Frequent physical activity may not reduce
vascular disease risk as much as moderate activity: large prospective study of UK women.
Circulation 2015; 131(8): 721-29.
383. LaMonte MJ, Eisenman PA, Adams TD et al. Cardiorespiratory Fitness and Coronary
Heart Disease Risk Factors. The LDS Hospital Fitness Institute Cohort. Circulation 2000;
102: 1623-28.
384. Taylor RS, Brown A, Ebrahim S et al. Exercise-based rehabilitation for patients with
coronary heart disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Am J Med 2004; 116: 682–92.
385. Pahor M, Guralnik JM, Ambrosius, WT, Blair S, Bonds DE et al for the LIFE study
investigators. Effect of Structured Physical Activity on Prevention of Major Mobility
Disability in Older Adults. The LIFE Study Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2014; 311(23):
2387-96.
386. Hu FB, Willet WC, Li T et al. Adiposity as compared with physical activity in predicting
mortality among women. N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 2694-703.
387. Shiroma EJ, Lee I-M. Physical Activity and Cardiovascular Health.Lessons Learned From
Epidemiological Studies Across Age, Gender,and Race/Ethnicity. Circulation 2010; 122:
743-52.
388. Shufelt CL, Bairey Merz CN. Contraceptive hormone use and cardiovascular disease. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53(3): 221–31.
389. Farley TM, Meirik O, Collins J. Cardiovascular disease and combined oral contraceptives:
reviewing the evidence and balancing risks. Hum Reprod Update 1999; 5: 721-35.
390. Committee Opinion. Committee on Gynaecologic Practice. Hormone therapy and heart
disease. No. 565. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol
2013; 121: 1407–10.
391. Hannaford PC, Owen-Smith V. Using epidemiological data to guide clinical practice: review
of studies on cardiovascular disease and use of combined oral contraceptives. Br Med J
1998; 316: 984-87.
392. Kemmeren JM, Algra A, Grobbee DE. Third generation oral contraceptives and risk of
venous thrombosis: meta-analysis. Br Med J 2001; 323: 1-9.
393. Lewis MA, Heineman LA, Spitzer WO et al. The use of oral contraceptives and the
occurrence of acute myocardial infarction in young women. Results from the Transnational
Study on Oral Contraceptives and the Health of Young Women. Contraception 1997;
56:129-40.
394. Lewis MA, Spitzer WO, Heinemann LA et al. Third generation oral contraceptives and risk
of myocardial infarction: an international case-control study. Transnational Research
Group on Oral Contraceptives and the Health of Young Women. Br Med J 1996; 312:
88-90.
395. Heinemann LAJ, Lewis MA, Spitzer WO et al. Thromboembolic stroke in young women.
Contraception 1998; 57: 29-37.
396. Baillargeon J-P, McClish DK, Essah PA, Nestler JE. Association between the current use \
of low dose oral contraceptives and cardiovascular arterial disease: A meta-analysis. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2005; 90: 3863-3870.
397. WHO Collaborative Study of Cardiovascular Disease and Steroid Hormone Contraception.
Ischaemic stroke and combined oral contraceptives: results of an international,
multicentre, case-control study. Lancet 1996; 348: 498-505.
398. Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Colditz GA, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH. A prospective study of
past use of oral contraceptive agents and risk of cardiovascular diseases. N Engl J Med
1988; 319: 1313–17.
399. Rosenberg L, Palmer JR, Rao S, Shapiro S. Low dose oral contraceptive use and the risk
of myocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med 2001; 161: 1065-70.
400. WHO. Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use. Fifth edition. 2015.Available at
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/family_planning/MEC-5/en/
401. Rossouw JE, Prentice RL, Manson JE et al. Postmenopausal hormone therapy and risk of
cardiovascular disease by age and years since menopause. JAMA 2007; 297(13):
1465-77.
402. Anderson GL, Limacher M, Assaf AR et al part of Women's Health Initiative Steering
Committee. Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in postmenopausal women with
hysterectomy: the Women's Health Initiative randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;
291(14): 1701-12.
403. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on hormone therapy during
menopause in Malaysian women. Available at:
http://www.moh.gov.my/attachments/5724.pdf
404. Reid R, MD, Abramson BL, Blake J, Desindes S, Dodin S. Managing Menopause. SOGC
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2014; 36(9 e Suppl A): S1-S80.
405. O'Keefe JH, Bybee KA, Lavie CJ. Alcohol and cardiovascular health: the razor-sharp
double-edged sword. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50(11): 1009-14.
406. Di Castelnuovo A, Costanzo S, Bagnardi V, Donati MB, Iacoviello L, de Gaetano G. Alcohol
dosing and total mortality in men and women. an updated meta-analysis of 34 prospective
studies. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166: 2437-45.
407. Fuchs CS, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA et al. Alcohol consumption and mortality among
women. N Engl J Med 1995; 332: 1245-50.
408. Corrao G, Bagnardi V, Zambon A, La Vecchia C. A meta-analysis of alcohol consumption
and the risk of 15 diseases. Prev Med 2004; 38: 613-19.
409. Ikehara S, Iso H, Yamagishi K, Kokubo Y, Saito I, Yatsuya H, Inoue M, Tsugane S; JPHC
Study Group. Alcohol consumption and risk of stroke and coronary heart disease among
Japanese women: the Japan Public Health Center-based prospective study. Prev Med
2013; 57(5): 505-10.
410. Di Minno MND, Franchini M, Russolillo A, Lupoli R, Iervolino S, Di Minno G. Alcohol
Dosing and the Heart: Updating Clinical Evidence. Semin Thromb Hemost 2011; 37(8):
875-884
411. Hare DL, Toukhsati SR, Johansson P, Jaarsma T. Depression and cardiovascular disease:
a clinical review. Eur Heart J 2014; 35(21): 1365-72.
412. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS
Guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart
disease. Circulation 2012; 126: e354-e471.
413. Luukinen H, Laippala P, Huikuri V. Depressive symptoms and the risk of sudden cardiac
death among the elderly. Eur Heart J 2003; 24: 2021-26.
414. Huffman JC, Celano CM, Beach SR, Motiwala SR, Januzzi JL. Depression and cardiac
disease: epidemiology, mechanisms, and diagnosis. Cardiovasc Psychiatry Neurol 2013;
2013: 695925. doi: 10.1155/2013/695925
415. Drory Y, Kravetz S, Hirschberger G, Israel Study Group on First Acute Myocardial
Infarction. Long-term mental health of women after a first acute myocardial infarction. Arch
Phys Med Rehabil 2003; 84: 1492-98.
416. Shah J, Ghasemzadeh N, Zaragoza-Macias E, Patel R, Eapen DJ, Neeland IJ, Pimple PM,
Zafari AM,Quyyumi AA, Vaccarino V. Sex and Age differences in the association of
Depression with Obstructive Coronary artery Disease and Adverse Cardiovascular Events.
J Am Heart Assoc 2014; 3(3): e000741. doi: 10.1161/JAHA
417. Serpytis P, Andriuskiene A, Pelanyte S, Matelyte V, Palsauskaite R, Serpytis R. Factors for
30 days survival in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J: Acute
Cardiovascular Care. Abstract Supplement 2014; 3(S2): 94.
418. Williams SA, KasI SV, Heiat A, Abramson JL, Krumholz HM, Vaccarino V. Depression and
risk of heart failure among the elderly: a prospective community- based study.
Psychosomat Med 2002; 64: 6-12.
419. Berkman LF, Blumenthal J, Burg M et al. Effects of treating depression and low perceived
social support on clinical events after myocardial infarction: the Enhancing Recovery in
Coronary Heart Disease Patients (ENRICHD) Randomized Trial. JAMA 2003; 289:
3106-16.
420. Lesperance F, Frasure-Smith N, Koszycki D et al. Effects of citalopram and interpersonal
psychotherapy on depression in patients with coronary artery disease: the Canadian
Cardiac Randomized Evaluation of Antidepressant and Psychotherapy Efficacy (CREATE)
trial. JAMA 2007; 297: 367-79.
421. Freedland KE, Skala JA, Carney RM et al. Treatment of depression after coronary artery
bypass surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2009; 66: 387-96.
422. Glassman AH, O'Connor CM, Califf RM et al. Sertraline treatment of major depression in
patients with acute MI or unstable angina. JAMA 2002; 288: 701-9.
423. Dowlati Y, Herrmann N, Swardfager WL, Reim EK, Lanctot KL. Efficacy and tolerability of
antidepressants for treatment of depression in coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis.
Can J Psychiatry 2010; 55: 91-9.
424. D'Agostino RB Sr, Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, Wolf PA, Cobain M, Massaro JM, Kannel
WB.General cardiovascular risk profile for use in primary care: the Framingham Heart
Study. Circulation. 2008; 117(6): 743.
425. Liew SM, Doust J, Glasziou P. Cardiovascular risk scores do not account for the effect of
treatment: a review. Heart 2011; 97: 689e697.
426. Liew SM, Blacklock C, Hislop J, Glasziou P, Mant D. Cardiovascular risk scores:
qualitative study of how primary care practitioners understand and use them. Br J Gen
Pract 2013; v.63(611) PMC3662457.
427. Chia YC, Gray SYW, Ching SM, Lim HM, Chinna K. Validation of the Framingham
general cardiovascular risk score in a multiethnic Asian population: a retrospective cohort
study. Br Med J Open 2015; 5: e007324.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014- 007324.
428. Selvarajah S, Kaur G, Haniff J, Kee CC, Tee GH, van de Graaf Y, Nots M. Comparsion of
the Framingham Risk Score, SCORE and WHO/ISH cardiovascular risk prediction
models in an Asian population. International Journal of Cardiology 2014; 176: 211-218.
429. European Guidelines on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in clinical practice. Third
Joint Task Force of European and other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention
in Clinical Practice. Eur J Cardio Prevention and Rehab 2003; 10(suppl 1); S1-78.
430. World Health Organization. Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease. Guidelines for the
assessment and management of Cardiovascular Risk. Geneva 2007; WHO Press.
431. Hippisley –Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y et al. Derivation and validation of QRISK,
a new cardiovascular disease risk score for the United Kingdom: prospective open cohort
study. Br Med J 2007; 335: 136-41.
432. Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y et al. Predicting cardiovascular risk in
England and Wales: prospective derivation and validation of QRISK2. Br Med J
2008; 336: 1475e82.
433. Woodward M, Brindle P, Tunstall–Pedoe H et al for the SIGN Group on Risk Estimation.
Adding social deprivation and family history to cardiovascular risk assessment: the
ASSIGN score from the Scottish Heart Health Extended Cohort (SHHEC). Heart 2007;
93: 172-6.
434. ACC/AHA 2013 Heart Risk Calculator. Available at http://www.cvriskcalculator.com/
435. Chia YC, Lim HM, Ching SM. Does use of pooled cohort risk score overestimate the use
of statin?: a retrospective cohort study in a primary care setting. BMC Family Practice
2014, 15: 172.
436. Bastuji-Garin S, Deverly A, Moyse D et al. on behalf of the INSIGHT committees and
Investigators. The Framingham prediction rule is not valid in a European population of
treated hypertensive patients. J Hypertens 2002; 20: 1973–80.
437. Liu J, Hong Y, D’Agostino RB Sr et al. Predictive value for the Chinese population of the
Framingham CHD risk assessment tool compared with Chinese Multi-Provincial Cohort
Study. JAMA 2004; 291: 2591-99.
438. Sibley C, Blumenthal RS, Bairey Merz CN et al. Limitations of current cardiovascular
disease risk assessment strategies in women. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2006; 15:
54-6.
439. Lloyd-Jones DM, Leip EP, Larson MG et al. Prediction of lifetime risk for cardiovascular
disease by risk factor burden at 50 years of age. Circulation 2006; 113: 791-8.
440. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, Bezanson JL, Dolor RJ. Effectiveness-Based Guidelines
for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Women—2011 Update. A Guideline From
the American Heart Association. Circulation 2011; 123: 1243-1262.
441. Wenger NK. Juggling Multiple Guidelines:A women’s Heart in the balance. J Women’s
Health (Larchmt) 2016; 25: 213-221.
442. Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, Benjamin EJ, Budoff MJ, Fayad ZA et al. 2010
ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults:
Executive summary. A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. N Engl J Med 2000;
343: 16-22.
443. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S on behalf of the INTERHEART Study Investigators. Effect
of potentially modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries
(the INTERHEART study): case-control study. Lancet 2004; 364: 937-52.
444. Selvarajah S, Haniff J, Hiong TG et al. Clustering of cardiovascular risk factors in a
middle-income country: a call for urgency. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2013; 20(2): 368-75.
445. Vasan RS, Sullivan LM, Wilson PWF et al. Relative importance of borderline and elevated
levels of coronary heart disease risk factors. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 393-402.
446. Stampfer MJ, Hu FB, Manson JE et al. Primary prevention of coronary heart disease in
women through diet and lifestyle. N Engl J Med 2000; 343: 16-22.
447. Agha G, Loucks EB, Tinker LF, Waring ME, Michaud DS, Foraker RE et al. Healthy
Lifestyle and Decreasing Risk of Heart Failure in Women. The Women's Health Initiative
Observational Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014; 64(17): 1777-85.
448. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E et al for the DASH Collaborative Research Group. A
Clinical Trial of the Effects of Dietary Patterns on Blood Pressure. N Engl J Med 1997; 336:
1117-24.
449. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ, Brands et al. Diet and lifestyle recommendations revision 2006:
A scientific statement from the American Heart Association Nutrition Committee.
Circulation 2006; 114: 82-96.
450. DeLorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL et al. Mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the
rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction; final report of the Lyon
Diet Heart Study. Circulation 1999; 99: 779-85.
451. Wang L, Gaziano JM, Liu S et al. Whole- and refined-grain intakes and the risk of
hypertension in women. Am J Clin Nutr 2007; 86: 472-9.
452. GISSI – Prevenzione trial. Dietary supplementation with n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
and vitamin E after myocardial infarction: results of the GISSI – Prevenzione trial. Lancet
1999; 354: 447-55.
453. Dauchet L, Amouyel P, Hercberg S, Dallongeville J. Fruit and vegetable consumption and
risk of coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Nutr 2006; 136:
2588-93.
454. Kris- Etherton PM, Harris WS, Aprel LJ for the Nutrition Committee. Fish consumption, fish
oil, omega-3-fatty acids and cardiovascular disease. Circulation 2002; 106: 2747-57.
455. US Department of Agriculture. Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory
Committee. February 2015.
456. Oh K, Hu FB, Manson JE et al. Dietary fat intake and risk of coronary heart disease in
women: 20 years of follow-up of the Nurses’ Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 2005; 161:
672-9.
457. Boniface DR, Tefft ME. Dietary fats and 16 year coronary heart disease mortality in a
cohort of men and women in Great Britain. Eur J Clin Nutr 2002; 56: 786-92.
458. Pereira MA, Pins JJ. Dietary fiber and cardiovascular disease: Experimental and
epidemiologic advances. Curr Athero Rep. 2000; 2(6): 494-502.
459. Whelton SK, Appel LJ, Espeland MA et al. Sodium restriction and weight loss in the
treatment of hypertension in older persons: a randomised controlled trial of
nonpharmacologic intervention in the elderly (TONE). TONE Collaborative Research
Group. JAMA 1998; 279: 839-46.
460. He J, Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Charleston J, Klag MJ. Long-Term Effects of Weight Loss
and Dietary Sodium Reduction on Incidence of Hypertension. Hypertension 2000; 35:
544-549.
461. Shephard RJ, Balady GJ. Exercise as cardiovascular therapy. Circulation 1999; 99:
963-72.
462. Critchley JA, Capewell S. Mortality risk reduction associated with smoking cessation in
patients with coronary heart disease: a systematic review. JAMA 2003; 290: 86-97.
463. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of
death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. Antithrombotic Trialists’
Collaboration. Br Med J 2002; 324: 71-86.
464. Pearson TA, Blair SN, Daniels SR et al. AHA Guidelines for primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease and stroke. 2002 update: consensus panel guide to
comprehensive risk reduction for adult patients without coronary or other atherosclerotic
vascular diseases. American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating
Committee. Circulation 2002; 106: 388-91.
465. Ridker PM, Cook NR, Lee I-M et al. A randomized trial of low-dose aspirin in the primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease in women. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 1293-304.
466. Antithrombotic Trialists' (ATT) Collaboration, Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, Emberson
J, Godwin J, Peto R, Buring J, Hennekens C, Kearney P, Meade T, Patrono C, Roncaglioni
MC, Zanchetti A. Aspirin in the primary and secondary prevention of vascular disease:
collaborative meta-analysis of individual participant data from randomised trials. Lancet
2009; 373(9678): 1849-60.
467. Halvorsen S, Andreotti F, ten Berg JM, Cattaneo M, Coccheri S et al. Aspirin therapy in
Primary Cardiovascular Disease Prevention. A Position Paper of the European Society of
Cardiology Working Group on Thromosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014; 64: 319-327.
468. Janelle M, Guirguis-Blake JM, Evans CV, Senger CA, Rowland MG, O’Connor EA,
Whitlock EP for Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Aspirin for the Primary
Prevention of Cardiovascular Events: A Systematic Evidence Review for the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force. Sept 2015. AHRQ Publication No. 13-05195-EF-1
469. Pignone M, Alberts MJ, Colwell JA, Cushman M, Inzucchi SE, Mukherjee D, Rosenson
RS, Williams CD, Wilson PW, Kirkman MS. Aspirin for Primary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Events in People With Diabetes A Position Statement of the American
Diabetes Association, a Scientific Statement of the American Heart Association, and an
Expert Consensus Document of the American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Circulation 2010; 121: 2694-701.
470. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Dyslipidaemia. 4th ed 2011. Available at
www.acadmed.com.my
471. Heart Protection Study Collaborative Study Group. MRC/BHF. Heart Protection Study of
cholesterol lowering with simvastatin in 20536 high- risk individuals: a randomized placebo
controlled trial. Lancet 2002; 360: 7-22.
472. LaRosa JC, Grundy SM, Waters DD et al. Intensive lipid lowering with atorvastatin in
patients with stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 1425–35.
473. Downs JR, Clearfield M, Weis S et al. Primary prevention of acute coronary events with
lovastatin in men and women with average cholesterol levels: results of
AFCAPS/TexCAPS. Air Force/Texas Coronary Atherosclerosis Prevention Study. JAMA
1998; 279: 1615–22.
474. Sever PS, Dahlof B, Poulter NR et al. Prevention of coronary and stroke events with
atorvastatin in hypertensive patients who have average or lower-than-average cholesterol
concentrations, in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial–Lipid Lowering Arm
(ASCOT-LLA): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2003; 361: 1149–58.
475. Ridker PM, Danielson E, Fonseca FA et al; for the JUPITER Study Group Rosuvastatin to
prevent vascular events in men and women with elevated C-reactive protein. N Engl J Med
2008; 359: 2195–207.
476. Brugts JJ, Yetgin T, Hoeks SE et al. The benefits of statins in people without established
cardiovascular disease but with cardiovascular risk factors: meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. Br Med J 2009; 338: b2376.
477. Ray KK, Seshasai SR, Erqou S et al. Statins and all-cause mortality in high-risk primary
prevention: a meta-analysis of 11 randomized controlled trials involving 65 229
participants. Arch Intern Med 2010; 170: 1024–31.
478. Taylor F, Huffman MD, Macedo AF et al. Statins for the primary prevention of
cardiovascular
disease.
Cochrane
Database
Syst
Rev
2013;
1:
CD004816.
479. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' (CTT) Collaborators The effects of lowering LDL
cholesterol with statin therapy in people at low risk of vascular disease: meta-analysis of
individual data from 27 randomised trials. Lancet 2012; 380(9841): 581–90.
480. Rubins HB, Robins SJ, Collins D et al. for the Veteran Affairs High density Lipoprotein
Cholesterol Intervention Trial Study Group. Gemfibrozil for the secondary prevention of
coronary heart disease in men with low levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol. N
Engl J Med 1999; 341: 410-8.
481. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration, Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J,
Holland LE, Reith C, Bhala N, Peto R, Barnes EH, Keech A, Simes J, Collins R. Efficacy
and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from
170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet 2010; 376(9753): 1670-81.
482. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension, 4th ed 2013. available at
www.acadmed.com.my
483. The SPRINT Research Group. A Randomized Trial of Intensive versus Standard
Blood-Pressure Control. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 2103-16.
484. Wassertheil-Smoller S, Anderson G, Psaty BM, et al. Hypertension and its treatment in
postmenopausal women: baseline data from the Women's Health Initiative. Hypertension
2000; 36: 780-9.
485. Gueyffier F, Boutitie F, Boissel JP et al. Effect of antihypertensive drug treatment on
cardiovascular outcomes in women and men. A meta-analysis of individual patient data
from randomized, controlled trials. The INDANA Investigators. Ann Intern Med
1997; 126: 761-7.
486. Quan A, Kerlikowske K, Gueyffier F, Boissel JP. Efficacy of treating hypertension in
women. J Gen Intern Med 1999; 14: 718-29.
487. Jones CA, Nagpal S. An update: women, hypertension and therapeutic efficacy. Can J
Cardiol 2001; 17: 1283-9.
488. Turnbull F, Woodward M, Neal B, Barzi F, Ninomiya T, Chalmers J, Perkovic V, Li N,
MacMahon S and the Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists' Collaboration. Do men
and women respond differently to blood pressure-lowering treatment? Results of
prospectively designed overviews of randomized trials. Eur Heart J 2008; 29: 2669-80.
489. Lewis CE, Grandits A, Flack J et al. Efficacy and tolerance of antihypertensive treatment
in men and women with stage 1 diastolic hypertension. Results of the Treatment of Mild
Hypertension Study. Arch Intern Med 1996; 156: 377-85.
490. Pemu PI, Ofili E. Hypertension in women: part I. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2008;
10(5): 406-10.
491. Nestel PJ, Clifton PM, Noakes M et al. Enhanced blood pressure response to dietary salt
in elderly women, especially those with small waist: hip ratio. J Hypertens 1993; 11:
1387–94.
492. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM et al DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group
Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med
2001; 344(1): 3-10.
493. Lewis CE. Characteristics, treatment of hypertension in women: a review of the literature.
Am J Med Sci 1996; 311: 193–9.
494. Os I, Bratland B, Dahlof B et al. Female sex as an important determinant of Lisinopril
induced cough. Lancet 1992; 339: 372-3.
495. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA et al. Benefits of modest weight loss in improving
cardiovascular risk factors in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2011; 34(7): 1481-86.
496. Poobalan AS, Aucott LS, Smith WCS et al. Long-term weight loss effects on all cause
mortality in overweight/obese populations. Complications of obesity. Obes Rev 2007; 8:
503-13.
497. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, Calkins C, Cigarroa JE et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS
Guideline for the Management of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: Executive Summary: A
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2014; 64: 2246-2280.
127
498. Deirdre A. Lane DA, Lip GYH. Clinician Update. Use of the CHA2DS2-VASc and
HAS-BLED Scores to Aid Decision Making for Thromboprophylaxis in Nonvalvular Atrial
Fibrillation. Circulation 2012; 126: 860-65.
499. Lonn E, Bosch J, Yusuf S et al for the HOPE and HOPE-TOO Trial Investigators. Heart
Outcome Prevention Evaluation & Heart Outcome Prevention Evaluation – The Ongoing
Outcome Trial. Effects of long term vitamin E supplementation on cardiovascular event
and cancer: a randomized controlled trail. JAMA 2005; 293: 1338-47.
500. Heart Protection Study Collaboration Group. MRC/BHF Heart protection study of
antioxidant vitamin supplementation in 20,536 high risk individuals: a randomized placebo
controlled trail. Lancet 2002; 360: 23-33.
501. Vivekananthan DP, Penn MS, Sapp SK, Hsu A, Topol EJ. Use of antioxidant vitamins for
the prevention of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet
2003; 361(9374): 2017-23.
502. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin, Mineral, and Multivitamin Supplements for
the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer: Recommendation
Statement. Am Fam Physician 2015; 91(1).
503. Clarke R, Halsey J, Bennett D, Lewington S. Homocysteine and vascular disease: review
of published results of the homocysteine-lowering trials. J Inherit Metab Dis 2011; 34(1):
83-91.
504. Yang HT, Lee M, Hong KS, Ovbiagele B, Saver JL. Efficacy of folic acid supplementation
in cardiovascular disease prevention: an updated meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Eur J Intern Med 2012; 23(8): 745-54.
505. Miller M, Stone NJ, Ballantyne C et al American Heart Association Clinical Lipidology,
Thrombosis, and Prevention Committee of the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and
Metabolism; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on
Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease. Triglycerides
and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation 2011; 123(20): 2292-333.
506. The Risk and Prevention Study Collaborative Group. n-3 fatty acids in patients with
multiple
cardiovascular
risk
factors.
N
Engl
J
Med
2013;
368:
1800-8.
507. Kotwal S, Jun M, Sullivan D, Perkovic V, Neal B. Omega 3 fatty acids and cardiovascular
outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2012;
5: 808-18.
508. Rizos EC, Ntzani EE, Bika E, Kostapanos MS, Elisaf MS. Association between omega-3
fatty acid supplementation and risk of major cardiovascular disease events: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2012; 308: 1024-33.
509. Kalay N, Basar E, Ozdogru I et al. Protective effects of carvedilol against
anthracyclines-induced cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 48(11): 2258-62.
510. Kaya MG, Ozkan M, Gunebakmaz O et al. Protective effect of nebivolol against
anthracyclines-induced cardiomyopathy: a randomised control study. Int J Cardiol 2013;
167(5): 2306-10.
511. Choe JY, Combs AB, Folkers K et al. Potentiation of the toxicity of Adriamycin by
propranolol.
Res
Commun
Chem
Pathol
Pharmacol
1978;
21(3):
577-80.
512. Cardinale D, Colombo A, Sandri MT et al. Prevention of high dose chemotherapy-induced
cardiotoxicity in high risk patients with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition.
Circulation 2006; 114(23): 2474-81.
513. Bosch X, Rovira M, Sitges M et al. Enalapril and carvedilol for preventing
chemotherapy-induced left ventricular systolic dysfunction in patients with malignant
hemopathies: the OVERCOME trial (prevention of left ventricular dysfunction with
enalapril and carvedilol in patients submitted to intensive chemotherapy for treatment of
Malignant hemopathies). J Am Coll Cardiol 2013; 61(23): 2355-62.
514. Gulati G, Heck SL, Hoffman P et al. Prevention of cardiac dysfunction during adjuvant
breast cancer therapy (PRADA): primary results of a randomized, 2 x 2 factorial,
placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. American Heart Association 2015 Scientific
Sessions; November 11, 2015; Orlando, FL. Abstract 2015-LBCT-20236-AHA.
128
515. Petitti DB. Combination Estrogen-Progestin Oral Contraceptives. N Engl J Med 2003; 349:
1443-50.
516. PROGRESS
Collaborative
Group.
Randomised
trial
of
a
perindopril-based
blood-pressure-lowering regimen among 6105 individuals with previous stroke or
transientis chaemic attack. Lancet 2001; 358: 1033–41.
517. Dahlof B, Devereux RB, Kjeldsen SE et al. Losartan Intervention for Endpoint reduction in
hypertension study (LIFE). Lancet 2002; 359: 1004-10.
518. Pepine CJ, Handberg EM, Cooper-DeHoff RM, et al. A calcium antagonist vs a
non-calcium antagonist hypertension treatment strategy for patients with coronary artery
disease. The International Verapamil-Trandolapril Study (INVEST): a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 2003; 290(21): 2805–16.
519. Julius S, Weber MA, Kjeldsen SE et al. The Valsartan Anti-hypertensive Long-Term Use
Evaluation (VALUE) Trial. Outcomes in Patients Receiving Monotherapy. Hypertension
2006; 48: 385-391.
520. Dahlof B, Sever PS, Poulter NR et al. Prevention of cardiovascular events with an
antihypertensive regimen of amlodipine adding perindopril as required versus atenolol
adding bendroflumethiazideas required, in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes
Trial-Blood Pressure Lowering Arm (ASCOTBPLA): a multicentre randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2005; 366(9489): 895–906.
521. Patel A. ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of a fixed combination of perindopril and
indapamide on macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus (the ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2007; 370:
829-40.
522. Jamerson K, Weber M, Bakris G et al. ACCOMPLISH Trial Investigators. Benazepril plus
Amlodipine or Hydrochlorothiazide for Hypertension in High-Risk Patients. N Engl J Med
2008; 359: 2417-28.
523. Beckett N, Peters R, Fletcher A et al. Treatment of Hypertension in Patients 80 Years of
Age or Older. N Engl J Med 2008; 358(18): 1887-98.
129
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The committee of this guideline would like to express their gratitude and appreciation to the
following for their contribution:
•
Technical Advisory Committee, Clinical Practice Guidelines, Ministry of Health for their
valuable input and feedback
•
Panel of external (local and international) reviewers who reviewed the draft
•
Ms Boey Ghod Chee, physiotherapist, IJN
•
Secretariat – Azmi Burhani Consulting
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
This CPG was made possible by an unrestricted educational grant from AstraZeneca to the
National Heart Association of Malaysia. The views of the funding body have not influenced the
contents of this guideline.