Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-45-5
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.nam.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally. Priority of care in multisystem injuries is beyond the
scope of this CPG.
REVIEW UPDATE
These guidelines were issued in 2015 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2019) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grades of Recommendation
i
Guidelines Development and Objectives
ii
Guidelines Development Group
v
Review Committee
vi
External Reviewers
vii
Algorithm 1. General Management of Adults
viii
with Isolated Head Injury
Algorithm 1a. General Management of Adults
ix
with Isolated Head Injury in Hospital
without CT Scan
Algorithm 1b. General Management of Adults
x
with Isolated Head Injury with CT Scan
Algorithm 2. Triaging of Adults with Suspected Head
xi
Injury in Pre-Hospital Care or
Emergency Department
Algorithm 3. Selection of Adults with Head Injury
xii
for Head CT
Algorithm 4. Selection of Adults with Head Injury
xiii
for Imaging of the Cervical Spine
Algorithm 5. Management of Adults Patient with
xiv
Mild Head Injury Requiring
Urgent Surgery other than Cranial Surgery
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
DEFINITION
3
3
CLASSIFICATION OF SEVERITY
5
4.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
6
5.
PRE-HOSPITAL CARE (PHC)
6
5.1 Assessment and General Treatment
6
5.2 Initial Management
7
5.3 Referral or Discharge at Primary Care Setting
9
5.4 Transportation
11
6.
MANAGEMENT IN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT (ED)
15
6.1 Triage
15
6.2 General Treatment
16
6.3 Observation in ED
No.
Title
Page
7.
IMAGING
25
7.1 Head CT
25
7.2 Skull X ray
27
7.3 Repeat Head CT
28
7.4 Cervical Imaging
29
8.
MEDICATION IN INITIAL MANAGEMENT
31
8.1 Analgesia/sedation
31
8.2 Intravenous fluid
32
8.3 Diuretic
32
8.4 Anticonvulsant
33
9.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
35
9.1 Reversal of Antiplatelet and Anticoagulant in
35
Patients with Head Injury
9.2 Restarting Antiplatelet/Anticoagulant in
36
Patients with Head Injury
9.3 Patients with Mild Head Injury Requiring Non-Life
37
Threatening Urgent Surgery other than Cranial Surgery
9.4 Safe Extubation of Patients with Head Injury
38
10.
TELECONSULTATION
40
11.
DISCHARGE ADVICE
41
12.
FOLLOW-UP
42
13.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
43
13.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
43
13.2 Potential Resource Implications
43
13.3 Clinical Audit Indicator
43
REFERENCES
44
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
49
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
51
Appendix 3 Glasgow Coma Scale and Score
52
Appendix 4 Head Chart
53
Appendix 5 Discharge Advice for Head Injury
54
Appendix 6 Canadian Cervical Rule (CCR)
55
Appendix 7 The NEXUS Low-Risk Criteria for
56
Low Probability of Cervical Injury
Appendix 8 Equipments for Transfer
57
Appendix 9 Transfer Checklist for Neurosurgical Patients
58
Appendix 10 Safe Extubation Criteria in Head Injury
59
Appendix 11 Drug Dosing Regimen for Initial Management
60
List of Abbreviation
62
Acknowledgement
63
Disclosure Statement
63
Source of Funding
63
No.
Title
Page
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit
of MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
•
overall quality of evidence
•
balance of benefits versus harms
•
values and preferences
•
resource implications
•
equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for this Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry
of Education. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary
Review Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N), Medline via Ovid,
Pubmed and Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) (refer to
Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The search was limited
to literature published in the last ten years, on humans and in English. In
addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were
searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were
also contacted to identify further studies. All searches were conducted
from 5 January 2014 to 9 July 2014. Literature searches were repeated
for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process
allowing any relevant papers published before 31 August 2015 to be
included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after
this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on Head Injury such as
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) - Early management
of patients with a head injury (2009) and National Institute for Health
and Clinical Excellence (NICE) - Head injury: Triage, assessment,
investigation and early management of head injury in infants, children
and adults (2014). The CPG was evaluated using the Appraisal of
Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being
used as references.
A total of 27 clinical questions were developed under different sections.
Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within these
sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 25 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG is based largely
on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials,
with local practices taken into consideration.
iii
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and
CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the
CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual on
Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice
Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.gov.my/
index.php/pages/view/117).
iv
OBJECTIVES
To provide evidence-based guidelines to those involved in the early
management of head injury in primary and secondary/tertiary care
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
Adult patients presenting with head injury (18 years old and above)
Exclusion Criteria
The guidelines do not cover definitive management of head injury:
•
all surgeries pertaining to neurosurgery and post-operative care
•
rehabilitation
•
management of multisystem injuries
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders including:
i.
Doctors
ii. Pharmacists
iii. Allied health professionals
iv. Medical students and healthcare trainees
v. Professional societies
vi. Patients and carers/non-governmental organisations
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary or secondary/tertiary care settings
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Liew Boon Seng
Neurosurgeon
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Members (alphabetical order)
v
Dr. Andre Das
Head of Department & Consultant Surgeon
Hospital Kajang, Selangor
Dr. Cecilia Anthonysamy
Emergency Physician
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Clement Edward A/L Thaumanavar
Head of Department & Consultant Surgeon
Hospital Tuanku Fauziah, Perlis
Dr. Gee Teak Sheng
Neurosurgeon
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Jalil Ishak
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jasin, Melaka
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd. Sofan Zenian
Neurosurgeon
Hospital Queen Elizabeth, Sabah
Dr. Nik Ahmad Shaiffudin Nik Him
Consultant Emergency Physician
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin
Terengganu
Dr. Noor Aishah Yussof
Coordinator
Klinik Kesihatan Dengkil, Selangor
Mdm. Norsima Nazifah Sidek
Pharmacist
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah
Terengganu
Dr. Tony Yong Yee Khong
General Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Vanitha Sivanaser
Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zainab Kusiar
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Mantin, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Zarina Yakof
Radiologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Datuk Dr. Johari Siregar Adnan
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Neurosurgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
vi
Dr. Adienuar Ahmad Norawi
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuantan, Pahang
Dr. Andrew Gunn Kean Beng
Consultant Surgeon
Gleneagles Medini Johor Bahru, Johor
Professor Dato’ Dr. Hj Jafri Malin
Datuk Hj. Abdullah
Director & Senior Consultant Neurosurgeon
Centre for Neuroscience Services &
Research
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Lim Wee Leong
Head of Department & Senior Consultant
Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dato’ Dr. Mohamed Yusof Hj. Abdul Wahab
Head of Department & Senior Consultant
Surgeon
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Datuk Dr. Mohd Saffari Mohd Haspani
Senior Consultant Neurosurgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri
Consultant Public Health Physician
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sabariah Faizah Jamaluddin
Head of Department &
Senior Consultant
Emergency Department
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dato’ Dr. Hjh. Salwah Hashim
Head of Department & Consultant
Radiologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
vii
Professor Dr. Ab Fatah Ab Rahman
Dean, Faculty of Health Sciences
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin
Terengganu
Professor Dato’ Dr. Ahmad Zubaidi Abdul Latif
Vice Chancellor & Senior Consultant
Neurosurgeon
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin
Terengganu
Dr. Azmin Kass Rosman
Head of Department & Senior Consultant
Neurosurgeon
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Selangor
Dr. Jaidon Ramli
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Johor Bahru, Johor
Dr. Hjh. Khatijah Abu Bakar
Head of Department &
Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Professor Dr. Mathew Joseph
Head of Department & Professor of
Neurosurgery
Department of Neurological Sciences
Christian Medical College
Vellore, India
Professor Dr. Rashidi Ahmad
Head of Department & Consultant
Emergency Physician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rizal Imran Alwi
Consultant Trauma Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Ruziaton Hashim
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Pandamaran
Selangor
Dr. Shaun Goh
Consultant Emergency Physician &
Trauma Director
Khoo Teck Puat Hospital
Singapore
Professor Dr. Syed Azhar Syed Sulaiman
Professor in Clinical Pharmacy
Pusat Pengajian Sains Farmasi
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Pulau Pinang
Dr. Tan It
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Sunway Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Vaughn Eaton
Director of Pharmacy
Southern Adelaide Local Health Network
Adelaide, Australia
Dr. W Mohd Nazaruddin W Hassan
Senior Lecturer & Consultant NeuroAnaesthesiologist
Pusat Pengajian Sains Perubatan
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Professor Dr. Poon Wai Sang
Consultant Neurosurgeon
National University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
ALGORITHM 1. GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF ADULTS
WITH ISOLATED HEAD INJURY
!
Triage and
Trauma Life Support
Health clinic/private clinic
Hospital without CT
Hospital with CT
Requiring
hospital
admission*
Requiring
CT brain ±
spine**
YES
YES
NO
NO
If a healthcare provider is unsure which hospital to refer to, the patient should then
be referred to the nearest hospital.
* Refer to Recommendation 3 on Criteria of Referral to Hospital on Patients with MHI.
** Refer to Algorithm 3 on Selection of Adults with Head Injury for Head CT.
CT = computed tomography
Isolated Head Injury
Referral to the nearest
hospital with CT scan
Refer to Algorithm 1b
Refer to Algorithm 1a
Referral to the nearest
hospital for observation
Discharge with head injury advice (verbal and written) and follow-up if necessary
ALGORITHM 1a. GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF ADULTS WITH
ISOLATED HEAD INJURY IN HOSPITAL WITHOUT CT SCAN
Isolated Head Injury
Triage and
Trauma Life Support
Requiring
CT brain ±
spine*
NO
YES
YES
YES
Referral to the nearest
hospital with CT scan
ED observation**
NO
NO
YES
NO
ward
observation
Discharge with head injury advice (verbal and written) and follow-up if necessary
* Refer to Algorithm 3 on Selection of Adults with Head Injury for Head CT.
** Refer to Recommendation 7 on Criteria of Patients with Mild Head Injury (MHI)
who can be Safely Observed in ED.
*** Refer to Recommendation 10 on Criteria for Admission of MHI Patients
Post-observation in ED.
CT = computed tomography; ED = Emergency Department
Indication for
observation
Admit for ward
observation
Requiring further
observation***
ALGORITHM 1b. GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF ADULTS WITH
ISOLATED HEAD INJURY IN HOSPITAL WITH CT SCAN
Discharge with head injury advice (verbal and written) and follow-up if necessary
Isolated Head Injury
Triage and
Trauma Life Support
Requiring
CT brain ±
spine*
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
CT scan brain ± spine
Indication for
neuro-trauma
referral
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
Indication for
observation
Admit for ward
observation
Requiring further
observation***
ED
observation**
ward
observation
Refer to hospital
with neuro-trauma
services
* Refer to Algorithm 3 on Selection of Adults with Head Injury for Head CT.
** Refer to Recommendation 7 on Criteria of Patients with Mild Head Injury (MHI)
who can be Safely Observed in ED.
*** Refer to Recommendation 10 on Criteria for Admission of MHI Patients
Post-observation in ED.
CT = computed tomography; ED = Emergency Department
ALGORITHM 2. TRIAGING OF ADULTS WITH
SUSPECTED HEAD INJURY IN PRE-HOSPITAL CARE OR
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
YES
NO
NO
• Airway obstruction
• GCS <13
• RR <10 or >30 breaths/minute
• SBP <90 mmHg
• HR <60 beats/minute or
>110 beats/minute
• SpO2 <90% on room air
STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 3
STEP 4
Measure vital signs and level of consciousness
• All penetrating injuries to head,
neck, torso and extremities
proximal to elbow and knee
• Chest wall instability/deformity
(flail chest)
• Two or more proximal
long-bone fractures
• Crushed, degloved or mangled
or pulseless extremity
• Amputation proximal to wrist
and ankle
• Pelvic fractures
• Open or depressed skull
fracture
• Paralysis
Assess anatomy of injury
NO
• Falls
- >6 metres (one storey is equal to 3 metres)
• High-risk auto crash
- Intrusion: >30 cm occupant site or >46 cm any site
- Ejection (partial or complete) from vehicle
- Death in same passenger compartment
- Vehicle telemetry data consistent with high risk of injury
• Auto vs pedestrian/bicyclist
• Thrown, run over, or with significant (>30 km/h) impact
• Motorcycle crash >30 km/h
• Older adults:
- Risk of injury/death increases with age ≥65 years
- SBP <110 mmHg might represent shock after age of 65 years old
- Low impact mechanisms (e.g. ground level falls) might results in
severe injury
• Anticoagulation and bleeding disorders
• Burns
• Pregnancy >20 weeks
• Emergency Medical Staff clinical judgement
Assess mechanism of injury and evidence of high-energy impact
Assess special patients or system considerations
YES
YES
NO
Adapted: Sasser SM, Hunt RC, Faul M, et al. Guidelines for field triage of injured patients: recommendations of the
National Expert Panel on Field Triage, 2011. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2012 Jan 13;61(RR-1):1-20
YELLOW
ZONE
Reassess
RED ZONE
Steps 1 and
2 attempts to
identify the
most injured
patients
RED ZONE
YELLOW
ZONE
GREEN
ZONE
ALGORITHM 3. SELECTION OF ADULTS WITH
HEAD INJURY FOR HEAD CT
NO
Presence
of risk factors for
urgent scan
Presence
of risk factors for
immediate
scan
Adults present to the ED
with head injury
YES
Perform Head
CT within 6 to 8
hours of the
head injury*
NO
Continue other managements as required
Risk factors for immediate scan:
• GCS <13 on initial management
• GCS <15 at 2 hours after injury
• Open, penetrating, suspected open,
close or depressed skull fracture
• Any sign of basal skull fracture
(haemotympanum, ‘raccoon’ eyes,
cerebrospinal fluid leakage from the
ear or nose, or Battle’s sign)
• Post-traumatic seizure
• Focal neurological deficit
• Vomiting ≥2 since the head injury
• Patient on anticoagulant and/or
antiplatelet or bleeding disorder with
symptoms such as diffuse headache,
loss of consciousness, amnesia or
vomiting
Risk factors for urgent scan:
• Age ≥65 years old
• A history of bleeding/clotting disorder
or on anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet
• Dangerous mechanism of injury
(a pedestrian or cyclist struck by a
motor vehicle, an occupant ejected
from a motor vehicle or a fall from
height >1 metre or 5 stairs)
• More than 30 minutes retrograde
amnesia of events immediately before
the head injury
• Previous cranial surgery
• History of epilepsy
Presence
of risk factors during
observation
NO
Risk factors during observation:
• GCS <15
• Post-traumatic seizure
• Focal neurological deficit
• Vomit ≥2 since the head injury
• Worsening diffuse headache
• Abnormal behaviour
• Amnesia
Ensure patient’s airway secured and
hemodynamically stable before CT scan.
Adapted: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Triage, assessment, investigation and early management
of head injury in children, young people and adults. London: NICE; 2014.
YES
Perform Head CT within
1 to 2 hours of risk factor
being identified*
*A provisional/preliminary
verbal radiology report
should be made
available within 1 hour
of the CT taking place
(depends on local setting)
YES
ALGORITHM 4. SELECTION OF ADULTS WITH HEAD INJURY
FOR IMAGING OF THE CERVICAL SPINE
Adults presenting with head injury
Is one or more of the following risk factors present?
• Initial assessment GCS <13
• Intubated patients
• A definitive diagnosis of cervical spine injury is required urgently (e.g. before surgery)
• Other body areas are being scanned for head injury or multi-region trauma
• The patient is alert and stable, there is a suspicion of cervical spine injury and any of
the following high risk factors are present:
- Age ≥65 years old
- Dangerous mechanism of injury*
- Focal peripheral neurological deficit or paraesthesia
YES
Perform CT cervical spine within 1 - 2
hours of risk factor being identified
Perform three-view cervical spine X-rays
within 1 hour of risk factor being identified
NO
A provisional written/verbal radiology
report should be made available within
1 - 2 hours of the CT taking place
Are the three-view cervical spine
X-rays technically inadequate,
suspicious or definitely abnormal?
If any of the following present factors that
allow safe assessment on range of
movement of cervical spine?
- Simple rear-end motor vehicle collision (MVC)**
- Sitting position in ED
- Ambulatory at any time
- Delayed onset of neck pain***
- Absence of midline c-spine tenderness
YES
NO
YES
NO
Can the patient actively rotate the
neck to 45 degrees to the left and
right on assessment?
No imaging/further imaging required.
Consider further imaging (CT/MRI)
if symptoms persist
YES
NO
*Dangerous mechanism
- Fall from elevation >1 metre/5
stairs
- Axial load to head e.g. diving
- MVC high speed (>100 km/hour)
- Rollover, ejection
- Motorised recreational vehicles
- Bicycle collision
**Simple rear-end MVC excludes:
- Pushed into oncoming traffic
- Hit by bus/large truck
- Rollover
- Hit by high speed vehicle
***Delayed
i.e. not immediate onset of neck
pain
Adapted: National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. Triage, assessment, investigation
and early management of head injury in
children, young people and adults. London:
NICE; 2014.
ALGORITHM 5. MANAGEMENT OF ADULTS WITH
MILD HEAD INJURY REQUIRING URGENT SURGERY
OTHER THAN CRANIAL SURGERY
NO
YES
Manage
according
to the specific
injuries
Patient with mild head injury
Life-threatening
injuries
Presence of risk
factors for immediate
Head CT*
Surgery**
NO
YES
YES
Availability of CT scan
Refer for CT scan
NO
Perform CT scan
Positive findings
Negative findings
Discuss with
neurosurgeon
Proceed with
surgery**
* Refer to Algorithm 3 on Selection of Adults with Head Injury for Head CT.
** Anaesthesia administration adheres to principles of neuroanesthesia.
1. INTRODUCTION
In the Malaysian National Trauma Database 2009 report, blunt trauma
made up 96% of all injuries. Road traffic accident (RTA) accounted
for 75% of cases with motorcyclists being most commonly injured. The
younger age group of 15 - 34 years old (56.6%) is at highest risk of
major trauma. A high proportion of those with major trauma (85%) had
injuries to the head and neck with Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS) ≥3.1, level III
Injury was the fifth (7.86%) commonest cause of hospitalisation
in Malaysian public hospitals in 20142, level III with RTA being the
commonest cause of injury-related hospitalisation. Apart from that,
head injury constituted the commonest diagnosis leading to intensive
care unit (ICU) admission.3, level III
Based on the World Health Organization Global status report on
road safety 2013, the road traffic fatality rate in Malaysia was higher
than global rate (25 vs 18 per 100 000 population). Many lives can be
saved with good pre-hospital care (PHC) and quick transportation to
hospital.4, level III
Strengthening of emergency services and PHC were identified as
crucial in improving secondary care as stated in the country health plan
strategy 2011 - 2015 report. Subspecialties development will continue
to be strengthened in regional hospitals including expansion and
strengthening of tertiary care related to trauma.5, level III
A local study on the effectiveness of trauma services provided by
secondary and tertiary hospitals showed an 83% mortality reduction in
severe injuries among those admitted to hospital with specialist trauma
services compared with those without such services. Nevertheless, they
had a higher likelihood of disability and impairment upon discharge.
It was concluded that improvement in access to trauma services for
severely injured patients and standardisation in management of trauma
care within hospitals in the country were required.6, level III
A specialty and subspecialty framework of MoH hospitals 10th Malaysia
Plan (2010 - 2015) reported that Hospital Kuala Lumpur and 13 states
hospitals will be provided with neurosurgery subspecialty to manage
complicated head injury.7, level III However, currently there are only
nine states and one district hospital with an additional three university
hospitals providing neurosurgical services.
In view of the above issues, this first evidence-based local CPG has
been developed with the aim of guiding healthcare providers in the
early management of head injury. It intends to reduce clinical practice
variation, provide optimum care for head injury patients and eventually
achieve significant reduction in mortality and morbidity related to the
condition. It also helps in optimising limited neurosurgical subspecialty
services in the country with a referral system that includes tele-health
services.
2. DEFINITION
Head injury is defined as blunt and/or penetrating injury to the head
(above the neck) and/or brain due to external force* with temporary or
permanent impairment in brain function which may or may not result in
underlying structural changes in the brain.
One or more of the following conditions from anatomical and
physiological changes must be present in patients with head
injury:8
1. Physiological changes
• observed or self-reported loss of or decreased level of
consciousness (any duration)
• any loss of memory (amnesia) of events immediately before or
after the injury
• any alteration in mental state or neuropsychological abnormality
at the time of the injury [such as loss of consciousness (LOC),
confusion, disorientation and slow thinking]
• objective neurological deficits (such as weakness, loss of balance,
change in vision, praxis, paresis/paraplegia, sensory loss and
aphasia) that may or may not be transient
2. Anatomical changes
• scalp and/or facial wound or swelling
• skull fracture (facial, basilar or vault) and/or clinical signs of skull
fracture***
• diagnosed intracranial lesion such as brain parenchyma injury,
injury to intracranial blood vessels, injury to the dura mater,
intracranial haemorrhage (ICH), subarachnoid haemorrhage or
intraventricular haemorrhage
• To define head injury, criteria i and ii must be present with/without
criteria iii:
i. mechanism - presence of external force*
ii. physiological - alteration in physiology of the brain
iii. anatomical - scalp and/or face and/or skull and/or brain injury
(internal and external)**
*The external forces may include any of the following events:
• the head being struck by an object
• the head striking an object
• the brain undergoing an acceleration/deceleration movement
without direct external trauma to the head
• a foreign body penetrating the brain
• forces generated from events such as blast or explosion, or other
forces yet to be defined
**The anatomical or mechanical changes in the brain such as axonal
injury which may not be visualised in the CT scan does not rule out
such injury.
***Clinical signs of skull base fractures such as periorbital ecchymosis
(“Raccoon’s eyes”), retro-auricular ecchymosis (“Battle’s sign”),
cerebrospinal fluid leakage either from the nose [cerebral spinal fluid
(CSF) rhinorhoea] or ear (CSF otorhoea), or seventh and eighth
cranial nerves deficits causing facial paralysis and hearing loss
respectively.
3. CLASSIFICATION OF SEVERITY
The severity of head injury can be classified according the presenting
Glasgow Coma Score (GCS):9 level III
• mild head injury (MHI): GCS 13 - 15
• moderate head injury: GCS 9 - 12
• severe head injury: GCS 3 - 8
The MHI group can be subdivided into two types as shown in Table 1.10 - 11, level III
Table 1. Classification of MHI
Refer to Appendix 3 on Glasgow Coma Scale.
Cerebral concussion
Should only be used if there is no imaging
evidence of brain injury
With or without history of LOC
Can be further subdivided into:
GCS 15
Mild head injury
GCS 13 - 15
With or without imaging evidence of brain
injury
Requires a LOC (≤30 minutes) or posttraumatic amnesia (≤24 hours)
Can be further subdivided according to
the risk of deterioration and expected
outcome:
Grade 1
Grade 2
Grade 3
• History of
confusion
• No history
of LOC
• Concussion
symptoms
resolve
in <15
minutes
• History of
confusion
• No history
of LOC
• Concussion
symptoms
last >15
minutes
• History
of LOC
either brief
(seconds)
or
prolonged
(minutes)
Low Risk
Medium Risk
High Risk
GCS 15
GCS 14 - 15
GCS 13
With one
or more of
the clinical
findings
With neurological deficits or
skull fracture or risk factors
with/without clinical findings
Concussion symptoms are divided into four
categories:
1. Physical
headache, fuzzy or blurry vision,
sensitivity to noise and/or light,
dizziness, feeling tired and lacking
energy, and problems with balance
2. Cognition/memory
difficulty thinking clearly, feeling slowed
down, trouble concentrating, and
difficulty remembering new information
3. Emotional/mood
irritability, inexplicable sadness,
nervousness and/or anxiety
4. Sleep disturbances
interruptions in normal sleep patterns
Clinical findings:
LOC, amnesia, diffuse headache, vomiting
Risk factors:
Coagulopathy, alcohol consumption and/or
drug misuse, age ≥65 years old, previous
cranial surgery and history of pre-trauma
epilepsy
4. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differential diagnoses of adult head injury include the following:
• primary anoxic, inflammatory, infectious, toxic or metabolic
encephalopathies, which are not complications of head trauma
• neoplasm
• brain infarction (ischaemic stroke) and intracranial haemorrhage
(haemorrhagic stroke) without associated trauma
• alcohol intoxication, psychotropic drugs or substance abuse
• seizure
5. PRE-HOSPITAL CARE (PHC)
PHC is defined as an immediate assistance a patient receives from
PHC providers before arriving at hospital. Mortality and morbidity due
to head injury may be reduced by adequate pre-hospital trauma care.
The first responder who recognises the emergency situation is
encouraged to rapidly activate emergency response system by dialling
999 and provide basic first aid measures. Most deaths in the first hour
after injury are the result of airway and circulatory systems compromise.
Appropriate assessment, stabilisation and care of trauma victim
including referral and transportation to appropriate receiving facility will
help avoid secondary brain injury.
5.1 Assessment and General Treatment
The Glasgow Coma Scale and Score are widely used in patients with
head injury due to their good reliability and validity. Patient’s best
eye, motor and verbal response are assessed and categorised into
mild (GCS 13 to 15), moderate (GCS 9 to12) and severe (GCS 3 to
8).12 These are reliable tools to monitor and detect deterioration in
patients with head injury. Alcohol intoxication, sedative medications,
hypoxia and hypotension can influence the conscious level. Therefore
any assessment of GCS should be repeated after resuscitation from
cardiopulmonary insult or recovery from intoxication and sedation in
patients with head injury. Other assessments that can be used other
than GCS are Head (AIS) and Trauma Score - Injury Severity Score.
• GCS score can be influenced by alcohol intoxication, sedative
medications, hypoxia and hypotension.
• Training on the use of GCS (technique and application) is essential
for accurate assessment of patients with head injury.
Total GCS and GCS Motor Scores including those at pre-hospital are
stronger predictors of 2-weeks mortality than Head AIS Score scales
after traumatic brain injury (TBI). In those aged ≥60 years, irrespective
of motor scale component of GCS, total GCS score and head AIS score
is an independent risk factor for the mortality.13, level II-2
Alcohol intoxication (blood alcohol concentration >0.08%) is an
important confounder which may influence pre-hospital assessment of
GCS in patients with TBI (p<0.001).14, level II-2
Recommendation 1
• Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) and Glasgow Coma Scale Score (GCS
score) should be used in the assessment of all patients with head
injury by trained healthcare providers.
5.2 Initial Management
5.2.1 Airway and ventilation
The most important pre-hospital management in head injury is the
maintenance of airway, breathing and circulation. Hypoxaemia [oxygen
saturation (SpO2) <90%] is the most important factor related to worse
outcome (more mortality and severe disability with SPO2 less than
90%) and therefore needs urgent attention.15
A systematic review of studies on pre-hospital intubation in severe head
injury concludes:16, level II-2
• The adjusted ORs for in-hospital mortality ranged from 0.24 (95%
CI 0.11 to 0.49) to 1.42 (95% CI 1.13 to 1.78).
• There were inconclusive results on functional outcome.
• Intubation failure or complication rates (e.g. pneumonia) ranged
from 2.1% to 41.1%.
Although there was insufficient evidence to suggest any recommendation,
beneﬁt and harm of pre-hospital intubation in severe TBI depend on
organisation of PHC services, skills of staff, risk of procedure failure
and expected transport times.16, level II-2
An airway should be established by the most appropriate means
available in severe TBI (GCS <9) to maintain an adequate airway or
when hypoxaemia is not corrected by supplemental oxygen.15
Patients should be maintained with normal breathing rates [End tidal
carbon dioxide (ET CO2) 35 - 40 mmHg]. Hyperventilation (ET CO2 <35
mmHg) should be avoided unless the patients shows sign of cerebral
herniation.15
Manual in line stabilisation must be performed in suspected cervical
spine injury and rapid sequence intubation is the preferred choice of
intubation technique as it is proven to be not associated with increased
risk of adverse neurological outcomes.17, level I
If tracheal intubation is required, manual in-line stabilisation is provided
by an assistant during intubation by using the fingers and palms of both
hands to stabilise the patient's occiput and mastoid processes to gently
counteract the forces of airway intervention. Prior to this maneuver, the
anterior half of a semi rigid collar is removed. The assistant stands at
the head or side of the patients. Manual in-line stabilisation anchors
the occiput and the torso anchors the lower cervical spine.18, level III The
procedure should be performed with caution as laryngoscopic forces
can be translated to mid-cervical spine.
5.2.2 Cervical spine
Unstable spinal injury may occur concomitantly with TBI and may lead
to permanent neurological deficit if not addressed appropriately.19, level III
Hence, cervical injury must be considered in all head injury.
Cervical spine immobilisation should be carried out in TBI patients with
any of the following risk factors:20
• GCS <15 on initial assessment by the healthcare professional
• paraesthesia in the extremities
• neck pain or tenderness
• focal neurological deficit
• any other clinical suspicion of cervical spine injury
Maintain cervical spine immobilisation until full risk assessment including
clinical assessment (and imaging if deemed necessary) indicates it is
safe to remove the immobilisation device.20
5.2.3 Circulation
Hypotension is defined as a SBP <90 mmHg in adults.15 Untreated
hypotension will produce secondary brain insult and studies have
demonstrated that a single episode of hypotension significantly worsens
the outcome.21, level III Treatment includes fluid and vasopressors to
maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 80 mmHg or more.20
There is no benefit on survival or functional outcome, and also no
difference in hospital length of stay by using hyperosmolar crystalloid
or colloid solutions over isotonic crystalloids in pre-hospital fluid
resuscitation of patients with TBI. Hypotension and hypoxia however
must be avoided, and fluid resuscitation should be sufficient to maintain
cerebral perfusion.22, level I
A multicentre Saline Albumin Fluid Resuscitation Trial showed that the
use of albumin was associated with higher mortality in patients with
severe head injury. Among patients with severe brain injury (GCS 3 -
8), 41.8% of them died in the albumin group as compared with 22.2%
patients in the saline group. However in those with GCS scores of 9 -
12, death occurred in eight of 50 patients in the albumin group (16.0%)
and eight of 37 patients in the saline group (21.6%).23, level I
Recommendation 2
• Hypoxaemia [oxygen saturation (SpO2) <90%] should be avoided in
head injury and corrected immediately upon identification. Oxygen
supplementation should be given to all patients with head injury to
prevent hypoxaemia.
• An airway should be established in head injury patients, by the most
appropriate means* available in the following conditions:
 severe head injury (Glasgow Coma Scale ≤8)
 inability to maintain an adequate airway
 hypoxaemia not corrected by supplemental oxygen
Manual in-line immobilisation should be performed during intubation.
• Cervical collar should be applied in head injury patients with
suspected cervical injury**.
• Isotonic crystalloid is the preferred choice of intravenous fluid
resuscitation in head injury.
* Use either definitive (e.g. endotracheal intubation) or non-definitive
airway (e.g. laryngeal mask airway) depending on expertise and
resources.
**Refer to the related preceding text.
5.3 Referral or Discharge at Primary Care Setting
The need to make a decision to refer or discharge a patient with head
injury who is seen in a primary health setting can be very challenging.
This is especially so in presumably mild cases as there is a possibility
that the cases may have pre-existing risk factors to intracranial bleeding
or symptoms masked by intoxication.
Patients presenting with MHI with the following findings may eventually
require neurosurgical intervention:24, level III
• restlessness
• decrease in GCS score within six hours
• severe headache
• focal temporal blow
• vomiting
• confusion
Male gender (OR=3.82, 95% CI 1.60 to 9.13) and alcohol intoxication
(OR=12.44, 95% CI 2.14 to 72.38) are important risk factors of delayed
referral.25, level III A healthcare provider should be aware that a quick
and accurate decision of referral for patient with presumably mild head
injury can be hindered if the patient is male and intoxicated by alcohol.
There is a possibility of ICH after minor head trauma in patients taking
anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet medication. The frequency of a
positive computed tomography (CT) with regards to anticoagulation is
27%, antiplatelet 41% and combined therapy 14%.26, level III
Low platelet count in TBI patients on antiplatelet therapy contributed
to negative outcome. Patients on clopidogrel therapy and high-dose
aspirin therapy (325 mg) (p=0.001) are more likely to have progression
of ICH and require neurosurgical intervention (p=0.01) compared with
patients on low-dose aspirin therapy (81mg). Platelet count of ≤135,000/
µL is the strongest predictor for progression of initial ICH (p<0.001)
on repeat head computed tomography (RHCT). A lower platelet count
i.e. ≤95,000/µL is the strongest predictor (p<0.001) for neurosurgical
intervention.27, level III
In older patients (≥55 years old) with TBI, those on anticoagulation
therapy are 4.6 times (95% CI 1.08 to 19.6) more likely to have a
secondary intracranial haemorrhage event (SIHE) compared with
antiplatelet users and non-users on follow-up. The anticoagulant users
are also more likely to have progression of initial haemorrhage.28, level II-2
Predictors of mortality for patients who present with isolated moderate
to severe TBI were assessed using a multivariable logistic model.
Age, male gender, ISS ≥16, GCS score ≤8, systolic blood pressure,
and diabetes mellitus (DM) were signiﬁcant predictors of mortality after
moderate to severe TBI. DM was associated with an increased for
mortality OR of 1.5 (95% CI 1.29 to 1.74).29, level III
In a cohort study of isolated TBI patients, pre-hospital hypertension of
>160 mmHg was an predictor for in-hospital mortality:30, level III
• OR for pre-hospital SBP of 160 - 180 mmHg was 1.33 (95% CI
1.22 to 1.44)
• OR for pre-hospital SBP of 190 - 230 mmHg was 1.97 (95% CI
1.76 to 2.21)
A deviation from admission heart rate (HR) of 70 beats per minute
(bpm) to 89 bpm was associated with increased mortality (p<0.001).
Another cohort study factors showed that factors associated with
mortality in TBI patients were:31, level II-2
• GCS <9 (HR=2.08, 95% CI 1.25 to 3.46)
• abnormal pupil (HR=2.08, 95% CI 1.25 to 3.46)
• ISS score ≥25 (HR=2.62, 95% CI 1.48 to 4.63)
• SBP <90 mmHg (HR=2.13, 95% CI 1.12 to 4.04)
• hypothermia <35°C (HR=1.42, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.01)
In local context, social issues such as transport, communication
problem or no supervision by a responsible adult should be considered
when referring patients with mild head injury.
Recommendation 3
• Referral of patients with mild head injury to the nearest hospital
should be considered especially if they have any of the following
factors:
 Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15 but symptomatic such as
amnesia, headache, vomiting or restlessness
 age ≥65 years old
 treated with antiplatelets or anticoagulants
 GCS <15 and/or declining GCS score
 alcohol intoxication and substance misuse
 focal temporal blow
 social issues
 indicated for head CT (refer to Algorithm 3 on Selection of Adults
with Head Injury for Head CT)
5.4 Transportation
Surgical neuro-trauma management in Malaysia is provided by general
and/or neurosurgeons. Many patients with head injuries are transferred
to these hospitals by road or occasionally by air or river/sea. During
transportation, patients with impaired consciousness and physiological
instability may develop secondary insults and are predisposed to
worse outcome. Adhering to best practice directed by evidence-based
protocols or management prior and during transport can help minimise
these adverse events.12
Patients with head injury should be transferred in a safe and timely
manner. The mode and rapidity of transferring patients with head
injury in the pre-hospital setting are based on the risk of intracranial
complications and severity of head injury.
Refer to Appendix 8 on Equipments for Transfer.
5.4.1 Transferring head injury patients from the scene of injury to
hospital
Patients with suspected TBI preferably should be transported from the
scene directly to a centre where TBI can be managed in its entirety
(centre with resources necessary to resuscitate, investigate and manage
any patients with major trauma or suspected polytrauma). Alternatively
patients can be directly transported to a centre capable of initial
management. Calls should be made earlier to inform the ED to standby
especially in cases of GCS ≤8. Cervical spine immobilisation should
be maintained during transfer until a full assessment and appropriate
investigations are performed. The mode of transport selected should
minimise total pre-hospital time. On scene management of TBI patient
and transfer must follow current standard management. Unnecessary
delay in transfer must be avoided.32
Transferring polytrauma patients with suspected TBI to an appropriate
facility with established trauma system is associated with a 15%
reduction in overall mortality.32
5.4.2 Transfer of Head Injury Patients from Clinic to Hospital
• Criteria for rapid transfer:32
 deterioration in patient’s condition
 GCS <15
 focal neurological deficit
 seizure
 suspected skull fracture or penetrating head injury
 high impact head injury
 suspected neck injury
Patients referred from primary care should be accompanied by a
competent adult. The referring health care providers should determine
whether an ambulance or other mode of transport is required. Public
transport and car may be an appropriate alternative provided the
patient is clinically stable and accompanied. The referring health care
providers should contact the referral hospital by phone of the impending
transfer.20 The decision to transfer patients from a rural location
should be discussed between the referring and receiving healthcare
providers.12 The rapidity and mode of transport from the pre-hospital
setting to ED depend on the risk of clinically important head injury and
the acute complications of head injury.
5.4.3 Transfer of Head Injury Patient from ED/Hospital without
Neuro-trauma Service to Neuro-trauma Centre
Patients with persistent hypotension despite resuscitation should have
the cause of hypotension identified and managed in a hospital with
surgical services. Advanced airway management including intubation
may be required prior to transfer and must be done by trained healthcare
providers.33, level I The risk of secondary brain injury during transfer to
tertiary centre is high if poorly executed. Transfer purely for the purpose
of imaging in unstable patients should be avoided.12
• Initial management including resuscitation and stabilisation are
essentials, and should be completed before transferring TBI
patients:15; 19, level III; 20
 Intubate* and ventilate patients with TBI if:
- GCS ≤8 or significant drop of total GCS score ≥2 or motor
component ≥1
- unstable fractures of the facial skeleton
- copious bleeding into mouth (e.g. from skull base fracture)
- hypoxaemia
- seizure
- respiratory irregularities
- hyperventilation causing hypocarbia (keep ET CO2 35 - 40
mmHg)
 Cause of persistent hypotension should be identified and managed
in hospital with surgical services.
 If patient has seizures, treat with anticonvulsants (refer to Chapter
8.4 on Anticonvulsant).
*if intubation is not possible, LMA insertion is acceptable
During transfer, hypotension, hypercarbia and hypoxia are the main
causes of secondary brain damage in patients with TBI. Hence, it is
important to maintain adequate oxygenation and ventilation with
appropriate short-acting sedation and analgesia and to avoid SpO2
<90%.19, level III
The general principles of safe transfer are:
• ensure haemodynamic optimisation (Refer to Section 5.2 on Prehospital Management and Section 8.2 on Intravenous Fluid)
• secure bleeding prior to transfer e.g. apply haemostatic suturing for
bleeding scalp wounds and splints for long bone fractures.19, level III
• intubation if required (Refer to Section 5.2 on Pre-hospital
Management)
• cervical immobilisation
• the transfer team should be trained in neuro-trauma management
• reliable communication equipment is essential to allow effective
communication between the transfer team with their hospital and the
neurosurgical team
• completed transfer checklist for neurosurgical patients (Refer to
Appendix 9 on Transfer Checklist for Neurosurgical Patients)
Stretcher is preferable to traditional spinal board. Hence, patient
should be taken off the spinal board while awaiting transfer. There is
insufficient evidence of safe duration for patient immobilisation on spinal
board.17, level I
• The fundamental requirements prior to transfer include adequate
oxygenation delivery and optimised vital parameters:32
 target MAP >80 mmHg, PaO2 >97.5 mmHg (13 kPa), PaCO2 within
35 - 40 mmHg, SpO2 >90%
• Parameters to monitor during transfer include:
 cardiac monitoring, BP, pulse oximetry, capnography (if available),
pupil size and reaction to light ± urine output
• Investigations before transfer when necessary are*:
 full blood count, coagulation screen, blood sugar, blood group
and cross-match, arterial blood gases, radiological investigations
[CT scan (where available), chest x-ray, pelvic X-rays and other
investigations as appropriate]
*The investigations should not delay transfer.
A copy of the summary and transfer record should be kept in the
referring hospital for audit purposes and potential medico-legal
consideration.19, level III
Recommendation 4
• Hypotension, hypoxia, hypocarbia and hypercarbia, and inadvertent
cervical injury should be avoided before and during transfer of
patients with head injury.
• Continuous monitoring of vital signs should be conducted during
transfer of head injured patients*.
• Effective communication should be established between the transfer
team and receiving hospital of head injury cases.
*Refer to Appendix 9 on Transfer Checklist for Neurosurgical
Patients.
6. MANAGEMENT IN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT (ED)
6.1 Triage
The purpose of triage is to ensure the right patient receives appropriate
timely treatment in the right place before she or he deteriorates. A
systematic method ensures quick work flow process. Triage of patients
with head injury in many countries has been based on American
College of Surgeon-Committee on Trauma/Centre for Disease Control
(ACOS-COT/CDC) 2011 Physiologic and Anatomical Guidelines for
field triaging of injured patients.34, level III
Based on this guideline, there is increased likelihood of death in TBI
with the following physiological factors:34, level III
• GCS ≤13 (OR=17.4, 95% CI 10.7 to 28.3)
• Respiratory rate (RR) <10 breaths per minute and >29 breaths per
minute in adults (OR=20.3, 95% CI 13.4 to 30.8)
• SBP <90 mmHg (OR=18.6, 95% CI 14.0 to 24.7)
Combination of all three physiologic criteria markedly increases the
OR to 67.8 (95% CI 48.3 to 95.3).
In trauma patient, with the following anatomical criteria outlined in the
same guidelines, there is increased likelihood of death:35, level III
• flail chest (LR=42.4, 95% CI 6.3 to 284.0)
• open or depressed skull fracture (LR=18.9, 95% CI 11.6 to 30.8)
• pelvic fracture (LR=12.3, 95% CI 9.1 to 16.5)
• penetrating injury to the head, neck, torso and extremities
(LR=49.7, 95% CI 42.3 to 58.3)
• two or more proximal long-bone fractures (LR=7.1, 95% CI 5.0 to
10.1)
An earlier study showed that the predictors of mortality in patients with
blunt TBI were:36, level II-2
• age (OR=1.04. 95% CI 1.01 to 1.07)
• GCS <9 (OR=19.29, 95% CI 5.04 to 73.82)
• skull bone fracture (OR=10.44, 95% CI 3.59 to 30.38)
A four-step algorithm based on physiologic abnormalities, anatomic
injuries, mechanism of injuries, and co-morbidities and age (modified
from ACOS-COT/CDC triaging guidelines) shows that the following
factors are associated with a higher risk of undertriage:37, level III
• isolated head injury with GCS 13-15 (talk and deteriorate)
(OR=14.0, 95% CI 4.55 to 43.3)
• age of 45-54 years old (OR=10.8, 95% CI 1.88 to 61.7)
• isolated pelvic injury (OR=14.2, 95% CI 2.58 to 78.0)
• night time arrival (OR=2.45, 95% CI 1.04 to 5.79)
Triage of patients suspected of head injury should follow an Algorithm
2 on Triaging of Adults with Suspected Head Injury in PHC or ED which
has been adapted from ACOS-COT/CDC triaging guidelines.34, level III
Recommendation 5
• Triage of patients suspected of head injury in pre-hospital care or on
arrival in emergency department should follow a four-step algorithm*
based on physiologic abnormalities, anatomic injuries, mechanism of
injuries, co-morbidities and age.
*Refer to Algorithm 2 on Triaging of Adults with Suspected Head
Injury PHC or ED.
6.2 General Treatment
Initial management of patients with head injury should be performed
according to primary survey of trauma patients as recommended by
Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines:38, level III
• airway patency and cervical spine protection
• breathing
• circulation and haemorrhage control
• disability
• exposure
• Stabilisation of airway, breathing and circulation is the priority for all
ED patients before attending to other injuries.
• In patients with depressed conscious level, head injury need to be
ruled out before diagnosis of intoxication is made.
• All healthcare providers in ED should be trained in the assessment of
patients with head injury and identification of risk factors for CT head
and cervical spine imaging.
In patients with head injury with GCS of ≤8, intubation is recommended
for airway protection. To prevent secondary injuries, parameters such
as PO2, PCO2, BP, PR, SpO2 and glucose level should be assessed
and be normalised.38, level III
National Trauma Data Bank study, which included mild and moderate
head injury, base deficit and mortality analysis, showed that the first
presenting SBP <110 mmHg in hospital was a more clinically relevant
definition of hypotension and hypoperfusion than SBP <90 mmHg.
This was independent of both age and gender of the patients. There
was an increase of approximately 6% in mortality for every 10 mmHg
decrease below SBP 115 mmHg, with a maximum of 40% mortality
at SBP 60 mmHg. However, further studies are warranted to support
these findings.39, level III
In traumatic ICH, those who do not require critical care interventions
are patients with full GCS, isolated head injury and age <65 years
(AUC=0.74, 95% CI 0.70 to 0.77).40, level II-2
There is a significant association between death and age (OR=1.04),
GCS (OR=0.59), ISS (OR=1.03), mean arterial BP (OR=0.71) and RR
(OR=0.82) in patients with TBI.41, level III
Recommendation 6
• Initial assessment and management of patients with head injury in
emergency department (ED) includes:
 airway patency and cervical spine protection
 breathing (to detect any intrathoracic injury)
 circulation and haemorrhage control
 disability including Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), pupil size and
reaction to light
 exposure including log roll
• Secondary survey (head to toe examinations) should be done
in patients with head injury which includes signs of base of skull
fracture*.
• Head chart which includes serial GCS, blood pressure, pulse rate and
pupil size should be done at least hourly on patients with head injury
in ED including while awaiting computed tomography or transfer to
another ward/hospital.
 Monitor for signs of intracranial hypertension such as decreased
pupillary response to light, hypertension with bradycardia, posturing
or respiratory abnormalities.
*Refer to Chapter 7 on Imaging - Skull X-ray.
6.3 Observation in ED
Head injury is one of the common reasons for ED visits. Most cases are
mild and self-limiting. However they usually require further observation
after initial systematic assessment and treatment. The primary aim is to
detect promptly patients who deteriorate neurologically and to ensure
safe home discharge.
Early imaging, rather than admission and observation for neurological
deterioration, will reduce the time to detection for life-threatening
complications and is associated with better outcomes.11, level II-2 Patients
with MHI (who do not have criteria for CT scan) can be managed in ED.
The management at ED observation wards is efficient at dealing with
short stay observation patients.20
6.3.1 Patients who can be safely observed in ED
Patients with MHI (who do not meet the criteria for head CT) can be
managed in the ED observation ward.
In the management of head injury, patients with GCS score of 15
and normal neurological findings who either have CT scan performed
immediately or undergo routine observation have similar extended
Glasgow outcome score (GOS) at three months follow-up.42, level I
In a RCT, all adult patients with mild TBI (GCS 13 - 15), without a history
of inherited coagulopathy or anticoagulant therapy, platelet aggregation
inhibitor therapy, intoxication or multiple associated injuries, who
present with a single ICH with maximum diameter <5 mm regained
full GCS within two hours. These patients may not require 24-hour
observation.43, level I
Patients with MHI and ICH of ≤4 mm, normal neurological examination,
no skull fracture, not on any warfarin (anticoagulant), aspirin or
clopidogrel (antiplatelet) and not intoxicated, can be safety observed
for six hours without neurosurgical consultation.44, level III
Patients with minor head injury (GCS 15), ≥65 years old, on low dose
aspirin with systolic blood pressure <150 mmHg and presenting with
initial negative primary head CT, should have a routine repeat head CT
within 12 - 24 hours to accurately identify head injury or such patients
should be subjected to a prolonged hospital observation for at least 48
hours.45, level III
Recommendation 7
• Patients with mild head injury in whom computed tomography scan is
not indicated and with all the following criteria can be safely observed
in emergency department* for a minimum of six hours:
 Glasgow Coma Scale score 15 on arrival or two hours later
 no neurological abnormality
 age <65 years old
 not on any anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy
 no history of coagulopathy
 no multiple injuries
 not intoxicated and not under influence of psychotropic drugs
*For hospital without observation ward, these patients may be admitted.
• Patients with MHI who are ≥65 years old and/or on anticoagulant/
antiplatelet should be admitted directly to ward irrespective of CT
findings.
6.3.2 Parameters for observation in ED
It is well established that the risk of intracranial complications and
subsequent need for surgery increases as GCS score declines.
Extensive studies have supported their repeatability and validity.12
A prospective observational study comparing GCS score of patients
done in the field, with the GCS score obtained by emergency
physicians upon arrival in ED showed a moderate relationship (r=0.45,
p=0.003). Assuming most GCS scores improve from field to ED, there
is concordance between ECP and physicians in assessment of TBI
patients using the GCS.46, level III
Variables that are highly accurate in predicting clinically significant
outcomes of mild TBI patients include GCS (OR=11.74, 95% CI 8.42
to 16.37), neurological deficit (OR=1.90, 95% CI 1.33 to 2.71), clinical
findings [such as amnesia, diffuse headache, vomiting and LOC
(OR=4.31, 95% CI 2.81 to 6.61)], skull fracture (OR=31.01, 95% CI
20.36 to 47.21) and risk factors [such as coagulopathy, age >60 years
old, previous neurosurgery, post-traumatic seizure (PTS) and alcohol/
drug abuse (OR=2.12, 95% CI 1.62 to 3.01)].11, level III
In patients with TBI, the significant risk factors for mortality are
increasing age, lower GCS, higher ISS, lower mean arterial BP and
abnormal RR (>25 and <10).41, level III
In patients with head injury admitted for observation, the minimum
acceptable documented neurological observations are GCS, pupil size
and reactivity, limb movements, RR, HR, BP, temperature and blood
oxygen saturation.20 Even though the evidence is based on patients
admitted for observation in hospital, the same principles apply to
patients observed in ED.
• Emergency care providers (ECP) should use a standard head injury
proforma in their documentation when assessing and observing
patients with head injury (refer to Appendix 4 on Head Chart).
• All healthcare providers caring for patients with head injury should
be capable of performing observations of the standard parameters
effectively.
• The acquisition and maintenance of observation and recording skills
require dedicated training and this should be available to all relevant
staff.
• When using GCS, document and communicate each response
(for example a patient scoring 13/15 based on scale of 4 on eye
opening, 4 on verbal response and 5 on motor response should
be communicated verbally as E4 opening eyes spontaneously, V4
confused, M5 localising pain) and written as E4V4M5.
Recommendation 8
• The following parameters should be used for observation of patients
with head injury:
a) Glasgow Coma Scale and Score
b) Vital signs
 Respiratory rate and oxygen saturation
 Pulse rate
 Blood pressure
 Pain score
 Temperature
c) Neurological deficits
 Pupil size and reactivity
 Limb movement
 Unusual behaviour, temperament or speech impairment
d) Other symptoms such as persistent vomiting, seizure, amnesia
and diffuse headache
Refer to Appendix 4 on Head Chart.
6.3.3 Method, frequency and duration of observation/assessment
in ED
There is insufficient evidence on method, frequency and duration of
observation/assessment of head injury in ED. In management of
head injury, pre-emptive investigation to detect lesions before they
lead to further neurological deterioration has superseded the earlier
deterioration dependent approach.12
i. Method
Safe assessment of TBI in ED requires consistent observation and reevaluation as the injury is dynamic.12
• During handover of patient care, ECP should communicate with
healthcare providers in ED on details of the mechanism and type of
injury, and records of neurological progress since arrival in ED.
• Head chart should be used to monitor patient’s progress. Any
discrepancy in assessment should be discussed immediately with
the senior medical officer or EP.
ii. Frequency
Frequency of observation should relate to risk of clinically important
findings in order to detect early deterioration of head injury.
The risk of rapid deterioration due to intracranial complications is
high during the first six hours and diminishes after that. Therefore,
observations should be more frequent during this period.20
a. In-patients with GCS 15/15
Patients with head injury, who warrant admission, should have
neurological observations carried out at least in the following frequency
starting after initial assessment in the ED:12
• half hourly for two hours
• hourly for four hours
• two hourly for six hours
• four hourly thereafter until agreed to be no longer necessary
b. In-patients with GCS <15/15
Perform and record observation on a half-hourly basis until GCS 15 has
been achieved. Thereafter, the minimum frequency of observation are
as follows:20
• half-hourly for two hours
• hourly for next four hours
• 2-hourly thereafter
• should there be any deterioration at any time after the initial 2-hour
period, observations should revert to half-hourly and follow the
original frequency schedule
iii. Duration
Patients with MHI can be safely observed for six hours without
neurosurgical consultation if they have the following features:44, level III
• ICH of ≤4 mm
• normal neurological examination
• no skull fracture
• not on any warfarin, aspirin or clopidogrel
• not intoxicated
Patient who have been provided with emergency care and having
clinical and/or physiological conditions that are expected to deteriorate
or resolve and require close observation may be admitted to ED
observation ward. These patients should have a pre-defined care plan
within stipulated time frame of eight hours or prerogative of EP in
charge as clinically indicated.47, level III
Recommendation 9
• Patients with head injury should be monitored with findings recorded
immediately using head chart.
 Any deterioration should prompt immediate re-evaluation of the
patients by the attending doctor.
• Observations may be performed and documented hourly in head
injury patients. Should there be any deterioration at any time after
the initial 2-hour period, the minimum frequency of observation
respectively are as follows until GCS 15 is achieved:
 half-hourly for first two hours
 hourly for next four hours
 2-hourly for six hours
 4-hourly thereafter until no longer necessary and/or fit for discharge
• Patients with mild head injury in whom computed tomography scan is
not indicated can be safely observed in emergency department for a
minimum of six hours.
6.3.4 Admission after observation in ED
The primary reasons for in-hospital admission after observation in ED
is for further management of patients who develop worsening postconcussion symptoms or presence of features indicating risk of further
complications. Patients with persistent impaired consciousness or
neurological impairment will need continued observation and in-patient
care.20
Some clinical risk factors can be used as a guide to identify those who
need neurosurgical intervention. In pre-injury warfarin and clopidogrel
use, the risk factors for ICH are vomiting (OR=3.68, 95% CI 1.55 to
8.76) and abnormal mental status (OR=3.08, 95% CI 1.60 to 5.94).48,
level III GCS (OR=11.74, 95% CI 8.42 to 16.37), neurological deficit
(OR=1.90, 95% CI 1.33 to 2.71), clinical findings [such as amnesia,
diffuse headache, vomiting and LOC (OR=4.31, 95% CI 2.81 to 6.61)],
skull fracture (OR=31.01, 95% CI 20.36 to 47.21) and risk factors [such
as coagulopathy, age >60 years old, previous neurosurgery, PTS and
alcohol/drug abuse (OR=2.12, 95% CI 1.62 to 3.01)] was found to be
highly accurate in predicting clinically significant outcomes of mild TBI
patients.11, level III
CT can be used as a safe modality to triage patients for admission
as it leads to similar clinical outcomes compared with observation in
hospital.42, level I
The criteria below are used for admitting patients to hospital following
a head injury:12; 20
• patients with new, clinically significant abnormalities on imaging
• patients whose GCS has not returned to 15 after imaging, regardless
of the imaging results
• when a patient has indications for CT scan but this cannot be done
within appropriate period, either because CT is not available or
because the patient is not sufficiently cooperative to allow scanning
• continuing worrying signs (e.g. persistent vomiting, unresolved
amnesia and headache) of concern to the clinician
• other sources of concern to the clinician (e.g. anticoagulant use,
drug or alcohol intoxication, other injuries, shock, suspected nonaccidental injury, meningism, cerebrospinal fluid leak)
• social problems or cannot be supervised by a responsible adult
Recommendation in this section is formulated based on extrapolation
from other guidelines and tailored to local context.
Recommendation 10
• Patients with mild head injury who have been observed for six hours
in emergency department should be admitted to ward if they have:
 clinically significant abnormalities on head computed tomography
(CT) imaging
 Glasgow Coma Scale Score <15*
 worrying signs (e.g. vomit ≥2 times, seizure, diffuse headache,
amnesia, abnormal behaviour or neurological deficit)*
 other body system injuries requiring admission
 social problem** including no supervision by a responsible adult
* Patients should have a head CT before admission.
**Transport issue, no communication, stay in remote area, suspected
abuse case or other factors affecting the monitoring and safety of
patients.
6.3.5 Discharge home from ED without observation
It is neither feasible nor desirable to admit all MHI patients attending
ED for observation especially those who have recovered and at low
risk of intracranial complications. Furthermore, patients with MHI who
present with a GCS of 15 to the ED rarely require urgent neurosurgical
intervention or experience precipitous deterioration.24, level II-2
Patients with low risk MHI can be discharged home after assessment
without observation. Low risk patients are those with:11, level III; 49, level II-2
• GCS of 15
• no clinical finding (amnesia, vomiting, diffuse headache and LOC)
• no neurological deficit
• no skull fracture
• no risk factors (coagulopathy, age <60 years, previous neurosurgery,
pre-trauma epilepsy and/or alcohol and/or drug misuse)
• Criteria to be met by patients of head injury prior to discharge:
 Presence of a willing responsible adult for at least 24-hour
observation
 Verbal and written discharge advice given to responsible care
givers and discussed prior to discharge
 Easy access to an emergency response system e.g. 999
 Living within reasonable access to medical care.
 Availability of home transport.
Adapted: Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Early management of patients
with a head injury. Edinburgh; SIGN; 2009
Recommendation 11
• Patient with low risk mild head injury* and who is living with a reliable
care giver can be discharged home safely without observation from
emergency department.
*Refer to preceding paragraph.
7. IMAGING
Management of moderate and severe head injury depends largely
on imaging to detect intracranial lesions. Timely imaging expedites
appropriate surgical and medical interventions. Exclusion or demonstration
of intracranial injury can guide decision about extent and duration of
observation in such cases.
7.1 Head CT
There are a few head CT rules available to guide the need for CT scan.
Canadian CT Head Rule (CCTHR) is used to select patients with MHI
(GCS 13 - 15) for CT head. CCTHR identifies five high risk factors (refer
to yellow box below) which predict neurological intervention [sensitivity
of 100% (95% CI 92 to 100%) and specificity of 68.7% (95% CI 62 to
70)].50, level II-2
CCTHR also identifies two medium-risk factors (refer to yellow box
below) which predict clinically important brain injury [sensitivity 98.4%
(95%CI 96 to 99%) and specificity 49.6% (95% CI 48 to 51%)].50, level II-2
However, CCTHR is not applicable in the presence of seizure, penetrating
skull injury, focal neurological deficit and use of anticoagulant.50, level II-2
The New Orleans Criteria (NOC) derived a set of clinical findings
to identify a group of minor head injury patients who need CT scan.
Presence of any the following findings will predict positive head CT
[sensitivity of 100% (95% CI 95 to 100%) and specificity of 25% (95%
CI 22 to 28%)]:51, level II-2
• headache
• vomiting
• age >60 years
• drug or alcohol intoxication
• deficits in short-term memory
• physical evidence of trauma above the clavicles
• seizure
Both CCHTR and NOC had been externally validated in detecting
all patients who require neurosurgical intervention in two studies.
For CCTHR, the sensitivities remained the same but with variable
specificities (37.2% and 58%). For NOC, the sensitivities were also high
(96% and 100%) but specificities were low (5.3% and 26%).52 - 53, level II -2
Scandinavian Neurotrauma Committee has concluded that the
presence of the following criteria warrants a head CT:54
• GCS ≤14
• LOC
• repeated (≥2) vomiting
• anticoagulant or coagulation disorders
• clinical signs of depressed or basal skull fracture
• PTS
• focal neurological deficits
There is no retrievable evidence on the timing of head CT. However, the
Scottish International Guidelines Network (SIGN) guidelines list down
factors for immediate (within one hour) and urgent (within eight hours)
CT scan in head injury. The timing for CT scan in MHI for local context
is based on expert opinion of CPG DG.
Canadian CT Head Rule
CT Head Rule is only applicable for patients with minor head injuries
and any of the following:
A. High risk (for neurological intervention)
 GCS score <15 at two hours after injury
 Suspected open or depressed skull fracture
 Any sign of basal skull fracture (haemotympanum, ‘racoon’ eyes,
cerebrospinal fluid otorrhoea/rhinorrhoea, Battle’s sign)
 Vomiting ≥2 episodes
 Age ≥65 years
B. Medium risk (for brain injury on CT)
 Amnesia before impact >30 minutes
 Dangerous mechanism (pedestrian struck by motor vehicle,
occupant ejected from motor vehicle, fall from height >3 feet or 5
stairs)
Minor head injury is defined as witnessed loss of consciousness,
definite amnesia or witnessed disorientation in a patient with a GCS
score of 13 - 15.
Patients on anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy have a positive head
CTs of 29% despite having a GCS score of 15. LOC is a predictor of
a positive CT result (p=0.008), suggesting that head CT should be
strongly considered in these patients.26, level III
In polytrauma patients with TBI, priority for initial management including
timing of head CT is complex. Primary cause of hypotension must
be urgently sought and treated, e.g. patients with exsanguinating
intra-abdominal injuries should be operated on and stabilised before
obtaining head CT. Neurologic examination of patients with hypotension
is unreliable. Closed head injury will not cause haemorrhagic shock.
Hypotension may occur with concomitant spinal cord injury or when
medullary failure supervenes in the terminal stages of ICH.38, level III
Recommendation 12
• Canadian Computed Tomography Head Rule (CCTHR) may be used
to decide on the need of Computed Tomography (CT) of the head in
mild head injury (MHI).
• Patients with MHI on anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet should be
considered for head CT.
• Urgency* for head CT in head injury patients should be based on
severity of the injury and risk factors.
• Patient's cardiopulmonary status should be stabilised before
performing head CT.
*Refer to the preceding text.
7.2 Skull X-ray
The definitive imaging for head injury is head CT. The scan is indicated
when there is anatomical and/or physiological evidence of head injury.
In MHI group with GCS of 15, asymptomatic and no neurological
deficit, external evidences of head injury especially skull fracture is an
indication for head CT prior to a definitive management plan.
Skull fractures may occur in the cranial vault or skull base. They may
be linear or comminuted, and open or closed. Open fractures are
diagnosed when any of the following is present:38, level III
• obvious evidence of penetrating head injury (involving skull bone
and structure beneath it)
• skull fracture visualised beneath scalp laceration wound
• clinical signs suggestive of skull base fracture
Closed fracture is diagnosed when skull depression is detected by
scalp palpation with or without overlying scalp swelling or hematoma.
Skull fracture is an important finding to predict intracranial lesion
following MHI which require a head CT.
• If skull fracture is present, the probability of an ICH is 4.9 times
higher than those without skull fracture.55, level III
• Skull fracture, with or without clinical signs, in MHI is an
independent risk marker of neurosurgically relevant intracranial
lesion (RR=3.9, 95% CI 2.2 to 7.1).56, level II-2
Head CT is the investigation of choice to identify ICH following head
injury. The plain skull x-ray is ineffective screening tool in predicting ICH
in MHI with a mean sensitivity of 50.0% (ranges from 13.0% to 75.0%)
and a mean specificity of 97.0% (ranges from 91.0% to 99.5%).55, level III
Skull fracture can only be ruled out by radiographic imaging such as
skull x-ray and head CT. In the absence of clinical signs of skull fracture,
one cannot rule out the presence of skull fracture. This is because
the sensitivities and specificities of clinical signs are low compared to
radiographic imaging, as shown in the Table 2 below.56, level II-2
Table 2. Sensitivity and specificity of clinical assessment
on skull fracture
If CT scan is not immediately available and patient does not fulfil clinical
criteria for CT scan of head, a skull x-ray can be performed. The patients
should undergo CT scan of head if skull x-ray is positive.56, level II-2
• A normal skull x-ray does not exclude ICH and may miss a fracture.
Recommendation 13
• Skull x-ray may be considered in mild head injury patients who do not
fulfil the criteria for head CT*.
*Refer to the Chapter 7.1 on Indications for CT.
7.3 Repeat Head CT
Given the high cost and radiation risk associated with head CT, the
practice of routine repeat CT scan of patients with head injury needs to
be addressed.
In a recent meta-analysis of 16 cohort studies, intervention rates were
higher in patients with MHI who had CT scan done based on neurological
deterioration compared with those who had routine repeat CT regardless
of neurological changes (2.7% vs 0.6%, p<0.001). The findings suggest
that it is unnecessary to repeat a CT scan after MHI when neurological
status remain unchanged or improves.57, level II-2 Neurological deterioration
is an independent predictor on the need for neurosurgical intervention in
patients with TBI who are not on antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy
(OR=3.98, 95% CI 1.7 to 9.1).58, level II-2
Clinical findings
Clinical assessment (both clinical signs
of skull fracture and scalp wound)
Clinical signs of skull fracture alone
with absence of scalp wound
Scalp wound alone
Sensitivity
51.6%
36.1%
15.4%
Specificity
71.4%
87.5%
50.0%
Patients with MHI who are ≥65 years old and on low dose aspirin, with
initial negative primary head CT, have secondary ICH accurately identified
in routine repeat head CT within 12 hours to 24 hours (p<0.00001).
For those who do not have a repeat scan, they should be subjected to
prolonged in-hospital observation for at least 48 hours.45, level III
In another meta-analysis of low quality cohort studies, repeat CT in
patients with TBI resulted in change of management for a minority of
patients. Better designed studies are needed to address the value of
repeat CT in the management of TBI.59, level II-2
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine repeat head CT
in MHI.
7.4 Cervical Imaging
• All patients with head injury are presumed to have cervical spine
injury until proven otherwise. Protection of the cervical spine in these
patients is a priority.
Assessment for the need of cervical spine imaging in patients with
head injury depends on their conscious level and ability to cooperate
in clinical examination. Two independent decision rules [Canadian
Cervical Spine Rule (CCR) and National Emergency X-radiography
Utilization Study (NEXUS)] are available to assist such assessment.
Refer to Appendix 6 and Appendix 7 on CCR and NEXUS criteria.
In a study comparing these two decision rules of cervical radiography,
CCR was more sensitive (99.4% vs 90.7%, p<0.001) and more specific
(45.1% vs 36.8%, p<0.001) than Nexus criteria for detection of cervical
spine injury in alert and stable patients with trauma to the head and
neck. The use of CCR when compared with Nexus criteria resulted in
lower radiography rates (55.9% vs 66.6%, p<0.001).60, level I
Validation of the CCR, using CT scan as a gold standard, to identify
cervical spine fracture demonstrated that CCR was very sensitive
(100%) but had very low specificity (0.60%). The study evaluated 19
of the 20 clinical findings described in the CCR excluding 45° rotation
of the neck and found eight predictors of cervical spine fracture which
were:61, level III
• midline tenderness
• GCS <15
• age ≥65 year
• paraesthesia
• high speed motor vehicle collision (MVC) 100 km/hour
• rollover MVC
• MVC with ejection/ejection
• patients who were never in sitting position in ED
In another study, several factors were significantly associated with
cervical spine injury (CSI) in patients with TBI. Patients in the older age
group (>65 years old) have a higher odds ratio of CSI when compared
to younger age patients in MVA but not in fall related injuries (OR=1.26,
95% CI 1.15 to 1.39). Skull/face fracture, other spine fracture/dislocation,
upper limb injury, thorax injury, and hypotension were significantly
associated with CSI (OR range from 32 to 3.34).62, level III
The incidence of CSI in patients with blunt polytrauma and reduced levels
of consciousness (GCS <15) ranges between 5.2% and 13.9%.63, level III In
a meta-analysis of seven studies, cervical CT was more sensitive (98%,
95% CI 96 to 99) than cervical spine plain radiography (52%, 95% CI 47
to 56) in detecting CSI.64, level I Thus, it is a good practice to include cervical
spine when performing head CT.
Recommendation 14
• Canadian Cervical Spine Rule (CCR) or National Emergency
X-radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS) criteria may be used as
selection criteria for cervical radiograph in alert and stable head
injury patients.
• Head Computed Tomography (CT) for patient with a Glasgow Coma
Scale <15 should have cervical spine CT at the same setting.
Refer to Algorithm 4 on Selection of Adults with Head Injury for
Imaging of the Cervical Spine.
8. MEDICATION FOR INITIAL MANAGEMENT
Agitation, pain and seizure may potentially contribute to elevation in
intracranial pressure (ICP), BP and body temperature. Analgesia,
sedative and anticonvulsant are administered to treat these conditions.65
Diuretic may be used to control raised ICP. Intravenous (IV) fluid is
administered to restore and maintain the systemic and cerebral
perfusion.
8.1 Analgesia and Sedative
Ideal properties of analgesia and sedative in neuro-trauma patients:
• quick onset and offset
• predictable clearance independent of end-organ function
• easily titrated to effect
• reduce ICP by cerebral blood volume reduction or cerebral
vasoconstriction
• maintain cerebral autoregulation
• permit normal cerebral vascular reactivity to changes in PaCO2
• minimal cardiovascular depressant effects
• inexpensive
• Analgesia and sedative are commonly administered in adults with
head injury for one or more of the following indications:
 to induce anxiolysis
 to control agitation/restlessness
 to control pain
 to facilitate mechanical ventilation
 to improve ICP and cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)
A systematic review showed that etomidate and propofol improved ICP
and CPP in adults with severe TBI. Boluses or short infusions of opioids
such as fentanyl and morphine resulted in clinically and statistically
significant increases in ICP and decreases in MAP and CPP. However,
there was no strong evidence to support that one agent was more
efficacious than another for improvement of favourable neurological
outcome (defined as a GOS score of 4 to 5) and mortality rate.66, level I In
a meta-analysis on severe TBI, there was no difference between the use
of propofol and midazolam in term of neurological outcome (OR=1.139,
95% CI 0.397 to 3.273) and mortality (OR=0.758, 95% CI 0.237 to
2.424).67, level I
A Cochrane systematic review revealed no significance in mortality
and severe disability between the use of barbiturate and control group.
However, barbiturate therapy resulted in increased occurrence of
hypotension (OR=1.8, 95% CI 1.19 to 2.7) which offset any ICP lowering
effect on CPP and lowered the mean body temperature.68, level l This is
supported by a large, multicentre cohort study which showed high dose
barbiturate decreased ICP but also caused hemodynamic instability
leading to increased use of high doses of vasopressors in severe TBI.69, level lll
In a meta-analysis of 19 RCTs, naloxone was safe to be used in severe
TBI in terms of mortality, ICP and prognosis.70, level I
There is no recent evidence retrieved on the use of analgesia/sedation
or their reversal agents in mild to moderate head injury. However, CPG
DG is of the opinion that this issue should be addressed based on
expert opinion.
For MHI, oral analgesic such as paracetamol, non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs and tramadol can be used provided there is no
definite contraindication.
8.2 Intravenous Fluids
In patients with head injury, resuscitation fluids are fundamental
components of the restoration and maintenance of the systemic and
cerebral perfusion.
A systematic review found no evidence to support the use of
hyperosmolar crystalloid or colloid solutions over isotonic crystalloids
for pre-hospital fluid resuscitation of patients with TBI.22, level I In a RCT,
fluid resuscitation with albumin was associated with higher mortality
rates and fewer favourable neurologic outcomes when compared with
saline in severe TBI patients in ICU.23, level l
A systematic review found only one RCT showing no significant
differences in mortality and morbidity between pre-hospital and delayed
fluid resuscitation (mean transfer time to hospital of 19 minutes).22, level I
8.3 Diuretic
Mannitol is widely used in the control of raised ICP following brain injury.
However, there is uncertainty over the optimal treatment regimen,
the effectiveness of mannitol as compared with other ICP lowering
agents and the usefulness of mannitol given at other stages following
head injury, for example in the pre-hospital setting prior to volume
resuscitation.
A Cochrane systematic review showed that mannitol therapy for raised
ICP had no significant beneficial or detrimental effect on mortality
when compared with pentobarbital or hypertonic saline. ICP-directed
treatment had small beneficial effect compared to treatment directed by
neurological signs and physiological indicators.71, level I
In view of insufficient evidence on the use of IV fluid regime for
resuscitation in PHC and the important of the issue to be addressed,
the CPG DG formulates the recommendations based on their expert
opinion.
8.4 Anticonvulsant
PTS is defined as a recurrent seizure disorder due to TBI. PTS can
be divided into three groups: immediate seizure (occurring within 24
hours of injury), early seizure (occurring within seven days of injury) and
late seizure (occurring more than seven days after injury). The peak
incidence of early PTS occurs within the initial 48 hours of the causative
head injury.72, level III
The incidence of early and late PTS without anticonvulsant prophylaxis
has been estimated from 4% to 25% and 9% to 42% respectively.65
Effective prophylaxis of early PTS reduces brain metabolic demands,
therefore reducing intracranial pressure and neurotransmitter release.
This can prevent secondary brain injury.73, level III
The risk factors for PTS include:74, level l
• GCS score <10/15
• cortical contusions
• depressed skull fractures
• early intracranial haematoma
• wounds with dural penetration
• prolonged length of coma (>24 hours)
• prolonged length of post-traumatic amnesia (>24 hours)
• damage in the region adjacent to the temporal sulcus
In a systematic review, IV prophylactic phenytoin administered within
eight hours of injury (ideally in the first one hour) was efficacious in
reducing the incidence of early PTS in moderate to severe head
injury.74, level l
There is no clinically significant advantage between levetiracetam
and phenytoin with regards to seizure control, adverse drug reaction,
complication and mortality.75, level ll-2
Recommendation 15
• Analgesia and sedative should be used in severe head injury patients
who are intubated and ventilated.
• In mild to moderate head injury:
 analgesia should be used to control pain
 short-acting sedative agent may be offered in titrated dose to
control agitation/restlessness
• Naloxone may be used as opioid reversal in head injury.
• Isotonic crystalloid is the preferred choice of intravenous fluid in head
injury.
• Mannitol, hypertonic saline or frusemide may be used to reduce
intracranial pressure in head injury after consultation with a specialist.
 Diuretics should not be used in hypotensive patients.
• Phenytoin should be given as prophylaxis against early posttraumatic seizure in head injury with risk factors*.
*Refer to preceding paragraph.
Refer to Appendix 11 on Drug Dosing Regimen for Initial
Management of Head Injury.
9. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
9.1 Reversal of Antiplatelet and Anticoagulant in Patients with
Head Injury
Patients with pre-injury use of antiplatelet agents (e.g. clopidogrel
and aspirin) are at an increased risk for mortality with blunt traumatic
ICH.76, level III It is prudent to achieve rapid control of haemorrhage as the
haemorrhagic expansion in traumatic ICH occurs within the first 24 hours
after injury77, level III and is an independent predictor of mortality.78, level III
The transfusion of platelet in patients with mild TBI does not significantly
increase cardiac and pulmonary events, or mortality compared with
patients without transfusion. It is also not significantly associated
with progression of injury based on imaging. Combined transfusion of
platelet, fresh frozen plasma and/or factor VII is associated with clinical
deterioration, specifically cardiac and respiratory events (OR=5.8, 95%
CI 1.2 to 28.2).79, level II-3
A systematic review of five articles on the utility of platelet transfusion
in adults with pre-injury antiplatelet and traumatic ICH showed
inadequate evidence to support the routine use of platelet transfusion in
the ED.80, level II-2
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine transfusion of
platelet in patients with MHI and on antiplatelet therapy.
Anticoagulant-associated ICH has a high risk of bleeding expansion,
disability or death. Pre-injury use of warfarin is a significant predictor
of mortality in patients with traumatic ICH. The important aspect of
management of anticoagulant-associated ICH is urgent reversal of
coagulopathy with rapid decrease of the International Normalized
Ratio (INR) to a value of <1.4, preferably to <1.2. Interventions aimed
at preventing the haematoma expansion are paramount as larger
haematomas are associated with poorer functional outcomes.78, level III
International consensus-based guidelines emphasise immediate
discontinuation of anticoagulant and reversal of anticoagulation in ICH
by administration IV vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), prothrombin
complex concentrate (PCC) or recombinant factor VIIa as indicated.
However there is no specific target INR for adequate reversal in ICH
patients on warfarin.81, level III
In a review of treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation
in patients with acute ICH, PCC was statistically faster than FFP in
correcting INR. Recombinant factor VIIa rapidly reversed the effect of
warfarin on INR with a reported 5% thromboembolic risk. Vitamin K has
slow onset of action. It carries a risk of allergic reaction. Hence it should
be given slowly to all patients with warfarin-associated ICH. Despite the
multiple treatment options available, the review did not demonstrate an
improved patient survival with any particular treatment option.82, level III
A study was conducted on 13 coagulopathic patients with traumatic
ICH and treated with recombinant factor VIIa. It demonstrated rapid
correction of INR to a threshold of 1.3 prevented expansion of bleeding
and facilitated urgent surgical intervention.83, level II-3
Recommendations 16
• Anticoagulants should be immediately stopped and reversed in
patients with intracranial bleeding by using vitamin K (only for
warfarin), fresh frozen plasma, prothrombin complex concentrate or
recombinant factor VIIa as indicated and there should be consultation
on this matter among relevant specialties.
9.2 Restarting Antiplatelet/Anticoagulant in Patients with Head
Injury
Reinitiating warfarin therapy in a patient with recent warfarin associated
intracranial haemorrhage (WAICH) is a challenging decision for the
physician. The risks include the reoccurrence of ICH once warfarin is
restarted versus the risk of thromboembolism without warfarin therapy.
Careful control of anticoagulation level decreases the risk of ICH.84, level III
A long-term clinical study indicated that recurrent WAICH is
uncommon when anticoagulant therapy is resumed. The end point
of thromboembolic events and WAICH is not statistically significant
between those restarted and not restarted on warfarin (p=0.62). Clinical
decision to resume anticoagulant therapy after WAICH should include
patient’s general medical condition, risk of falls and risk factors for
systemic haemorrhage. Patients without these risks may benefit from
restarting warfarin therapy. Failure to resume therapy may subject the
patient to thromboembolic complications.85, level III
A systematic review concluded that it may be advisable to reinitiate
anticoagulation earlier with the timing and intensity modified based on
predictors of thromboembolic and haemorrhagic complications. The
predictors for haemorrhagic complications are:86, level II-2
• younger patients (p<0.0001)
• traumatic causes (p=0.002)
• subdural haemorrhage (p=0.049),
• patients anticoagulated for cardiac indications (p=0.0047)
• failure to reverse anticoagulation (OR=3.633, 95% CI 1.431 to
9.226)
Predictors for thromboembolic complications are:86, level II-2
• younger patients (p=0.048)
• spinal haemorrhage, multiple haemorrhage and non-traumatic
causes (p=0.046)
• anticoagulation started at lower intensity (p=0.0001)
• There is insufficient evidence on when to restart antiplatelet and
anticoagulant in patients with head injury.
• If there is an urgent need for anticoagulation but risk of bleeding is
still considered reasonably high, decision on when and how to start
anticoagulant should be decided by a multidisciplinary team.
9.3 Patient with Mild Head Injury Requiring Non-Life Threatening
other than Cranial Surgery
Head injury may co-exist with other injuries such as compound femur
fracture that may need urgent surgery. Any delay may lead to morbidity
and mortality.87, level III
Reported benefits of early long-bone stabilisation in polytrauma
patients include increased patient mobilisation by eliminating the need
for traction and reducing pulmonary morbidity, hospital care costs,
mortality, hospital length of stay, intensive care unit and ventilator
days.88, level II-2
The concerns for patients with head injury include:
• possibility of secondary brain injury
• timing for performing non-urgent surgery
• interruption in GCS monitoring for patients while undergone
anaesthesia
• MHI with no indication for a CT scan but require surgery
As the types of non-urgent surgery is limitless and choices aplenty,
the CPG DG has decided to use compound fracture of the femur as
a surrogate indicator. It is probably the most major among non-lifethreatening or limb-threatening surgeries. Urgent intervention for a
compound injury is to prevent osteomyelitis.87, level III
There is no retrievable evidence on indications for CT scan in patients
with MHI who do not fulfil the CCHTR criteria but require urgent
surgery. The decision on the need of CT scan should be made by a
multidisciplinary team. The period of greatest risk for delayed ICH
(causing significant morbidity and mortality) following trauma is the first
six hours.12
• Delayed ICH should be considered in patients who do not regain full
consciousness or develop new neurological deficit post-anaesthesia.
Early fixation of long bone fracture under general anaesthesia (GA)
in patients with head injury is an acceptable practice. In multisystem
trauma patients with TBI and chest injury, early timing of orthopaedic
femur fracture fixation under GA is not associated with worse outcome
than those without femur fracture and no surgery.89, level II-2 Orthopaedic
and facial fracture fixation under GA (<24 hours) is not associated with
worse neuropsychological or functional outcome than late surgery. As
there is no evidence that early stabilisation has any detrimental effect,
it is preferable to perform early long-bone stabilisation in polytrauma
patients.89, level II-2
Recommendation 17
• Early extracranial surgery in head injury patients can be performed
safely under general anaesthesia.
Refer to Algorithm 5 on Adults with Mild Head Injury Requiring
Urgent Surgery Other Than Cranial Surgery.
9.4 Safe Extubation of Patients with Head Injury
Patients may have to be pre-emptively intubated for certain situations
(e.g. intoxicated, restlessness and for radiological or diagnostic
procedures). However, there may be a need to extubate these patients
after that. Extubation of these patients demands consideration of airway
patency, respiratory parameters, neurological status and associated
injury. Points to be considered include timing and place of extubation,
and post-extubation care.
There is limited evidence on the above issues. An observational study
showed that it was safe to extubate patients in ED provided that certain
rules and criteria were followed as the following:90, level III
• pre-extubation
 resolution of the clinical issue requiring intubation
 fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) ≤40%
 positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) ≤5 cm H2O
 SpO2 >95%, SBP >100 mmHg, HR <130 bpm
 patient not known to be a case of difficult intubation
• post-extubation
 patient should receive close monitoring for at least 60 minutes
A person trained in airway and ventilator management preferably an
anaesthesiologist or EP should carry out the extubation.
• For patients who have been intubated for certain situations (eg.
intoxicated, restlessness and for radiological and diagnostic
procedures), the following points are to be considered prior to
extubation:
 Equipments for intubation with a person trained in airway
management should be readily available.
 At least 60 minutes post-extubation close observation (GCS, SpO2,
BP, PR, RR and sign of hypoxia or airway compromise) is required.
 When in doubt, extubation should not be attempted.
 Patients are preferably placed in High Dependency Unit (HDU) or
Critical Care Area.
*Refer to Appendix 10 on Safe Extubation Criteria in Head Injury.
A RCT showed that GCS score ≥8 and partial pressure arterial oxygen/
fraction of inspired oxygen ratio (PaO2/FiO2) >200 were associated with
increased odds of successful extubation.91, level I
10. TELECONSULTATION
Observation in a general hospital with telemedicine facilities does not
put patients with mild to moderate head injury and positive CT scan at
a significant risk provided there are:92, level II-2
• careful initial assessment
• continuous observation
• easy access to neurosurgical services in the event of progression
Teleconsultation avoids unnecessary transfer of one third of patients
with head injury (34%). It changes the treatment at the referring hospital
on the advice of the neurosurgeon (42%).93, level II-3
A local study showed that teleradiology significantly reduced the
number of inter-hospital transfer by 37%. However 20.1% of patients
who were not transferred based on clinical data alone would have to
be transferred when the clinical data and images were reviewed. On
multiple logistic regression analysis, MHI was twice as likely to be
transferred if both clinical data and images were reviewed compared
with clinical data alone.94, level III
iPad2 is equally efficacious as LCD monitor in interpretation of radiologic
images during teleconsultation (AUC of 0.900 and 0.935 respectively,
p=0.183).95, level II-3
Video consultation (VC) may be a safe mode of consultation in emergency
neurosurgery compared with teleradiology (TR) and telephone
consultation (TC). Although the time taken for VC is significantly longer,
VC and TR have unequivocally better diagnostic accuracy than TC
alone. VC is more likely to result in logistical problems, as reflected by
the unacceptably high failure rate of 30.1%.96, level I
Recommendation 18
• Teleconsultation should be used in the management of head injury if
available.
• Patient’s confidentiality must always be upheld at all times when
utilising teleconsultation.
11. DISCHARGE ADVICE
It is important to give careful verbal and written discharge advice to
patients with head injury and their care givers. This will help them to
identify alarming features that need immediate medical attention and
those who need post-concussion rehabilitation.97, level III; 98, level I The
discharge form should include phone contact number of the hospital in
the event of a emergency or related queries.99, level III
A standardised head injury discharge advice is beneficial provided that
the staff are trained and well versed with it.97, level III Factors that may
influence the comprehension of the advice are age group, years of
schooling, literacy level and simplicity of the discharge form.100, level I
Therefore a discharge form should be standardised and comprehensible
at all levels. Patient with minor TBI may be discharged from ED provided
there is a responsible care giver. Carers should understand the given
discharge advice.101, level III
• All patients or their care givers should be given verbal and written
discharge advice. This must be documented.
 They should be asked to repeat the advice to ensure that they
understand the content upon discharge.
• Where possible, head injury discharge form should be available in
multiple local languages.
Discharge instructions to patients and care giver should highlight the
following alarming features:99, level III
• GCS <15 (unable to open eyes spontaneously, disorientated or
unable to obey command)
• vomiting
• headache
• amnesia
• seizure
• neurological deficit
Recommendation 19
• Head injury discharge advice form should be comprehensible. It
should include instructions to recognise alarming features and phone
contact number of local healthcare facilities*.
*Refer to Appendix 5 on Discharge Advice for Head Injury.
12. FOLLOW-UP
Patients with minor head injury can be followed up by telephone
conversation within 48 hours on their ability to recall alarming features
and well-being.101, level III Early rehabilitation significantly aids patients
with MHI who continue to experience difficulties with everyday
activities.102, level I
Patients with moderate or severe head injury should be discharged with
routine follow-up. Rehabilitation programme improves patients’ condition
by reducing social disabilities and post-concussion symptoms.98, level I
Recommendation 20
• Moderate to severe head injury should have scheduled clinic follow-up.
• Mild head injury may have follow-up via clinic visit or telephone call
within 48 hours.
13. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of head injury should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
13.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for implementations of the recommendations in the
CPG include:
1. wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hard-copies) to healthcare
providers
2. regular update on HI management at conferences and scientific
meeting locally
Existing barriers for implementations of the recommendations of the
CPG are:
1. evolving understanding of the illness and its treatment
2. insufficient resources for integrated care at different level of
service delivery
3. variation in treatment practice and preferences
4. no national registry for HI for further planning of services
13.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
1. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
via printed and electronic copies
2. reinforce regular training of healthcare providers, with adequate funding
3. ensure trained multidisciplinary team is available at different
levels of healthcare
4. ensure widespread distribution of updated patient education materials
13.3 Clinical Audit Indicator
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality management:
Inclusion criteria: All MHI who are treated at all healthcare facilities
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage
of patients
with isolated
mild head
injury initially
treated as
inpatient and
died
Number of patients with isolated mild head
injury initially treated as inpatient and died
during admission within one year period
Number of patients with isolated mild head
injury initially treated as inpatient
in the same period
=
x 100%
REFERENCES
1.
Jamaluddin SF, Abd Wahab M , Abdul Wahab MY , et al. National Trauma Database January
2009 To December 2009– Fourth Report; Malaysia: 2011.
2.
Health Informatics Centre. Health Facts 2015; Ministry of Health, Malaysia, 2015.
3.
Technical Committee of Malaysian Registry of Intensive Care. 6th Report of Malaysian Registry
of Intensive Care 2008; Ministry of Health, Malaysia; May 2009.
4.
World Health Organization. Global status report on road safety 2013: supporting a decade of
action. WHO: Geneva; 2013.
5.
Medical Development Division. Country Health Plan 10th Malaysia Plan 2011-2015; Ministry of
Health, Malaysia.
6.
Sethi D, Aljunid S, SB S, et al. Comparison of the effectiveness of trauma services provided by
secondary and tertiary hospitals in Malaysia. Ann Emerg Med. 2007 49(1):52-61.
7.
Medical Development Division. Specialty and subspecialty Framework of Ministry of Health
hospitals 10 MP (2010-2015); Ministry of Health, Malaysia; Dec 2011.
8.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and The Department of Defense (DoD). VA/DoD Clinical
Practice Guideline for Management of Concussion/Mild Traumatic Brain Injury (mTBI);
Washington: 2009.
9.
Jennett B, Teasdale G. Aspects of coma after severe head injury. Lancet. 1977;23;1(8017):878959.
10.
Carney N, Ghajar J, Jagoda A, et al. Concussion guidelines step 1: systematic review of
prevalent indicators. Neurosurgery. 2014;75 Suppl 1:S3-15.
11.
Fabbri A, Servadei F, Marchesini G, et al. Prospective validation of a proposal for diagnosis and
management of patients attending the emergency department for mild head injury. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004;75(3):410-416.
12.
Early management of patients with a head injury. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network.
SIGN. Edinburgh:2009.
13.
Timmons SD, Bee T, Webb S, et al. Using the abbreviated injury severity and Glasgow Coma
Scale scores to predict 2-week mortality after traumatic brain injury. J Trauma. 2011;71(5):11721178.
14.
Shahin H, Gopinath SP, Robertson CS. Influence of Alcohol on Early Glasgow Coma
Scale in Head-Injured Patients. The Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care.
2010;69(5):1176-1181.
15.
Badjatia N, Carney N, Crocco TJ, et al. Brain Trauma Foundation; BTF Center for Guidelines
Management. Guidelines for prehospital management of traumatic brain injury 2nd edition.
Prehosp Emerg Care. 2008;12 Suppl 1:S1-52.
16.
von Elm E, Schoettker P, Henzi I, et al. Pre-hospital tracheal intubation in patients with traumatic
brain injury: systematic review of current evidence. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103(3):371-386.
17.
Ahn H, Singh J, Nathens A, et al. Pre-hospital care management of a potential spinal cord injured
patient: a systematic review of the literature and evidence-based guidelines. J Neurotrauma.
2011;28(8):1341-1361.
18.
Austin N, Krishnamoorthy V, Dagal A, et al. Airway management in cervical spine injury. .
International Journal of Critical Illness and Injury Science. 2014;4(1):50-56.
19.
Association of Anesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. Recommendations for the Safe Transfer
of Patients with Brain Injury. London: AAGBI; 2006.
20.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Triage, assessment, investigation and
early management of head injury in children, young people and adults. UK: NICE; 2014.
21.
Chowdhury T, Kowalski S, Arabi Y, et al. Pre-hospital and initial management of head injury
patients: An update. Saudi J Anaesth. 2014;8(1):114-120.
22.
Tan PG, Cincotta M, Clavisi O, et al. Review article: Prehospital fluid management in traumatic
brain injury. Emerg Med Australas. 2011;23(6):665-676.
23.
SAFE Study Investigators; Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials
Group; Australian Red Cross Blood Service; George Institute for International Health, Myburgh
J, Cooper DJ, Finfer S, et al. Saline or albumin for fluid resuscitation in patients with traumatic
brain injury. . N Engl J Med. 2007;357(9):874-884.
24.
Clement CM, Stiell IG, Schull MJ, et al. Clinical features of head injury patients presenting with a
Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15 and who require neurosurgical intervention. Ann Emerg Med.
2006;48(3):245-251.
25.
Raj R, Siironen J, Kivisaari R, et al. Factors correlating with delayed trauma center admission
following traumatic brain injury. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2013;21:67.
26.
Brewer ES, Reznikov B, Liberman RF, et al. Incidence and predictors of intracranial hemorrhage
after minor head trauma in patients taking anticoagulant and antiplatelet medication. J Trauma.
2011;70(1):E1-5.
27.
Joseph B, Pandit V, Meyer D, et al. The significance of platelet count in traumatic brain injury
patients on antiplatelet therapy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(3):417-421.
28.
Peck KA, Calvo RY, Schechter MS, et al. The impact of preinjury anticoagulants and prescription
antiplatelet agents on outcomes in older patients with traumatic brain injury. J Trauma Acute
Care Surg. 2014;76(2):431-436.
29.
Ley EJ, Srour MK, Clond MA, et al. Diabetic patients with traumatic brain injury: insulin deficiency
is associated with increased mortality. J Trauma. 2011;70(5):1141-1144.
30.
Barmparas G, Liou DZ, Lamb AW, et al. Prehospital hypertension is predictive of traumatic brain
injury and is associated with higher mortality. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(4):592-598.
31.
Tohme S, Delhumeau C, Zuercher M, et al. Prehospital risk factors of mortality and impaired
consciousness after severe traumatic brain injury: an epidemiological study. Scand J Trauma
Resusc Emerg Med. 2014;7:22:21.
32.
Ayson M. Best-evidence Review of Transfer Protocols for Moderate to Severe Traumatic Brain
Injury. ACC: 2011.
33.
Ryynänen O-P, Iirola T, Reitala J, et al. Is advanced life support better than basic life support
in prehospital care? A systematic review. Scandinavian Journal of Trauma, Resuscitation and
Emergency Medicine. 2010;18(1):62.
34.
Pearson WS, Ovalle F, Faul M, et al. A Review of Traumatic Brain Injury Trauma Center Visits
Meeting Physiologic Criteria from the American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Field Triage Guidelines. Prehospital Emergency
Care. 2012;16(3):323-328.
35.
Lerner EB, Roberts J, Guse CE, et al. Does EMS Perceived Anatomic Injury Predict Trauma
Center Need? Prehospital Emergency Care. 2013;17(3):312-316.
36.
Hsiao KY, Hsiao CT, Weng HH, et al. Factors predicting mortality in victims of blunt trauma brain
injury in emergency department settings. Emergency Medicine Journal. 2008;25(10):670-673.
37.
Nakahara S, Matsuoka T, Ueno M, et al. Predictive Factors for Undertriage Among Severe Blunt
Trauma Patients: What Enables Them to Slip Through an Established Trauma Triage Protocol?
The Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care. 2010;68(5):1044-1051.
38.
American College of Surgeon Committee on Trauma. Advanced Trauma Life Support Student
Course Manual (9th Edition). Chicago: 2012.
39.
Eastridge BJ, Salinas J, McManus JG, et al. Hypotension Begins at 110 mm Hg: Redefining
Hypotension With Data. The Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care.
2007;63(2):291-299.
40.
Nishijima DK, Shahlaie K, Echeverri A, et al. A clinical decision rule to predict adult patients with
traumatic intracranial haemorrhage who do not require intensive care unit admission. Injury.
2012;43(11):1827-1832.
41.
Saadat S, Akbari H, Khorramirouz R, et al. Determinants of mortality in patients with traumatic
brain injury. Turkish Journal of Trauma and Emergency Surgery. 2012;18(3):219-224.
42.
af Geijerstam JL, Oredsson S, M B. OCTOPUS Study Investigators. Medical outcome after
immediate computed tomography or admission for observation in patients with mild head injury:
randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2006;333(7566):465.
43.
Schaller B, Evangelopoulos DS, Muller C, et al. Do we really need 24-h observation for patients
with minimal brain injury and small intracranial bleeding? The Bernese Trauma Unit Protocol.
Emergency Medicine Journal. 2010;27(7):537-539.
44.
Joseph B, Friese RS, Sadoun M, et al. The BIG (brain injury guidelines) project. Journal of
Trauma and Acute Care Surgery. 2014;76(4):965-969.
45.
Tauber M, Koller H, Moroder P, et al. Secondary Intracranial Hemorrhage After Mild Head Injury
in Patients With Low-Dose Acetylsalicylate Acid Prophylaxis. The Journal of Trauma: Injury,
Infection, and Critical Care. 2009;67(3):521-525.
46.
Bazarian JJ, Eirich MA, SD S. The relationship between pre-hospital and emergency department
Glasgow coma scale scores. Brain Inj. 2003 17(7):553-560.
47.
Medical Development Division. Emergency Medicine and Trauma Services Policy. Putrajaya:
MoH, Malaysia; 2012.
48.
Nishijima DK, Offerman SR, Ballard DW, et al. Risk of Traumatic Intracranial Hemorrhage In
Patients With Head Injury and Preinjury Warfarin or Clopidogrel Use. Academic Emergency
Medicine. 2013;20(2):140-145.
49.
Fabbri A, Servadei F, Marchesini G, et al. Which type of observation for patients with high-risk
mild head injury and negative computed tomography? Eur J Emerg Med. 2004;11(2):65-69.
50.
Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen K, et al. The Canadian CT Head Rule for patients with minor
head injury. Lancet. 2001 357(9266):1391-1396.
51.
Haydel MJ, Preston CA, Mills TJ, et al. Indications for computed tomography in patients with
minor head injury. N Engl J Med. 2000 343(2):100-105.
52.
Bouida W, Marghli S, Souissi S, et al. Prediction value of the Canadian CT head rule and the
New Orleans criteria for positive head CT scan and acute neurosurgical procedures in minor
head trauma: a multicenter external validation study. Ann Emerg Med. 2013;61(5):521-527.
53.
Smits M, Dippel DW, de Haan GG, et al. External validation of the Canadian CT Head Rule
and the New Orleans Criteria for CT scanning in patients with minor head injury. JAMA.
2005;294(12):1519-1525.
54.
Undén J, Ingebrigtsen T, Romner B, et al. Scandinavian Neurotrauma Committee (SNC).
Scandinavian guidelines for initial management of minimal, mild and moderate head injuries in
adults: an evidence and consensus-based update. BMC Med. 2013;11:50.
55.
Hofman PA, Nelemans P, Kemerink GJ, et al. Value of radiological diagnosis of skull fracture
in the management of mild head injury: meta-analysis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000
68(4):416-422.
56.
Muñoz-Sánchez MA, Murillo-Cabezas F, Cayuela-Domínguez A, et al. Skull fracture, with
or without clinical signs, in mTBI is an independent risk marker for neurosurgically relevant
intracranial lesion: a cohort study. Brain Inj. 2009;23(1):39-44.
57.
Almenawer SA, Bogza I, Yarascavitch B, et al. The value of scheduled repeat cranial computed
tomography after mild head injury: single-center series and meta-analysis. Neurosurgery. 72.
2013;1(56-62):discussion 63-64.
58.
Joseph B, Aziz H, Pandit V, et al. A three-year prospective study of repeat head computed
tomography in patients with traumatic brain injury. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;219(1):45-51.
59.
Reljic T, Mahony H, Djulbegovic B, et al. Value of repeat head computed tomography after
traumatic brain injury: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Neurotrauma. 2014 31(1):78-98.
60.
Stiell IG, Clement CM, McKnight RD, et al. The Canadian C-spine rule versus the NEXUS lowrisk criteria in patients with trauma. N Engl J Med. 2003 349(26):2510-2518.
61.
Duane TM, Wilson SP, Mayglothling J, et al. Canadian Cervical Spine rule compared with
computed tomography: a prospective analysis. J Trauma. 2011;71(2):352-355.
62.
Fujii T, Faul M, Sasser S, et al. Risk factors for cervical spine injury among patients with traumatic
brain injury. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2013;6(4):252-258.
63.
Thomas M, Teece S. Towards evidence based emergency medicine: best BETs from Manchester
Royal Infirmary. Computed tomography and the exclusion of upper cervical spine injury in trauma
patients with altered mental state. Emerg Med J. 2002;19(6):551-552.
64.
Holmes JF, Akkinepalli R. Computed tomography versus plain radiography to screen for cervical
spine injury: a meta-analysis. . J Trauma. 2005;58:902-905.
65.
Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of Neurological Surgeons; Congress of
Neurological Surgeons, et al. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. II.
Hyperosmolar therapy. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24 Suppl 1:S14-20. Erratum in: J Neurotrauma.
2008 Mar;25(3):276-8.
66.
Roberts DJ, Hall RI, Kramer AH, et al. Sedation for critically ill adults with severe traumatic brain
injury: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care Med. 2011;39(12):27432751.
67.
Gu JW, Yang T, Kuang YQ, et al. Comparison of the safety and efficacy of propofol with
midazolam for sedation of patients with severe traumatic brain injury: a meta-analysis. J Crit
Care. 2014;29(2):287-290.
68.
Roberts I, Sydenham E. Barbiturates for acute traumatic brain injury. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2012;12:12 CD000033.
69.
Majdan M, Mauritz W, Wilbacher I, et al. Barbiturates use and its effects in patients with severe
traumatic brain injury in five European countries. J Neurotrauma. 2013;30(1):23-29.
70.
Zafar SN, Khan AA, Ghauri AA, et al. Phenytoin versus Leviteracetam for seizure prophylaxis
after brain injury - a meta analysis. BMC Neurol. 2012;12:30.
71.
Wakai A, Roberts I, Schierhout G, et al. Mannitol for acute traumatic brain injury. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2007;24(1):CD001049.
72.
Grisar T, Bottin P, de Borchgrave d'Alténa V, et al. Prophylaxis of the epilepsies: should antiepileptic drugs be used for preventing seizures after acute brain injury? Acta Neurol Belg.
2005;105(1):5-13.
73.
Practice parameter: antiepileptic drug treatment of posttraumatic seizures. Brain Injury Special
Interest Group of the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil. 1998 May;79(5):594-7.
74.
Khan AA, Banerjee A. The role of prophylactic anticonvulsants in moderate to severe head injury.
Int J Emerg Med. 2010;22;3(3):187-191.
75.
Inaba K, Menaker J, Branco BC, et al. A prospective multicenter comparison of levetiracetam
versus phenytoin for early posttraumatic seizure prophylaxis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg.
2013;74(3):766-771.
76.
Wong DK, Lurie F, Wong LL. The effects of clopidogrel on elderly traumatic brain injured patients.
J Trauma. 2008;65(6):1303-1308.
77.
Narayan RK, Maas AI, Servadei F, et al. Traumatic Intracerebral Hemorrhage Study Group.
Progression of traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage: a prospective observational study. J
Neurotrauma. 2008;25(6):629-639.
78.
Davis SM, Broderick J, Hennerici M, et al. Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral
Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Hematoma growth is a determinant of mortality and poor
outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2006;66(8):1175-1181
79.
Washington CW, Schuerer DJ, Grubb RL Jr. Platelet transfusion: an unnecessary risk for mild
traumatic brain injury patients on antiplatelet therapy. J Trauma. 2011;71(2):358-363.
80.
Nishijima DK, Zehtabchi S, Berrong J, et al. Utility of platelet transfusion in adult patients with
traumatic intracranial hemorrhage and preinjury antiplatelet use: a systematic review. J Trauma
Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(6):1658-1663.
81.
Ansell J, Hirsh J, Hylek E, et al. American College of Chest Physicians. Pharmacology and
management of the vitamin K antagonists: American College of Chest Physicians EvidenceBased Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008;133(6 Suppl):160S-198S.
82.
Bechtel BF, Nunez TC, Lyon JA, et al. Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in
patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review. Int J Emerg Med.
2011;4(1):40.
83.
Bartal C, Freedman J, Bowman K, et al. Coagulopathic patients with traumatic intracranial
bleeding: defining the role of recombinant factor VIIa. J Trauma. 2007;63(4):725-732.
84.
Broderick J, Connolly S, Feldmann E, et al. American Heart Association; American Stroke
Association Stroke Council; High Blood Pressure Research Council; Quality of Care and
Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Guidelines for the management of
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in adults: 2007 update: a guideline from the American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council, High Blood Pressure Research
Council, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. 38.
2007;6(2001-23).
85.
Claassen DO, Kazemi N, Zubkov AY, et al. Restarting anticoagulation therapy after warfarinassociated intracerebral hemorrhage. Arch Neurol. 2008;65(10):1313-1318.
86.
Hawryluk GW, Austin JW, Furlan JC, et al. Management of anticoagulation following central
nervous system hemorrhage in patients with high thromboembolic risk. J Thromb Haemost.
2010;8(7):1500-1508.
87.
Nau T, Aldrian S, Koenig F, et al. Fixation of femoral fractures in multiple-injury patients with
combined chest and head injuries. ANZ J Surg. 2003;73(12):1018-1021.
88.
Dunham CM, Bosse MJ, Clancy TV, et al. EAST Practice Management Guidelines Work Group.
Practice management guidelines for the optimal timing of long-bone fracture stabilization in
polytrauma patients: the EAST Practice Management Guidelines Work Group. J Trauma.
2001;50(5):958-967.
89.
Wang MC, Temkin NR, Deyo RA, et al. Timing of surgery after multisystem injury with traumatic
brain injury: effect on neuropsychological and functional outcome. J Trauma. 2007;62(5):12501258.
90.
Weingart SD, Menaker J, Truong H, et al. Trauma patients can be safely extubated in the
emergency department. J Emerg Med. 2011;40(2):235-239.
91.
Namen AM, Ely EW, Tatter SB, et al. Predictors of successful extubation in neurosurgical
patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;163(3Pt 1):658-664.
92.
Fabbri A, Servadei F, Marchesini G, et al. Observational approach to subjects with mild-tomoderate head injury and initial non-neurosurgical lesions. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2008;79(10):1180-1185.
93.
Stormo A, Sollid S, Størmer J, et al. Neurosurgical teleconsultations in northern Norway. J
Telemed Telecare. 2004;10(3):135-139.
94.
Hassan R, Siregar JA, NA. ARM. The implementation of teleneurosurgery in the management
of referrals to a neurosurgical department in Hospital Sultanah Amninah Johor Bahru. Malays J
Med Sci. 2014;21(2):54-62.
95.
Park JB, Choi HJ, Lee JH, et al. An assessment of the iPad 2 as a CT teleradiology tool using
brain CT with subtle intracranial hemorrhage under conventional illumination. J Digit Imaging.
2013 26(4):683-690.
96.
Wong HT, Poon WS, Jacobs P, et al. The comparative impact of video consultation on emergency
neurosurgical referrals. Neurosurgery. 2006 59(3):607-613.
97.
Kerr J, Swann IJ, Pentland B. A survey of information given to head-injured patients on direct
discharge from emergency departments in Scotland. Emerg Med J. 2007;24(5):330-332.
98.
Wade DT, King NS, Wenden FJ, et al. Routine follow up after head injury: a second randomised
controlled trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1998;65(2):177-183.
99.
Fung M, Willer B, Moreland D, et al. A proposal for an evidenced-based emergency department
discharge form for mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj. 2006;20(9):889-894.
100. Yates K, Pena A. Comprehension of discharge information for minor head injury: a randomised
controlled trial in New Zealand. N Z Med J. 2006;119(1239):U2101.
101. Heng KW, Tham KY, How KY, et al. Recall of discharge advice given to patients with minor head
injury presenting to a Singapore emergency department. Singapore Med J. 2007 48(12):11071110.
102. Wade DT, Crawford S, Wenden FJ, et al. Does routine follow up after head injury help? A
randomised controlled trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1997;62(5):478-484.
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination, search was limit to English, human and last 10 years:-
1. Craniocerebral Trauma/
2. (traum* adj1 (craniocerebral or cranial or
frontal region or frontal or parietal region or
parietal or temporal region or temporal or
occipital region or occipital or forehead or head
or skull or posterior fossa)).tw.
3. (traum* adj1 (occipital or parietal or frontal)).
tw.
4. (head injur* adj1 (multiple or superficial or
minor or open or closed)).tw.
5. (injur* adj1 (cranial or head or craniocerebral
or multiple head or superficial head or minor
head or open head or skull)).tw.
6. Skull Fractures/
7. (skull adj1 fracture*).tw.
8. (skull fracture* adj1 (linear or non depressed
or non-depressed)).tw.
9. (fracture* adj1 (non-depressed skull or non
depressed skull linear skull or compound
skull)).tw.
10. Brain Injuries/
11. (injur* adj1 (traum* brain or mild traum* brain
or brain traum* mild or diffuse brain or focal
brain or acute brain or brain)).tw.
12. (brain injur* adj1 (traum* or acute or focal or
diffuse)).tw.
13. (encephalopath* adj1 (post concussive or
post-concussive or traum* or post-traum* or
post traum*)).tw.
14. (brain adj1 (traum* or laceration* or
contusion*)).tw.
15. (cortical adj1 contusion*).tw.
16. traum* brain injury.tw.
17. tbi*.tw.
18. Diffuse Axonal Injury/
19. (injur* adj1 diffuse axonal).tw.
20. diffuse axonal injury.tw.
21. axonal injur* diffuse.tw.
22. Post-Concussion Syndrome/
23. ((post concuss* or post-concuss*) adj1
(syndrome* or symptom*)).tw.
24. Brain Concussion/
25. (concussion* adj1 (cerebral or brain or severe
or mild or moderate or intermediate)).tw.
26. Skull Fracture, Depressed/
27. (compound depressed adj1 skull fracture*).tw.
28. (skull fracture* adj1 depressed).tw.
29. Multiple Trauma/
30. ((injur* or wound* or traum*) adj1 multiple).tw.
31. polytrauma*.tw.
32. Contrecoup Injury/
33. (injur* adj1 (contre-coup or contre coup or
contrecoup)).tw.
34. Brain Hemorrhage, Traumatic/
35. (h?emorrhage* adj1 (traumatic cerebellar or
traum* brain)).tw.
36. (traum* adj1 (cerebellar h?emorrhage* or
brain h?emorrhage*)).tw.
37. Brain Stem Hemorrhage, Traumatic/
38. (traum* adj1 (brainstem h?em* or brain stem
h?em* or bulbar h?em* or medullary h?em*
or pontine h?em* or midbrain h?em* or h?em*
brain stem or h?em* brainstem)).tw.
39. (h?em* adj1 (traumatic medullary or traumatic
bulbar or post-traumatic brainstem)).tw.
40. Cerebral Hemorrhage, Traumatic/
41. (traum* adj1 (cerebral h?em* or intracerebral
h?em* or cerebral parenchymal h?em*
or brain h?em* cerebral or cerebral
intraparenchymal h?em*)).tw.
42. (h?em* traum* adj1 (intracerebral or cerebral)).
tw.
43. Epilepsy, Post-Traumatic/
44. (seizure* adj1 (disorder* post traum* or
disorder* post-traum* or early post-traum* or
early post traum* or impact)).tw.
45. ((post-traum* seizure* or post traum* seizure*)
adj1 (disorder* or early)).tw.
46. (epileps* adj1 (post-traum* or post traum* or
traum*)).tw.
47. (concussive adj1 convulsion*).tw.
48. Pneumocephalus/
49. (pneumocephalus adj1 (traum* or tension or
pressure)).tw.
50. Cerebrospinal Fluid Otorrhea/
51. ((otorrh?ea or rhinorrh?ea*) adj1 (posttraum* cerebrospinal fluid or post traum*
cerebrospinal fluid or cerebrospinal fluid
traum* or traum* cerebrospinal fluid or
cerebrospinal fluid post- traum*)).tw.
52. (cerebrospinal
fluid
adj1
(post-traum*
otorrh?ea or post traum* otorrh?ea or
otorrh?ea traum* or traum* otorrh?ea or
otorrh?ea post-traum* or otorrh?ea post
traum* or post-traum* rhinorrh?ea* or post
traum* rhinorrh?ea* or rhinorrh?ea* traum*
or traum* rhinorrh?ea* or rhinorrh?ea* posttraum* or rhinorrh?ea* post traum*)).tw.
53. Cerebrospinal Fluid Rhinorrhea/
54. Coma, Post-Head Injury/
55. (coma* adj1 (post-traum* or post traum* or
post-head injury or post head injury or postconcussive or post concussive)).tw.
56. Head Injuries, Closed/
57. ((head injur* or head traum*) adj1 (closed or
nonpenetrating or blunt or penetrating)).tw.
58. ((traum* or injur*) adj closed head).tw.
59. OCULOMOTOR NERVE INJURIES/
60. ((traum* or injur*) adj1 (third-nerve or third
nerve or third-nerve palsy or third nerve palsy
or oculomotor nerve or oculomotor neuropath*
or third cranial nerve or cranial nerve iii or
second-nerve or second nerve or secondnerve palsy or second nerve palsy or optic
nerve or optic neuropath* or second cranial
nerve or cranial nerve ii)).tw.
61. ((oculomotor or optic) adj (nerve traum* or
nerve injur*)).tw.
62. Optic Nerve Injuries/
63. HEAD INJURIES, PENETRATING/
64. (penetrating adj1 (craniocerebral traum* or brain
traum* or brain injur* or cranial traum* or head
traum* or head injur*)).tw.
65. ((traum* or injur*) adj1 (penetrating head
or
penetrating
cranial
or
penetrating
craniocerebral)).tw.
66. Intracranial Hemorrhage, Traumatic/
67. (intracranial h?em* adj traum*).tw.
68. (traum* intracranial adj1 h?em*).tw.
69. Brain Hemorrhage, Traumatic/
70. ((traum* cerebellar or traum* brain) adj1
h?em*).tw.
71. (traum* adj1 (brain h?em* or cerebellar
h?em*)).tw.
72. HEMATOMA, EPIDURAL, CRANIAL/
73. ((cranial or intracranial) adj1 (extradural h?em*
or epidural h?em*)).tw.
74. HEMATOMA, SUBDURAL/
75. (subdural adj1 h?em*).tw.
76. (traum* adj1 subdural h?em*).tw.
77. HEMATOMA, SUBDURAL, ACUTE/
78. (subdural adj1 h?em* acute).tw.
79. (h?em* adj1 (acute subdural or subdural
acute)).tw.
80. HEMATOMA, SUBDURAL, INTRACRANIAL/
81. (subdural h?em* adj2 (intracranial or traum*)).
tw.
82. (subdural adj1 h?em* intracranial).tw.
83. (h?em* adj1 (subdural intracranial or subdural
cranial or intracranial subdural)).tw.
84. Skull Fracture, Basilar/
85. ((frontobasilar or basilar) adj1 skull fracture*).
tw.
86. (fracture* adj1 basilar skull).tw.
87. (battle* adj1 sign).tw.
88. Subarachnoid Hemorrhage, Traumatic/
89. ((traum* or post-traum* or post traum*) adj1
subarachnoid h?em*).tw.
90. (h?em* adj (traum* or post-traum* or post
traum*)).tw.
91. or/1-90
92. (prehospital adj1 emergency care).tw.
93. ((pre-hospital or primary care) adj (assess* or
evaluat*)).tw.
94. Abbreviated Injury Scale/
95. (abbreviated adj1 injur* scale*).tw.
96. Injury Severity Score/
97. iss score*.tw.
98. injur* severity score*.tw.
99. score* injury severity.tw.
100. GLASGOW COMA (coma adj1 scale Glasgow).
101. coma scale Glasgow.tw.
102. Glasgow Coma Scale.tw.
103. 92 or 93 or 94 or 95 or 96 or 97 or 98 or 99 or
100 or 101 or 102
104. 91 and 103
91. or/1-90
92. tomography, x-ray computed/ or tomography,
spiral computed/ or multidetector computed
tomography/
93. (helical adj1 ct*).tw.
94. ((compute*-assisted or compute* assisted
or compute*) adj1 (tomography spiral or
tomography helical)).tw.
95. (spiral
adj1
(c?t
scan*
or
compute*
tomography or ct*)).tw.
96. (scan* adj1 spiral c?t*).tw.
97. (tomography adj1 (spiral compute* or spiral
compute*-assisted or helical computed)).tw.
98. ((ct scan* or cat scan* or ct) adj1 (x-ray* or x
ray* or cine)).tw.
99. ((scan* x-ray* or scan x ray*) adj (ct or cat)).tw.
91. or/1-90
92. (anticoagulant adj1 agent*).tw.
93. anticoagulant*.tw.
94. (thrombin inhibitor adj1 indirect).tw.
95. Inhibitors indirect thrombin.tw.
96. PLATELET AGGREGATION INHIBITORS/
97. (antiplatelet adj1 drug*).tw.
98. (platelet adj1 antogonist*).tw.
99. Blood platelet adj1 antagonist*).tw.
100. antiplatelet agent*.tw.
101. Anticoagulants/
102. (platelet adj1 inhibitor*).tw.
103. (blood platelet adj1 antiaggregrant*).tw
104. (platelet adj1 antiaggregant*).tw.
105. blood platelet aggregation inhibitor*.tw.
106. platelet aggregation inhibitors.tw.
100. (tomodensitometry.tw.
101. (tomograph* adj1 (x-ray* compute* or x ray*
compute* or xray* compute* or electron beam
or compute* x-ray* or compute* x ray* or
compute* xray* or transmission compute*)).tw.
102. ((compute*
tomograp*
or
tomograp*
compute*) adj1 (x-ray* or x ray* or xray* or
transmission)).tw.
103. ((x-ray* compute* or xray* compute* or x ray*
compute* or electron beam compute*) adj1
(assisted tomograph* or tomograph* or axial
tomograph*)).tw.
104. tomograph* x ray* or tomograph* xray* or
tomograph* x-ray*) adj1 (compute* assisted or
compute* axial)).tw.
105. tomography multisection computed.tw.
106. tomography multidetector-row computed.tw.
107. ((multidetector row or multidetector-row or
multidetector or multislice or multisection) adj1
computed tomography).tw.
108. tomography multislice computed.tw.
109. tomography multidetector computed.tw.
110. 92 or 93 or 94 or 95 or 96 or 97 or 98 or 99 or
100 or 101 or 102 or 103 or 104 or 105 or 106
or 107 or 108 or 109
111. 91 and 110
107. Aspirin/
108. (acid adj1 acetylsalicylic).tw.
109. aspirin.tw.
110. Ticlopidine/
111. ticlopidine.tw.
112. (ticlopidine adj1 hydrochloride).tw
113. ticlid.tw.
114. 92 or 93 or 94 or 95 or 96 or 97 or 98 or 99 or
100 or 101 or 102 or 103 or 104 or 105 or 106
or 107 or 108 or 109 or 110 or 111 or 112 or
113
115. 91 and 114
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the definition of head injury?
2.
What are the differential diagnoses in suspected head injury?
3.
What are the classifications of severity in head injury?
4.
What is the safe and effective pre-hospital/primary care assessment
in a patient with head injury by healthcare providers (e.g. GCS)?
5.
What is the safe and effective pre-hospital care/primary care in a
patient with head injury?
6.
What are the criteria for discharge or referral of a patient with head
injury at primary care?
7.
What are the safe and effective measures to prevent secondary brain
injury during transfer of a patient with head injury to hospital?
8.
What are the triage criteria for a patient with head injury in ED?
9.
What is the safe and effective initial management of a patient with
mild/moderate/severe head injury in ED?
10. What are the criteria for observation of a patient with head injury in
ED?
11. What are the safe and effective method, frequency and duration of
observation/assessment in a patient with mild head injury in ED?
12. What are the criteria for admission of a patient with head injury (postobservation at ED)?
13. What are the criteria for discharge of a patient with head injury from
ED without observation?
14. What are the indications for urgent/immediate head CT in head injury?
15. What are the criteria for skull x-ray in head injury if CT is not available?
16. What are the criteria for a repeat head CT in a patient with head injury
who does not require surgical intervention?
17. What are the indications for cervical imaging in head injury?
18. Is anaesthesia for non-urgent and non-life threatening extracranial
surgery safe for a patient with mild head injury?
19. What is the safe and effective method of reversing or restarting
antiplatelet or anticoagulant in a patient with head injury on the
medications?
20. What are the criteria for safe extubation in a patient with head injury?
21. What is the safe and effective analgesia in a patient with head injury?
22. What is the safe and effective sedation and reversal of sedation in a
patient with head injury?
23. What are the criteria to start anticonvulsant in a patient with head
injury?
24. What are the safe and effective IV fluids (e.g. hypertonic saline)/
diuretic in a patient with head injury?
25. Is tele-consultation safe and effective in management of head injury?
26. What discharge advice should be provided to a patient with head
injury or his/her care givers?
27. When and how should a patient with head injury be followed-up?
Eye Opening Response
Verbal Response
Motor Response
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
Component
Response
Score
Spontaneous
To voice/sound
To pressure/pain
None
Orientated
Confused
Words
Sounds
None
Obeys commands
Localising
Flexion withdrawal
Abnormal flexion
Extension
None
APPENDIX 3
GLASGOW COMA SCALE AND SCORE
The GCS is based on a 15-point scale used for estimating and
categorising the severity of brain injury following a TBI. The scale
measures the best motor, verbal and eye opening response.
Glasgow Coma Score
The score is the cumulative sum of the scale in each component. The
levels of head injury severity are classified as:
Mild
GCS 13 - 15
Moderate
GCS 9 - 12
Severe
GCS 3 - 8
APPENDIX 4
HEAD CHART
Date
Time
PUPILS SCALE
TEMP(+)
Pulse
(Blue)
BP
(Red)
S
T
A
T
U
S
Temp(ºc)
Pulse
41
180
40
160
39
140
38
120
37
100
36
80
35
60
34
40
Pain Score
Respiratory Rate
Oxygen (L/ min or %)
Oxygen saturation %
Pupils
Right
Left
Size
Reaction
Size
Reaction
SPONTANEOUS
TO VOICE/SOUND
WORDS
SOUNDS
TO PRESSURE/PAIN
NONE
NONE
ORIENTATED
CONFUSED
OBEYS COMMANDS
LOCALISING
FLEXION WITHDRAWAL
ABNORMAL FLEXION
EXTENSION
NONE
GRUNTS, AGITATED, RESTLESS
NONE
SMILE, COOS APPROPRIATELY
CONSOLABLE CRIES
NORMAL SPONTANEOUS
MOVEMENTS
LOCALISING
INCONSOLABLE CRIES
NORMAL FLEXION
ABNORMAL FLEXION
EXTENSION
NONE
TOTAL GCS
NORMAL POWER
MILD WEAKNESS
SEVERE WEAKNESS
SPASTIC FLEXION
NO RESPONSE
SEVERE WEAKNESS
SPASTIC FLEXION
NO RESPONSE
NORMAL POWER
MILD WEAKNESS
E
V
M
>2 YR
>1 YR
>1 YR
M
O
V
E
M
E
N
T
L
I
M
B
S
B
E
S
T
C
O
M
A
S
C
A
L
E
ARMS
LEGS
7mm
6mm
5mm
4mm
3mm
2mm
1mm
8mm
E
V
M
EYE CLOSED
DUE TO
SWELLING (C)
ENDOTRACHEAL
TUBE OR
TRACHEOSTOMY
(T)
USUALLY
RECEIVED BEST
ARM RESPONSE
E
V
M
<1 YR
<1 YR
<2 YR
SPONTANEOUS
TO VOICE/SOUND
TO PRESSURE/PAIN
NONE
RECORD RIGHT (R) AND LEFT (L)
SEPARATELY IF THERE IS A
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
TWO SIDES
CLINICAL EVENTS:
vomit ≥2x
seizure
diffuse headache
amnesia
abnormal behaviour
Name:________________________
Age:___________
Sex: Male / Female
IC:___________________________
RN:____________
Ward: _____________
APPENDIX 5
DISCHARGE ADVICE FOR HEAD INJURY
Patient's name:
Contact no.:
Care giver's name:
Date:
IC/RN:
If any of the following alarming symptoms are present, you or your care
giver should immediately contact the hospital for advice.
If within the next 24 hours you experience/as observed by care giver:
• Fainting or sleepiness
• Increasing confusion, inability to recognise time, place or people
• Change in behaviour
• Constant headache which is worsening
• Vomiting
• Inability to remember new events
• Jerking or seizures, abnormal speech
• Blood or fluid coming out of the ear
• Inability to move any part of your body
What you should and should not do
Name of Doctor:
Emergency Contact:
Witness:
 Take paracetamol for headache
 Take your usual medications
 Mild exercise when you feel
better
 Take rest or a few days off from
work
DO
 Take
sleeping
pills
and
anticoagulants/ antiplatelets
 Take alcohol
 Play contact sport
 Drive
DON’T (until advised by your doctor)
APPENDIX 6
CANADIAN CERVICAL RULE (CCR)
•
For alert (GCS=15) and stable trauma patients where cervical spine
injury is concern
Source: Stiell IG, Clement CM, McKnight RD, et al. The Canadian C-spine rule
versus the NEXUS low-risk criteria in patients with trauma. N Engl J Med.
2003 349(26):2510-2518
Any High Risk Factors Which Mandates Radiography?
Any of the following:
- Age >65 years old
- Dangerous mechanism*
- Paraesthesia in extremities
NO
YES
NO
YES
UNABLE
ABLE
*Dangerous mechanism:
- Fall from elevation >3 feet/5 stairs
- Axial load to head e.g. diving
- MVC high speed (>100km/hour), rollover, ejection
- Motorised recreational vehicles
- Bicycle collision
**Simple rear-end MVC excludes:
- Pushed into oncoming traffic
- Hit by bus/large truck
- Rollover
- Hit by high speed vehicle
***Delayed
i.e. not immediate onset of neck pain
Any Low Risk Factors Which Allows Safe Assessment
of Range of Motion?
Any of the following:
- Simple rear-end MVC**
- Sitting position in ED
- Ambulatory at any time
- Delayed onset of neck pain***
- Absence of midline c-spine tenderness
Able to Actively Rotate Neck?
45
o left and right
No Radiography
Radiography
APPENDIX 7
THE NEXUS LOW-RISK CRITERIA FOR LOW PROBABILITY
OF CERVICAL INJURY
Cervical-spine radiography is indicated for patients with trauma
unless they meet all of the following criteria:
• No posterior midline cervical-spine tenderness
a
• No evidence of intoxication
b
• A normal level of alertness
c
• No focal neurologic deficit
d
• No painful distracting injuries
e
Criteria are from Hoffman and colleagues.
a. Midline posterior bony cervical-spine tenderness is present if the patient
reports pain on palpation of the posterior midline neck from the nuchal
ridge to the prominence of the first thoracic vertebra, or if the patient
evinces pain with direct palpation of any cervical spinous process.
b. Patients should be considered intoxicated if they have either of the
following: a recent history provided by the patient or an observer of
intoxication or intoxicating ingestion, or evidence of intoxication on
physical examination such as an odour of alcohol, slurred speech,
ataxia, dysmetria, or other cerebellar findings, or any behaviour
consistent with intoxication. Patients may also be considered to be
intoxicated if tests of bodily secretions are positive for alcohol or
drugs that affect the level of alertness.
c. An altered level of alertness can include any of the following: a GCS
score of 14 or less; disorientation to person, place, time, or events;
an inability to remember three objects at five minutes; a delayed or
inappropriate response to external stimuli; or other findings.
d. A focal neurologic deficit is any focal neurologic finding on motor or
sensory examination.
e. No precise definition of a painful distracting injury is possible.
This category includes any condition thought by the clinician to be
producing pain sufficient to distract the patient from a second (neck)
injury. Such injuries may include, but are not limited to, any longbone fracture; a visceral injury requiring surgical consultation; a large
laceration, degloving injury, or crush injury; large burns; or any other
injury causing acute functional impairment. Physicians may also
classify any injury as distracting if it is thought to have the potential to
impair the patient’s ability to appreciate other injuries.
Source: Stiell IG, Clement CM, McKnight RD, et al. The Canadian C-spine rule
versus the NEXUS low-risk criteria in patients with trauma. N Engl J Med.
2003 349(26):2510-2518.
APPENDIX 8
EQUIPMENTS FOR TRANSFER
A. Essential equipments:
• portable mechanical ventilator
• adequate supply of O2
• portable battery powered multifunction monitor to include:
 ECG
 non-invasive BP set
 pulse oximetry
 temperature (optional)
 invasive pressure monitoring (optional)
 capnography (optional)
B. Other equipments:
• suction
• battery powered syringe pumps
• battery powered IV volumetric pumps (infusion by gravity is
unreliable during transfer)
• intubation equipment
• self-inflating bag, valve and mask
• venous access equipment
• defibrillator/AED
• spare batteries
• blanket
C. An adequate supply of essential drugs to go with the patient:
• sedative agents (e.g. midazolam)
• muscle relaxants (e.g. suxamethonium) may be required for
re-intubation
• analgesics (e.g. fentanyl)
• anticonvulsants (e.g. diazepam)
• vasoactive drugs (e.g. ephedrine, dopamine, noradrenaline)
• atropine
• sodium bicarbonate
• intravenous fluids (e.g. 0.9%NaCl)
• ±mannitol 20%, frusemide
D. Communication equipments
Adapted: Best-evidence Review of Transfer Protocols for Moderate to Severe
Traumatic Brain Injury. (Available at http://www.acc.co.nz/PRD_EXT_
CSMP/groups/external_providers/documents/reports_results/wpc111560.
pdf)
APPENDIX 9
TRANSFER CHECKLIST FOR NEUROSURGICAL PATIENTS
The development of standardised transfer documentation is encouraged
according to the local setting.
Adapted: Best-evidence Review of Transfer Protocols for Moderate to Severe
Traumatic Brain Injury. (Available at http://www.acc.co.nz/PRD_EXT_
CSMP/groups/external_providers/documents/reports_results/wpc111560.
pdf)
NO
YES
Checklist
SpO2 >90%?
Airway clear?
Airway protected adequately? (where applicable)
Intubation and ventilation required? (where applicable)
BP MAP >80 mmHg? (adults)
Pulse <100/min? (adults)
Continuous cardiac monitoring?
Peripheral perfusion adequate?
Two reliable large bore IV cannulae in situ?
Estimated blood loss already replaced?
Arterial line? (optional)
Central venous access? (optional)
Admission GCS recorded?
GCS before transfer recorded?
Pupillary size and reactivity recorded?
Focal signs recorded?
Seizures controlled?
Raised ICP appropriately managed?
Cervical spine injury (cervical spine protection), chest
injury, fractured ribs, pneumothorax addressed?
Intra-thoracic, intra-abdominal bleed addressed?
Pelvic fracture addressed?
Long bone injuries splinted?
Continuous bladder drainage?
Nasogastric tube? (where applicable)
Blood available? (where applicable)
Chest tube function? (where applicable)
Appropriate personnel escorting adequately experienced
and trained?
Instructed about this case?
Adequate equipment and drugs?
Sufficient oxygen supplies? (should be additional one
hour or twice the estimated journey time)
Referral letter attached?
CT scans/X-rays films/CD attached?
Where to go in the neurosurgical unit?
Telephone numbers programmed into mobile phone?
Electronic and communication equipment battery fully
function?
Name and contact number of receiving doctor?
Respiration
Circulation
Head injury
Others
Escort
APPENDIX 10
SAFE EXTUBATION CRITERIA IN HEAD INJURY
If the patients are to be safely extubated in ED, the following criteria
should be met:
Preferably patients should be placed in HDU or Critical Care Area.
Source: Gray SH, Ross JA, Green RS. How to safely extubate a patient in the emergency
department: a user's guide to critical care. CJEM. 2013 Sep;15(5):303-6.
NO
YES
Criteria
Resolution of the process necessitating intubation
The original airway or breathing problem has resolved
Able to oxygenate and ventilate on low ventilator settings
A. Options for assessing ability to oxygenate and
ventilate would include oxygen saturation >92% or a
normal arterial blood gas
B. A common assessment of respiratory strength would
be negative inspiratory force (NIF) <-30cm H2O
(normal NIF values would be -90 to -120 cm H2O)
C. Typical low ventilator settings would include the
following:
• Pressure support ≤10 mmHg
• PEEP ≤5 cm H2O
• Tidal volumes ≥5 mL/kg
• FiO2 ≤0.40%
Able to maintain a patent airway
A. Anatomically easy airway for laryngoscopy and
intubation
B. Patient follows commands (opens eyes, grasps
hand, lifts head off bed)
C. A cuff leak is present: with the cuff of the endotracheal
tube deflated, a leak >25% should be present
(exhaled volume less than inhaled volume due to
leak)
Anticipated clinical course does not require mechanical
ventilation
A. Good cough with acceptable secretions
B. Haemodynamically stable, with no vasopressors
• SpO2 >92% on FiO2 <0.4
• HR <100 beats/min
• RR <30 breaths/min
• SBP >90 mmHg
• No active cardiac ischemia
C. No other mitigating factor
• Cervical spine injury or instability
• Acute lung injury
• Acute pharyngeal injury
• Plan for imminent operation or transport
• Attending physician feels uncomfortable with
extubation
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
APPENDIX 11
DRUG DOSING REGIMEN FOR INITIAL MANAGEMENT
OF HEAD INJURY
Drug
Dose
Adverse Reaction (>10%)
Drug
Dose
Adverse reaction
Cardiovascular: bradycardia,
oedema
Central Nervous (CN): CN
depression, confusion, dizziness,
drowsiness, fatigue, headache,
sedation
Endocrine and metabolic:
dehydration
Gastrointestinal (GI): Constipation,
nausea, vomiting, xerostomia
Local: application site reaction
Neuromuscular and skeletal: chest
wall rigidity (high dose IV), muscle
rigidity, weakness
Ocular: miosis
Respiratory: dyspnoea, respiratory
depression
Miscellaneous: diaphoresis
Respiratory:
Decreased respiratory rate (23%)
Apnoea (13%)
Cardiovascular: bradycardia,
hypotension
CN: drowsiness (9 - 48%), dizziness
(6 -20%)
GI: xerostomia (78%), constipation
(9 -40%), nausea (7 - 28%)
Sedation:
IV infusion 0.05 - 0.1 mg/kg
over at least 2 - 5 minutes
Analgesia:
0.5 - 2 µg/kg/h continuous
infusion
Analgesia :
0.05 - 0.1 mg/kg/hr
continuous infusion
Benzodiazepines
Midazolam
Fentanyl
Morphine
sulphate
Opioids
IV effects: hypotension, bradycardia,
cardiac arrhythmia, cardiovascular
collapse (especially with rapid IV
use),venous irritation and pain
Concentration related effects:
Nystagmus, blurred vision, diplopia,
ataxia, slurred speech, dizziness,
drowsiness, lethargy, coma, rash,
fever, nausea, vomiting, confusion,
mood changes
B. Anticonvulsant
A. Analgesia/Sedation
Loading dose:
15 - 20 mg/kg IV infusion
over 30 - 60 minutes
Rate: should not be more
than 50 mg/minute (to avoid
hypotension)
Maintenance dose:
IV 100 mg given three times daily
Phenytoin
Source:
• Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of Neurological Surgeons; Congress
of Neurological Surgeons et al. J Neurotrauma. 2008 Mar;25(3):276-8.
• Flower O, Hellings S. Sedation in traumatic brain injury. Emerg Med Int.
2012;2012:637171
• American Pharmacists Association. Drug Information Handbook, 22th Edition
Hudson: Wolters Kluwer Clinical Drug Information, Inc.; 2013
>20 µg/mL: far lateral nystagmus
>30 µg/mL: 45
o lateral gaze
nystagmus and ataxia
>40 µg/mL: decreased mentation
>100 µg/mL: death
CN: behavioural symptoms
(agitation, aggression, anger,
anxiety, apathy, depersonalization,
depression, emotional lability,
hostility, hyperkinesias, irritability,
nervousness, neurosis, and
personality disorder (5 - 13%),
somnolence (8 - 23%), headache
(14%), hostility (2 - 12%)
GI: vomiting (15%)
Levetiracetam
Oral 300 mg ON for a total of
seven days
Loading dose: 20 mg/kg IV
(rounded to the nearest 250
mg and administered over
60 minutes)
Maintenance dose:
1000 mg IV every 12 hours
(given over 15 minutes)
The dose may be adjusted
as needed for therapeutic
effect up to 1500 mg every
12 hours (3000 mg/day).
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
µg
microgramme
µL
microlitre
AIS
Abbreviated Injury Scale
BP
blood pressure
bpm
beats per minute
ACOS-COT/
American College of Surgeon – Committee on Trauma /Centre
CDC
for Disease Control
CCR
Canadian Cervical Spine Rule
CCTHR
Canadian CT Head Rule
CI
confidence interval
CN
central nervous
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CPP
cerebral perfusion pressure
CSI
cervical spine injury
CSF
cerebral spinal fluid
CT
computed tomography
DG
Development Group
DM
diabetes mellitus
ECP
emergency care providers
ED
emergency department
EP
emergency physician
ET CO2
end tidal carbon dioxide
FFP
fresh frozen plasma
FiO2
fraction of inspired oxygen
GA
general anaesthesia
GCS
Glasgow Coma Score
GI
gastrointestinal
GOS
Glasgow Outcome Scale
HDU
High Dependency Unit
HR
heart rate
ICH
intracranial haemorrhage
ICP
intracranial cerebral pressure
ICU
Intensive care unit
INR
international normalized ratio
IPH
intraparenchymal haemorrhage
ISS
Injury Severity Score
IV
intravenous
kg
kilogramme
kPa
kilopascal
LOC
loss of consciousness
LR
likelihood ratio
NEXUS
National Emergency X-radiography Utilization Study
NOC
New Orleans Criteria
MAP
mean arterial pressure
mg
milligramme
MoH
Ministry of Health
MHI
mild head injury
mL
millilitre
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
• Ms Loong Ah Moi, CPG Unit, MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya for retrieval
of evidence
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Early Management of Head Injury in
Adults was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
mm
millimetre
mmHg
millimetre mercury
MVC
motor vehicle collision
OR
odd ratio
PCC
prothrombin complex concentrate
PEEP
positive end-expiratory pressure
PHC
pre-hospital care
PTS
post-traumatic seizure
RC
Review Committee
RCT
randomised control trial
RR
respiratory rate
RTA
road traffic accident
SAH
subarachnoid haemorrhage
SBP
systolic blood pressure
SpO2
oxygen saturation
TBI
traumatic brain injury
vs
versus
WAICH
Warfarin-associated intracranial haemorrhage