Mistry of Heath Malaysia
(ra Heath Division
OF DEVELOPMENTALLY.
MISSING INCISORS:
SANITAGINS ADILIVAd IWIINITID
fos
Oral Heath Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
ow PAK 12 (60)
ORTHODONTIC MANAGEMENT
OF DEVELOPMENTALLY
MISSING INCISORS
[STATEMENT OF INTENT
‘The clinical practice guidelines are meant to be a guide for clinical
practice, based on thebest avaiable evidenceat the time of development.
Adnerence to these guidelines may not necessarily ensure the best
‘outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is responsible for
‘the management of his/her unique patient based onthe clinical picture
presented by the patient and the management options available locally
[REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
“These guidelines were fst issued in 2005 and revised in 2012. The next
review of these guidelines willbe in 2016 or sooner if new evidence
becomes avaiable.
(0PG Secretariat
Health Technology Assessment Section
Medical Development Division
Level, Block El, Parcel E
Precinct 1
£62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Electronic version avallable onthe folowing websites:
httpiwerw.moh.goveny
hitpviwerw.ohd.gowmy
hitpviwerw.acadmed.org.my
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
| evidence obtained from at last one propery randomized
controled tal (FCT)
14 Evidence abtalned trom well-designed conte tials without,
‘andomaaton
112 Evidence obtained from welidesigned cohort or case-control
‘sna stole, proerably om more han ene center orrewearch
‘rou
13 Evidence obtained fom multiple seri wih or without tho
Intervention. Dramatte results in uncooled experments (such
‘the results ofthe nredcon of paniin Westment ithe
940s) cou alo be rgarded 9 hs ype of eudence
Opinions of respect authorities, basod on clinical experince;
descriptive stole or repos of exper comics,
Source: pte tm U.SCanadan Pvenve Senos Tek Fre
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
‘A Atleast one meta anaiyss systematic review or RCT, or evidence
‘ated as good and arty appeal tote irgetpopaation|
8 Evidence rom wall conducted clinical tri, rectly appleableta
‘he target population, and emanating overall consistency of
resus or evidence extrapolated tom meta analyss, systematic
review or RCT
© Evidence fom expert committee ports, or opinions and for
inca experionoos of respecod authorities ideatesabsonco
‘of Grecty applcabe ciical studies of good qualty
Source: Mele hom the Seotsh tale Gens Neto (IGN)
Note:The grades of recommendation rees tothe stength of the evince on
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
RATIONALE
Patients presenting with developmentally missing incisors. generally
suffer from poor dentalacial appearance and function. This condition
Is often complicated by dental anomalles associated with typodontia
‘Such as impacted teeth, microdontla, hypodontia of posteror teeth,
{layed eruption and taurodontsm. It is a common problem seen by
the general dentist and is usualy referred to the orthodontist. though
there are essentially two dstinct approaches to managing this problem;
that is space closure or opening, these patients often manifest with
‘many underlying skeletal and dental problems, each with ther on
ros and cons, which oftentimes poses a dilemma for the individual
‘operator, A mult-<dscipinary team approach for a holistic management
‘ofthis condition is therefore recommended an it's important that each
‘member in the team understands his/her role inthe overall weatment
plan and complement each other in thelr procedures at each stage for
‘the best treatment outcome.
Process.
Evidence was obtained by systematic review of current literature on
Ccongenitally/developmentally missing incisors using the usual electronic
‘search engines PubMed/Medline: Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews; Scopus and Ovid. Local non-indexed journals were hand
‘Searched, Literature search was rom 197010201. Theterm ‘congenitally
‘missing teeth is widely usedinIteratur altnough the correct terminology
currently used is ‘developmentally missing teth’ since permanent tooth
formation Is a developmental process during growth. Relevant key
‘words and terms or MeSH terms wore used ether singly oF in varo
‘combinations to retieve the relevant articles: “hypodontia’, “mai
“missing teeth’, .ineisor,"mandibular", “management”, “unecupted"
“principles”, “orthadontc”, “restorative”, interceptve", “congenitally
missing teeth", “cevelopmental missing teeth", “developmental
‘absence of teeth’, “developmental formation", “developmental
agenesis", “congenitally missing incisors", “agenesis of permanent
‘teeth, “transplantation”, “hypodontia and restoration”, “hypodontia and
bridge", “autotransplantation’, “implants, “osseointegrated implants”
‘and "dental implants
‘This CPG was drawn up by a core working committee of orthodontist,
‘general dental practitioner (GDP) and a dental nurse appointed
by the Minsty of Heath, Malaysia. The draft was reviewed by @
pane! of local review members and external reviewers. comprising
‘orthodontists, paediatric dental specialists, restorative dental specialists
‘and periodontists and edited by the working committee before being
posted on the Ministy of Health, Malaysia website for comments and
feedbacks. All statements and recommendations formulated were
‘feed by the working committee and where evidence was insufficient,
recommendations were made based on consensus ofthe group. These
‘uidelines were presented tothe Technical Advisory Commitee for CPG
{or approval
“The levels of evidence and grading of recommendations used in tis
(CPG were adapted from the US./(Canadian Preventive Services Task
Force and the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN),
‘OBJECTIVES
‘To assist healthcare professionals in
1. Interceptive management in children with signs of developing
malocclusion and to preserve the alveolar bone for future
prostheses
2. Decision to open or close space inthe dentition
3, Timely and appropriate management of tooth transplants oF
prostheses
4. Orthodontic preparation for cases needing or opening
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What is the etiology and prevalence of developmentally missing
2. What are the appropriate diagnostic tools to sid treatment
planning?
8 What are the inteceptive options for developmentally missing
4. What are the benefts of interventions?
5. What are the treatment options for missing incisor in adolescents
‘and adults?
6. What ar the indications and contraindicatons of space closure and
‘opening?
7. What ae the long-term aesthetic and functional outcomes of space-
‘closed orthodontic cases and space-opened restorative cases?
‘TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion erteria
‘+ Children and adults with developmentally missing permanent
Exclusion evteria
+ Gif lp and palate and craniotacial syndromes
‘+ Developmentally missing permanent teeth other than incisors
‘TARGET GROUP/USER
‘These guidelines are applicable to all healthcare professionals involved
In the management of oral heath and denttion of patients,
(CORE MEMBERS OF CPG DEVELOPMENT GROUP,
Dr. Loke Shuet Ton
Senior Conia Orthodontist
Dental Gini, Jn engi Kelana, Kang, Selangor
‘Dr. Cheong Wai Sern
Private Ganerl Dental
Practtone
Dental Cin, Klan, Selangor
rari Patrik bin Abdullah
Onhedontst
Dental Gini,
‘alan Perak Penang
“Jeovarotnam AP K. Sockaingam
Heel Dental Nurs
Petaing Dstt Dental Cn,
‘Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr. Noralia bint Amira
Cnhedontst
Dental Cin,
Pore Dickson, Negeri Sembtan
Dr. Siti Aba bin Othman,
Senior Lecter & Orson
Deparment of Chirens’Denisty
fad Orthodontics
Feacuty of Denisty
‘Unverstyof Malay, Kuala Lumpur
‘Dr. Ummm Aiman bint Yuet
‘Onhedontst
Dental Gin,
"Muar, Johor
Dr Chia Yang Soon
Orthodontet
Dental Cine
Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr Fatimah bint Abdullah
Orthodontist
Dental in, Jalan Abdul Samad,
‘lor Baha, Johor
Dr. Nooranisa bint Shawal Hamid
Orthod
Dent Cin, Dato Keramat,
WP Kuala Lumpur
De. Sait AP
Dental Pubic Heath Specialist
Oral Heath Dison
ans of Heath Malaysia
Dr. Surguna Devi AVP RS.
Moniandy
Orthodontist
Dental Cine,
Si Kembany
MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
1. Asma Alhusna Abg Abdulah Dr. Kalalorasu Perlasamy
Lecture & Orthodontist Specialist Sonior Constant Pecatnc
Deparment of Orthodontes ental Specialist,
Faculty of Deny ‘Sunga Buioh Hosp,
Univer Kebangeaan Malaysia Kua Lumpur
Lt Col Dr Shalene Kereshanan Dr. Mohd. Muzafar Hamirudin
‘rhedontst Head of Doparimont
ead of Malaysian Armed Forces Dept of Prostnodoiios
Onhedontc Ua Fecuty of Denny
Hosptal Angkatan Tetera, Univers Kebangsaan Malaysia
“uanku Mizar Kuala Lampaur
{and cuent Presdent of Malaysian
Progen of Mayan Dental Associaton (MOA)
‘Associaton of Orthogontsts
(ne80) 2011-2012
1p. Rohani bint Mahmood
‘Consultant Restorative Seciast
ead of Restorative Specialty
Putrajaya Dental Gin, Puraaya
PANEL OF EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
lan Buchanan Professor Susan Cunningham
CGonsutant rnedontist, CConsutant Orhocontit &
‘Gabgow Deval Hospital ane Progranene Doctor
Schoo! Gssgou UCU Eastman Dota iettte
Seta London, United Kingdom
ALGORITHM FOR ORTHODONTIC MANAGEMENT OF
DEVELOPMENTALLY MISSING INCISORS
-Autotransointation of tooth
Bonded retainer
Bone atrophy
idee
‘crown trae
Ectoderma eyeiosio
ctoic oath
pedent
Impacted oot
GLossaRY
Parentage of Lowe Arta Face Height
Gente hertance ertsied as asese
‘Yanepanaion of tooth tom ove ste to arte n
Antero verne samt eres. daa wire
A pie tino rg ie ot
sora intone mass
‘fad artical oplaceret for a ming toot or
etsy rasa ota
‘of te sae are on hopes nt
Theo ng rcnaton of he oan
‘Atl ral tain sic com al aor
{over ateo orca ito
oy doston tor nel of th dnton in fom,
‘Azz wn stnemal otopmant ot ha
‘Aaparma poston oe cin tea
Srila apnled dry whan owng ranger oh
‘rally otro thn arta phatogech Each
{oot tegang wh te conta” soul Bo
(a3 perma ne tat ta to
“Sher n th pinay © pomanent eth sen
Teeth hich ae provid rom normal option
‘Toot Agenesls
“oot Prose
‘Transposition of teh
Te manson pet 8 denna
easement he wih betwen acacet roms
Measure he wih betwoan aac ots
‘Stans tr sl aco
Maserpransbus Pane aie
tical etn tats anchored nto fw bone Yo
‘piace ame ratualoth
‘arma pon of to aw
A passive reovae appliance t© mit the
coated poston ae
-Aarma ein of ho jaw
‘lane pataning to an magna Ine extends
‘Swgng tine rat ana et pare
Dersopmenal absones oath
An ttt pn a mig ie
Intorchanaed_potion of tat to is real
oan ne sve fh nama oon
A ln tae onary st ra
‘igang thesia plane
‘Ann ye ofstoratvemtaral pica veratoth
‘itoce himay be made of pocainorconpasta
pete
1. INTRODUCTION
Hypodonta Is defined as the developmental absence of one or more
teeth elther in the primary or permanent dentition, excluding thi
molars." Patients. with hypodontia especialy developmentally
missing incisors may present in varying degrees of severity prompting
‘them to seek treatment for improvement in dentaVacial aesthetic and
functions. Patents commonly complain of ‘gaps in thelr font teeth,
non-eruption of permanent incisors following exfoliation of deciduous
incisors, aisharmony of front tooth size or an unattractive smile. I is
quite a common problem often intaly seen by the GDP and usualy
referred tothe orthodontist fr management.
Missing incisors can have a major impact on dental and facial aesthetios
‘and often may affect the self-esteem and social well being of the
Inlvidual. Usually this condition can be detected at an early age through
‘early diagnosis by the GOP. Hypodontia is often associated with other
‘ental anomalies and early andor interceptive management can reduce
‘the development of more severe malocclusion and preserve dental
‘structures necessary for restorative procedures.**~"
‘These guidelines aim to provide evidence-based recommendations
to help healthcare providers in the management of patients. with
developmentally missing incisors. As wit all orthodontic care pathways,
patient care should be individually talored, based on sound clinical
Judgement, and clinical competency plays an important role in the
‘decision-making process.
2. AETIOLOGY
2.1. Genetic Factors
Hypodontia usually has a genetic basis and often a high proportion of
affected individuals have a family history of hypodontia or associated
ental anomalies." Mutation in transcription factors MSX1, PAX
‘and AXIN 2 have been identified in familes with an autosomal dominant
‘obgodontia ="
Normally teeth which re ‘end of series’ are more commonly absent ie.
lateral incisors, second premolars and third molars." Hypodontia is
‘also often seeninpatients presenting with syndromes such as ectodermal
‘ysplasia, Down's syndrome and hemifacial microsomia and in non
‘syndromic condtions such as clett lip and palate. However, familial
hypodonia fs complex and multifactorial influenced by a combination of
‘gene function, envronmental interaction and developmental timing. =~"?
22 Enviromental Factors
Environmental factors which cause arrested tooth development may
Include factors that cause faire of tooth bud cal proliferation from the
{ental lamina, This may be due to infection (eg. rubella, osteomyelitis),
‘trauma in the dental region such as fractures, surgical procedures
‘nthe jaw and extraction of the preceding primary tooth, drugs (eg.
‘thaliomice), chemotherapy or racotherapy at @ young age,sm28im=
3, PREVALENCE
“The prevalence of hypodonta in the primary dentition is about 0.5%
‘and range from 3.5-6:5% in the permanent dentition in Caucasians,
with females outnumbering males by a ratio of 8:2.°"="" Maxilary
lateral incisors are more commonly missing than mandibular incisors
in Gaucasians.'*="" However, mandibular incisors were found to be
‘the most commonly absent teth in Chinese and Japanese populations
‘and was more prevalent than missing maxillary lateral incisors =~ *
‘Simla findings have been reported in local Malaysian children where
the prevalence of missing mandibular incisors was the highest among
developmentally missing teeth (82-499%°"""=—"
4. DIAGNOSIS.
4.1, Medical, Dental, Family and Social History
Developmentally missing incisor teeth can be diagnosed early; 3 -
4 years old for missing primary teeth and as early as 6 years old for
missing permanent incsors.""="” A dlagnostc protocol with meticulous
‘and consistent method of evaluation for patients with hypodontia wll
‘assist the eniclan inthe decision-making process." ="
A thorough medica. dental. family and social history should first be
taken to confi the developmental absence of permanent teeth and
to determine the possible aetiology. Family history is important as,
hypodontia usually has a genetic basis with some family members
affected, although familial hypodontia is complex. However, aetiology
|s usually muft-factrial and often influenced by a combination of gene
‘unetion, environmental interaction and developmental timing."
‘Surveys have shown that a very high proportion of children with severe
hypodontia have reported functional and psychosocial impacts as a
resuit of developmentally missing teeth. "9 Excessive spacing and
‘compromised aesthetics becomes a focus for bullying In school and
‘may lead to psychosocial Implications in children, such as depression,
loneliness, anxiety, low sel-esteem and underachievement. Effective
‘counseling vil hap the victims and the family overcome ths and prepare
‘themselves for the complex management of this conaiton "="
42 Examination
4.2.4 Clinical Examination
‘Most studies investigating dentofacial form in patients with hypodontia
hhave found distinct sagittal skeletal, vertical-skeletal and dento-alveolar|
Characteristics, These deviations were more apparent in patents with
both anterior and posterior teeth missing and increased in severity with
Increasing number of missing teeth. Anterior hypodontiahasa significant
‘fect on the Anterior Posteror (more retrusive) and vertical skeletal
(reduced) relationship as well as the interinesal angle increased) with
Increasing seventy of the hypodontia. Therefore, a careful examination
(of the clinical features must be performed to obtain all information
necessary for proper treatment planning,"="=e"
4.2.1.1 Extra-oral examination Facial Analysis to:
‘+ Identity adverse skeletal pattems in sagittal, transverse and vertical
simensions
with increasing severity of hypodontia the sagittal skeletal relationship
tends towards a Clas Il pattem due to a combination of a decrease in
‘maxilay and mandibular prognathism and mandibular length i elation
tothe anterior cranial base." A significant increase in chin thickness.
‘also contrbutes to the above." "= The vertical skeletal patter in
‘severe hypodontia shows decreased Maxila-o-Mandlbular Plane
Angle (MMPA) and reduced 9% Lower Anterior Face Height (LAFH) "==
fh cases whore thee are mssing mandibular incor, the andibular
‘symphysis growth and morphology may be affected due to disturbance
In tongue-lp pressure and lack of ingual support."
‘+ Identity the soft tissue pattern ="
A convex soft tissue profile fs usually an indication for space closure;
‘whereas space opening in the maxillary arch is favoured in patents
with a concave profile. When the patient has a high smile line, colour
‘matching and reshaping of the canine replacing the missing incisor as
‘well a5 labial gingival contours and canine root prominence become
more Important. I an obtuse nasolabial angle Is present, excessive
‘upper incisor retraction during space closure should be avoided,
‘+ Assess and discuss with the patient the dental aesthetics and
‘orthodontic options that may improve the patient's overall aesthetics
‘and sef-esteem
Aesthetic values may not be the same between ciffrent clinicians
‘and patients" The Bolton ratio of 0.78 between upper and lower
‘anterior teeth and the Golden proportion of 0.618 inthe arrangement of
‘the maxillary teeth from the frontal view may be used as a guide when
termining the amount of space needed for replacement of maxllary
lateral incisors although this may not necessarly produce the best smile
aesthetics" A careful aesthetic assessment ofthe incisors intexms.
of incisor splay, gingiva levels and the dental mdine as well as contour
‘and shade of the anterior teeth has to be glven due consideration prior
to planning for ornodontc-restorative treatment"?
4.2.4.2 Intra-oral examination to: "= sso
‘Assess overall orl health status
Evaluate current and potential denttion status
Inentity occlusal/dentaldsharmonies
Determine the functional status of patent's occlusion ie. factors
‘associated with malocclusion, deleterious habits and current signs
‘of Temporo-manaibular Joint Dysfunction (TMD)
‘+ Iaentity potential periodontal problems such as pocketing
‘+ Examine if sufclent space is available for replacement of missing
+ Determinefsuficenttootn structure exists for restoration of microdont
4.2.1.8 ldentty associated dental anomalies."*~"
(other permanent teeth can be microdont, conical or tapered:
Delayed formation and eruption of permanent teeth "="
Manila lateral incisors may be microdont or absent 2"
Maxilzy canines may flow an ectopl path Eruption =~
Maxilary canine-fst premolar transpostion ==
‘Mandibular lateral incsor-carine transposition ="?
‘+ Palataly impacted maxillary canines, "ssh
‘Short roots of teeth - tooth agenesis was found in about 46% of
individuals with short roots of some permanent teeth especially the
‘maxillary central incisors and premolars >=
‘+ Taurodontism has been reported to be higher in patients with
ypodonta =n
‘+ Rotation of the lateral incisor on the contralateral side have been
associated wth agenesis of unsteal lateral incisor=™="
‘+The lack of teeth is often associated with a developmental falure
‘of alveolar bone with apparent ‘wasting’ of the ridge and lack of
posterior suppor as well as smaller arch cimensions."*= 2
RECOMMENDATION
+ Dataledctnicalassessment shouldbe done with focus on skeletal
patterns in the sagittal transverse and skeletal dimensions
‘Aesthetic assessment of maxillary incisors should be done at
rest and in function
+ Use ‘Botton ratio of anterior teeth’ and ‘Golden Proportions’
‘measurement as a quantifiable guide to aesthetic values of
anterior teeth
‘Identity associated dental anomalies and its relation to the
‘resenting malocclusion
Grade B
4.2.2 Radiographic Investigations
‘The Oral Panoramic Tomograph (OPT) is essential for diagnosis of
missing permanent teeth in patients who are 6 years or older. This
| generally unsuitable for much younger chien because of the
length of the exposure and the need for the patient to keep stil2=="
Itis also @ useful too! fr general survey ofthe dentition and associated
ental anomalies." " These radiographs can be supplemented
wth intra-oral radiographs for a closer view of the intended areas.
‘+ Lateral cephalogram radiographs are taken for analysis. of
‘skeletal, dental and soft tissue facil components. A sutablelongterm treatment plan requires. knowledge of the presenting and
developing skeletal pattern and this can be obtained through
‘cephalometric analysis"
+ Other siagnostic investigations such as_magnetic resonance
Imaging (MRI) and CT scan for soft and hard tissue imaging are
rarely used routinely but may be useful only if indicated by the
individual patent's clinical presentation"? Cone Beam CT
(@-D) may be used for assessment of bone level/wicth prior to
placement of implants.
4.2.3 Pretreatment diagnostic records
Photographs and study casts are usually needed for proper patient
‘assessment and for documentation purposes.*! " Photos of
the patient in relaxed and smiling postures can help the clinician
Identity ertical aspects of their teeth. These procedures are helpful
in planaing intrusion or extrusion of teeth for more aesthetic gingival
margins. Diagnostic orthodontic wax-ups of study models are very
Useful to evaluate cifferent treatment options and aid teatment
planning"
RECOMMENDATION
Essential pretreatment diagnostic records should include
+ Panoramic raciogranh
+ Study casts
+ Photographs
Grade B
(Orthodontic wax-up of study casts can bo used as a diagnostic aid
Grade C
‘5, MANAGEMENT
GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
15.1 No Active Treatment
No treatment is necessary if theres no malocclusion associated with @
missing incisor and the patients happy with his/her dentition, Treatment
's not recommended if the patient is unwilling to commit to lengthy and
costly treatment =="
‘52 Interceptive Treatment (mixed dentition)
15.2.4 Role of GDP
‘+ Early detection of missing teeth
‘The GOP's responsibilty n early detection of developmentally missing
incisors, associated dental anomalies and developing malocclusion
's important for ealy planning of interoeptive and comprehensive
‘reatment with the respective specalss em"
In patients witn missing primary incisors, ts recommended tat they
bbe monitored unti the succeeding permanent incisor is confimed
present by 6 years of age through radiographs.
‘+ Counseling of patient and family
‘The GDP can prepare the patient and family by outning the dental,
‘medical, psycho-social, functional, nancial and prolonged treatment
time implications especialy In a severe hypodontia case. Effective
‘counseling can hep the family accept mult-cscipinary treatment
‘and improve patient stisacton. =="
‘+ Liaison between patient and mult-disciplinary team
‘The GDP can provide restorative treatment in straightforward cases,
‘continuing care and maintenance ofthe trement outcome following
interim or comprehensive treatment. Continuance is important for
long term success and patient satisfaction ss
‘5.2.2 Extraction of primary canine to prevent/ntercept associated
Impaction of maxillary canine"
‘Studies have shown strong association of hypodontia with maxillary
Caine impaction. Although there is inadequate evidence to support
routine extraction of primary maxilary canines to facilitate eruption
‘of impacted permanent canines in children, early extraction of the
{deciduous canine has been advocated in many studies =!"
‘5.2. Early extraction of primary incisor or canine to allow eruption
‘of canine into maxillary lateral incisor position: This may be done:
‘+ To maintain the alveolar bone for future implant placement.
‘The canine maintains the wieth and depth of the alveolar bone
{or insertion of futwe dental implants. When the canine is then
‘orthodontically moved distally to create space forthe implants, the
‘width and depth of the alveolar bone in te lateral incisor region is
‘maintained. This may then negate the need for alveolar bone gratt
roe to implant insertion,
+ For natural space closure
If space closure is planned, then allowing the canine to erupt and
<i nto the lateral insor positon wl help to reduce the amount of
‘space tobe closed orthadontcaly inthe future
‘5.2.4 Retention ofthe primary incisor/canine
Hf the primary incisor andlor canine is functional and there Is. no
Interceptive treatment required as explained above, these teeth may be
retained to help preserve the alveolar bone for orthodontic treatment
‘and future placement of implants!"
RECOMMENDATION
Interceptive management
+ Permanent maxilary canines with potential impaction or
transposition should be detected early with ragiographs
+ Deciduous canines may be extracted early to facitate eruption
‘of palatally ectopic maxilary canines
Grade A
+ Maxillary canines should be allowed to erupt into missing lateral
incisor position for natural space closure or preservation of
‘alveolar bone for future prosthesis
‘+The GDP can play an important role in early detection of missing
tecth, counseling of fay and lasing with mult-cisciptinar team
Grade C
53 Comprehensive Treatment
A muticdscipinary approach involving orthodontist, restorative
ental specialist, paediatric dental specialist, periodontist, orl
‘surgeon and GOP is ideal in patents who equi intr-disciplinary
rmanagement.92"s" Without a team approach, orthodontists
tend to manage hypodontia based on their own practice environment
and experience." Judging of smile aesthetics in space-closed
and space-opened cases vary between and within groups of dentists,
‘orthodontists, dental specialists and layman.’""*"* Thus, treatment
{decisions based on perceived fnished outcomes may be misleading as
‘both options can produce excellent results." = %tes)
5.1 Early Adolescence
‘The decision to open oF close space should be made early and
restorative procedures for space opening explained to the patient.
‘Spaces may be restored by autotranspiantation of premolars, movable
{dentures oF interim bridge unti growth completion ofthe patient when
final restorations are done. Space closure may oF may not involve fixed
appliance treatment.
{5.4.1 Autotransplantation:*!= ===
‘This can be recommended i the criteria allows for donor premolars to
bbe donated tothe receiver site especialy n cases with multiple missing
rmaxily incisors. In growing children, the transplanted tooth will not
‘only maintain growth and development of the alveolar ridge, but also
provide a permanent solution to agenesis of teeth "=" Successfully
transplanted premolars appear to continue erupting and aesthetics
's good when restored with porcelain veneer crowns oF ful porcelain
frowns. Autotransplanted premolars may act as tooth support for
bridges in lrge-span spaces. =~"
* titer for auttranslantaton ==>
‘Timing of root development of the donor premolar is important
‘+ Roots of the donor premolar should be less than $i formed
Adncomplete and complete root formation show 9636 and 15 %
pulpal healing respectively)
‘+ The diameter ofthe apical foramen of the graft
‘Skil ofthe surgeon
‘+ Internal cooing of bus and no extra-alveolar storage ofthe donor
tooth prior to transplantation appears to increase the chance for
pulpal healing and limit the risk of root resorption
‘+ Adequate space in the arch:
‘+ No “igaling’ contacts between donor tooth and opposing teeth
ring post-surgery, mame?
RECOMMENDATION
+ Autotransplantation of premolars to missing incisors ste should
‘be done if
~ Donor premotar roots ar less than 94 formed.
~ Mutiple incisors are missing
~The procedure is handled by skilled surgeons
‘+The autotransplanted premolars should be restored with veneers
orfull crowns,
Grade 8
5.3.1.2 Space opening,
‘+ Space opening =~"
Is usualy not recommended before the age of 19 years so as to
prevent relapse and progression of alveolar bone atrophy. implants
fate planned as te final restoration, the ting fr implantation should
1 close tothe end of orthodontic treatment." In the meantime
the alveolar bone may be preserved by retaining the primary tooth
‘+ Restorative options
‘+ Conventional porcelain fused to metal bridge.
“This is usualy not recommended in young patents because of the
large amount of tooth reduction required in teeth with young pus.
‘young patints, anterior spaces due to missing incisors may beciosed
_andreistouted to the posterior regions for mpant placement late
‘+ The posterior space may then be restored with interim bridges or
bonded retainers while wating for osseointgrate implants."
‘+ Orthodontic Retention before implant placement"
Removable retanersin ation to bonded orthodontic retainershave
been recommended after orthodontic opening of space for future
implants. Space loss and relapse ofthe accent teth may resting
‘second phase of orthodontic treatment prior to implant placement.
‘+ Interim prosthesis before implant placement"!
“Theinterim prosthesis may be aremovableo fixed partial denture,
Removable parial dentures which ae tobe worn for afew years
before implant placement may result in elapse of the dentition
(or loss of space." Bonded orthodontic retainers or fixed
resin-bonded o laboratory composite with fibre-einforcement
bridges are recommended for longer interim periods to reduce
root approximation.
‘+ Conventional porelain-fused to metal bridge or tooth implant.
‘This should only be placed ater growth completion. Removable
partial dentures or bridges may be the final long-term restoration
in patients who cannot afford or do not want osseointegrated
ental implants inthe long tem." 75he arma
5.3.1.3 Space closure.
‘Space closure" may involve grinding or modification of the adjacent
teeth, composite build-up or porcelain laminate veneer crown for the
long-term." Orthodontic retention is important for maintenance of
space closure.
RECOMMENDATION
* Orthodontic tooth positioning should be talored to the
requirements of prosthetic replacement by removable partial
dentures, conventional bridges or dental implants
Grade c
+ Removable or thted Inter prosthetic replacements are
recommended for space maintenance and stabilty white waiting
{or nal prostheses,
Grade c
‘+ Bonded orthodontic retainers are recommended for longer
Interim periods before implant placement
Grade c
+ Final prostheses lke conventional bridges and implants should
‘be done when facial growth is complete
Grade A
5.3.2 Late Adolescence/Adult
“The decsionto open or close spacesissimilartothatin early adolescence
‘and the ultimate goal is excelent aesthetics, periodontal health and
function in the lng term.
Rationale for space closure
+ Most evident advange the permanence and biological
Ccompatibity of the finished dertion. The patent has. hisher
ua, tual dentition with no. need for prosthete replacement
+ There is better contour of the interdental gingival papilla around
natal teeth ===
+ There is natural aging of the dentton and gingival margin as the
patient matures and grows.=— 2
+ Functional occlsion with group-protected function. Thee is no
‘evidence of temporomansibular dysfunction (TMD) with space
closure and group function of teeth 6:2
+ With eartuly detaied orthodontic tretment in combination with
modern aesthetic dental materials and tooth restorations using
bonded ceramics, resin composites and tooth whitening, orthodontic
space closure ian atractiv option =="
Rationale for space opening."
+ Complete space closure is nt possible with mutiple missing incisors
+ Adjacent teth not favourable as incisor replacements
+ Patient profile and malocclusion does not favor space closure in
terms of general periodontal neath or aesthetics =="
+ With modern prosthetic toth replacements. such as. porcelain
fuses to. metal bridges, achesive or resn-bonded bridges and
‘ossenitegrated tooth implants, long-tem functional and aesthetic
results can be expected. Any ofthese three options can produce
predictable excelent results but the primary consideration ito select
the least invasive option that satsfes the aesthetics and functional
objectives ofthe patent."
'5.8.2:1 Indications for space closure or opening
‘+ Missing unilateral incisor
‘+ Tendency towards crowding in a patient with a balanced profle
‘and nocmal inclination of anterior teeth
‘Canines and premolars of similar size and color
‘+ Bimaxilary dentoalveolar protusion
+ Glass II malocclusion
missing mancibular incisor
‘+ Glass | malocclusion with marked mandibular crowing or
protrusion and missing mandibular incisor
Missing single mancibuar incisor
Cass Il malocclusion
Posterior crowalng inthe mandibular arch
Discrepancy in Botton anterior rato (mlcrodont maxilay lateral
incisor
Factors favouring space opening: ==="
‘+ Norma intercuspation of posterior teeth in a well-aligned Ciass !
‘malocclusion
‘+ Pronounced spacing of the maxillary dentition and normal
‘mandibular dentition
‘Glass Il malocclusion with retrognathic profile
‘+ Large size diference between canine and fst premolar.
‘+ Large sz clerence between canine and contralateral lateral incisor
missing mandibular incisor
‘+ Missing two or more mandibular incisors
‘+ Glass II malocclusion with well aligned or spaces mandibular
dentition
+ Discrepancy in Bolton anterior ratio (large maxillary incisors or
‘small mandibular incisors)
‘+ Norma! ntercuspation of posterior teeth in a well-aligned Ciass |
‘malocclusion
5.8.2.2 Points to consider in orthodontic space closure
[tention to certain key points during tooth movement can produce
‘excellent finishing and function "=5e.
‘+ Marginal level ofthe relocated canine and fst premolar
Ifthe canine Is replacing the lateral incisor, then extusion of the
‘canine and intrusion ofthe fst premolar will result in a more natural
‘marginal gingival contour with the contralateral teeth
(Crown torque of relocated canine and frst premolar
Monitor centerines anc symmetry during unilateral space closure
Cosmetic contouring of relocated canine
(cclusal contact of extruded canine and lower incisors
Functional occlusion
Cosmetic reshaping with composite resins and veneers
Grown lengthening/gingival contouring
Retention period
{5.8.2.3 Final prosthetic replacements
‘+ Removable partial denture
‘This may be the prosthesis of choice if the patient is unwiling to
Undergo lengthy and costly eatment.
+ Bridge
Different options inclide adhesive or resn-bonded bridge (RBB),
{iber-tenforced composite bridge (FRCB) and porceain-used to
‘metal bridge (PFE),
‘+ BBs have a survival rate of about 87.796 after 5 years." and
FROBs have an overall survival rate of 73.436 at 4.5 years
F Survival time was about 8.9 tines higher when ABB was done
by senior staff compared with junior staft™"~" Most frequent
‘complication was due to debonding ===
‘+ Survival rate of FRCB was 64% after 5 years imespectve of
Surface or hybrid retained. Most falures were due to fracture of
the framework and delamination "===
++ Porcelain-fused-to-gold bridges have favourable long-term
‘survival rate of 68.3% after 20 years. Vital teeth had about three
times higher survival rate than root-canal treated teeth. The main
reason for these falures was caries (30%) "=~
‘+ Osseointegrated dental implants
Currently, single tooth replacement with implants has become one
(of the most popular treatment aiternatives for the replacement of
‘missing teth for enhanced aesthetics and function. The main benefit
's it leaves the acjacent teeth untouched. This is advantageous in
‘younger patients and in sound dentitons. However, it should be
placed only after growth completion ssatnat2
Criteria for placement of implants:
|. Adequate space
‘Adequate space for placement ofthe Implant and restoration shoule
be obtained. Generally, a minimum of fmm space is requied atthe
intercoronal and iter-radiular regions and 1.5 to 2.0 mm space
between the implant head and adjacent teeth, although the space
‘eauirement depends onthe type and size of implant inserted"
1 Root paralleling during orthodontic treatment. ===
‘Adequate width and depth of bone for the implant is crucial for
‘successful placement. the acjacent maxilary teeth aretoo proclined
after orthodontic trestment, the space forthe future implant may
bbe compromised due to non-oot paralieling. Long cone petiapical
radiographs are essential in assessing adequate space in the root
region unless CBCT is avaiable.
Long-term Stablity = =tstintns
“There is no evidence to support the superiority of diferent types
(of implants in their long-term performance." Three-year and
five-year studies of diferent implants have shown success rates
‘of about 96-1036 "=a"?
RECOMMENDATION
COsseointegrated implant placement should be done
‘Only after growth completion
“+ if there ie adequate width and depth between adjacent tooth
Crowns and roots. Generally, a minimum of 6mm space is
required atthe crown and cervical level
Grade A
‘+ Together with root-parallaling assessment with radiographs
Grade ©
15.324 Posttreatment Orthodontic Retention
Retention is advisable for almost all treated malocclusion although
there is no standard practice dretention regime or protocol and there
's variablity among orthodontists == 105001" There Is @
Universal trend towards vacuum-formed retainers and bonded retainers
‘especially mandibular xed lingual retainers. Most orthodontists prescribe
removable retainers to be wor ful-time inital folowed by par-time,
but lifetime wear and there was no specie time for removal of fixed
lingual retainers. "=== Curent orthodontic opinion recommends
singe of, mult-stranded stainless stee! wires for bonded retainers "==
Sl there was no consistent patter in the application of retention
‘methodologies and was dependent mainly on personal preferences
though permanent retention (ietime) has. been recommended for
‘cases folowing orthodontic treatment to close generalized spacing ora
‘midline clastema in an otherwise normal occlusion =m tates
RECOMMENDATION
+ Almost all treated malocolusions need retention to resist the
‘tendency of teeth to retuen to thelr pxe-treatment postions
Grade A
* Bonded tingual retainers are recommended for long-term
retention and stabilty
Grade A
6, IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
“This section provdes advice onthe resource implications and strategies
‘associated with implementing the key recommendations for quality
‘management of patients with developmentally missing incisors
Implementation of this CPG is an essential part of good clinical
‘governance. Its appropriate tothe local community, dental outpatients
‘and specials clinics andis applicable to both pubic and private sectors.
Mechanisms should be in place to review the current healthcare system
By contrast, witen spaces are to be subsequently restored, the patient
incurs restorative costs for dentures, bridgework or implants. Additional
possible costs for crown lengthening, surgical costs for bone grating and
‘endodontic costs in instances where there is loss of tooth vitality due to
repeated tooth preparation may be required. Furthermore, replacement
‘ofthe restorations may be required more than once during the patients
time"
6.1.2 Healthcare professional factors:
‘+ Lack of awareness among dental nurses and dental offcers (ront
Ine staff especialy incsticts without dental specialists
+ These frontsinestatfarethe primary source ofreteralstoorthodontsts
‘and other dental specialists
6.1.3 Health services factors:
+ Lack of dental specialists
+ Lack of established muli-ciscipinary teams in districts
‘+ Accessiblity and nancial implications for patents due to logistics of
‘muit-cisciptinary teams in url areas
{62 To enhance the utllzation of this CPG, the following clinical
‘auditindications. for quality management using the Peer
‘Assessment Rating (PAR) Index is proposedt-""== "=
% of patients with | | Numberot patents with missing
missing incisors | = | incisors and good teatment
treated and with good | | outcomes 2 years after debond
treatment outcomes 2 | | (270% reduction inPAR score) |x
years after debond 100
Total numberof treated patents
with developmentally missing
Its recommended that that treatment outcomes be evaluated 2 years
after debond instead of the usual time at debond in order to assess.
Stability and relapse of the occlusion. There are aifferent retention
regimes and protocols between operators within the country andin other
‘counties. ===" However, It's the expert grOUp's opinion that
‘the period of 2 years was an adequate time frame for any setting ofthe
‘occlusion to occurs
“The end of the 2-year review period is also the usual time when the
patient is discharged from active care ofthe orthodontist. Study casts
taken at this time can be used for this assessment before the patient is
sischarged."*""" (Appencix 3) A mean percentage reduction in PAR
‘score should be greater than 70% to be considered a good standard of
‘orthodontic treatment outcome’
17. REFERENCES
1. Goodman JR, Jones SP, Hobkirk JA, King PA, Hypodontia:t.
ClincalFestures and Management of ido moderatehypodortia,
Dental Update 1994;381-384
2. Arte 8, Pkinen S. *Hypadontia". Orphanet encyclopedia 2004
May: 1-7
3. Wu COL, Wong RWK, Hagg UA review of hypodontia: the
possible stiologies and orthodontic, surgical and restorative
‘treatment options -conventional and futuristic. Hong Kong Dental
§2007:42)113-21
4. Coboure MT: Familial human hypodonta- is it all in the genes?
Br Dent J 2007; 203: 208-8
‘5, Mattheeuws N, Demaut L, Martens G. Has hypodontia increased
in Caucasians during the 20th century. A meta-analysis. Eur J
‘Orthod 2004 Feb;26(1):99-108
6. NunJH, CarterNE, Glgrass TJ, Hobson RS, Jepsen WJ, Meechan
JG, Nohi FS. The Intercisipinary management of hypodontia
‘Background and role of paediatric dentistry. BD 2008 vol 194:No
5, March 8:245-251
7. Daugaard- Jensen J, Noda M, Skovgaard LT, Kjaer. Comparison
‘of pattern of agenesis inthe primary and permanent dentition in
‘population characterised by agenesis inthe primary dentition
Int Paealatr Dent 1997 Sep; 79) 143-8
8. Larmour OJ, Mossey PA, Thind 8S, Forgle AH, Stirups DR.
Hypodontia ~A retrospective review of prevalence and etiology.
Par 1:Quintessence international 2005 $6(4}:263-270
9. Nik Hussein NN. Hypodontia in the permanent dentition: a study
(of ts prevalence in Malaysian chcren, Aust Orthod J.1989 Oct,
1112905,
10. Nik Hussein NN, Maid ZA. Dental anomalies in the permanent
<entition. Dent J Malaysia 1995;16:33-9
11. Loke ST. Hypodiontia in Saban- Whats missing? Dent J Malaysia
1990; 2036-10.
12, Locker D, Jokovie A, PrakashP, Tompson B. Oral health-related
Quality of life of children with oigedontia.. Int J. of Paed. Dent
2010,2008-14
18. Arabjo EA, Olivera DD, Araujo MT. Diagnostic protocol in cases
‘of congenitally missing maxillary lateral incisors. World J Orthod
2006;7(8)376-88
14, Wong ATY, MeMilan AS, McGrath C, Oral health-related quality of
le and severe hypodontia, J Oral Rehabil 2006;33:860-873
15, GilDS, HobkrkJ, Steven, Hemmings K, Goodman J. Counseling
Patients with hypodontia, Dental Update June 2008: pg 2-8
16. Acharya P, Jones SP, Motes D, Gil D, Hunt NP. A cephalometric
‘study to Investigate the skeletal relationships in patients with
Increasing severty of hypodontia. Angle Orthod 2010;80:69708
17. Endo T, O202 A, Yoshino S, Shimooka S. Hypodontia pattems
‘and variations in canifacial morphology in Japanese orthodontic
patients. Angle Orthod, 2006:76:6
18. Oréton M, Cure MS, De Putter C, Ruiter JM, Kuljpers-Jagtman
AM. Dentofacial Characteristics of patients with Rypodontia, Cin
ora Invest 2010;14:487-87
19. Chan OWS , Samman N, MeMilan AS. Craniofacial protle
in Southern ‘Chinese witn'hypodontia. European Journal of
‘Orthodontics 81 (2008); 300-805
20, Endo T, Ozoe R, Yoshino S, Shimooka 8. Congenitally missing
‘mandibular incisors and mandibular symphysis. morphology.
Angle 2007:77°6
21. Armbruster PC, Gardiner OM, Whitley JB, FleraJ. The congenitally
missing maxilary lateral incisor. Par 2: Assessing dentists’
preferences for treatment. World J Orthod 2005:6:376-381
22. Bukhary SMN, Gill DS, Tredwin CJ, Moles OR. The infuence of
varying maxillary lateral incisor dimensions on perceived smile
‘aesthetics. BDJ 2007;208:687-68,
23. Spear FM, Kokich VG, Matthews DP. Interisciplinary management
‘of anterior dental esthetics. JADA 2006;137:160-169
24, Small BW. Esthetic management of congenitally missing lateral
incisors with single-tooth implants: A Case report. Quintessence
Int, 1996 Sep:2719)'585-80,
25. Hobkiik JLA. and Brook AH. The management of patients with
‘severe hypodontia. J of Oral Rehablitation, 1960:7:289-208.
28. Mckeown HF, Robinson DL, Elcock, Al-Sharood M, Brook AH,
“Toth cimensions in hypodonta patients, their unaffected relatives
and a contro! group measured by a new image analysis system.
Eur J Orthod 2002;24/2) 181-141
27. lune B and Sarnas KV. Tooth size an tooth formation in cilren
‘with advanced hypodonta. Angle Orthodont 1974 44:316-321
28. Baccett T. A contoled study of associated dental anomalies.
Angle Orthod 1998; 68:267-74
29, Bin, Becker A, Shalhav M. Position of the maxillary canine in
relation to anomalous or missing lateral incisors; a population
‘study. Eur J Orthod 1986:8:12-16
30, Camille S. Maxitary canine anomalies and tooth agenesis. Eur J
‘Ortnod 2005 Oet;27(5}:450-8. Epub 2005 Aug 10.
31, Peck 8, Peck L, Kataja M. Mandibular lateral incisor-canine
‘transposition, concomitant dental anomalies, and genetic contro
Angle Orthod 1998 Octs68(5)455-68,
32. Prrnen 8, Arte S, Apajaaht S. Palatal displacement of canine is
‘genetic and related to congenital absence of teeth. J Dent Res
1996 Oct:75(10):1742-6
38, Becker A, Gills, Shpack N. The etiology of palatal displacement
‘of maxilary canines. Cin Orthod Res, 1999 May;22):62-6
34, Apajalant S, Are S, Prinen S. Short root anomaly in families
‘and its association with other dental anomalies. Eur J Oral Sc
1990;107:97-101
35, Tollon-Walton V, Nieminen P, Arte, Carvalho-Lobato P, Use
Torrent JM, Manzanares-Cespedes MC. An epidemiological study
‘of dental agenesis in a primary health area in Spain: Estimated
prevalence and associated factors, Med Oral Patol Ora Cir Buc
2010 Julyt:15/4;2569-74,
36. Seow WK, Lal PY. Associaton of taurodontism with hypodonta: a
Ccontoled study. Paed Dent 1989;11:214-219
37, Baccst! TTooth rotation associated with aplasia of nonadjacent
teeth. Angle Orthod 1998; 68: 471-174,
38, _Xlanghhong Bu, Khaled Khalaf, and Ross S. Hobson. Dental arch
‘imensions in oligodontia patents. Am J Orthod Dentofacial
(Orthop 2008;184:768-72
539, Whaltes €. Essentials of dental radiography and radiology. 2nd
Edition 1996. Churcil Livingstone Chapter 15:151-166
40. Whitington BR, Durward CS. Survey of anomalies in primary teeth
‘and ther conelaton with the permanent dentition. NZ Dental J.
1996 Mari 92{407)/4-8
41, Locht 8, Panoramic radlographic examination of 704 Danish
Chilren aged 8-10 years. Community Dent Oral Epidemio, 1980
0ot7):975-80,
42, Meschan JG, Carter NE, Gilgrass TJ, Hobson RS, Jepson NJ, Nohl
FS. dan Nunn JH. Interaisciplinary management of Hypodonta:
(Oral Surgery, BOS 2008:428-427
43, WhiteSO, Pharoah MJ, OralRasiology principles andlnterpretation.
‘5th ed, Philadelphia: Mosby CO; 2004'pq 332.
44, American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. Guidelines on
Management of developing Denttion and Occlusion in Paediatric
Dentistry Reference Manual V 2008: $2/NO6 10/11:213-225
45, Hobson RS, Carter NE, Gillgyass TJ, Jepson NJ, Meechan JG,
[NohiF Nuna JH. The intrscipinary management of hypodonta:
‘the relationship between an interciscplinary team and the general
{ental practitioner Br Dent J 2003 May 10:194(9):479-82
48, Morgan ©, Howe L. The restorative management of hypodontia
ith implants: overview of alternative treatment options. Dental
Update 2009; 30:562-568
47, Kokich Je VO, Kinzer GA. Managing congentally missing lateral
incisors. Part Canine Substitution J Esthet Restor Dent 2005
175-10
48, Davies J, Gray Rd, Mackie IC. Good occlusal practiceinchitren’s
nist. Br Dent J 2001 Dec 22;191(12)655-9
49, Gill DS, Jones 8, Hobkitk J, Bassi S, Hemmings K, Goodman
J. Counseling patients with hypodontia. Dent Update 2008
‘Jun'35(5348-50, 348-50, 352
50. Gahan MJ, Lewis BR, Moore D, Hodge TM. The orthodontcrestorative interface: 1 Patent assessment . Dent Update 2010
Mari37(}:74-6
S51. Parkin N, Benson PE, Shah A, Thind B, Marshman Z, Glenroy G,
Dyer F Extraction of primary (baby) teeth for unerupted palatal
<isplaced permanent canine teth in children, Cochrane Database
‘Syst Rew. 2009 Ax 15;2):CD004621
52, Kinzer GA, Kokich Jr. VO. Managing congenitally missing lateral
incisors. Par Ii: Single-tooth implants. J Esthet Restor Dent
2005:17:202-210,
58, Kokich VO, Kinzer GA, Janakiesvski J. Congentally missing
lateral incisors: Restorative replacement, Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop 2011 Apri;vol 139(4435-445
‘54, Kokich VG. Maxillary lateral incisor implants: Planning withthe aid
‘of orthodontics. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2008; 62: 48-56
155. Fekonja A. Hypodontia in orthodontically teated chicken, Eur J
Orthod, 2005 Oct:27(5}:457-60. Epub 2005 Jul 25,
156, Sabri R. Management of missing manila lateral incisors. JADA.
1999 Jan;130:80-84,
‘57. Carter NE, Gilgrass TJ, Hobson RS, Jepson N, Meechan JG, Nohl
FS, Nunn JH. The inteciscipinary management of hypodonta:
‘orthodontics. Br Dent J 2003 Apr 12;194(7):361-6
‘58, _ Jepson NJ, NOhIFS, Garter NE, Glgrass J, Meechan JG, Hobson
RS, Nunn JH. The interisciplinary management of hypodonta:
restorative dentistry. Br Dent J 2003 Mar 22;194(6):200-304
159, _Nohi F, Cole B, Hobson R, Jepson N, Meechan J, Wright M. The:
management of hypodontia: present and future, Dent Update
2008 Mar.35(2):79-80
60, Lewis BR, Gahan MJ, Hodge TM, Moore . The orthedontc~
restorative interface: 2.Compensating for variations in tooth
‘number and shape. Dent Update 2010 Apr.97(9)198-40
61. Zachrisson BU, RosaM, ToreskogS. Congenitally missing maxillary
lateral incisors: Canine substitution. Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop 2011 Apri vol 199(4494-445
662. Louw JD, Smith BJ, McDonald F& Palmer RM. The management
(of developmentally absent maxilay lateral incisors ~ @ survey of
‘orthodontists in the UK. BD. 2007: 203, £25
68, Kinzer GA, Kokich Jr. VO. Managing congenitally missing lateral
incisors. Part: Tooth-supported restorations. J Esthet Restor
Dent 2005:17:76-84
64, Thilander B. Orthodontic space closure versus implant placement
in subjects with missing teeth. J Oral Rehabil. 2008 Jan:35 Suppl
1984-71
165. Zachrisson BU, Stenuik A, Haanaes H. Management of missing
‘maxillary anterior teth with emphasis on autotransplantation. Am
‘Jof Dentofac Orthop 2004; vol 126:8:284-288,
68. _Kirsterson L.Autotransplantation of human premolars: A clinical
‘and radiographic study of 100 tet, Int J of Oral Surgery 1985 Vol
14:2200-213
67. Paulsen HU, Andreasen JO. Eruption of premolars subsequent
to autotransplantaton. A longitudinal radiographic study. Eur J of
Ortnod 1998;2:45-55
68. Aslan Bi, Ucuncu N-& Dogan A. Long term follow-up of a
patient with mutiple congenitally missing teeth treated with
‘autotransplantation and orthodontics. Angle Orthod 2010: 802)
396-408
169, Andreasen JO, Paulsen HU, Yu, Bayer & Schwartz 0. Alongterm study of 970 autotransplanted premolars. Part I. Tooth
‘survival and pulp healing subsequent to transplantation. Eur J
Ortnod 1980; 12 (1): 14-24
70. Meiers JC, Frelich MA. Chairside prefabricated fiber-reinforced
resin composite fixed partial dentures. Quintessence Int 2001
Feb;92(2)99-10¢
71, Olsen TM, Kokich VG Sr. Postorthedantic root approximation ater
‘opening space for maxilary lateral incisor implants, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Onhop 2010 Feb;137(2)158-9
72. Bishop K, Addy L, Knox J. Modern restorative management of
patients with congenialy missing teeth'3. Conventionalrestoratve
‘options and considerations. Dental update 2007 Jan-Feb;34:3038
73. Van Heumen C0, Van Diken JW, Tanner J, Pikaar Ri, Lassila LY,
‘Creugers NH, Valitu PK, Kreulen OM. Five-year survival of S-unit
‘iberteinforced composite fixed patil dentures in the anterior
‘area, Dent Mater, 2008 Jun 25(6):820-7
74, ality PK. Survival rates of resin-bonded, glass fbe-reinforced
‘composite fixed partial dentures with a mean follow-up of 42
‘months: a plot study. J Porsthet Dent 2004 Mar 91(3):281-6
175. _Pjetursson BE, Tan WO, Tan K, Bragger U, Zwahien M, Lang NPA.
‘systematic review ofthe survival and complication rates of resinbonded bridges after an observation period of atleast 5 years.
Cin Oral Implants Res. 2008 Feb;19(2)191-41
78. Rada R, Cruz Gonzalez Wl, The U-Beam bridge: an advancement
in the fiber-reinforced resin-bonded fixed partial denture,
‘Quintessence Int 2009 Ju-Aug:40(7}:35-40
7, Robersson 8, Mohiin B. The congenitally missing upper lateral
incisor. A retrospective study of ochadontc space closure versus
restorative treatment. Eur J Ortho 2000 Deo;22(6}'697-710
78. Rosa M, Zachrisson BU. Integrating esthetic dentistry and space
closure in patents with missing maxilary lateral incisors. J of
Clinical Orthodontics 2001 Vol XV; No.8:221-284
79, Thoxdason A, Zachvisson BU:, Mor A. Remodeling of canines to
the shape of lateral incs0es by grinding: a long-term clinical and
radiographic evaluation. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 1991;
1002): 128-132.
180. haf, Philips JM, Dawson MIP, Broad RO, Hosey MT. A study of
Patients attending a mltciscipinary hypodontia clinic. Br Dent J
£2008 Dec 20;205(12)649-52
81, Newman GV, Newman RA. Report of four familal cases with
‘congenitally missing mandibular incisors. Am J Orthod Dentofac
(Orthop. 1998 Aug:1142):195-207
182. _Argyropoulos E, Payne G. Techniques for improving orthodontic
resuits inthe treatment of missing maxillary lateral incisors. Acase
repor with Iteratue review. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 1988
Augi94(2):150-65
183. Van Heumen CO, Kreulen CM, Creugers NH. Clinical studies of
{iber- reinforced resin-bonded fixed partial dentures a systematic
review. Eur Oral So 2009 Feb:117(1)1-6
‘84, Gamett Mu, Wassell RW, Jepson NJ, Nohl FS. Survival of resinbonded bridgework provided for post-orthodontic hypodontia
patients with missing maxilary lateral inciors. Br Dent J 2008 Oct
2;201(8)527-84
185. De Backer H, Van Macle G, De Moor N, Van den Berghe L. An up
to 20-year retrospective study of 4-unit fixed dental prostheses
forthe replacement of 2 missing adjacent teeth, Int J Prosthadont
2008 May-Jun: 21(3):259-66
86. Morgan ©, Howe L. The restorative management of hypodontia
with Implants: 2. Planning and treatment with Implants. Dental
Update 2004; 31:22-30
87. Henry PJ, Laney WR, Jemt T, Haris D, Krogh PH, Polizi G,
aro GA, Herrmann |. Osseointegrated implants for single-tooth
replacement: a prospective 5-year multicenter study. It J Oral
Maxilofac Implants 1996 Jul-Aug; 18):450-455
88. _Lundewist S, Haraldson T Oral function in patients wearing fixed
prosthesis on osseointegrated implants in the maxilla. Scand J
Dent Res. 1980 Deci98(6)544-9
89. Kokich VG. Maxilay lateral incisor implants: planning withthe
aid of orthodontics. J Oral Maxillofac Surg, 2004 Sep:62(9 Suppl
248-56
90, Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Kwan S, Worthington HV, Coulthard
P Interventions for replacing missing teeth: bone augmentation
‘techniques for dental implant treatment. Cochrane Databse Syst
Fev, 2008 Jul 16;(3:0003607
91, Richardson @, Russell KA. Congenitally missing maxillary lateral
incisors and orthodontic treatment considerations for the single-
‘tooth implant. J Can Dent Assoc. 2001;67(1;25-8
92, Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Kakiss , Coulthard P, Worthington
HV. Interventions for replacing missing teeth: trestment of
pevimplantis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Apr 16;2):
‘60004970
98, Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Maghaireh H, Couthard P, Worthington
HV Interventions for replacing missing teeth: management of sft
tissues for dental implants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007
‘Jul 188):00006697
94, ‘Gibbard LL, Zarb G. A S-year prospective study of implant-
“supported single-tooth replacements. J Can Dent Assoc. 2002
Feb;68(2)110-6
95, Esposito M, Murray-Curtis L, Grusovin MG, Coulthard P,
‘Worthington HV. Interventions for replacing missing teeth: diferent
‘types of dental implants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 Oct,
1740008815
96, Cooper L, Felton DA, Kugelberg CF, Eliner S, Chats N, Molina
AL, Motiaty JD, Paquette D, Paimewist U. A mulcenter 12-month
‘evaluation of single-tooth implants restored 3 weeks atte T-stage
‘surgery. nt J Oral Maxofac Implants 2001;16:182-192
97. Laney WR, Jemt TH, Henry D, Krogh Pu, Pozi PH, Zar
G, Hermann GA. Osseointegrated implants for single-tooth
replacement progress report rom a multicenter prospective study
after 3 years. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 1994;9(1:49-54
98, Johnston C, Burden D, Mow D. Clinical Guidelines: Orthodontic
Retention. Revised November 2008
99, Littlewood Su, Milt OT, Doubleday B, Bearn OR, Worthington
HV. Onthoditc Retention: A systematic review. J of Orthod 2006
v0 33:205-212
100. Ormiston JR, Huang Gu, Litle RM, Decker JD, Seuk GD.
Retrospective analysis of long-term stable and unstable
‘orthodontic treatment outcomes. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop,
2005 Nov;12845):568-74
101. Lépez-ArealL, Paredes V, Gandia JL. Long-term analysis of upper
incisor crowing. A longitudinal study octhadontcaly treatment
patients. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal 2011 Mar 1;16(2):22453
102, Artun J, Garol JD, Litle RM, Long-term stably of mandibular
incisors folowing successful treatment of Class ll, Division t
‘malocelusions. Angle Orthod 1996;66(3):229-38
103, Andrén A, NaraghiS, Mohiin 80, Kjelberg H.Pattem and ammount
‘of change after othodontic corction of upper font teeth 7 years
postretention. Angle Orthod 2010 Jut80(8):432-7,
104, Naraghi , Andrén A, Kellberg H, Mohlin BO. Relapse tendency
atte orthodontic cortection of upper front teeth retained with a
bonded retainer. Angle Orthod 2006 Ju 76(4'570-6
105, Pratt MO, Kemper GT, Hartsfield JK J, Fardo D, Nash DA.
Evaluation of tetetion protocols among members ofthe American
Association of Orthodontists in the United States. Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Onhop 2011 Oct;140(4:520-6
108. Wong PM, Freer TJ. A comprehensive survey of retention
procedures in Australia and New Zealand. Aust Orthod J 2004
Nov:202)99-106
107. Rerkema AM, Sips ET, Bronkhorst E, Kujpers-Jagtman AM. A
‘survey on orthodontic retention procedures. in The Netherlands.
Eur J Orthod 2008 Aug319):832-7. Epub 2008 Apr 28
108. Singh P, Grammati 8, Kirschen . Orthodontic retention pattems
Inthe Unted Kingdom. J Orthod 2008 Jun:36/2:115-21
109, Edman Tynelius G, Bondemark L, Li-Kariander E. Evaluation
fof orthodontic treatment after 1 year of retention- a randomized
‘controled tial Eur J Onthoc 2010 32:542-547
110, Kennedy DB. Orthodontic management of missing teeth. J Can
Dent Assoc 1999;65:548-50
111, Richmond , Shaw WO, O'Brien KD, Buchanan IB, Jones R,
‘Stephens OD, Roberts CT, Andrews M. The development of the
PAR Index (Peer Assessment Rating): relailty and valty. Eur J
(Orthod 1982 14:125-138
112, Barry G, Kaur. Guidelines for primary care trusts and local health
Boards to assess the treatment outcome of patents treated by
‘specialist orthodontists or dentists using the Peer Assessment
Rating (PAR) Index. Clinical Standards Committee of the British
Orthodontic Society. 2008 July pgt-9
118, Richmond 8. Personal aust in orthodontics. Br J Orthod 1988
20:195-44
Appendix +
‘Space Closure
Mss any rit le ier Peshing of caine
Teamont sey extacien CB!
‘anne et sly wed
‘igned no ue spece
Pog staped uper
igi ier nosor
‘Space open reatbted Cones uppers terns
nde to ropace ance
onto sumnmrnes —
sopndd
ara eee
pec A
nee Sea
————n
Eee | ee
js. eae
2 uae
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
“The members of the GPG development group woul Ike to express thelr
‘gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contribution:
‘+ Panel of local and extemal reviewers
‘+ Ministry of Health Technical Advisory Committe for CPG
+ Allthose whohave contributed arectlyorindirecty tothe development
ofthis CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
“The members in the core working committee had completed disclosure
‘forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical fms or act as consultants to
‘such firms, (Detals ae available upon request rom the CPG Secretariat
In the Ministry of Health)
‘SOURCES OF FUNDING
‘The development ofthis CPG was supported financially in its entirety
by the Ministy of Health Malaysia and was developed without ary
involvement of the pharmaceutical industry or any outside agency.