CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
NE MOHPPAK46 176
MANAGEMENT OF GLAUCOMA
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-86-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.mso.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2017 and will be reviewed in a minimum period of four years (2021) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope
of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this document,
which is the definitive version at all times. This version can be found on
the websites mentioned above.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations,
i
Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1 Classification of Glaucoma based
x
on Angle Configuration
Algorithm 2 Classification of Primary Open Angle Glaucoma/
xi
Ocular Hypertension/Primary Open
Angle Glaucoma Suspect
Algorithm 3 Classification of Primary Angle Closure Suspect/
xii
Primary Angle Closure/Primary Angle Closure
Glaucoma
Algorithm 4 Setting the Target IOP
xiii
Algorithm 5 Adjustment of Target IOP
xiv
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1 Epidemiology
2
1.2 Definition and Classification
2
2.
RISK FACTORS
4
2.1 Risk Factors for Primary Open Angle Glaucoma
4
2.2 Risk Factors for Primary Angle Closure Suspect/Primary 5
Angle Closure/Primary Angle Closure Glaucoma
3
SCREENING
6
4.
DIAGNOSIS
7
4.1 History
7
4.2 Examination
7
4.3 Investigation
10
4.4 Staging of Glaucoma
11
5.
TREATMENT
13
5.1 Principles of Treatment
13
5.2 Medical Treatment
14
5.3 Laser Treatment
19
5.4 Surgical Treatment
23
6.
FOLLOW-UP
25
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
7.
MONITORING OF PROGRESSION
27
7.1 Visual Field Assessment (Functional Test)
27
7.2 Optic Nerve and Retinal Nerve Fibre Layer Evaluation 28
(Structural Test)
8.
REHABILITATION
29
9.
REFERRAL
30
10.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
31
10.1 Ocular Hypertension
31
10.2 Primary Open Angle Glaucoma Suspect
33
10.3 Steroid-Induced Glaucoma
34
10.4 Neovascular Glaucoma
34
10.5 Intraocular Pressure Monitoring in
35
Post-Refractive Surgery Cases
11.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
37
11.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
37
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
37
REFERENCES
39
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
45
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
46
Appendix 3 Van Herick Test
47
Appendix 4 Indentation/Dynamic Gonioscopy
48
Appendix 5 Estimation of Optic Disc Size
49
Appendix 6 Management Acute Angle Closure
51
Appendix 7 Proper Instillation Technique of Eye Drop
52
Appendix 8 Main Features of Topical Anti-Glaucoma
53
Medications
Appendix 9 Laser Iridotomy
61
Appendix 10 Categories of Severity of Visual Impairment
62
Appendix 11 Ocular Hypertension Pathway (OHT and
63
POAG Suspects with High IOP)
Appendix 12 POAG Suspects with Normal IOP Pathway
64
List of Abbreviations
65
Acknowledgement
67
Disclosure Statement
67
Source of Funding
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is in the process of incorporating Grading
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
(GRADE) into its work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence
and its effect size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG
Development Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall
balances of the following aspects are considered in determining the
strength of the recommendations:-
• Overall quality of evidence
• Balance of benefits versus harms
• Values and preferences
• Resource implications
• Equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Recommendation 1
• Risk factors* should be identified in the management of glaucoma.
Recommendation 2
• Population-based screening for glaucoma is not advocated.
• Screening of glaucoma should be considered for patients with risk
factors.
Recommendation 3
• Glaucoma diagnosis should be made based on combination of history
(with presence of risk factors), ocular examination and investigation.
Recommendation 4
• Medical treatment in glaucoma should be individualised based on
patient’s characteristics and drug factors, and adjusted according to
target intraocular pressure (IOP).
• Prostaglandin analogues should be used as first-line treatment in
glaucoma.
• Patient education should be given to patients with glaucoma. This
includes benefits and side effects of treatment, proper instillation
technique of eye drop and compliance to treatment.
Recommendation 5
• Laser iridotomy should be performed in primary angle closure
disease when indicated.
• Peripheral iridoplasty may be considered for initial treatment in acute
angle closure.
Recommendation 6
• Intraoperative Mitomycin C during trabeculectomy should be used in
glaucoma patients at risk of surgical failure.
Recommendation 7
• Glaucoma patients with blindness or low vision should be referred
for vision rehabilitation which includes vocational, occupational and
independent living.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
Recommendation 8
• Ocular hypertension (OHT) patients should have comprehensive
initial eye examination and assessment of risk factors for conversion
to primary open angle glaucoma (POAG).
 Central corneal thickness measurement should be performed.
• Treatment of OHT should be based on the risk of conversion to
POAG.
Recommendation 9
• Comprehensive eye examination and risk assessment should be
performed in primary open angle glaucoma suspect.
 Diurnal intraocular pressure fluctuation should be considered in
the assessment.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
The CPG update was done based on the CPG Management of Primary
Open Angle Glaucoma, issued in 2008. In the update, the scope had
been widened to include both primary open angle and angle closure
glaucoma, and also selected conditions. A literature search was carried
out using the following electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid
and Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Embase,
Pubmed and Guidelines International Network (refer to Appendix 1
for Example of Search Strategy). The search was limited to literature
published in the last ten years, on humans and in English. In addition, the
reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to
further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted
to identify further studies. All searches were conducted from 23 March
2015 to 29 July 2015. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31 January 2017 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on glaucoma such
as Glaucoma: Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Open Angle
Glaucoma and Ocular Hypertension (National Collaborating Centre for
Acute Care, 2009), Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma PPP (American
Academy of Ophthalmology, 2015), Terminology and Guidelines for
Glaucoma 4th Edition (European Glaucoma Society, 2014) and Asia
Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines Third Edition (Asian Pacific Glaucoma
Society, 2016). The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of
Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being
used as references.
A total of 16 clinical questions were developed under different sections.
Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within these
sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 25 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG is based largely
on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials,
with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and
CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the
CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual on
Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice
Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.gov.my/
index.php/pages/view/117).
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
To provide evidence-based recommendations in the management of
glaucoma on the following aspects:
• screening
• diagnosis
• treatment
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
i.
Inclusion Criteria
• Adult patients (>18 years old) with:
 primary open angle glaucoma
 primary angle closure glaucoma
 selected conditions such as ocular hypertension, glaucoma
suspect, steroid-induced glaucoma, neovascular glaucoma
and post-refractive surgery glaucoma
ii. Exclusion Criteria
• Secondary open angle glaucoma including pseudo exfoliation
or pigment dispersion, primary congenital, infantile or childhood
glaucoma
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of glaucoma in primary and secondary/tertiary care including:
i.
Doctors
ii. Optometrists
iii. Allied health professionals
iv. Trainees and medical students
v. Patients and their advocates
vi. Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Jelinar Dato’ Mohamed Noor JMW
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
vii
Associate Professor Dr. Azhany Yaakub
Senior Lecturer & Ophthalmologist
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Farrah Jaafar
Ophthalmologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Associate Professor
Dr. Jemaima Che Hamzah
Head of Department & Consultant
Ophthalmologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Professor
Dr. Liza Sharmini Ahmad Tajudin
Head of Department & Consultant
Ophthalmologist,
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Ms. Loh Lai Yee
Pharmacist
Hospital Melaka
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head, Clinical Practices Guidelines Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section,
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd Aziz Husni
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Mohamad Aziz Salowi
Ophthalmologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Norhalwani Husain
Ophthalmologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II,
Kelantan
Associate Professor
Dr. Norlina Mohd Ramli
Senior Lecturer & Consultant
Ophthalmologist
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ong Poh Yan
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Rosdina Abd Kahar
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Sungai Mati, Tangkak,
Johor
Ms. Siti Khadijah Osman
Optometrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor
Dr. Sushil Kumar Vasudevan
Senior Lecturer & Consultant
Ophthalmologist
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Zainora Mohammed
Senior Lecturer & Optometrist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
viii
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Ahmad Mt Saad
Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Members
Dr. Elias Hussein
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Fang Seng Kheong
Consultant Ophthalmologist &
President, Malaysian Society of Ophthalmology
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr. Mimiwati Zahari
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nor Fariza Ngah
Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist &
National Advisor of Ophthalmology Services
Hospital Shah Alam, Selangor
Professor Dr. Tong Seng Fah
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Abdul Mutalib Othman
Consultant Ophthalmologist & Medical Lecturer
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin, Terengganu
Dr. Augusto Azuara-Blanco
Professor of Ophthalmology, Queen’s University Belfast,
Honorary NHS Consultant Ophthalmologist, BHSCT,
Institute of Clinical Sciences,
Belfast, United Kingdom
Dr. Chieng Lee Ling @ Lee Ong
General Ophthalmologist
Hospital Miri, Sarawak
Associate Professor Dr. Syril Dorairaj
Consultant in Ophthalmology, Glaucoma & Anterior Segment Surgery,
Director, International Council of Ophthalmology Fellowship,
Mayo Clinic, Florida, United States of America
Dr. Ivan Goldberg
Clinical Associate Professor, Discipline of Ophthalmology, University of Sydney,
Head, Glaucoma Unit, Sydney Eye Hospital,
Director, Eye Associates,
Sydney, Australia
Ms. Noor Zahirah Husain
Head of Optometrist Profession of Ministry of Health
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Emerita Dr. Norhani Mohidin
Head of Pusat Pengajian Optometri
Fakulti Sains Kesihatan, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Nurhayati Isa
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Padang Rengas, Kuala Kangsar, Perak
Dr. Vivian Gong Hee Ming
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Eye Clinic, Gleneagles Penang, Pulau Pinang
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
x
ALGORITHM 1. CLASSIFICATION OF GLAUCOMA BASED ON
ANGLE CONFIGURATION
• POAG = primary open angle glaucoma
• OHT = ocular hypertension
• NTG = normal tension glaucoma
• PAC = primary angle closure
• PACG = primary angle closure glaucoma
Open
Primary
OHT
Secondary
Close/Narrow
Primary
PAC suspect
PAC
PACG
Secondary
Angle
Configuration
POAG
suspect
POAG
NTG
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 2. CLASSIFICATION OF PRIMARY OPEN ANGLE
GLAUCOMA/OCULAR HYPERTENSION/
PRIMARY OPEN ANGLE GLAUCOMA SUSPECT
*ONH and/or peripapillary RNFL appearance and VF changes are
suggestive of, but not definitive for glaucoma
Modified: National Collaborating Centre for Acute Care. Glaucoma:
Diagnosis and management of chronic open angle glaucoma
and ocular hypertension. London: RCS; 2009
Any
Damage
Defects
Any
Suspicious*
>21 mmHg
Normal
Normal
OHT
POAG
suspect
POAG
High IOP
Normal IOP
POAG suspect
OHT
POAG
Normal/suspicious*
IOP
ONH/RNF
VF
Assessment
xi
IOP = intraocular pressure
ONH = optic nerve head
RNFL = retinal nerve fiber layer
VF = visual field
OHT = ocular hypertension
POAG = primary open angle glaucoma
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 3. CLASSIFICATION OF PRIMARY ANGLE CLOSURE
SUSPECT/PRIMARY ANGLE CLOSURE/
PRIMARY ANGLE CLOSURE GLAUCOMA
*ONH and/or peripapillary RNFL appearance is suggestive of, but not
definitive for glaucoma
Assessment
Normal
Normal
Normal
IOP
ONH
VF
PACS
ITC
Yes
(appositional)
>21 mmHg
Normal/
suspicious*
Normal
PAC
Yes
(PAS)
>21 mmHg
Damage
Defects
PACG
Yes
(PAS)
xii
ITC = iridotrabecular contact
IOP = intraocular pressure
ONH = optic nerve head
VF = visual field
PAS = peripheral anterior synechiae
PACS = primary angle closure suspect
PAC = primary angle closure
PACG = primary angle closure glaucoma
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 4. SETTING THE TARGET IOP
*Consider central corneal
Source: European Glaucoma Society. Terminology and Guidelines for
Glaucoma (4th Edition). Savona: Publicomm; 2014
xiii
EARLY
SHORT
YES
LOW
LONG
ADVANCED
SLOW
NO
HIGH
FAST
Life
Expectancy
Rate of
Progression
Additional
Risk
Factors
Untreated
IOP*
Higher
target
IOP
Lower
target
IOP
Glaucoma
Damage
The above factors need to be considered as a whole
in deciding the individual target pressure required.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 5. ADJUSTMENT OF TARGET IOP
Modified: European Glaucoma Society. Terminology and Guidelines for
Glaucoma (4th Edition). Savona: Publicomm; 2014
xiv
Determine target IOP
Prescribe treatment accordingly
Target IOP
achieved in 6 - 8
weeks
Follow-up
4 - 6 months
Progression
Consider lower
target IOP
Follow-up
4 - 6 months
Target IOP
achieved in 6 - 8
weeks
Yes
No
Switch/add second
medication
Referral to Glaucoma
specialist
Yes
No
Yes
No
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
1
1. INTRODUCTION
Glaucoma is a chronic eye disease that damages the optic nerve,
and can result in serious vision loss and irreversible blindness. It
is the second leading cause of blindness worldwide.1 Individuals
with glaucoma are often asymptomatic and present at a late stage.
Blindness from glaucoma is preventable if treatment is instituted early.
The number of persons estimated to be blind as a result of primary
glaucoma is 4.5 million, accounting for slightly more than 12% of all
global blindness.2 In Malaysia, the 2014 National Eye Survey II showed
an estimated prevalence of blindness in those aged 50 and above was
at 1.2% [presenting visual acuity (VA) <3/60 in the better eye] of which
6.6% was caused by glaucoma.3
As with any other chronic diseases, the management of glaucoma
may be a burden on the economy. The direct and indirect economic
impact of glaucoma on the population has been studied. The direct
cost estimates for approximately two million citizens of United States of
America and 300,000 citizens of Australia with glaucoma are USD2.99
billion4 and AUD144.2 million5 respectively. However, the true cost is
probably higher as about half of the patients with glaucoma are unaware
they have the disease.6 - 9
Resource use and direct cost of glaucoma management increase
with worsening disease. The average direct cost of treatment ranges
from USD623 per patient/year for glaucoma suspects or patients with
early stage disease to USD2511 per patient/year for patients with endstage disease. Medication costs composed the largest proportion of
total direct cost for all stages of disease (24 - 61%).10 A similar trend
is seen in Europe where resource utilisation and direct medical costs
of glaucoma management increase with worsening disease severity.
The direct cost of treatment is increased by an estimated €86 for each
incremental step ranging from €455 per patient/year for stage 0 to €969
per patient/year for stage IV disease. Medication costs range from 42%
to 56% of total direct cost for all stages of disease.11
In East Asia, primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG) is an important
cause of blindness. The cost of managing acute PACG in Singapore,
which affects 12.2 per 100,000/year in those aged 30 and older is
estimated annually to be USD261,742.12
The first edition of the Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) published in
2008 was confined to POAG. Many new developments have emerged
which led to variation in clinical practice. Based on this, the CPG has
been updated and the scope widened to include PACG and special
conditions. It aims to guide healthcare providers on evidence-based
management of glaucoma in the Malaysian healthcare setting.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
2
1.1 Epidemiology
Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness. The global
prevalence of POAG is 3.05% (95% CI 1.69 to 5.27) and PACG 0.50%
(95% CI 0.11 to 1.36).13, level III Overall prevalence of glaucoma in Asia
is 3.54%. POAG is the predominant glaucoma subtype, followed by
PACG and secondary glaucoma with prevalence of 2.34% (95% CI
0.96 to 4.55), 0.73% (95% CI 0.18 to 1.96%) and 0.47% (95% CI 0.09
to 1.48) respectively.14, level III
Across ethnicity, people of African origin have the highest prevalence of
glaucoma (6.11%, 95% CI 3.83 to 9.13) and POAG (5.4%, 95% CI 3.17
to 8.27). While Asians have the highest prevalence of PACG (1.2%,
95% CI 0.46 to 2.55).13, level III
1.2 Definition and Classification
• Glaucoma is a chronic disease with progressive optic neuropathy
characterised by morphological changes of the optic nerve head
(ONH) and retinal nerve fibre layer (RFNL) with corresponding visual
field (VF) defect.15
• In primary glaucoma, there are no identifiable causes.
• Based on the angle configuration, glaucoma is further divided into
open angle and closed angle/angle closure.
 In both types, there are risk factors i.e. ocular hypertension
(OHT), primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) suspect, primary
angle closure suspect (PACS) and primary angle closure (PAC).
Refer to Algorithm 1.
• Primary open angle disease can be classified as:
 OHT - presence of high IOP without glaucomatous optic
neuropathy (GON) and VF changes.
 POAG suspect - presence of normal IOP with suspicious ONH
and/or VF changes.
 POAG - presence of GON with corresponding VF defect.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
3
Refer to Algorithm 2 on Classification of Primary Open Angle
Glaucoma/Ocular Hypertension/Primary Open Angle Glaucoma
Suspect.
• Primary angle closure disease can be classified as:
 primary angle closure suspect (PACS) - presence of appositional
contact between peripheral iris and posterior trabecular
meshwork (TM)
 primary angle closure (PAC) - presence of occludable
drainage angle with evidence of peripheral anterior synechiae
(PAS), elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), iris whorling,
glaukomflecken, lens opacities or excessive pigment deposition
on TM without glaucomatous optic nerve damage
 primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG) - PAC with evidence of
glaucomatous optic nerve damage
Refer to Algorithm 3 on Classification of Primary Angle Closure
Suspect/Primary Angle Closure/Primary Angle Closure Glaucoma.
Modified: Foster PJ, Buhrmann R, Quigley HA, et al. The definition and classification
of glaucoma in prevalence surveys. Br J Ophthalmol. 2002;86(2):238-42
PAC and PACG can present with or without acute angle closure (AAC).
In Malaysian population, more than half do not present with
AAC.16 - 17, level III
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
4
2. RISK FACTORS
The identification of risk factors for POAG and PACS/PAC/PACG is
important in their individual disease management.
2.1 Risk Factors for Primary Open Angle Glaucoma
2.1.1 Non-Ocular Factors
a. Advancing/older age
• Advancing age is a risk of POAG.18 - 20, level II-2
• The overall prevalence of open angle glaucoma (OAG) by
age was 0.3 (95% CI 0.1 to 0.5) in people aged 40 years and
increased steeply to 3.3% (95% CI 2.5 to 4.0) in people aged 70
years.21, level I
b. Ethnicity/race
• Individuals of West African, Afro-Caribbean or Hispanic/Latino
ethnicity have a higher prevalence of POAG.22
c. Positive family history among first-degree relatives (parents or
siblings)
• Multiple genetic factors are likely to play a role.15
• Positive family history of glaucoma is associated with 3-fold
increased risk of POAG.21, level I; 23, level III
• Individuals with family history of glaucoma among siblings are
four times more likely to develop glaucoma compared to two times
for those whose parents have glaucoma. However, individuals
whose children had a history of glaucoma are not at risk.22
d. Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome
• Obstructive Sleep Apnoea (OSA) syndrome is associated with
significantly increased risk of glaucoma.24, level lll; 25, level II-2; 26, level lll; 27, level II-2
e. Diabetes mellitus
• Diabetes mellitus (DM) is associated with an increased risk of
glaucoma (RR=1.37, 95% CI 1.20 to 1.57).28, level II-2
2.1.2 Ocular factors
a. Intraocular pressure
• Elevated IOP significantly increases risk of POAG.19 - 20, level II-2;
23, level III
• The diurnal variation of IOP is greater in glaucoma patients
compared with normal individuals.22
• Asymmetry of IOP by ≥3 mmHg between the two eyes is
suspicious of glaucoma.22
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
5
b. Central Corneal Thickness
• Thinner central corneal thickness (CCT) is associated significantly
with risk of glaucoma.19 - 20, level II-2
c. Myopia
• Myopia is significantly more prevalent in patients with POAG.23, level III
• Myopic refractive error > -6 D may be a risk factor associated
with glaucomatous optic neuropathy.29, level III
d. Corneal hysteresis
• Corneal hysteresis is a risk factor for progression of glaucoma.
30, level II-2; 31, level III
2.1.3 Other Possible Risk Factors
• Higher systolic and diastolic blood pressure23, level III
• Higher systolic perfusion pressure23, level III
• Larger vertical CDR19 - 20, level II-2
• Larger vertical CDR asymmetry19, level II-2
• Higher pattern standard deviation (PSD) on Humphrey VF test
19 - 20, level II-2
• Male gender18, level II-2
2.2 Risk Factors for Primary Angle Closure Suspect/Primary
Angle Closure/Primary Angle Closure Glaucoma
2.2.1 Non-Ocular Factors
a. Advancing/older age
• Increasing age is a risk factor for angle closure disease.32 - 34, level III
b. Positive family history
• OR=1.65, 95% CI 1.16 to 2.3433, level III
2.2.2 Ocular Factors
a. Elevated intraocular pressure
• Increased IOP is a risk factor for PACG.32 - 33, level III
b. Biometric measurement
These include:
• Decreasing axial length34, level III
• Decreasing anterior chamber depth34, level III
• Increased choroidal thickness35, level III
2.2.3 Other possible risk factors
• DM (OR=3.18, 95% CI 1.34 to 7.58)32, level III
• Female (OR=2.07, 95% CI 1.09 to 3.9)32, level III
• Nuclear cataract (OR=1.23, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.48)34, level III
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
6
Recommendation 1
• Risk factors* should be identified in the management of glaucoma.
*Refer to the preceding text.
3. SCREENING
Screening of glaucoma aims to identify individuals at risk or early stage
of the disease to prevent or reduce blindness.
There is no strong evidence to advocate population-based screening
for glaucoma.22; 36, level I; 37, level III
However, screening should be considered for higher risk groups
at the age of 40 years and be carried out by trained healthcare
providers.21, level I; 22; 37, level III
There is no single test or a group of tests that is accurate for
glaucoma screening.38, level II-2 However, combination of optic disc (OD)
assessment, RNFL assessment, tonometry and VF may be used.
Recommendation 2
• Population-based screening for glaucoma is not advocated.
• Screening of glaucoma should be considered for patients with risk
factors especially:
 age >40 years
 family history of glaucoma
 diabetes mellitus
Refer to Chapter on Risk factors for further details.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
7
4. DIAGNOSIS
• Most glaucoma patients are asymptomatic. Their VA can remain
normal even at advanced stages of the disease. As such, they are
usually diagnosed during routine visit to eye care professionals for
other eye problems.
The diagnosis of glaucoma is based on history (including presence
of risk factors) and eye examination (ONH, RNFL, VF, IOP and
gonioscopy). Certain investigations may help in the diagnosis of
glaucoma. Confirmation of the diagnosis may require more than one
visit.22
4.1 History22
4.1.1 Symptoms
• Asymptomatic
• Reduced vision (acute and/or advanced glaucoma)
• Ocular pain, redness, haloes)
• Headache, nausea, vomiting
• VF defect
4.1.2 Ocular history
• History of ocular surgery, ocular trauma and use of topical
steroids
• Refractive status; myopia (POAG), hyperopia >3 Diopter (angle
closure)
• Refractive surgery
4.1.3 Systemic history
• Systemic history of DM, hypertension, migraine, Raynauld’s
phenomenon and use of systemic steroids
• OSA syndrome
4.1.4 Family history of glaucoma
4.1.5 Other risk factors (refer to Chapter 2)
4.2 Examination22
4.2.1 Visual acuity
• Usually normal but may be reduced in acute or advanced
glaucoma
mainly in acute angle closure
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
8
4.2.2 Pupil
• Mid-dilated pupils (in AAC)
• Posterior synechiae
• Relative afferent pupillary defect in asymmetrical cases
4.2.3 Anterior chamber and lens
• Depth of anterior chamber (shallow in patient with PAC)
• PAS
• Iris whorling and/or atrophy
• Anterior subcapsular opacities (glaukomflecken)
• Cataract
4.2.4 Intraocular pressure measurement
• IOP should be measured preferably with Goldmann applanation
tonometry (GAT) which is the gold standard.
• In non-ambulatory patients and those who have corneal disease,
alternative tonometry such as tonopen, rebound tonometer etc.
can be used.
• CCT needs to be measured with a pachymeter.
• Time of measurement should be recorded as IOP varies at
different times of the day; peaks are often before noon.
• Acute angle closure (AAC) is diagnosed when IOP >21 mmHg with
occludable angle in the presence of:
1. any two of the following symptoms
 ocular and periocular pain
 nausea and/or vomiting
 history of blurring of vision and haloes
AND
2. any three of the following signs
 conjunctival injection
 corneal epithelial oedema
 mid-dilated unreactive pupil
 shallow anterior chamber
4.2.5 Assessment of the angle
• Slit Lamp Examination of angles (Van Herick test, a slit lamp
estimation of the angle depth - refer to Appendix 3)
• Gonioscopy
 Evaluation of the angle is needed to determine the type of
glaucoma.
 The angle is considered open when gonioscopic findings
(without indentation) show grades III or IV based on Shaffer’s
classification and it is considered narrow at grade II or less.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
9
Refer to Table 1 on Gonioscopic chart and grading system.
 Gonioscopy should always be performed in a dark room with
a narrow slit beam, making sure that the beam does not enter
the pupil which can cause the pupil to constrict.39, level III
 Indentation/dynamic gonioscopy is essential to:
- differentiate appositional from synechial angle closure in
patients with suspected angle closure
- detect plateau iris configuration
Refer to Appendix 4 on Indentation/Dynamic Gonioscopy.
Table 1. Gonioscopic chart and grading system for gonioscopic
findings (without indentation)
*TM=trabecular meshwork
Source: Asia-Pacific Glaucoma Society. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines (Third
Edition). Amsterdam: Kugler Publication; 2016
4.2.6 Assessment of the optic disc and retinal nerve fibre layer
• Assessment should be done through a dilated pupil unless
contraindicated. It can be done with:
 slit lamp biomicroscopy using high power condensing lens
(recommended method)
 stereoscopic OD photography
 red free illumination (either on slit lamp or photography)
 direct ophthalmoscopy (limited to OD assessment)
• The OD should be examined for (refer to Appendix 4):
 OD size
 increase in the vertical CDR*
 Inferior Superior Nasal Temporal (ISNT) rule (whereby the
thickest neuro-retinal rim (NRR) is inferior and thinnest is
temporal)
 NRR notching or acquired pit of the OD*
 asymmetry CDR between OD >0.2*
 OD haemorrhage
 nasalisation and bayonetting of retinal vessels
 peripapillary beta zone atrophy
• RNFL should be examined for thinning or loss (slit/wedge
defects)**. Refer to Appendix 5.
*features that are indicated for referral by primary care providers to
ophthalmology service
**feature seen in fundus photo for referral by primary care providers
to ophthalmology service
Grade
Shaffer
Modified Schaffer
0
Closed
Schwalbe’s line
is not visible
I
10º
Schwalbe’s
line is visible
II
20 º
Anterior
*TM is
visible
III
30 º
Scleral
spur is
visible
IV
40 º
Ciliary
band is
visible
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
10
4.3 Investigation
4.3.1 Automated visual field analysis*
• Standard Automated Perimetry (SAP)
 Automated static threshold perimetry is currently the gold
standard for VF assessment.
 Commonly used threshold algorithms are Swedish Interactive
Threshold Algorithm (SITA) Standard and SITA Fast in the
Humphrey perimeter. Other available algorithms such as
“Dynamic Strategy” in the Octopus perimeter may be used.
 For those with very advanced disease, it may be necessary to
consider:
- Goldmann size V stimulus rather than size III
- a perimetric strategy which focuses more closely on the
remaining area of VF (Octopus M1 or M2 or the Humphrey 10-2)
• Non-conventional perimetry
 There is insufficient evidence that Short Wave Automated
Perimetry and Frequency Doubling Threshold Perimetry has
any advantage over SAP.15
*In VF assessment, the tests must be reliable and reproducible.
VF defects suggestive of POAG are:
• classical defects - paracentral scotoma, nasal step and arcuate
scotoma; temporal wedge is an uncommon feature
• early defects on SAP
 Glaucoma hemifield test (GHT) graded as outside normal limits
 a minimum of three clustered points (non-edge points) with
significantly depressed sensitivity, of which one should have a
significance of p<1% on the pattern deviation plot
 p-value of PSD <5%
4.3.2 Optic nerve head and retinal imaging
• In centres with Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) machines,
global RNFL is the best parameter to detect early glaucomatous
structural damage.40, level III
• Confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (CSLO) may be used
to detect structural change and the rate of rim area loss.41, level I
4.3.3 Central Corneal Thickness
• Mean CCT measurement is 540 ± 30 µm (mean ± standard
deviation in µm).15
• CCT affects IOP measurement. Thus, measurement of CCT is
important as it aids in patient’s management.22 However there is
no validated conversion table.
• Thin CCT will result in falsely low IOP readings and vice versa.22
4.3.4 Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography
• Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography (AS-OCT)
is a rapid non-contact method of imaging the angle structures
anterior to the ciliary body.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
11
• AS-OCT tends to detect more angle closure compared with
gonioscopy (gold standard).42, level III
4.4 Staging of Glaucoma
The staging of glaucoma is based on SAP as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Staging of Glaucoma
Source: Mills RP, Budenz DL, Lee PP et al. Categorizing the stage of glaucoma from
pre-diagnosis to end-stage disease. Am J Ophthalmol. 2006; 141(1):24-30
Stage: Humphrey MD score
Stage 0: No or Minimal Defect
Stage 1: Early Defect
< -6.00 dB
Stage 2: Moderate Defect
≥ -6.00 to -12.00 dB
Stage 3: Advanced Defect
≥ -12.01 to -20.00 dB
Stage 4: Severe Defect
≥ -20.00 dB
Stage 5: End-Stage Disease
Additional Criteria
(at least one of the listed criteria must apply)
• Does not meet any criteria for Stage 1
• A cluster of ≥3 points on the pattern
deviation plot in an expected location of the
VF depressed below the 5% level, at least
one of which is depressed below the 1%
level
• Corrected PSD/PSD significant at p<0.05
• GHT outside normal limits
• ≥25% but <50% of points on the pattern
deviation plot depressed below the 5%
level, and ≥15% but <25% of points
depressed below the 1% level
• At least one point within the central 5° with
sensitivity of <15 dB but no points in the
central 5° with sensitivity of <0 dB
• Only one hemifield containing a point with
sensitivity <15 dB within 5° of fixation
• ≥50% but <75% of points on pattern
deviation plot depressed below the 5% level
and ≥25% but <50% of points depressed
below the 1% level
• Any point within the central 5° with
sensitivity <0 dB
• Both hemifields containing a point(s) with
sensitivity <15 dB within 5° of fixation
• ≥75% of points on pattern deviation plot
depressed below the 5% level and ≥50%
but <50% of points depressed below the
1% level
• At least 50% of points within the central 5°
with sensitivity <0 dB
• Both hemifields containing >50% of points
with sensitivity <15 dB within 5° of fixation
• Unable to perform HVF in worst eye due
to central scotoma or worst eye VA 6/60 or
worse due to POAG.
• Fellow eye may be at any stage.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
12
Recommendation 3
• Glaucoma diagnosis should be made based on a combination of
history (with presence of risk factors), ocular examination and
investigation.
 Essential ocular examination includes intraocular pressure
measurement, optic disc assessment and gonioscopy.
 Essential investigations include reliable visual field test.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
13
5. TREATMENT
The aim of glaucoma treatment is to preserve maximal functional vision
throughout a patient’s lifetime without sacrificing his/her quality of life
(QoL) and at a sustainable cost. QoL is affected by visual function,
treatment regime and its adverse effects, financial burden of the
treatment and the psychological effect of having a potentially blinding
disease.
5.1 Principles of Treatment
Currently, lowering of IOP is the only proven efficient approach in
preventing progression of glaucoma.22 The risk of progression is
decreased by 10% with each mmHg of IOP reduction from baseline to
the first follow-up visit (HR=0.90 per mmHg decrease, 95% CI 0.86 to
0.94).43, level I IOP lowering can be achieved by either medication, laser
treatment, surgery or any combination of these modalities.
Target IOP is an estimate of mean IOP at which further glaucomatous
damage is likely to be prevented. It should be tailored to individual
patients and may be adjusted during the course of the disease. It is set
based on the following factors:22
• pre-treatment IOP
• stage of optic nerve damage and VF defects
• rate of glaucoma progression
• age, life expectancy and visual requirements of the patient
• presence of glaucoma risk factors
Refer to Algorithm 5 on Setting the Target IOP.
In ocular hypertension (OHT), a treatment target IOP of ≤24 mmHg and
IOP reduction of ≥20% from baseline is recommended.44, level I
In established glaucoma:
• a 25% IOP reduction from baseline is protective against
progression in early (mild) glaucoma43, level I
• non-progression is seen in mild to moderate glaucoma with a
mean IOP of 16.5 mmHg45, level I
• an IOP of >14 mmHg is associated with greater worsening of VF
defect in advanced stage46, level II-2
• a 30% IOP reduction from baseline is protective against
progression in NTG47, level I
• non-progression is seen in mild to moderate PACG with IOP <12
mmHg in a local Malaysian population48, level II-2
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
14
Based on the above findings and existing guidelines,15; 49 the following
target IOP is suggested by the CPG DG (refer to Table 3).
Table 3. Suggested target IOP according to stage of glaucoma
• Target IOP in glaucoma
 should be individualised.
 can be adjusted throughout the management of the condition*
*Refer to Algorithm 5 on Setting the Target IOP.
In AAC, the aims of treatment are to lower the IOP urgently and relieve
the acute symptoms. These are achieved by multiple modalities. Refer
to Appendix 6.
5.2 Medical Treatment
Medical treatment is usually the initial treatment of choice in glaucoma.
It includes the use of topical and systemic anti-glaucoma medications
that increase aqueous outflow, reduce aqueous production or both.
• Criteria for prescribing anti-glaucoma medications are:22
 patient’s characteristics (stage of glaucoma, age, risk factors,
co-morbidities, compliance, psychological and socio-economic
status)
 drug factors (efficacy, safety, dosing regimen, preservative/nonpreservative, cost and availability of the drug)
There are six main pharmacologic classes of anti-glaucoma medications
which can be used as monotherapy or in combination therapy. They
are:
• prostaglandin analogues
• beta-blockers
• adrenergic agonists
• carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs)
• cholinergic agents
• osmotic agents
Stage of glaucoma
OHT (if decision is made
to treat)
Early (mild) disease
Moderate disease
Advanced disease
Target IOP
≤24 mmHg with reduction of at least 20% from
baseline IOP
≤20 mmHg with reduction of at least 25% from
baseline lOP
≤17 mmHg with reduction of at least 30% from
baseline lOP
≤I4 mmHg with reduction of at least 30% from
baseline lOP
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
15
5.2.1
Prostaglandin analogues
Prostaglandin analogues are the first choice/first-line medications
in glaucoma treatment. They have the highest IOP lowering effect
and minimal systemic side effects among all topical anti-glaucoma
medications. Their once daily dosing enhances compliance.22
In a good meta-analysis of high quality RCTs, bimatoprost was
significantly more efficacious in lowering IOP compared with latanoprost
and travoprost at different time points in a day for POAG and OHT at
1 - 6 months follow-up.50, level I The results on efficacy were supported by
three meta-analysis conducted after that.51 - 53, level I
A meta-analysis of 15 RCTs on normal tension glaucoma showed that
prostaglandin analogues (latanoprost and bimatoprost) were the most
significantly efficacious IOP-lowering medications compared with other
medications on short-term follow-up (0.5 - 3 months).54, level I
In chronic angle closure glaucoma (or PACG), prostaglandin analogues
(latanoprost, travoprost and bimatoprost) are significantly efficacious
in lowering IOP from baseline at 1 - 3 months and the IOP reduction is
greater than timolol.55, level I
In terms of side effects, the incidence of hyperaemia is significantly more
in bimatoprost compared with latanoprost and travoprost.50, level I; 56, level I
5.2.2
Beta-blockers
Beta-blockers are commonly used as anti-glaucoma medications.
Currently, they are used as either first- or second-line medications in
patients with no contraindications. There are two types of beta-blocker
available which are selective and non-selective agents.
Beta-blockers are efficacious as monotherapy51, level I; 54, level I; 55 - 57, level I
and adjunctive therapy58, level I in all types of glaucoma.
Topical beta-blockers can be the first-line medications when considering
medical treatment of glaucoma in pregnancy. There is no significant
difference in the risk of low birth weight infants between mothers
prescribed with beta-blockers and those in the comparison cohort
(OR=1.48, 95% CI 0.86 to 2.56).59, level III
• Beta-blockers are contraindicated in individuals with:
 respiratory problems such as asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
 cardiac problems such heart block, cardiac failure and
bradycardia
• Important systemic side effects of beta-blockers are bronchospasm,
bradycardia, cardiac failure and syncope.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
16
5.2.3 Adrenergic agonists
Brimonidine is efficacious as an adjunctive therapy58, level I but in
selected cases, it may be used as a monotherapy. Its common side
effect is ocular allergy.
• Adrenergic agonists are contraindicated in individuals on monoamine
oxidase inhibitor therapy.
• Side effects of adrenergic agonists include burning sensation and
hyperaemia.
5.2.4 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
CAIs are available in topical and systemic forms. They are efficacious
as an adjunctive therapy.58, level I In selected cases, they may be used as
monotherapy. Long-term use of systemic CAIs is not advisable due to
their possible serious side effects.
• CAIs are contraindicated in individuals with:
 sulphonamide allergy
 renal calculi or failure
 respiratory/metabolic acidosis and hypokalaemia
• Important systemic side effects of CAIs are:
 Stevens-Johnson syndrome
 angioedema
 metabolic acidosis
 electrolyte imbalance
 blood dyscrasias
5.2.5 Cholinergic agents
Topical pilocarpine is mainly used as short-term, pre-laser treatment of
patients with narrow angle. Its long-term use is not favoured due to its
side effects (such as blurred vision, peri-orbital pain and stinging) and
frequent dosing i.e. four times a day.22
5.2.6 Osmotic agents
Osmotic agents are only available as systemic therapy. They are
usually used in acute situations when rapid IOP reduction is desired.
Commercially available agents are oral glycerol and intravenous
mannitol.22
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
17
• Osmotic agents are contraindicated in individuals with:
 cardiac disease
 renal disease
• Important systemic side effects of osmotic agents are:
 dehydration
 cardiac failure
 hyponatraemia
 acute renal failure
• Osmotic agents may cause hyperglycaemia in diabetic patients.
5.2.7 Fixed combination medications
Several fixed combination medications have been developed to
maximise patient’s compliance and QoL. Most fixed combination
medications contain timolol as one of its components.
The six commonly used fixed combination medications significantly
reduce IOP from baseline and the combination of prostaglandin
analogue and timolol have the highest IOP reduction between 33.9%
and 34.9%.60, level I
Fixed combination medications are equally safe and efficacious at
lowering IOP compared with their non-fixed components. Three main
ocular side effects are hyperaemia, ocular irritation and keratitis which
are more frequent in non-fixed combination.61, level I
Fixed combination provides significantly improved long-term adherence
compared with non-fixed combination in glaucoma treatment.62, level I
Combination treatment, either as fixed or non-fixed, is not recommended
as first-line treatment.15
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
18
General Principles in Medical Treatment in Glaucoma22
• Determine an individualised target IOP and readjust treatment if
necessary throughout the course of disease.
• Diagnostic parameters to be considered in deciding on antiglaucoma medications are:
 IOP levels and/or fluctuations
 extent of OD damage
 severity of VF defects
 CCT
Baseline parameters should be collected prior to initiating treatment
and verified before modifying treatment.
• Choose monotherapy that:
 provides greatest IOP lowering effects to achieve target IOP
 has the best safety profiles e.g. least side effects, good
tolerability, etc.
 enhances compliance e.g. simple dosing regimen, minimal
disruption to QoL, etc.
 is available and affordable
• Treatment
 Treatment is considered effective when the individual target IOP
is achieved.
 If the target IOP is not achieved:
-
switch within prostaglandin analogue or to a different class of
medication
-
use adjunctive treatment either non-fixed or fixed combination
 Generally, if more than two medications are required for IOP
control; other forms of treatment should be considered.
• Patient education is important and it includes:
 nature of the disease
 benefits and side effects of treatment
 proper instillation technique of eye drop*
 importance of compliance (adherence, persistence and followup)
*Refer to Appendix 7 on Proper Instillation Technique of Eye Drop.
Refer to Appendix 8 on Main Features of Topical Anti-Glaucoma
Medications.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
19
Recommendation 4
• In glaucoma treatment, healthcare providers should aim to maintain
maximal functional vision throughout a patient’s lifetime without
sacrificing his/her quality of life and at a sustainable cost.
• Medical treatment in glaucoma should be individualised based on
patient’s characteristics and drug factors, and adjusted according to
target intraocular pressure (IOP).
• Prostaglandin analogues should be used as first-line treatment in
glaucoma.
• If the target IOP is not achieved in glaucoma, consider switching
anti-glaucoma medications or adding adjunctive treatment either
non-fixed or fixed combination.
• Patient education should be given to patients with glaucoma. This
includes benefits and side effects of treatment, proper instillation
technique of eye drop and compliance to treatment.
5.2.8 Neuroprotection in glaucoma
There is insufficient evidence to support that neuroprotective
medications are effective in preventing retinal ganglion cell death, and
thus preserving vision in people with OAG.63, level I
5.3
Laser Treatment
Laser treatment has become important in the management of glaucoma.
It is indicated when medical therapy fails, as an adjunct or as a primary
treatment where appropriate. There are several types of laser treatment
used to treat glaucoma as shown below.
Types of Laser Treatment in Different Types of Glaucoma
• Open Angle Glaucoma
 Laser trabeculoplasty for outflow enhancement
 Trans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation (TSCP) for inflow reduction
(usually for end-stage disease)
• Angle Closure (± Glaucoma)
 Laser iridotomy for pupillary block relief
 Laser peripheral iridoplasty for modification of iris contour
 TSCP for inflow reduction (usually for end-stage disease)
• Post-Filtering Surgery
 Laser suture lysis for outflow enhancement
Source: Asia-Pacific Glaucoma Society. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines (Third
Edition). Amsterdam: Kugler Publications; 2016
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
20
5.3.1 Laser trabeculoplasty
Laser parameters used for Selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT) and
Argon laser trabeculoplasty (ALT) are shown in Table 4.
Laser trabeculoplasty is initially efficacious in 80 - 85% of treated eyes
with a mean IOP reduction of 20 to 25% (6 - 9 mmHg).64, level III It is also
efficacious and safe in OHT.65, level I
In a meta-analysis of six RCTs, there was no significant difference of IOP
reduction between SLT and ALT up to two years in patients who were
naive to laser (first laser trabeculoplasty). There was also no significant
difference in adverse events between the two modes of treatment.66, level I
These were supported by another meta-analysis in 2015, although one
of the RCTs included patients treated with ALT. The meta-analysis also
showed no difference in efficacy between SLT and medications. The
overall safety profile of SLT was good, with most side effects being
transient and amenable to medical therapy.67, level I
In patients treated previously with ALT or SLT, retreatment with SLT is
efficacious and safe in further lowering IOP.68, level II-2; 69, level I; 70, level II-1
SLT 360˚ is a more effective treatment compared with 90˚ or 180˚.71, level I
Higher baseline IOP is the main predictor for the success of laser
therapy in both SLT72, level I and ALT.46, level II-2; 73, level II-2; 74, level III
Indications for laser trabeculoplasty in open angle glaucoma are:64, level III
• failure or intolerance of medical therapy
• adjunct to medical therapy
• primary treatment if appropriate
Complications of laser trabeculoplasty are:64, level III
• temporary blurred vision
• IOP spike with possible VF loss
• transient iritis
• PAS if placement of burns is too posterior or post-laser
inflammation control is not effective (in ALT)
• endothelial burns if treatment is too anterior (in ALT)
• chronic increase in IOP
• corneo-refractive changes
• suprachoroidal effusion
5.3.2 Laser iridotomy
Laser iridotomy, a relatively non-invasive procedure is efficacious
in relieving pupillary block. Complications of laser iridotomy are IOP
spikes, temporary blurring of vision and corneal burn. These could be
minimised by using proper technique.64, level III
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
21
Indications for laser iridotomy in angle closure disease are:64, level III
• PAC
• PACG
• PACS:
 absolute indication - PAC in the fellow eye
 relative indication - need for repeated dilated examination e.g.
diabetic patients
- poor access to regular ophthalmic care
- confirmed family history of PACG
Refer to Appendix 9 on Laser Iridotomy.
5.3.3 Argon laser peripheral iridoplasty
Argon laser peripheral iridoplasty (ALPI) is a non-invasive procedure.
It contracts the peripheral iris which results in widening of the anterior
chamber angle and re-opens the appositionally closed segments.
However, ALPI is associated with higher failure rates and lower IOP
reduction compared with prostaglandin analogues in eyes with persistent
appositional angle closure and raised IOP after laser iridotomy.75, level I
Indications for ALPI in angle closure disease are as follows:64, level III
• initial treatment in acute angle closure attack
• adjunctive measure when systemic medications fail to control
IOP
• persistent occludable angle following laser iridotomy
• facilitate access to TM for laser trabeculoplasty
• an adjunct to goniosynechialysis
ALPI is contraindicated in area with PAS.
5.3.4 Cyclophotocoagulation
Cyclophotocoagulation (CPC) is a cyclodestructive procedure that
reduces aqueous production by the ciliary epithelium. The procedure
may be performed transcleral or endoscopically.
CPC is indicated in the following:64, level III
• painful blind eyes or eyes with poor vision
• failed multiple filtering surgeries
It is also may be performed in sighted eyes when the benefits outweigh
the risks for incisional surgery.76, level III
Complications include:64, level III
• pain
• persistent inflammation
• loss of visual acuity
• hypotony and phthisis
• scleral thinning or rupture
• pupillary distortion
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
22
• macular oedema
• retinal detachment
• aqueous misdirection syndrome
• sympathetic ophthalmia
Table 4 shows the summary of parameters and lenses for laser
treatment.
Table 4. Parameters and lenses for laser treatment
*Refer to Appendix 9.
Source: Asia-Pacific Glaucoma Society. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines (Third
Edition). Amsterdam: Kugler Publications; 2016
Recommendation 5
• Laser trabeculoplasty should be considered in primary open angle
glaucoma when indicated*.
• Laser iridotomy should be performed in primary angle closure
disease when indicated**.
• Peripheral iridoplasty may be considered for initial treatment in acute
angle closure.
• Cyclophotocoagulation should be considered in refractory glaucoma.
*Refer to the preceding text.
**Refer to the preceding text.
Parameters
Laser procedures
SLT
ALT
Peripheral
iridoplasty
Transscleral CPC
Laser
iridotomy*
Number
of spots
30 - 50
(over 180o)
50
(over 180o)
10 - 40
(over 360o)
Spot size
400 m
50 m
500 m
-
Exposure time
3 nsec
0.1 sec
0.5 sec
0.5 - 2 sec
Fluence
(mJ/mm2)
6
40,000
-
-
Power
0.4 - 1.4 mJ
Type of lenses
Not
needed
Latina SLT lens,
Goldmann gonioscopy lens,
Ritch trabeculoplasty lens,
CGA© LASAG/Meridien CH,
Magna View Gonio lens
Abraham (+66 D),
Wise (+103 D),
CGI©LASAG CH
lens,
central non-mirrored
part of the
Goldmann lens
300 - 600 mW
150 - 240 mW
20 - 40
(over 180 -
360o)
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
23
5.4 Surgical Treatment
Surgery is indicated in glaucoma when the target IOP cannot be
reached despite maximal medical therapy or when there is intolerance
or non-compliance to medical therapy.22
Available surgical options include trabeculectomy, implantation of
glaucoma drainage devices (GDD) and non-penetrating glaucoma
surgery.
5.4.1 Trabeculectomy
Trabeculectomy is the primary surgery of choice in POAG.22 However,
the development of fibrosis may lead to failure of the surgical procedure.
Thus, antimetabolites such as Mitomycin C (MMC) and 5-Fluorouracil
are used to improve the success rate.22 Intraoperative MMC reduces
the risk of surgical failure in primary trabeculectomy (RR=0.29, 95% CI
0.16 to 0.53).77, level I However, the use of antimetabolites may increase
complications such as bleb leaks, hypotony, late-onset blebitis and
endophthalmitis.22
5.4.2 Lens extraction
Clear lens extraction has beneficial effect in PAC and PACG with
IOP >30 mmHg in terms of QoL (p=0.005) and IOP control (p=0.04)
compared with standard laser PI. There is no significant serious adverse
events reported.78, level I This procedure should only be performed by an
experienced surgeon.
In medically-controlled PACG with co-existing cataract, there are no
significant differences in mean IOP between phacoemulsification alone
and combined phacotrabeculectomy with adjunctive MMC at 6 - 24
months. However, phacoemulsification alone is associated with less
post-operative complications (p<0.001).79, level I
5.4.3 Combined trabeculectomy and lens extraction
In medically-uncontrolled PACG with coexisting cataract, combined
phacotrabeculectomy with adjunctive MMC results in significantly lower
mean IOP than phacoemulsification alone at three, 15 and 18 months
of follow-up. However, combined surgery is associated with higher
post-operative complications (p<0.001) and possible progression of
optic neuropathy (p=0.03).80, level I
In glaucoma patients who require cataract and filtering surgery,
performing cataract surgery after trabeculectomy significantly increases
the rates of bleb failure. However, the risk of failure is reduced if lens
extraction is performed >6 months post-trabeculectomy.64, level III
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
24
5.4.4 Glaucoma drainage devices
The use GDD such as Baerveldt, Ahmed and Molteno are usually
reserved for patients with high risk of failure from augmented
trabeculectomy. This includes eyes with previous failed filtering surgery,
severe conjunctival or ocular surface diseases, active neovascular
diseases, paediatric glaucomas or excessive conjunctival scarring.22
Ahmed and Baerveldt implants are as efficacious as trabeculectomy
in IOP reduction.81 - 82, level I Although Molteno implant provides better
and sustained IOP reduction,83, level II-2 there is no clinical trial to support
this. Baerveldt implant has a higher qualified success rate than
trabeculectomy at 5-year follow-up.82, level I
Based on two multi-centre RCTs, Baerveldt implant had greater IOP
reduction compared with Ahmed implant at 3 - 5 years of follow-up.
However, serious complications occurred less frequently in Ahmed
implant.84 - 85, level I Ahmed and Baerveldt implants have similar rate
of complications compared with trabeculectomy.81 - 82, level I However,
a lower rate of persistent hypotony has been reported with Baerveldt
implant compared to trabeculectomy.82, level I
5.4.5 Others (non-penetrating glaucoma surgery and minimally
invasive glaucoma surgery)
Deep sclerostomy and viscocanalostomy are types of non-penetrating
glaucoma surgery.22 There is limited evidence on viscocanalostomy
or deep sclerostomy resulting in better IOP control compared with
trabeculectomy.86, level I Thus it is not suitable for patients who need low
target IOP. Its advantages over trabeculectomy include lower risk of
post-operative hypotony and bleb infection.22
Minimally invasive glaucoma surgery is a group of procedures which
include ab-interno and ab-externo techniques which aims for less tissue
manipulation and side effects compared with standard filtering surgery.
However, there is no good evidence to show its efficacy.15
Recommendation 6
• Intraoperative Mitomycin C during trabeculectomy should be used in
glaucoma patients at risk of surgical failure.
• Early lens extraction may be considered as first-line treatment in
primary angle closure and primary angle closure glaucoma.
• Glaucoma drainage devices may be offered in the treatment of
refractory glaucoma.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
25
6. FOLLOW-UP
Glaucoma patients need to be followed-up to monitor the effects of
treatment, and to detect disease progression and any changes in
patient’s risk profile and systemic health that may affect glaucoma
management plan.22
Currently there is no retrievable evidence on this matter. The CPG
DG uses existing guidelines15; 64, level III; 87; 88 and their expert opinion to
address issues on follow-up schedule of glaucoma patients.
During each review, the following should be elicited:22
• History
 Ocular history
 Medical and drug history
 Local and systemic problems with ocular medications
 General assessment of the impact of visual function on daily
living
 Frequency and time of last IOP lowering medications
 Verification of compliance
• Ocular examination
 VA in both eyes
 IOP measurement in both eyes
 Slip lamp for external eye examination
 ONH evaluation
 Gonioscopy, VF, ONH and RFNL (imaging/photography) are
done according to the follow-up schedule or when indicated
The following are the recommended follow-up schedule for patients with
glaucoma based on the target IOP and disease progression (refer to
Table 5). However, it should be individualised according to the severity
of disease and risk factors.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
26
Table 5. Follow-up schedule for glaucoma and related conditions
*Disease progression supersedes target IOP in determining interval of
follow-up.
The following are the recommended investigations schedule for
glaucoma patients and related conditions (refer to Table 6).
Table 6. Investigations schedule for glaucoma and related
conditions
Diagnosis
Follow-up schedule
OHT
POAG suspect
POAG and PACG
Refer to Subchapter 10.1
Refer to Subchapter 10.2
Target IOP achieved:
No : 1 - 2 months
Yes : 6 - 12 months
Disease progression (structural and functional):
Yes : 3 - 6 months
No : 6 - 12 months
Diagnosis
OHT
POAG Suspect
Open angle
glaucoma
Angle closure
glaucoma
Refer to Subchapter 10.1
Refer to Subchapter 10.2
Stable: Yearly
Progression:
4 - 8 months
Stable: Yearly
Progression:
4 - 8 months
Baseline
and when
indicated
Baseline,
post-laser
iridotomy
and 3-yearly
or when
indicated
Every 1 - 2
years
Every 1 - 2
years
Baseline
or when
indicated
Baseline
or when
indicated
VF
Gonioscopy
OD image
CCT
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
27
7. MONITORING OF PROGRESSION
Patients with glaucoma require life-long treatment and monitoring.
Adjustment of treatment and target IOP depends on the evaluation of
glaucoma progression (refer to Algorithm 5 on Adjustment of Target
IOP). It is important to assess both optic nerve structure and function
in detecting progression. The use of functional test may fail to detect
progression in eyes with early glaucomatous damage. On the other
hand, structural test may fail to detect progression in moderate to
severe glaucomatous damage.89, level III
7.1 Visual Field Assessment (Functional Test)
VF assessment using the white-on-white SAP is still considered to be
the best method to monitor glaucomatous progression in patients with
evident VF damage. It has direct relevance to patient’s QoL. Although
there is no standard method, there are several approaches used to
analyse VF progression:90, level III
• clinical judgement (based on the simple observation of a
sequential series of VF tests)
• defect classification systems (usually used in research setting)
• trend analysis (regression analyses to measure rates of change)
• event analysis (comparison of a follow-up examination to the
baseline VF)
Estimating the rate of progression is invaluable to guide therapeutic
decisions and estimate the likelihood of visual impairment during the
patient’s lifetime.
• Changes in VF are determined by the:89, level III; 91, level III
 same SAP strategy and test pattern
 threshold tests using full threshold and SITA standard testing
strategies
 sufficient number (minimum two) of reliable tests to establish a
good baseline
 sufficient number of examinations to detect change
• Six VF examinations should be performed in the first two years to
detect rapid progression (-2 dB/year or worse) and establish a good
set of baseline data.15
• VF progression should be correlated with clinical findings.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
28
7.2 Optic Nerve and Retinal Nerve Fibre Layer Evaluation (Structural
Test)
Imaging of the optic nerve and RNFL allows objective, standardised and
reproducible ways to assess and continuously monitor glaucomatous
damage. Three types of computer-based optic nerve imaging devices
are available for glaucoma:92
• CSLO
• OCT
To determine the progression of glaucoma, progression analysis
programmes are being incorporated into the above devices using the
patients’ baseline images as references. Currently these programmes
are still unable to predict future functional loss. Good quality images are
important to facilitate progression analysis as poor quality image can
lead to false positive or negative results.89
Frequency of imaging should be similar to VF testing. Six imaging tests
should be performed in the first two years to detect progression in high
risk patients. A repeat imaging should be performed within three months
after the baseline. Patients should be followed-up with the same test/
method to monitor progression.15
• Imaging alone does not replace VF testing in monitoring progression.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
29
8. REHABILITATION
Glaucoma could result in permanent visual impairment and blindness.
Consultation with an optometrist trained in vision rehabilitation is
advisable to enhance patient’s residual vision and QoL.88; 93, level III The
rehabilitation significantly improves vision-related QoL in patients with
glaucoma.94, level II-2
Vision rehabilitation includes the use of optical and non-optical devices,
and referral to other services (vocational, occupational and independent
living) and psychosocial counselling.93, level III Multidisciplinary approach
improves scores of overall visual ability of visually-impaired patients
including those with glaucoma at 30 days follow-up (p<0.001).95, level II-2
• All patients with low vision and blindness should be registered with
Social Welfare Department to be eligible for financial and social
benefits.96, level III
Recommendation 7
• Glaucoma patients with blindness or low vision should be referred
for vision rehabilitation which includes vocational, occupational and
independent living.
Refer to Appendix 10 on Categories of severity of visual impairment.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
30
9. REFERRAL
The aim of referral is to ensure that the patients receive specialised
and optimised care under glaucoma-trained healthcare providers. This
chapter is written based on expert opinion of the CPG DG and evidence
in other chapters in the guidelines.
• Indications for referral are as follows:
 acute angle closure (immediate referral)
 confirmation of diagnosis
 progression of disease
 issues related to medical treatment:
- side effects
- requirement of ≥2 medications
- poor compliance or adherence
 uncontrolled IOP despite maximum medical treatment requiring
laser or surgical intervention
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
31
10. SPECIAL CONDITIONS
10.1 Ocular Hypertension
Clinical features of OHT are:
• untreated IOP >21 mmHg
• open anterior chamber angle
• normal OD and RNFL
• normal VF
• no clinical evidence of secondary causes of elevated IOP
Important diagnostic testing includes:
• measurement of IOP
• gonioscopy
• measurement of CCT
 It is an essential part of ocular examination in the workup of
OHT patients.
 It aids in interpretation of IOP readings and stratification of
patient risk for developing POAG.
 In OHT patients, the average CCT is 570 μm. Eyes with CCT
<555 μm are at greater risk of developing POAG compared to
eyes with CCT of ≥588 μm.97, level II-2
 GAT may overestimate the actual IOP in eyes with thicker CCT
and underestimate in eyes with thinner CCT.98 - 99, level III IOP
measurement should not be corrected as there is no generally
accepted correction formula for it.
• OD and RNFL assessment and/or imaging
 OD and RNFL should be assessed and secondary causes
of any abnormalities should be excluded. Stereoscopic disc
photographs are advocated as baseline documentation.
Computerised digital imaging of the OD and RNFL can be
used to provide quantitative information and to facilitate in
monitoring of patients.41, level I
• VF test for initial evaluation and as baseline for future monitoring
of progression
Management of OHT consists of:
• monitoring for changes suggestive of glaucomatous damage in
the OD, RNFL and VF
• evaluating and identifying patients at risk of POAG conversion in
order to initiate treatment
The likelihood of patients with OHT developing POAG increases with
the number and severity of risk factors. Some of the predictive factors
for conversion to POAG in both Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study
(OHTS) and European Glaucoma Prevention Study (EGPS) trials
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
32
are:19, level II-2; 97, level II-2
• older age
• higher IOP
• thinner CCT
• larger CDR
• higher Humphrey VF PSD
A risk calculator using the above predictive factors as parameters
can determine the overall risk of developing POAG in five years.18, level II-2
It is available for free online from http://ohts.wustl.edu/risk. Based on
OHTS data, low glaucoma 5-year risk was defined arbitrarily as <6%,
moderate as 6 - 13% and high >13%.100, level I
In OHTS, medical treatment of OHT was effective in delaying or
preventing the onset of POAG. Lowering of IOP by 20% reduced risk
for progression by 50% over five years duration. However, 90 - 95% of
the patients did not progress to POAG and thus not all require treatment.
100 - 101, level I Based from the OHTS data, treatment of patients with IOP
≥24 mmHg and ≥2% annual risk of development of POAG is likely to be
cost-effective.102, level I
The decision to treat OHT will need to be individualised based on:
• clinical findings
• risk assessment
• life expectancy
• patient’s preferences
• treatment cost, risks and benefits
Monitoring schedule of OHT should be based on the risk of conversion
to POAG.87 In OHTS, a reduction of 20% from the mean baseline IOP
was used as the target IOP.101, level I In EGPS, dorzolamide alone was
not effective in preventing the onset of POAG at five years followup compared to placebo.103, level I It has been suggested to begin by
choosing a target pressure of 20% lower than the mean baseline
IOP.92 The first choice of treatment is usually topical medication. Laser
trabeculoplasty may be considered if there is drug intolerability, poor
compliance or cost issues.
Refer Appendix 11 on OHT Pathway (OHT and POAG suspects with
high IOP).
OHT patients need to be monitored long-term for the development of
POAG regardless whether they are being treated or not. When there
is evidence of changes suggestive of glaucomatous damage that is
consistent with POAG (e.g. ONH appearance, RNFL or VF), then
patients should be managed as POAG cases.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
33
There is no evidence from studies on how OHT patients should be
monitored and put on follow-up schedules. In OHTS, the first feature
suggestive of POAG was either change in OD and/or VF.104, level I
Thus, both structural and functional assessments are essential when
monitoring OHT patients. Computer-based imaging of the ONH
and RNFL is a useful adjunct to clinical examination as it provides
quantitative information and may aid in documenting progression.
41, level I Therefore, clinical examination and imaging of the ONH and
RNFL, with assessment of the VF is commonly needed to facilitate the
evaluation of progressive glaucomatous damage.
Recommendation 8
• Ocular hypertension (OHT) patients should have comprehensive
initial eye examination and assessment of risk factors for conversion
to primary open angle glaucoma (POAG).
 Central corneal thickness measurement should be performed.
• Treatment of OHT should be based on the risk of conversion to
POAG*.
*Risk calculator can be used.
10.2 Primary Open Angle Glaucoma Suspect
POAG suspect is defined as an individual with clinical findings and/
or risk factors that increase the likelihood of developing POAG.105 The
clinical findings include any of the following features:87
• any IOP level
• suspicious glaucomatous appearance of OD (refer to Subchapter
4.2.6)
• normal or suspicious glaucomatous VF defects (refer to
Subchapter 4.3.1)
Management of POAG suspect consists of:
• monitoring for changes suggestive of glaucomatous damage in
the OD, RNFL and VF
• evaluating and identifying patients at risk of POAG conversion in
order to initiate treatment
An individual with normal IOP, and changes in optic nerve and VF
consistent with glaucomatous damage, should be diagnosed as having
Normal Tension Glaucoma (NTG). It should be treated and monitored
similar to POAG.87
Conversion of glaucoma suspect to NTG is poorly understood. NonIOP dependent factors, especially vascular dysregulation, are thought
to play a relatively larger role.106, level III
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
34
Risk factors of NTG are:
a. ocular
• disc haemorrhages (HR=2.72, 95% CI 1.39 to 5.32)107, level II-2
• wide diurnal IOP fluctuation108, level III; 109, level II-2
• presence of beta zone within peripapillary atrophy110, level III
b. systemic
• OSA Syndrome26, level III
• Raynaud’s phenomenon88
• migraine88; 107, level II-2
• low blood pressure93, level III
• nocturnal hypotension93, level III
• low ocular perfusion pressure111, level II-2
• low intracranial and cereberospinal fluid (CSF) pressure112, level III
Monitoring of POAG suspect may be done at intervals of:87
• 1 to 2 years if there is low risk of conversion*
• 6 months to 1 year if there is high risk of conversion*
*Risk of conversion is clinically assessed based on age, IOP, CCT, and
changes in ONH and VF.
If there is no change in the parameters after 3 - 5 years, the patient can
be transferred from active glaucoma care to general ophthalmologist or
community optometrist.87
Refer to Appendix 12 on POAG Suspects with Normal IOP Pathway.
Recommendation 9
• Comprehensive eye examination and risk assessment should
be performed in primary open angle glaucoma suspect. Diurnal
intraocular pressure fluctuation should be considered in the
assessment.
10.3 Steroid-Induced Glaucoma
Steroid use may give rise to secondary OHT which may infrequently
lead to steroid-induced glaucoma. It can occur as a result of topical,
systemic or intravitreal administration of steroids. However in clinical
practice, most can be controlled by topical glaucoma medications
but a small proportion requires surgery.113, level I; 114, level II-2 In a small
study of 34 patients, glaucoma medications were discontinued in all
patients by 18 months after cessation of steroid therapy.114, level II-2
10.4 Neovascular Glaucoma
Neovascular glaucoma (NVG) is a severe form of secondary glaucoma
in which the eye develops progressive neovascularisation of the iris
and angle. It is induced by ocular microvascular disease with retinal
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
35
ischaemia. Initially fibrovascular membrane covers the angle,
causing secondary open angle glaucoma. This can progress to angle
closure glaucoma. The common conditions associated with NVG are
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, central retinal vein occlusion and
other conditions such as ocular ischaemic syndrome and tumours.
Management of NVG involves optimising treatment of the underlying
disease and control of high IOP. The treatment for NVG includes:15
• medical treatment
 topical and systemic IOP lowering medication (refer to
Subchapter on Medical Treatment)
 topical steroid
 topical atropine
• laser/surgery
 retinal ablation with laser or cryotherapy
 filtering surgery with antimetabolites
 GDD
 cyclodestructive procedure
 intravitreal or intracameral anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
(anti-VEGF)
NVG is a difficult condition to manage and medical treatment usually
fails to control the IOP. Surgical treatment provides better IOP control.
Trabeculectomy with MMC efficaciously reduces the elevated IOP in
NVG. The extent of PAS and a history of vitrectomy are significant
negative predictors of IOP reduction.115, level II-1 Both Ahmed valve implant
and Molteno single plate implant significantly reduce IOP in patients
with NVG up to six months.116, level III There is no signiﬁcant difference
in the IOP lowering between TSCP and Ahmed implant in refractory
NVG treatment. However, TSCP is less time consuming and easier to
perform.117, level I Rates of TSCP complications are higher in NVG and
with treatment protocols using more than 80 Joule per session.64, level III
Anti-VEGF may have a role in the treatment of NVG.
• There is no significant difference in regression of neovascularisation
of iris and reduction of IOP between 1.25 mg and 2.5 mg
intracameral bevacizumab followed by trabeculectomy at six
months follow-up.118, level I
• Intravitreal bevacizumab with PRP followed by Ahmed valve
implantation is significantly efficacious in controlling IOP at 18
months119, level I and causing complete regression of rubeosis iridis
in NVG at 24 months.120, level I
• However, intravitreal ranibizumab (0.5 mg) injection before
surgery has no significant effect on IOP, BCVA, anti-glaucoma
medications or post-operative complications in NVG treated with
Ahmed glaucoma valve implantation up to 12 months.121, level II-1
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
36
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend a preferred method of
treatment for NVG. The treatment options need to be individualised.
• The key to prevent NVG is to optimise management of the underlying
diseases.
10.5 Intraocular Pressure Monitoring in Post-Refractive Surgery
Cases
Corneal laser refractive surgery is a popular method for correction of
refractive errors. However, refractive surgery is relatively contraindicated
in patients with glaucoma because of its potential problems. These
include acute transient IOP elevation and damage to existing filtering
blebs during corneal flap construction, steroid-induced IOP elevation
and pressure-induced intra-lamellar stromal keratitis, and inaccuracy of
post-operative IOP measurement which may influence the management
of glaucoma.
Most IOP measuring devices are reliant on corneal biomechanics
and thickness. Different corneal thickness and tissue properties have
varying effects of IOP measurement by different IOP measuring
devices. In post-refractive surgery, there is an underestimation of IOP
by most of the devices because of thinner CCT. GAT is significantly
influenced by CCT compared with Pascal dynamic contour tonometry
and tonopen.98 - 99, level III; 122 - 123, level II-3
Proper and accurate establishment, and documentation of baseline
parameters (e.g. VF, IOP, CCT and OD image) prior to refractive
surgery is essential in providing optimal monitoring for development
and progression of glaucoma in future.
• In post-refractive surgery, there is an underestimation of IOP by
most devices.
• Documentation of baseline parameters prior to refractive surgery is
essential.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
37
11. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of glaucoma should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
11.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hard-copies) to
healthcare providers
• regular update on glaucoma management at conferences and
scientific meeting locally
• public awareness during World Glaucoma Week
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited knowledge and evolving understanding of glaucoma
• insufficient resources for integrated care at different level of
service delivery
• variation in treatment practice and preferences
• no national glaucoma registry for further planning of services
• lack of awareness, poor access to eye care services and different
cultural/religious beliefs among the patients
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
• ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
via printed and electronic copies
• reinforce regular training with adequate funding of healthcare
providers
• ensure trained multidisciplinary team is available at different
levels of healthcare
• ensure widespread distribution of updated patient education
materials
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
38
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MOH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage of newlydiagnosed
glaucoma
patients treated with
prostaglandin analogue
as first-line treatment
Number of newly-diagnosed
glaucoma patients treated with
prostaglandin analogue as
first-line treatment
in a period
=
x 100%
Number of newly-diagnosed
glaucoma patients
on medical treatment
in the same period
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
39
REFERENCES
1.
Prevention of Blindness and Visual Impairment (available at http://www.who.int/blindness/
causes/priority/en/index1.html).
2.
Quigley HA, Broman AT. The number of people with glaucoma worldwide in 2010 and 2020. Br
J Ophthalmol. 2006;90(3):262-267.
3.
Mustari Z, MA S, Hussein E, et al. The National Eye Survey 2014. Kuala Lumpur: Ophthalmology
Service, Ministry of Health Malaysia;2015.
4.
Rein DB, Zhang P, Wirth KE, et al. The economic burden of major adult visual disorders in the
United States. Arch Ophthalmol. 2006;124(12):1754-1760. Erratum in: Arch Ophthalmol. 2007
Sep;1125(1759):1304.
5.
Taylor HR, Pezzullo ML, Keeffe JE. The economic impact and cost of visual impairment in
Australia. Br J Ophthalmol. 2006;90(3):272-275.
6.
Varma R, Ying-Lai M, Francis BA, et al. Prevalence of open-angle glaucoma and ocular
hypertension in Latinos: the Los Angeles Latino Eye Study. Ophthalmology. 2004;111(8):14391448.
7.
de Voogd S, Ikram MK, Wolfs RC, et al. Incidence of open-angle glaucoma in a general elderly
population: the Rotterdam Study. Ophthalmology. 2005;112(9):1487-1493.
8.
Quigley HA, West SK, Rodriguez J, et al. The prevalence of glaucoma in a population-based
study of Hispanic subjects: Proyecto VER. Arch Ophthalmol. 2001;119(12):1819-1826.
9.
Mitchell P, Smith W, Attebo K, et al. Prevalence of open-angle glaucoma in Australia. The Blue
Mountains Eye Study. Ophthalmology. 1996;103(10):1661-1669.
10.
Lee PP, Walt JG, Doyle JJ, et al. A multicenter, retrospective pilot study of resource use and
costs associated with severity of disease in glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2006;124(1):12-19.
11.
Traverso CE, Walt JG, Kelly SP, et al. Direct costs of glaucoma and severity of the disease: a
multinational long term study of resource utilisation in Europe. Br J Ophthalmol. 2005;89(10):12451249.
12.
Wang JC, Chew PT. What is the direct cost of treatment of acute primary angle closure
glaucoma? The Singapore model. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2004;32(6):578-583.
13.
Tham YC, Li X, Wong TY, et al. Global prevalence of glaucoma and projections of glaucoma burden
through 2040: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ophthalmology. 2014;121(11):2081-2090.
14.
Chan EW, Li X, Tham YC, et al. Glaucoma in Asia: regional prevalence variations and future
projections. Br J Ophthalmol. 2016;100(1):78-85.
15.
European Glaucoma Society. Terminology and Guidelines for Glaucoma (4th Edition). Savona:
Publicomm; 2014.
16.
Liza-Sharmini AT, Sharina YN, Dolaboladi AJ, et al. Clinical presentation, severity and
progression of primary angle closure in Malays. Med J Malaysia 2014;69(1):21-26.
17.
Liza-Sharmini AT, Ng GF, Nor-Sharina Y, et al. Clinical presentation, severity and progression of
primary angle closure in Malay and Chinese patients. Med J Malaysia. 2014;69(6):245-251.
18.
Leske MC, Wu SY, Honkanen R, et al. Nine-year incidence of open-angle glaucoma in the
Barbados Eye Studies. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(6):1058-1064.
19.
European Glaucoma Prevention Study (EGPS) Group., Miglior S, Pfeiffer N, et al. Predictive
factors for open-angle glaucoma among patients with ocular hypertension in the European
Glaucoma Prevention Study. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(1):3-9.
20.
Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study Group, European Glaucoma Prevention Study Group,
Gordon MO, et al. Validated prediction model for the development of primary open-angle
glaucoma in individuals with ocular hypertension. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(1):10-19.
21.
Burr JM, Mowatt G, Hernández R, et al. The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
screening for open angle glaucoma: a systematic review and economic evaluation. Health
Technol Assess. 2007;11(41):iii-iv, ix-x, 1-190.
22.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Primary Open Angle Glaucoma. Putrajaya: MoH;
2008.
23.
Orzalesi N, Rossetti L, Omboni S, et al. Vascular risk factors in glaucoma: the results of a
national survey. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2007;245(6):795-802.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
40
24.
Sergi M, Salerno DE, Rizzi M, et al. Prevalence of normal tension glaucoma in obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome patients. J Glaucoma. 2007;16(1):42-46.
25.
Wu X, Liu H. Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome increases glaucoma risk: evidence
from a meta-analysis. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015;8(1):297-303.
26.
Bilgin G. Normal-tension glaucoma and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: a prospective study.
BMC Ophthalmol. 2014;14:27.
27.
Lin CC, Hu CC, JD H, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea and increased risk of glaucoma: a
population-based matched-cohort study. Ophthalmology. 2013;120(8):1559-1564.
28.
Zhao D, Cho J, Kim MH, et al. Diabetes, fasting glucose, and the risk of glaucoma: a metaanalysis. Ophthalmology. 2015;122(1):72-78.
29.
Xu L, Wang Y, Wang S, et al. High myopia and glaucoma susceptibility the Beijing Eye Study.
Ophthalmology. 2007;114(2):216-220.
30.
Zhang C, Tatham AJ, Abe RY, et al. Corneal Hysteresis and Progressive Retinal Nerve Fiber
Layer Loss in Glaucoma. Am J Ophthalmol. 2016;166:29-36.
31.
Murphy ML, Pokrovskaya O, Galligan M, et al. Corneal hysteresis in patients with glaucoma-like
optic discs, ocular hypertension and glaucoma. BMC Ophthalmol. 2017;17(1):1.
32.
Senthil S, Garudadri C, Khanna RC, et al. Angle closure in the Andhra Pradesh Eye Disease
Study. Ophthalmology. 2010;117(9):1729-1735.
33.
Qu W, Li Y, Song W, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for angle-closure disease in a rural
Northeast China population: a population-based survey in Bin County, Harbin. Acta Ophthalmol.
2011;89(6):e515-520.
34.
Casson RJ, Marshall D, Newland HS, et al. Risk factors for early angle-closure disease in a
Burmese population: the Meiktila Eye Study. Eye (Lond). 2009;23(4):933-939.
35.
Zhou M, Wang W, Huang W, et al. Is increased choroidal thickness association with primary
angle closure? Acta Ophthalmol 2014;92(7):e514-520.
36.
Hatt SR, Wormald R, Burr J. Screening for prevention of optic nerve damage due to chronic open
angle glaucoma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;(4):CD006129.
37.
Hernández R, Rabindranath K, Fraser C, et al. Screening for open angle glaucoma: systematic
review of cost-effectiveness studies. J Glaucoma. 2008;17(3):159-168.
38.
Mowatt G, Burr JM, Cook JA, et al. Screening tests for detecting open-angle glaucoma:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008;49(12):5373-5385.
39.
Liu CJ, Cheng CY, Hsu WM. Scanning laser polarimetry with variable corneal compensation in
primary angle-closure glaucoma. Ophthalmology. 2008;115(8):1334-1339.
40.
Leung CK, Medeiros FA, Zangwill LM, et al. American Chinese glaucoma imaging study: a
comparison of the optic disc and retinal nerve fiber layer in detecting glaucomatous damage.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007;48(6):2644-2652.
41.
Zangwill LM, Jain S, Dirkes K, et al. The rate of structural change: the confocal scanning laser
ophthalmoscopy ancillary study to the ocular hypertension treatment study. Am J Ophthalmol.
2013;155(6):971-982.
42.
Nolan WP, See JL, Chew PT, et al. Detection of primary angle closure using anterior segment
optical coherence tomography in Asian eyes. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(1):33-39.
43.
Leske MC, Heijl A, Hussein M, et al. Factors for glaucoma progression and the effect of treatment:
the early manifest glaucoma trial. Arch Ophthalmol. 2003;121(1):48-56.
44.
Kass MA, Heuer DK, Higginbotham EJ, et al. The Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study: a
randomized trial determines that topical ocular hypotensive medication delays or prevents the
onset of primary open-angle glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2002;120(6):701-713.
45.
Bengtsson B, Leske MC, Hyman L, et al. Fluctuation of intraocular pressure and glaucoma
progression in the early manifest glaucoma trial. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(2):205-209.
46.
The Advanced Glaucoma Intervention Study (AGIS): 7. The relationship between control of
intraocular pressure and visual field deterioration.The AGIS Investigators. Am J Ophthalmol.
2000;130(4):429-440.
47.
Comparison of glaucomatous progression between untreated patients with normal-tension
glaucoma and patients with therapeutically reduced intraocular pressures. Collaborative NormalTension Glaucoma Study Group. Am J Ophthalmol. 1998;126(4):487-497. Erratum in: Am J
Ophthalmol 1999 Jan;1127(1991):1120.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
41
48.
Sharmini AT, Yin NY, Lee SS, et al. Mean target intraocular pressure and progression rates in
chronic angle-closure glaucoma. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2009;25(1):71-75.
49.
Canadian Ophthalmological Society Glaucoma Clinical Practice Guideline Expert Committee,
Canadian Ophthalmological Society. Canadian Ophthalmological Society evidence-based
clinical practice guidelines for the management of glaucoma in the adult eye. Can J Ophthalmol
2009;44 Suppl 1:S7-93. Erratum in: Can J Ophthalmol. 2009 Aug;44(4):477.
50.
Aptel F, Cucherat M, Denis P. Efficacy and tolerability of prostaglandin analogs: a meta-analysis
of randomized controlled clinical trials. J Glaucoma. 2008;17(8):667-673.
51.
Stewart WC, Konstas AG, Kruft B, et al. Meta-analysis of 24-h intraocular pressure fluctuation
studies and the efficacy of glaucoma medicines. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2010;26(2):175-180.
52.
van der Valk R, Webers CA, Lumley T, et al. A network meta-analysis combined direct and
indirect comparisons between glaucoma drugs to rank effectiveness in lowering intraocular
pressure. J Clin Epidemiol. 2009;62(12):1279-1283.
53.
Li T, Lindsley K, Rouse B, et al. Comparative Effectiveness of First-Line Medications for Primary
Open-Angle Glaucoma: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-analysis. Ophthalmology.
2016;123(1):129-140.
54.
Cheng JW, Cai JP, Wei RL. Meta-analysis of medical intervention for normal tension glaucoma.
Ophthalmology. 2009;116(7):1243-1249.
55.
Cheng JW, Cai JP, Li Y, et al. A meta-analysis of topical prostaglandin analogs in the treatment
of chronic angle-closure glaucoma. J Glaucoma. 2009;18(9):652-657.
56.
Honrubia F, García-Sánchez J, Polo V, et al. Conjunctival hyperaemia with the use of latanoprost
versus other prostaglandin analogues in patients with ocular hypertension or glaucoma: a metaanalysis of randomised clinical trials. Br J Ophthalmol. 2009;93(3):316-321.
57.
Vass C, Hirn C, Sycha T, et al. Medical interventions for primary open angle glaucoma and ocular
hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD003167.
58.
Cheng JW, Li Y, Wei RL. Systematic review of intraocular pressure-lowering effects of adjunctive
medications added to latanoprost. Ophthalmic Res. 2009;42(2):99-105.
59.
Ho JD, Hu CC, HC L. Antiglaucoma medications during pregnancy and the risk of low birth
weight: a population-based study. Br J Ophthalmol. 2009;93(10):1283-1286.
60.
Cheng JW, Cheng SW, Gao LD, et al. Intraocular pressure-lowering effects of commonly
used fixed-combination drugs with timolol: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2012;7(9):e45079.
61.
Cox JA, Mollan SP, Bankart J, et al. Efficacy of antiglaucoma fixed combination therapy versus
unfixed components in reducing intraocular pressure: a systematic review. Br J Ophthalmol.
2008;92(6):729-734.
62.
Barnebey HS, Robin AL. Adherence to Fixed-Combination Versus Unfixed Travoprost 0.004%/
Timolol 0.5% for Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension: a Randomized Trial. Am J Ophthalmol.
2016;pii: S0002-9394(16)30598-0.
63.
Sena DF, Lindsley K. Neuroprotection for treatment of glaucoma in adults. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2013;(2):CD006539.
64.
Asian Pacific Glaucoma Society. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines (Third Edition). Amsterdam:
Kugler Publications; 2016.
65.
Katz LJ, Steinmann WC, Kabir A, et al. Selective laser trabeculoplasty versus medical therapy as
initial treatment of glaucoma: a prospective, randomized trial. J Glaucoma. 2012;21(7):460-468.
66.
Wang W, He M, Zhou M, et al. Selective laser trabeculoplasty versus argon laser trabeculoplasty
in patients with open-angle glaucoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2013;8(12):e84270.
67.
Wong MO, Lee JW, Choy BN, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis on the efficacy of
selective laser trabeculoplasty in open-angle glaucoma. Surv Ophthalmol. 2015;60(1):36-50.
68.
Polat J, Grantham L, Mitchell K, et al. Repeatability of selective laser trabeculoplasty. Br J
Ophthalmol. 2016;100(10):1437-1441.
69.
Damji KF, Bovell AM, Hodge WG, et al. Selective laser trabeculoplasty versus argon
laser trabeculoplasty: results from a 1-year randomised clinical trial. Br J Ophthalmol.
2006;90(12):1490-1494.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
42
70.
Latina MA, Sibayan SA, Shin DH, et al. Q-switched 532-nm Nd:YAG laser trabeculoplasty
(selective laser trabeculoplasty): a multicenter, pilot, clinical study. Ophthalmology.
1998;105(11):2082-2088.
71.
Nagar M, Ogunyomade A, O’Brart DP, et al. A randomised, prospective study comparing
selective laser trabeculoplasty with latanoprost for the control of intraocular pressure in ocular
hypertension and open angle glaucoma. Br J Ophthalmol. 2005;89(11):1413-1417.
72.
Hodge WG, Damji KF, Rock W, et al. Baseline IOP predicts selective laser trabeculoplasty
success at 1 year post-treatment: results from a randomised clinical trial. Br J Ophthalmol.
2005;89(9):1157-1160.
73.
Heijl A, Peters D, Leske MC, et al. Effects of argon laser trabeculoplasty in the Early Manifest
Glaucoma Trial. Am J Ophthalmol. 2011;152(5):842-848.
74.
Tzimis V, Tze L, Ganesh J, et al. Laser trabeculoplasty: an investigation into factors that might
influence outcomes. Can J Ophthalmol. 2011;46(4):305-309.
75.
Narayanaswamy A, Baskaran M, Perera SA, et al. Argon Laser Peripheral Iridoplasty for Primary
Angle-Closure Glaucoma: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Ophthalmology. 2016;123(3):514521.
76.
Zhekov I, Janjua R, Shahid H, et al. A retrospective analysis of long-term outcomes following a
single episode of transscleral cyclodiode laser treatment in patients with glaucoma. BMJ Open.
2013;3(7.pii ):e002793.
77.
Wilkins M, Indar A, Wormald R. Intra-operative mitomycin C for glaucoma surgery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2005;(4):CD002897.
78.
Azuara-Blanco A, Burr J, Ramsay C, et al. Effectiveness of early lens extraction for the
treatment of primary angle-closure glaucoma (EAGLE): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2016;388(10052):1389-1397.
79.
Tham CC, Kwong YY, Leung DY, et al. Phacoemulsification versus combined
phacotrabeculectomy in medically controlled chronic angle closure glaucoma with cataract.
Ophthalmology. 2008;115(12):2167-2173.e2162.
80.
Tham CC, Kwong YY, Leung DY, et al. Phacoemulsification versus combined
phacotrabeculectomy in medically uncontrolled chronic angle closure glaucoma with cataracts.
Ophthalmology. 2009;116(4):725-731, 731.e721-723.
81.
HaiBo T, Xin K, ShiHeng L, et al. Comparison of Ahmed glaucoma valve implantation
and trabeculectomy for glaucoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis;. PLoS One.
2015;10(2):e0118142.
82.
Gedde SJ, Schiffman JC, Feuer WJ, et al. Treatment outcomes in the Tube Versus
Trabeculectomy (TVT) study after five years of follow-up. Am J Ophthalmol. 2012;153(5):789803.e782.
83.
Molteno AC, Bevin TH, Herbison P, et al. Long-term results of primary trabeculectomies and
Molteno implants for primary open-angle glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011;129(11):1444-1450.
84.
Budenz DL, Barton K, Gedde SJ, et al. Five-year treatment outcomes in the Ahmed Baerveldt
comparison study. Ophthalmology 2015;122(2):308-316.
85.
Christakis PG, Tsai JC, Kalenak JW, et al. The Ahmed versus Baerveldt study: three-year
treatment outcomes. Ophthalmology. 2013;120(11):2232-2240.
86.
Eldaly MA, Bunce C, Elsheikha OZ, et al. Non-penetrating filtration surgery versus trabeculectomy
for open-angle glaucoma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;(2):CD007059.
87.
National Collaborating Centre for Acute Care. Glaucoma: Diagnosis and management of chronic
open angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension. London: RCS; 2009.
88.
National Health and Medical Research Council. NHMRC Guidelines for the screening, prognosis,
diagnosis, management and prevention of glaucoma 2010. Canberra: NHMRC; 2010.
89.
Weinreb RN, Garway-Heath DF, Leung C, et al. Progression of glaucoma: the 8th consensus
report of the World Glaucoma Association. Amsterdam: Kugler Publications; 2011.
90.
Brusini P. Monitoring glaucoma progression. Prog Brain Res. 2008;173:59-73.
91.
Chauhan BC, Garway-Heath DF, Goñi FJ, et al. Practical recommendations for measuring rates
of visual field change in glaucoma. Br J Ophthalmol. 2008;92(4):569-573.
92.
American Academy of Ophthalmology. Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma PPP - 2015. San
Francisco: Elsevier Inc; 2015.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
43
93.
American Optometric Association. Care of the Patient with Open Angle Glaucoma. St. Louis:
AOA; 2010.
94.
Luo RJ, Liu SR, Tian Z, et al. Rehabilitation of vision disorder and improved quality of life in
patients with primary open angle glaucoma. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011;124(17):2687-2691.
95.
Wang BZ, Pesudovs K, Keane MC, et al. Evaluating the effectiveness of multidisciplinary lowvision rehabilitation. Optom Vis Sci. 2012;89(9):1399-1408.
96.
Perkhidmatan Optometri, Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia. Prosedur Operasi Standard
Penjagaan dan Rehabilitasi Visual Pesakit Penglihatan Terhad. Putrajaya: Majlis Optik Malaysia,
KKM; 2009.
97.
Gordon MO, Beiser JA, Brandt JD, et al. The Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study: baseline
factors that predict the onset of primary open-angle glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2002;120(6):714720.
98.
Ku JY, Danesh-Meyer HV, Craig JP, et al. Comparison of intraocular pressure measured
by Pascal dynamic contour tonometry and Goldmann applanation tonometry. Eye (Lond).
2006;20(2):191-198.
99.
Martinez-de-la-Casa JM, Garcia-Feijoo J, Vico E, et al. Effect of corneal thickness on dynamic
contour, rebound, and goldmann tonometry. Ophthalmology. 2006;113(12):2156-2162.
100. Kass MA, Gordon MO, Gao F, et al. Delaying treatment of ocular hypertension: the ocular
hypertension treatment study. Arch Ophthalmol. 2010;128(3):276-287.
101. Kass MA, Heuer DK, Higginbotham EJ, et al. The Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study: a
randomized trial determines that topical ocular hypotensive medication delays or prevents the
onset of primary open-angle glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol 2002;120(6):701-713.
102. Kymes SM, Kass MA, Anderson DR, et al. Management of ocular hypertension: a costeffectiveness approach from the Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study. Am J Ophthalmol.
2006;141(6):997-1008.
103. Miglior S, Zeyen T, Pfeiffer N, et al. Results of the European Glaucoma Prevention Study.
Ophthalmology. 2005;112(3):366-375.
104. Keltner JL, Johnson CA, Anderson DR, et al. The association between glaucomatous visual fields
and optic nerve head features in the Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study. Ophthalmology.
2006;113(9):1603-1612.
105. American Academy of Ophthalmology. Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma Suspect PPP - 2015. San
Francisco: Elsevier Inc.; 2016.
106. Sommer A, Tielsch JM. Primary open-angle glaucoma: a clinical-epidemiologic perspective. In:
Shields MB,Van Buskirk M, editors. 100 years of progress in glaucoma. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Raven; 1997.
107. Drance S, Anderson DR, Schulzer M, et al. Risk factors for progression of visual field
abnormalities in normal-tension glaucoma. Am J Ophthalmol. 2001;131(6):699-708.
108. Choi J, Kook MS. Systemic and Ocular Hemodynamic Risk Factors in Glaucoma. Biomed Res
Int. 2015;2015:141905.
109. Asrani S, Zeimer R, Wilensky J, et al. Large diurnal fluctuations in intraocular pressure are an
independent risk factor in patients with glaucoma. J Glaucoma. 2000;9(2):134-142.
110. Park SC, Lee DH, Lee HJ, et al. Risk factors for normal-tension glaucoma among subgroups of
patients. Arch Ophthalmol. 2009;127(10):1275-1283.
111. Leske MC, Heijl A, Hyman L, et al. Predictors of long-term progression in the early manifest
glaucoma trial. Ophthalmology. 2007;114(11):1965-1972.
112. Ren R, Jonas JB, Tian G, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid pressure in glaucoma: a prospective study.
Ophthalmology. 2010;117(2):259-266.
113. Kiddee W, Trope GE, Sheng L, et al. Intraocular pressure monitoring post intravitreal steroids: a
systematic review. Surv Ophthalmol 2013;58(4):291-310.
114. Sihota R, Konkal VL, Dada T, et al. Prospective, long-term evaluation of steroid-induced
glaucoma. Eye (Lond). 2008;22(1):26-30.
115. Kiuchi Y, Sugimoto R, Nakae K, et al. Trabeculectomy with mitomycin C for treatment of
neovascular glaucoma in diabetic patients. Ophthalmologica. 2006;220(6):383-388.
116. Yalvac IS, Eksioglu U, Satana B, et al. Long-term results of Ahmed glaucoma valve and Molteno
implant in neovascular glaucoma. Eye (Lond). 2007;21(1):65-70.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
44
117. Yildirim N, Yalvac IS, Sahin A, et al. A comparative study between diode laser
cyclophotocoagulation and the Ahmed glaucoma valve implant in neovascular glaucoma: a longterm follow-up. J Glaucoma. 2009;18(3):192-196.
118. Gupta V, Jha R, Rao A, et al. The effect of different doses of intracameral bevacizumab on surgical
outcomes of trabeculectomy for neovascular glaucoma. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2009;19(3):435-441.
119. Mahdy RA, Nada WM, Fawzy KM, et al. Efficacy of intravitreal bevacizumab with panretinal
photocoagulation followed by Ahmed valve implantation in neovascular glaucoma. J Glaucoma.
2013;22(9):768-772.
120. Arcieri ES, Paula JS, Jorge R, et al. Efficacy and safety of intravitreal bevacizumab in eyes with
neovascular glaucoma undergoing Ahmed glaucoma valve implantation: 2-year follow-up. Acta
Ophthalmol. 2015;93(1):e1-6.
121. Tang M, Fu Y, Wang Y, et al. Efficacy of intravitreal ranibizumab combined with Ahmed glaucoma
valve implantation for the treatment of neovascular glaucoma. BMC Ophthalmol. 2016;16:7.
122. Hamed-Azzam S, Briscoe D, Tomkins O, et al. Evaluation of intraocular pressure according to
corneal thickness before and after excimer laser corneal ablation for myopia. Int Ophthalmol.
2013;33(4):349-354.
123. Aristeidou AP, Labiris G, Katsanos A, et al. Comparison between Pascal dynamic contour
tonometer and Goldmann applanation tonometer after different types of refractive surgery.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2011;249(5):767-773.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
45
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following Medical Subject Heading terms or free text terms were
used either singly or in combination, search was limit to English, human
and last 10 years:-
Clinical Question: What are the risk factors for primary glaucoma
(open angle and angle closure glaucoma)?
1.
glaucoma/
2.
glaucoma*.tw.
3.
glaucoma, angle-closure/
4.
glaucoma* adj1 (narrow angle or narrow-angle or closed angle or
closed-angle or angle closure or angle-closure).tw.
5.
glaucoma, open-angle/
6.
glaucoma* adj1 (simpl* or open angle or open-angle).tw.
7.
low tension glaucoma/
8.
glaucoma* adj1 (low tension or normal tension).tw.
9.
tension adj1 (glaucoma* low or glaucoma* normal).tw.
10. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9
11. risk factors/
12. Risk adj1 factor*.tw.
13. 11 or 12
14. 10 and 13
15. limit 14 to (“all adult (19 plus years)” and english and humans and
last 10 years)
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
46
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the risk factors for primary glaucoma (open angle and
angle closure glaucoma)?
2.
Who to be screened for glaucoma?
What are the effective and safe screening tools/methods for
glaucoma?
3.
What are the criteria for glaucoma diagnosis?
4.
What are the principles of treatment for glaucoma?
5.
What are the effective and safe pharmacological treatments in
glaucoma?
6.
Is laser treatment effective and safe in primary open angle
glaucoma?
7.
What are the effective and safe surgical treatments in glaucoma?
8.
What is the effective and safe follow-up schedule in glaucoma?
9.
What is the effective method of monitoring patient’s compliance
and adherence in glaucoma?
10. What is the effective method of monitoring progression in
glaucoma?
11. What are the effective and safe rehabilitation measures in
glaucoma?
12. What are the safe and effective treatments in ocular hypertension?
13. How to diagnose and follow-up glaucoma suspect (optic disc
abnormalities)?
14. What are the effective and safe treatments in patients with steroidinduced glaucoma?
15. What are the effective and safe treatments in neovascular
glaucoma?
16. What are the effective and safe methods of intra-ocular pressure
measuring in post-refractive surgery in glaucoma?
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
47
APPENDIX 3
VAN HERICK TEST
•
A narrow slit of light is projected onto the peripheral cornea at an
angle of 60° as near as possible to the limbus.
•
This results in a slit image on the surface of the cornea, the width of
which is used as reference for the assessment of the conditions in
the chamber angle [limbal corneal thickness (LCT)].
•
The peripheral anterior chamber depth (PACD) can be described by
the distance between the corneal slit image and the slit image on
the iris
Modified: Savage JA. Gonioscopy in the Management of Glaucoma. San Francisco:
AAO; 2006
Van Herick Grade
Ratio of PACD to LCT
Schematic diagram
Grade 0
Closed angle closure
Grade 1
<1:4
Angle closure likely
Angle approx. 10o
Grade 2
1:4
Angle closure possible
Angle approx. 20o
Grade 3
1:2
Angle closure unlikely
Grade 4
1:1 (or > 1.1)
Angle closure very unlikely
LCT
PACD
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
48
APPENDIX 4
INDENTATION/DYNAMIC GONIOSCOPY
Technique
1. Explain the procedure to patient.
2. Instill topical anaesthesia.
3. Darken the room.
4. Set the slit lamp magnification to 10 - 25x, a fairly short (2 - 3 mm)
slit and narrow light beam. The light beam should not pass through
the pupil as this may cause pupil constriction.
5. Use a goniolens with a smaller posterior diameter than the corneal
diameter (such as Sussman, or Zeiss 4-mirror goniolens). A coupling
agent is not required.
6. Start with non-indentation gonioscopy.
7. In indentation gonioscopy, gentle pressure is placed on the cornea
to force the aqueous humour into the anterior chamber angle. This
causes posterior bowing of the iris which enables further assessment
of the angle.
8. Too much pressure on the cornea may distort the anterior chamber
angle and may give the observer the false impression of an open
angle. This happens when the examiner notices the presence of
Descemet membrane folds.
9. Examine each quadrant of the angle and record accordingly.
Refer to www.gonioscopy.org. for further details.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
49
APPENDIX 5
ESTIMATION OF OPTIC DISC SIZE
•
OD size influences the estimation of CDR.
•
A normal patient with a small disc will have a small cup, thus a
smaller CDR. A normal patient with a large disc tend to have a large
cup, thus a larger CDR.
•
OD size can be estimated using a handheld convex lens and a slit
lamp (using the adjustable beam height).
•
A small beam is adjusted to the vertical diameter of the OD and its
length is read on the scale of the slit lamp. It is most accurate in a
diated pupil.
•
Based on the lens used, this value needs to be corrected using the
magnification factor depending on lens power.
•
A normal dics size is approximately 1.5 mm. A disc is considered
small if it is ≤ 1.2 mm and large if it is ≥1.8
Lens used
+60D Volk
+78D Volk
Superfield Volk
Correction factor
1.0
1.13
1.50
Asymmetrical CDR
RIGHT EYE : CDR 0.3
LEFT EYE : CDR 0.6
Cup to disc ratio
Disc
Cup
Optic
disc
Vertical axis
Measurement of Optic Cup/Disc Ratio
Cup
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
50
Right eye OD showing typical glaucomatous optic disc changes:
• ISNT rule not obeyed (inferior NRR thickness is the same as
superior NRR)
• large vertical CDR 0.8 (ratio of black to yellow arrow)
• peripapilllary OD haemorrhage and loss of RNFL (white arrow
in picture A)
• focal neuro-retinal rim thinning/notching (white arrow picture B)
Modified: American Academy of Ophthalmology. Gonioscopy in the Management
of Glaucoma. San Francisco: AAO; 2006
• The ISNT rule is useful
in evaluating whether
thinning is physiological
or pathological.
• A healthy disc tends to
have its thickest portion
of NRR inferiorly,
follows by superiorly
and nasally, with
the thinnest portion
temporally. NRR
thickness as shown in
yellow bar follows ISNT
rule.
A normal OD photograph showing
the thickness of neuro-retinal rim
following the ISNT rule.
A
B
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
51
APPENDIX 6
Medical therapy to break attack
and prepare patient for LPI
Prompt LPI
ALPI
NO
YES
Patent iridotomy
IOP uncontrolled
IOP controlled
View
clear
Patient with AAC
AAC = acute angle closure
LPI = laser peripheral iridotomy
ALPI = argon laser peripheral iridoplasty
PAC = primary angle closure
IOP = intraocular pressure
Compression or ALPI
to clear the view
Evidence for secondary
cause of AAC crisis
Definite evidence for PAC mechanism of AAC
Treat pathology of secondary AAC and
lower IOP medically or surgically
Unsuccessful
or not possible
Unsuccessful
or not possible
Schedule iridotomy in
fellow eye if chamber angle
is anatomically similar
Surgical iridectomy or cataract surgery
± goniosynechialysis or trabeculectomy
Modified: American Academy of
Ophthalmology. Primary Angle
Closure PPP - 2015. San
Francisco: Elsevier Inc; 2015
Follow-up with dark room
gonioscopy to assess adequacy
of angle opening
• Dark room gonioscopy to assess other mechanism of angle closure
• Ascertain continued patency of the iridotomy
• Further medical and surgical treatment to lower IOP
MANAGEMENT ACUTE ANGLE CLOSURE
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
52
APPENDIX 7
PROPER INSTILLATION TECHNIQUE OF EYE DROP
It is important to:
•
Wash hands before and after putting the eye drop.
•
Apply the eye drop as directed by the doctor.
Instillation technique
1. Tilt the head back and look up.
2. Pull down the lower eyelid to form a pocket.
3. Hold the bottle vertically and bring it above the eye. Do not let
the bottle tip touch the eye.
4. Squeeze one drop into the pocket of the lower eyelid.
5. If you’re not sure a drop has entered the eye, instil a second drop.
6. Close the eye gently. Do not blink or squeeze the eyelid. Apply a
gentle pressure on the lacrimal duct at a nasal corner of the eye
with the index finger for two to three minutes.
7. If using more than one eye drops, wait at least five minutes
before instilling the next eye drop.
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
53
APPENDIX 8
MAIN FEATURES OF TOPICAL ANTI-GLAUCOMA MEDICATIONS
Features
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
Second choice
Mechanism of action
Increase in uveoscleral
outflow
Reduction of aqueous
production
• Reduction of aqueous
production
• Increase in
uveoscleral outflow
Reduction of aqueous
production
Increase in trabecular
outflow
IOP reduction efficacy
Treatment option
++++
25 - 30%
(better control of
circadian IOP)
+++
20 - 25%
• Selective beta-
blockers has lower
efficacy
• Efficacy maybe
reduced by
simultaneuos
treatment with
systemic beta-
blockers
• Tachyphylaxis may
occur
++ to +++
20 - 25%
• Long term use of
apraclonidine may be
limited due to allergic
reactions and
tachyphylaxis (lower
incidence with
brimonidine)
+ to ++
15 - 20%
+ to ++
20 - 25%
Duration of effect
24 hours
12 hours
12 hours
8 - 12 hours
6 - 12 hours
First or second choice
(switching within this
class maybe of benefit
as patient may respond
differently)
First or second choice
Third choice
Second choice
(α2-selective agents
maybe used as short
term primary therapy
following anterior
segment procedures for
preventing acute spike
in IOP)
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
54
Features
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
Instillation frequency
• Once daily (except
unoprostone twice daily)
• Paradoxical effect
(↑ IOP) may occur if
more than once daily
dosing
• More effective if
administered in the
evening
1 - 2 times daily
2 - 3 times daily
2 - 3 times daily
(Monotherapy - thrice
daily dosing,
adjunctive therapy -
twice daily dosing)
3 - 4 times daily
Drug combinations - addictive effect
Prostaglandin
analogues/
prostamides
+
+
+
±
Beta-blockers
+
+
+
+
Adrenergic agonists
+
+
+
+
Topical CAIs
+
+
+
+
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
±
+
+
+
Commercially available
preparation
Topical CAIs
• Brinzolamide 1%*
• Dorzolamide 2%*
• Latanoprost 0.005%*
• Travoprost 0.004%*
• Bimatoprost 0.03%,
0.01%*
• Tafluprost 0.0015%*
• Unoprostone 0.12%,
0.15%
Non-selective
• Timolol 0.25%, 0.5%*
• Levobunolol 0.25%,
0.5%*
• Befunolol 0.5%
• Metipranolol 0.1%,
0.3%
• Cartelolol 0.5%, 2%
• Pindolol 0.5%
β1 selective
• Betaxolol 0.25%, 0.5%*
α2-selective
• Brimonidine 0.15%*
• Apraclonidine 0.5%,
1%
• Clonidine 0.15%, 0.5%
Non-selective
• Dipivefrin 0.1%,
• Epinephrine 0.25%,
0.5%
Direct-acting
cholinergic agents
• Pilocarpine 1%, 2%, 4%*
• Aceclidine 2%
• Carbachol 0.75% - 3%
• Acethylcholine 1%
Indirect-acting
• Demecarium bromide
0.125% - 0.25%
• Ecothiophate iodide
0.03% - 0.25%
• Physostigmine
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
55
Features
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
Beta-blockers
Yes*
No
Yes*
Yes*
Adrenergic agonists
No
No*
Yes
No
Topical CAIs
No
Yes*
Yes
No
Non-preservatives or
with different
preservative
preparations
No
Yes*
(both preparations
available)
Yes*
(preparation with
different preservative
available)
No
Yes*
(non-preservative
preparation
available)
No
Yes*
• Travoprost 0.004% &
timolol 0.5% eye drops*
• Bimatoprost 0.03% &
timolol 0.5% eye drops*
• Latanoprost 0.005% &
timolol maleate 0.5%
eye drops*
• Tafluprost 0.0015% &
timolol 0.5% eye drops*
• Dorzolamide 2% &
timolol 0.5% eye drops*
• Brimonidine 0.2% &
timolol 0.5% eye drops*
• Brinzolamide 1% &
timolol 0.5% eye drops*
Fixed combination
preparations
Yes*
Brimonidine 0.2% &
brinzolamide 1% eye
drops
Yes*
Brimonidine 0.2% &
brinzolamide 1% eye
drops
*Drugs available in Malaysia
The information on various anti-glaucoma medications on this section only serves as a general guide and is not all inclusive.
Source:
• Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Primary Open Angle Glaucoma. Putrajaya: MoH; 2008
• European Glaucoma Society. Terminology and Guidelines for Glaucoma (4th Edition). Savona: Publicomm; 2014.
• Individual product information sheet
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
56
Safety Profiles of Topical Anti-glaucoma Medications
Safety Profiles
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
±
±
++
±
±
Relative
contraindications:
• uveitis
• Herpes Simplex Viral
keratitis
• cystoid macular oedema
Caution in:
• complicated
intraocular surgery
(e.g. posterior capsule
rupture)
Contraindications
• Bronchial asthma,
chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
• Bradycardia, heart
block, cardiac failure
Relative contraindication
for β1 selective
• On monoamine
oxidase inhibitor
therapy
• Children <2 years old
due to possibility of
central nervous
system suppression
• Compromised
corneal endothelium
• Sulfonamide allergy
• Severe renal
impairment
• Caution Hepatic
impairment
• Uveitic, neovascular
and lens induced
glaucoma
• Aqueous misdirection
syndrome
Pregnancy and nursing
mothers
Human studies are
lacking. Use only if
potential benefit
outweighs the potential
risk to foetus/infant.
Human studies are
lacking. Use only if
potential benefit
outweighs the potential
risk to foetus/infant.
Human studies are
lacking. Use only if
potential benefit
outweighs the potential
risk to foetus/infant.
Human studies are
lacking. Use only if
potential benefit
outweighs the potential
risk to foetus/infant.
Human studies are
lacking. Use only if
potential benefit
outweighs the potential
risk to foetus/infant.
(teratogenic effect
seen with high dose
of systemic CAIs
in animal studies)
Common drug
interactions
Chronic pilocarpine use
may reduce the efficacy
of these agents
Systemic beta-blockers
Calcium antagonists
Digitalis
Catecholamine-depleting
drugs
Central nervous system
depressants (alcohol,
barbiturates, opiates,
sedatives, anaesthetics),
tricyclic antidepressants
Caution in patients on
steroid (potential for
hypokalaemia)
Competitive interaction
on outflow with
prostaglandin
Topical allergies
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
57
+
++
(Brinzolamide 1% causes
less ocular discomfort)
++
+++
Ocular adverse effects
+ to ++
Ocular discomfort
(stinging, burning,
foreign body sensation)
Pruritis
Photophobia
Tearing
Conjunctival
hyperaemia
Decreased corneal
sensitivity
Punctate epithelial
keratopathy
Allergy (conjunctivitis,
eyelid erythema)
Ocular discomfort
(stinging, burning,
foreign body sensation)
Pruritis
Allergy
(conjunctivitis, eyelid
erythema)
Conjunctival
hyperaemia
Subconjunctival
haemorrhage
Lid retraction
Pupil dilatation
(apraclonidine)
Ocular discomfort
(stinging, burning,
foreign body sensation)
Pruritis
Tearing
Allergy (conjunctivitis,
eyelid erythema)
Blurred vision
Transient myopia
Punctate epithelial
keratopathy
Brow ache
Lacrimation
Miosis
Dimness of vision
Blurring of vision,
myopic shift
Cilliary spasm
Aggravate pupillary
block
Retinal detachment
Ocular discomfort
(stinging, burning,
foreign body sensation)
Pruritis
Photophobia
Tearing
Dry eye
Blurred vision
Asthenopia
Allergy (conjunctivitis,
eyelid erythema)
Conjunctival
hyperaemia (usually
transient and noninfectious)
Subconjunctival
haemorrhage
Hypertrichosis
Blepharitis
Eyelid skin darkening
Corneal oedema
Punctuate epithelial
keratopathy
Reactivation of Herpes
Simplex Virus keratitis
Iris darkening
Cataract
Anterior uveitis
Cystoid macula oedema
Safety Profiles
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
58
Systemic adverse
effects
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+ to ++
0 to ++
0 to ++
(Selective β-blockers
has a wider safety
margin - less systemic
side effects especially
cardiopulmonary
side-effects)
+ to +++
Cardiaovascular
adverse effects
Bradyarrhythmias
Hypotension
Cardiac failure
Arrhythmia
Flushing
Noctural hypotension
Respiratory adverse
effects
Bronchospasm
Bronchoconstriction
Neurology adverse
effects
Syncope
Drowsiness
Anergy
Fatigue
Depression
Aggravation of
myasthenia gravis
Memory impairment
Apnoea in infants
Syncope
Drowsiness
Headache
Asthenia
Fatigue
Depression
Dizziness
Headache
Asthenia
Depression
Paresthesia
Headache
Gastrointestinal tract
(GIT) adverse effects
GIT discomfort
Oral dryness
GIT discomfort
Oral dryness
Throat irritation
Altered taste
Salivation
Abdominal cramps
Diarrhoea
Vomiting
Safety Profiles
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
59
-
-
Other adverse effects
Urolithiasis
Urinary frequency
Masked hypoglycaemia
Hypercholesterolaemia
Sexual dysfunction (loss
of libido, impotence)
Reduced effort tolerance
Increased falls in the
elderly
Safety Profiles
β-blockers
α2 Adrenergic agonists
Topical CAIs
Cholinergic agents
(direct-acting)
Prostaglandin
analogues/prostamides
The information on various anti-glaucoma medications on this section only serves as a general guide and is not all inclusive.
Source:
• Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Primary Open Angle Glaucoma. Putrajaya: MoH; 2008
• European Glaucoma Society. Terminology and Guidelines for Glaucoma (4th Edition). Savona: Publicomm; 2014.
• South East Asia Glaucoma Interest Group. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines Second Edition. Hong Kong: Scientific Communication International; 2008
• Individual product leaflet
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
60
Application of Mitomycin C (MMC) or 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) in Trabeculectomy
Antimetabolite
Timing of application
Dose and duration
Mode of application
MMC**
• comes in as a vial and in purple
colour powder of 10 mg injection
potency
• freshly reconstituted with distilled
water or normal saline in
concentration of 0.2 - 0.4 mg/ml
During surgery/intra-operatively
0.2 - 0.4 mg/ml applied for 1 - 5
minutes
For primary surgery, a concentration
of 0.4 mg/ml is applied for 1 minute,
whereas for poor prognosis
filters/cases, the same concentration
can be applied for 3 minutes.
Subconjunctival local application
Post-operatively/prior to needling
0.01 ml of MMC (0.4 mg/ml) and 0.02
ml of bupivacaine with epinephrine
Subconjunctival injection
5-FU**
(comes in 50mg/ml solution in 5 ml
vial and is used without dilution)
During surgery/ intra-operatively
50 mg/ml for 1 - 3 minutes
Subconjunctival local application
Post-operatively/prior to needling
5 mg/0.1ml for up to 4 post-operative
weeks
Subconjunctival injection
**Antimetabolites usage should be individualised to each patient depending on the complexity of cases.
Care in the preparation and disposal of metabolites:
• It is recommended to prepare metabolite in a separate trolley using aseptic technique.
• The instruments used in MMC or 5-FU application should not be re-used during the surgery to avoid contamination of the surgical
field.
• The soaked sponges must be disposed in an incinerator or safely in concordance with bio-waste rules.
• Disposal of leftover/unused antimetabolites should be taken with the same care as any other chemotherapies. It should be sent
back to local pharmacy department for proper disposal.
Modified: South East Asia Glaucoma Interest Group. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines Second Edition. Hong Kong: Scientific Communication International;
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
61
APPENDIX 9
LASER IRIDOTOMY
Pre-Laser Management
i.
Get informed consent.
ii. Instil pilocarpine 2%.
iii. Consider brimonidine 0.15 - 0.2%, and/or -blocker, and/or oral
CAI, and/or steroid eye drops before the procedure to reduce posttreatment IOP spike/inflammation.
iv. Instil topical anaesthesia.
v. Use iridotomy lenses e.g. Abraham (+66 diopters) or equivalent.
vi. Choose superior quadrants of the iris which is well covered by the
upper eyelid, in a thin looking area or an iris crypt and placed as
peripheral as possible.
Laser Setting for ’Sequential’ Laser - Argon followed by Nd: Yag Laser
• Preparatory burns - Argon laser
 Spot size: 200 - 500 μm
 Exposure time: 0.2 - 0.5 sec
 Power: 200 - 600 mW (depends on iris pigmentation; lower
power for darker irides to avoid charring)
• Penetrating burns - Argon laser (chipping technique)
 Spot size: 50 μm
 Exposure time: 0.05 - 0.1 sec
 Power: 600 - 1,000 mW (modify parameters depending on
individual’s response)
 End point: presence of gush of aqueous and pigments
• Penetration laser burns - Nd:YAG laser
 Power: 3 - 8 mJ
 Number of shots: Usually 2 - 5 shots
 Adequate iridotomy size: 200 - 500 µm
Modified: Asia-Pacific Glaucoma Society. Asia Pacific Glaucoma Guidelines (Third
Edition). Amsterdam: Kugler Publication; 2016
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
62
APPENDIX 10
CATEGORIES OF SEVERITY OF VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
*VF restriction criteria is applicable even if VA is better than for that
category of visual impairment.
Modified: International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems 10th Revision (ICD-10)-WHO Version for 2016 (available at
http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2016/en#/H53-H54)
Snellen VA with best possible correction
Category of visual
impairment
1
Moderate visual
impairment
2
Severe visual
impairment
3
Blindness
4
Blindness
5
Blindness
Maximum less than
Minimum equal to or
better than
Or central VF*
6/18
6/60
6/60
3/60
3/60
1/60
(counting finger
at 1 meter)
20° or less but
more than 10°
10° or less but
more than 5°
1/60
(counting finger
at 1 meter)
Light Perception
5° or less
No Light Perception
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
63
APPENDIX 11
OCULAR HYPERTENSION PATHWAY (OHT AND
POAG SUSPECTS WITH HIGH IOP)
Assess
CCT
Untreated
IOP
Age
>590 µm
555 - 590 µm
<555 µm
Any
Any
>21 - 25
mmHg
>25 - 32
mmHg
>21 - 25
mmHg
>25 - 32
mmHg
>21 - 25
mmHg
>25 - 32
mmHg
>32
mmHg
Any
Any
Any
Treat
until 60
years
Treat
until 65
years
Treat
until 80
years
Monitoring
Ongoing monitoring
IOP, ONH & VF
Low risk of
conversion to
POAG 12 - 24 m
High risk of
conversion to
POAG 6 - 12 m
Initial monitoring
IOP only
1 - 4 m
1 - 4 m
IOP only
IOP, ONH & VF
Low risk of
conversion to
POAG 6 - 12 m
High risk of
conversion to
POAG 4 - 6 m
No treatment
PGA
PGA
Yes
Changes
No
Assess monitoring results
Discharge after 3 - 5 years
if no change and advise
annual follow-up with
general ophthalmologist or
primary care optometrist
IOP at target
Evidence of optic
nerve damage and/or
VF changes
IOP not on target
< Age threshold or age
threshold not applicable
Treated patients with
age > threshold
Change or start
pharmacological treatment
or review target IOP
No change in
treatment plan
Offer no
treatment
If IOP cannot be controlled
medically, refer to
consultant ophthalmologist
Monitor untreated IOP
only after 1 - 4 m
Diagnosis to be
re-evaluated by
consultant ophthalmologist
PGA = prostaglandin analogues
OAG = open angle glaucoma
m = months
Modified: National Collaborating Centre for Acute Care. Glaucoma: Diagnosis and management of chronic
open angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension. London: RCS; 2009
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
64
APPENDIX 12
POAG SUSPECTS WITH NORMAL IOP PATHWAY
1To be clinically assessed based on age, IOP, CCT, changes in ONH
and VF
2ONH and/or peripapillary RNFL appearance is suggestive of, but not
definitive for glaucoma
3If there is no change in the parameters after 3 - 5 years, the patient can
be transferred from active glaucoma care to general ophthalmologist
or primary care optometrist for annual assessment.
Modified: National Collaborating Centre for Acute Care. Glaucoma: Diagnosis and
management of chronic open angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension.
London: RCS; 2009.
No treatment
Monitoring
Low risk of
conversion to
POAG1
12 - 24 months
High risk of
conversion to
POAG1
6 - 12 months
IOP
ONH
VF
Remain
normal
Normal or
suspicious2
Normal or
uncertain
>21 mmHg
Damage
Any
Defects
Transfer3
OHT
pathway
POAG
pathway
Normal or
suspicious2
Normal or
uncertain
POAG suspects with normal IOP
IOP, ONH and VF
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
65
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
α
alpha
β
beta
€
Euro
5-FU
5-Fluorouracil
µg
microgram
µm
micrometre
AAC
acute angle closure
ALPI
Argon laser peripheral iridoplasty
ALT
Argon laser trabeculoplasty
AS-OCT
Anterior Segment-Optical Coherence Tomograpy
AUD
Australian Dollar
CAI(s)
carbonic anhydrase inhibitor(s)
CCT
central corneal thickness
CDR
cup: disc ratio
CI
confidence interval
CPC
cyclophotocoagulation
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CSLO
confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy
D
diopter
dB
decibel
DM
diabetes mellitus
EGPS
European Glaucoma Prevention Study
GAT
Goldmann applanation tonometry
GDD
glaucoma drainage devices
GIT
gastrointestinal tract
GHT
Glaucoma hemifield test
GON
glaucomatous optic neuropathy
HR
hazard ratio
IOP
Intraocular pressure
ISNT
Inferior Superior Nasal Temporal
LCT
limbal corneal thickness
mg
milligramme
mJ
milllijoule
ml
millilitre
mm
millimetre
mm2
millimetre square
MMC
Mitomycin C
mmHg
millimetre mercury
mW
milliwatt
MoH
Ministry of Health
NRR
neuro-retinal rim
nsec
nanosecond
NTG
normal tension glaucoma
NVG
neovascular glaucoma
OAG
open angle glaucoma
OCT
optical coherence tomography
OD
optic disc
OHT
ocular hypertension
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
66
OHT
ocular hypertension
OHTS
Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study
ONH
optic nerve head
OR
odds ratio
OSA
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
PACG
primary angle closure glaucoma
PAC
primary angle closure
PACD
peripheral anterior chamber depth
PACG
primary angle closure glaucoma
PACS
primary angle closure suspect
PAS
peripheral anterior synechiae
PSD
Pattern Standard Deviation
POAG
primary open angle glaucoma
QoL
quality of life
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RNFL
retinal nerve fibre layer
RR
relative risk
SAP
Standard Automated Perimetry
sec
second
SITA
Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm
SLT
Selective laser trabeculoplasty
TM
trabecular meshwork
TSCP
trans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation
USD
United States Dollar
VA
visual acuity
VEGF
vascular endothelial growth factor
VF
visual field
Management of Glaucoma (Second Edition)
67
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
• Dr. Ana Fizalinda Abdullah Sani, Dr. Noor Aishah Yussof, Ms. Sin
Lian Thye, Ms. Loong Ah Moi and Ms. Noormah Darus for their
contribution in the CPG development
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Glaucoma
(Second Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH
Malaysia while the printing was funded by the Malaysian Society of
Ophthalmology.
"ees ' ge Bs ey oes
Ff z 7% FB 3
& ‘es