~
~ “MANAGEMENT.Q
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN: 978-967-2887-57-7
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://sleepsocietymalaysia.org
https://mpaeds.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platforms: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This clinical practice guideline (CPG) is meant to be a guide for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guideline should not override the responsibility of the
practitioners to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the
individual patient. This should be done in consultation with the patients
and their families or guardians, taking into account the management
options available locally.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
UPDATING THE CPG
This guideline was approved in 2022 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2026) or sooner if there is a need to do so. When it
is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or National Advisor of
the related specialty will be informed about it. A discussion will be done
on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A
multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review
methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed. Every care is taken
to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of
publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections
will be published in the web version of this document, which is the
definitive version at all times. This version can be found on the websites
mentioned above.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
v
Development Group
viii
Review Committee
x
External Reviewers
xi
Algorithm 1. Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
xiii
in Adults
Algorithm 2. Surgical Treatment in Adults with Obstructive
xiv
Sleep Apnoea
Algorithm 3. Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
xv
in Children
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY, RISK FACTORS AND CO-MORBIDITIES
2
2.1 Epidemiology and Risk Factors
2
2.2 Medical complications
2
3.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA IN ADULTS
4
3.1 Screening
4
3.2 Diagnosis
6
3.3
Treatment
10
a. Weight Management and Lifestyle Modification
10
b. Positive Airway Pressure Therapy
11
c. Surgery
14
d. Maxillomandibular advancement
17
e. Adjunctive Therapy
19
f.
Bariatric Surgery
22
3.4
General Principles of Perioperative Management of
22
Suspected and Confirmed OSA
a. Preoperative Management of Suspected
22
and Confirmed OSA
b. Intraoperative Management of Suspected
23
and Confirmed OSA
c. Postoperative Management of Suspected
25
and Confirmed OSA
3.5 Monitoring and Follow-up
27
3.6 Referral
27
a. Referral for Sleep Medicine Services
27
b. Referral Criteria for Surgical Intervention
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
4.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA IN CHILDREN
29
4.1
Epidemiology and Risk Factors
29
4.2
Diagnosis
30
4.3 Airway Assessment
32
4.4 Treatment
32
a. Pharmacotherapy
32
b. Surgery
33
c. Continuous positive airway pressure
34
d. Adjunctive therapy
35
4.5 Perioperative Management
36
a. Preoperative assessment
36
b. Intraoperative management
37
c. Postoperative care
37
4.6 Monitoring and follow-up
38
5.
SPECIAL GROUP
40
5.1 Pregnancy
40
5.2 Craniofacial Anomalies
41
5.3 Down Syndrome
43
5.4 Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
44
6.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
46
6.1 Facilitating and limiting factors
46
6.2 Potential Resource Implications
46
6.3 Clinical Audit Indicators
47
REFERENCES
48
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
57
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
58
Appendix 3 Modified Mallampati
59
Appendix 4 Tonsillar Grading
60
Appendix 5 Berlin Questionnaire
61
Appendix 6 STOP-BANG Questionnaire (English version) 62
Appendix 7 STOP-BANG Questionnaire (Malay version)
63
Appendix 8 Epworth Sleepiness Scale
65
Appendix 9 ASA Classification
66
Appendix 10 Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire (English version) 68
Appendix 11 Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire (Malay version) 69
Appendix 12 Mechanism of Airway Obstruction and
70
Principle of Management in Children
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
List of Abbreviations
72
Acknowledgement
74
Disclosure Statement
74
Source of Funding
74
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work
process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size
is carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group.
In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key clinical recommendations that should
be prioritised for implementation.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA (OSA) IN ADULTS
Screening
• STOP-BANG* Questionnaire should be used for screening of adults
with clinical suspicion of OSA.
• Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) may be used to assess daytime
sleepiness.
* STOP - Snoring, Tiredness, Observed apnoea and high blood
Pressure
BANG - BMI, Age, Neck circumference and Gender
Diagnosis
• OSA should be diagnosed using polysomnography (PSG) either
level 1, 2 or 3.
• In patient with suspected OSA, the PSG should be performed within
six month of initial consultation.
 Scoring of PSG should be performed by trained medical personnel
and its interpretation should be verified by trained specialists.
Treatment
• Lifestyle intervention for weight reduction should be advocated in
OSA.
• Positive airway pressure (PAP) therapy should be offered to patients
with OSA upon diagnosis especially in moderate to severe OSA.
 Nasal mask is the preferred interface.
• Upper airway surgery may be considered in selected group of OSA
patients.
 A follow-up PSG may be considered three months after surgery.
• Maxillomandibular advancement may be considered in certain
patients with moderate to severe OSA.
• Mandibular advancement appliance may be considered for adult
patients with OSA.
 The preferred design should be tailored to the patient’s condition.
• In obese OSA patients (body mass index ≥35 kg/m2), bariatric
surgery may be considered.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
iii
General Principles of Perioperative Management of Suspected
and Confirmed OSA
• Patients who are at risk of OSA should be screened for OSA
preoperatively.
 The preferred screening tool is STOP-BANG.
• Patient with or suspected high risk of OSA should be monitored
closely postoperative.
• Hospitals should have suitable positive airway pressure devices
available for perioperative use or ensure patients with OSA bring
their own device to the hospital.
Referral
• Patients with clinical suspicion of OSA with or without cardiometabolic risk factors and STOP-BANG score ≥3 should be referred
for diagnostic sleep test.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA IN CHILDREN
Diagnosis
• Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ) should be used as a screening
tool for OSA in children.
• PSG level 1 should be considered for diagnosis of OSA in this group
especially those at risk.
 If it is not available, overnight pulse oximetry may be used as an
alternative diagnostic tool.
Treatment
• Oral montelukast and/or nasal corticosteroids may be considered in
children with OSA.
• Adenotonsillectomy (AT) is the treatment of choice in children with
OSA due to adenotonsillar hypertrophy.
 In those with post-AT residual disease, upper airway and multilevel
obstruction should be reassessed and manage accordingly.
• Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) should be offered to
children with OSA if they have persistent symptoms or signs after
surgery or in whom surgery is contraindicated.
 Nasal CPAP is the preferred option
 CPAP should be managed by experienced and skilled
multidisciplinary clinicians
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Monitoring and Follow-up
• Children with OSA especially the high-risk group should be followedup by multidisciplinary team trained in sleep medicine.
• Children with OSA who require long-term use of CPAP should be
monitored objectively by respiratory paediatrician with paediatric
sleep experience.
• Monitoring of CPAP therapy complications is required during followup.
SPECIAL GROUP
• Pregnant women with suspected OSA based on symptoms and signs
should be referred for further management by a multidisciplinary
specialist team.
• Patients with OSA and craniofacial anomalies should be assessed
for the benefit and risk of a surgical intervention.
• Patients with Down syndrome should be screened for OSA and
treated accordingly.
• CPAP is the preferred initial treatment in stable ambulatory patients
with obesity hypoventilation syndrome and severe OSA.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
v
GUIDELINES METHODOLOGY
a.
Guidelines Development
The members of the Development Group (DG) for this CPG were from
the Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Higher Education and private
sector. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review
Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platforms: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane
Database of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed and Guidelines
International Network. Refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy. The inclusion criterion was patients suspected and diagnosed
with OSA. The exclusion criteria were complex sleep apnoea syndrome
(e.g. overlap syndrome etc.) and other sleep disorders e.g. narcolepsy,
insomnia etc. The search was limited to literature published in the last
10 years, on humans and in English. In addition, the reference lists of
all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched and experts in the
field contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted
from November 2020 to 31 May 2022. The literature search was
repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development
process allowing any relevant papers published before 31 May 2022
to be included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published
after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other guidelines as listed below:
• Treatment of Adult Obstructive Sleep Apnea with Positive Airway
Pressure: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical
Practice Guideline (2021)
• Use of polysomnography and home sleep apnea tests for the
longitudinal management of obstructive sleep apnea in adults: An
American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical guidance statement
(2021)
• Referral of adults with obstructive sleep apnea for surgical
consultation: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical
practice guideline (2021)
• Evaluation and Management of Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome:
An Official American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Guideline
(2019)
• Clinical Practice Guideline for Diagnostic Testing for Adult
Obstructive Sleep Apnea: An American Academy of Sleep
Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline (2017)
• Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine Guidelines on
Preoperative Screening and Assessment of Adult Patients With
Obstructive Sleep (2016)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
vi
• Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients
with obstructive sleep apnea: An updated report by the American
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative
Management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea (2014)
• American Academy of Pediatrics: Diagnosis and management of
childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (2012)
• Obstructive sleep disordered breathing in 2- to 18-year-old
children: Diagnosis and management (2016)
• European Respiratory Society (ERS) statement on obstructive
sleep disordered breathing in 1- to 23-month-old children (2017)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to being used as references.
A total of 15 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions.
The DG members met 22 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meeting. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion were resolved consensually. The CPG was
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
Literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/Canadian
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001) while the
grading of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE
(refer to page i). The writing of the CPG follows strictly the requirements
of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to
the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and, the Health Technology
Assessment (HTA) and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia, for review and
approval. Details on the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained
from Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based
Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.
moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634).
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
vii
b.
Objectives
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of OSA in adults and children
based on the following aspects:
a. screening
b. diagnosis and assessments
c. treatment options
d. monitoring and follow-up
e. special groups
c.
Clinical Questions
Refer to Appendix 2.
d.
Target Population
Inclusion Criterion
• All patients suspected and diagnosed with OSA
Exclusion Criteria
• Complex sleep apnoea syndrome (e.g. overlap syndrome etc.)
• Other sleep disorders e.g. narcolepsy, insomnia etc.
e.
Target Group/User
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care of the
management of OSA including:
• doctors and dental surgeons
• allied health professionals
• trainees and medical students
• patients and their advocates
• professional societies
f.
Healthcare Settings
Primary, secondary and tertiary care
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Associate Professor Dr. Ahmad Izuanuddin Ismail
Deputy Director & Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Al-Sultan Abdullah Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM), Selangor
Members (in alphabetical order)
viii
Dr. Asiah Kassim
Consultant Paediatric &
Paediatric Respiratory Physician
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Farah Hani Hassan
Otorhinolaryngology, Head & Neck
Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Hafizah Zainudin
Consultant Paediatric &
Paediatric Respiratory Physician
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin,
Terengganu
Dr. Hamidah Ismail
Consultant Paediatric Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Lalitha Pereirasamy
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Mazlinda Mahadzir
Head of Department &
Consultant Otorhinolaryngology - Head
& Neck Surgery
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health
Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section (MaHTAS),
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd Zambri Mohamed Makhbul
Orthodontic Specialist
Klinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ng Siew Peng
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Nurainul Hana Shamsuddin
Family Medicine Specialist
Hospital Pengajar Universiti Putra Malaysia
Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Rama Krsna Rajandram
Consultant Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeon
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Mukhriz Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rashidah Yasin
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Oriental Melaka Straits Medical Centre,
Melaka
Dr. Rozanah Abd Rahman
Head of Department &
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Saraiza Abu Bakar
Head of Department &
Consultant Otorhinolaryngology - Head &
Neck Surgery
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Sharifah Tahirah Syed Alwi Aljunid
Head of Department &
Consultant Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeon
Hospital Shah Alam, Selangor
Ms. Siti Mariam Mohtar
Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Associate Professor Dr. Wan
Nurazreena Wan Hassan
Consultant Orthodontist
Faculty of Dentistry
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Vanitha M Sivanaser
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zienna Zufida Zainol Rashid
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Pandamaran, Selangor
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
x
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Irfhan Ali Hyder Ali
Head of Respiratory Services & Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Members (in alphabetical order)
Professor Dr. Felicia Lim Siew Kiau
Consultant Paediatric Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Mukhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Goh Bee See
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Mukhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Iskandar Firzada Osman
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jaya Gading,
Pahang
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Lew Chee Kong
Consultant Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeon
TTDI Oral Facial Surgery and
Ortodontic Specialist Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Lim Thiam Aun
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Pengajar Universiti Putra Malaysia,
Selangor
Dr. Mohd Ayzam Ahmad
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dato’ Dr. Rus Anida Awang
Consultant Paediatric Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dato’ Dr. Siti Sabzah Mohd Hashim
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
xi
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Ahmad Fariz Mohamed
Principal Fellow (Patient Advocate)
Institute for The Environment and
Development (LESTARI)
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Bangi, Selangor
Dr. Amanda J Piper
Clinical Lead, Respiratory Support
Service
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital
Camperdown, New South Wales,
Australia
Professor Dr. Anna Marie Nathan
Consultant Paediatrician &
Paediatric Pulmonologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Arthur Teng
Head, Department of Sleep Medicine,
Senior Staff Specialist Sleep and
Respiratory Pediatrician and Conjoint
Associate Professor of Medicine
The University of New South Wales,
Sydney Australia
Dr. Audrey Yoon
Adjunct Assistant Professor/Clinical
Assistant Professor
Consultant Orthodontist and Paediatric
Dentistry
Stanford Sleep Medicine/University of
Pacific Orthodontics, San Francisco
California, United States
Dr. Chan Giin Cherng
Family Medicine Specialist/Specialist
General Practitioner
Edgewater Medical Centre,
Maribyrnong Australia
Associate Professor Dr. Chihiro Tanikawa
Consultant Orthodontist
Department of Orthodontics and
Dentofacial Orthopedics, Graduate
School of Dentistry Osaka University,
Japan
Dr. Haiza Ibrahim
General Practitioner
Klinik Dr Marisa dan Rakan
Dengkil, Selangor
Dr. Han Yung Wen
Family Medicine Specialist/General
Practitioner
Klinik EcoSoul, Setia Alam, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Hazama
Mohamad
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Ho Bee Kiau
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Botanik Klang
Klang, Selangor
Dr. Ismail Kassim
General Practitioner
Ismail Klinik and Surgery
Batu Pahat, Johor
Professor Dr. Lee Ping Yen
Adjunct Professor
UMeHealth Unit
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Malaya. Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mahesh Babu Ramamurthy
Senior Consultant & Head, Division of
Paediatric Pulmonology and Sleep,
National University Hospital, Singapore
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Dr. Mike Yiu Yan Leung
Assistant Dean (External Relations)
Postgraduate Programme Director in
Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery
Clinical Associate Professor in Oral &
Maxillofacial Surgery, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Associate Professor Dr. Naricha
Chirakalwasan
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand
Associate Professor Dr. Nor Azam
Kamaruzaman
Family Medicine Consultant
Head of IIUM Family Health Clinic
Department of Family Medicine
Kulliyyah of Medicine
International Islamic University Malaysia,
Pahang
Dr. Norhaya Mohd Razali
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah,
Terengganu
Associate Professor Dr. Rufinah Teo
Consultant Paediatric Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala
Lumpur
Honorary Professor Dato’ Dr. Wang Chew Yin
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
ALGORITHM 1. MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP
APNOEA IN ADULTS
xiii
Clinical Suspicion of OSA
Screening with STOP-BANG
score of ≥3
Consider other
diagnosis &
treat accordingly
Still highly suspicious
of OSA (e.g. presence
of risk factors, maxillofacial
abnormalities, etc.)
Assessment*/referral to
ORL/respiratory clinic for PSG
Yes
No
Yes
AHI score ≥5**
Re-assess for other
diagnosis & treat
accordingly
Lifestyle modifications
PAP therapy
± Surgery***
Tolerate & compliant
Continue periodic follow-up
PAP intolerant or non-compliant
Refer for surgical management
or oral appliances
(refer to Algorithm 2)
No
OSA: obstructive sleep apnoea
ORL: otorhinolaryngologist
STOP-BANG: STOP - Snoring, Tiredness, Observed apnoea and high blood Pressure
BANG - BMI, Age, Neck circumference and Gender
AHI: Apnoea-Hypopnoea Index
PAP: positive airway pressure
*May include endoscopic upper airway evaluation
**Preferably cases of OSA are managed by a multidisciplinary team (certain cases may receive
upper airway surgery earlier)
***Patient who opts for surgery should follow Algorithm 2
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
ALGORITHM 2. SURGICAL TREATMENT IN ADULTS WITH
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA
xiv
PAP intolerant or non-compliant
Consider oral
appliances
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
BMI ≥35 kg/m2
Refer for
bariatric surgery
Presence of
dentofacial deformity
Refer to OMFS
Refer to ORL
DISE/FNMM
Consider oral
appliances & MFT
Maxillary expansion
MMA
PSG at 3 - 6 months post-surgery
Significant concentric
palatal collapse
Surgery (uni- or multilevel) on
nasal/palate/oropharyngeal/tongue
PSG at 3 months post-surgery
Surgical
success
PAP reconsideration
& follow-up
Follow-up
PAP therapy & follow-up
PAP reconsideration
Yes
Surgical
success
Follow-up
BMI: body mass index; DISE: drug-induced sleep endoscopy
CPAP: continuous positive airway pressure
FNMM: fiber-optic nasal endoscopy with Muller’s Manoeuvre
MFT: myofunctional therapy; MMA: maxillomandibular advancement
OMFS: oral and maxillofacial surgeon; ORL: otorhinolaringologist
PAP: positive airway pressure; PSG: polysomnography
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
ALGORITHM 3. MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP
APNOEA IN CHILDREN
xv
Children with clinical
suspicion/high risk* of OSA
Assessment by paediatrician &
upper airway examination by ORL
Refer to paediatrician &
treat accordingly
PSQ screening with
score of ≥8
High risk for OSA*
Multidisciplinary
assessment by
paediatrician/respiratory
paediatrician/ORL/OMFS/
orthodontist
Adenotonsillar
hypertrophy ± skeletal
discrepancies
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
PSG/overnight pulse oximetry
PSG/overnight pulse oximetry
PSG/overnight pulse oximetry
Moderate/
severe OSA
Mild OSA
AHI 1 – 5/hr
Moderate OSA
AHI 5 – 10/hr
Severe OSA
AHI >10/hr
Refer respiratory
paediatrician for
further assessment
Trial of medications
Adenotonsillectomy
Refer
respiratory
paediatrician
for CPAP
Follow-up by
paediatrician/ORL
Follow-up by paediatrician/
respiratory paediatrician/ORL/
OMFS/orthodontist
Persistent symptoms & signs of OSA
Refer to respiratory paediatrician & ORL for reassessment
CPAP: continuous positive airway pressure
OMFS: oral and maxillofacial surgeon
ORL: otorhinolaryngologist
OSA: obstructive sleep apnoea
PSQ: Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire
PSG: polysomnography
*obesity, craniofacial anomalies, Down syndrome etc. (refer to Subchapter 4.1)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
1
1. INTRODUCTION
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea (OSA) is a common sleep-related breathing
disorder caused by repetitive upper airway collapse resulting in partial
or complete breathing cessation. Symptoms include unrefreshed sleep,
daytime sleepiness, fatigue, insomnia, awakening with a gasping
or choking sensation and loud snoring. Sleep disordered breathing
(SDB) and obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) are commonly
described as OSA in the literature. For the purpose of this document,
we will use OSA as the referring terminology.
This disease affects both children and adults and is associated with
significant morbidity. A recent review estimated that nearly one billion
adults aged 30 - 69 years worldwide could have OSA. The number
of people with moderate to severe OSA in whom treatment was
highly recommended was estimated to be at least 425 million.1, level III
In children, the prevalence of OSA was reported to be up to 5.7%.
Obesity was identified as an independent risk factor for OSA in this
group.2, level I Early recognition and treatment are essential in preventing
sequelae from OSA. This medical condition increases all cause and
cardiovascular (CV)-related mortality predominantly among the middleaged group. It is also associated with other co-morbidities including
metabolic and cognitive consequences. Therefore, it is important to be
aware of the disease and updated with its management.
The management of OSA has evolved since its discovery in 1965,
especially after the introduction of Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
(CPAP) therapy via nasal mask in 1981 as a form of treatment for OSA.
To date, there is no specific local CPG addressing the management
of OSA. Thus, it is timely to have the first Malaysian CPG on OSA to
guide local healthcare providers in managing this common disorder. It
will provide a standard framework for the management of OSA based
on the latest evidence available.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY, RISK FACTORS AND CO-MORBIDITIES
2.1 Epidemiology and Risk Factors
The prevalence of OSA varies due to differences in the definition,
diagnostic methods and sociodemographic features. Using American
Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) 2012 diagnostic criteria, a
systematic review estimated that globally 936 million adults aged
30 - 69 years had OSA, in which 45% had moderate to severe
disease.1, level III In another systematic review, the overall prevalence of
OSA ranged from 9% to 38% in adults. Evidence showed that advancing
age, male gender and higher body mass index (BMI) increased the
prevalence.3, level III However, there are no recent local published studies
on the prevalence of OSA.
The established risk factors for OSA include:4
• age (40 to 70 years old)
• male gender
• family history of OSA
• morbid obesity
Craniofacial features are a risk factor for OSA. The main craniofacial
features associated with OSA in adults (based on population of mixed
ethnicities) include:
• increased soft palate and tongue thickness5, level I
• reduced transverse dimension of the maxilla6, level III
• a reduced pharyngeal airway space5, level I
• increased vertical skeletal dimensions5, level I
• reduced skeletal sagittal dimensions5, level I
• a lowered position of the hyoid5, level I
2.2 Medical Complications
Patients with OSA are at risk of developing cardio-metabolic
complications. A few meta-analyses showed associations between
both conditions:
• stroke
 OR=2.24, 95% CI 1.57 to 3.197, level II-2
 OR=1.86, 95% CI 1.28 to 2.698, level II-2
• cardiovascular diseases (CVD) (OR=1.71, 95% CI 1.17 to
2.17)8, level II-2
• coronary heart disease (CHD) (OR=1.48, 95% CI 1.06 to
2.27)8, level II-2
• metabolic syndrome9, level II-2
 OR=2.87, 95 % CI 2.41 to 3.42 in cross-sectional studies
 OR=2.56, 95 % CI 1.98 to 3.31 in case-control studies
The quality of primary studies in two of the meta-analyses were
moderate.7 & 9, level II-2
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
3
Other medical conditions associated with OSA as shown in metaanalyses were:
• asthma (OR=2.64, 95% CI 1.76 to 3.52)10, level III
• non-alcoholic fatty liver disease with11, level III
 abnormal histopathological examination (HPE) findings
(OR=2.01, 95% CI 1.36 to 2.97)
 abnormal radiological findings (OR=2.99, 95% CI 1.79 to 4.99)
 aspartate aminotransferase (AST) elevation (OR=2.36, 95%
CI 1.46 to 3.82)
 alanine transaminase (ALT) elevation (OR=2.60, 95% CI 1.88
to 3.61)
• chronic kidney disease (CKD) (RR=1.85, 95% CI 1.32 to
2.59)12, level III
• all type of cancer13, level II-2
 mild OSA (RR=1.14, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.25)
 moderate OSA (RR=1.36, 95% CI 1.24 to 1.50)
 severe OSA (RR=1.59, 95% CI 1.45 to 1.74)
• cognitive impairment (RR=1.26, 95% CI 1.05 to 1.50)14, level II-2
Only one meta-analysis reported good quality of the primary
papers.11, level III
Two systematic reviews found associations between OSA and:
• chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)15, level II-2
• major
depressive
disorder
and
post-traumatic
stress
disorder16, level III
In a large, multinational cross-sectional study on subjects undergoing
assessment of suspected sleep-disordered breathing, the diagnosis
and severity of OSA was associated with an increased likelihood
of a concomitant diagnosis of T2DM. The risk of T2DM increased
significantly as OSA severity increased i.e. 1.33 (95% CI 1.04 to 1.72)
in mild, 1.73 (95% CI 1.33 to 2.25) in moderate and 1.87 (95% CI 1.45
to 2.42) in severe OSA (p<0.001 for trend).17, level III
Recommendation 1
• Medical conditions* associated with obstructive sleep apnoea should
be identified and treated accordingly.
*Refer to preceding text in Subchapter 2.2
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
3. OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA IN ADULTS
3.1 Screening
Adult patients with OSA can present with both daytime and night-time
symptoms as shown below:
The clinical findings of OSA may include raised blood pressure, large
neck circumference, obesity and crowded oropharynx [modified
Mallampati grade 3 and 4 (refer to Appendix 3 on Modified Mallampati),
micro/retrognathia, high arch palate, enlarged tonsils (refer to
Appendix 4 on Tonsillar Grading), macroglossia].
Screening tools are useful to detect patients at risk for OSA. Early
detection will lead to early referral and also prioritisation of patients who
may need a diagnostic tool e.g. an overnight polysomnography (PSG)
to confirm the diagnosis.
Several screening tools have been widely used in the adult population
e.g. the Berlin Questionnaire (BQ) (Appendix 5), STOP-BANG
Questionnaire (SBQ) (refer to Appendix 6 and 7), STOP Questionnaire
(SQ) and Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) (Appendix 8).
A meta-analysis found that the sensitivity and diagnostic odds ratio
(DOR) of the SBQ were higher than those of the BQ, SQ and ESS in
detecting mild, moderate and severe OSA. However, the specificity of
SBQ was lower compared with ESS. Hence the study concluded that
the SBQ was superior in the detection of various severity of OSA in
adults compared with the others. The pooled sensitivity and specificity
are shown in Table 1.18, level III The primary papers included were of
mixed quality.
Daytime symptoms
• Excessive daytime sleepiness
• Unrefreshed sleep
• Tiredness/fatigue
• Early morning headache
• Dry mouth
• Poor attention/concentration span
• Memory impairment
• Mood disturbance or irritability
• Decrease libido/erectile
dysfunction
Night-time symptoms
• Snoring
• Witnessed apnoea (cessation of
breathing)
• Gasping/choking
• Nocturia
• Difficulty initiating and maintaining
sleep
• Fragmented sleep (frequent
wakening)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
5
Table 1. Pooled sensitivity and specificity of different screening
tools for OSA
AHI=Apnoea Hypopnoea Index
A recent meta-analysis evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of various
screening tools in different clinical cohorts supported the above findings
and concluded that SBQ had the highest sensitivity to detect OSA with
highest diagnostic OR in sleep clinic and surgical populations but
lacked specificity.19, level III The quality of the primary papers included
were moderate.
10 items grouped in 3
categories:
• symptoms of snoring and
cessation of breathing
• symptoms of excessive
daytime sleepiness
• presence of hypertension
with additional information
on height and weight
High risk: positive score in 2
or more categories
Questionnaire
Description
Severity
of OSA
Pooled
Sensitivity
Pooled
Specificity
Berlin
Questionnaire
(Appendix 5)
AHI>5
76%
59%
AHI>10
76%
44%
4 subjective and 4
demographic items:
• STOP - Snoring,
Tiredness, Observed apnoea
and high blood Pressure
• BANG - BMI, Age, Neck
circumference and Gender
High risk of OSA: Yes to 3 or more
questions
Low risk of OSA: Yes to less than 3
questions
STOP-BANG
Questionnaire
(refer to
Appendix 6
and 7)
AHI>5
88%
42%
AHI>10
90%
36%
AHI>15
84%
38%
AHI>15
93%
35%
4 items consisting of yes/no
answers:
STOP - Snore,
Tiredness/fatigue, Observed
stopped breathing and high
blood Pressure
High risk: 2 or more ‘yes’
answer
STOP
Questionnaire
AHI>5
87%
42%
AHI>10
89%
32%
AHI>15
90%
28%
8 items measuring the
likeliness of daytime
sleepiness in different
situations, the score ranges
from 0 - 24.
High risk: score 11 or more
Epworth
Sleepiness
Scale
(Appendix 6)
AHI>5
54%
65%
AHI>10
47%
62%
AHI>15
58%
60%
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
This is further supported by another systematic review using subjects
mostly from sleep clinic populations. The review found the highest
sensitivity rates for SBQ in the prediction of mild and severe OSA
(97.55% and 98.7% respectively) while the highest specificity rate was
for BQ (90% and 80% respectively). For predicting moderate OSA, SQ
had both the highest sensitivity (100%) and specificity (92.3%).20, level III
However, the quality assessment on the primary papers included was
not reported.
In the era of digital technology, the use of mobile technology and novel
tools has the potential to aid in the screening and diagnosis of OSA.
A meta-analysis evaluating the accuracy of smartphones and portable
devices in screening for OSA found that bed or mattress-based devices
and contactless devices had the greatest potential for use in screening
and possibly monitoring OSA. They had the best overall sensitivity of
0.921 (95% CI 0.870 to 0.953). The overall sensitivity of contactless
devices to detect OSA was 0.905 (95% CI 0.839 to 0.946). The
contactless devices used various mechanisms including respiratory
and body movement obtained either from emission of sound waves,
emission of low-power radiofrequency energy or use of a piezoelectric
sensor, photograph images and speech recordings. However, due to
lack of studies comparing the new tools with gold standard method
(PSG), more evidence is needed before recommendations can be
made for these devices in clinical use.21, level III The included primary
papers were of mixed quality.
Recommendation 2
• STOP-BANG* Questionnaire should be used for screening of adults
with clinical suspicion of obstructive sleep apnoea.
 Epworth Sleepiness Scale may be used to assess daytime
sleepiness.
* STOP - Snoring, Tiredness, Observed apnoea and high blood
Pressure
BANG - BMI, Age, Neck circumference and Gender
3.2 Diagnosis
• OSA is suspected in the presence of clinical signs and symptoms,
and a positive screening questionnaire. The diagnosis can only be
confirmed by PSG (level 1, 2 or 3).
The diagnosis of OSA cannot be made solely based on clinical signs
or symptoms identified during sleep-oriented history and physical
examination. They need to be supported by PSG or home sleep apnea
testing (HSAT).22
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
7
OSA is diagnosed through PSG. There are four levels of sleep test
as described in Table 2. Only level 1 - 3 can be used for diagnostic
purposes, whilst level 4 is used for screening.
Table 2. Different level of sleep testing
Adapted: Hesselbacher SE, Mattewal A, Hirshkowitz M et al. Classification, Technical
Specifications, and Types of Home Sleep Testing Devices for SleepDisordered Breathing. Sleep Med. Clin. 6 (2011):261-282.
In the standard PSG, Apnoea-Hypopnoea Index (AHI) is defined as
apnea+hypopnea/total sleep time while the AHI in the portable monitor
(PM) is the number of apneas+hypopneas/total recording time. As a
result, PM are likely to underestimate the severity of respiratory events
compared with PSG.
The other disadvantages of PM include its inability to evaluate the
quality of sleep and other non-respiratory sleep disorders. HSAT and
PM have the advantage that the patient sleeps in his/her own bed, thus
the sleep pattern may be more representative of everyday sleep. PM
reduces health-care costs and waiting times, thus making the diagnosis
of OSA accessible to centres that do not have conventional PSG.
The following are recommended for a diagnosis of OSA in adults:22
• PSG or HSAT can be used in uncomplicated cases presenting
with signs and symptoms of OSA with an increased risk for
moderate to severe disease.
• PSG should be performed if a single HSAT is negative,
inconclusive or technically inadequate.
• Full attended PSG (level 1) should be used for patients with
significant cardiorespiratory disease, potential respiratory muscle
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Parameter
Portable
monitor (Partial
PSG/HSAT)
Continuous
single or dual
bio-parameter
Minimum of
one channel:
O2 saturation,
respiratory
effort
Not measured
Not measured
Unattended
Full unattended
PSG
Minimum of
seven channels:
EEG, EOG,
EMG, ECG,
airflow,
respiratory
effort, O2
saturation
Measured
Measured
Unattended
Full attended
PSG
Minimum of
seven channels:
EEG, EOG,
EMG, ECG,
airflow,
respiratory
effort, O2
saturation
Measured
Measured
Attended
Description
Measures
Body position
Leg movement
Personnel
Not measured
Unattended
Can be
measured
Minimum of
four channels
(two respiratory
effort and
airflow, heart
rate (HR)/ECG,
O2 saturation)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
weakness due to neuromuscular condition, awake hypoventilation
or suspicion of sleep-related hypoventilation, chronic opioid
medication use, history of smoking or severe insomnia,
• A second PSG may be considered if the initial PSG is negative
and clinical suspicion for OSA remains.
• Diagnostic criteria for adult OSA23
(A and B) or C satisfy the criteria
A. The presence of one or more of the following:
1. The patient complains of sleepiness, non-restorative sleep,
fatigue or insomnia symptoms
2. The patient wakes with breath holding, gasping or choking
3. The bed partner or other observer reports habitual snoring,
breathing interruptions or both during the patient’s sleep
4. The patient has been diagnosed with hypertension, a mood
disorder, cognitive dysfunction, coronary artery disease,
stroke, congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation or type 2
diabetes mellitus
B. PSG or out-of-centre sleep testing (OCST) demonstrates:
1. ≥5 predominantly obstructive respiratory events [obstructive
and mixed apnoeas, hypopnoeas or respiratory effort-related
arousals (RERAs)] per hour of sleep during a PSG or per
hour of monitoring (OCST)
OR
C. PSG or OCST demonstrates:
1. ≥15 predominantly obstructive respiratory events (apnoeas,
hypopnoeas or RERAs) per hour of sleep during a PSG or
per hour of monitoring (OCST)
• The third edition of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders
(ICSD)-3 defines OSA as:23
 AHI ≥5/hour associated with the typical symptoms of OSA or
associated medical/psychiatric disorder
 AHI ≥15/hour (even in the absence of symptoms or disorders)
Sleep testing or PSG is a test to evaluate various types of sleep
disorders and not just OSA. Ideally, PSG should be done either at
night (overnight) or during the subject’s usual sleep schedule, with a
recording of no less than 6.5 hours, including at least three hours of
sleep. A diagnosis of OSA can still be made even if the recording is less
than the ideal hours provided that it is interpreted by a sleep specialist.
In a meta-analysis on diagnostic accuracy of 19 high quality studies,
level 3 portable sleep tests when compared with level 1 PSG showed a
good diagnostic performance in adult with uncomplicated OSA and no
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
9
unstable co-morbidities. The ROCs were high, ranging between 0.85
and 0.99 across different levels of disease severity.24, level III
Another meta-analysis on the diagnostic accuracy of level 4 portable
sleep monitors vs PSG for OSA showed that the diagnostic accuracy
of type 4 portable monitoring varied depending on the type of device,
number of channels and disease severity.25, level III
In a systematic review on the value of oxygen desaturation index (ODI)
with reference to AHI among predominantly middle-aged men without
co-morbidities, the sensitivities of ODI ranged from 32% to 98.5%,
whereas specificities ranged from 47.7% to 98% in the diagnosis of
OSA. Studies reported data for a 4% ODI ≥15/hour showed an improved
specificity for diagnosing OSA which ranged from 75% to 98%. Thus,
consideration should be given for diagnosing adult OSA with a 4% ODI
of ≥15/hour. However, the quality of the primary papers were poor with
large discrepancies in the definitions of almost all of the variables used
in the studies.26, level III
Digital health using smart phones and portable devices had been
studied to diagnose OSA. A meta-analysis with mixed quality of primary
papers on sleep-related breathing disorder showed that bed/mattressbased devices had the best overall sensitivity of 0.921 (95% CI 0.870
to 0.953). On the other hand, contactless devices can detect mild OSA
with a sensitivity of 0.976 (95% CI 0.899 to 0.995).21, level III
The CPG DG opines that in patient with suspected OSA, the PSG
should be performed within six month of initial consultation. Scoring
of PSG should be performed by trained medical personnel and its
interpretation should be verified by trained specialists.
Severity of OSA in adults are shown as below:
Recommendation 3
• Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) should be diagnosed using
polysomnography (PSG) either level 1, 2 or 3.
• In patient with suspected OSA, the PSG should be performed within
six month of initial consultation.
 Scoring of PSG should be performed by trained medical personnel
and its interpretation should be verified by trained specialists.
AHI
Severity of OSA
<5/hr
5-15/hr
15-30/hr
>30/hr
No OSA
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
•
Upper Airway Assessment
Upper airway assessment is important in deciding the best surgical
approach to treat OSA. Fiber-optic nasal endoscopy with Muller’s
Manoeuver (FNMM) has been used as a method to assess upper airway
obstruction. Drug-induced sleep endoscopy (DISE) has recently been
introduced for such assessment. However, it requires deep sedation
and involvement of anaesthetists, and thus may pose challenges in
carrying out the procedure in the local setting. Three cross-sectional
studies showed that there were discrepancies between FNMM and
DISE findings in the degree of obstruction. There were significant
differences in the detection of retrolingual collapse identified via DISE
compared with FNMM.27 - 29, level III
The CPG DG opines that DISE is more accurate than FNMM in
determining the degree of upper airway obstruction prior to sleep
surgery based on case series.
• If DISE is unable to be performed prior to surgery, FNMM may still be
offered as an alternative procedure to identify the level and degree
of obstruction.
3.3 Treatment
Management of adult OSA patients include lifestyle modification,
weight management, PAP therapy, oral appliance therapy and surgical
procedures. Delivery of quality treatment for OSA patients require a
multidisciplinary approach. Communication among team members is
essential for effective and holistic OSA management.
a. Weight Management and Lifestyle Modification
Obesity is strongly associated with OSA3, level II-2 and there is a potential
reciprocal role of OSA in obesity.30, level III Thus, weight management and
lifestyle modification is an important treatment either as an adjunct to
other treatment or alone i.e. bariatric surgery in OSA with obesity.
Three meta-analyses showed that lifestyle intervention which include
diet, exercise or combination of both, improved both AHI and BMI in
adults with OSA.
• In the first meta-analysis weight loss through diet and/or physical
activity decreased AHI compared with control (WMD= -6.04/hour,
95% CI -11.18 to -0.90). However, diet alone did not show any
significant difference in the outcome.31, level I
• The second meta-analysis also supported the finding where
intensive lifestyle interventions reduced weight (WMD= -13.76 kg,
95% CI -19.21 to -8.32) and improved both AHI (WMD= -16.09/
hour, 95% CI -25.64 to -6.54)) and ODI (WMD= -14.18, 95% CI
-24.23 to -4.13).32, level I
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
11
• In the recent meta-analysis, combination of diet and exercise
improved AHI (WMD= -8.09/hour, 95% CI -11.94 to -4.25) and
BMI (WMD= -2.41 kg/m2, 95% CI -4.09 to -0.73). Apart from that,
diet alone improved both AHI (WMD= -8.61/hour, 95% CI -15.89
to -1.33) and BMI (WMD= -3.97, 95% CI -5.77 to -2.18), while
exercise alone only improved AHI (WMD= -8.08/hour, 95% CI
-15.78 to -0.42) but not BMI.33, level I
The primary papers in the meta-analyses were generally of moderate
quality.
Recommendation 4
• Lifestyle intervention for weight reduction should be advocated in
obstructive sleep apnoea.
b. Positive Airway Pressure Therapy
Positive airway pressure (PAP) therapy has become the primary therapy
to treat adults with OSA across the spectrum of disease severity.
• PAP therapy refers to the delivery of compressed air which splints
the collapsed upper airway.
 It is the gold standard treatment for OSA.34
 Two types of PAP therapy are continuous PAP (CPAP) and bilevel PAP (BiPAP). Both can be automated (APAP) or fixed
pressure.
A meta-analysis showed improvement in physical QoL of patients with
OSA who had received CPAP compared with controls. However, there
were no significant difference in overall and psychological QoL35, level I
i.
Positive Airway Pressure Therapy and its effect on comorbidities
CPAP was effective in prevention of stroke in OSA as reported in a
meta-analysis. Cohort studies demonstrated significant effectiveness
(OR=0.590, 95% CI 0.350 to 0.994). Although RCT result was nonsignificant on effectiveness, subgroup analysis showed stroke reduction
with good CPAP adherence (>4 hours and at least 70% of usage days)
and moderate to severe OSA with OR of 0.530 (95% CI 0.323 to 0.86)
and 0.505 (95% CI 0.260 to 0.979) respectively. The primary papers
included were mostly low risk of bias.36, level I
In another meta-analysis on the prevention of CV events in patients
with OSA, CPAP therapy did not improve CV outcomes e.g. stroke,
atrial fibrillation, myocardial infarction and unstable angina. The
findings need to be taken with caution due to risk of bias of the included
studies.37, level I
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Despite unfavourable findings on most major adverse cerebrovascular
and CV endpoints (MACEs), CPAP therapy in OSA had been shown
to be effective in improving arterial stiffness measured by pulse wave
velocity (a marker of vascular damage and an independent predictor of
CV morbidity and mortality) compared with control (MD= -0.44, 95% CI
-0.76 to -0.12). The included studies in the meta-analysis had moderate
risk of bias.38, level I
In patients with OSA and resistant hypertension, a meta-analysis
showed that CPAP therapy was associated with clinically significant
changes in 24-hour systolic blood pressure (SBP) (MD= -5.06 mmHg,
95% CI -7.89 to -2.13) and 24-hour diastolic blood pressure (MD= - 4.21
mmHg, 95% CI -6.5 to -1.93). The quality of the evidence was moderate
or low for most outcomes.39, level I CPAP therapy was more effective in
treating resistant hypertension than nonresistant hypertension in OSA
as shown in a systematic review.40, level I
A meta-analysis looking at CPAP therapy among patients with OSA
and depression showed significant improvement in psychological
symptoms especially those who used the therapy for >4 hours/night
compared with controls.41, level I Most of the studies included were of
moderate quality.
ii.
Automated vs fixed-continuous positive airway pressure
A meta-analysis of 24 RCTs showed that automated PAP (APAP) had
increased compliance compared with fixed-CPAP in OSA (MD=0.18
hours/night, 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.31). However, there was no significant
difference in AHI reduction. The side effects (SEs) reported were dry
mouth, air leakage and skin or nasal-oral irritation. There was no
significant difference in SEs reported in five RCTs comparing APAP
with fixed CPAP.42, level I The quality of the primary papers in the metaanalysis was moderate.
However, in a recent meta-analysis, there was no significant difference
in adherence between APAP and fixed-CPAP.43, level I
The findings of a recent Cochrane systematic review comparing APAP
and fixed-CPAP in adults with moderate to severe OSA were:44, level I
• APAP increased machine usage by 13 minutes/night (MD=0.21
hours/night, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.31) and reduced daytime sleepiness
based on Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) by a small amount
(MD= -0.44 units, 95% CI -0.72 to -0.16) at six weeks; however,
the reduction in ESS was not clinically significant.
• fixed-CPAP had slightly lower AHI values (MD=0.48/hour, 95% CI
0.16 to 0.80)
Adverse events (AEs) reported were nasal blockage, dry mouth,
pressure intolerance and mask leak. The tolerability outcome could
not be compared between the two modalities due to different variables
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
13
measured. The quality of the primary papers in the review was of
moderate to high certainty.
iii. Interface
CPAP delivery interface includes nasal, intra-nasal (nasal-pillow) and
oronasal masks.
In a small Cochrane systematic review, the optimum form of CPAP
delivery interface remained unclear due to the limited number of
studies.45, level I
Nasal mask showed no significant difference in adherence with nasal
pillow or oronasal mask in meta-analyses of RCTs.43, level I
According to the 2020 American Thoracic Society Workshop report,
nasal mask should be the initial option for most patients.46, level III
iv. Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure
Indications to switch from CPAP to BiPAP are when:47
• patient complains of being uncomfortable or intolerant to high
CPAP pressures
• CPAP level is ≥15 cm H2O and respiratory disturbances continue
c.
Education, Supportive and Behavioural Interventions
A Cochrane systematic review compared the use of educational,
supportive, behavioural or mixed (combination of two or more
intervention types) strategies with control in encouraging compliance
of CPAP usage in adults with OSA. Supportive interventions included
office or/and home-based visits or phone check-ins by clinical staff while
behavioural interventions included psychotherapeutic techniques. The
findings showed that CPAP usage increased with:48, level I
• behavioural intervention (MD=1.31 hours/night, 95% CI 0.95 to 1.66)
• supportive intervention (MD=0.7 hours/night, 95% CI 0.36 to 1.05)
• educational intervention (MD=0.85 hours/night, 95% CI 0.32 to
1.39)
• mixed intervention (MD=0.82 hours/night (95% CI 0.2 to 1.43)
The primary papers were of varied quality.
According to AASM guidelines, telemonitoring intervention has been
shown to improve adherence.34
Recommendation 5
• Positive airway pressure (PAP) therapy should be offered to patients
with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) upon diagnosis especially in
moderate to severe OSA.
 Nasal mask is the preferred interface.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
c.
Surgery
PAP therapy is the mainstay treatment for OSA, however any major
structural upper airway obstruction should be treated accordingly.
Surgical treatment for OSA is one of the treatment options in selected
group of patients. Surgery is part of continuous care for OSA patients
who do not tolerate or accept PAP therapy.49 It is also indicated to
increase PAP compliance in patients with major structural upper airway
obstruction.
In deciding the benefits of surgery, surgical success and surgical cure
have been used. Surgical success in OSA is defined as postoperative
reduction in the AHI of 50% and/or a postoperative AHI of <20 event/
hour54, level II-3 whilst surgical cure is defined as an AHI of <5 events/hour
after any sleep surgery.
The CPG DG opines that follow-up PSG should be performed three
months after surgery for reassessment.
i.
Nasal surgery
Nasal breathing is vital for better quality sleep. A non-randomised
clinical trial showed that combining nose surgery in multilevel surgery
improved surgical success compared with multilevel surgery without
nose surgery in OSA (OR=1.8, 95% CI 1.3 to 2.7).50, level II-1
Evidence from an earlier meta-analysis with moderate quality of
primary papers showed that isolated nasal surgery in patients
with OSA and nasal obstruction reduced therapeutic CPAP device
pressures compared with baseline (MD= -2.66 cmH2O, 95% CI -3.65 to
-1.67).51, level II-3
Upper airway surgery may have a moderate effect on decreasing
therapeutic PAP requirements (i.e. optimal PAP level) and increasing
PAP adherence although this estimate is based on a small number of
uncontrolled observational studies.49
ii.
Oropharyngeal and velopharyngeal surgery
There are various surgical techniques to address obstruction at
velopharyngeal region.
A meta-analysis comparing barbed reposition pharyngoplasty (BRP)
and expansion sphincter pharyngoplasty showed no significant
difference between the two techniques in terms of AHI reduction in
OSA. However, the quality of primary papers was poor.52, level II-1
In a meta-analysis evaluating the effects of lingual tonsillectomy
with palatal surgery in OSA showed improvements postoperatively
in:53, level II-3
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
15
• AHI (MD= -18.51/hour, 95% CI -31.72 to -5.31)
• minimal oxygen saturation (MD= 5.26, 95% CI 0.10 to 10.42)
• ESS (MD= -5.44, 95% CI -8.69 to -2.18)
In terms of complications, no postoperative airway compromise was
reported. However, three of the patients in two included studies had
significant bleeding which required revision surgeries. The quality of the
included papers was moderate.
A recent systematic review showed good outcomes after BRP surgery.
There was a significant difference between preoperative and postoperative values of AHI and ODI. The surgical success rate reported in
the included studies ranged between 65.4% and 93%. There were no
important intraoperative or postoperative complications in all studies.
BRP has been proven to be safe and effective surgery in OSA.54, level II-3
Laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty (LAUP) has been used as a surgical
option to treat OSA. However, a meta-analysis showed that it only
reduced AHI by 32% among all patients with only a minimal change in
lowest oxygen saturation. A meta-analysis concluded that LAUP only
gave a surgical success rate of 23% and cure rate of 8%, with worsening
of the AHI among 44% of patients. The meta-analysis recommended
that LAUP be performed with caution or not performed at all given
the unfavourable results.55, level I However, quality assessment of the
primary papers was not reported.
Temperature controlled radiofrequency tissue ablation (TCRFTA) can
be applied at the level of the base of tongue, soft palate, or both levels
depending on the predominant site of obstruction. A meta-analysis
showed TCRFTA of the tongue base as a stand-alone procedure in
OSA improved sleep parameters and symptoms at one-year posttreatment:56, level I
• RDI (respiratory disturbance index) (RoM=0.60, 95 % CI 0.47 to
0.76)
• LSAT (lowest oxygen saturation) (RoM=1.05, 95 % CI 1.01 to 1.10)
• ESS (RoM=0.59, 95 % CI 0.51 to 0.67)
• Snoring (RoM=0.48, 95 % CI 0.37 to 0.62)
TCRFTA of soft palate as stand-alone procedure showed no significant
short-term improvements in RDI or ESS. However, there was significant
improvement in snoring. On the other hand, TCRFTA of both levels
showed significant reduction in RDI with symptom improvement (ESS
and snoring) although the oxygenation parameters were not significantly
improved at one-year post-treatment.
iii. Tongue surgery
Tongue surgery includes conventional glossectomy and transoral
robotic base-of-tongue surgery.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
A meta-analysis looked at the outcomes of glossectomy using three
different techniques (midline glossectomy, lingualplasty and submucosal
minimally invasive lingual excision) in patients with OSA. The analysis
showed significant improvement in AHI, ESS, snoring visual analogue
score and lowest oxygen saturation with glossectomy. It also revealed
surgical success rate of 59.56% (95% CI, 52.99% to 65.96%) and
cure rate of 22.5% (95% CI 11.26% to 36.26%) of OSA cases.57, level III
However, no quality assessment was mentioned.
Transoral robotic base-of-tongue surgery (TORS BOT) is a newer
alternative approach for tongue surgery in OSA. Two meta-analyses
showed that TORS BOT led to a significant improvement in sleeprelated outcomes (AHI, ESS and lowest oxygen saturation) in patients
with OSA.58, level II-3; 59, level III The surgical success rate using this
approach was 68.4% (95% CI 63.0 to 73.5) while the surgical cure rate
was 23.8% (95% CI 19.1 to 29.2).58, level II-3 Quality assessment in both
meta-analyses were either not appropriate or not mentioned.
Currently, there is no retrievable evidence on direct comparison of
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness between conventional glossectomy
and transoral robotic base-of-tongue surgery.
Recommendation 6
• Upper airway surgery may be considered in selected group of
obstructive sleep apnoea patients.
 A follow-up polysomnography may be considered three months
after surgery.
iv. Maxillary expansion in adults
Maxillary constriction in a transverse dimension has been shown to be
one of the pathophysiological risks for OSA. This discrepancy leads to
increased nasal airflow resistance and displacement of the posterior
tongue leading to pharyngeal collapse.6, level III
Maxillary expansion in adults with OSA can be achieved by:
• surgical-assisted rapid palatal expansion (SARPE)
• distraction osteogenesis maxillary expansion (DOME)
These procedures:
• widen the nasal floor and increase palatal muscles tension to
prevent palate collapsibility during sleep60, level III
• increase upper airway volume which improve nasal breathing and
tongue space61, level III
• prevent posterior displacement of the tongue61, level III
A recent meta-analysis showed that SARPE in adults with OSA led to
significant:6, level III
• reduction in nasal resistance
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
17
• improvement of self-reported questionnaire [Nasal Obstruction
Symptom Evaluation (NOSE) score]
In another meta-analysis of adults with OSA, maxillary expansion also
resulted in:60, level III
• decreased AHI from a mean of 24.3 events/hour (95% CI 15.3 to
33.3) to 9.9 events/hour (95% CI 5.4 to 14.4)
• improvement of lowest oxygen saturation from 84.3% (95% CI
81.7 to 87.0) to 86.9% (95% CI 85.1 to 88.7)
A cross-sectional study showed that DOME used to treat adult OSA
patients with narrow maxilla and nasal floor led to significant:62, level III
• improvement in mean ESS score
• improvement in AHI
• reduction in NOSE score
• increased percentage of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
• There is paucity of evidence on the amount of maxillary expansion
needed to improve respiratory parameters and long-term
improvements in OSA. However, the surgery can be considered
in adults with moderate and severe OSA associated with a narrow
maxilla and nasal floor.
d.
Maxillomandibular Advancement
Maxillomandibular advancement (MMA) is one of the surgical
interventions for patients with moderate to severe OSA. In a small RCT
comparing MMA and CPAP in 50 patients with severe OSA, there was
no significant difference in improvement of AHI and ESS.63, level I However,
there was no explanation of randomisation or type of analysis done.
MMA with or without adjunctive surgical procedures had been shown
to be an effective and predictable surgical treatment option for patients
with moderate to severe OSA with a surgical success rate of 86% and
cure rate ranging from 38 - 50%.64 - 65, level II-3
A recent meta-analysis of eight clinical trials on moderate to severe
OSA showed that MMA:66, level II-3
• achieved surgical success with mean final AHI of 12.4/hour (95%
CI 7.18 to 17.6)
• increased posterior airway volume (PAV) which correlated with
improvements in postoperative AHI (r=0.75, 95% CI 0.65 to 0.85)
In another meta-analysis which examined the impact of MMA in OSA, it
was shown that:67, level II-3
• upper airway volume increased in the vertical position (MD=8.909
mm3, 95% CI 6.614 to 11.204) and supine position (MD=6.047
mm3, 95% CI 5.539 to 6.565)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
• AHI reduced (MD=45.596/hour, 95% CI 50.375 to 40.818)
• RDI reduced (MD=50.474/hour, 95% CI 63.680 to 37.089)
• oxygen saturation increased (MD=8.990%, 95% CI 5.205 to 12.775)
• ESS reduced (MD= -10.491, 95% CI -12.519 to -8.464)
There is no strong evidence to establish the magnitude and direction
of maxillary or mandibular movement required to cure OSA and thus
this should be tailored to each individual patient based on clinical
assessment.
The stability of improvement in airway parameters with MMA has been
reported to be sustained significantly over a mean follow-up of 10
months.68, level II-3
The revised Stanford Protocol (2019) state that the following patients
can benefit from MMA:69, level III
• patients with OSA and concurrent dentofacial deformity
 those who have a co-existing indication for orthognathic/
corrective jaw surgery are indicated for proceeding directly to
MMA surgery to concurrently improve speech and mastication
function
• patients with moderate to severe OSA without dentofacial
deformity with:
 complete lateral pharyngeal wall collapse on DISE
 low hyoid position and obtuse cervicomental angle
 high inclination of the occlusal plane
Potential complications of MMA have been reported to be low but can
be divided into:70, level III
• intraoperative complications
 bleeding due to injury to the descending palatine artery during
maxillary downfracture
 increased risk of unfavourable fracture patterns due to highly
cortical bone
• early postoperative complications
 airway obstruction which should be acutely recognised;
moderate to severe OSA patients must be monitored in the ICU
after extubation until the airway is confirmed to be secured
 due to the large movements, there is increased risk of wound
dehiscence and exposure of plate leading to possible infected
plates requiring close postoperative monitoring
• late postoperative complications
 malunion of bony segments
 hardware issues relating to chronic sinusitis, acute infection or
persistent pain
 relapse of the OSA symptoms which require revision surgery
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
19
Recommendation 7
• Maxillomandibular advancement may be considered in certain
patients with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnoea.
e.
Adjunctive Therapy
i.
Mandibular advancement appliance
Mandibular advancement appliance (MAA) is a relatively non-invasive
intra-oral device which is worn overnight to position the mandible
in a forward and downward direction. In principle, by repositioning
the mandible forward, the total airway volume during mandibular
advancement increases, predominantly at the lateral dimensions, in the
volume of the velopharynx, and to a lesser extent in the volume of the
hypopharynx. The mechanics of airway volume increase is achieved
through an increase in the lower anterior facial height, reduction
in the distance between the hyoid and posterior nasal spine, lateral
displacement of the parapharyngel fat pads away from the airway and
anterior movement of the tongue base muscles. Consequently, this
facilitates a reduction in AHI.71, level III
The effectiveness and safety of MAA vs other modalities were studied
in adults with OSA in a meta-analysis and a network meta-analysis.
CPAP was found to be more effective than MAA in reducing AHI with
MD of between 8.243 (95% CI 3.354 to 13.132)72, level I and 9.59 (95%
CrI 3.75 to 15.40).73, level I
Apart from that, the network meta-analysis of moderate quality papers
also reported that CPAP was more effective than MAA in:73, level I
• Increasing lowest oxygen saturation (MD=5.25%, 95% CrI 7.64 to
3.22)
• reducing 24-hour SBP (MD=3.22 mmHg, 95% CrI 0.03 to 6.34)
and daytime SBP (MD=4.58 mmHg, 95% CrI 0.71 to 7.98)
In another analysis, when compared with control (sham CPAP or
placebo), MAA was more effective in:
• reducing AHI (MD=13.91/hour, 95% CrI 21.01 to 7.00)
• increasing lowest oxygen saturation (MD=3.71%, 95% CrI 1.39 to
6.42)
• reducing ESS (MD=1.58, 95% CrI 2.89 to 0.28)
• improving arousal index (MD=8.32/hour, 95% CrI 12.91 to 4.55)
MAA was an effective option in patients with poor compliance to CPAP.
Compliance was significantly lower in CPAP than MAA by 1.1 hour
per night. The quality of the primary papers in the meta-analysis was
moderate.72, level I
The effectiveness of MAA is influenced by its design. Factors considered
in MAA fabrication are mono-bloc vs dual-bloc, custom-made vs readyManagement of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
made and the amount of mandibular advancement. A meta-analysis
comparing mono-bloc and dual-bloc MAA with success rate measured
as:
difference in mean AHI pre- and posttreatment x 100%
mean AHI pretreatment
where the former had a higher success rate of 82.1% (95% CI 72.2 to
88.7) compared with the latter of 54.7% (95% CI 44.3 to 63.7). Monobloc MAAs also showed better improvement in the lowest oxygen
saturation [10.048% (95% CI 7.733 to 12.363) vs 3.357% (95% CI 2.290
to 4.423)]. The primary papers included were of moderate quality.74, level I
Two systematic reviews found custom-made MAA to be more effective
than ready-made MAA.75 - 76, level I Compared with ready-made MAA,
custom-made MAA was more effective in:
• reducing AHI (MD= -3.52/hour, 95% CI -6.36 to -0.69)
• achieving better treatment response [defined as either partial
(50% reduction in AHI) or complete (AHI <5/hour)], with an OR of
0.47 (95% CI 0.28 to 0.78)
• improving quality of life based on the Functional Outcomes of
Sleep Questionnaire (MD=0.76, 95% CI 0.14 to 1.38).
Furthermore, patients preferred custom-made MAA (p <0.001)76, level I
and had better adherence with it (MD= -1.34, 95% CI -2.02 to -
0.66).75, level I
A meta-regression analysis showed that the amount of mandibular
advancement did not significantly influence the success rate of the
MAA.77, level I
The usage of MAA had been associated with mild to moderate side
effects including excessive salivation, temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
discomfort, tooth discomfort, sore jaw muscles, dry mouth, occlusal
change and difficulty chewing in the morning.72, level I
A meta-analysis found the skeletal changes after the use of MAA were
rotation of the mandible (downward and forward), and increase in the
SNA angle by 0.06 ± 0.03o. While occlusal changes were:78, level I
• increase in the lower incisor proclination by 1.54 ± 0.16o
• decrease overjet by 0.89 ± 0.04 mm
• decrease overbite by 0.68 ± 0.04 mm
Recommendation 8
• Mandibular advancement appliance may be considered for adult
patients with obstructive sleep apnoea.
 The preferred design should be tailored to the patient’s condition.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
21
ii.
Myofunctional therapy
Myofunctional therapy refers to the combinations of oropharyngeal
exercises. These combinations include both isotonic and isometric
exercises which involve several muscles and areas of the mouth,
pharynx and upper respiratory tract to work on certain functions e.g.
speaking, breathing, blowing, sucking, chewing and swallowing.
In a Cochrane systematic review, myofunctional therapy in OSA
patients:79, level I
• reduced AHI (MD= -13.20 points, 95% CI -18.48 to -7.93)
compared with sham therapy based on two studies of lowcertainty evidence
• reduced AHI (MD= -6.20 points, 95% CI -11.94 to -0.46) compared
with waiting list based on one study of low-certainty evidence
• increased AHI (MD= 9.60 points, 95% CI 2.46 to 16.74), compared
with CPAP based on one study of low-certainty evidence
• increase AHI (MD=10.50 points, 95% CI 3.43 to 17.57), compared
with CPAP based on one study of low-certainty evidence
iii. Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacotherapy has been used as an adjunct therapy in OSA
patients with nasal obstruction and residual sleepiness.
Nasal obstruction is a common complaint in patients with OSA especially
with concomitant allergic rhinitis. In a Cochrane systematic review, an
RCT with moderate quality showed that intranasal fluticasone in OSA
patients with allergic rhinitis significantly reduced AHI compared with
placebo.80, level I
A more recent meta-analysis showed that intranasal corticosteroids
improved AHI in OSA compared with placebo (SMD= -0.73, 95% CI,
-1.23 to -0.23). The included studies reported only few mild AEs.81, level I
However, the quality of the included studies was mixed.
In another meta-analysis on OSA, topical nasal treatments
(oxymetazoline, xylometazoline and phenylephrine) did not significantly
improve AHI compared with placebo. The included primary papers were
of moderate quality.82, level I
Some OSA patients may have residual excessive daytime sleepiness
even after using CPAP as first-line treatment. A meta-analysis showed
that both modafinil and armodafinil improved subjective (based on
ESS) and objective (sleep latency as measured by the Maintenance of
Wakefulness Test) day time sleepiness in OSA compared with placebo
as shown below:83, level I
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
With both medications, the most commonly reported AE was headache
with RR of 1.78 (95% CI 1.20 to 2.65) in the modaﬁnil group and 2.04
(95% CI 1.36 to 3.05) in the armodaﬁnil group. Other AEs included were
nausea, anxiety or nervousness, insomnia and dizziness. The quality of
primary papers was moderate.83, level I
In the local setting, intranasal corticosteroids are prescribed to OSA
patients with symptoms of allergic rhinitis and chronic rhinosinusitis.
Recommendation 9
• Intranasal corticosteroids may be prescribed to obstructive sleep
apnoea patients with symptoms of allergic rhinitis and chronic
rhinosinusitis.
f.
Bariatric Surgery
AASM recommends that clinicians discuss referral for bariatric surgery
in OSA patients with obesity (BMI ≥35 kg/m2) who are intolerant or
unaccepting of PAP. AASM made a strong recommendation in favour of
bariatric surgery referral based on moderate-quality evidence from two
RCTs and 28 observational studies.49
Recommendation 10
• In obese patients with obstructive sleep apnoea (BMI ≥35 kg/m2),
bariatric surgery may be considered.
3.4 General Principles of Perioperative Management of Suspected
and Confirmed OSA
a.
Preoperative Management of Suspected and Confirmed OSA
Patients with a high probability of OSA based on screening tools are
at an increased risk of postoperative morbidity. Health care providers
should consider making OSA screening as part of their standard preanaesthetic evaluation. An evidence-based guideline recommends:84
• patients with a diagnosis of OSA should be considered to be at
increased risk for perioperative complications
• adult patients at risk for OSA should be identified before surgery
• screening tools e.g. STOP-BANG, perioperative sleep apnea
prediction (P-SAP) score, Berlin questionnaire and American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) checklist can be used as
Medication
ESS [WMD
(95% Cl)]
Maintenance of Wakefulness Test
[WMD (95% Cl)]
Modafinil
Armodafinil
-2.96 (-3.73 to -2.19)
-2.63 (-3.40 to -1.85)
2.51 (1.50 to 3.52)
2.71 (0.04 to 5.37)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
23
preoperative screening tools to identify patients with suspected
OSA
• there is insufficient evidence to cancel or delay surgery to confirm
OSA in patients high risk for OSA, unless there is evidence of
uncontrolled systemic diseases
• Surgery should not be cancelled or delayed in patients with high
risk of OSA preoperatively unless there is evidence of uncontrolled
systemic disease.
Majority of OSA patients presenting for surgery are undiagnosed
and lack sufficient time before surgery to undergo formal diagnostic
PSG. There is inadequate evidence to recommend mandatory use of
PSG in the preoperative period. A cross-sectional study showed that
implementation of a universal screening initiative using STOP-BANG
incorporated into the electronic medical record improved compliance of
screening at 66.1% and thus identification of patients at high risk for OSA.
Nearly 90% of patients in the high STOP-BANG score group (STOPBANG Score of ≥4) were found to have a higher American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status, higher co-morbidities and a
mean BMI of 30.18 kg/m2.85, level III
A prospective cohort study showed a positive correlation between
STOP-BANG scores of 5 - 8 and AHI >15/hour (ρ=0.38, p<0.01).
Patients with a STOP-BANG score of 5 - 8 had a higher risk of AHI >15/
hour than those with a score of 3 - 4 (OR=2.9, 95% CI 1.1 to 7.8). There
was no correlation between STOP-BANG of 3 - 4 and AHI >15/hour.
Adding alternative scoring models with specific combinations of factors
failed to improve the screening of the patients.86, level III
Recommendation 11
• Patients who are at risk of obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) should
be screened for OSA preoperatively.
 The preferred screening tool is STOP-BANG.
b.
Intraoperative Management of Suspected and Confirmed OSA
An evidence-based guidelines focusing on airway management
looking at commonly used anaesthesia-related drugs and anaesthetic
techniques in patients with OSA recommends:87
• known or suspected OSA should be considered an independent
risk factor for difficult intubation, difficult mask ventilation or a
combination of both; thus adequate difficult airway management
precautions should be taken
• those who receive neuromuscular blocking agents may be at
increased risk on effects of postoperative residual neuromuscular
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
blockade, hypoxaemia or respiratory failure; however, there
is insufficient evidence to suggest the preference of any
neuromuscular blocking reversal agent to reduce the risk of these
complications
• patients may be at increased risk for adverse respiratory events
from the use of opioid medication and propofol for procedural
sedation; thus precaution should be practiced when these agents
are used
• there is no specific recommendation on inhalational anaesthesia
agents because of a lack of evidence in assessment of its residual
effects
• patients may be at increased risk for adverse respiratory events
from intravenous (IV) benzodiazepine sedation; thus it should be
used with caution
• when applicable, regional anaesthesia is preferable over general
anaesthesia
The difficult airway in OSA patients is a contributing factor to the
high rate of adverse respiratory events and thus should be managed
accordingly. A meta-analysis showed that there was 3-fold increase in
difficult intubation (OR=3.46, 95% CI 2.32 to 5.16) and difficult mask
ventilation (OR=3.39, 95% CI 2.74 to 4.18) in OSA patients compared
with non-OSA patients. However, there were no significant difference in
supraglottic airway failure rates between the groups.88, level II-2
In a narrative review, presence of OSA was associated with increased
risk for major complications during and after surgery, including
respiratory failure-intubation, prolonged mechanical ventilation, CV
events, neurocognitive disorders, intensive care admission, prolonged
hospital stay and readmission. These risk factors included excessive
sedation, opioid-based analgesia, intubation and mechanical ventilation.
Regional anaesthesia reduced incidence of major complications
compared with general anesthesia in OSA.89, level III
Sleep apnoea is associated with negative outcomes following general
anaesthesia. It has been a practice that short-acting anaesthetic agents
are preferred to standard agents to reduce this risk. However, a small
RCT showed that short-acting agents (desflurane-remifentanil) did
not appear to reduce the impact of general anaesthesia compared
with standard agents (sevoflurane-fentanyl) in terms of mean values
of supine AHI on the first and third post perative nights. However, the
prevalence of severe OSA on the third postoperative night was higher
than on the preoperative night (OR=7.00, 95% CI 2.07 to 23.60). This
data suggested that monitoring should be continued up to at least the
third postoperative night.90, level I The RCT used per protocol analysis on
certain outcomes.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
25
One cross-sectional study analysed the effects of recovery time in
patients with OSA receiving total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) and
volatile gas anaesthesia for upper airway ambulatory otolaryngology
surgery. TIVA significantly reduced the time spent in Post-anaesthesia
Recovery Unit (PACU) across the severity of OSA. There was a strong
correlation for patients on inhalational anaesthesia to have increased
recovery times from PACU to the ward as OSA severity increased
(p<0.001), whereas this was insignificant for those receiving TIVA.91,
level III
Another cross-sectional study of bariatric patients undergoing preoperative screening for oesophagogastroduodenoscopy compared
the use of sealed nasal positive airway pressure mask and passive
oxygenating devices. Those who used sealed nasal positive airway
pressure mask significantly had higher BMI and ASA classification
(Appendix 7), and were more likely to have OSA. They also had
significantly lower incidence of desaturation events and higher
median lowest O2 compared with those using passive oxygenating
devices.92, level III
• Patients with OSA are at high risk of experiencing anaesthesiarelated respiratory or CV complications.
• The following are important to be considered when anaesthesia is to
be given to patients with OSA during the intraoperative period:
 regional anaesthesia is preferred over general anaesthesia
where it is applicable
 TIVA is preferred over volatile anaesthesia
 IV benzodiazepine should be used with caution during sedation
• Obstructive sleep apnoea is associated with difficult mask ventilation
and intubation.
c.
Postoperative Management of Suspected and Confirmed OSA
Higher postoperative adverse outcomes in the presence of OSA have
been documented in patients undergoing various types of surgeries
compared to the general population. The majority of OSA patients are
undiagnosed and untreated during the perioperative period, adversely
affecting post operative recovery. It has been recommended that
assessment of patients for possible OSA before surgery is done with
careful postoperative monitoring for those suspected to be at high risk
of OSA.84
The patient and the treating health care team should be aware that
a high probability of OSA may increase postoperative morbidity. The
following have been recommended postoperatively in relation to adults
with OSA.84
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
• Hospitals should have suitable PAP devices available for perioperative use or ensure patients bring their own device to the
hospital.
• Patients should wear their PAP device at appropriate times during
their stay in the hospital, both preoperatively and post-operatively.
• Untreated OSA patients with optimised co-morbid conditions
may proceed to surgery, provided strategies to minimise postoperative complications are implemented.
Patients with OSA are at risk of postoperative AEs because drugs used
during general anesthesia may increase the risk of prolonged periods
of apnoea.
• A meta-analysis showed that surgical patients with OSA were
at increased risk of postoperative respiratory failure (OR=2.42,
95% CI 1.53 to 3.84) and cardiac events (OR=1.63, 95% CI
1.16 to 2.29) compared with non-OSA patients. Additionally, the
presence of OSA was also associated with 2.5 times higher odds
of unplanned transfer to an ICU following surgery (OR=2.46, 95%
CI 1.29 to 4.68).93, level I
• Another meta-analysis showed that 85% of opioid-induced
respiratory depression (ORID) occurred postoperatively within
the first 24 hours. Surgical patients with pre-existing cardiac,
respiratory disease or OSA were at increased risk for ORID. For
example, patients with OSA had an OR of 1.4 (95% CI 1.2 to
1.7). Patients with post-operative OIRD received higher doses of
morphine equivalent daily doses than controls (MD=2.8, 95% CI
0.4 to 5.3)94, level II-2
• A third meta-analysis among adult patients using STOP-BANG
questionnaire showed that patients with high risk-OSA had 4-fold
higher risk of post-operative complications compared with those
with low risk-OSA (OR=3.93, 95% CrI 1.85 to 7.77). Additionally,
their duration of hospital stay was longer (MD=2.01 days, 95% CrI
0.77 to 3.24).95, level II-2
• In a cross-sectional study, adverse respiratory events were
a common occurrence in the PACU and were more frequently
observed in high risk OSA (STOP-BANG >3) patients compared
with low risk OSA (39% vs 10%, p<0.001). Patients with high
risk OSA presented with mild-moderate hypoxemia and also
high inability to breathe deeply (34% vs 9%, p=0.001). They
also had a longer median stay in the PACU (120 min vs 99 min,
p=0.035).96, level III
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
27
Recommendation 12
• Patients with or suspected high risk of obstructive sleep apnoea
(OSA) should be monitored closely postoperatively.
• Hospitals should have suitable positive airway pressure devices
available for perioperative use or ensure patients with OSA bring
their own device to the hospital.
3.5 Monitoring and Follow-up
• Monitoring and follow-up of OSA cases are important in ensuring
treatment response, adherence and optimisation of medical risk
factors. AASM recommends periodic follow-up to confirm:34
 adequacy of treatment via reduction of AHI
 symptom resolution via objective questionnaire (e.g. sleepiness
or QoL)
 treatment adherence via PAP usage data
• OSA should be ideally managed by a multidisciplinary team
consisting of respiratory physicians, otolaryngology surgeons,
oral maxillofacial surgeons, orthodontists, bariatric surgeons and
dietitians.
In addition to assessments of treatment effectiveness, AASM also
recommends addressing issues associated with PAP therapy.34
Examples are mask interface and humidification.
Following a surgical procedure and an appropriate period of healing
(weeks to months), patients should be assessed using PSG or HSAT.
The patients should be assessed clinically on periodic basis since OSA
may recur post-operatively.97
AASM recommends follow-up PSG or HSAT can be considered:97
• after a 10 - 20% reduction or increase in weight
• after at least three months of recovery following weight loss
surgery
3.6 Referral
a.
Referral for Sleep Medicine Services
Sleep medicine services in Malaysia for the management of OSA are
offered by multidisciplinary specialties including respiratory medicine,
otorhinolaryngology (ORL), oral and maxillofacial surgery, and
orthodontic.
CPG DG opines that all patients with clinical suspicion of OSA with or
without cardio-metabolic risk factors and STOP-BANG score ≥3 should
be referred for diagnostic sleep test.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Recommendation 13
• Patients with clinical suspicion of obstructive sleep apnoea with or
without cardio-metabolic risk factors and STOP-BANG score ≥3
should be referred for diagnostic sleep test.
b.
Referral Criteria for Surgical Intervention
CPAP is the mainstay of OSA treatment but its effectiveness can be
compromised when the patients are unable to adhere to it. Consultation
with the physician should be made to address barriers to adherence.
Surgeries can improve adherence of CPAP or complement other
therapies.
Surgical referral for alternative treatment options has been
recommended for adult OSA patients with:49
• BMI <40 kg/m2 who are intolerant or unaccepting of PAP
obesity (BMI ≥35 kg/m2) who are intolerant or unaccepting of PAP
for bariatric surgery
• BMI <40 kg/m2 and persistent inadequate PAP adherence due to
pressure-related side effects
• major upper airway anatomic abnormality (PAP should be offered
as initial therapy before considering upper airway surgery)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
29
4
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNOEA IN CHILDREN
4.1 Epidemiology and Risk Factors
The prevalence of OSA in children is 1 - 4%.98, level III
OSA in children is defined by the presence of sleep disordered
breathing symptoms in combination with AHI >1 events/hour.99
Clinical presentation of OSA in this group varies from symptoms directly
related to upper airway obstruction to the complications related to OSA
itself (refer to Table 3).
Table 3. Clinical presentation of OSA in children
Adapted: Joosten KF, Larramona H, Miano S, et al. How do we recognize the child
with OSAS?. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2017;52(2):260-271.
Patient with these risks or abnormalities are encouraged to be screened
for OSA:100, level III
• obesity
• prematurity
• adenotonsillar hypertrophy and family history of adenotonsillar
hypertrophy
• nasal septum deviation, allergic rhinitis
• craniofacial anomalies
• maxillary (midface) hypoplasia in craniosynostosis syndromes
• mandibular hypoplasia without or with cleft palate
• neuromuscular disorder
• complex disorders: achondroplasia, Chiari malformation, Down
syndrome, Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, mucopolysaccharidoses,
Prader–Willi syndrome
In a cross-sectional study involving infants 0 - 17 months of age with
a diagnosis of OSA by clinical features and nocturnal PSG, additional
co-morbidities of OSA found were gastroesophageal reflux, periodic
limb movements in sleep, laryngomalacia/tracheomalacia and
epilepsy.101, level III
Symptoms of upper airway
obstruction
Snoring
Witnessed apnoea
Difficulty in breathing
Abnormal sleep posture
Mouth breathing
Excessive sweating
Complications of OSA
Elevated blood pressure
Enuresis
Excessive daytime sleepiness
Inattention/hyperactivity
Cognitive deficits
Academic difficulties
Failure to thrive
Morning headache
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Snoring history is often missed by parents and caregivers of children
and adolescents with OSA due to adenotonsillar hypertrophy and
obesity. Although it is easy to elicit, it is not specific to OSA.2
• Snoring is common among children and adolescents with
adenotonsillar hypertrophy and obesity. History of snoring should be
obtained to suspect OSA in this group.
4.2 Diagnosis
Recognising and diagnosing OSA in children requires a high index of
clinical suspicion. A meta-analysis of 10 diagnostic studies on clinical
assessment of OSA in children showed substantial variation in the
sensitivity and specificity among different symptoms and signs i.e.
snoring, observed apnoea, difficulty in breathing, excessive daytime
somnolence and tonsillar size. Several models using combinations of
symptoms and signs had been proposed but showed mixed results
in diagnostic accuracy. One of the models that has been studied was
Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ) by Chervin RD et al. 2000 which
had a sensitivity of 0.78 and specificity of 0.72.102, level III PSQ score of ≥8
indicate sleep related breathing disorder. In a recent meta-analysis using
PSG as the reference standard, PSQ had good sensitivity in screening
for all severity of OSA in children [sensitivity of 73% (95% CI 67 to 78),
80% (95% CI 71 to 86) and 89% (95% CI 75 to 97) for mild, moderate
and severe respectively].103, level III The questionnaire had been validated
in several languages. In a local study, both English (Appendix 10) and
Malay PSQ (Appendix 11) had acceptable psychometric measurement
properties (Cronbach’s α of 0.753 and 0.760 respectively) to assess
SDB in the Malay speaking population.104, level III
The gold standard diagnostic test for OSA in children is overnight,
attended, in-laboratory PSG (PSG level 1). The PSG will demonstrate
the severity of OSA which helps in short- and long-term management
of the patients. Specific measuring and scoring criteria for children
should be used in the interpretation of the PSG results. If level I PSG
is not available, clinicians may opt for alternative diagnostic tests e.g.
nocturnal video recording, overnight pulse oximetry, daytime nap PSG
or ambulatory PSG.2
• OSA in children is diagnosed in the presence of symptoms
with:105, level III
 AHI ≥2 or obstructive apnoea index ≥1
OR
 AHI ≥1 (including central events)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
31
Severity of OSA in children are shown as below:
Reference: kaditis A, Kheirandish-Gozal L, Gozal D. Pediatric OSAS: Oximetry can
provide answers when polysomnography is not available. Sleep Med
Rev. 2016;27:96-105.
In Malaysia, diagnostic testing of OSA in children is more challenging
compared to adult including limited facilities for PSG for children. A
systematic review studied diagnostic test accuracy (DTA) of different
tests for OSA in reference to PSG in children. Sleep lab-based
polygraphy, urinary biomarkers, and rhinomanometry showed excellent
DTA. However, the quality of the primary studies was generally low.106,
level III
A meta-analysis showed good overall diagnostic accuracy of type
3 PSG compared with full PSG in predicting OSA in children with
sensitivity of 76% (95% CI 64 to 85%), specificity 76% (95% CI 60%
to 88%) and AUC of 0.88. However, the methodological quality of the
primary papers was poor.107, level III
Overnight pulse oximetry is readily available in the local healthcare
system. A systematic review on overnight pulse oximetry as a testing
modality for the diagnosis of OSA in children showed that at least three
clusters of desaturation events and at least three oxygen saturation
(SpO2) drop below 90% in a overnight pulse oximetry recording were
indicative of moderate-to-severe OSA. An ODI4 >2 episodes/hour
combined with OSA symptoms also exhibited high PPV (84%) for
AHI >1/hour. Apart from that, McGill Oxymetry Score has shown good
sensitivity and specificity for OSA. The included studies had moderate
to high risk of bias.105, level III Pulse oximetry had good sensitivity in
screening moderate and severe paediatric OSA as shown in a recent
meta-analysis [sensitivity of 0.83 (95% CI 0.69 to 0.91) and 0.83 (95%
CI 0.57 to 0.94) respectively]. It also had a good specificity in mild,
moderate and severe OSA in children (specificity ranged from 0.75 to
0.86).103, level III
An overnight pulse oximetry must have the following technical
requirements:108, level III
• sufficient recording capacity for overnight monitoring
• short averaging time (<3 seconds at a heart rate of 80 bpm)
AHI
Severity of OSA
1-5/hr
5-10/hr
>10/hr
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Recommendation 14
• Paediatric Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ) should be used as a screening
tool for obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) in children.
• Polysomnography level 1 should be considered for diagnosis of
OSA in this group especially those at risk.
 If it is not available, overnight pulse oximetry may be used as an
alternative diagnostic tool.
4.3 Airway Assessment
Flexible fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy is often used to identify potential
sites of airway obstruction in children e.g. enlarged nasal turbinates,
septal deviation, adenoid hypertrophy, lingual tonsil hypertrophy,
tongue base prolapses and laryngomalacia. The evaluation may be
limited by several factors. Namely, children may not cooperate and also
the examination is performed in an upright position on awake patients,
it may not capture the dynamic upper airway collapse that may occur
exclusively during sleep.109, level III
DISE, on the other hand, is commonly performed in children who have
undergone previous or prior to AT. Typically, this is done in children who
are at high-risk for persistent OSA including those with obesity, severe
OSA, Down syndrome, craniofacial anomalies (i.e., Pierre Robin
sequence, Treacher Collins syndrome), hypotonia and neurologic
impairment. DISE has been used to decide on definitive management
of OSA.109, level III
• DISE allows the surgeon to address multiple levels of airway
obstruction and decide on definitive management of OSA in children.
• Craniofacial assessment should be done to rule out the effect of the
skeletal pattern on the airway dimension (refer to Subchapter 5.2) as
a contributory factor to OSA.
4.4 Treatment
a.
Pharmacotherapy
A Cochrane systematic review on the effectiveness and safety of antiinflammatory drugs for OSA treatment in children showed no difference
between intranasal corticosteroids and placebo on improvement of AHI.
However, montelukast group had lower AHI compared with placebo
(MD= -3.41, 95% CI -5.36 to -1.45). AEs of these medications were
rare and minor e.g. nasal bleeding.110, level I The four RCTs included in
the review were of moderate quality.
In a recent meta-analysis of four moderate quality RCTs in children with
OSA, the following comparisons using oral montelukast showed:111, level I
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
33
• oral montelukast vs placebo
oral montelukast improved OAHI (SMD= -0.99/hour, 95% CI -1.40
to -0.58), ODI (MD=-2.83/hour, 95% CI -3.86 to -1.79), AI (SMD=
-1.02/hour, 95% CI -1.47 to -0.57) and minimal SpO2 (MD=4.07%,
95% CI (2.27 to 5.88).
• oral montelukast + routine drugs vs routine drugs (i.e. antitussive,
expectorant, antihistamines and antibiotics)
combination of oral montelukast with routine drugs improved
AHI (MD= -1.62/hour, 95% CI -2.63 to -0.61) and minimal SpO2
(MD=2.53%, 95% CI 0.88 to 4.18)
• oral montelukast + nasal spray of mometasone furoate vs nasal
spray of mometasone furoate
combination of oral montelukast with nasal spray of mometasone
furoate improved AHI (MD=0.46/hour, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.88) and
minimal SpO2 (MD=2.30%, 95% CI 1.58 to 3.02)
In terms of safety, AEs reported were headache, nausea and vomiting
in the oral montelukast group.
Recommendation 15
• Oral montelukast and/or nasal corticosteroids may be considered in
children with obstructive sleep apnoea.
b.
Surgery
Adenotonsillectomy (AT) is the most commonly performed procedure
in children with adenotonsillar hypertrophy and OSA. In a systematic
review, children with AT had 75% surgical success.112, level I In a
large RCT in children with OSA aged 5 - 9 years old, normalisation of
PSG findings was observed in 79% of children in the early-AT
group compared with 46% in those of watchful-waiting group
(p<0.001).113, level I
In children post-AT, persistent OSA symptoms may be due to multilevel
obstruction, which is particularly found in children with co-morbidities
e.g. Down syndrome, obesity and craniofacial abnormalities.112, level I
Adjunct surgical treatments e.g. lingual tonsillectomy, supraglottoplasty,
epiglottopexy and tracheostomy can be offered to them. Before
considering further surgical management, the anatomic location of
obstruction needs to be determined. This can be undertaken in several
ways e.g. flexible awake laryngoscopy and DISE.114, level III
The adenoids may regrow after incomplete adenoidectomy due to
various factors.
• smaller nasopharynx in young children
• method of adenoidectomy - curettage adenoidectomy leaves
residual adenoid tissue
• infection leading to inflammation of the residual tissue
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Hence, revision adenoidectomy is needed and surgical method with
direct visualization should be used.
Tonsillar tissue may regrow in the cases when there is residual tissue
after surgery or in some cases when tonsillotomy was performed.
Recommendation 16
• Adenotonsillectomy (AT) is the treatment of choice in children with
obstructive sleep apnoea due to adenotonsillar hypertrophy.
 In those with post-AT residual disease, upper airway and multilevel
obstruction should be reassessed and managed accordingly.
c.
Continuous positive airway pressure
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is one of the therapies
in children with OSA. It delivers positive pressure via a nasal mask to
mechanically stent the airway and improve functional residual capacity.
CPAP management is challenging in children and only a
small percentage tolerate therapy. In a systematic review, caregiver
support was shown to increase adherence to CPAP [longer CPAP
use/night by 86.60 minutes (95% CI 10.90 to 162.30) and percentage
of CPAP usage more than 4 hours/ night by 18.10% (95% CI 3.87 to
32.33)] compared with absence of caregiver support. Mode of PAP
delivery (BiPAP, CPAP and APAP) did not significantly improve
adherence.115, level I
CPAP therapy is indicated in children with OSA if they have persistent
symptoms or signs after surgery or in whom surgery is contraindicated.
Some of the relative contraindications for adenotonsillectomy include:2
• morbid obesity and small tonsils/adenoid
• bleeding disorder refractory to treatment
• submucus cleft palate
It is also recommended that children on CPAP should be managed by
a clinician with expertise in this field. CPAP pressure must be titrated in
the sleep laboratory before therapy is being prescribed. During followup, objective monitoring of adherence, presence of side effects and
any factors causing suboptimal therapy must be assessed and CPAP
pressure titrated accordingly. Behavioural modification therapy may be
required to improve adherence especially in young children or those
with developmental delay. Children grow rapidly and therefore the mask
fit must be assessed at least six-monthly.2 Complication related to mask
(e.g. midfacial hypoplasia) can be minimised by close monitoring and
pro-active approach.116
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
35
There is no recent evidence on advantage of using BiPAP over CPAP.
A cross-sectional study showed no difference in adherence between
automated continuous positive pressure (APAP) and CPAP in paediatric
group with OSA.117, level III
Recommendation 17
• Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) should be offered
to children with obstructive sleep apnoea if they have persistent
symptoms or signs after surgery or in whom surgery is contraindicated.
 Nasal CPAP is the preferred option
 CPAP should be managed by experienced and skilled
multidisciplinary clinicians
d.
Adjunctive therapy
i.
Orthodontic functional appliances
Functional appliance is a type of mandibular advancement appliance
used for orthodontic correction in growing adolescents (10 - 16 years
old) for the treatment of mandibular retrognathia.
A systematic review on children and adolescents (<16 years old) with
mild to moderate OSA who require orthodontic correction for their
malocclusion (e.g. mandibular retrognathia, deep bite and crossbite)
showed limited evidence to suggest that functional appliance result
in short-term (6 - 12 months) improvement in AHI scores. The AHI
reductions were significant with:118, level I
• full time wear of the twin block functional appliances
• part time wear of modified monoblocs
• full time wear of a customised mandibular repositioning oral
appliance
However, the quality of the primary papers was low.
In a Cochrane systematic review oral or functional appliances showed
better reduction in AHI with RR of 0.39 (95% CI 0.20 to 0.76) compared
with no treatment in children with OSA. The oral appliance also reduced
daytime and nocturnal symptoms of:119, level I
• oral breathing (RR=0.16, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.59)
• nasal stuffiness (RR=0.18, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.69)
• habitual snoring (RR=0.18, 95% CI 0.06 to 0.55)
• restless sleep (RR=0.21, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.84)
However, the quality of primary papers was low.
ii.
Maxillary expansion
Maxillary expansion devices are used to correct transverse skeletal
discrepancy e.g. narrow maxilla and posterior crossbites in growing
children.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
A network meta-analysis did not find rapid maxillary expansion
(RME) to effectively reduce the AHI compared with controls and other
types of treatment. In terms of effectiveness in AHI reduction, AT +
pharyngoplasty was the most effective in reducing AHI (WMD=9.81/
hour, 95% CI 2.18 to 17.44) when compared with no treatment. RME
was found to be one of the most effective interventions to improve
lowest oxygen saturation compared with AT.120, level I However, quality of
included primary papers were not mentioned.
In a systematic review comparing pre-and post-treatment, RME was
found to improve the AHI (MD= -4.84/hour, 95% CI -8.47 to -1.21) and
lowest oxygen saturation (MD=5.78, 95% CI 1.99 to 9.58).121, level I
iii. Maxillary skeletal protraction
Maxillary protraction is used for correction of maxillary retrognathia in
growing children. Currently, there is no evidence on maxillary protraction
for the treatment of OSA in children.
• More strong evidence is warranted before orthodontic appliances
e.g. functional appliances, RME and maxillary protraction devices
can be recommended for the treatment of OSA in children. However,
if an OSA patient presents with skeletal discrepancies, they can be
considered for orthodontic appliances.
4.5 Perioperative Management in Paediatric
An increase in prevalence of paediatric OSA and obesity, surgical
procedures poses a practical challenge to the anaesthesiologist. In
general, the principles of perioperative anaesthetic management of a
paediatric group at high risk or with OSA for surgical procedures are as
outlined below.98, level III
a.
Preoperative assessment
• Detailed medical history which includes screening questionnaire,
review of medical record, clinical risk factors and co-morbidity and
targeted physical examination are mandatory.
• Severity of OSA, lowest and duration of oxygen desaturation and
CO2 measurement from the PSG results if available should be
documented.
• Patients with lowest oxygen desaturation <70% must be referred
for further cardiopulmonary assessment.
• Sedative premedication should be administered with caution and
those receiving it should be monitored with continuous pulse
oximetry.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
37
b.
Intraoperative management
• There is no current evidence or consensus to support any specific
anaesthesia technique.
• In cases of potential difficult intubation, appropriate airway adjunct
i.e. fibreoptic bronchoscope, video laryngoscope and difficult
airway cart should be made available.
• Anaesthesia with opioid sparing technique is preferred.
• Awake extubation is advocated.
c.
Postoperative care
• Continuous monitoring is strongly recommended in OSA patients.
It can be done in the general or critical care wards.
• The CPG DG opines that moderate to severe OSA patients with the
following conditions may require monitoring in critical care wards:
 patient factor - neuromuscular disorder, craniofacial anomalies,
requirement of oxygen preoperatively
 surgical factor - surgery near or above diaphragm
 anaesthetic factor - postoperative IV narcotic or patient-controlled
analgesia
• Postoperative use of BiPAP and CPAP at the preoperative setting
may be continued.
• Postoperative analgesia choices include non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug and paracetamol.
In a practice guideline for the perioperative management of patients
with OSA, the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force
recommends to consider the use of local peripheral nerve blocks and
central neuroaxial anaesthesia when indicated. Patients who are at an
increased perioperative risk from OSA should not be discharged to an
unmonitored setting following recovery from anaesthesia until they are
no longer at risk of post operative respiratory complications.122
Dexmedetomidine is associated with an overall perioperative opioidsparing effect in paediatric patients undergoing AT with a significant
reduction in perioperative opioid use.123, level III
Recommendation 18
• Perioperative assessment should be thoroughly performed in the
paediatric group at high risk and those diagnosed with obstructive
sleep apnoea (OSA).
• Paediatric patients at an increased perioperative risk from OSA
should be closely monitored following recovery from anaesthesia.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
4.6 Monitoring and Follow-up
All paediatric OSA should be monitored and followed-up between six
weeks to 12 months after each treatment intervention. The parameters
to be assessed during follow-up include symptoms, severity of OSA
evaluated objectively, complications from the cardiovascular and central
nervous system, quality of life, enuresis and paediatric growth rate.
PSG is the preferred objective method to detect residual OSA after a
treatment intervention. However, in settings where PSG is not available,
alternative methods e.g. polygraphy, oximetry and capnography can be
considered for use.99
AASM guidelines recommend that all OSA patients with persistent
signs and symptoms after therapy should be reassessed to determine
whether further treatment is required.124, level III
ERS Task Force further describes the criteria and interval of
reassessment of children with OSA:99
• persistent SDB symptoms or at risk of persistent OSA preoperatively ≥6 weeks after AT
• mild OSA treated with montelukast/nasal corticosteroids after 12
weeks of treatment
• post-RME at 12 months or earlier if symptoms persist
The ERS Task Force also recommends repeat titration of PAP therapy
at least annually or earlier if there is a clinical indication.99
On follow-up, adherence to PAP therapy is measured objectively within
three months of treatment initiation. If the therapy is ineffective, measures
to improve adherence e.g. behavioural modification, treatment of CPAP
side effects or alternative treatments can be instituted.124, level III
Children with OSA especially the high-risk group must be under followup by a multidisciplinary team consisting of paediatrician or respiratory
paediatrician, ORL, craniofacial surgeon, intensivist, orthodontist and
other relevant specialists trained in sleep medicine.125
Children with OSA who require long-term use of CPAP must be monitored
by paediatric respiratory specialist with paediatric sleep experience
objectively by follow-up PSG to determine CPAP requirement.2
During follow-up, monitoring of CPAP therapy complications e.g. nasal
bridge pressure sores, oronasal dryness, eye irritation discomfort
and flattening of the midface (from long-term use of the interface on
growing facial structures) may occur and require early recognition for
intervention by attending clinicians.126
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
39
Recommendation 19
• Children with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) especially the highrisk group should be followed-up by multidisciplinary team trained in
sleep medicine.
• Children with OSA who require long-term use of continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP) should be monitored objectively by
respiratory paediatrician with paediatric sleep experience.
• Monitoring of CPAP therapy complications is required during followup.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
5.
SPECIAL GROUP
5.1 Pregnancy
OSA is common in pregnancy and associated with various pregnancyrelated health outcomes. A meta-analysis showed that the worldwide
prevalence of OSA among pregnant women was 15% (95% CI 12 to
18). The estimated prevalence for each trimester ranged from 15 - 19%.
OSA was linked to a higher risk of pregnancy induced hypertension, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, pulmonary oedema during pregnancy,
Caesarean-section and postoperative wound complications. The OR
values were 1.97, 2.35, 1.55, 6.35, 1.42, and 1.87 respectively. OSA
was also related to an increased risk for preterm birth (OR=1.62) and
neonatal intensive care unit admission (OR=1.28).127, level II-2
a.
Screening and Diagnosis
Pregnant woman with risk factors especially obesity and craniofacial
anomalies should be asked about symptoms of OSA. The use of
screening questionnaires may not be helpful based on the following
evidence.
A meta-analysis showed that performance of screening questionnaires
for OSA during pregnancy were poor to fair.128, level III
• BQ had pooled sensitivity of 0.66 (95% CI 0.45 to 0.83) and
specificity of 0.62 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.75)
• ESS had pooled sensitivity of 0.44 (95% CI 0.33 to 0.56) and
specificity of 0.62 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.75)
In one of the included studies, a large cross-sectional study on pregnant
women in their third trimester showed the overall predictive ability of the
screening tools (STOP, STOP-BANG, BQ, ASA Checklist and ESS) for
OSA was modest with AUC of 0.62 to 0.695. However, none of the
screening tools accurately identified OSA among the patients.
Diagnosing OSA in a pregnant woman is a challenge for physicians.
The gold standard for objective testing is level 1 PSG which is timeconsuming, labour-intensive and costly. Unattended, portable home
PSG is a reasonable alternative among the general population.
However, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) guideline
for the use of portable home polysomnography excludes pregnant
women.
b.
Treatment
There is lack of evidence on the treatment of OSA in pregnancy. In a
small RCT on pregnant women with gestational diabetes, two weeks
of CPAP treatment resulted in significantly lower rates of preterm
delivery, unplanned cesarean section and neonatal intensive care unit
admissions compared with no CPAP. However, there was no OSA
parameters measured in the study.129, level I
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
41
A cohort study of pregnant women with hypertensive disorder showed
that CPAP significantly reduced the incidence of severe forms of
hypertensive syndrome and improved both lowest oxygen saturation
and ESS after one month of CPAP usage. The respiratory event index
was significantly associated with hypertension severity.130, level II-2
Recommendation 20
• Pregnant woman with suspected obstructive sleep apnoea based on
symptoms and signs should be referred for further management by
a multidisciplinary specialist team.
5.2 Craniofacial Anomalies
a.
Risk of OSA
Children with craniofacial anomalies (CA), e.g. Pierre Robin Sequence
(PRS) with micrognathia, retrognathia, glossoptosis with or without cleft
lip/palate, have an increased risk of OSA due to upper airway obstruction
as the tongue is relatively large compared to the mandibular structures
and tends to prolapse backwards. Airway obstruction in these groups
can be severe and results in intermittent hypoxia that may impair longterm cognitive and intellectual development.131, level III
Children with midface and mandibular hypoplasia have variable
severity of OSA which correlates with the degree of hypoplasia. Almost
30% of paediatric group with syndromic cleft lip or palate are screened
positive for OSA. The risk of OSA increases due to changes in the
upper airway structure which include nasal deformities. OSA is more
severe in PRS patients with cleft palate than those with isolated cleft
palate.132 - 136, level III
Children below 18 years old with Class II skeletal pattern, tendency
for backward growth rotator137, level I and reduced upper airway sagittal
width are at risk of OSA.138, level II-2
A meta-analysis on the craniofacial morphological characteristics (refer
to Figure 1): associated with OSA in non-syndromic paediatric patients
compared with controls showed.137, level I
• the cephalometric findings i.e. angle between sella, nasion and B
point (SNB) and difference between SNA and SNB, where SNA
is the angle between sella, nasion and A point, while SNB is the
angle between sella, nasion and B point (ANB) angles, indicated
more Class II skeletal pattern:
 SNB (MD= -1.79o, 95% CI -2.61 to -0.97)
 ANB (MD = 1.38o, 95% CI 0.83 to 1.92)
• the cephalometric finding i.e. angle between mandibular plane
and sella nasion line (MP-SN) angle, indicated more vertical
growth (MD=4.20o, 95% CI 3.32o to 5.07o)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
In a separate meta-analysis to elucidate the association between
craniofacial disharmony and paediatric sleep-disordered breathing
compared with controls showed:138, level II-2
• the cephalometric finding i.e. ANB angle, indicated a more Class
II skeletal pattern (MD=1.64, 95% CI 0.88 to 2.41)
• reduced distances in the distance from the posterior nasal spine
to the nearest adenoid tissue measured along the PNS-basion
line (PNS-AD1) and distance from the posterior nasal spine to the
nearest adenoid tissue measured along the line perpendicular to
the sella-basion line (PNS-AD2), indicating reduced upper airway
sagittal width in children with OSAS
 PNS-AD1 (MD= -4.17, 95% CI -5.85 to -2.50)
 PNS-AD2 (MD=3.12, 95% CI-4.56 to -1.67)
Figure 1. Cephalometric references and landmarks used in the metaanalysis: S, Sella; N, nasion; Ba, basion; ANS, anterior nasal spine;
PNS, posterior nasal spine; PP, palatal plane; A, A-point; B, B-point;
MP, mandibular plane (gonion-menton); PNS-AD1, distance from PNS
to the nearest adenoid tissue measured along the line PNS-Ba; PNSAD2, distance from PNS to the nearest adenoid tissue measured along
the line perpendicular to S-Ba; Ll long axis of the mandibular incisor.
Abbreviation list:
 MP-SN: angle between mandibular plane and sella nasion line
 SNB: angle between sella, nasion and B point
AD1
PNS
AD2
MP
ANS
PP
N
Ba
S
A
LI
B
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
43
 ANB: difference between SNA and SNB, where SNA is the angle
between sella, nasion and A point, while SNB is the angle between
sella, nasion and B point
 PNS-AD1 (distance from the posterior nasal spine to the nearest
adenoid tissue measured along the PNS-basion line)
 PNS-AD2 (distance from the posterior nasal spine to the nearest
adenoid tissue measured along the line perpendicular to the sellabasion line)
Adapted: Katyal V, Pamula Y, Martin AJ, et al. Craniofacial and upper airway
morphology in pediatric sleep-disordered breathing: Systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2013;143(1):20-30.e3.
b.
Treatment
The principle of treatment of OSA in CA is to secure a safe airway in the
children especially infants. In neonates or infants with severe airway
obstruction, a tracheostomy tube to bypass the obstructed upper airway
is necessary until corrective surgery can be performed.139 - 140, level III
Surgical treatment of OSA in CA children include mandibular
distraction osteogenesis, AT and rapid maxillary expansion. Evidence
have shown that OSA has improved in these children after these
surgeries.133, level III; 140 - 142, level III
Recommendation 21
• Patients with obstructive sleep apnoea and craniofacial anomalies
should be assessed for the benefit and risk of a surgical intervention.
Non-surgical treatment using nasal CPAP and oxygen therapy may be
useful if surgery is not possible or in mild to moderate OSA. Medications
like proton pump inhibitor may also be used.141; level III; 143 - 144 level III
5.3 Down Syndrome
Patients with Down syndromes (DS) are known to be at high risk for
OSA. The prevalence of OSA in DS varies from 45% to 82%. There are
multiple factors to explain the increased prevalence of OSA in DS which
include differences in anatomy and physiology. Soft tissue crowding of
the pharynx and palate caused by midfacial and mandibular hypoplasia
is further exacerbated by an increased incidence of adenotonsillar
hypertrophy, relative macroglossia and glossoptosis, laryngomalacia,
and subglottic and tracheal stenosis. Due to its high prevalence,
screening and treatment for this group of patients are strongly
supported.145, level III
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
A recent study showed no association between age and the severity
of OSA in DS. However, more infants and children age <2 years had
more severe disease than those aged ≥2 years (p=0.005). Of those
with ongoing monitoring, 78.0% had moderate or severe OSA at
some time.146, level III
Treatment of OSA in DS includes pharmacotherapy, CPAP and surgery.
AT is one of the mainstay treatments of OSA in this group. Significant
improvements in obstructive AHI, and minimum oxygen saturation was
obtained in DS patients treated with AT. However, almost half of them
had persistent OSA post operatively.147, level III
Recommendation 22
• Patients with Down syndrome should be screened for obstructive
sleep apnoea and treated accordingly.
The summary of management for children with OSA is based on the
level of obstruction as shown in Appendix 12.
5.4 Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) is defined as a combination
of:148; 149
• obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2)
• daytime hypercapnia [arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2) ≥45
mmHg]
• sleep disordered breathing
• exclusion of alternative causes of alveolar hypoventilation
OHS is typically diagnosed during an episode of acute-on-chronic
hypercapnic respiratory failure. Approximately 90% of patients with
OHS have OSA.
A systematic review comparing noninvasive ventilation (NIV) vs CPAP
as initial treatment of OHS with severe OSA showed that:150, level I
• no death reported within three months and no significant difference
of death at 5.5 years follow-up (based on low certainty evidence)
• no significant difference in the resolution of hypercapnia up to
three months (based on moderate certainty evidence) or three
years of treatment (based on low certainty evidence)
• PaO2 improved with both modalities, with no significant difference
between them up to three months and after three years follow-up
(based on high certainty evidence)
• no significant difference in proportion of patients who did not
require supplemental oxygen after three months and three years
(based on moderate certainty of evidence)
• no significant difference in sleep parameters i.e. change in AHI
at two months (based on moderate certainty evidence) and
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
45
excessive daytime sleepiness at three months and three years
(based on low to moderate certainty of evidence)
CPAP was conditionally recommended over NIV as the first-line
treatment for stable ambulatory patients with OHS and co-existent
severe OSA because it had similar effectiveness but less costly and
required less resources.150, level I
Recommendation 23
• Continuous positive airway pressure is the preferred initial treatment
in stable ambulatory patients with obesity hypoventilation syndrome
and severe obstructive sleep apnoea.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
6.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Management of OSA should be guided by the latest evidence and
availability of local resources to provide quality care to patients. Several
factors may affect the implementation of recommendations in the
CPG. OSA is best managed by a multidisciplinary approach to ensure
success of treatment and reduction of complications.
6.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in this CPG
include:
• availability of CPG to health care providers (hard copies and soft
copies/online)
• regular seminars/conferences/courses for health care providers
on management of OSA including those involving professional
bodies (e.g. Sleep Disorder Society Malaysia, Malaysian Thoracic
Society, Malaysia Society of Oral, Head and Neck Surgery and
Family Medicine Specialist Association)
• public awareness activities during World Sleep Day including the
involvement of governmental/non-governmental organisations
e.g. Gabungan Persatuan Pemandu Pengangkutan Darat
Malaysia, Malaysian Pilots Association
• accessibility to relevant multidisciplinary teams
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
• limited awareness and understanding/knowledge in managing
OSA among health care providers
• variation in clinical management and preferences
• insufficient resources in terms of budget, expertise, access to
diagnostic tests, medications and treatment options
• misconception about the disease and its management by the
public
6.2 Potential Resource Implications
OSA is a prevalent disease and underdiagnosed in Malaysia. It is a
chronic disorder associated with several cardio-metabolic complications,
neurocognitive impairment, increased motor vehicle accidents and
reduced productivity when untreated. Hence, early diagnosis and
prompt management of OSA can improve its outcomes.
As OSA is the commonest sleep-related breathing disorder, its
management should be emphasised throughout all levels of care.
Therefore, implementation of nation-wide screening among high-risk
group e.g. with STOP-BANG questionnaire is important. Those at high
risk should be provided with health education and advice on lifestyle
modifications to prevent complications of the disease.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
47
PSG is the gold standard to accurately diagnose OSA whilst CPAP
is the mainstay of treatment. However, there is a lack of availability
of sleep laboratories, as well as a scarcity of sleep specialists and
trained sleep technologists in Malaysia. Provision of sleep laboratories,
trained personnel and PAP therapy in managing OSA requires strong
consideration and support from all stakeholders involved. Furthermore,
the treatment cost may be high and not covered by insurance policies
which will increase the burden on public services in providing effective
treatment.
6.3 Clinical Audit Indicators
The following are proposed as clinical audit indicators for quality
management of OSA:
*reduction of AHI by 50% and AHI <20
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module (available at: https://www.moh.gov.my/index.php/
pages/view/3962?mid=1570).
• Percentage
of patients with
suspected of OSA
with completed
PSG (level 1, 2
or 3) within six
months
=
Number of patients suspected of OSA
in the same period
Number of patients suspected of OSA
with completed PSG (level 1, 2 or 3)
within six months in a period
x100%
• Percentage
of patients who
receive PAP
therapy within six
months of OSA
diagnosis
=
Number of patients diagnosed with OSA
in the same period
Number of patients who receive PAP
therapy within six months of OSA
diagnosis in a period
x100%
• Percentage of
surgical success
rate* of adult
OSA patients
(excluding
bariatric surgery)
=
Number of surgeries done on OSA
patients in the period
Number of successful surgeries of
adult OSA patients (excluding bariatric
surgery) in a period
x100%
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
References
1.
Benjafield AV, Ayas NT, Eastwood PR, et al. Estimation of the global prevalence
and burden of obstructive sleep apnoea: a literature-based analysis. Lancet
Respir Med. 2019;7(8):687-698.
2.
Marcus CL, Brooks LJ, Draper KA, et al. Diagnosis and management of
childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics. 2012;130(3):576-584.
3.
Senaratna CV, Perret JL, Lodge CJ, et al. Prevalence of obstructive sleep
apnea in the general population: A systematic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews.
2017;34:70-81.
4.
Semelka M, Wilson J, Floyd R. Diagnosis and Treatment of Obstructive Sleep
Apnea in Adults. American Family Physician. 2016;94(5):355-360.
5.
Neelapu BC, Kharbanda OP, Sardana HK, et al. Craniofacial and upper airway
morphology in adult obstructive sleep apnea patients: A systematic review and
meta-analysis of cephalometric studies. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2017;31:79-90.
6.
Calvo-Henriquez C, Megias-Barrera J, Chiesa-Estomba C, et al. The Impact of
Maxillary Expansion on Adults’ Nasal Breathing: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2021;35(6):923-934.
7.
Loke YK, Brown JW, Kwok CS, et al. Association of obstructive sleep apnea with
risk of serious cardiovascular events: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. 2012;5(5):720-728.
8.
Salari N, Khazaie H, Abolfathi M, et al. The effect of obstructive sleep apnea
on the increased risk of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Neurological Sciences. 2022;43(1):219-231.
9.
Xu S, Wan Y, Xu M, et al. The association between obstructive sleep apnea and
metabolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Pulmonary
Medicine. 2015;15:105.
10. Kong DL, Qin Z, Shen H, et al. Association of Obstructive Sleep Apnea with
Asthma: A Meta-Analysis. Scientific Reports. 2017;7(1):4088.
11. Musso G, Cassader M, Olivetti C, et al. Association of obstructive sleep apnoea
with the presence and severity of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Obesity Reviews. 2013;14(5):417-431.
12. Liu T, Zhan Y, Wang Y, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and risk of renal
impairment: a systematic review and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis.
Sleep Breath. 2021;25(1):17-27.
13. Cheng H, Li D. Investigation into the association between obstructive sleep
apnea and incidence of all-type cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Sleep Medicine. 2021;88:274-281.
14. Leng Y, McEvoy CT, Allen IE, et al. Association of Sleep-Disordered Breathing
With Cognitive Function and Risk of Cognitive Impairment: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 2017;74(10):1237-1245.
15. Shawon MS, Perret JL, Senaratna CV, et al. Current evidence on prevalence and
clinical outcomes of co-morbid obstructive sleep apnea and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: A systematic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2017;32:58-68.
16. Gupta MA, Simpson FC. Obstructive sleep apnea and psychiatric disorders: a
systematic review. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2015;11(2):165-175.
17. Kent BD, Grote L, Ryan S, et al. Diabetes mellitus prevalence and control in
sleep-disordered breathing: the European Sleep Apnea Cohort (ESADA) study.
Chest. 2014;146(4):982-990.
18. Chiu HY, Chen PY, Chuang LP, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the Berlin
questionnaire, STOP-BANG, STOP, and Epworth sleepiness scale in detecting
obstructive sleep apnea: A bivariate meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews.
2017;36:57-70.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
49
19. Bernhardt L, Brady EM, Freeman SC, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of screening
questionnaires for obstructive sleep apnoea in adults in different clinical cohorts:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Breath. 2022;26(3):1053-1078.
20. Amra B, Rahmati B, Soltaninejad F, et al. Screening Questionnaires for
Obstructive Sleep Apnea: An Updated Systematic Review. Oman Medical
Journal. 2018;33(3):184-192.
21. Rosa T, Bellardi K, Viana A, Jr., et al. Digital Health and Sleep-Disordered
Breathing: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Journal of Clinical Sleep
Medicine. 2018;14(9):1605-1620.
22. Kapur VK, Auckley DH, Chowdhuri S, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for
Diagnostic Testing for Adult Obstructive Sleep Apnea: An American Academy of
Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
2017;13(3):479-504.
23. American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International classification of
sleepdisorders, 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014.
24. El Shayeb M, Topfer LA, Stafinski T, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of level 3 portable
sleep tests versus level 1 polysomnography for sleep-disordered breathing: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association
Journal. 2014;186(1):E25-51.
25. Abrahamyan L, Sahakyan Y, Chung S, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of level IV
portable sleep monitors versus polysomnography for obstructive sleep apnea: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Breath. 2018;22(3):593-611.
26. Rashid NH, Zaghi S, Scapuccin M, et al. The Value of Oxygen Desaturation Index
for Diagnosing Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Systematic Review. Laryngoscope.
2021;131(2):440-447.
27. Askar SM, Quriba AS, Hassan EM, et al. Positional Awake Endoscopy
Versus DISE in Assessment of OSA: A Comparative Study. Laryngoscope.
2020;130(9):2269-2274.
28. Cavaliere M, Russo F, Iemma M. Awake versus drug-induced sleep endoscopy:
evaluation of airway obstruction in obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnoea
syndrome. Laryngoscope. 2013;123(9):2315-2318.
29. Soares D, Folbe AJ, Yoo G, et al. Drug-induced sleep endoscopy vs awake
Müller’s maneuver in the diagnosis of severe upper airway obstruction.
Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery. 2013;148(1):151-156.
30. Ong CW, O’Driscoll DM, Truby H, et al. The reciprocal interaction between
obesity and obstructive sleep apnoea. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2013;17(2):123131.
31. Araghi MH, Chen YF, Jagielski A, et al. Effectiveness of lifestyle interventions
on obstructive sleep apnea (OSA): systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep.
2013;36(10):1553-1562, 1562a-1562e.
32. Mitchell LJ, Davidson ZE, Bonham M, et al. Weight loss from lifestyle interventions
and severity of sleep apnoea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep
Medicine. 2014;15(10):1173-1183.
33. Edwards BA, Bristow C, O’Driscoll DM, et al. Assessing the impact of diet,
exercise and the combination of the two as a treatment for OSA: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Respirology. 2019;24(8):740-751.
34. Patil SP, Ayappa IA, Caples SM, et al. Treatment of Adult Obstructive Sleep
Apnea with Positive Airway Pressure: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine
Clinical Practice Guideline. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2019;15(2):335343.
35. Timkova V, Nagyova I, Reijneveld SA, et al. Quality of life of obstructive sleep
apnoea patients receiving continuous positive airway pressure treatment: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart and Lung. 2020;49(1):10-24.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
36. Lin HJ, Yeh JH, Hsieh MT, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure with
good adherence can reduce risk of stroke in patients with moderate to severe
obstructive sleep apnea: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2020;54:101354.
37. Labarca G, Dreyse J, Drake L, et al. Efficacy of continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) in the prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine
Reviews. 2020;52:101312.
38. Chalegre ST, Lins-Filho OL, Lustosa TC, et al. Impact of CPAP on arterial
stiffness in patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a meta-analysis of randomized
trials. Sleep Breath. 2021;25(3):1195-1202.
39. Labarca G, Schmidt A, Dreyse J, et al. Efficacy of continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) in patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and resistant
hypertension (RH): Systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine
Reviews. 2021;58:101446.
40. Feldstein CA. Blood pressure effects of CPAP in nonresistant and resistant
hypertension associated with OSA: A systematic review of randomized clinical
trials. Clinical and Experimental Hypertension. 2016;38(4):337-346.
41. Yang X, Yang J, Yang C, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure can improve
depression in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome: a metaanalysis based on randomized controlled trials. Journal of International Medical
Research. 2020;48(3):300060519895096.
42. Ip S, D’Ambrosio C, Patel K, et al. Auto-titrating versus fixed continuous positive
airway pressure for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic
review with meta-analyses. Syst Rev. 2012;1:20.
43. Patil SP, Ayappa IA, Caples SM, et al. Treatment of Adult Obstructive Sleep
Apnea With Positive Airway Pressure: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine
Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, and GRADE Assessment. Journal of Clinical
Sleep Medicine. 2019;15(2):301-334.
44. Kennedy B, Lasserson TJ, Wozniak DR, et al. Pressure modification or
humidification for improving usage of continuous positive airway pressure
machines in adults with obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2019;12(12):Cd003531.
45. Chai CL, Pathinathan A, Smith B. Continuous positive airway pressure delivery
interfaces for obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2006;2006(4):Cd005308.
46. Genta PR, Kaminska M, Edwards BA, et al. The Importance of Mask Selection
on Continuous Positive Airway Pressure Outcomes for Obstructive Sleep Apnea.
An Official American Thoracic Society Workshop Report. Ann Am Thorac Soc.
2020;17(10):1177-1185.
47. Summary of AASM Clinical Guidelines for the Manual Titration of Positive
Airway Pressure in Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea - Updated July 2012:
American Association of Sleep Technologists; 2012 [Available at:
https://www.aastweb.org/hubfs/Technical%20Guidelines/Guidelinesummary.
pdf?t=1496163811483]
48. Askland K, Wright L, Wozniak DR, et al. Educational, supportive and behavioural
interventions to improve usage of continuous positive airway pressure machines
in adults with obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2020;4(4):Cd007736.
49. Kent D, Stanley J, Aurora RN, et al. Referral of adults with obstructive sleep
apnea for surgical consultation: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical
practice guideline. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2021;17(12):2499-2505.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
51
50. Pang KP, Montevecchi F, Vicini C, et al. Does nasal surgery improve multilevel
surgical outcome in obstructive sleep apnea: A multicenter study on 735 patients.
Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 2020;5(6):1233-1239.
51. Camacho M, Riaz M, Capasso R, et al. The effect of nasal surgery on continuous
positive airway pressure device use and therapeutic treatment pressures: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep. 2015;38(2):279-286.
52. Neruntarat C, Khuancharee K, Saengthong P. Barbed Reposition Pharyngoplasty
versus Expansion Sphincter Pharyngoplasty: A Meta-Analysis. Laryngoscope.
2021;131(6):1420-1428.
53. Samutsakorn P, Hirunwiwatkul P, Chaitusaney B, et al. Lingual tonsillectomy
with palatal surgery for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in adults: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. European Archives of Oto-RhinoLaryngology. 2018;275(4):1005-1013.
54. Iannella G, Lechien JR, Perrone T, et al. Barbed reposition pharyngoplasty
(BRP) in obstructive sleep apnea treatment: State of the art. American Journal of
Otolaryngology. 2022;43(1):103197.
55. Camacho M, Nesbitt NB, Lambert E, et al. Laser-Assisted Uvulopalatoplasty
for Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sleep.
2017;40(3).
56. Baba RY, Mohan A, Metta VV, et al. Temperature controlled radiofrequency
ablation at different sites for treatment of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Breath. 2015;19(3):891-910.
57. Murphey AW, Kandl JA, Nguyen SA, et al. The Effect of Glossectomy
for Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery. 2015;153(3):334-342.
58. Miller SC, Nguyen SA, Ong AA, et al. Transoral robotic base of tongue
reduction for obstructive sleep apnea: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Laryngoscope. 2017;127(1):258-265.
59. Meccariello G, Cammaroto G, Montevecchi F, et al. Transoral robotic surgery
for the management of obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review and metaanalysis. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology. 2017;274(2):647-653.
60. Abdullatif J, Certal V, Zaghi S, et al. Maxillary expansion and maxillomandibular
expansion for adult OSA: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of
Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery. 2016;44(5):574-578.
61. Awad M, Gouveia C, Zaghi S, et al. Changing practice: Trends in skeletal
surgery for obstructive sleep apnea. Journal of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
2019;47(8):1185-1189.
62. Yoon A, Guilleminault C, Zaghi S, et al. Distraction Osteogenesis Maxillary
Expansion (DOME) for adult obstructive sleep apnea patients with narrow
maxilla and nasal floor. Sleep Medicine. 2020;65:172-176.
63. Vicini C, Dallan I, Campanini A, et al. Surgery vs ventilation in adult severe
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. American Journal of Otolaryngology.
2010;31(1):14-20.
64. Zaghi S, Holty JE, Certal V, et al. Maxillomandibular Advancement for Treatment
of Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2016;142(1):58-66.
65. Holty JE, Guilleminault C. Maxillomandibular advancement for the treatment of
obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine
Reviews. 2010;14(5):287-297.
66. Giralt-Hernando M, Valls-Ontañón A, Guijarro-Martínez R, et al. Impact of
surgical maxillomandibular advancement upon pharyngeal airway volume and
the apnoea-hypopnoea index in the treatment of obstructive sleep apnoea:
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2019;6(1):e000402.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
67. Rojo-Sanchis C, Almerich-Silla JM, Paredes-Gallardo V, et al. Impact of
Bimaxillary Advancement Surgery on the Upper Airway and on Obstructive
Sleep Apnea Syndrome: a Meta-Analysis. Scientific Reports. 2018;8(1):5756.
68. AlSaty G, Xiang J, Burns M, et al. Follow-up observation of patients with
obstructive sleep apnea treated by maxillomandibular advancement. American
Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2020;158(4):527-534.
69. Liu SY, Awad M, Riley R, et al. The Role of the Revised Stanford Protocol in
Today’s Precision Medicine. Sleep Medicine Clinics. 2019;14(1):99-107.
70. Camacho M, Liu SY, Certal V, et al. Large maxillomandibular advancements for
obstructive sleep apnea: An operative technique evolved over 30 years. Journal
of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery. 2015;43(7):1113-1118.
71. Chan AS, Sutherland K, Schwab RJ, et al. The effect of mandibular advancement
on upper airway structure in obstructive sleep apnoea. Thorax. 2010;65(8):726732.
72. Schwartz M, Acosta L, Hung YL, et al. Effects of CPAP and mandibular
advancement device treatment in obstructive sleep apnea patients: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Breath. 2018;22(3):555-568.
73. Liu T, Li W, Zhou H, et al. Verifying the Relative Efficacy between Continuous
Positive Airway Pressure Therapy and Its Alternatives for Obstructive Sleep
Apnea: A Network Meta-analysis. Frontiers in Neurology. 2017;8.
74. Bartolucci ML, Bortolotti F, Corazza G, et al. Effectiveness of different mandibular
advancement device designs in obstructive sleep apnoea therapy: A systematic
review of randomised controlled trials with meta-analysis. Journal of Oral
Rehabilitation. 2021;48(4):469-486.
75. Tallamraju H, Newton JT, Fleming PS, et al. Factors influencing adherence
to oral appliance therapy in adults with obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2021;17(7):14851498.
76. Johal A, Agha B. Ready-made versus custom-made mandibular advancement
appliances in obstructive sleep apnea: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of Sleep Research. 2018;27(6):e12660.
77. Bartolucci ML, Bortolotti F, Raffaelli E, et al. The effectiveness of different
mandibular advancement amounts in OSA patients: a systematic review and
meta-regression analysis. Sleep Breath. 2016;20(3):911-919.
78. Tsolakis IA, Palomo JM, Matthaios S, et al. Dental and Skeletal Side Effects
of Oral Appliances Used for the Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea and
Snoring in Adult Patients-A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Pers Med.
2022;12(3).
79. Rueda JR, Mugueta-Aguinaga I, Vilaró J, et al. Myofunctional therapy
(oropharyngeal exercises) for obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2020(11).
80. Mason M, Welsh EJ, Smith I. Drug therapy for obstructive sleep apnoea in
adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013(5):Cd003002.
81. Liu HT, Lin YC, Kuan YC, et al. Intranasal corticosteroid therapy in the treatment
of obstructive sleep apnea: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am
J Rhinol Allergy. 2016;30(3):215-221.
82. Nguyen DK, Liang J, Durr M. Topical nasal treatment efficacy on adult obstructive
sleep apnea severity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int Forum Allergy
Rhinol. 2021;11(2):153-161.
83. Kuan YC, Wu D, Huang KW, et al. Effects of Modafinil and Armodafinil in Patients
With Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
Clinical Therapeutics. 2016;38(4):874-888.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
53
84. Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachandran SK, et al. Society of Anesthesia
and Sleep Medicine Guidelines on Preoperative Screening and Assessment
of Adult Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Anesthesia and Analgesia.
2016;123(2):452-473.
85. Stubberud AB, Moon RE, Morgan BT, et al. Using the Electronic Medical Record
to Improve Preoperative Identification of Patients at Risk for Obstructive Sleep
Apnea. Journal of Perianesthesia Nursing. 2019;34(1):51-59.
86. Seguin L, Tamisier R, Deletombe B, et al. Preoperative Screening for Obstructive
Sleep Apnea Using Alternative Scoring Models of the Sleep Tiredness Observed
Pressure-Body Mass Index Age Neck Circumference Gender Questionnaire: An
External Validation. Anesthesia and Analgesia. 2020;131(4):1025-1031.
87. Memtsoudis SG, Cozowicz C, Nagappa M, et al. Society of Anesthesia and
Sleep Medicine Guideline on Intraoperative Management of Adult Patients With
Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Anesthesia and Analgesia. 2018;127(4):967-987.
88. Nagappa M, Wong DT, Cozowicz C, et al. Is obstructive sleep apnea associated
with difficult airway? Evidence from a systematic review and meta-analysis of
prospective and retrospective cohort studies. PloS One. 2018;13(10):e0204904.
89. Cozowicz C, Stundner O, Memtsoudis SG. Regional anesthesia and pain
management in patients with sleep apnea: can they improve outcomes? Current
Opinion in Anaesthesiology. 2019;32(5):683-689.
90. Albrecht E, Bayon V, Hirotsu C, et al. Impact of short-acting vs. standard
anaesthetic agents on obstructive sleep apnoea: a randomised, controlled,
triple-blind trial. Anaesthesia. 2021;76(1):45-53.
91. Stewart M, Estephan L, Thaler A, et al. Reduced Recovery Times with Total
Intravenous Anesthesia in Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Laryngoscope.
2021;131(4):925-931.
92. Dimou F, Huynh S, Dakin G, et al. Nasal positive pressure with the SuperNO(2)
VA™ device decreases sedation-related hypoxemia during pre-bariatric surgery
EGD. Surgical Endoscopy. 2019;33(11):3828-3832.
93. Hai F, Porhomayon J, Vermont L, et al. Postoperative complications in patients
with obstructive sleep apnea: a meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia.
2014;26(8):591-600.
94. Gupta K, Nagappa M, Prasad A, et al. Risk factors for opioid-induced respiratory
depression in surgical patients: a systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ
Open. 2018;8(12):e024086.
95. Nagappa M, Patra J, Wong J, et al. Association of STOP-Bang Questionnaire as
a Screening Tool for Sleep Apnea and Postoperative Complications: A Systematic
Review and Bayesian Meta-analysis of Prospective and Retrospective Cohort
Studies. Anesthesia and Analgesia. 2017;125(4):1301-1308.
96. Xará D, Mendonça J, Pereira H, et al. Adverse respiratory events after general
anesthesia in patients at high risk of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Braz J
Anesthesiol. 2015;65(5):359-366.
97. Caples SM, Anderson WM, Calero K, et al. Use of polysomnography and home
sleep apnea tests for the longitudinal management of obstructive sleep apnea
in adults: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical guidance statement.
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2021;17(6):1287-1293.
98. Patino M, Sadhasivam S, Mahmoud M. Obstructive sleep apnoea in children:
perioperative considerations. British Journal of Anaesthesia. 2013;111 Suppl
1:i83-95.
99. Kaditis AG, Alonso Alvarez ML, Boudewyns A, et al. Obstructive sleep disordered
breathing in 2- to 18-year-old children: diagnosis and management. European
Respiratory Journal. 2016;47(1):69-94.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
100. Joosten KF, Larramona H, Miano S, et al. How do we recognize the child with
OSAS? Pediatric Pulmonology. 2017;52(2):260-271.
101. Qubty WF, Mrelashvili A, Kotagal S, et al. Comorbidities in infants with obstructive
sleep apnea. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2014;10(11):1213-1216.
102. Certal V, Catumbela E, Winck JC, et al. Clinical assessment of pediatric
obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Laryngoscope.
2012;122(9):2105-2114.
103. Wu CR, Tu YK, Chuang LP, et al. Diagnostic meta-analysis of the Pediatric Sleep
Questionnaire, OSA-18, and pulse oximetry in detecting pediatric obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2020;54:101355.
104. Hasniah AL, Jamalludin AR, Norrashidah AW, et al. Cross-cultural adaptation
and reliability of pediatric sleep questionnaire in assessment of sleep-disordered
breathing in the Malay speaking population. World Journal of Pediatrics.
2012;8(1):38-42.
105. Kaditis A, Kheirandish-Gozal L, Gozal D. Pediatric OSAS: Oximetry can provide
answers when polysomnography is not available. Sleep Medicine Reviews.
2016;27:96-105.
106. Brockmann PE, Schaefer C, Poets A, et al. Diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea
in children: a systematic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2013;17(5):331-340.
107. Certal V, Camacho M, Winck JC, et al. Unattended sleep studies in pediatric
OSA: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Laryngoscope. 2015;125(1):255262.
108. Twiss J, Chawla J, Davey MJ, et al. Overnight oximetry for evaluating paediatric
obstructive sleep apnoea: Technical specifications and interpretation guidelines.
Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health. 2019;55(10):1279.
109. Wilcox LJ, Bergeron M, Reghunathan S, et al. An updated review of pediatric druginduced sleep endoscopy. Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 2017;2(6):423431.
110. Kuhle S, Hoffmann DU, Mitra S, et al. Anti-inflammatory medications for
obstructive sleep apnoea in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2020;1(1):Cd007074.
111. Ji T, Lu T, Qiu Y, et al. The efficacy and safety of montelukast in children with
obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine.
2021;78:193-201.
112. Pabla L, Duffin J, Flood L, et al. Paediatric obstructive sleep apnoea: is our
operative management evidence-based? Journal of Laryngology and Otology.
2018;132(4):293-298.
113. Marcus CL, Moore RH, Rosen CL, et al. A randomized trial of adenotonsillectomy
for childhood sleep apnea. New England Journal of Medicine. 2013;368(25):23662376.
114. Uwiera TC. Considerations in Surgical Management of Pediatric Obstructive
Sleep Apnea: Tonsillectomy and Beyond. Children (Basel). 2021;8(11).
115. Sawunyavisuth B, Ngamjarus C, Sawanyawisuth K. Any Effective Intervention
to Improve CPAP Adherence in Children with Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A
Systematic Review. Glob Pediatr Health. 2021;8:2333794x211019884.
116. Fauroux B, Abel F, Amaddeo A, et al. ERS Statement on pediatric long term
noninvasive respiratory support. European Respiratory Journal. 2021:2101404.
117. Mulholland GB, Jeffery CC, Ziai H, et al. Multilevel Palate and Tongue Base
Surgical Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. Laryngoscope. 2019;129(7):1712-1721.
118. Nazarali N, Altalibi M, Nazarali S, et al. Mandibular advancement appliances
for the treatment of paediatric obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review.
European Journal of Orthodontics. 2015;37(6):618-626.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
55
119. Carvalho FR, Lentini-Oliveira DA, Prado LB, et al. Oral appliances and functional
orthopaedic appliances for obstructive sleep apnoea in children. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016;10(10):Cd005520.
120. Lin SY, Su YX, Wu YC, et al. Management of paediatric obstructive sleep
apnoea: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. International Journal
of Paediatric Dentistry. 2020;30(2):156-170.
121. Camacho M, Chang ET, Song SA, et al. Rapid maxillary expansion for pediatric
obstructive sleep apnea: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Laryngoscope.
2017;127(7):1712-1719.
122. Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive
sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists
Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with obstructive sleep
apnea. Anesthesiology. 2014;120(2):268-286.
123. Adler AC, Daszkowski A, Tan JC, et al. The Association of Dexmedetomidine on
Perioperative Opioid Consumption in Children Undergoing Adenotonsillectomy
With and Without Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Anesthesia and Analgesia.
2021;133(5):1260-1268.
124. Kothare SV, Rosen CL, Lloyd RM, et al. Quality measures for the care of pediatric
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
2015;11(3):385-404.
125. Kaditis AG, Alonso Alvarez ML, Boudewyns A, et al. ERS statement on
obstructive sleep disordered breathing in 1- to 23-month-old children. European
Respiratory Journal. 2017;50(6).
126. Gozal D, Tan HL, Kheirandish-Gozal L. Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea in
Children: Handling the Unknown with Precision. J Clin Med. 2020;9(3).
127. Liu L, Su G, Wang S, et al. The prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea and its
association with pregnancy-related health outcomes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Sleep Breath. 2019;23(2):399-412.
128. Tantrakul V, Numthavaj P, Guilleminault C, et al. Performance of screening
questionnaires for obstructive sleep apnea during pregnancy: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2017;36:96-106.
129. Chirakalwasan N, Amnakkittikul S, Wanitcharoenkul E, et al. Continuous
Positive Airway Pressure Therapy in Gestational Diabetes With Obstructive
Sleep Apnea: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
2018;14(3):327-336.
130. Stajić D, Ilić D, Vuković J, et al. The effect of continuous positive airway pressure
treatment on hypertensive disorder in pregnant women with obstructive sleep
apnea. Sleep Breath. 2022;26(1):297-305.
131. Kapp-Simon KA, Krueckeberg S. Mental development in infants with cleft lip
and/or palate. Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal. 2000;37(1):65-70.
132. Fernandes MBL, Salgueiro A, Bighetti EJB, et al. Symptoms of Obstructive
Sleep Apnea, Nasal Obstruction, and Enuresis in Children With Nonsyndromic
Cleft Lip and Palate: A Prevalence Study. Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal.
2019;56(3):307-313.
133. Cielo CM, Taylor JA, Vossough A, et al. Evolution of Obstructive Sleep Apnea in
Infants with Cleft Palate and Micrognathia. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
2016;12(7):979-987.
134. Silvestre J, Tahiri Y, Paliga JT, et al. Screening for obstructive sleep apnea in
children with syndromic cleft lip and/or palate. Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive
& Aesthetic Surgery. 2014;67(11):1475-1480.
135. MacLean JE, Fitzsimons D, Fitzgerald DA, et al. The spectrum of sleepdisordered breathing symptoms and respiratory events in infants with cleft lip
and/or palate. Archives of Disease in Childhood. 2012;97(12):1058-1063.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
136. Luna-Paredes C, Antón-Pacheco JL, García Hernández G, et al. Screening
for symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea in children with severe craniofacial
anomalies: assessment in a multidisciplinary unit. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology. 2012;76(12):1767-1770.
137. Flores-Mir C, Korayem M, Heo G, et al. Craniofacial morphological characteristics
in children with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Journal of the American Dental Association. 2013;144(3):269-277.
138. Katyal V, Pamula Y, Martin AJ, et al. Craniofacial and upper airway morphology
in pediatric sleep-disordered breathing: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2013;143(1):2030.e23.
139. Rizzi CJ, Amin JD, Isaiah A, et al. Tracheostomy for Severe Pediatric Obstructive
Sleep Apnea: Indications and Outcomes. Otolaryngology and Head and Neck
Surgery. 2017;157(2):309-313.
140. Jenny HE, Massenburg BB, Weissler EH, et al. Neonatal Micrognathia: National
Trends in Early Mandibular Surgery. Annals of Plastic Surgery. 2017;78(3):338-341.
141. Moraleda-Cibrián M, Edwards SP, Kasten SJ, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea
pretreatment and posttreatment in symptomatic children with congenital
craniofacial malformations. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2015;11(1):37-43.
142. Rachmiel A, Emodi O, Aizenbud D. Management of obstructive sleep apnea in
pediatric craniofacial anomalies. Ann Maxillofac Surg. 2012;2(2):111-115.
143. Ramgopal S, Kothare SV, Rana M, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea in infancy:
a 7-year experience at a pediatric sleep center. Pediatric Pulmonology.
2014;49(6):554-560.
144. Rosen D. Management of obstructive sleep apnea associated with Down
syndrome and other craniofacial dysmorphologies. Current Opinion in Pulmonary
Medicine. 2011;17(6):431-436.
145. Nerfeldt P, Sundelin A. Obstructive sleep apnea in children with down syndrome
- Prevalence and evaluation of surgical treatment. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology. 2020;133:109968.
146. Waters KA, Castro C, Chawla J. The spectrum of obstructive sleep apnea in
infants and children with Down Syndrome. International Journal of Pediatric
Otorhinolaryngology. 2020;129:109763.
147. Maris M, Verhulst S, Wojciechowski M, et al. Outcome of adenotonsillectomy
in children with Down syndrome and obstructive sleep apnoea. Archives of
Disease in Childhood. 2017;102(4):331-336.
148. Mokhlesi B, Masa JF, Brozek JL, et al. Evaluation and Management of Obesity
Hypoventilation Syndrome. An Official American Thoracic Society Clinical
Practice Guideline. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine.
2019;200(3):e6-e24.
149. Masa JF, Mokhlesi B, Benítez I, et al. Long-term clinical effectiveness of
continuous positive airway pressure therapy versus non-invasive ventilation
therapy in patients with obesity hypoventilation syndrome: a multicentre, openlabel, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2019;393(10182):1721-1732.
150. Soghier I, Brożek JL, Afshar M, et al. Noninvasive Ventilation versus CPAP as
Initial Treatment of Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome. Ann Am Thorac Soc.
2019;16(10):1295-1303.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
57
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Questions: What are the safe and effective treatment options
of OSA?
1.
SLEEP APNEA, OBSTRUCTIVE/
2.
(obstructive adj2 sleep apn#ea*).tw.
3.
osahs.tw.
4.
(obstructive adj3 sleep apn#ea syndrome).tw.
5.
sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome.tw.
6.
SLEEP APNEA SYNDROMES/
7.
(sleep adj1 apn#ea*).tw.
8.
(sleep apn#ea* adj2 syndrome*).tw.
9.
((sleep disordered or sleep-disordered) adj2 breathing).tw.
10. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9
11. CONTINUOUS POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE/
12. ((bilevel or nasal) adj4 continuous positive airway pressure).tw.
13. (continuous adj3 positive airway pressure).tw.
14. (cpap adj1 ventilation).tw.
15. positive airway pressure.tw.
16. 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15
17. 10 and 16
18. limit 17 to (english language and humans and yr=”2010 -Current”)
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the prevalence/incidence of OSA?
2.
Who are at risk of OSA?
3.
What is the accuracy of the following screening tools for OSA?
• Epworth Sleepiness scale
• STOP-BANG
• Berlin Questionnaire
• TUCASA questionnaire
• Trending of pulse oximetry (McGill oximetry scoring system)
• Paediatric sleep questionnaire
4.
What are the diagnostic criteria of OSA?
5.
What are the indications for different levels of polysomnography in
OSA?
6.
What are the clinical assessments for OSA?
7.
What are the co-morbidities associated with OSA?
8.
What are the safety and effectiveness of the following treatment
options for OSA?
• weight management and lifestyle modification
• Positive airway pressure therapy
• surgical interventions
• adjunctive therapy
 oral devices
 medications
9.
What is the preoperative assessment of suspected and confirmed
OSA?
10. What is the intraoperative management of suspected and confirmed
OSA?
11. What is the postoperative management of suspected and confirmed
OSA?
12. What are the parameters to be assessed at follow-up in OSA?
13. What are the indications to repeat sleep study assessment postintervention of OSA?
14. What are the accurate diagnosis and effective treatment of OSA in
the following conditions?
• Pregnancy
• Syndromic patients
• Obesity hypoventilation disorder
15. What are the referral criteria of OSA to secondary/tertiary care?
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
59
Appendix 3
MODIFIED MALLAMPATI GRADING
Adapted: Harvey R, O’Brien L, Aronovich S, et al. Friedman tongue position and
cone beam computed tomography in patients with obstructive sleep apnea.
Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 2017;2(5):320-324.
Grade 1
soft palate, fauces, uvula,
anterior and posterior
pillars visible
Grade 2
soft palate, fauces,
uvula, visible
Grade 3
soft palate and base
of uvula, visible
Grade 4
soft palate not visible
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Appendix 4
TONSILLAR GRADING
Source: Friedman M, Salapatas AM, Bonzelaar LB. Updated Friedman Staging
System for Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Adv Otorhinolaryngol. 2017;80:41-48.
a Size 0, absence of tonsillar tissue.
b Size 1, within the pillars.
c Size 2, extended to the pillars.
d Size 3, extended past the pillars.
e Size 4, extended to the midline.
a
b
c
d
e
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
61
Appendix 5
BERLIN QUESTIONNAIRE
1) Complete the following:
height__________ age_____________
weight__________ male/female______
2) Do you snore?
yes
no
don’t know
If you snore:
3) Your snoring is?
slightly louder than breathing
as loud as talking
louder than talking
very loud, can be heard in adjacent rooms
4) How often do you snore?
nearly everyday
3 - 4 times a week
1 - 2 times a week
1 - 2 times a month
never or nearly never
5) Has your snoring ever bothered
other people?
yes
no
6) Has anyone noticed that you quit
breathing during your sleep?
nearly everyday
3 - 4 times a week
1 - 2 times a week
1 - 2 times a month
never or nearly never
Scoring Questions:
Any answer within box outline is a positive response.
Scoring Categories: Category 1 is positive with 2 or more positive responses
to questions 2 - 6
Category 2 is positive with 2 or more positive responses
to questions 7 - 9
Category 3 is positive with 1 or more positive responses
and/or a BMI >30
Final Results:
2 or more positive categories indicates a high likelihood of
sleep disordered breathing.
Reference: Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, et al. Using the Berlin Questionnaire
to identify patients at risk for the sleep apnea syndrome. Annals of internal
medicine. 1999;131(7):485-491.
7) How often do you feel tired or
fatigued after you sleep?
nearly everyday
3 - 4 times a week
1 - 2 times a week
1 - 2 times a month
never or nearly never
8) During your wake time, do you
feel tired, fatigued or not wake up
to par?
nearly everyday
3 - 4 times a week
1 - 2 times a week
1 - 2 times a month
never or nearly never
9) Have you ever nodded off or fallen
asleep while driving a vehicle?
yes
no
If yes, how often does it occur?
nearly everyday
3 - 4 times a week
1 - 2 times a week
1 - 2 times a month
never or nearly never
10)
Do you have high blood pressure?
yes
no
don’t know
BMI =
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Appendix 6
STOP-BANG QUESTIONNAIRE
1
Snoring: Do you snore loudly (loud enough to be heard through
closed doors)?
Yes
No
2
Tired: Do you often feel tired, fatigued or sleepy during daytime?
Yes
No
3
Observed: Has anyone observed you stop breathing during your
sleep?
Yes
No
4
Blood Pressure: Do you have or are you being treated for high
blood pressure?
Yes
No
5
BMI: BMI more than 35 kg/m2?
Yes
No
6
Age: Age over 50 years old?
Yes
No
7
Neck circumference: Neck circumference greater than 40 cm?
Yes
No
8
Gender: Male?
Yes
No
High risk of OSA: Yes to 3 or more questions
Low risk of OSA: Yes to less than 3 questions
Source: Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, et al. STOP questionnaire: a tool to screen
patients for obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 2008;108(5):812-821.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
63
Appendix 7
STOP-BANG QUESTIONNAIRE (MALAY VERSION)
STOP-BANG – Soal Selidik Apnea Tidur Obstruktif
No Rujukan Subjek: ____________ Umur: ________ Jantina: L/P
1. Berdengkur
Ya/Tidak
Adakah anda kuat berdengkur (agak kuat sehingga boleh didengari
walaupun di belakang pintu tertutup atau pasangan katil anda menyiku
anda kerana berdengkur pada waktu malam)?
2. Letih
Ya/Tidak
Adakah anda sentiasa berasa penat, lesu atau mengantuk pada siang
hari?
(contohnya tertidur semasa memandu)?
3. Diperhatikan
Ya/Tidak
Adakah sesiapa memerhatikan anda berhenti bernafas atau tercekik/
tercungap-cungap semasa sedang tidur?
4. Tekanan darah
Ya/Tidak
Adakah anda sedang diberi rawatan kerana penyakit darah tinggi?
5. Indeks berat badan
Ya/Tidak
Indeks berat badan lebih daripada 35 kg/m2? (obes)
6. Umur
Ya/Tidak
Berumur lebih daripada 50 tahun?
7. Ukurlilit leher (diukur melalui halkum)
Ya/Tidak
Bagi lelaki, adakah ukuran kolar kemeja anda 17 inci/43 cm atau lebih luas?
Bagi wanita, adakah ukuran kolar kemeja anda 16 inci/41 cm atau lebih luas?
8. Jantina Lelaki
Ya/Tidak
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
MARKAH:
RISIKO OSA:
Kriteria pemarkahan Untuk populasi umum
Risiko rendah terhadap apnia tidur obstruktif (OSA): Ya kepada 0-2
soalan
Risiko pertengahan terhadap OSA: Ya kepada 3-4 soalan
Risiko tinggi OSA: Ya kepada 5-8 soalan
Atau
Ya kepada 2 atau lebih daripada 4 terhadap soalan
STOP + jantina lelaki
Atau
Ya kepada 2 atau lebih daripada 4 terhadap Soalan
STOP + index berat badan >35 kg/m2
Atau
Ya kepada 2 atau lebih daripada 4 terhadap soalan
STOP + ukurlilit leher 17”/43 cm bagi
lelaki, 16”/41 cm bagi wanita
Reference: Abdullah B, Idris AI, Mohammad ZW, et al. Validation of Bahasa Malaysia
STOP-BANG questionnaire for identification of obstructive sleep apnea.
Sleep Breath. 2018;22(4):1235-1239.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
65
Appendix 8
EPWORTH SLEEPINESS SCALE
Name: ______________________ Today’s date:_________________
Your age (Yrs): ______Your sex (Male = M, Female = F): ________
How likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the following situations,
in contrast to feeling just tired?
This refers to your usual way of life in recent times.
Even if you haven’t done some of these things recently try to work out
how they would have affected you.
Use the following scale to choose the most appropriate number for
each situation:
0 = would never doze
1 = slight chance of dozing
2 = moderate chance of dozing
3 = high chance of dozing
It is important that you answer each question as best as you can.
Situation
Chance of Dozing (0-3)
Sitting and reading
Watching TV
Sitting, inactive in a public place
(e.g. a theatre or a meeting
As a passenger in a car for an hour
without a break
Lying down to rest in the
afternoon when circumstances permit
Sitting and talking to someone
Sitting quietly after a lunch without alcohol
In a car, while stopped for a few
minutes in the traffic
Reference: Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth
Sleepiness Scale. Sleep, 1991; 14: 50-55.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Appendix 9
ASA PHYSICAL STATUS CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
Committee of Oversight: Economics
(Approved by the ASA House of Delegates on October 15, 2014,
and last amended on December 13, 2020)
The ASA Physical Status Classification System has been in use for over
60 years. The purpose of the system is to assess and communicate
a patient’s pre-anesthesia medical co-morbidities. The classification
system alone does not predict the perioperative risks, but used with
other factors (e.g. type of surgery, frailty, level of deconditioning), it can
be helpful in predicting perioperative risks.
The definitions and examples shown in the table below are guidelines
for the clinician. To improve communication and assessments at a
specific institution, anesthesiology departments may choose to develop
institutional-specific examples to supplement the ASA-approved
examples.
Assigning a Physical Status Classification level is a clinical decision
based on multiple factors. While the classification may initially be
determined at various times during the preoperative assessment of
the patient, the final assignment of Physical Status Classification is
made on the day of anaesthesia care by the anaesthesiologist after
evaluating the patient.
ASA PS
Classification
Definition
Adult examples,
including but not
limited to:
Paediatric examples,
including but not
limited
Obstetric examples,
including but not
limited to:
Healthy, non-
smoking, no or
minimal alcohol use
Healthy (no acute or
chronic disease), normal
BMI percentile for age
A normal
healthy patient
ASA I
Substantive functional
limitations; one or more
moderate to severe
diseases.
Poorly controlled
DM or HTN, COPD,
morbid obesity (BMI ≥40),
active hepatitis,
Uncorrected stable
congenital cardiac
abnormality, asthma with
exacerbation, poorlycontrolled epilepsy,
insulin dependent DM,
morbid obesity,
malnutrition, severe OSA,
A patient with
severe systemic
disease
ASA III
ASA Il
Normal pregnancy*,
well-controlled
gestational HTN,
controlled
preeclampsia without
severe features,
diet-controlled
gestational DM
Asymptomatic
congenital cardiac
disease, well-controlled
dysrhythmias, asthma
without exacerbation,
well-controlled epilepsy,
non-insulin dependent
DM, abnormal BMI
percentile for age, mild/
moderate OSA,
oncologic state in
remission, autism with
mild limitations
Mild diseases only
without substantive
functional limitations.
Current smoker, social
alcohol drinker,
pregnancy, obesity
(30<BMI<40), wellcontrolled DM/HTN,
mild lung disease
A patient with
mild systemic
disease
Preeclampsia with
severe features,
gestational DM with
complications or high
insulin requirements, a
thrombophilic disease
requiring anticoagulation
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
67
ASA PS
Classification
Definition
Adult examples,
including but not
limited to:
Paediatric examples,
including but not
limited
Obstetric examples,
including but not
limited to:
alcohol dependence or
abuse, implanted
pacemaker, moderate
reduction of ejection
fraction, ESRD
undergoing regularlyscheduled dialysis,
history (>3 months)
of MI, CVA, TIA or
CAD/stents
oncologic state, renal
failure, muscular
dystrophy, cystic fibrosis,
history of organ
transplantation, brain/
spinal cord malformation,
symptomatic
hydrocephalus,
premature infant postconceptual age <60
weeks, autism
with severe limitations,
metabolic disease,
difficult airway, long
term parenteral nutrition.
Full term infants <6
weeks of age.
Ruptured abdominal/
thoracic aneurysm,
massive trauma,
intracranial bleed with
mass effect, ischemic
bowel in the face of
significant cardiac
pathology or multiple
organ/system
dysfunction
Massive trauma,
intracranial hemorrhage
with mass effect, patient
requiring ECMO,
respiratory failure or
arrest, malignant
hypertension,
decompensated
congestive heart failure,
hepatic encephalopathy,
ischemic bowel or
multiple organ/system
dysfunction
A moribund
patient who is
not expected
to survive
without the
operation
ASA V
ASA IV
Preeclampsia with
severe features
complicated by HELLP
or other adverse event,
peripartum
cardiomyopathy with
EF <40, uncorrected/
decompensated heart
disease, acquired or
congenital
Symptomatic congenital
cardiac abnormality,
congestive heart failure,
active sequelae of
prematurity, acute
hypoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy, shock,
sepsis, disseminated
intravascular coagulation,
automatic implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator,
ventilator dependence,
endocrinopathy, severe
trauma, severe
respiratory distress,
advanced oncologic state
Recent (<3 months) MI,
CVA, TIA or CAD/stents,
ongoing cardiac
ischemia or severe valve
dysfunction, severe
reduction of ejection
fraction, shock, sepsis,
DIC, ARD or
ESRD not undergoing
regularly-scheduled
dialysis
A patient with
severe
systemic
disease that is
a constant
threat to life
Uterine rupture
A declared
brain-dead
patient whose
organs are
being removed
for donor
purposes
ASA VI
* Although pregnancy is not a disease, the parturient’ s physiologic state is significantly
altered from the woman is not pregnant, hence the assignment of ASA 2 for a woman
with uncomplicated pregnancy
**the addition of “E” denotes emergency surgery (an emergency is defined as existing
when delay in treatment of the patient would lead to a significant increase in the threat
to life or body part)
Reference: American Society of Anesthesiologists, ASA Physical Status Classification
System. 2020. [Available at: https://www.asahq.org/standards-andguidelines/asa-physical-status-classification-system]
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Appendix 10
PAEDIATRIC SLEEP QUESTIONNAIRE
Responses are “no” = 0, “yes” = 1, and “don’t know”=missing.
Adapted: Chervin RD, Hedger K, Dillon JE, et al. Pediatric sleep questionnaire (PSQ):
validity and reliability of scales for sleep-disordered breathing, snoring,
sleepiness, and behavioral problems. Sleep Med. 2000:1;1(1):21-32.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
69
Appendix 11
PAEDIATRIC SLEEP QUESTIONNAIRE (MALAY VERSION)
Respon “Tidak” = 0, “Ya=1” dan “tidak tahu”=”missing”
Reference: Hasniah AL, Jamalludin AR, Norrashidah AW, et al. Cross-cultural
adaptation and reliability of pediatric sleep questionnaire in assessment
of sleep-disordered breathing in the Malay speaking population. World J
Pediatr. 2012;8(1):38-42.
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
Appendix 12
MECHANISM OF AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION AND PRINCIPLE OF
MANAGEMENT IN CHILDREN
MECHANISM OF AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION:
NARROWING OF AIRWAY DUE TO
SOFT TISSUE, BONE, CARTILAGE
OR NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDER
NASO-PHARYNX
ORO-PHARYNX
LARYNGO-PHARYNX
(HYPO-PHARYNX)
NASO-PHARYNX
ORO-PHARYNX
LARYNGO-PHARYNX
(HYPO-PHARYNX)
Epiglotis,
vocal
cord
PRINCIPLES OF
MANAGEMENT
CORRECTIVE
SURGERY
SURGERY
RELIEF OF
OBSTRUCTION
BYPASS AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION
Craniosynostosis
e.g. Crouzon
Syndrome
Maxilliofacial
Pierre Robin
Sequence
Surgery:
Bone advancement
e.g. Mandibular distraction
osteogenesis, rapid
maxillary expansion
Nasal septum deviation
Surgery: Septoplasty
Adenoid hypertrophy
Surgery: Adenoidectomy
Choanal atresia
Surgery: Tracheostomy
Adenotonsillar
hyperthrophy
Surgery:
Adenotonsillectomy
Nasal polyp
Surgery:
Polypectomy
Tonsillar hypertrophy
surgery: Tonsillectomy
AV malformation
e.g. Cystic hygroma
Surgery: Resection
Veno-lymphatic malformation
Surgery: Resection
Laryngomalacia
Surgery: Supraglottoplasty
Laryngomalacia
Surgery:
Supraglottoplasty
Pierre Robin
Sequence
Surgery:
Tracheostomy
Veno-lymphatic
malformation
Surgery:
Tracheostomy
Severe Obesity
Surgery:
Tracheostomy
Spasticity
e.g. Cerebral
Palsy
Surgery:
Tracheostomy
SITE OF AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
71
Maxillofacial
e.g. Pierre Robin
Sequence
Treatment:
CPAP
Metabolic
diseases
e.g. Mucopolysacharidoses
Treatment:
CPAP
Macroglossia
e.g. Beckwidth
Wiederman
Syndrome
Treatment:
CPAP
Down’s
Syndrome
Treatment:
CPAP
Allergic rhinitis
Treatment:
Anti-inflammatory drugs
e.g. nasal corticosteroids,
montelukast, anti-histamines
REDUCE
OEDEMA AND
INFLAMMATION
CONTROL
DISEASE
Subglottic hemangioma
Treatment: Propanolol
Mild to moderate
laryngomalacia
Treatment: CPAP
RELIEVE
AIRWAY
OBSTRUCTION
Obesity
Treatment: CPAP
SPLINT
CROWDED
AIRWAY
CPAP
MEDICAL
Hypotonia e.g. Down’s /
Neuromuscular diseases
Treatment: CPAP
SPLINT
HYPOTONIC
AIRWAY
Illustration: Norhazirah Mohd Razali Concept: Mohd Yusran Othman and Asiah Kassim
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AASM
American Academy of Sleep Medicine
AE(s)
adverse event(s)
AHI
Apnoea-Hypopnoea Index
AI
Arousal index
ALT
Alanine Transaminase
ANB
difference between SNA and SNB, where SNA is the angle between
sella, nasion and A point, while SNB is the angle between sella,
nasion and B point
APAP
automated positive airway pressure
ARD
acute respiratory distress
ASA
American Society of Anesthesiologists
AST
Aspartate Aminotransferase
AT
adenotonsillectomy
ATS
American Thoracic Society
AUC
area under the curve
BiPAP
bi-level PAP
BMI
body mass index
BRP
barbed reposition pharyngoplasty
BQ
Berlin Questionnaire
CA
craniofacial anomalies
CAD
coronary artery disease
CHD
cardiovascular disease
CI
confidence interval
CKD
chronic kidney disease
COPD
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CPAP
continuous positive airway pressure
CV
cardiovascular
Crl
Credible interval
CVA
cerebrovascular accident
CVD
cardiovascular disease
DG
Development Group
DIC
disseminated intravascular coagulation
DISE
drug-induced sleep endoscopy
DM
diabetes mellitus
DOME
distraction osteogenesis maxillary expansion
DTA
diagnostic test accuracy
DS
Down syndrome
ECG
electrocardiogram
ECMO
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
EEG
electroencephalogram
EF
ejection fraction
EMG
electromyogram
EOG
electrooculogram
ESRD
end-stage renal disease
ESS
Epworth Sleepiness Scale
FNMM
fiber-optic nasal endoscopy with Muller’s Manoeuver
ERS
European Respiratory Society
HELLP
Hemolysis, Elevated Liver Enzymes and Low Platelets
HPE
histopathology examination
HSAT
home sleep apnea testing
HTN
hypertension
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
73
ICSD-3
The third edition of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders
ICU
intensive care unit
LAUP
laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty
LSAT
lowest oxygen saturation
MAA
mandibular advance appliance
MD
mean difference
MI
myocardial infarction
MMA
maxillomandibular advancement
MP-SN
angle between mandibular plane and sella nasion line
NOSE
nasal obstruction symptom evaluation
NIV
noninvasive ventilation
ODI
oxygen desaturation index
ODI4
Oxyhaemoglobin desaturation (≥4%) index
OHS
Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
OSA
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
OR
odds ratio
ORID
opioid-induced respiratory depression
ORL
otorhinolaryngology
PaCO2
arterial carbon dioxide tension
PACU
Post-Anaesthesia Recovery Unit
PAP
positive airway pressure
PAV
posterior airway volume
PM
portable monitor
PNS-AD1
distance from the posterior nasal spine to the nearest adenoid tissue
measured along the PNS- basion line
PNS-AD2
distance from the posterior nasal spine to the nearest adenoid tissue
measured along the line perpendicular to the sella-basion line
PPV
positive predictive value
PRS
Pierre Robin Sequence
PSG
polysomnogram
PSQ
Pediatric Sleep Questionnaire
P-SAP
perioperative sleep apnea prediction
QoL
quality of life
RCT(s)
randomized controlled trial(s)
RDI
Respiratory Disturbance Index
RME
rapid maxillary expansion
REM
rapid eye movement
ROC
receiver operating characteristic
RR
relative risk
SARPE
surgical-assisted rapid palatal expansion
SBQ
STOP-BANG Questionnaire
SBP
systolic blood pressure
SDB
sleep disordered breathing
SMD
standardised mean difference
SNB
angle between sella, nasion and B point
SE(s)
side effect(s)
SpO2 Oxygen saturation
SQ
STOP Questionnaire
T2DM
type 2 diabetes mellitus
TCRFTA
temperature controlled radiofrequency tissue ablation
TIA
transient ischaemic attack
TIVA
total IV anaesthesia
TMJ
temporomandibular joint
Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Zamilah Mat Jusoh@Yusof and Ms. Subhiyah Ariffin on retrieval
of evidence
• Ms. Nazneen Izma Shahrizan for illustrating the background of the
CPG cover
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None hold shares in pharmaceutical
firms or act as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Obstructive Sleep
Apnoea was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
TORS BOT
transoral robotic base-of-tongue surgery
vs
versus
WMD
weighted mean difference
MALAYSIAN HEALTH TECHNOLOGY