CLINICAIAPRACTICE
SGUIDELINES
Ma\aGement
of Haemophilia
Management of Haemophilia
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-64-9
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://maspho.org
http://haematology.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Haemophilia
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2018 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2022) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Haemophilia
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1: Haemophilia Genetic Inheritance (X-linked)
x
Algorithm 2: Genetic Testing for Haemophilia Patient
xi
and Carrier Screening
Algorithm 3: Physiotherapy Management
xii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
2
3.
INVESTIGATIONS
4
3.1 Laboratory Tests
4
3.2 Genetic Tests
5
4.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CARE
7
4.1 Stratification of Haemophilia Centre with regards to
7
Haemophilia Services
4.2 National Haemophilia Registry
8
5.
TREATMENT
10
5.1 Pharmacological Treatment
10
5.1.1 Factor Replacement Therapy
10
5.1.2 Adjunct Therapies
14
5.1.3 Analgesia
16
5.2 Non-pharmacological Treatment
18
5.2.1 Rehabilitation of Musculoskeletal System
18
5.2.2 Protection, Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation 20
5.2.3 Joint Protection
21
5.2.4 Sports/physical Activity
21
5.2.5 Post-operative Care
21
5.2.6 Weight Management
22
6.
TREATMENT FOR ACUTE BLEEDING IN SPECIFIC SITES 23
6.1 Central Nervous System
23
6.2 Joints
23
6.3 Musculoskeletal
24
6.4 Ear, Nose, Throat and Eye
27
6.5 Gastrointestinal Tract
Management of Haemophilia
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
6.6 Genitourinary Tract
27
6.7 Oral Cavity
28
7.
TREATMENT OF MUSCULOSKELETAL COMPLICATIONS 30
7.1 Synovitis
30
7.2 Joint Arthropathy
31
7.3 Pseudotumour
31
8.
INHIBITORS
33
8.1 Treatment of Acute Bleeding
34
8.2 Prophylaxis Therapy
34
8.3 Eradication of Inhibitors
35
9.
HOME THERAPY
37
10. ADHERENCE IN HAEMOPHILIA TREATMENT
39
11. SPECIAL SITUATIONS
41
11.1 Surgeries and Invasive Procedures
41
11.2 Management of Pregnant Carrier
42
11.3 Vaccination
43
11.4 Circumcision
43
12. DENTAL CARE
44
12.1 Preventive Dental Measures
44
12.2 Dental Procedures
44
12.3 Management of Oral Bleeding
46
13. MONITORING
48
13.1 Inhibitors
48
13.2 Bleeding Frequency
48
13.3 Joint Health
49
13.4 Radiological Measures
49
14. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
50
14.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
51
14.2 Potential Resource Implications
51
REFERENCES
53
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
59
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
60
Appendix 3 Guidelines on Sample Collection and
62
Transportation
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 4 Recommended Sports/Physical Activities in
63
Haemophilia
Appendix 5 Development of Abnormal Posture
65
Following Bleeds
Appendix 6 Face, Legs, Activity, Cry,
66
Consolability (FLACC) Scale, Visual Analog
Scale and Numeric Rating Scale
Appendix 7 Analgesic Medication Table
67
Suggested Dose Conversion Ratio
Appendix 8 Haemophilia Joint Health Score
72
Appendix 9 Petterson Score
78
List of Abbreviations
79
Acknowledgement
81
Disclosure Statement
81
Source of Funding
81
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Haemophilia
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Haemophilia
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group (DG) as the key recommendations that answer
the main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Investigations
• Factor VIII or factor IX assay should be performed in persons
suspected of haemophilia with prolonged Activated Partial
Thromboplastin Time and normal Prothrombin Time.
• Mixing test should be done to screen for factor inhibitor in haemophilia.
 If it is not corrected, Bethesda or Nijmegen assay should be done
to determine the factor inhibitor level.
• Mutation analysis for haemophilia should be performed on affected
male and his mother.
• Cascade screening for haemophilia should be offered to at least first-
and second-degree female relatives if the mother of persons with
haemophilia is a confirmed carrier.
Pharmacological Treatment
• Prophylactic factor infusion should be given to ALL persons with
severe haemophilia.
• Analgesia should be offered for pain relief according to its severity in
haemophilia.
Non-pharmacological Treatment
• Rehabilitation should be offered in PWH during acute or sub-acute
bleeds and those with chronic arthropathy.
• Protection, Rest, Ice therapy, Compression, Elevation (PRICE)
should be commenced as a first aid measure in acute and sub-acute
bleed in persons with haemophilia.
Inhibitors
• Bypassing agents should be used to treat acute bleeding in
haemophilia with inhibitors.
• Immune tolerance induction should be considered in all persons with
haemophilia with inhibitor.
Management of Haemophilia
Home therapy
• Home therapy should be advocated to all persons with haemophilia.
Special Situations
• All injectable vaccinations in haemophilia should be given
subcutaneously.
Dental Care
• In persons with haemophilia,
 comprehensive oral health care should be initiated early within six
months after the first tooth erupts and no later than 12 months
 routine dental examination with preventive care measures should
be conducted regularly throughout life
 good oral hygiene and dietary counselling should be advocated to
prevent dental diseases
• Comprehensive oral health care in haemophilia should be performed
by a multidisciplinary team which include a dental surgeon.
Monitoring
• Monitoring of care in persons with haemophilia should include:
 Annual Bleeding Rate
 inhibitor screening
 Annual Haemophilia Joint Health Score
 ultrasound of knee, ankle and elbow when feasible
Management of Haemophilia
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the DG for this CPG were from the Ministry of Health
(MoH). There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review
Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database of
Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed and Guidelines International
Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The
search was limited to humans and English. In addition, the reference
lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched further to
look for relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted to
identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 6 March
2016 to 15 August 2018. Literature searches were repeated for all
clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing
any relevant papers published before 31 July 2018 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
References were made to other CPGs on haemophilia e.g.
• Guidelines for the Management of Haemophilia (World Federation
of Haemophilia, 2012)
• Guidelines for the Management of Haemophilia in Australia
(Australian Haemophilia Centre Directors’ Organisation, 2016)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to being used as references.
A total of 17 main clinical questions were developed under three
different sections (screening, treatment and monitoring). Members of
the DG were assigned individual questions within these sections (refer
to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG members met 26 times
throughout the development of these guidelines. All literature retrieved
were appraised by at least two DG members using Critical Appraisal
Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence tables and further
discussed in their meetings. All statements and recommendations
formulated subsequently were agreed upon by both the DG and RC.
Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations were made
by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG is based largely on the
findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials, with
local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
Management of Haemophilia
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
Upon completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/penerbitan/mymahtas/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Haemophilia
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of haemophilia in the following aspects:
a) diagnosis
b) treatment
c) monitoring
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• All patients with congenital haemophilia A and B
Exclusion Criteria
• Patients with:
a. Acquired haemophilia
b. Other congenital bleeding disorders
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care in the management of
haemophilia including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. policy makers
v. patients and their advocates
vi. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Haemophilia
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Zulaiha Muda
Consultant Paediatric Haemato-oncologist
Women & Children Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
vii
Dr. Aisyah Muhammad Rivai
Consultant Paediatric
Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Azman Othman
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Tengkera, Melaka
Dr. Cheah Yee Keat
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Tuanku Jaa’far,
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Che Hadibiah Che Mohd Razali
Consultant Paediatric
Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Dato’ Dr. Goh Ai Sim
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Kamalia Kamarulzaman
Nuclear Medicine Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Lim Soo Min
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit &
Public Health Physician
MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya
Mr. Mohd Helmi Hashim
Physiotherapist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Nazzlin Dizana Din
Paediatric Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah,
Terengganu
Dr. Nor’Ashikin Johari
Consultant Paediatric Orthopaedic Surgeon
Women & Children Hospital,
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Norhafizah Ayob
Physiotherapist
Women & Children Hospital,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norjehan Yahaya
Specialist in Special Needs Dentistry
Hospital Kuala Lumpur,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ong Gek Bee
Consultant Paediatric
Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Umum Sarawak,
Sarawak
Dr. Raja Zarina Raja Shahardin
Consultant in Paediatric Dentistry
Women & Children Hospital,
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Siti Mariam Mohtar
Senior Assistant Director
MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya
Ms. Subasyini a/p Sivasupramaniam
Pharmacist
Women & Children Hospital,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Wan Hayati Mohd Yaakob
Pathologist (Haematology)
Hospital Tuanku Ampuan Rahimah,
Selangor
Management of Haemophilia
Ms. Wong Shu Ping
Pharmacist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Yeoh Seoh Leng
Consultant Paediatric
Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Yuslina Mat Yusoff
Pathologist (Haematology)
Institut Penyelidikan Perubatan,
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Haemophilia
viii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Hishamshah Mohd Ibrahim
Senior Consultant Paediatric Haematolo-oncologist
Head of Department
Paediatric Department
Women & Children Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Abd. Razak Muhamad
Consultant Paediatric Orthopaedic &
Trauma Surgeon
Gleneagles Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Azlan Husin
Consultant Physician & Clinical
Haematologist Hospital Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Carol Lim Kar Koong
Head of Department & Consultant
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist (Maternal
Fetal Medicine)
Hospital Sultan Ahmad Shah, Pahang
Ms. Haironi Ismail
Physiotherapist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Ms. Halimah Hashim
Physiotherapist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II,
Kelantan
Dr. Jalil Ishak
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jasin, Melaka
Dr. Jameela Sathar
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Lily Wong Lee Lee
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Queen Elizabeth, Sabah
Professor Dr. Noraini @ Nun Nahar Yunus
Professor in Paediatric Dentistry
Lincoln University College
Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Ms. Norima Md. Noor
Pharmacist
Hospital Banting, Selangor
Dr. Nik Rus Mazeni Nik Yusoff
Consultant Pathologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Taqrir Akramin Khalib
Patient Advocate & President
Pertubuhan Hemofilia Malaysia
Dr. Zainah Shaikh Hedra
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Sultanah Nora Ismail, Johor
Management of Haemophilia
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Ganasalingam Sockalingam
Head of Department & Senior
Consultant in Paediatric Dentistry
Women & Children Hospital,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Graeme Ting
Consultant and Head of Discipline
Special Needs Dentistry
University of Otago, Dunedin,
New Zealand
Dr. Jafanita Jamaluddin
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, &
Paediatrics Services Unit, Medical
Development Division, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Thiyagar Nadarajaw
Head of Department & Consultant
Paediatrician and Adolescent
Medicine Specialist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Professor Mike Laffan
Professor of Thrombosis and
Haemostasis
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
Ms. Nor Hasni Haron
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Pharmaceutical Care Section
Pharmacy Practice &
Development Division
MoH, Selangor
Mr. Peit De Klient
Physiotherapist
UMC Utrecht Department of
Rehabilitation
Utrecht, Netherlands
Dr. Ri Liesner
Consultant in Paediatric Haemostasis
and Thrombosis
Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children
London, United Kingdom
Dr. Ridzuan Dato’ Isa
Head of Department & Emergency
Physician
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Siti Zaleha Suleiman
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Merlimau, Melaka
Professor Dr. Wan Zaidah Abdullah
Head of Department &
Consultant Haematopathologist
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kelantan
Management of Haemophilia
ALGORITHM 1. HAEMOPHILIA GENETIC INHERITANCE
(X-LINKED)
x
XY XX
XY
XY
XX
XX
XY XX
XY
XY
XX
XX
A.
Father with haemophilia Non-carrier mother (normal)
B. Non-haemophilia father (normal) carrier mother
All sons are unaffected All daughters are carriers
50% chance of son
will have haemophilia
50% chance of daughter
will be carriers
Management of Haemophilia
xi
ALGORITHM 2. GENETIC TESTING FOR
HAEMOPHILIA PATIENT AND CARRIER SCREENING
*Send samples in sodium citrate tubes of index case and both parents if testing
is done in Pusat Darah Negara and in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid tubes
of index case and mother if testing is done in IMR. Refer to Appendix 3 on
Guidelines on Sample Collection and Transportation.
Index case of haemophilia (diagnosed by factor assay)
Offer pre-test counselling to patient and
parents and, obtain informed consent
Send specimen using ‘molecular analysis for haemophilia’ request form
for each person*
Carrier status of mother is
confirmed positive
Counselling
Counselling
Offer carrier screening
for female siblings
and maternal aunties
Management of Haemophilia
ALGORITHM 3. PHYSIOTHERAPY MANAGEMENT
xii
Physiotherapy Management
Active Bleeding
Post-operative
Sports/physical activities
PRICE
P - Protection
(splint)
R - Rest
I - Ice
C - Compression
E - Elevation
Acute
(within 72 hours):
Subacute
(>3 days)
Chronic
(>6 months):
- Hydrotherapy
- Mobilising
exercise
- Strengthening
exercise
- Mechanical
exercise
- Hydrotherapy
- Mobilising exercise
- Strengthening
exercise
- Mechanical exercise
- Weight-bearing
exercise
- PRICE
- Isometric exercise
- Mobilisation
• Active exercise
• Bed mobility
• Ambulation
- All PWH should do regular
sports/physical activities.
- Refer to Appendix 4 for
the type of sport/physical
activities in relation to the
risk of bleeding.
• All these activities are preferably carried out within 24-hour of factor infusion.
• Sports and physical fitness are important to maintain good muscle tone to protect the joints from the haemophilic-induced injuries, and
these activities contribute to improvement in quality of life.
Management of Haemophilia
1. INTRODUCTION
Haemophilia is a group of inherited blood disorders in which there is
life-long defect in the clotting mechanism. The most common types of
haemophilia are haemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and haemophilia
B (factor FIX deficiency). They are inherited as X-linked recessive traits;
therefore, males are affected and females are carriers. Females can
be affected as well. In 30% of cases, no family history is obtainable
because of spontaneous new mutation. The mean prevalence of
haemophilia A in Malaysia has increased from 5.6 per 100,000 males
in 1998 to 6.6 per 100,000 males in 2006, with a mean of 5.9 ± 0.4
per 100,000 males and for haemophilia B, 1.00 ± 0.11 per 100,000
males. The prevalence for the high income countries was 2.69 ± 1.61
per 100,000 males whereas the prevalence for the rest of the world was
1.20 ± 1.33 per 100,000 males.1
These rare disorders are complex to diagnose and manage. Persons
with haemophilia (PWH) are at risk of life-threatening bleeding and
musculoskeletal deformities if not treated properly. There are variations
in practice among the clinicians in the management of haemophilia. The
cost escalates when complications e.g. inhibitor development and/or
chronic arthropathy develops. Standardising haemophilia management
may help contain cost while optimising clinical outcomes.
The haemophilia services started in the blood bank in 1980s and hence
for historical reasons, outpatient haemophilia care was provided by the
blood bank and PWH referred to the haematology or paediatric wards
when required. More recently, haemophilia care is being taken over
by clinicians in line with haemophilia care internationally. In the past
two decades, many advances have been made in the understanding
of these bleeding disorders and their management. In the newlydeveloped National Haemophilia Programme, the need for a local
evidence-based CPG on haemophilia is deemed important. Therefore,
this document has been developed by a multidisciplinary team is
intended to provide recommendations on the diagnosis, treatment and
monitoring of haemophilia and its complications.
Management of Haemophilia
2. CLINICAL PRESENTATION
PWH can present with the following symptoms:2
• easy bruising in early childhood
• ‘spontaneous’ bleeding particularly into the soft tissues, muscles,
joints and gums
• excessive bleeding following trauma or surgery
A newborn or infant with haemophilia can present with spontaneous
intracranial bleed.
A child may also present with post-vaccination or vitamin K injection
haematoma.
A positive family history is present in two-thirds of patients while another
one-third may have spontaneous mutation.2
The most common site of bleeding in haemophilia is the joints (70 - 80%)
especially hinged joints (e.g. ankles, knees and elbows).2
Bleeding is considered:2
• serious if it occurs in the
 joints (hemarthrosis)
 muscles, especially deep compartments (iliopsoas, calf and
forearm)
 mucous membranes in the mouth, gums, nose and genitourinary
tract
• life-threatening if it occurs in the
 neck or throat (including floor of the mouth)
 intracranial
 gastrointestinal
The severity of haemophilia is based on the clotting factor level as
shown in Table 1.
Management of Haemophilia
Table 1. Relationship of bleeding severity to clotting factor
level in haemophilia
Source: World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of
Haemophilia (2nd edition). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
Severity
Clotting factor level
Bleeding manifestations
<1 IU/dL (<0.01 IU/ml)
or
<1% of normal
Spontaneous bleeding into joints or
muscles, predominantly in the
absence of identifiable haemostatic
challenge
Severe
1 - 5 IU/dL (0.01 - 0.05 IU/ml)
or
1 - 5% of normal
Occasional spontaneous bleeding;
prolonged bleeding with minor
trauma or surgery
Moderate
5 - 40 IU/dL (0.05 - 0.40 IU/ml)
or
5% to <40% of normal
Severe bleeding with major trauma or
surgery; spontaneous bleeding is rare
Management of Haemophilia
3. INVESTIGATIONS
3.1 Laboratory Tests
Other bleeding disorders may have similar symptoms to haemophilia.
Hence reliable laboratory services are crucial to ensure an accurate
diagnosis so that management is given appropriately.
Screening tests for suspected hereditary bleeding disorders include:
•
Prothrombin Time (PT)
•
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (APTT)
•
Platelet count
The interpretation of the screening tests is illustrated in Table 2.
Table 2. Interpretation of screening tests
*Normal value depends on individual laboratory reference range.
Adapted: World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of
Haemophilia (2nd edition). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
If APTT is prolonged and there is positive family history of haemophilia,
proceed to perform FVIII or FIX factor assay. Otherwise, mixing study
should be done first. The interpretation of mixing test is illustrated in
Table 3.
Table 3. Interpretation of mixing test
Source: McKenzie SB & Wiliams L. Clinical Laboratory Haematology, Third Edition.
San Antonio: Pearson Clinical Laboratory Science Series; 2015
Investigations of other causes of bleeding disorder must be performed
if PT and APTT are normal.
With regards to factor VIII (FVIII) and factor IX(FIX) assays:
•
FVIII or FIX assay is performed to confirm the deficiency of
coagulation factor.
PT
APTT
Platelet count
Possible diagnosis
Normal
Prolonged
Normal
Haemophilia A or B
Normal
Normal
Normal or reduced
Platelet defects
Normal
Normal or prolonged Normal or reduced Von Willebrand Disease (VWD)
Mixing study results
Immediate
2-hour incubation
Interpretation
Corrected
Corrected
Not corrected
Corrected
Not corrected
Not corrected
Factor deficiency
Time dependent inhibitor e.g. FVIII inhibitor
Immediately acting inhibitor
e.g. Lupus anticoagulant antibody
Management of Haemophilia
•
The severity of haemophilia A and B is correlated with FVIII
and FIX level respectively (refer to Table 1 in Chapter 2 on
Relationship of bleeding severity to clotting factor level in
haemophilia).
•
To detect all mild Haemophila A, more than one type of FVIII
assay is needed e.g. chromogenic assay.
With regards to inhibitor test in congenital haemophilia:2
•
Refer to Chapter 8 for indication on inhibitor screening.
•
Mixing test can help to screen for factor inhibitor.
•
Bethesda assay or Nijmegen assay can determine factor inhibitor
level. Inhibitor level ≥0.6 Bethesda unit (BU) is considered positive.
Recommendation 1
•
Factor VIII or factor IX assay should be performed in persons
suspected of haemophilia with prolonged Activated Partial
Thromboplastin Time and normal Prothrombin Time.
•
Mixing test should be done to screen for factor inhibitor in
haemophilia.
 If it is not corrected, Bethesda or Nijmegen assay should be
done to determine the factor inhibitor level.
3.2 Genetic Tests
Close
collaboration
between
coagulation
laboratory,
genetics
laboratory and a clinical genetic counselling service is fundamental for
the provision of a successful genetic diagnostic service.3, level III
Haemophilia is an X-linked recessive disorder [refer to Algorithm 1 on
Haemophilia Genetic Inheritance (X-Linked)] which affects males,
who will pass on the haemophilia gene to their daughters. Female
carrying a FVIII or FIX gene mutation are carriers.2
The following are considered to be obligate carriers:2
•
daughters of a PWH
•
mothers of one son with haemophilia and who have at least one
other family member with haemophilia
•
mothers of one son with haemophilia and who have a family
member as a known carrier of the haemophilia gene
•
mothers of two or more sons with haemophilia
Genetic testing for carrier status should be offered to all at-risk female
family members of PWH to facilitate genetic counselling. Mutation
analysis is best performed on an affected male, while cascade carrier
testing should be offered to first-degree female relatives. If the female
is a carrier, then clotting studies including FVIII should be undertaken.
Management of Haemophilia
Ideally, management advice and genetic counselling should be offered
to all PWH, carriers and their families to make informed choices, which
should be provided through a centre with experience in managing
haemophilia.2; 4 In local setting, molecular testing is offered to the
affected child and his mother. If the mother is a confirmed carrier,
cascade screening will be done for the first- and second-degree female
relatives (sisters and maternal aunties).
Genetic testing may also help in assessing risk of inhibitor development
in PWH.4
The method selected for mutation detection will depend on resources
and expertise available in a particular laboratory.3, level III; 5, level III
For Haemophilia A, it is recommended that severe haemophiliacs
should be screened for the FVIII intron 22 inversion mutation followed
by the FVIII intron 1 inversion mutation. This approach should identify
the underlying mutation in 45 - 50% of severe haemophilia A patients.
The remaining severe haemophilia A pedigrees should then be analysed
further by full mutation analysis of FVIII.3, level III
For Haemophilia B, direct deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequencing of
the essential regions of FIX should be done without a pre-screening
step.5, level III
Recommendation 2
•
Mutation analysis for haemophilia should be performed on affected
male and his mother.
•
Cascade screening for haemophilia should be offered to at least
first- and second-degree female relatives if the mother of persons
with haemophilia is a confirmed carrier.*
*Refer to Algorithm 2 on Genetic Testing for Haemophilia Patient
and Carrier Screening.
Prenatal testing may be offered if couple is interested. However, it is not
available in public hospitals.
Management of Haemophilia
4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CARE
4.1 Stratification of Haemophilia Centre with regards to
Haemophilia Services
Haemophilia is a complex disorder. The wide-ranging needs of PWH and
their care givers are best met through a coordinated, comprehensive
and multidisciplinary care by a team of healthcare professionals, in
accordance with accepted protocols and national CPG.
Haemophilia treatment centres (HTCs) should be established to ensure
that PWH have access to the full range of services necessary to manage
their condition. The aim of care is to improve health and quality of life.
This includes prevention of bleeding, long-term management of joint
and muscle damage, and management of complications from treatment
including inhibitor development and possible transfusion-transmitted.
HTC carries out the following functions and activities:6, level III
•
provides care for PWH, including diagnosis, treatment, follow-up
and rehabilitation
•
provides PWH with safe and effective treatment products
•
provides a 24-hour emergency treatment service
•
provides basic diagnostic and monitoring laboratory support
during normal working hours for the more common inherited
bleeding disorders
•
provides access to multidisciplinary support, locally or in
conjunction with:
 physiotherapy and orthopaedics
 surgery
 dental care
 hepatology
 infectious diseases
 obstetrics and gynaecology
 peadiatric if children are treated
 genetics
 nuclear medicine
 clinical psychology
 pharmacy
 social work
•
offers specific treatment for PWH with inhibitors and immune
tolerance in collaboration with a Haemophilia Comprehensive
Care Centre (HCCC)
•
provides advisory service, including genetic counselling to PWH
and healthcare professionals
•
promotes information and training programmes on inherited
bleeding disorders to PWH and healthcare professionals
Management of Haemophilia
HCCC, apart from performing above roles of HTC, also carries out the
following additional functions and activities:6, level III
•
co-ordinates the delivery of haemophilia services - both in the
hospital and community including liaison with affiliated HTCs
•
provides reference laboratory service with a full repertoire of tests
for the diagnosis and monitoring of inherited bleeding disorders
•
provides access to a genetic diagnosis service which include
carrier detection and antenatal diagnosis
•
collates data (e.g. product usage, PWH demographics)
•
participates in research, including clinical trials
The pharmacist in HCCC should also provide Haemophilia Medication
Therapy Adherence Clinic (HMTAC) and drug counselling.
In the local setting, the following stratification is proposed in the
management of haemophilia (refer to Figure 1).
HTC = Other hospitals with specialist within a region and not assigned
as HCCC
Figure 1. Proposed stratification of haemophilia centres in Malaysia
4.2 National Haemophilia Registry
•
A national haemophilia registry is of utmost importance to ensure
cost-effective treatment of PWH.
A national haemophilia registry is a database of information on PWH.
The aims of the registry are:7, level III
•
to increase awareness of the disease prevalence
•
to identify the needs of PWH
•
to recognise shortcomings in the healthcare delivery system
•
to predict future needs and areas of concern
•
to empower the national haemophilia organisation and clinicians
to lobby effectively on behalf of PWH
HTC
HTC
HTC
HCCC Sabah
& Sarawak
Region
HTC
HTC
HTC
HCCC
East-coast
Region
HTC
HTC
HTC
HCCC
Northern
Region
HTC
HTC
HTC
HCCC
Southern
Region
HTC
HTC
HTC
HCCC
Central
Region
Management of Haemophilia
•
MoH registry on haemophilia:7, level III
 contains demographic and clinical information obtained from all
hospitals and clinics
 reflects a true national picture of the condition
 requires government support to motivate and sustain participation
of all treating centres for data entry
Important data in a haemophilia registry should include:8 - 9, level III
•
epidemiology and clinical care
•
co-morbidity and mortality outcomes e.g. allergic reactions,
transfusion-transmitted infections, thrombosis and deaths
•
joint outcomes
•
bleeding specifications and outcomes
•
burden of disease and cost of treatment
•
patient reported outcomes e.g. annual bleeding rate (ABR),
quality of life (QoL) (refer to Chapter 13 on Monitoring)
Management of Haemophilia
5. TREATMENT
Repeated joint bleeds is the major cause of morbidity in PWH. In
patients with severe haemophilia, bleeding episodes may occur as
frequently as 20 - 30 times per year. PWH are 20 - 50 times more likely
to develop intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) compared with those without
haemophilia, with a reported prevalence of 2.7 - 12% and an incidence
rate of 290 - 748/10 000 patient-years.10, level III and a mortality rate of
19.6%.11, level III Factor replacement therapy, non-pharmacological and
adjunctive treatments are essential in preventing joint damage and
other potential serious and life-threatening events.
5.1 Pharmacological Treatment
5.1.1 Factor replacement therapy
There are two types of clotting factor concentrate (CFC) used for
replacement therapy:
•
Plasma-derived factor (pdF) Concentrates - manufactured via
fractionation of human pooled plasma
•
Recombinant factor concentrates - manufactured via DNA
engineering technology
In a well-regulated environment, guided by regulatory agencies e.g.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)/European Medical Agency (EMA),
products approved are of adequate efficacy and safety.12, level III
The World Federation of Haemophilia (WFH) publishes and regularly
updates a Registry of CFC, listing all the currently available factor
concentrates in the market approved by regulatory agencies. WFH
does not express preference for recombinant over pdF. Choices of
factor concentrates and their classes must be made according to local
criteria.2
Efficacy of CFC can be assessed against the scale of response to
infusion as shown in Table 4.
Management of Haemophilia
Table 4. CFC efficacy scale of response to bleeding episodes
Source: World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of
Haemophilia (2nd edition). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
The currently manufactured products show a good safety record on
lipid enveloped viruses e.g. human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and
hepatitis C virus. In the last 25 years, there has been no report on HIV,
hepatitis B and hepatitis C transmission via plasma-derived products.
However, the current viral inactivation/removal process does not
eliminate a majority of the non-lipid viruses/prions e.g. hepatitis A virus,
parvovirus B19, Creutzfeldt-Jakob. At the moment, the transmission is
probably kept at a lower level by excluding at-risk blood donors.2
•
Blood borne infectious diseases remain a concern in PWH using
pdF especially the unknown/yet to be discovered viruses which may
escape the current viral reduction process.
Factor concentrates vary widely in their purity. Those with low purity
have a tendency to cause allergic reaction. The use of high purity FIX is
preferred to PCC as a replacement therapy for haemophilia B as PCC
may predispose to the risk of thromboembolism especially when used
in high doses.2
Inhibitor development is the most serious complication of haemophilia
treatment. Refer to Chapter 8 on Inhibitors.
A multi-centred RCT demonstrated that PDF containing von Willebrand
factor (vWF) had a lower incidence of inhibitor development than those
treated with recombinant factor VIII (rFVIII).13, level I However the EMA’s
Committee for Medical Products for Human Use (CHMP) concluded
that there was no clear and consistent evidence to indicate a difference
in the incidence of inhibitor development between plasma-derived and
recombinant factors.12, level III
Outcome
Treatment of bleeding episodes
Abrupt pain relief and/or unequivocal improvement in objective
signs of bleeding within approximately eight hours of a single
infusion
Excellent
Definite pain relief and/or improvement in signs of bleeding within
approximately 8 - 12 hours of an infusion; requiring up to two
infusions for complete resolution
Good
Probable or slight beneficial effect within approximately 12 hours
of the first infusion; requiring >2 infusions for complete resolution
Moderate
No improvement within 12 hours or worsening of symptoms
requiring >2 infusions for complete resolution
Poor
Management of Haemophilia
PWH with HIV, hepatitis B and hepatitis C should be treated the same as
patients without haemophilia. PWH who have and continue to receive
pdF should be screened for these infections every 6 - 12 months or if
clinically indicated.2
•
In view of risk of blood-borne infection with plasma-derived products,
recombinant factor concentrate is the preferred choice for factor
replacement in haemophilia.
The optimal approach to haemophilia treatment is using CFC to prevent
bleeds, chronic joint damage and reduce complications (short and
long term). Factor replacement therapy can either be on-demand or
prophylaxis.
On-demand therapy, also known as episodic therapy, is defined as
therapy to stop an acute haemorrhage. Cessation of bleeding does not
reverse the deleterious effects on synovial tissues by the blood which
has accumulated in the affected joint.
Prophylactic factor replacement therapy is defined as regular infusion of
CFC in an attempt to raise clotting factor levels and to keep them at 1%
or higher at all times.14, level I It can be divided into primary, secondary or
tertiary prophylaxis:2
•
Primary - starts in the absence of joint disease before the second
large joint bleed and before age three years old
•
Secondary - starts after the second large joint bleed but before
onset of joint disease
•
Tertiary - starts after joint disease to prevent further damage
A systematic review advocated starting prophylaxis before the age of
three in PWH for better joint outcome.15, level l
A Cochrane systematic review and a randomised controlled trial
(RCT) reported that prophylactic factor replacement therapy was more
effective than on-demand therapy in severe haemophilia in terms of:
•
reduction in bleeding frequency (RR=0.30, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.76)16, level I
•
protection from joint damage (RD=0.70, 95% CI 0.39 to 1.01)16, level I
•
lower median number of total bleeding episodes per year which
included joint bleeds (0 vs 27.9; p<0.0001)17, level I
•
fewer annualised spontaneous (median of 0 vs 16.3) and traumarelated (median of 0 vs 6.4) bleeding events17, level I
Incidence of ICH is significantly reduced in the prophylactic group
compared with the no prophylaxis group (0.00033 cases/patient year
vs 0.017 cases/patient year; RR 50.06).18, level II-2
Management of Haemophilia
In a retrospective cohort study, regular prophylactic therapy reduced
the risk of inhibitor development by 60% compared with on-demand
therapy (RR=0.4, 95% CI 0.2 to 0.8) at 50 exposure days in severe
haemophilia.19, level II-2 In a more recent large prospective cohort study,
the association was observed after 20 days with a HR ranged from 0.22
to 0.32. It was more pronounced in low risk FVIII genotypes.20, level II-2
However, the Cochrane systematic review showed no significant
difference in the risk of inhibitor development and infection between
prophylaxis and on-demand therapies.16, level I
There are many different prophylactic factor replacement therapy
protocols used but optimal regimen remains to be defined. The
commonly used protocols are as shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Prophylactic factor replacement therapy regimens in
haemophilia
Adapted:
1. World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of Haemophilia
(2nd edition). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
2. Wu R, Luke KH, Poon MC, et al. Low dose secondary prophylaxis reduces joint
bleeding in severe and moderate haemophilic children: a pilot study in China.
Haemophilia. 2011;17(1):70-4
Prophylactic regimens should be individualised according to bleeding
phenotype, activity and pharmacokinetics. Other issues e.g. age,
venous access and availability of clotting factor must also be taken
into consideration. Patients on high dose prophylaxis (Malmo protocol)
showed improved HJHS and reduction in joint bleeds (p<0.001) but
at a significant increase in cost.21, level II-2 When high dose prophylaxis
is not possible due to financial constraint, a low or intermediate dose
could be used.
Prophylaxis should be initiated as soon as possible after a first major
bleed (joint, muscle or intracranial bleed) and before the age of three
if there is no major bleed. Prophylaxis before the age of three is being
Protocol
Dosage
25 - 40 IU/kg three times/week for haemophilia A
30 - 50 IU/kg twice/week for haemophilia B
High dose prophylaxis;
Malmo protocol
10 IU/kg two times/week for haemophilia A
20 IU/kg once/week for haemophilia B (secondary
prophylaxis)
Low dose prophylaxis
15 - 25 IU/kg two to three times/week for haemophilia A
30 - 50 IU/kg once or twice/week for haemophilia B
(after first/second joint bleed or two bleeds per month)
Intermediate dose
prophylaxis;
Utrecht protocol
Management of Haemophilia
advocated as evidence has shown better outcome compared with when
it is started after that age.15, level I
There are two ways to start the prophylaxis:15, level I
i. Give full dose prophylaxis following one of the above regimes
(refer to Table 5).
ii. Start once weekly first and escalate the frequency of infusions if
significant spontaneous bleeding occurs until full dose prophylaxis
is achieved. A detailed account of bleeding events should be
maintained and frequency of infusions adjusted appropriately.
The on-going trials of new generation of coagulation factors with
extended half-life show promising results which may improve the
management of PWH once available locally.
Recommendation 3
•
Prophylaxis should be given to ALL persons with severe haemophilia.
 Primary
prophylaxis
should
start
following
intracranial
haemorrhage, first joint bleed, severe intramuscular bleed or by
three years old, whichever comes first.
 Malmo protocol is the preferred prophylactic therapy regimen in
haemophilia.
5.1.2 Adjunct therapies
a. Desmopressin
Desmopressin (DDAVP) is a synthetic analogue of vasopressin that
boosts plasma level of FVIII and vWF in mild to moderate haemophilia
A and certain subtypes of VWD. It may also be used in symptomatic
carrier of haemophila A.
DDAVP is effective and safe in mild haemophilia A. It is also
haemostatically effective in 96% of cases when used prophylactically
in minor procedures.22, level II-2
The decision to use DDAVP must be based on baseline concentration
of FVIII, increment achieved and duration of treatment required. This is
applicable in minor form of bleeding. It should not be used in moderate
to severe form of bleeding.2 DDAVP can be given through various
routes as shown in Table 6.
Management of Haemophilia
Table 6. Administration of DDAVP
Source: Mannucci PM, Desmopressin (DDAVP) in the Treatment of Bleeding
Disorders (Revised edition). Montréal: WFH; 2012
A single dose of DDAVP either via IV or SC route can be expected to
boost the level of FVIII to 3 - 6 folds higher than the baseline.2 There is
however some variability in response and a test dose is the only way
to distinguish good responders from poor or non-responders. Plasma
half-life is 5 - 8 hours for FVIII and 8 - 10 hours for vWF. PWH treated
repeatedly with DDAVP may become less responsive because the stores
are exhausted. The average FVIII responses if DDAVP is repeated at
24-hour interval are approximately 30% less than responses obtained
after the first dose.2; 23, level III Due to its anti-diuretic side effect, plasma
osmolality and sodium level should be measured when repeated doses
are given.2
•
DDAVP is relatively contraindicated in children less than two years
old who may be at risk of seizure secondary to cerebral oedema due
to hyponatremia.
b. Tranexamic Acid
Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an anfibrinolytic agent that promotes clot
stability by inhibiting the activation of plasminogen to plasmin. It
is particularly useful in controlling bleeding from skin and mucosal
surfaces e.g. oral bleeding, epistaxis and menorrhagia.2
TXA is available in three preparations i.e. oral, IV and mouthwash. In
centres where the mouthwash preparation is not available, the oral
form (tablet/capsule) can be dissolved in water and subsequently used
as a mouthwash (5% weight in volume or 500 mg in 10 ml). The dose is
15 - 25 mg/kg/dose every eight hours.
Types
Dose
Time to peak
Side effects
0.3 µg/kg diluted into
50 -100 ml of
physiological saline and
infused over 20 - 30
minutes
30 - 60 minutes
Rapid infusion can
cause tachycardia,
flushing, tremor and
abdominal
discomfort
Due to anti-diuretic
activity, observe for:
• hyponatremia
• water retention
IV
90 - 120 minutes
0.3 µg/kg
Subcutaneous
(SC)
Intranasal
Adult: 1.5 mg/ml in
each nostril
Those <40 kg, a single
dose in 1 nostril is
sufficient
Management of Haemophilia
TXA can either be used alone or in combination with standard dose
of CFC and can be a helpful adjunctive therapy in the prevention and
treatment of all bleeds except those involving the renal tract. In patients
with inhibitory antibodies, it can be used to treat bleeds or to manage
surgery in combination with activated recombinant Factor VII (rVIIa)
or activated Prothrombin Complex Concentrate (aPCC). However,
combination use must be done with caution in any elderly PWH or
those who have cerebral or cardiovascular risk factors.
TXA should not be used in the treatment of haematuria as it may
prevent dissolution of clots in the ureters which may result in obstructive
uropathy and potential damage to the kidney function.2
c. Others
There is no good evidence on the use of fibrin glue and floseal in
haemophilia. However, these treatments have been used in local
practice. These treatments had been used fairly commonly since 1990s
in surgical procedures involving high risk patients which includes PWH.
The procedures highlighted were circumcision, dental extraction/oral
surgery and resection of pseudotumour. It had been observed that
there was low risk of bleeding with significant reduction in the CFC
usage when fibrin glue was added in the management of those surgical
procedures.24, level III
5.1.3 Analgesia
Pain in PWH may be acute or chronic. This may include pain caused
by venous access, joint or muscle bleed, post-operative pain, dental
extraction and/or chronic haemophilic arthropathy.
Pain assessment can be done using the following pain scales as
recommended by MoH (refer to Table 7 and Appendix 6).
Table 7. Recommended pain scale by MoH
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Pain Medication Therapy Management Service:
Guideline for Pharmacy (Second Edition) Petaling Jaya: MoH; 2018
Age group
Scale
1 - 3 years and adult patient unable
to communicate verbally
Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability
(FLACC) Scale
>3 - 7 years
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)
>7 years and adults
Numeric Rating Scale (NRS)
Management of Haemophilia
Pain severity is categorised in Table 8 and its management is described
following it.
Table 8. Category of pain
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Pain Management Handbook. Putrajaya: MoH;
2013
Effectiveness of analgesics in PWH:
•
Paracetamol is recommended for mild pain.2
•
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors are effective analgesics:
 celecoxib in chronic synovitis and non-specific mild to
moderate pain25, level II-3
 etoricoxib in hemophilic arthropathy26, level II-2
•
Mild opioid is recommended as an alternative in moderate pain.2
•
If pain is moderate to severe in children, a strong opioid
is necessary. Morphine is the opioid of choice.27, level III In
haemophilia, morphine is recommended in severe pain.2
Safety of analgesics in PWH:
•
The risk of upper gastrointestinal bleeding increases by two-folds
in traditional nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
compared with celecoxib or rofecoxib in haemophilic arthropathy
although it is statistically not significant.28, level II-2
•
Celecoxib was noted to have no serious adverse events
including hypertension or other CV events in a non-comparative
study.25, level II-3
•
Etoricoxib was noted to have higher bleeding duodenal ulcer,
upper respiratory tract infection and headache compared with
placebo (p=0.043) in a cohort study.26, level II-2
Total pain score
Severity of pain
1 - 3
4 - 6
7 - 10
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Management of Haemophilia
Pain management strategies are as follows:
Figure 2. Pain relief ladder
Notes:
1. Celecoxib: effectiveness and safety are not established in children <2 years old
2. Etoricoxib: effectiveness and safety are not established n patients <16 years old
3. Tramadol: effectiveness and safety not established in children <12 years old;
caution in children 12 - 18 years who have risk factors that may increase respiratory
depression
4. Codeine: effectiveness and safety are not established in children <18 years old
Adapted:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya: MoH; 2010.
2. Micromedex® Solution (Available at
http://www.micromedexsolutions.com/micromedex2/4.24.0/WebHelp/
MICROMEDEX_2.htm)
3. Shann F. Drug Doses (Seventeenth Edition), Parkville: University of Melbourne;
2017
4. Etoricoxib package insert.
Recommendation 4
•
Analgesia should be offered for pain relief according to pain severity
in haemophilia*.
*Refer to Table 8 and Figure 2.
5.2 Non-pharmacological Treatment
5.2.1 Rehabilitation of musculoskeletal system
Rehabilitation in PWH improves joint health status and muscle strength
and, reduces pain. Physiotherapists play an important role in the
Increasing pain severity
Non-opioid
• Paracetamol
• COX-2 inhibitors
± Adjuvants
Weak Opioid
• Tramadol
• Dihydrocodeine
(DF118)
± Non-opioid
± Adjuvants
Strong Opioid
• Morphine
• Oxycodone
• Fentanyl
Non-opioid
± Adjuvants
Pain score 1 - 3
(Mild Pain)
Pain score 4 - 6
(Moderate Pain)
Pain score 7 - 10
(Severe Pain)
Management of Haemophilia
management of both acute and sub-acute bleeds, chronic synovitis,
chronic arthropathy and other musculoskeletal pathology in PWH.
Post-bleed rehabilitation include PRICE and exercise programmes
for restoration of pre-morbid status, minimisation of re-bleed risk and
prevention of secondary musculoskeletal complications.2
Rehabilitation must be stressed as an active part in the management of
acute joint bleeding episodes in PWH:2
•
PWH should be encouraged to change the position of the
affected joint from a position of comfort to a position of function
as soon as the pain and swelling begin to subside. The gentle
passive movement will gradually decrease the flexion of the
joint and strive for complete extension. Refer to Appendix 5 on
Development of Abnormal Posture Following Bleeds.
•
Active movement should be done as much as possible with
muscle contractions to minimise muscle atrophy and prevent
chronic loss of joint motion.
•
Active exercises and proprioceptive training should be continued
until complete pre-bleed joint range of motion (ROM) and
functioning are restored and, signs of acute synovitis resolve.
•
If exercises progress cautiously, factor replacement is not
necessarily required before the exercises.
Rehabilitation, e.g. hydrotherapy, mechanical exercises (static bicycle,
treadmill or multigym) and strengthening exercises, significantly
improve joint health status, ROM and pain score compared with no
intervention in haemophilia.29 - 30, level I No adverse effects e.g. bleeding
have been reported as a result of any of these exercises.29, level I
Participation in physical activity, exercise and sports lead to physical
and psychological benefits as well as supporting emotional and social
well-being of PWH.31, level II-2
For PWH with significant musculoskeletal dysfunction, weight-bearing
activities that promote development and maintenance of good bone
density (e.g.weight training, walking and hiking) should be encouraged.2
Manual therapy treatment using ankle joint traction, passive stretching,
proprioceptive training, isometric exercise and active counter-resistance
exercise significantly improves gastrocnemius muscle circumference
and reduces ankle pain compared with educational session and no
intervention in haemophilia.32, level III
Prolonged immobilisation after fracture in PWH can lead to limited
ROM. Physiotherapy should be started once the fracture is stabilised
to restore:4
•
ROM
•
muscle strength
•
function
Management of Haemophilia
Recommendation 5
•
Rehabilitation should be offered in person with haemophilia during
acute or sub-acute bleeds and those with chronic arthropathy for
functional recovery.
5.2.2 Protection, Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation
Protection, Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation (PRICE) is important
in pain management in haemophilia.2; 33 It relieves acute pain and
decreases risk of re-bleeding.33; 34, level lll This is further explained in the
following Table 9.
Table 9. Application of PRICE
Adapted:
1. World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of Haemophilia
(2nd edition). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
2. Hanley J, McKernan A, Creagh MD, et al. Musculoskeletal Working Party of the
UKHCDO. Guidelines for the management of acute joint bleeds and chronic
synovitis in haemophilia: A United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors’
Organisation (UKHCDO) guideline. Haemophilia. 2017;23(4):511-20
3. Rodríguez-Merchán EC. Articular Bleeding (Hemarthrosis) in Hemophilia: An
Orthopedist’s Point of View (Second edition). Montréal: WFH; 2008
Recommendation 6
•
Protection, Rest, Ice therapy, Compression, Elevation (PRICE)
should be commenced as a first aid measure in acute and sub-acute
bleed in persons with haemophilia.
• Avoidance of weight bearing
• Restriction of activities until swelling and temperature of the
joint return to normal
• Use of a sling, removable splint and compressive bandage
for the affected joints
• Immobilisation of the affected joint until pain resolves
• Use of crutches when ambulating
• Should not be applied directly to the skin Should not exceed
20 minutes at 2-hourly intervals
• Always be guided by levels of pain and discomfort
• Configuration follows the limb/joint shape
• Provision of a graduated compressive force which is
comfortable for the individual
• Elevation when sitting and lying in supine position
Components
Application
Protection (P)
Rest (R)
Ice Therapy (I)
Compression
(C)
Elevation (E)
Management of Haemophilia
5.2.3 Joint protection
Target joints can be protected with braces or splints during physical
activity. Adjunctive therapies for bleeding in muscles and joint are
important, especially when clotting factor concentrates (CFC) are
limited or not available. They include:2
•
first aid measures e.g. PRICE
•
removable splint or compressive bandage
•
walking aid
It is advisable for PWH to use appropriate foot wear which provides
good cushioning, arch support and wiggle room for toes to reduce risk
of bleeding.35, level III
5.2.4 Sports/physical activity
PWH should be encouraged to perform physical/sport activities to
promote:2; 32, level III; 36, level III; 37, level I
•
physical fitness
•
normal neuromuscular development
•
psychological and social benefits
•
quality of life (QoL)
Participation in non-contact sports, e.g. walking, swimming and cycling,
are encouraged for PWH.2 It does not increase the risk of bleeding
nor development of target joints.36, level III PWH who want to cycle need
proper and adequate protective gear and for children, should be under
supervision.
High contact and collision sports (e.g. soccer, hockey, rugby, boxing and
wrestling) and high-velocity sports (e.g. motocross racing and skiing)
are best avoided because of the potential life-threatening injuries.2
5.2.5 Post-operative care
Physiotherapy plays an important role in management of PWH who has
undergone surgical intervention e.g. total knee replacement (TKR) and
total hip replacement (THR). An exercise plan is prescribed according
to the mobility level of PWH on discharge. This includes:38, level III
•
PRICE - immediately after operation
•
isometric exercise - starts when the drains and bandages are
removed; focused on quadriceps strengthening
•
mobilisation - includes active exercise, bed mobility and
ambulation after 7 - 10 days of post-operation
Post-operative rehabilitation should be carried out gradually by
physiotherapist to improve strength, proprioception and normal function
of the joint.2
Management of Haemophilia
The summary on non-pharmacological treatment is shown in Algorithm
3 on Physiotherapy Management in Haemophilia.
5.2.6 Weight management
Body Mass Index (BMI) and body weight can increase due to lack of
physical activity. In adults, normal BMI is 18 - 23 kg/m2, overweight
when BMI >23 - 29.9 kg/m2 and obesity if BMI >30 kg/m2. In children,
overweight and obesity varies according to age.
A high BMI has been associated with:2
•
significant limitation in ROM of the joints
•
increased arthropathic pain and risk of developing target joints
•
increased risk of cardiovascular diseases which may further
damage arthropathic joints
Regular physical activity should be advised. The physiotherapist
should advise PWH on modification in daily physical activities if there
are restrictive functional limitations.2 This should be accompanied by a
proper calorie restricted diet by a dietitian.
Management of Haemophilia
6. TREATMENT FOR ACUTE BLEEDING IN SPECIFIC SITES
Acute bleed should be treated as soon as possible preferably within two
hours. Amount of factors to be given is dependent on site and severity;
usually it is given until bleeding resolves. Haemostatic agents e.g. TXA
should be given concurrently except in genitourinary bleeding. For
PWH on prophylaxis with good compliance, prophylactic regime should
be reviewed if bleed is not due to trauma.2
•
In PWH, bleeding in head, neck and gastrointestinal tract is a medical
emergency. Factor replacement should precede investigation.
6.1 Central Nervous System
All post-traumatic head injuries and significant headache in PWH must
be treated as ICH until proven otherwise.2
•
The initial factor replacement therapy to raise factor levels to 100 IU/
dL should precede all investigations.2; 39, level III
ICH must be confirmed by urgent imaging e.g. Computed Tomography
(CT) scan/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) before further administration
of factors.2
Following ICH, prophylaxis is indicated.2
Refer to Table 10 on recommended treatment.
6.2 Joints
Haemarthrosis is defined as bleeding into a joint space which may
occur spontaneously or in response to trauma especially in moderate
and severe haemophilia. The joints most commonly affected are the
knees, elbows and ankles.2
Patients often describe a tingling sensation and tightness in the joint
preceding the clinical signs of haemarthrosis. It is difficult to differentiate
from flare ups of haemophilia arthropathy. However, for haemarthrosis, the
joint rapidly loses ROM and becomes acutely painful, warm and swollen.
A re-bleed is defined as worsening of the condition while on treatment
or within 72 hours of stopping treatment.
Recurrent haemarthroses are almost invariably associated with
severe haemophilia. When it occurs in the same joint ≥3 times within
a consecutive 6-month period, the joint will become a target joint and
eventually lead to haemophilic arthropathy if not treated.2
Management of Haemophilia
A joint ceases to be a target joint when there is <2 bleeds into the joint
within 12 consecutive months.33
The goal of treatment of acute haemarthrosis is to stop the bleeding
as soon as possible. Subsequent treatment aims to prevent recurrent
bleeding and progressive joint damage. The management for these
conditions are:2
•
Factor replacement therapy
 Administer the appropriate dose of factor concentrate to raise
the patient’s factor level suitably (refer to Table 10).
 If bleeding does not stop, a second infusion maybe required
by repeating half the initial loading dose in 12 hours
(haemophilia A) or 24 hours (haemophilia B) until satisfactory
resolution (refer to Table 5 and Table 10).
•
Pain relief
Refer to Subchapter 5.2.3.
•
Radiological imaging
Routine use of imaging is not indicated and should be reserved
for patients presenting with atypical features, major swelling or
trauma of a joint to exclude a concomitant traumatic lesion.
•
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation should be emphasised in the active management
of haemathrosis. Refer to Subchapter 5.1.1.
•
Arthrocentesis (joint aspiration)
Arthrocentesis may be considered for symptomatic relief of a
tense haemarthrosis which shows no improvement 24 hours after
conservative treatment.2 It is safe when done by experienced
physicians using established protocol.40, level II-3
Further evaluation for the presence of inhibitor, septic arthritis or
fracture is necessary if the symptoms and signs continue longer than
three days.
6.3 Musculoskeletal
Early identification and proper management of muscle bleeding are
important to prevent complications e.g. re-bleeding, compartment
syndrome, joint contractures and formation of pseudotumours.2
Clinical features of muscle bleeding are:2
•
pain if the muscle is stretched or actively contracted
•
affected limb is positioned in a comfortable posture to avoid pain
•
tenderness upon palpation
•
swelling (may not be visible)
The following groups of muscle bleeding are associated with
neurovascular compromise and require immediate management to
prevent permanent damage and loss of function:2
Management of Haemophilia
•
iliopsoas muscle (risk of femorocutaneous, crural and femoral
nerve palsy)
•
superior-posterior and deep posterior compartments of the lower
leg (risk of posterior tibial and deep peroneal nerve injury)
•
flexor group of forearm muscles (risk of Volkmann’s ischemic
contracture)
The goals of treatment are to stop the bleeding, prevent re-bleeding
and to restore muscle function. The management for this condition
includes:2
•
Factor replacement therapy
Administer the appropriate dose of factor concentrate as soon as
possible; ideally when the patient recognises the first symptoms
of discomfort or after trauma (refer to Table 10).
•
Pain relief
Refer to Subchapter 5.2.3.
•
Radiological imaging
Ultrasonography (US) and MRI are important diagnostic tools to
confirm diagnosis and monitor recovery especially at critical sites.
•
Rehabilitation
Refer to Subchapter 5.1.1.
In PWH, choice of sport and level of activity should be based on individual
factor levels, bleeding history and physical health to prevent acute
muscle bleeding. Routine musculoskeletal review helps to promote
general muscle fitness and to individualise exercises for specific sports.
Single dose prophylaxis is considered prior to engaging in physical
activities that might precipitate bleed in severe haemophiliacs.41, level III
Iliopsoas haemorrhage
Iliopsoas haemorrhage has a unique presentation. It may mimic an
acute abdomen. Symptoms may include pain in the lower abdomen,
groin, lower back and pain on extension of the hip joint. There may
be paraesthesia in the medial aspect of the thigh or other signs of
femoral nerve compression e.g. loss of patellar reflex and quadriceps
weakness.2; 42, level III
USG is a useful and fastest tool to diagnose iliopsoas haematoma.42, level III
Management of iliopsoas haemorrhage includes:2
•
hospitalise the patient for control of pain and strict bed rest
•
maintain the factor levels for 5 - 7 days or longer, as symptoms
dictate (refer to Table 10)
•
monitor recovery using an imaging study (USG or MRI)
•
limit the patient’s activity until pain resolves and hip extension
improves; rehabilitation aimed at restoration of complete hip
extension before returning to full activity
Management of Haemophilia
Fractures
The principle management of fracture in PWH is the same as those
without haemophilia. It can be divided into:
•
conservative management
•
operative management
For conservative management, the factor replacement regimen is the
same as treating intramuscular haemorrhage (refer to Table 10). On the
other hand, in operative management, the factor replacement regimen
is as per major surgery.
CFC should be given immediately to raise the level to at least 50% and
maintained for 3 - 5 days. Low dose CFC may be continued for 10 - 14
days to prevent soft tissue bleeding.2
The management plan should follow the orthopaedic principle for
fracture, including operative treatment under appropriate coverage of
CFC.2
For fracture treated with conservative management:
•
in the initial stage, it is safe to use backslab; do not use
circumferential plaster
•
full cast can be used once the bleeding is controlled with the
factor replacement and swelling subsides
•
the duration of immobilisation is as the fracture treatment in a
normal patient
For fracture treated with surgery, avoid prolonged immobilisation and
start physiotherapy as soon as the fracture is stabilised.2
For factor coverage, the following regimen is suggested:
•
Day 1 - 2, raise the factor level to 80 - 100% and given 8-hourly
for haemophilia A, 12-hourly for haemophilia B
•
Day 3 - 5, raise the factor level to 30 - 60% and given 12-hourly
for haemophilia A, daily for haemophilia B
•
thereafter, raise the factor to 30%, given daily until soft callus is
formed (total duration is approximately about two weeks)
Refer to Subchapter 5.1.1 on Rehabilitation of musculoskeletal
system.
Management of Haemophilia
6.4 Ear, Nose, Throat and Eye
For bleeding arising from the ear, nose, throat and eye in PWH,
immediately raise patient’s factor levels (refer to Table 10). Antifibrinolytic
therapy e.g. TXA may be used as adjunctive therapy. They should be
referred to the respective disciplines if necessary.2
6.5 Gastrointestinal Tract
For bleeding arising from the gastrointestinal tract in PWH, immediately
raise patient’s factor levels (refer to Table 10). Antifibrinolytic therapy e.g.
TXA may be used as adjunctive therapy. Imaging may be necessary.2
6.6 Genitourinary Tract
For bleeding in the genitourinary tract in PWH, vigorous hydration should
be started at 3 L/m2 for a minimum of 48 hours. The factor level needs
to be raised up to 50% if there is pain or persistent gross haematuria
after 48 hours (refer to Table 10). Watch out for complications e.g.
urinary tract obstruction that may require urological referral.2
•
Avoid using anti-fibrinolytic agent as it may cause clots leading to
urinary tract obstruction.
Management of Haemophilia
6.7 Oral Cavity
Refer to Chapter 12.
Table 10. Suggested plasma peak levels and duration of treatment
for acute bleeding in specific sites and surgeries*
*Table is based on country with no resource constraint.
** IU/dL=%
Source: World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of
Haemophilia (2nd edition). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
In the absence of an inhibitor, each unit of FVIII/kg body weight infused via intravenous
(IV) will raise the plasma FVIII level approximately 2 IU/dL. The half-life of FVIII is
approximately 8 - 12 hours and FIX is 18 - 24 hours.43, level III
Renal
Deep laceration
Type of
Haemorrhage
Desired
level
(IU/dL)**
Duration
(Days)
Central Nervous System/head
Throat and neck
Gastrointestinal
Surgery (major)
Surgery (minor)
Duration
(Days)
Haemophilia A
Haemophilia B
1 - 5, depending on
type of procedure
1 - 5, depending on
type of procedure
1 - 2
3 - 5, sometimes
longer as secondary
prophylaxis during
physiotherapy
1 - 2
3 - 5, sometimes
longer as secondary
prophylaxis during
physiotherapy
50 - 80
30 - 80
60 - 80
40 - 60
30 - 50
20 - 40
80 - 100
60 - 80
40 - 60
30 - 50
1 - 3
4 - 6
7 - 14
1 - 3
4 - 6
7 - 14
50 - 80
30 - 80
• Pre-op
• Post-op
• Pre-op
• Post-op
• Initial
• maintenance
• Initial
• maintenance
• Initial
• maintenance
• Initial
• maintenance
50
50
80 - 100
50
60 - 80
30
5 - 7
3 - 5
7 - 14
7 - 14
80 - 100
50
60 - 80
30
1 - 7
8 - 14
1 - 7
8 - 14
80 - 100
50
80 - 100
30 - 60
60 - 80
30 - 60
2 - 3, sometimes
longer if response
is inadequate
2 - 3, sometimes
longer if response
is inadequate
40 - 60
40 - 60
1 - 2 , may be longer
if response is
inadequate
1 - 2 , may be longer
if response is
inadequate
40 - 60
40 - 60
60 - 80
30
1 - 7
8 - 21
1 - 7
8 - 21
5 - 7
3 - 5
40
40
Superficial muscle/ no neurovascular compromise (except iliopsoas)
Joint
Iliopsoas and deep muscle with neurovascular injury, or substantial blood loss
Desired
level
(IU/dL)**
Management of Haemophilia
•
A formula for dose of factor concentrate calculation is as follows:
Dose required = (desired % rise - baseline level) x (kg body weight)
K
•
For severe haemophilia, the baseline level is assumed to be 0%.
K = 2.0 for plasma-derived FVIII (Haemophilia A) or 1.5 for
recombinant FVIII
1.0 for plasma-derived FIX (Haemophilia B) or 0.6 for
recombinant FIX
Source: Haemophilia and Bleeding Disorders Protocol. Ampang Hospital, 2012
(unpublished document)
Recommendation 7
•
Acute bleed in persons with haemophilia (PWH) should be treated
with factor replacement as soon as possible, preferably within two
hours.
 The desired factor level is dependent on site and severity*;
usually it is given until bleeding resolves.
 Factor replacement should precede investigation and aim to
achieve factor level of 100% for life-threatening bleed.
*Refer to Table 10.
Management of Haemophilia
7. TREATMENT OF MUSCULOSKELETAL COMPLICATIONS
7.1 Synovitis
Synovitis is defined as hypertrophy and hypervascularity of the
synovium characterised by painless chronic swelling of the affected joint,
evidenced by clinical examination and imaging e.g. US and/or MRI.33
The goal of treatment is to deactivate the synovium as soon as possible
and preserve joint function. The treatment modalities include:
•
factor concentrate replacement (refer to Table 10)
•
physiotherapy (refer to Subchapter 5.1)
•
NSAIDs (COX-2 inhibitors) to reduce inflammations
•
synovectomy including radiosynovectomy (RS)
RS is a local form of radiotherapy that involves intra-articular injection
of small radioactive particles to treat synovitis. It offers a conservative
alternative to surgical synovectomy in patients with synovitis and
recurrent bleeding in the target joint, which has proven refractory to
intensive treatment with clotting factor concentrates.33
RS is an effective, safe and minimally invasive procedure in haemophilic
synovitis with:44, level III
•
significant reduction in articular pain (69.4%), haemarthrosis
(64.1%), and degree of synovitis (31.3%)
•
improvement in WFH clinical score (19%)
•
small number of patients (0.9%) develop complications e.g. knee
septic arthritis, severe swelling or small cutaneous burn
•
no patient develop cancer
There is no difference in outcomes between patients with prophylaxis
and on-demand treatment.
In synovitis (haemophilia and VWD) treated with RS using rhenium-186,
the mean time to progression (TTP) is:45, level II-3
•
72.0 + 4.8 months with a median follow-up of 36 months for ankle
•
67.5 + 6.5 months with a median follow-up of 35 months for
elbow joint
There is significant inverse correlation between the number of joint
bleeding in both ankle and elbow within six months after therapy and
TTP (p<0.05). This is independent of patient’s age, haemophilia type
and severity, inhibitor status, radiological score, ROM status and pretreatment bleeding frequency.
Recommendation 8
•
Radiosynovectomy should be considered in haemophilic synovitis
with recurrent bleeding in the target joint.
Management of Haemophilia
7.2 Joint Arthropathy and Contracture
Chronic haemophilic arthropathy may occur from the second decade of
life or earlier, depending on the severity of bleeding and its treatment.
The goals of treatment are to improve joint function, relieve pain and
assist PWH to continue/resume normal ADL.
The treatment includes:
•
pain management (refer to Subchapter 5.2.3)
•
rehabilitation (refer to Subchapter 5.1.1)
•
secondary prophylaxis should be optimised
Surgical intervention may be considered if these conservative measures
fail. These may include prosthetic joint replacement for severe disease
involving a major joint (knee, hip, shoulder and elbow). For surgical
procedure, adequate resources, including sufficient factor concentrates,
laboratory support and post-operative rehabilitation, must be available.
In PWH, joint contracture can be treated by:
•
botulinum toxin injection46, level II-3
•
muscle release surgery47, level III
7.3 Pseudotumour
Pseudotumour is a rare complication of haemophilia, occuring in 1 - 2%
of the haemophilic population.
A pseudotumour is an encapsulated haematoma with a thick, fibrous
capsule. Repeated cycles of bleeding and calcification will lead to
progressive enlargement of the mass and subsequent erosion of the
adjacent bone. The rich vascular supply of the capsule is the cause of
excessive bleeding during and after surgery, and this vascular supply
usually originates from more than a single artery.
There are two types of pseudotumour:
•
proximal pseudotumour
•
distal pseudotumour
Proximal pseudotumour frequently occurs in the proximal axial skeleton,
especially around the femur and pelvis. This slow growing tumour
occurs more frequently in adults and do not respond to conservative
treatment.48, level III
Distal pseudotumour predominantly affects younger age group, develop
rapidly and appear to be secondary to an intraosseous haemorrhage.
The sites of the tumour includes tibia, metacarpal, phallanges,
paranasal sinus,48, level III mandible and maxilla.49, level III
Management of Haemophilia
Pseudotumour generally presents with painless, firm, expanding
masses that may appear to be multilocular and adherent to the deeper
structures. It may remain asymptomatic until complications occur.48, level III
The typical radiological features are large soft-tissue masses and areas
of adjacent bone destruction. Calcification within the mass is a frequent
finding. Pseudotumour of the ilium may cause significant bony erosion
with little new periosteal bone formation.48, level III
Untreated pseudotumour leads to complications e.g.:
•
fistulisation to skin or intraabdominal organs
•
infection
•
pathological fracture
•
septicaemia
•
internal bleeding
•
death
Treatment for pseudotumour
a. Proximal pseudotumour
•
Surgical resection
Surgical resection is curative and should ideally be performed in a
HCCC. This procedure is usually difficult and carries a high complication
rate including vascular and neurological damage, haemorrhage and
infection.
•
Embolisation:48, level III
 serves as a sole therapeutic modality to reduce the size and
stabilise the pseudotumour where surgery poses a great risk of
life-threatening haemorrhage
 has a role to minimise the vascularisation of the pseudotumour
and reduce its size prior to surgery
b. Distal pseudotumour
•
Irradiation
Irradiation works by causing direct injury to the blood vessels feeding
the pseudotumour and disruption to the endothelial proliferation of
the wall of the pseudotumour. It is indicated when the pseudotumour
occurs in multiple sites, inaccessible sites and sites where anatomy
and function should be preserved. The treatment involves a total dose
of 6 - 23.5 Gy (2 Gy per fraction) together with factor replacement. It is
effective if the pseudotumour is <10 cm.48, level III
•
Curettage and filling with:50, level III; 51, level III; 52, level III
 fibrin seal and cancellous bone graft (involvement of soft tissue
and bone)
 cancellous bone graft alone (bone involvement)
Management of Haemophilia
8. INHIBITORS
Inhibitors are antibodies that neutralise clotting factors which develop
following factor replacement therapy. Presence of inhibitors lead to
ineffective factor replacement therapy. The cumulative incidence (i.e.
lifetime risk) of inhibitor development is:2
•
20 - 30% in severe haemophilia A
•
5 - 10% in mild or moderate haemophilia A
•
<5% in haemophilia B
Risk factors of inhibitor development are:
•
high intensity treatment of clotting factor [FVIII concentrate
>150 IU/kg/week within the first 8 - 12 weeks of therapy (HR=1.9,
95% CI 1.3 to 2.8)]53, level II-2
•
FVIII genotype - large deletions and nonsense mutations
have higher risk compared with intron 22 inversions [pooled
OR=3.6 (95% CI 2.3 to 5.7) and OR=1.4 (95% CI 1.1 to 1.8)
respectively]20, level II-2
•
family history of inhibitors (RR=3.5, 95% CI 1.5 to 8.1)19, level II-2
Regular prophylaxis is associated with a lower risk of inhibitor
development than on-demand treatment.19 - 20, level II-2
•
Inhibitors can develop in all patients who have been exposed to
factor concentrates.
•
Presence of inhibitors should be suspected in the following
situations:
 poor response to replacement therapy
 recovery assays are not as expected
 increase bleeding episodes despite optimal prophylaxis
•
Inhibitor should be screened:2
 at regular intervals
-
for children - once every five exposure days until 20 exposure
days, then every 10 exposure days between 21 and 50
exposure days, then at least twice a year until 150 exposure
days
-
for adults with >150 exposure days, every 6 - 12 months
 after intensive treatment for >5 days, within four weeks of the last
infusion
 prior to surgery
Recommendation 9
•
Screening for inhibitor should be done in all persons with haemophilia
exposed to factor replacement therapy.*
*Refer to the preceding yellow box.
Management of Haemophilia
8.1 Treatment of Acute Bleeding in PWH with Inhibitors
The main treatment option for bleeding episodes in PWH with inhibitors
is bypassing agents e.g. rFVIIa or aPCC. These agents bypass the
coagulation pathway that normally utilises FVIII. aPCC should be used
with caution in patients planned for ITI as it may cause anamnestic
response with the rise of inhibitor levels.
rFVIIa and aPCC are equally effective and well tolerated with no
increase in thromboembolic risk in the treatment of acute bleeding
episodes in haemophilia with inhibitors.54, level I
The dose of rFVIIa is 90 - 120 µg/kg rounded up to the nearest vial
size, given every 2 - 3 hours until haemostasis achieved. Equivalent
effectiveness and safety have been demonstrated with a single dose
of 270 µg/kg vs three doses of 90 µg/kg54, level I aPCC can be used at
doses of 50 - 100 IU/kg given every 8 - 12 hours, but should not exceed
200 IU/kg/day.33; 54, level I
Home treatment with bypassing products is effective in haemostasis
and safe with no serious adverse events.55, level II-3
Recommendation 10
•
Bypassing agents should be used to treat acute bleeding in
haemophilia with inhibitors.
8.2 Prophylaxis Therapy in PWH with Inhibitors
There is a role for prophylaxis with bypassing agents in PWH with
inhibitors. In a Cochrane systematic review:56, level I
•
both bypassing agents as prophylaxis were significantly effective
in reducing bleeding as compared with on-demand group
•
there was lack of evidence on the superiority of one agent over
the other
•
there was no significant difference between high dose 270 ug/
kg daily and low dose 90 ug/kg daily rFVIIa regimen in reducing
overall bleeding and serious adverse events while the prophylaxis
dose for aPCC is 85 ± 15 IU/kg three times a week or every other
day
Prophylaxis can be considered after life-threatening bleed or in frequent
bleeders. However, the high cost limits its use. Based on current local
price, the estimated cost of prophylactic aPCC in a 50 kg patient is
RM4.5 million/year (1 vial of 500 IU=RM2726).
Management of Haemophilia
Novel agents such as SC emicizumab, concizumab and fitusiran are
being investigated as alternative prophylaxis for PWH with inhibitors.
Emicizumab, a bispecific monoclonal antibody that bridges factor IXa
and factor X, and given as a weekly SC injection has been approved
by FDA and EMA.
8.3 Eradication of Inhibitors
The rationale for advocating immune tolerance induction (ITI) in PWH
with inhibitor is because treatment with bypassing agents is suboptimal
as compared with factor replacement therapy in PWH without inhibitor.
Hence, eradication of inhibitor is important to put the patient back on
prophylactic therapy with factor concentrate.
ITI is a therapy where repeated medium to large doses of factor
concentrate are administered over a period of weeks to years to
induce antigen specific tolerance and reduce inhibitory antibodies.
It is carried out until the antibodies disappear. There are different
regimens consisting of various factor dosages with or without immune
suppression. The success rate in haemophilia A is about 50 - 80%57, level III
and haemophilia B 13 - 31%.58, level III
Initiation of ITI should be postponed until the inhibitor titre has dropped
to <10 BU. An inhibitor titre of <10 BU immediately before ITI initiation
positively affects both the likelihood of success and the time required to
achieve tolerance.59, level III
Consider starting ITI regardless of the inhibitor titre if:59, level III
•
the inhibitor titre does not fall below 10 BU within a 1- to 2-year
period of close observation or
•
a severe life- or limb-threatening bleeding event occurs
•
Prerequisite for starting ITI to ensure no interruption of treatment for
best response:
 commitment from PWH with inhibitor/care giver
 good venous access
 adequate budget
Management of Haemophilia
Refer to Table 11 for dose recommendations on initial regimens and
escalation of low-or intermediate-dose regimens based on response
and breakthrough bleeds.
Table 11. Regimen for ITI
Source: Collins P, Chalmers E, Alamelu J, et al. First-Line Immune Tolerance
Induction for Children with Severe Haemophilia A: A Protocol from The UK
Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation Inhibitor and Paediatric Working
Parties. Haemophilia. 2017; 23:654-659
In a Cochrane systematic review, the time taken to eradicate inhibitor
was shorter in the high dose regimen (200 IU/kg/day) as compared with
low dose (50 IU/kg three times a week) resulting in less bleeding event
(p=0.027). However, there was no difference in successful tolerance
between the two regimens (RR=1.07, 95% CI 0.68 to 1.68).60, level I
The off-label use of rituximab had been shown in some studies to be
effective in eradicating inhibitors in haemophilia. A durable remission
was achieved in 53.1% with no serious adverse reactions reported. The
response was better in mild/moderate haemophilia and with concomitant
treatment with factor VIII concentrates and immunosuppressive
agents.61, level III
Recommendation 11
•
Immune tolerance induction should be considered in all persons
with haemophilia with inhibitor.
• Start ITI at a dose of 50 IU/kg every other day
• To control clinically significant breakthrough bleeds,
escalate to daily treatment, then only increase the dose by
increments of 50 IU/kg/day up to 200 IU/kg/day
• If the inhibitor titre on this ITI regimen increases above 40
BU, increase dose immediately to 100 IU/kg/day. If the
inhibitor titre increases above 200 BU, increase the dose
immediately to 200 IU/kg/day
• Start ITI at a dose of 100 IU/kg/day
• To control clinically significant breakthrough bleeds,
escalate the dose by increments of 50 IU/kg/day up to 200
IU/kg/day
• If the inhibitor titre rises to >200 BU, increase dose
immediately to 200 IU/kg/day
• Start ITI at a dose of 100 IU/kg/day
<5 BU
>5 and <200 BU
>200 BU
Historic peak
inhibitor titre
Regimen
Management of Haemophilia
9. HOME THERAPY
Home therapy is part of haemophilia comprehensive care, where the
administration of replacement therapy is done outside hospitals, with
its safety and effectiveness closely supervised.62, level III
Home therapy allows immediate access to clotting factor. The earlier
the factor is initiated, ideally within two hours of bleeding onset, the
faster the bleeding will resolve.2 PWH who practice home therapy have
better QoL compared with those who do not. They have a lower risk of
hospitalisation for bleeding (RR=0.8, 95% CI 0.7 to 0.9).63, II-2
•
Requirements for home therapy
 Initiation of home therapy should only be done after adequate
education and training. This is followed by close supervision of
its safety and efficacy. Education should include:2
-
general knowledge of haemophilia
-
recognition of bleeds and common complications
-
first aid measures
-
dosage calculation, preparation, storage and administration
of clotting factor concentrates
-
aseptic techniques and venepuncture techniques (or access
of central venous catheter)
-
record keeping
-
proper storage and disposal of needles/sharps, and handling
of blood spills
E-learning programme improves knowledge and skills of PWH on home
treatment (p=0.002).64, level I
Recommendation 12
•
Home therapy should be advocated to all persons with haemophilia.
Central venous access device
It is essential to have patent venous access for factor delivery in PWH.
Peripheral venous is the route of choice; however, central venous
access device (CVAD) facilitates easier factor administration in young
children with small and difficult veins.2
CVAD is indicated in PWH with difficult venous access who require
immune tolerance induction therapy or prophylaxis.65, level III
However, despite the benefits of CVAD, its usage in haemophilia should
be approached cautiously because of its potential complications e.g.
risk of surgery, infection, mechanical complication, thrombosis and should
only be inserted and used in centres with expertise of CVAD.2; 65, level III
Management of Haemophilia
Risk factors for CVAD infections are:
•
patient with inhibitors at insertion (p=0.0040)65, level III
•
age under six years at the time of insertion66, level lll
•
external catheter devices compared to implanted ports66, level lll
An arteriovenous fistula is a feasible option for venous access in
haemophilia but formation of a fistula in a haemophiliac and its
management should only be done in centres with this expertise
and there are associated risks as well (inadequate maturation and
hypertrophy of the fistula arm).67, level II-2
Management of Haemophilia
10. ADHERENCE IN HAEMOPHILIA TREATMENT
Adherence is defined as the extent to which a person’s behaviour on
taking medication, following diet, and/or executing lifestyle changes
corresponds with agreed recommendations from a healthcare
provider.68, level III Life-long dedication and adherence to prophylactic
therapy is crucial to prevent bleeding and maintain good health in PWH.
a. Factors influencing adherence
•
Motivators for haemophilia treatment adherence:
 experience of bleeding symptoms (p<0.05)69, level III
 good relationship with healthcare providers (p<0.001)69, level III
 positive belief in necessity of treatment (p<0.01)69, level III
 haemophilia perceived as a highly chronic condition
(p=0.003)70, level III
 less negative emotions (p=0.023)70, level III
•
Barriers for haemophilia treatment adherence:69, level III
o absence or infrequent bleeding symptoms
o increasing age (older patients) (p=0.002)
b. Measures to improve adherence
•
Ensure adequate time and resources are allocated for family
adherence education.71, level II-2
•
Promote interventions aiming at PWHs’ acceptance of their
chronic condition.70, level III
•
Target young adults as they are transitioning from adolescence
and assuming primary responsibility for their haemophilia
care.71, level II-2
c. Haemophilia Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic
•
(HMTAC) is an adherence programme in Malaysia where trained
pharmacists assist PWH and caregivers based on structured
modules to:
 understand haemophilia and its treatment
 identify healthy lifestyle decisions which may impact bleeding
tendencies and factor concentrate use
 utilise HMTAC team members for queries or feedback on
problems
 maintain good attendance at work or school
•
Objectives and benefits of HMTAC include:
 to help PWH understand and treat haemophilia
 to support PWH and their family through continuous
supervision of all pharmacotherapy related to bleeding
disorders
Management of Haemophilia
 to educate and empower PWH to be independent and be
able to do home therapy
 to lower morbidity and to provide long-term cost-effective
care
Recommendation 13
•
Haemophilia Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic should be made
available in all haemophilia treatment centres.
Management of Haemophilia
11. SPECIAL SITUATIONS
11.1 Surgeries and Invasive Procedures
Surgeries for PWH require proper planning, effective communication
and multidisciplinary collaboration. It is best managed at or in
consultation with a comprehensive HTC and the following requirements
need to be considered:2
•
surgery is scheduled early in the week and early in the day for
optimal laboratory and factor support
•
anaesthesiologist involved has experience in treating patients
with bleeding disorders
•
adequate laboratory support for monitoring factor level and
inhibitor testing
•
adequate quantities of factor concentrates must be available
peri-operatively and during the duration of healing and/or
rehabilitation
Pre-operatively, inhibitor screening and inhibitor assay must be carried
out, particularly if the recovery of the replaced factor is less than
expected.2
Surgical procedures can be either major or minor. A major procedure is
defined as one that requires haemostatic support for a period exceeding
five consecutive days.2 It often refers to major abdominal, intracranial,
cardiovascular, spinal, major orthopaedic (e.g. joint replacement)
and any other surgery with risk of large volume blood loss or blood
loss into a confined anatomical space. In children this may include
adeno-tonsillectomy. Minor surgery refers to removal of skin lesions,
arthroscopy, minor dental procedures and dental extractions.73, level III
Infusion of factor concentrates is also necessary before invasive
procedures e.g. lumbar puncture, arterial blood gas or any endoscopy
with biopsy.2
The dosage and duration of factor concentrate coverage depends on
the type of surgery performed (refer to Table 10).
Recommendation 14
•
Persons with haemophilia who need surgery or invasive procedure
should have an optimal plan (which include adequate factor coverage
peri-operatively) and managed by a multidisciplinary team.
Management of Haemophilia
11.2 Management of Pregnant Carrier
The care of known carriers of haemophilia should be undertaken by an
obstetric unit in close liaison with a haemophilia care centre. A written
management plan should include the haemostatic management of the
mother and baby.74, level III
Gender identification should be made during antenatal period by US
scan between 18 and 20 weeks. Foetal gender can also be determined
by maternal blood sampling at around 10 weeks of gestation. If the foetus
is found to be male, the diagnosis of haemophilia maybe confirmed
by amniocentesis to decide the management at delivery.74, level III In our
local setting, these tests are available in some private laboratories.
FVIII level should be measured in carriers during the third trimester of
pregnancy and if it is <50 IU/dL, clotting factor replacement is necessary
for surgical or invasive procedures during delivery.2
In a meta-analysis, delivery of infants with known or suspected
haemophilia should be atraumatic, regardless of whether it is vaginal or
caesarean, in order to decrease the risk of bleeding.75, level II-2
•
Cranial bleeding occurred with a significantly higher frequency
in newborns with haemophilia compared with the general
population i.e.:
 ICH (OR=44, 95% CI 34.7 to 57.1)
 extracranial haemorrhage: (OR=8.2, 95% CI 5.38 to12.6)
•
In newborns with haemophilia, delivery by caesarean section
was associated with the lowest risk of ICH (OR=0.34, 95% CI
0.14 to 0.83).
•
Assisted vaginal delivery (forceps and vacuum extraction)
increased the risk of ICH (OR=4.39, 95% CI1.46 to 13.7).
•
The care of known carriers of haemophilia in pregnancy should
should involve a multidisciplinary team with expertise in haemophilia
care.
•
Route of delivery in haemophilia carriers should be as per obstetric
indications.
•
Assisted vaginal delivery and invasive procedures should be
avoided in male foetus.
Intramuscular (IM) vitamin K and hepatitis B vaccination should be
withheld until haemophilia is excluded. Oral vitamin K should be given
if there is a delay in diagnosis or if haemophilia is confirmed.74, level III
Management of Haemophilia
•
In view of limitation of laboratory services in the local setting, the
management of a male newborn of a carrier mother are as follow:
 the newborn is assumed to have haemophilia until proven otherwise
 oral vitamin K should be given instead of IM vitamin K
 hepatitis B vaccination should be given subcutaneously
 APTT and factor assay should be done as soon as possible to
confirm haemophilia; cord blood is preferable if feasible.
Recommendation 15
•
All haemophilia carriers should have FVIII level done during third
trimester of pregnancy.
 If FVIII level is <50 IU/dL, clotting factor replacement is necessary
for surgical or invasive procedures during delivery.
•
Gender identification should be determined antenatally in
haemophilia carriers.
11.3 Vaccination
Patients with bleeding disorders should receive the recommended
vaccinations for their age group. However, these vaccinations should
be given subcutaneously rather than intramuscularly to reduce the
injection site complications.2
Hepatitis B vaccination by SC route is as effective as IM route.76, level III
Recommendation 16
•
All injectable vaccinations in haemophilia should be given
subcutaneously.
11.4 Circumcision
Circumcision is not absolutely contraindicated in PWH but should be
performed cautiously by the surgeon in liaison with the haematologist in a
haemophilia care centre. However, it should be taken into consideration
that bleeding and other complications maybe more serious in those
with inhibitors.
Fibrin glue is a topical, biological sealant which stimulates the final
stages of coagulation. It diminishes the risk of post-operative bleeding
and reduces the need of factor replacement therapy.77, level III; 78, level II-2
•
Muzakarah Jawatankuasa Fatwa Majlis Kebangsaan Bagi Hal Ehwal
Ugama Islam Malaysia Kali Ke-77 has decided that circumcision in
PWH is considered life-threatening and hence it is not obligatory.79
Management of Haemophilia
12. DENTAL CARE
12.1 Preventive Dental Measures
Routine dental examination with preventive care should be conducted
regularly.80, level III In PWH, it should be initiated at the time the baby
teeth start to erupt.2; 81, level III It is advisable to refer all PWH for oral
assessment within six months of eruption of the first tooth and no later
than 12 months of age.82
Good oral hygiene practice helps to prevent periodontal disease
(gum disease), dental caries, gum bleeding and the need for dental
extraction. Brushing teeth twice a day (using soft bristle toothbrush)
with toothpaste containing fluoride will remove plaque deposits.2; 81, level
III Dental floss or interdental brush should be used wherever possible.2
Early childhood caries (ECC) is a significant oral health related disease
in the baby teeth of young children. Dietary counselling including
reduced sugar intake should be part of the oral health advice for PWH83,
level III and those with high risk of ECC.82
Properly
designed
and
implemented
oral
health
educational
programmes are helpful to make positive changes in oral health of
PWH.84, level III; 85, level II-3; 86, level II-1; 87, level III
Recommendation 17
•
In person with haemophilia,
 comprehensive oral health care should be initiated early within
six months after the first tooth erupts and no later than 12 months
 routine dental examination with preventive care measures
should be conducted regularly throughout life
 good oral hygiene practice and dietary counselling should be
advocated to prevent dental diseases
12.2 Dental Procedures
Effective and safe dental procedures should be a priority in PWH.
A multidisciplinary approach involving dental surgeon and the
haemophilia team is important for comprehensive oral health
care.2; 80, level III Before performing any invasive dental or surgical
procedures, the dental surgeon must liase with the haematologist in
order to prevent or minimise potential bleeding or infection risks. Careful
planning for haemostatic cover is crucial for PWH with inhibitors.2 With
respect to local anaesthetic (LA) and factor replacement therapy, the
recommendations is as stipulated in Table 12.
Management of Haemophilia
Table 12. Dental anaesthetic procedures and factor
replacement therapy
Source: Anderson JA, Brewer A, Creagh D, et al. Guidance on The Dental
Management of Patients with Haemophilia and Congenital Bleeding
Disorders. Br Dent J. 2013;215(10):497-504
*In local practice, these procedures are best avoided for paediatric
patient.
Locally, different types of dental local anaesthetic are used e.g.
mepivacaine hydrochloride (HCL) 2%, lignocaine HCL 2% and articaine
HCL 4%. The articaine HCL 4% with 1:100,000 epinephrine has been
described for infiltration as an alternative to inferior dental block in the
restoration of mandibular molars and may remove the need for preoperative factor cover.80, level III
PWH must seek immediate care from the haematologist/dental surgeon
post-operatively if one of these events occur:2
•
prolonged bleeding
•
difficulty in speaking
•
difficulty in swallowing
•
difficulty in breathing
Refer to Subchapter 5.2.3 on Analgesia.
Malocclusion e.g. overcrowding teeth may lead to periodontal (gum)
disease if left untreated.88, level III Therefore, an orthodontic assessment
for PWH should be considered between the ages of 10 - 14 which is
during the late mixed to early permanent dentition stages.2
Recommendation 18
•
Comprehensive oral health care in haemophilia should be performed
by a multidisciplinary team which include a dental surgeon.
• Labial/buccal infiltration
• Intra-papillary injections
• Intra-ligamentary injections
• Inferior dental block/
mandibular block*
• Lingual infiltration*
Procedures that do not require factor cover
(applies to adult patients only). Paediatric
patients may receive factor replacement
therapy before local anaesthetic infiltration
as advised by haematologist
Procedures that require factor
cover (applies to both adult
and paediatric patients)
Management of Haemophilia
12.3 Management of Oral Bleeding
Causes of oral bleeding in PWH include:
•
eruption of permanent teeth with exfoliation of baby teeth83, level III
•
gingival/gum bleeding associated with poor oral hygiene2
•
trauma2
•
invasive dental procedures e.g. dental extractions, surgical
procedures, etc.2
In children with haemophilia, the surrounding gum may appear bluish
and swollen when the baby teeth are erupting or teething. Normally,
these conditions do not bleed. Therefore, it is suggested to allow the
baby teeth to self-exfoliate in order to minimise risk of bleeding.83, level III
In local setting, extraction is indicated when the baby tooth is mobile
and causes gum bleeding. The need for factor coverage should be
discussed with the haematologist.
The type of dental procedures significantly affects the bleeding
outcome and can be categorised according to risk of bleeding. Highrisk procedures have higher bleeding outcome compared with low-risk
procedures (OR=8.97, 95% CI 3.5 to 23).89, level III The risk of bleeding
in dental procedures is shown in Table 13.
Table 13. Dental procedures and risk of bleeding
Source: Givol N, Hirschhorn A, Lubetsky A, et al. Oral Surgery-Associated
Postoperative Bleeding in Haemophilia Patients - A Tertiary Centre’s Two
Decade Experience. Haemophilia. 2015; 21(2):234-40
Antifibrinolytic agents e.g. TXA and epsilon aminocaproic acid therapy
administered systemically in PWH undergoing minor oral surgery or
dental extraction are beneficial in preventing post-operative bleeding
(RD= -0.57, 95% CI -0.76 to -0.37). The antifibrinolytic agents reduce
the need for clotting factor concentrates and post-operative bleeding.
No significant adverse events have been reported.90, level I
• Flap elevation
• Teeth extractions
• Crown lengthening procedure
• Soft tissue biopsy
• Scaling and/or root planning
• Inferior alveolar nerve block
• Restorative treatment e.g. filling, crown, bridge, etc.
• Prosthodontics treatment e.g. denture fabrication, root
canal treatment, etc.
• Orthodontic treatment
High-risk
Low-risk
Type of dental procedure
Level of risk
Management of Haemophilia
Antifibrinolytic therapy in the form of TXA 5% weight/volume mouthwash
(four times a day) should be kept in the mouth for two minutes before
discarding.91, level III Oral TXA and/or 5% TXA mouthwash should be
prescribed alone or in combination pre- and post-dental extraction for up
to seven days. The mouthwash should not be given to younger children
as they may inadvertently swallowed it, leading to overdosage.80, level III
In local setting, compression of the bleeding area using gauze soaked
with diluted TXA (TXA 500 mg diluted in 10 ml of distilled water) is used
until bleeding stops.
In PWH undergoing dental extractions, bleeding may be minimised
by using either resorbable or non-resorbable sutures, surgical splints
and other additional local haemostatic measures.80, level III Factor
replacement may be required for PWH according to the haematologist’s
care plan.2
•
The relative risk of bleeding in person with haemophilia depends on
the types of dental procedures.
•
Antifibrinolytic therapy reduces the need for clotting factor
concentrate and post-operative oral bleeding.
Management of Haemophilia
13. MONITORING
Haemophilia care involves managing PWH from birth until adulthood.
Clinical follow-up of PWH has become more complex with the
introduction of new treatment strategies and the emergence of new
tools to evaluate the medical and social consequences.
Regular and standardised evaluation should be done at least
12-monthly so that problems are identified early and treatment modified
accordingly.2 The parameters to monitor are:
•
inhibitors
•
bleed frequency
•
joint health
•
radiological measures
13.1 Inhibitors
Refer to Chapter 8 on Inhibitors.
13.2 Bleeding Frequency
Bleeding pattern is the key parameter to evaluate the efficacy of
treatment strategy and thus, information on bleeding episodes should
be thoroughly documented. Issues related to haemostasis (bleed
record) should be evaluated.2
Standard assessment of bleed frequency includes ABR, which is the
number of bleeds collected over 12 consecutive months. In addition
to ABR, annual joint bleeding rate (AJBR) should be specified.92, level III
ABR is calculated based on the following formula:93, level I
ABR
=
Number of bleeding events
(Number of days receiving treatment/365.25 days)
Information to be recorded on haemarthrosis and other types of
bleeding are:92, level III; 94, level III
•
number of episodes
•
time and site of each bleed
•
provoked (i.e. traumatic) or spontaneous bleed
•
target joint or non-target joint bleed
•
dose, number, interval and response to factor administration
In PWH treated with early prophylaxis, self-reported bleeding does
not significantly correlate with any other outcome parameters (ABR
with HJHS: r=0.107; Functional Independence Score in Haemophilia
(FISH): r=0.300; Pettersson scores: r=0.016; Arnold-Hilgartner (AH)
Management of Haemophilia
scores: r=0.081; and additive and progressive scores: r=0.073 and
0.066 respectively).95, level III
In addition to self-reported bleeding, outcome assessment in PWH
on long-term prophylaxis should include objective joint assessment,
assessment of activities and health-related QoL.15, level III
13.3 Joint Health
Preservation of good joint status is an important component of
haemophilia care. The HJHS is a clinical measure of joint structure and
function. It is more efficient than WFH score at differentiating:96, level III
•
severe from mild and moderate haemophilia (97%, p=0.003)
•
subjects treated with prophylaxis from those treated on-demand
(74%, p=0.003)
Inter-physiotherapist discrepancies in routine HJHS have been shown
to hamper comparison of scores between treatment regimens.97, level III
Thus, training of physiotherapist on HJHS assessment is essential.
HJHS may be used safely as a first-line tool for monitoring of joint
health as it has significantly strong correlation with radiological scores
(r=0.67), moderate correlation with physical domains of the quality of life
questionaire (SF-36) (r= -0.50), utility (r= -0.41),15, level III and MRI scores
(r=0.444 with additive score and r=0.440 with progressive score).95, level III
It is recommended to do HJHS at least once a year.94, level III Refer to
Appendix 8 on HJHS Score.
13.4 Radiological Measures
Diagnostic imaging provides objective information on the joint status
in PWH.
In PWH on prophylaxis, imaging of the six major joints (knees, ankles
and elbows) should be considered at the age of eight years or before
if clinically indicated. Usual interval is at 4- to 5-year intervals.94, level III
When using conventional radiography for assessment, WFH
recommends the use of Pettersson score.2 The Pettersson scoring
system has excellent reliability when used by radiologists experienced
in reading musculoskeletal images. It can be used for assessment of
advanced osteochondral changes.92, level III Refer to Appendix 9 on
Pettersson Score.
MRI and USG can detect early soft-tissue and osteochondral changes
in a joint before they become apparent on physical examination or plain
radiographs.92, level III
Management of Haemophilia
A systematic review showed that USG had the ability to detect pathological
changes e.g. synovial thickening and osteochondral abnormalities in
haemophilic joints. There was association between USG findings and
functional status of the joint. However, its ability to detect a change in
arthropathy with therapy has yet to be determined.98, level III
The current practice of prescribing clotting factor or conservative
measures based on pain perception seems inadequate. There are
discrepancies between musculoskeletal USG findings and patient/
physician-perceived pain aetiology. Only approximately one-third of
the painful musculoskeletal episodes are judged correctly either by the
patient or physician. Thus, USG should be part of the assessment when
PWH presents with musculoskeletal pain.99, level III
In a systematic review on MRI as a tool for evaluating haemophilic
arthropathy in children, MRI had good diagnostic accuracy for
discriminating the presence of arthropathy. The association between
early MRI findings and long-term functional joint outcomes has yet to
be determined.100, level II- 2
Recommendation 19
•
Monitoring of care in person with haemophilia should include:
 Annual Bleeding Rate
 inhibitor screening*
 Annual Haemophilia Joint Health Score
 ultrasound of knee, ankle and elbow when feasible
*Refer to Chapter 8 on Inhibitor.
Management of Haemophilia
14. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of haemophilia should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
14.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a. wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hard-
and soft-copies)
b. regular topic update for healthcare providers via continuous
medical education (seminar/conference/course)
c. National Haemophilia Programme
d. involvement of governmental/NGOs e.g. World Haemophilia
Day, Haemophilia Camp, etc.
e. accessibility to relevant multidisciplinary teams
Existing barriers for application are:
a. poor understanding/limited knowledge on the topic
b. insufficient resources in terms of budget, expertise, diagnostic
tools, medications
c. no national registry
d. variation in clinical management and preferences
e. low priority on the issue by the stakeholders
14.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to health care
personnel via printed copies, electronic websites, etc.
b. reinforce training of health care personnel by regular seminars or
workshops to ensure information is made available
c. develop multidisciplinary teams at hospital and community level
to include involvement of specialists, medical/dental officers,
pharmacists, allied health professional and nurses
d. ensure screening and monitoring facilities, and medications are
available at HTC
e. ensure widespread distribution of patient education materials
Management of Haemophilia
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of haemophilia:
*Monitoring by ABR, inhibitor screening and HJHS
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
=
X 100%
Percentage of
prophylactic factor
infusion given to person
with severe haemophilia
Total number of persons with
severe haemophilia in the same year
Total number of persons with
severe haemophilia receiving
prophylaxis factor infusion in a year
=
X 100%
Percentage of monitoring*
done in PWH
Total number of PWH in a year
Total number of PWH
being monitored* in a year
Management of Haemophilia
REFERENCES
1.
Stonebraker JS, Bolton-Maggs PH, Michael Soucie J, et al. A study of variations
in the reported haemophilia B prevalence around the world. Haemophilia.
2012;18(3):e91-94
2.
World Federation of Haemophilia. Guidelines for the Management of Haemophilia
(2nd edition ). Montréal: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2012
3.
Keeney S, Mitchell M, Goodeve A. Practice guidelines for the molecular diagnosis
of Haemophilia A. (Available at: http://www.ukhcdo.org/docs/Haemophilia%20
A%20BPG%20revision%20Sept%202011%20APPROVED.pdf)
4.
Australian Haemophilia Centre Directors’ Organisation’s. Guidelines for the
management of haemophilia in Australia. Malvern East: AHCDO; 2016
5.
Keeney S, Mitchell M, Goodeve A. Practice Guidelines for the Molecular Diagnosis
of Haemophilia B. (Available at: http://www.acgs.uk.com/media/774631/
haemophilia_b_bpg_revision_sept_2011_approved.pdf)
6.
European guidelines for the certification of Haemophilia Centres, Sheffield,
UK, European Haemophilia Network, 2013 (Available at http://www.euhanet.
org/docs/EuhanetEuropean_guidelines_for_the_certification_of_Haemophilia_
Centres_2013.pdf)
7.
Evatt B. World Federation of Hemophilia Guide to Developing a National Patient
Registry. Montréal: WFH; 2005
8.
Osooli M, Berntorp E. Registry-based outcome assessment in haemophilia: a
scoping study to explore the available evidence. J Intern Med. 2016;279(6):
502-514
9.
Dolan G, Makris M, Bolton-Maggs PH, et al. Enhancing haemophilia care
through registries. Haemophilia. 2014;20 Suppl 4:121-129
10. Ljung RC. Intracranial haemorrhage in haemophilia A and B Br J Haematol.
2008;140(4):378-384
11. Witmer C, Presley R, Kulkarni R, et al. Associations between intracranial
haemorrhage and prescribed prophylaxis in a large cohort of haemophilia
patients in the United States. Br J Haematol. 2011;152(2):211-216
12. Farrugia A. Guide for the assessment of clotting factor (3rd edition). Montreal:
WFH; 2017
13. Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM, Garagiola I, et al. Randomized Trial of Factor VIII and
Neutralizing Antibodies in Hemophilia A. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(21):2054-2064
14. Malaysia MoH. Management of Haemophilia Putrajaya: MoH; 2012
15. Fischer K, Nijdam A, Holmström M, et al. Evaluating outcome of prophylaxis
in haemophilia: objective and self-reported instruments should be combined.
Haemophilia. 2016;22(2):e80-86
16. Iorio A, Marchesini E, Marcucci M, et al. Clotting factor concentrates given to
prevent bleeding andbleeding-related complications in people with hemophilia
A or B.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 9. Art.
No.:CD003429
17. Manco-Johnson MJ, Kempton CL, Reding MT, et al. Randomized, controlled,
parallel-group trial of routine prophylaxis vs. on-demand treatment with sucroseformulated recombinant factor VIII in adults with severe hemophilia A (SPINART).
J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11(6):1129-1127
18. Andersson NG, Auerswald G, Barnes C, et al. Intracranial haemorrhage
in children and adolescents with severe haemophilia A or B - the impact of
prophylactic treatment. Br J Haematol. 207;179(2):298-307
19. Gouw SC, van der Bom JG, Marijke van den Berg H. Treatment-related risk
factors of inhibitor development in previously untreated patients with hemophilia
A: the CANAL cohort study. Blood. 2007;109(11):4648-4654
Management of Haemophilia
20. Gouw SC, van den Berg HM, Fischer K, et al. Intensity of factor VIII treatment
and inhibitor development in children with severe hemophilia A: the RODIN
study. Blood. 2013;121(20):4046-4055
21. Fischer K, Steen Carlsson K, Petrini P, et al. Intermediate-dose versus highdose prophylaxis for severe hemophilia: comparing outcome and costs since the
1970s. Blood. 2013;122(7):1129-1136
22. Di Perna C, Riccardi F, Franchini M, et al. Clinical efficacy and determinants of
response to treatment with desmopressin in mild hemophilia a Semin Thromb
Hemost. 2013;39(7):732-739
23. Mannucci PM. Desmopressin (DDAVP) in the treatment of bleeding disorders
(Revised edition). Montréal: WFH; 2012
24. Rodriguez-Merchan EC. Fibrin glue for local haemostasis in haemophilia surgery
Hosp Pract (1995). 2017;45(5):187-191
25. Rattray B, Nugent DJ, Young G. Celecoxib in the treatment of haemophilic
synovitis, target joints, and pain in adults and children with haemophilia.
Haemophilia. 2006;12(5):514-517
26. Tsoukas C, Eyster ME, Shingo S, et al. Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of
etoricoxib in the treatment of hemophilic arthropathy. Blood. 2006;107(5):17851790
27. World Health Organisation. WHO guidelines on the pharmacological treatment
of persisting pain in children with medical illnesses. Geneva: WHO; 2012
28. Eyster ME, Asaad SM, Gold BD, et al. Upper gastrointestinal bleeding in
haemophiliacs: incidence and relation to use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Haemophilia. 2007;13(3):279-286
29. Strike K, Mulder K, Michael R. Exercise for haemophilia.Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 12. Art. No.:CD011180
30. Schäfer GS, Valderramas S, Gomes AR, et al. Physical exercise, pain and
musculoskeletal function in patients with haemophilia: a systematic review.
Haemophilia. 2016;22(3):e119-129
31. Negrier C, Seuser A, Forsyth A, et al. The benefits of exercise for patients with
haemophilia and recommendations for safe and effective physical activity.
Haemophilia. 2013;19(4):487-498
32. Cuesta-Barriuso R, Torres-Ortuño A, Pérez-Alenda S, et al. Sporting Activities
and Quality of Life in Children With Hemophilia: An Observational Study. Pediatr
Phys Ther. 2016;28(4):453-459
33. Hanley J, McKernan A, Creagh MD, et al. Guidelines for the management of
acute joint bleeds and chronic synovitis in haemophilia: A United Kingdom
Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation (UKHCDO) guideline. Haemophilia.
2017;23(4):511-520
34. Rodríguez-Merchán EC. Articular bleeding (hemarthrosis) in hemophilia: An
orthopedist’s point of view (Second edition). Montréal: WFH; 2008
35. Heijnen L, Heim M, Jansen HIdMR. Manufactured shoes and orthopedic shoes
(Third edition). Montréal: WHF; 2008
36. Khair K, Littley A, Will A, et al. The impact of sport on children with haemophilia.
Haemophilia. 2012;18(6):898-905
37. Gomis M, Querol F, Gallach JE, et al. Exercise and sport in the treatment of
haemophilic patients: a systematic review. Haemophilia. 2009;15(1):43-54
38. De Kleijn P, Fischer K, Vogely HCh, et al. In-hospital rehabilitation after multiple
joint procedures of the lower extremities inhaemophilia patients: clinical
guidelines for physical therapists. Haemophilia. 2011;17(6):971-978
39. Nagel K, Pai MK, Paes BA, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of intracranial
hemorrhage
in
children
with
hemophilia.
Blood
Coagul
Fibrinolysis.
2013;24(1):23-27
Management of Haemophilia
40. Manners PJ, Price P, Buurman D, et al. Joint Aspiration for Acute Hemarthrosis
in Children Receiving Factor VIII Prophylaxis for Severe Hemophilia: 11-year
Safety Data. J Rheumatol. 2015;42(5):885-890
41. Sørensen B, Benson GM, Bladen M, et al. Management of muscle haematomas
in patients with severe haemophilia in an evidence-poor world. Haemophilia.
2012;18(4):598-606
42. Balkan C, Kavakli K, Karapinar D. Iliopsoas haemorrhage in patients with
haemophilia: results from one centre. Haemophilia. 2005;11(5):463-467
43. Björkman S, Berntorp E. Pharmacokinetics of coagulation factors: clinical
relevance for patients with haemophilia. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2001;40(11):815832
44. Rodriguez-Merchan EC, De la Corte-Rodriguez H, Jimenez-Yuste V.
Radiosynovectomy in haemophilia: long-term results of 500 procedures
performed in a 38-year period. Thromb Res. 2014;134(5):985-990
45. Zulfikar B, Turkmen C, Kilicoglu O, et al. Long-term outcomes in haemophilic
synovitis after radiosynovectomy using rhenium-186: a single-centre experience.
Haemophilia. 2013;19(2):275-280
46. Daffunchio C, Caviglia H, Nassif J, et al. Knee flexion contracture treated
with botulinum toxin type A in patients with haemophilia (PWH). Haemophilia.
2016;22(1):136-141
47. Rodríguez-Merchán EC, Magallón M, Galindo E, et. al. Hamstring release
for fixed knee flexion contracture in hemophilia. Clin Orthop Relat Res.
1997(343):63-67
48. Espandar R, Heidari P, Rodriguez-Merchan EC. Management of haemophilic
pseudotumours with special emphasis on radiotherapy and arterial embolization.
Haemophilia. 2009;15(2):448-457
49. Kwon AY, Huh KH, Yi WJ, et al. Haemophilic pseudotumour in two parts of the
maxilla: case report. Dentomaxillofac Radiol. 2016;45(6):20150440
50. Petratos DV, Pergantou H, Matsinos GS, et al. Intraosseous pseudotumour of
the talus in a child with severe haemophilia. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2009;18(6):357-61
51. Caviglia HA, FernAndez-Palazzi F, Gilbert MS. Haemophilic pseudotumours of
the limbs and their percutaneous treatment. Haemophilia. 2002;8(3):402-406
52. Sagarra M, Lucas M, De La Torre E, et al. Successful surgical treatment of
haemophilic pseudotumour, filling the defect with hydroxyapatite. Haemophilia.
2000;6(1):55-56
53. Marcucci M, Mancuso ME, E. S, et al. Type and intensity of FVIII exposure on
inhibitor development in PUPs with haemophilia A. A patient-level meta-analysis.
Thromb Haemost. 2015;113(5):958-967
54. Matino D, Makris M, Dwan K, et al. Recombinant factor VIIa concentrate versus
plasma-derived concentrates for treating acute bleeding episodes in people with
haemophilia and inhibitors. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015,
Issue 12. Art. No.: CD004449
55. Holme PA, Glomstein A, Grønhaug S, et al. Home treatment with bypassing
products
in
inhibitor
patients:
a
7.5-year
experience.
Haemophilia.
2009;15(3):727-732
56. Chai-Adisaksopha C, Nevitt SJ, Simpson ML, et al. Bypassing agent prophylaxis
in peoplewith hemophilia A or B with inhibitors. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2017, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD011441
57. Coppola A, Di Minno MN, Santagostino E. Optimizing management of immune
tolerance induction in patients with severe haemophilia A and inhibitors: towards
evidence-based approaches. Br J Haematol. 2010;150(5):515-528
58. DiMichele DM. Immune tolerance in haemophilia: the long journey to the fork in
the road. Br J Haematol. 2012;159(2):123-134
Management of Haemophilia
59. DiMichele DM, Hoots WK, Pipe SW, et al. International workshop on immune
tolerance induction: consensus recommendations. Haemophilia. 2007;13 Suppl
1:1-22
60. Athale AH, Marcucci M, Iorio A. Immune tolerance induction for treating inhibitors
in people with congenital haemophiliaA or B. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2014, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD010561
61. Franchini M, Mengoli C, Lippi G, et al. Immune tolerance with rituximab in
congenital haemophilia with inhibitors: a systematic literature review based on
individual patients’ analysis. 2008. Haemophilia;14(5):903-912
62. Teitel JM, Barnard D, Israels S, et al. Home management of haemophilia.
Haemophilia. 2004;10(2):118-133
63. Soucie JM, Symons J 4th, Evatt B, et al. Home-based factor infusion therapy
and hospitalization for bleeding complications among males with haemophilia.
Haemophilia. 2001;7(2):198-206
64. Mulders G, de Wee EM, Vahedi Nikbakht-Van de Sande MC, et al. E-learning
improves knowledge and practical skills in haemophilia patients on home
treatment: a randomized controlled trial. Haemophilia. 2012;18(5):693-698
65. Vepsäläinen K, Lassila R, Arola M, et al. Complications associated with central
venous access device in children with haemophilia: a nationwide multicentre
study in Finland. Haemophilia. 2015;21(6):747-753
66. Ewenstein
BM,
Valentino
LA,
Journeycake
JM,
et
al.
Consensus
recommendations for use of central venous access devices in haemophilia.
Haemophilia. 2004;10(5):629-648
67. Mancuso ME, Berardinelli L, Beretta C, et al. Improved treatment feasibility in
children with hemophilia using arteriovenous fistulae: the results after seven
years of follow-up. Haematologica. 2009;94(5):687-692
68. Adherence to Long-term Therapy - Evidence for Action. (Available at: http://
apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/d/Js4883e/6.html#Js4883e.6.1.1)
69. Schrijvers LH, Uitslager N, Schuurmans MJ, et al. Barriers and motivators of
adherence to prophylactic treatment in haemophilia: a systematic review.
Haemophilia. 2013.19(3):355-361
70. Lamiani G, Strada I, Mancuso ME, et al. Factors influencing illness
representations and perceived adherence in haemophilic patients: a pilot study.
Haemophilia. 2015;21(5):598-604
71. Witkop ML, McLaughlin JM, Anderson TL, al e. Predictors of non-adherence
to prescribed prophylactic clotting-factor treatment regimens among adolescent
and young adults with a bleeding disorder. Haemophilia. 2016;22(4):e245-250
72. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Protocol Haemophilia Medication Therapy
Adherence Clinic (HMTAC) (First Edition): MoH; 2012
73. Australian Haemophilia Centre Directors’ Organisation (AHCDO). A Consensus
Statement on the Dental Treatment of Patients with Inherited Bleeding Disorders
(Available at: www.ahcdo.org.au/documents/item/14)
74. Chalmers E, Williams M, Brennand J, et al. Guideline on the management of
haemophilia in the fetus and neonate. Br J Haematol. 2011;154(2):208-215
75. Davies J, RA Kadir. Mode of delivery and cranial bleeding in newborns
with haemophilia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature.
Haemophilia. 2016;22(1):32-38
76. Carpenter SL, Soucie JM, Presley RJ, et al. Hemophilia Treatment Center
Network Investigators. Hepatitis B vaccination is effective by subcutaneous
route in children with bleeding disorders: a universal data collection database
analysis. Haemophilia. 2015;21(1):e39-43
77. Sasmaz I, Antmen B, Leblebisatan G, et al. Circumcision and complications
in patients with haemophilia in southern part of Turkey: Çukurova experience.
Haemophilia. 2012;18(3):426-430
Management of Haemophilia
78. Avanogmacr;lu A, Celik A, Ulman I, et al. Safer circumcision in patients with
haemophilia: the use of fibrin glue for local haemostasis. BJU Int. 1999;83(1):91-94
79. Hukum Khatan Bagi Pesakit Heamophilia Dan Kanak-Kanak Cacat Akal. Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, Muzakarah Jawatankuasa Fatwa Majlis Kebangsaan Bagi
Hal Ehwal Ugama Islam Malaysia, Jabatan Kemajuan Islam Malaysia, 2007
(Available at http://piswi.islam.gov.my/index.php/himpunan-fatwa/30-himpunanfatwa/sosial/32-hukum-khatan-bagi-pesakit-heamophilia-dan-kanak-kanakcacat-akal)
80. Anderson JA, Brewer A, Creagh D, et al. Guidance on the dental management
of patients with haemophilia and congenital bleeding disorders. Br Dent J.
2013;215(10):497-504
81. Shastry SP, Kaul R, Baroudi K, et al. Hemophilia A: Dental considerations and
management. J Int Soc Prev Community Dent. 2014;4(Suppl 3):S147-152
82. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Severe Early Childhood Caries (2nd
Edition): MoH; 2012
83. Scully C, Dios PD, P G. Oral care for people with hemophilia or a hereditary
bleeding tendency (Second edition). Montréal: WFH; 2008
84. Evangelista LM, Lima CC, RC I, et al. Oral health in children and adolescents
with haemophilia. Haemophilia. 2015;21(6):778-783
85. Gaddam KR, Nuvvula S, Nirmala S, et al. Oral health status among 6- to 12-yearold haemophilic children--an educational intervention study. Haemophilia.
2014;20(4):e338-341
86. Kabil N, ElAlfy MS, Metwalli N. Evaluation of the oral health situation of a group of
Egyptian haemophilic children and their re-evaluation following an oral hygiene
and diet education programme. Haemophilia. 2007;13(3):287-292. Erratum in:
Haemophilia. 2011;17(6):979. El Alfy, M [corrected to ElAlfy, M S]
87. Rajantie H, Alapulli H, Mäkipernaa A, et al. Oral health care in children with
haemophilia in Helsinki, Finland. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent. 2013;14(5):339-43
88. Alsulaiman AA, Kaye E, Jones J, et al. Incisor malalignment and the risk
of periodontal disease progression. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.
2018;153(4):512-522
89. Givol N, Hirschhorn A, Lubetsky A, et al. Oral surgery-associated postoperative
bleeding in haemophilia patients - a tertiary centre’s two decade experience.
Haemophilia. 2015;21(2):234-240
90. van Galen KPM, Engelen ET, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, al e. Antifibrinolytic therapy
for preventingoral bleeding in patients with haemophilia or Von Willebrand
disease undergoing minor oral surgery or dental extractions. CochraneDatabase
of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD011385
91. Rasaratnam L, Chowdary P, Pollard D, et al. Risk-based management of dental
procedures in patients with inherited bleeding disorders: Development of a
Dental Bleeding Risk Assessment and Treatment Tool (DeBRATT). Haemophilia.
2017;23(2):247-254
92. Fischer K, Poonnoose P, Dunn AL, et al. Choosing outcome assessment tools
in haemophilia care and research: a multidisciplinary perspective. Haemophilia.
2017;23(1):11-24
93. Valentino LA, Rusen L, Elezovic I, et al. Multicentre, randomized, open-label
study of on-demand treatment with two prophylaxis regimens of recombinant
coagulation factor IX in haemophilia B subjects. Haemophilia. 2014;20(3):398406
94. de Moerloose P, Fischer K, Lambert T, et al. Recommendations for assessment,
monitoring and follow-up of patients with haemophilia. Haemophilia.
2012;18(3):319-325
Management of Haemophilia
95. Oymak Y, Yildirim AT, Yaman Y, et al. The effectiveness of tools for monitoring
hemophilic arthropathy. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015;37(2):e80-85
96. Feldman BM, Funk SM, Bergstrom BM, et al. Validation of a new pediatric joint
scoring system from the International Hemophilia Prophylaxis Study Group:
validity of the hemophilia joint health score. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2011;63(2):223-230
97. Nijdam A, Bladen M, Hubert N, et al. Using routine Haemophilia Joint Health
Score for international comparisons of haemophilia outcome: standardization is
needed. Haemophilia. 2016;22(1):142-147
98. Ligocki CC, Abadeh A, Wang KC, et al. A systematic review of ultrasound
imaging as a tool for evaluating haemophilic arthropathy in children and adults.
Haemophilia. 2017;23(4):598-612
99. Ceponis A, Wong-Sefidan I, Glass CS, et al. Rapid musculoskeletal ultrasound
for painful episodes in adult haemophilia patients. Haemophilia. 2013;19(5):790708
100. Chan MW, Leckie A, Xavier F, et al. A systematic review of MR imaging as a tool for
evaluating haemophilic arthropathy in children. Haemophilia. 2013;19(6):e324Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effective and safe treatments for/in
haemophilia?
1.
HEMOPHILIA A/
2.
congenital hemophilia a.tw.
3.
hemophilia a.tw.
4.
hemophilia.tw.
5.
haemophilia.tw.
6.
HEMOPHILIA B/
7.
christmas disease.tw.
8.
((f9 or factor ix) adj deficienc*).tw.
9.
((haemophilia or hemophilia) adj b).tw.
10. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9
11. FACTOR VIIA/
12. (activated adj1 factor vii).tw.
13. (coagulation adj1 factor viia).tw.
14. factor viia.tw.
15. Novoseven.tw.
16. activated blood coagulation factor vii.tw.
17. Factor Eight Inhibitor Bypassing Agent.tw.
18. Activated Prothrombin Complex Concentrate.tw.
19. Activated PCC.tw.
20. aPCC.tw.
21. Immune Tolerance/
22. Immune Tolerance.tw.
23. 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22
24. 10 and 23
25. limit 24 to English language and humans
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the clinical presentations of haemophilia?
2.
What are the accurate laboratory tests for haemophilia?
3.
What are the accurate laboratory tests for inhibitor detection in
haemophilia?
4.
Who and what tests should be done for haemophilia screening?
5.
What are the general principles of care in haemophilia?
6.
Are the following non-pharmacological treatments effective and
safe in haemophilia?
• Rehabilitation for musculoskeletal
• PRICE
• Joint protection
• Sports/physical activity
• Post-operative care
7.
Are the following pharmacological treatments effective and safe in
haemophilia?
• Factors - plasma-derived factors, recombinant
• Adjuvant - desmopressin, tranexamic acid, others
8.
What are the effective and safe treatments for pain in haemophilia?
9.
What are the effective and safe treatments for acute bleeding in
various body systems in haemophilia?
• Central Nervous System
• Joint
• Muscles
• Nose, throat and eye
• Gastrointestinal tract
• Genitourinary tract
10. What are the effective and safe treatments for complications in
haemophilia?
• Synovitis
• Pseudotumour
• Inhibitors
11. What are the benefits and requirements for home therapy in
haemophilia?
12. What are the factors to improve adherence/compliance in
haemophilia treatment?
13. What are the management in the following special situations of
haemophilia?
• Surgeries and Invasive Procedures
• Delivery of Infant with Known/Suspected Haemophilia
• Vaccination
• Circumcision
Management of Haemophilia
14. What are the effective and safe preventive measures for oral
diseases in haemophilia?
15. What are the effective and safe dental procedures in haemophilia?
16. What are the effective and safe methods for the management of
oral bleeding in haemophilia?
17. How to monitor effectively and safely the following parameters in
haemophilia on treatment?
• Inhibitors
• Bleeding frequency
• Joint health
• Radiological measures
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 3
GUIDELINES ON SAMPLE COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION
FOR COAGULATION TEST
Adapted:
1. Kitchen S, McCraw A, Echenagucia M. Diagnosis of Hemophilia and Other
Bleeding Disorders, A Laboratory Manual (Second Edition). Montréal: WFH World
Federation of Hemophilia; 2010
2. Mackie I, Cooper P, Lawrie A, et al. Guidelines on the laboratory aspects of assays
used in haemostasis and thrombosis. Int J Lab Hematol. 2013;35(1):1-13
Variables
Recommendations
• Ensure correct patient identification
• Non-traumatic venepuncture
• Avoid drawing blood from indwelling IV line
• Avoid inappropriately narrow gauge needle
• Avoid capillary blood
• Relaxed and in warm surroundings
• Withdraw blood without pressure cuff, if possible. If need
to use pressure cuff, do not apply more than one minute.
• 3.2 % sodium citrate anticoagulant tube. Citrate tubes
must be properly filled.
• Once drawn, the tube should be gently inverted five times.
• Anticoagulant/blood ratio is 1:9.
• The sample must reach the laboratory within three hours
of collection.
• Freeze platelet-free plasma. Specimens can be stored at
-20°C for up to two weeks or at -70°C for up to six
months.
• Transport the frozen specimen with ice-pack or dried-iced
immediately to referral laboratory.
Patient
identification
Venepuncture
Condition
Pressure cuff
Tube and
anticoagulant
Ratio
Time
If test is
outsourced to
referral
laboratory
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 4
RECOMMENDED SPORTS/PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES IN
HAEMOPHILIA
Different sports/physical activities carry different risks in PWH. It is
important to understand these risks in order to choose the appropriate
sports/physical activities as shown in the table below. Levels 1 - 2
indicate that the benefits of these sports/physical activities outweigh
the associated risks. All sports rated 3 are not recommended for PWH.
Activity Category
The following is the list of sports/physical activities with the related
coding:
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Safe
Safe to
moderate risk
Moderate risk
Moderate to
dangerous risk
Dangerous
Activity
Category
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Aerobics
2
Archery
1
Aquatics
1
Badminton
1.5
Baseball
2.5
Basketball
2.5
Bicycling
1.5
Bicycle Motorcross (BMX)
3
Bowling
2
Boxing
3
Canoeing
2.5
CV Training Equipment
• Elliptical Machine
1
• Rowing Machine
1.5
• Ski Machine
1.5
• Stationary Bike
1
• Stepper
2
• Treadmill
1.5
Cheerleading
2.5
Circuit Training
1.5
Dance
2
Diving/Competitive
3
Diving/Recreational
2
Exercise Classes
• Body Sculpting
1.5
• Cardio Kick-Boxing
2
• Physioball
1.5
• Spinning
1.5
Fishing
1
Football
3
Frisbee
1
Frisbee Golf
1.5
Ultimate Frisbee
2
Golf
1
Gymnastics
2.5
Hiking
1
Hockey (Field, Ice, Street)
3
Horseback Riding
2.5
Ice-Skating
2.5
Management of Haemophilia
Source: National Hemophilia Foundation, for all bleeding and clotting disorders,
Playing it Safe, Bleeding Disorders, Sports and exercise. 2005 (Available at:
https://www.hemophilia.org/sites/default/files/document/files/Playing-ItSafe.pdf)
Activity
Category
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Inline Skating
2.5
Jet Skiing
2.5
Jumping Rope
2
Kayaking
2.5
Lacrosse
3
Martial Arts - Karate/Kung Fu/Tae Kwon Do
2.5
Martial Arts/Tai Chi
1
Motorcycling/Motor Cross Racing
3
Mountain Biking
2.5
Pilates
1.5
Power Lifting
3
Racquetball
2.5
River Rafting
2.5
Rock Climbing
• (Indoor/Challenge Course)
2
• Rock Climbing (Natural Setting)
3
Rodeo
3
Roller-skating
2
Rowing/Crew
2
Rugby
3
Running and Jogging
2
Scooter (Motorised)
3
Scooter (Non-motorised)
2.5
Scuba Diving
2.5
Skateboarding
2.5
Skiing/Cross Country
2
Skiing/Downhill
2.5
Skiing/Telemark
2.5
Snorkelling
1
Snowboarding
2.5
Snowmobiling
3
Soccer
2.5
Softball
2.5
Surfing
2.5
Swimming
1
T-Ball
2
Tennis
2
Track and Field
2.5
Trampoline
3
Volleyball
2.5
Walking
1
Water-skiing
2.5
Weight Lifting/Resistance Training
1.5
Weight Lifting/Power Lifting
3
Wrestling
3
Yoga
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 5
DEVELOPMENT OF ABNORMAL POSTURE FOLLOWING BLEEDS
Source: Mulder, Kathy. Exercises for People with Hemophilia. World Federation of
Haemophilia. 2006,
(Available at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228383305_Exercises_
for_People_with_Hemophilia)
Knee
Flexion
Walking on flexed
knee,
with
hip
flexed and/or ankle
plantarflexed
to
compensate
Pain in patellofemoral
joint; stress on ankle;
overuse of hamstrings;
weak quadriceps
Elbow
Flexion
Loss
of
elbow
extension, arm may
be
carried
with
shoulder extended
Eventual difficulty with
forward elevation of the
arm
Shoulder
Adduction, internal
rotation
Arm held close to
body
Difficulty with ADL and
self-care
Hip extensors
Hip extensors
Hip extensors
Unable to sit
Hamstrings
Knee, flexion, hip
extension
Knee flexed
Altered gait; knee flexed,
walking on toes
Biceps brachii
Elbow flexion,
shoulder internal
rotation
Elbow flexed
Incomplete
elbow
extension;
decreased
protective
balance
reactions
Calf
(gastrocnemius)
Ankle plantarflexion,
knee flexion
Ankle plantarflexed, knee flexed
Walking on toes, knee
flexed; stress on knee
and ankle joints
Wrist and finger
extensors
Wrist and finger
extension, elbow
flexion
Wrist
and
finger
extension,
elbow
flexion
Walking on toes, knee
flexed; stress on knee
and ankle joints
Thigh
(quadriceps)
Knee extension
Incomplete knee flexion;
risk of re-injury with sudden
knee flexion; functional
difficulties
on
stairs,
squatting, etc.
Knee
remains
extended
Wrist and finger
flexors
Wrist and finger
flexion, elbow flexion
Wrist
and
finger
flexion, elbow flexion
Inability to open hand;
weak
grip
due
to
incomplete wrist extension
Hip flexor
(iliopsoas)
Hip flexed, extreme
lordosis, walking on
toes
Back pain; incomplete
hip extension; stress on
knee and ankle
Wrist and fingers
Flexion
Wrist flexed, hand
closed
Difficulty extending wrist
and fingers; inefficient grip
Toes
Extension (dorsiflexion)
Extension (dorsiflexion)
Difficulty wearing shoes
Ankle
Plantarflexion
Walking on toes,
with knee and/or
hip
flexed
to
compensate
Ankle
in
unstable
position, with small area
of
weight-bearing
on
talus and sole of foot;
overuse of calf muscles;
pressure on knee
Hip (unusual site)
Flexion, external
rotation
Hip flexed, increased
lumbar
lordosis,
compensatory knee
flexion
Incomplete
hip
extension during gait;
compensation
with
increased
rotation
of
pelvis or spine
Joint bleeds
Position of comfort
Habitual posture
Potential problems
Muscle bleeds
Position of comfort
Habitual posture
Potential problems
Hip
flexion,
some
external rotation and
increased
lumbar
lordosis
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 6
PAIN ASSESSMENT TOOLS
FACE, LEGS, ACTIVITY, CRY, CONSOLABILITY (FLACC) SCALE
Each of the five categories (F) face, (L) leg, (A) activity, (C) cry and (C) consolability
is scored from 0 – 2 resulting in total range of 0 – 10
VISUAL ANALOG SCALE
NUMERIC RATING SCALE
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Pain Medication Therapy Management Service:
Guideline for Pharmacy (Second Edition). Petaling Jaya: MoH; 2018
CATEGORIES
SCORING
0
1
2
No particular
expression or smile
Occasional grimace
or frown, withdrawn,
disinterested
Frequent to
constant quivering
chin, clenched jaw
Content, relaxed
Reassured by
occasional touching,
hugging or being
talk to, distractable
Difficult to console
Normal position or
relaxed
Uneasy, restless, tense
Kicking or legs
drawn up
No cry
(awake or asleep)
Moans or whimpers;
occasional complaint
Crying steadily,
screams or sobs,
frequent complaints
Lying quietly, normal
position, moves easily
Squiring, shifting back
and forth, tense
Arched, rigid or jerking
Face
Legs
Activity
Cry
Consolability
Management of Haemophilia
Appendix 7
ANALGESIC MEDICATION TABLE
Drug class
Drug
Recommended dosages
Side effects
Cautions and contraindications
Simple
analgesic
Paracetamol
Adults (oral or IV):
0.5 - 1 gm, 6 - 8-hourly
Max: 4 gm/day
Rare
Hepatic
impairment,
alcohol
dependence
Preferred drug particularly in elderly
patients
Liver damage following over-dosage
Child >1 month old (oral or IV):
20 mg/kg stat, then15 mg/kg every
4 - 6-hourly
Max: 60 mg/kg (up to 90 mg/kg for
48 hours)
Selective Cox-2
Inhibitors
Celecoxib
Adults (oral):
100 - 400 mg, 12 - 24-hourly
Max: 800 mg/day
Not recommended in severe renal
and/or hepatic impairment
Initiate therapy at lowest recommended
dose in elderly
Ischaemic heart disease
Cerebrovascular disease
Contraindicated in hypersensitivity to
sulfonamides
Associated with a lower risk of serious
upper
gastrointestinal
side
effects
compared to NSAIDs
*Child 2 years or older (oral):
(10 - 25 kg): 50 mg 12-hourly
(>25 kg): 100 mg 12-hourly
or 4 mg/kg daily
Etoricoxib
Children and adults >16 years old
(oral):
60 - 90 mg daily
120 mg daily in acute pain
Max: 90/day; long-term use should
be limited to a maximum of 90 mg
daily
120 mg daily may be used for acute
pain relief but for short-term only
Hypertension
Renal impairment
Increase in CVS events
Uncontrolled hypertension
Ischaemic heart disease
Cerebrovascular disease
Associated with a lower risk of serious
upper
gastrointestinal
side
effects
compared to NSAIDs
Renal impairment
Allergic reaction in susceptible
individuals
Increase in CVS events
Management of Haemophilia
Drug class
Drug
Recommended dosages
Side effects
Cautions and contraindications
Weak opioids
Tramadol
Adults (oral or IV):
50 - 100 mg, 6 - 8-hourly
Max: 400 mg/day
Dizziness
Nausea
Vomiting
Constipation
Risk of seizures in patients with history
of seizures with high doses
In elderly, start at lowest dose (50 mg)
and maximum of 300 mg daily
Child (oral or IV):
2 - 3 mg/kg stat, then 1 - 2 mg/kg
every 4 - 6-hourly
Drowsiness
Interaction with tricyclic antidepressant,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor.
Safety and effectiveness not established
in children <12 years old; caution in
children 12 - 18 years old who have risk
factors that may increase respiratory
depression
Dihydrocodeine
tartrate
(DF118)
Adults (oral): 30 - 60 mg, 6 - 8hourly
Max: 240 mg/day
Nausea
Vomiting
Constipation
Drowsiness
Respiratory depression
Acute alcoholism
Paralytic ileus
Raised intracranial pressure
Child (oral):
0.5 - 1 mg/kg every 4 - 6-hourly
Combinations of
paracetamol 500 mg
+ codeine 8 mg
(Panadeine®)
Children and adults (oral): 1 - 2
tablets, 6 - 8-hourly
Max: 8 tablets/day
Constipation
Reduce dose in elderly
Safety and effectiveness not established
in children <18 years old
Combinations of
paracetamol 325 mg
+ tramadol 37.5 mg
(Ultracet®)
Adults (oral): 1 - 2 tablets, 6 - 8hourly
Max: 8 tablets/day
Nausea
Vomiting
Drowsiness
Hepatic impairment
Renal impairment
Alcohol dependence
Epilepsy
Safety and efficacy is not established in
children <12 years old; caution in
children 12 – 18 years old who have risk
factors that may increase respiratory
depression
Management of Haemophilia
Drug class
Drug
Recommended dosages
Side effects
Cautions and contraindications
Strong opioids
Morphine
Adults:
(oral immediate-release):
5 - 10 mg every 4-hourly (elderly:
2.5 - 5 mg every 4 - 6-hourly)
(oral sustained-release):
To be given in 12-hourly dosing
(SC/IM): 5 - 20 mg every 4-hourly
as needed
(IV): 2 - 10 mg every 4-hourly as
needed
Common:
Nausea
Vomiting
Constipation
Drowsiness
Sedation
Not common in cancer pain:
Sweating
Euphoria
Respiratory depression
Acute bronchial asthma
Respiratory depression
Dose adjustment for renal impairment
and head injuries
Transdermal fentanyl -
• Not to be used unless opioid dose is
stable
• Minimum dose: 12 g/hr = 30 mg oral
morphine in 24 hours
Child:
(oral immediate-release):
1 - 12 months old: 0.08 - 0.2 mg/kg
every 4-hourly
1 - 2 years old: 0.2 - 0.4 mg/kg
every 4-hourly
2 - 12 years old: 0.2 - 0.5 mg/kg
every 4-hourly (max: 5 mg per
dose)
(oral sustained-release):
1 - 12 years old: 0.2 - 0.8 mg/kg
every 12-hourly
(SC/IV):
Neonates: 25 - 50
g/kg every 6hourly
1 - 6 months old: 100 g/kg every 6hourly (max: 2.5 mg per dose)
6 months - 2 years old: 100 g/kg
every 4-hourly (max: 2.5 mg per
dose)
2 -12 years old: 100 - 200
g/kg
every 4-hourly (max: 2.5 mg per
dose)
Pruritus
Myoclonus
• Not to be used in opioid naive patients
Management of Haemophilia
Drug class
Drug
Recommended dosages
Side effects
Cautions and contraindications
Oxycodone
Adults (oral):
Immediate-release: 5 - 10 mg every
4 - 6-hourly
Controlled-release: To be given in
12-hourly dosing
Children (oral): 0.2 mg/kg every 4 -
6-hourly
Controlled-release: 0.6 - 0.9 mg/kg
every 12-hourly
Oxycodone + Naloxone Children >12 years old and adults
(oral):
Oxycodone 10 mg/ naloxone 5 mg
every 12-hourly titrated every 1 - 2
days (max: oxycodone 80 mg
/naloxone 40 mg/ day)
Transdermal fentanyl
Equianalgesic dose of total 24
hours opioid requirement (refer to
Conversion Table)
*Celecoxib capsules can be opened and the contents emptied onto a teaspoon of applesauce or dispersed in water. One 200 mg of celebrex capsule is
to be dispersed in 20 ml of water to yield a 10 mg/ml dispersion. Suspension should be freshly prepared, required volume immediately administered and
balance discarded (internet communication, 9 September 2018 at https://www.rch.org.au/uploadedFiles/Main/Content/pharmacy/Celecoxib.pdf)
Management of Haemophilia
SUGGESTED DOSE CONVERSION RATIO
Adapted:
1. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya: MoH; 2010
2. Micromedex® Solution (Available at http://www.micromedexsolutions.com/micromedex2/4.24.0/WebHelp/MICROMEDEX_2.htm)
3. Shann F, Drug Doses, 17th Edition. Victoria, Australia. 2017; 24-104
4. Etoricoxib package insert
To
From
Codeine (mg/day)
Oral Morphine
(mg/day)
SC Morphine
(mg/day)
Oxycodone
(mg/day)
Fentanyl
transdermal patch
( g/hr)
Codeine (mg/day)
8
20
12
24
Oral Morphine
(mg/day)
8
2.5
1.5
3
SC Morphine
(mg/day)
20
2.5
0.6
1.2
Oxycodone
(mg/day)
12
1.5
0.6
2
Fentanyl
transdermal patch
( g/hr)
24
3
1.2
Management of Haemophilia
SWELLING
None (N), Puffy (P), Spongy (S), Tense (T)
Landmarks:
Visible (V); Partially Visible (PV); Not Visible
(NV)
Palpable (P); Not Palpable (NP)
Left Elbow
N P S T
V PV
P NP
Right Elbow
N P S T
V PV NV
P NP
Left Knee
N P
V PV NV
P NP
Right Knee
V PV NV
P NP
Left Ankle
V PV NV
P NP
Right Ankle
V PV NV
P NP
SCORE
0 = No swelling
1 = Mild – appears, feels slightly swollen: landmarks
visible
2 = Moderate – looks swollen, feels spongy: some landmarks partly
obscured
3 = Severe – looks very swollen; is tense:
bony landmarks fully obscured
Comments:
Please provide any comments in the space
provided
(If necessary may note circumference in cm)
DURATION OF SWELLING
Note number of months
Please checkmark one
Patient Report
Parent Report
Reported from chart
Other: ______________________
0 = No swelling or <6 months
1 = 6 months
N
P
S T
N
P
S T
N
P
S T
NV
Appendix 8
HAEMOPHILIA JOINT HEALTH SCORE
Assessment #: Evaluator Name: __________________
Subject ID #: ____________________
Date of Evaluation: ________________
yyyy / mm / dd
Haemophilia Joint Health Score Worksheet 2.1
Management of Haemophilia
Left Elbow
Right Elbow
Left Knee
Right Knee
Left Ankle
Right Ankle
MUSCLE ATROPHY
SCORE
0 = None – no atrophy
1 = Mild – muscle has slightly less contour, or mild flattening of the muscle belly is noted
2 = Severe – moderate/severe muscle wasting and depression or flattening of the muscle belly is noted
Comments:
Please note decreased contour, muscle
flattening, marked wasting.
CREPITUS ON MOTION
Note: Audible (A) Mild (M)
Palpable (P) Severe (S)
If none apply:
None (N)
Left Elbow
A
P
Right Elbow
A
P
Left Knee
A
P
Right Knee
A
P
Left Ankle
A
P
Right Ankle
A
P
M
S
N
M
S
N
M
S
N
M
S
N
M
S
N
M
S
N
SCORE
0 = No crepitus
1 = Mild – slightly audible and/or palpable
2 = Severe – Consistently moderately or very pronounced audible and/or palpable grinding and crunching
Assessment #: Evaluator Name: __________________
Subject ID #: ____________________
Date of Evaluation: ________________
yyyy / mm / dd
Haemophilia Joint Health Score Worksheet 2.1
Management of Haemophilia
FLEXION LOSS
Note Range of Motion (ankle
record from 90˚ starting point)
Left Elbow
Flex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Right Elbow
Flex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Left Knee
Flex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Right Knee
Flex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Left Ankle
PlantarFlex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Right Ankle
PlantarFlex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
The recommendation is to score using both methods (normal contralateral side and normative tables) and then record the worse score.
SCORE
Contralateral Side:
0 = <5˚
1 = Loss of 5˚ - 10 ˚
2 = Loss of 11˚ - 20˚
3 = Loss of >20˚
Normative Tables :
0 = Within Range
1 = Loss of 1 to 4˚
2 = Loss of 5˚ - 10˚
3 = Loss of >10˚
EXTENSION LOSS
Note Range of Motion (ankle
record from 90˚ starting point)
Hyperextension: record as “plus”
(+)
_____degrees
Loss of extension record as
“minus” (-)
_____degrees
Left Elbow
Ext:
Measured in:
1)
Supine
2)
Sitting
Right Elbow
Ext:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Left Knee
Ext:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Right Knee
Ext:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Left Ankle
DorsiFlex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
Right Ankle
DorsiFlex:
Measured in:
1) Supine
2) Sitting
The recommendation is to score using both methods (normal contralateral side and normative tables) and then record the worse score.
SCORE
Contralateral Side:
0 = <5˚
1 = Loss of 5˚ - 10 ˚
2 = Loss of 11˚ - 20˚
3 = Loss of >20˚
Normative Tables :
0 = Within Range
1 = Loss of 1 to 4˚
2 = Loss of 5˚ - 10˚
3 = Loss of >10˚
Assessment #: Evaluator Name: __________________
Subject ID #: ____________________
Date of Evaluation: ________________
yyyy / mm / dd
Haemophilia Joint Health Score Worksheet 2.1
Management of Haemophilia
JOINT PAIN
Active joint mov’t through
range with gentle
pressure (at end range)
Left Elbow
Comments:
Right Elbow
Comments:
Left Knee
Comments:
Right Knee
Comments:
Left Ankle
Comments:
Right Ankle
Comments:
SCORE
0 = No pain through active range of motion
1 = No pain through active range; only pain on gentle overpressure or palpation
2 = Pain through active range
STRENGTH
Using the Daniels &
Worthingham’s scale.
Within available
ROM, note grade
Left Elbow
Flexion
Extension
Right Elbow
Flexion
Extension
Left Knee
Flexion
Extension
Right Knee
Flexion
Extension
Left Ankle
# of heel
raises____
PlantarFlex.
DorsiFlex
Right Ankle
# of heel
raises____
PlantarFlex.
DorsiFlex
SCORE
0 = Holds test position against gravity with maximum resistance (gr.5)
1 = Holds test position against gravity with moderate resistance (but breaks with maximal resistance)
(gr.4)
2 = Holds test position against gravity with minimal resistance (gr.3+), or holds test position against
gravity (gr.3)
3 = Able to partially complete ROM against gravity (gr.3-/2+), or able to move through ROM gravity
eliminated (gr.2), or through partial ROM gravity eliminated (gr.2-)
4 = Trace (gr.1) or no muscle contraction (gr.0)
NE = Non-evaluable
# of Heel Raises:
(to be used only for plantarflexion scoring)
Score 0 = 4 to 5 heel raises
Score 1 = 2 to 3 heel raises
Score 2 = Sufficiently plantar flexes to clear heel
Score 3 = Plantar flexes ankle through range
(gravity eliminated)
Score 4 = trace or no muscle contraction
Assessment #: Evaluator Name: __________________
Subject ID #: ____________________
Date of Evaluation: ________________
yyyy / mm / dd
Haemophilia Joint Health Score Worksheet 2.1
Management of Haemophilia
GAIT (Skills)
Walking
Stairs
Running
Hopping on 1 leg
Left Knee
Right Knee
Left Ankle
Right Ankle
*Individual joints to be observed but not scored*
Note: N (Normal), L (limp), TW (toe walking), WSF (walking on side of foot), US (uneven strides), NPO (no push off), AWS (abnormal weight shift), FTO (foot turned
out), NHS (No heel strike), EHO (early heel off) OR DSP (decreased stance phase), LKE (limited knee extension), KH (knee hyperextension)
0 = All skills are within normal limits Global Score
1 = One skill is not within normal limits
2 = Two skills are not within normal limits
3 = Three skills are not within normal limits
4 = No skills are within normal limits
NE = Non-evaluable
*Axial alignment to be observed and not scored*
AXIAL ALIGNMENT
To be measured in weightbearing position
Left Knee
Right Knee
Left Ankle
Right Ankle
______ degrees
Please checkmark one:
valgus
or
varus
______ degrees
Please checkmark one:
valgus
or
varus
______ degrees
Please checkmark one:
valgus
or
varus
______ degrees
Please checkmark one:
valgus
or
varus
Assessment #: Evaluator Name: __________________
Subject ID #: ____________________
Date of Evaluation: ________________
yyyy / mm / dd
Haemophilia Joint Health Score Worksheet 2.1
Management of Haemophilia
Hemophilia Joint Health Score 2.1 – Summary Score Sheet
Left Elbow
Right Elbow
Left Knee
Right Knee
Left Ankle
Right Ankle
Swelling
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Duration (swelling)
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Muscle Atrophy
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Crepitus on motion
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Flexion Loss
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Extension Loss
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Joint Pain
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Strength
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Joint Total
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
Sum of Joint Totals
NE = Non-evaluable
+
Global Gait Score
(
NE included in Gait Items)
HJHS Total Score =
Swelling
0 = No swelling
1 = Mild
2 = Moderate
3 = Severe
Crepitus on Motion
0 = None
1 = Mild
2 = Severe
Strength (Using the Danials & Worthingham’s scale)
Within available ROM
0 = Holds test position against gravity with maximum resistance
(gr.5)
1 = Holds test position against gravity with moderate resistance
(but breaks with maximal resistance) (gr.4)
2 = Holds test position with minimal resistance (gr.3+), or holds test
position against gravity (gr.3)
3 = Able to partially complete ROM against gravity (gr.3-/2+), or able
to move through ROM gravity eliminated (gr.2),
or through partial ROM gravity eliminated (gr.2-)
4 = Trace (gr.1) or no muscle contraction (gr.0)
NE = Non-evaluate
Duration
0 = No swelling
or <6 months
1 = 6 months
Flexion Loss
Contralateral:
0 = <5˚
1 = 5˚ - 10˚
2 = 11˚ - 20˚
3 = 20˚
Normative Tables:
0 = within range
1 = 1˚ - 4˚
2 = 5˚ - 10˚
3 = >10˚
Muscle Atrophy
0 = None
1 = Mild
2 = Severe
Extention loss
Contralateral:
0 = <5˚
1 = 5˚ - 10˚
2 = 11˚ - 20˚
3 = 20˚
(from hyperextension)
Normative Tables:
0 = within range
1 = 1˚ - 4˚
2 = 5˚ - 10˚
3 = >10˚
Global Gait (walking, stairs, running, hopping on 1 leg)
0 = All skills are within normal limits
1 = One skill is not within normal limits
2 = Two skills are not within normal limits
3 = Three skills are not within normal limits
4 = No skills are within normal limits
NE = Non-evaluable
Joint Pain
0 = No pain through active range of motion
1 = No pain through active range; only pain on gentle
overpressure or palpation
2 = Pain through active range
NOTE: There is an accompanying instruction manual and worksheets that are required when administering the HJHS
General Comments:
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
Source: Feldman BM, Funk S, Hilliard P, et al. Haemophilia Joint Health Score 2.1,
World Federation of Haemophilia; 2011 (Available at http://wfh.org/2/7/7_0_
Assessment_Tools_HJHS.htm)
Subject ID #: __________________ Name of Physiotherapist:______________
Assessment #: _______________ Date: ______________
yyyy / mm / dd
Hemophilia Joint Health Score 2.1 – Summary Score Sheet
Management of Haemophilia
Possible joint score: 0 - 13 points
Add up the score for each radiologic change to get the total score. The higher the total
score, the worst is the arthropathy. There’s no specified degree of score to say it’s
mild/moderate or severe.
Source: Pettersson H, Ahlberg A, Nilsson IM. A radiologic classification of hemophili
arthropathy. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1980;(149):153-159
Radiologic Change
Finding
Score
(Points)
Osteoporosis
Absent
Present
0
1
Enlargement of epiphysis
Absent
Present
0
1
Irregularity
of
subchondral
surface
Absent
Present
Pronounced
0
1
2
Narrowing of joint space
Absent
<50%
>50%
0
1
2
Subchondral cyst formation
Absent
1 cyst
>1 cyst
0
1
2
Erosions at joint margins
Absent
Present
0
1
Incongruence
between
joint
surfaces
Absent
Slight
Pronounced
0
1
2
Deformity
(angulation
and/or
displacement
of
articulating
bones)
Absent
Slight
Pronounced
0
1
2
Appendix 9
Pettersson Score
Management of Haemophilia
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
µg
microgramme
ABR
Annual Bleeding Rate
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
AH
Arnold-Hilgartner
AJBR
annual joint bleed rates
aPCC
activated prothrombin complex concentrate
APTT
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time
BMI
body mass index
BU
Bethesda unit
CCC
Comprehensive Care Centre
CFC
clotting factor concentrate
CHMP
Committee for Medical Products for Human Use
COX-2
Cyclooxygenase-2
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CT
computer tomography
CV
cardiovascular
CVAD
central venous access device
DG
Development Group
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DDAVP
desmopressin
dL
decilitre
EDTA
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EMA
European Medical Agency
FDA
Food Drug Agency
FISH
Functional Independence Score in Haemophilia
FIX
factor IX assay
FLACC
Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability
FVIII
factor VIII assay
g
gramme
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluation
Gy
Gray
HAV
hepatitis A virus
HCCC
Haemophilia Comprehensive Care Centre
HCV
hepatitis C virus
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HJHS
Haemophilia Joint Health Score
HMTAC
Haemophilia Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic
HR
hazard ratio
HRQoL
Health-related Quality of Life
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
HTC
Haemophilia Treatment Centre
ICH
intracranial haemorrhage
IM
intramuscular
ITI
immune tolerance induction
IU
international unit
IU/kg
international unit/kilogram
IV
intravenous
kg
kilogramme
Management of Haemophilia
LA
local anaesthesia
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
mg
milligramme
ml
millilitre
MoH
Ministry of Health
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NSAID(s)
non-steroidal anti imflammatory drug(s)
OR
odds ratio
p
p value
PCC
prothrombin complex concentrate
pdF
plasma-derived factor
PRICE
protection, rest, ice therapy, compression, elevation
PT
prothrombin time
PWH
person with haemophilia
QoL
quality of life
RC
Review Committee
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RD
risk difference
rFVIIa
recombinant FVIIa
ROM
range of motion/movement
RR
risk ratio
RS
radiosynovectomy
SC
subcutaneous
THR
total hip replacement
TKR
total knee replacement
TTP
time to progression
TXA
tranexamic acid
USG
ultrasonography
VAS
Visual Analogue Score
VWD
von Willebrand Disease
vWF
von Willebrand Factor
vs
versus
WFH
World Federation of Haemophilia
Management of Haemophilia
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
• Ms. Wong Wai Chee and Ms. Norharlina Che Zakaria on retrieval
of evidence and, Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali on critical
appraisal in the CPG development
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. (Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Haemophilia was
supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health Malaysia.
MALAYSIAN HEALTH TECHNOLOGY