CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE
PREVENTION, DIAGNOSIS
& MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE
ENDOCARDITIS
PUBLISHED BY:
Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) Secretariat
c/o Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
4th floor, Block E1, Parcel E
62590 Putrajaya
COPYRIGHT
The owners of this publication are the National Heart Association of Malaysia
(NHAM) and the Academy of Medicine Malaysia. The content in this document
may be produced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided
that a copyright acknowledgement to the owners is included and the content is not
changed in any form or method, not sold and not used to promote or endorse any
product or service. In addition, the content is not to be used in any inappropriate or
misleading context.
This document will be made available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.malaysianheart.org/
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines are meant to be a guide for clinical practice. It
is based on the best available evidence, knowledge and clinical experience at the
time of development. These guidelines do not guarantee the best outcome in every
case and the responsibility lies on the individual healthcare provider to manage his/
her patient based on the clinical manifestations of the patient and the management
options available locally.
PERIOD OF VALIDITY
These clinical practice guidelines were issued in 2017 and will be reviewed in 4
years (2021) or earlier depending on the availability of new evidence. NHAM will
inform either the Chairperson of this current CPG committee or the National
Advisor of the related specialties when the time for updating this CPG is due. Prior
to commencement of updating this CPG, a discussion to determine the need for
an update, including the scope of the CPG updates should be done. If there is a
need for an update, as with this current committee, a multidisciplinary team will be
formed for the specific purpose of updating this CPG.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FORWARD BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH
4
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
EXPERT PANEL
5
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
7
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION AND LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
10
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF THE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
11
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR
THE PREVENTION, DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
15
1.0 INTRODUCTION
24
2.0 EPIDEMIOLOGY
27
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
29
3.1 Clinical evaluation of suspected infective endocarditis
30
3.1.1
Pre-existing risk factors
30
3.1.2
Clinical manifestations
31
3.2 Investigations
34
3.2.1
Laboratory investigations
34
3.2.2
Microbiological diagnosis
34
3.2.3
Histopathological diagnosis
40
3.3 Imaging
43
3.3.1
Echocardiography
43
3.3.2
Other imaging modalities
50
3.4 Diagnostic criteria
53
3.4.1
The modified Duke criteria and its limitations
53
4.0 MANAGEMENT
57
4.1 Clinical management
57
4.1.1
Monitoring
58
4.1.2
Complications
60
4.1.3
Issues with anticoagulation
70
4.1.4
Referral for specialist care
74
4.1.5
Pre-discharge management
4.2 Antimicrobial therapy: principles and methods
78
4.2.1
General principles
78
4.2.2
Suggested regimes for treatment of native or
prosthetic valve infective endocarditis
78
4.2.2.1
Streptococcus viridans
79
4.2.2.2
Nutritionally variant streptococci
82
4.2.2.3
Staphylococcus aureus and
Coagulase-negative staphylococcus (CoNS)
84
4.2.2.4
Enterococcus species
88
4.2.2.5
HACEK microorganisms
91
4.2.2.6
Candida
92
4.2.2.7
Non-HACEK Gram-negative microorganisms
93
4.2.2.8
Other microorganisms
94
4.2.3
Empirical therapy
95
4.2.4
Outpatient parenteral antimicrobial therapy for
infective endocarditis
99
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
100
5.1 Indications
100
5.2 Timing of surgery
102
5.2.1
Preventing systemic embolism
103
5.3 Surgery in specific conditions
104
5.3.1
Cerebral infarction or haemorrhage
104
5.3.2
Right-sided endocarditis
105
5.3.3
Prosthetic valve endocarditis
106
5.4 Principles of surgery
107
5.4.1
Aortic valve
109
5.4.2
Mitral valve
109
5.4.3
Tricuspid valve
109
5.4.4
Periannular extension
109
5.5 Surgery for infective endocarditis in congenital
heart disease
110
5.5.1
Indications for surgery
110
5.5.2
Timing of surgery
111
5.5.3
Surgical techniques
113
6.0 OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
114
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
117
7.1 Infective endocarditis in congenital heart disease
117
7.1.1
Epidemiology
117
7.1.2
Mortality
7.1.3
Lesion specific incidence of infective endocarditis in
congenital heart disease
118
7.1.4
Management of infective endocarditis in congenital
heart disease
120
7.2 Infective endocarditis in paediatric patients
121
7.2.1
Infective endocarditis in neonates with normal
heart structures
121
7.2.2
Clinical presentation
122
7.2.3
Management of paediatric infective endocarditis
123
7.3 Infective endocarditis in transcatheter valve
implantations
124
7.3.1
Transcatheter pulmonary valve implantation
124
7.3.2
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation/
transcatheter aortic valve replacement
126
7.4 Infective endocarditis in cardiac implantable
electronic devices
127
7.5 Infective endocarditis in pregnancy
129
8.0 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR INFECTIVE
ENDOCARDITIS
130
8.1 Introduction
130
8.2 Cardiac conditions associated with the highest risk
of infective endocarditis
130
8.3 Antimicrobial prophylaxis for specific procedures
131
8.3.1
Dental procedures
131
8.3.2
Non-dental procedures
132
8.4 Antimicrobial regimes for infective endocarditis
prophylaxis
133
8.5 Preventive measures
135
8.5.1
Periodontal and dental disease
135
8.5.2
Cardiac implantable devices or prosthesis implantation
135
9.0 IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES AND RESOURCE
IMPLICATIONS
136
10.0 APPENDICES
137
REFERENCES
170
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
179
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
179
SOURCES OF FUNDING
Infective endocarditis (IE) is an uncommon and potentially
lethal infection affecting patients at risk. Despite advances in
medicine, IE still causes significant morbidity and mortality.
This is due to the changing epidemiology of the disease, the
wide spectrum of presentation extending from the neonate to
the elderly, diagnostic difficulties, delayed surgical interventions
and embolic complications. The advances in cardiothoracic
surgery and cardiology over the years with the increasing use
of prosthetic material, valves and intracardiac devices have also contributed to the
challenges in managing IE in these patients.
Some important evolution in management strategies would be the development
of an Endocarditis Team with multidisciplinary expertise in cardiology,
cardiothoracic surgery, infectious disease and other subspecialties as indicated.
This is encouraged to enable early diagnosis, optimise treatment and prevent
complications in these patients. It also allows for smoother and more efficient
referrals to specialised centres.
Previously, surgical intervention was delayed because of the high-risk and mortality
but, recently published data have also shown that early surgical interventions in
these patients decrease embolic complications and improve outcomes.
There have also been changes with regards to antimicrobial prophylaxis. The
evidence currently shows that routine antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to dental
procedures is not indicated for all cardiac patients and should be limited to highrisk cardiac patients only. Maintaining a good oral and skin hygiene routine is highly
recommended in the prevention of IE.
With these recent developments in the prevention, diagnosis and management
of IE, it is timely that we develop local clinical practice guidelines to update all
respective healthcare providers with regards to the new management strategies.
I congratulate the committee for the effort and hope that these guidelines would
serve to decrease the incidence of IE and its associated morbidity and mortality.
Datuk Dr. Noor Hisham Abdullah
Director General of Health Malaysia
FOREWORD BY THE
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
EXPERT PANEL
Dr. Geetha Kandavello
Chairperson
Deputy Head of Department
Senior Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist and Clinical Director
Adult Congenital Heart Disease Services
Paediatric and Congenital Heart Centre
National Heart Institute (IJN), Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Ariza Adnan
Consultant Pathologist (Medical Microbiology)
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Mr. John Chan Kok Meng
Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon
Gleneagles Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kalaiarasu M.Peariasamy
Head of Department and Senior Consultant
Paediatric Dentistry
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Ms. Kamaleswary Arumugam
Principal Pharmacist
National Heart Institute (IJN), Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Leong Chee Loon
Consultant Physician and Infectious Disease Specialist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd Rahal Yusoff
Specialist in Internal Medicine
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norazah Zahari
Consultant Paediatrician and Paediatric Cardiologist
University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Shamruz Khan bin Akerem Khan
Consultant Cardiologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor
Mr. Sivakumar Sivalingam
Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon and Clinical Director
Congenital Heart Surgery
National Heart Institute (IJN), Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Suresh Kumar A/L Chidambaram
Consultant Infectious Disease Specialist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Syahidah binti Syed Tamin
Consultant Cardiologist and Adult Valvular Heart Disease Specialist
National Heart Institute (IJN), Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Yap Lok Bin
Consultant Cardiologist
National Heart Institute (IJN), Kuala Lumpur
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES EXPERT PANEL
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Malaysian expert reviewers
Speciality
Name
Designation/institution of practice
Dentistry
Datin Dr. Salmiah
binti Bustanuddin
Deputy Director of the State Health
(Oral Health)
Oral Health Division
Selangor State Health Department
Dr. Yaw Siew Lian
Principal Deputy Director
Oral Health Research & Epidemiology
Section
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health, Malaysia
Family
Medicine
Dr. Mimi binti Omar
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jinjang
Kuala Lumpur
Infectious
Disease
Dr. Chua Hock Hin
Infectious Disease Consultant
Hospital Umum Sarawak
Paediatric
Infectious
Disease
Dr. Jeyaseelan A/L
P. Nachiappan
Consultant Paediatrician and
Infectious Disease Specialist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Ipoh, Perak
Dr. Tan Kah Kee
National Head of Paediatric Infectious
Disease
Ministry of Health;
Consultant Paediatrician and
Infectious Disease Specialist
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar
Seremban, Negeri Sembilan
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Speciality
Name
Designation/institution of practice
Medical
Microbiology
Datin Dr. Salbiah Hj
Nawi
National Head of Medical Microbiology
Ministry of Health;
Consultant Pathologist (Medical
Microbiology)
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Cardiology
Dr. Lee Chuey Yan
Head of Department and Consultant
Cardiologist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Johor Bahru, Johor
Paediatric
Cardiology
Dr. Martin Wong
Ngie Liong
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist
Sarawak Heart Centre
Assoc. Prof. Dr.
Abdul Rahim Wong
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kota Bahru, Kelantan
General
Medicine
Dr. Fauzi Azizan bin
Abdul Aziz
Head of Medical Department
Hospital Tuanku Ampuan Najihah
Kuala Pilah, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Chin Pek Woon
Consultant Physician and Head of
Medical Department
Hospital Enche’ Besar Hajjah Khalsom
Kluang, Johor
Cardiothoracic
Surgery
Dato Dr. Mohd
Hamzah
Kamarulzaman
National Head of Cardiothoracic
Surgery
Ministry of Health;
Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon
Hospital Serdang
Selangor
Mr. Basheer
Ahamed Abdul
Kareem
Head of Department and Consultant
Cardiothoracic Surgeon
Penang General Hospital
Neurology
Datuk Dr. Raihanah
binti Abd Khalid
Consultant Neurologist
Assunta Hospital
Petaling Jaya, Selangor
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Speciality
Name
Designation/institution of practice
Neurology
Dr. Shanthi
Viswanathan
Consultant Neurologist
Department of Neurology
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Neurosurgery
Dr. Nor Faizal bin
Ahmad Bahuri
Consultant Neurosurgeon
Department of Neurosurgery
University Malaya Medical Centre
Interventional
Radiology
Assoc. Prof. Dr.
Khairul Azmi bin
Abdul Kadir
Head of Department of Radiology and
Consultant Neurointerventional
Radiologist
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Pharmacy
Tan Chee Chin
Pegawai Farmasi U52
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Johor Bahru, Johor
International expert reviewers
G. Ralph Corey, MD
Professor of Medicine
Gary Hock Professor in Global Health, in the School
of Medicine; Research Professor of Global Health;
Professor of Pathology;
Member in the Duke Clinical Research Institute;
Vice-Chair for Education and Global Health in the
Department of Medicine;
Infectious Disease Consultant
Duke University Medical Centre
Durham, North Carolina, USA
Nandan S. Anavekar,
M.B., B.Ch.
Associate Professor of Medicine Cardiovascular
Diseases
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Professor J. Pepper,
OBE
Professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery
Royal Brompton Hospital
London, UK
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
AND LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
I
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that a
given procedure/therapy is beneficial, useful and/or effective.
II
Conditions for which there is conflicting evidence and/or divergence of
opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of a procedure/therapy.
IIa
Weight of evidence/opinion is in favour of its usefulness/efficacy.
IIb
Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion.
III
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that
a procedure/therapy is not useful/effective and in some cases may be
harmful.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
A
Data derived from multiple randomised clinical trials or meta-analyses.
B
Data derived from a single randomised clinical trial or large nonrandomised studies.
C
Only consensus of opinions of experts, case studies or standard of care.
Adapted from the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association and the
European Society of Cardiology. 2015.
Note: The grades of recommendations denoted throughout these guidelines reflect the strength of the
evidence that each recommendation is based upon. It may not refer to the clinical significance of the
recommendation. All patients with infective endocarditis should be managed together with the best
clinical judgment of the healthcare provider.
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF
THE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
Rationale
Infective endocarditis (IE) causes substantial morbidity and mortality despite
advances in antimicrobial therapy, methods of diagnosis and treatment of
complications.
This first edition clinical practice guidelines (CPG) has been developed to guide
the prevention, diagnosis and management of IE for use by Malaysian healthcare
professionals. The writing committee consisting of experts in infectious disease,
cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, microbiology, pharmacy and dentistry from
the Ministry of Health, the National Heart Institute (IJN), the Ministry of Education
hospitals and private healthcare has developed these guidelines using as
references, best practice recommendations from internationally recognised bodies
and latest available evidence-based articles. The CPG was developed based on the
local landscape of IE and has been reviewed by a multidisciplinary team of experts
involved in the comprehensive management of this disease.
Objectives
To provide evidence-based guidance for the prevention, diagnosis and management
of all patients with or at risk of IE with the aim to reduce related morbidity and
mortality by:
• Facilitating the early diagnosis of IE, so appropriate treatment can be instituted
early.
• Providing guidance on the principles of appropriate antimicrobial therapy
based on the type of IE and the causative microorganisms.
• Determining the indications and optimal timing for cardiothoracic surgery in IE.
• Determining the indications for antimicrobial prophylaxis in the prevention of IE.
Process
An extensive search of the current medical literature on the prevention, diagnosis
and management of IE was done based on the clinical questions developed by
the expert panel. The electronic databases used were the Cochrane database of
systemic reviews (CDSR), Medline/PubMed via Ovid, and Sumsearch2 with the
following search criteria; to include all original articles (clinical trials, systemic reviews,
meta-analysis and observational studies) published in English and to exclude
publications in languages other than English, and animal studies. When local data
were required, local publications in unindexed journals and unpublished data were
used. Literature search was conducted till the most current available published
data. The references ranged from years 1966 to the latest National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) update for the prophylaxis against IE in 2016.
The main search strategy was built around the following MeSH and free text terms
used either singly or in combination:
18F-FDG PET/CT, acute, adult, adverse effects, antiplatelet therapy, antibiotics,
anticoagulant, anticoagulation, anti-fungal, antimicrobial, bacteraemia, blood
culture, blood culture negative, blood culture negative infective endocarditis,
blood culture positive, blood culture positive infective endocarditis, body
piercing, Candida, cardiac implantable electronic device, challenges,
classification, clinical, clinical manifestation, culture negative, Coagulasenegative staphylococcus, collection, complications, congenital heart disease,
control, definition, dental, dental health services, diagnosis, diagnostic criteria,
drug monitoring, echocardiogram, echocardiography, empirical, endocarditis,
Enterobacteriacae, Enterococcus, epidemiology, follow-up, fungal, guidelines,
HACEK, haemorrhagic stroke, health, healthcare, healthcare associated,
heart failure, histopathology, incubation, indication, infective endocarditis,
interpretation, intervention, intravenous drug user, investigation, ischaemic
stroke, laboratory investigation, limitations, magnetic resonance imaging,
management, microbiological, microbiology, modified Duke criteria, monitor,
morbidity, mortality, multislice computed tomography, mycotic aneurysm, native
valve, neonates, neurological, non-HACEK, nuclear imaging, nutritionally variant
streptococci, out patient, out patient parenteral antibiotic therapy, outcomes,
paediatric, parenteral therapy, perivalvular extension, persistent infection,
positron emission tomography, post-discharge, pre-discharge, pre-procedural,
predisposing risk, presentation, prevention, prognosis, prophylaxis, prosthetic
valve, pseudoaneurysms, pulmonary valve implantation, referral, renal impairment,
right-sided, sampling, S. aureus, S. viridans, services, side effects, signs and
symptoms, single-photon emission computed tomography, single-photon
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF THE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
emission computed tomography white cell count, specialist care, specimen,
stains, Staphylococci, Streptococci, Staphylococcus Aureus, Streptococcus
Viridans, subacute, surgery, survival, systemic embolism, tattooing , therapy,
timing, transcatheter aortic valve implantation, transcatheter aortic valve
replacement, transcatheter pulmonary valve implantation, transcatheter valve
implantation, transoesophageal echocardiography, transthoracic echocardiography,
treatment, valvular.
From the searched literature, the relevant articles were picked based on the
Critical Appraisal Skills Program (CASP). In addition, the reference lists of these
relevant articles were searched to identify further studies. International guidelines
on the prevention, diagnosis and management of IE e.g. from American Heart
Association (AHA), European Society of Cardiology (ESC), NICE, the British Society
for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, and Australian Infective Endocarditis Prophylaxis
Expert Group, and the Canadian revisions to the latest AHA guidelines were also
used as reference points in the development of this CPG. These international
guidelines were reviewed and assessed by the committee using the AGREE II tool
prior to inclusion as reference.
The members of the expert panel appraised all the literature retrieved in a systematic
manner. The expert panel and review committee agreed on all statements and
recommendations formulated in the CPG. Where the evidence was insufficient the
recommendations were derived by consensus of both groups. Disagreements were
resolved by voting and the consensus decision of the majority was used.
These guidelines were presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for Clinical
Practice Guidelines, the Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice
Guidelines Council, Ministry of Health Malaysia for review and approval.
13
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF THE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
Clinical questions addressed
• What are the diagnostic criteria and its limitations in diagnosing IE?
• What are the appropriate microbiological investigations and procedures to
diagnose IE?
• What are the appropriate imaging modalities in diagnosing IE?
• What are effective and safe antimicrobial therapies for treatment of IE?
• How to diagnose and appropriately manage complications of IE?
• What are the indications and timing for surgery in valvular IE?
• What are the indications and timing for surgery in congenital heart disease
(CHD) IE?
• What are the risk factors for IE in CHD?
• Who are at risk of developing IE in the paediatric population?
• How is IE diagnosed and appropriately managed in these conditions:
>
>
Patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIED)?
>
>
Patients with transcatheter pulmonary valve implantation (TPVI),
transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) and transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR)?
• Which high-risk cardiac conditions need antimicrobial prophylaxis?
• Which dental and other interventional procedures are high-risk for developing
IE?
• If indicated, what is the effective and safe antimicrobial prophylaxis before an
interventional procedure?
• What effective and safe preventive measures should be practiced by patients
at risk of IE to reduce bacteraemia?
Target group
This CPG is applicable to all healthcare professionals and relevant stakeholders
involved in the prevention and care of patients with high-risk of IE or, patients with
suspected or proven IE.
Target population
These guidelines are targeted at all age groups in the population at risk of IE and/or
those who present in any form and severity of IE.
Healthcare settings
These guidelines were developed for the prevention, diagnosis and management of
IE in the primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare settings.
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF THE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL
PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE
PREVENTION, DIAGNOSIS AND
MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE
ENDOCARDITIS
General information
• Infective endocarditis (IE), even though uncommon, causes significant
morbidity and mortality in both children and adults.
• The trend of IE has evolved to affect older patients with co-morbidities and no
known structural heart disease.
• Streptococcus species is a common causative microorganism in young
patients with pre-existing structural heart disease whilst Staphylococcus
aureus (S. aureus) is more common in the older patients and those with
healthcare associated IE.
Diagnosis
• Early and accurate diagnosis of IE is crucial to institute appropriate treatment
and prevent complications. A high level of clinical suspicion of IE is warranted
especially in those with pre-existing risk factors (refer Section 3.1.1).
• Due to the varied spectrum of the disease, a combination of clinical
assessment, microbiological testing and imaging are required to make the
diagnosis.
• Blood culture is a key investigation in the diagnosis of IE. Proper technique of
blood culture collection is crucial, as this will reduce the rate of contamination
and yield a true positive result (refer Appendix 3).
• Blood cultures should be drawn for patients with fever of unexplained origin
and a heart murmur, a history of heart disease or previous endocarditis.
• Three sets of blood cultures should be obtained first before administering
antimicrobials when a patient has fever and predisposing risk factors for IE.
• If blood cultures remain negative after 5 days of incubation and there
is no history of prior antimicrobial use, consider blood culture negative
infective endocarditis (BCNIE), which can be caused by fungi or fastidious
microorganisms, and perform the appropriate microbiological tests (refer Table
3.2 and Figure 3a).
• Histopathological examination (HPE) of cardiac tissue/vegetations obtained
during surgery is of diagnostic value and is recommended.
• A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) should be obtained without delay if the
diagnosis of IE is suspected.
• Echocardiogram findings should be interpreted in the context of the clinical
scenario and repeated if the clinical suspicion of IE persists despite a negative
initial echocardiogram.
• Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE/TEE) should be done if initial TTE
examination is negative, in patients with strong clinical suspicion of IE, in those
with prosthetic valves/cardiac material and in those with high-risk features (refer
Figure 3b).
• Echocardiography plays a crucial role in the diagnosis of IE, monitoring for
complications and progression of valvular dysfunction, assessing the outcome
of surgical repair and in the follow-up after completion of antimicrobials (refer
to Table: Role of echocardiography in the diagnosis and management of IE,
below).
• In patients with S. aureus bacteraemia from an unknown aetiology or persistent
bacteraemia despite antimicrobials, echocardiography should be considered.
• Some newer imaging modalities (multislice computed tomography; MSCT,
magnetic resonance imaging; MRI and nuclear imaging) can assist in
diagnosing IE and its complications.
• The modified Duke criteria is used to diagnose IE but has limited diagnostic
accuracy in the early phase of the disease and in those patients with prosthetic
valve or cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) endocarditis (refer Figure 3c).
Management
• The management of IE is aimed at eradicating the infection, and preventing and
treating both intra and extracardiac complications.
• Patients with complicated IE should preferably be referred to a specialist
centre. Specialist centres are those with cardiothoracic, cardiac imaging and
specialised cardiology services (refer Section 4.1.4).
• A multidisciplinary team approach involving infectious disease (ID) physicians,
cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons and other relevant subspecialty experts
is essential in the management of IE (refer Table 4.2).
• In all patients with suspected endocarditis, elicit risk factors for fastidious/
intracellular pathogens (refer Table 3.2).
• The mainstay of treatment is appropriate and adequate antimicrobial therapy
(refer Section 4.2). The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) should be done
to ensure optimal antimicrobial therapy.
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
>
>
For penicillin susceptible (MIC ≤ 0.125 µg/ml) Viridans streptococci:
»»
Monotherapy with benzyl penicillin, ampicillin or ceftriaxone is adequate.
[IIa/B]
»»
Duration of therapy is for 4 weeks for native valve endocarditis (NVE)
and 6 weeks for prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE). [IIa/C]
>
>
For penicillin relatively resistant (MIC > 0.125 to 2 µg/ml) Viridans
streptococci:
»»
Gentamicin has to be added to the regime. [IIa/B]
»»
Duration of gentamicin is for 2 weeks for NVE and 6 weeks for PVE.
[IIa/C]
>
>
Granulicatella and Abiotrophia (formerly nutritionally variant
streptococci; NVS) are fastidious and slow growing making it technically
difficult to determine antimicrobial susceptibility.
»»
Combination treatment of penicillin, ampicillin or ceftriaxone with
gentamicin for at least the first 2 weeks, followed by continuation of
chosen antimicrobial without gentamicin for 6 weeks is recommended.
[II/B]
>
>
Staphylococcus endocarditis:
»»
Vancomycin is inferior to cloxacillin for methicillin-sensitive
Staphylococcal aureus (MSSA) endocarditis.
»»
Addition of gentamicin for native valve staphylococcus endocarditis is
not recommended. [III/B]
»»
Addition of gentamicin and rifampicin is recommended for prosthetic
valve staphylococcal endocarditis. [I/C]
»»
In order to prevent resistance, rifampicin should be started after 3-5
days of effective therapy or after blood cultures are negative.
>
>
HACEK microorganisms:
»»
Ceftriaxone monotherapy is recommended for endocarditis
due to Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans,
Cardiobacterium, Eikinella and Kingella (HACEK) microorganisms. [IIa/B]
»»
Alternative drugs such as ampicillin-sulbactam or ciprofloxacin may be
used provided the isolate is susceptible. [IIb/C]
>
>
Candida endocarditis:
»»
Valve surgery combined with anti-fungal therapy is required for adequate
treatment of Candida endocarditis. [I/B]
»»
Long-term suppressive therapy will be required if valve replacement is
not performed.
>
>
Non-HACEK microorganisms:
»»
Combination therapy with β-lactam and aminoglycosides, or
fluroquinolones is recommended for 6 weeks. [IIa/C]
• The empirical antimicrobial treatment in valvular endocarditis should cover
for streptococci, enterococci and HACEK microorganisms if it is community
acquired NVE or late PVE. Consider additional cover for MSSA in patients with
acute presentation or with additional risk factors such as intravenous drug use
(IVDU) and patients with prosthesis. If it is healthcare associated NVE or early
PVE, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), enterococci and
non-HACEK Gram-negative microorganisms should be covered (refer Section
4.2 and Figure 4a).
• Patients with IE should be closely monitored for response to treatment and for
complications (refer Section 4.1).
• Some common complications of IE are (refer Section 4.1.2):
>
>
Heart failure:
»»
Commonly associated with valve dysfunction.
»»
Surgery is indicated for those with acute decompensated heart failure
due to valvular dysfunction.
>
>
Persistent infection and perivalvular extensions:
»»
Monitor for conduction abnormalities e.g. atrioventricular (AV) block.
»»
TEE should be performed to look for perivalvular extensions.
>
>
Systemic embolism:
»»
Usually occurs in left-sided IE and within the first 2 weeks of therapy.
»»
Common sites are the brain and spleen.
»»
Risk factors for embolism are associated with vegetation size (> 10
mm), mobility, location (anterior mitral valve leaflet) as well as the
causative microorganism (S. aureus).
>
>
Neurological complications:
»»
Occurs early in the course of IE (first 2 weeks).
»»
Common complications are ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke, and
mycotic aneurysms.
»»
Management should be individualised and care plan decided
by a multidisciplinary team that also includes neurologists and
neurosurgeons.
»»
It is advisable to withhold anticoagulation in mechanical prosthetic valve
endocarditis (MPVE) patients who have haemorrhagic neurological
complications for at least 2 weeks with close monitoring of the valves
and patient’s clinical condition.
»»
The duration to withhold anticoagulation is dependent on the severity of
the neurological complication and the patient’s clinical condition (refer
Table 4.1).
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
• Anticoagulation should be managed based on the individual patient’s clinical
status, presence of neurological complications and, on the presence or
absence of indications for cardiac surgery (refer Section 4.1.3).
• Early surgical intervention is recommended especially in view of improving
outcomes, preventing complications and increasing the success rate of valve
reconstruction (refer Section 5.1).
• The main aim during surgery is to completely remove all infected tissue and to
repair rather than replace the valve where possible.
• The timing for cardiac surgery is dependent on the patient’s clinical condition,
type of microorganism, size of vegetation and the presence of complications.
• The severity of clinical manifestations should not limit the decision for surgical
intervention when indicated (refer Sections 5.1 & 5.2, and Table: Timing and
indications for surgical intervention, below).
Timing and indications for surgical intervention
Timing of surgery
Clinical condition
Emergency
(within 24 hours)
Cardiogenic shock from severe valve
dysfunction
Urgent
(within 3-4 days)
Pulmonary oedema but not in cardiogenic
shock
Very large vegetations (> 10 mm)
Paravalvular abscess or heart block
Early
(within 1-2 weeks)
Fungal, S. aureus or other highly resistant
microorganisms
Persistent infection > 5-7 days after initiating
antimicrobials
Persistent or enlarging vegetations despite
antimicrobials
Recurrent emboli despite adequate
antimicrobial therapy
Semi-elective
(after 2 weeks of
antimicrobials)
PVE and relapsing infection
Elective
(after 6 weeks of
antimicrobials)
Well-tolerated chronic severe valvular
regurgitation with controlled infection
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
IE in specific conditions
There are important considerations for IE in congenital heart disease (CHD), CIED
and transcatheter valve implants:
• These conditions merit a high index of suspicion of IE (refer Sections 7.3 &
7.4).
• In these patients, once a diagnosis of IE has been established or if there is
strong clinical suspicion of IE, the patient should be sent to a specialist centre
(refer Section 4.1.4).
• The epidemiology of paediatric IE has evolved to reflect those with the
advancement of interventions for CHD. It now broadly reflects the following
groups:
>
>
Patients with prolonged use of central venous catheters in:
»»
Corrected CHD during the post-operative period.
»»
Neonates with normal heart structures who require intravenous treatment
for other issues (refer Sections 7.1 & 7.2).
>
>
Adult and paediatric patients with:
»»
Complex cyanotic CHD.
»»
Unrepaired CHD.
»»
Repaired CHD with prosthetic material.
»»
Cardiac surgery or transcatheter device interventions done within the
last 6 months (refer Section 7.2).
Prevention of IE
• Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not routinely recommended for cardiac patients
undergoing invasive dental or other medical procedures and should be limited
only for cardiac patients associated with the highest risk of adverse outcomes
from IE (refer Chapter 8.0).
• Those with high predisposing risk for developing IE should be advised to
maintain good oral and skin hygiene.
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Summary of clinical management of IE (refer Section 4.1)
Diagnosis
Treatment success
Indicated
Consult SC
Assess for complications
Repeat TEE
More advanced imaging and
microbiological investigations
Not Indicated
Monitor treatment
Refer to SC for surgery
(refer Table 4.2)
Treatment failure
Send tissue samples for HPE and
microbiology
Definite IE or Possible IE with high clinical suspicion (refer Section 3.4)
Commence empirical antimicrobial treatment (refer Figure 4a)
History
Physical examination
Basic investigations
(refer Chapter 3.0)
Refine antimicrobial therapy guided by culture
results and MIC levels as soon as possible
Treat for appropriate duration (refer Section 4.2)
Pre-discharge management (refer Section 4.1.6):
Document pre-discharge clinical status and
echocardiographic findings
Education on preventive measures and features of
recurrence of IE
Follow-up management (refer Chapter 6.0):
Monitor for relapse and reinfections
Review indications for elective cardiac surgery
Education on preventive measures
1. Vital signs
2. Regular examination for complications
(refer Section 4.1.4)
3. Daily ECG (refer Section 4.1.1)
4. Repeat ECHO as needed (refer Figure 3b)
5. Review anticoagulant use (refer Section 4.1.2)
Microbiology
(refer Figure 3a)
ECHO
(refer Figure 3b)
Review indications for surgery
(refer Chapter 5.0)
ECG: Electrocardiogram
ECHO: Echocardiogram
HPE: Histopathological examination
MIC: Minimum inhibitory concentration
SC: Specialist centre
TEE: Transoesphageal echocardiogram
Table: Role of echocardiography in the diagnosis and management
of IE
Timing
Echocardiography
assessment
Comments
Diagnosis
Presence and size of
vegetation
If > 10 mm in diameter, there
is excess risk of embolisation
and surgery is indicated to
prevent embolisation
Valve function: mechanism
and quantification of
regurgitation or obstruction
to flow
Valve damage: perforations
or new dehiscence
Paravalvular extensions:
fistula, abscess and
pseudoaneurysms
Ventricular function and
haemodynamics
Monitoring
during active IE
Valve function: worsening
dysfunction or acute
regurgitation
If present with acute/
worsening heart failure,
surgery is indicated
Monitoring of ventricular
function
New development of
paravalvular extension with
or without new lesions
In the context of uncontrolled
infection
Changes in vegetation size
and mobility
Risk of embolisation if
> 10 mm in diameter
Presence of pericarditis with
or without myocarditis
Ideally this should be
evaluated with cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI)
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
SUMMARY OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Timing
Echocardiography
assessment
Comments
Perioperative
Intraoperative TEE to assess:
• Severity of valve
dysfunction and
pathology, and ventricular
function
• Outcome of the surgical
intervention
Pre-discharge
To establish a new baseline
(most often a TTE is
adequate)
Document baseline
haemodynamic parameters
and severity of any valvular
lesions
On follow-up
Close monitoring especially
in the first year post-IE to
assess the severity and
progression of residual
valvular dysfunction
For stable valvular lesions, to
decide on timing of surgical
intervention
If worsening, to consider ongoing infection or need for
early surgery
Follow established guidelines
for management of valvular
heart disease1
1.0
INTRODUCTION
Infective endocarditis (IE) is defined as an infection of the endocardial surface of the
heart (heart valves and mural endocardium) by microorganisms (mainly bacteria).
IE has evolved over the years as the prevalence of rheumatic heart disease declined.
Advances in the treatment of congenital heart disease (CHD) and structural heart
disease with the introduction of conduits, prosthetic materials and intracardiac
devices has led to many patients surviving well into adulthood, hence making them
more susceptible to infection in view of the presence of these foreign materials.
Incidence of IE in patients with adult CHD is 3 times higher than that in the paediatric
population. Increase in the ageing population has also led to older patients with
multiple co-morbidities and no known structural heart disease being at risk of this
disease too.
The spectrum of microorganisms involved with IE have also changed of late, with
the increase in the presence of virulent and drug-resistant microorganisms such as
Staphylococci and fungi that have contributed to the difficulties in the management
of IE.
IE still remains a therapeutic challenge with a high morbidity and mortality despite
advances in medicine and surgery. The changing trends in the epidemiology, the
varied clinical manifestations and complications, and diagnostic difficulties with the
uncertainties of appropriate timing for surgical interventions, have contributed to the
poor prognosis of this disease.
The aim of these clinical practice guidelines (CPG) is to enable medical personnel at
all levels of care to diagnose IE early and effectively manage these patients. It also
stresses the importance of preventing IE in those with predisposing risk factors.
In keeping to this aim, this CPG attempts to highlight some of the more crucial
areas in the diagnosis and management of IE:
• To enable early and accurate diagnosis:
>
>
The chapter on diagnosis (refer Chapter 3.0) incorporates important
information and recommendations pertaining to clinical, microbiological and
imaging assessments to guide physicians in making an early diagnosis of IE.
>
>
Included in this chapter is a comprehensive section (refer Section 3.2.2)
on microbiological investigations focusing on increasing the yield in blood
culture negative infective endocarditis (BCNIE).
>
>
The role of echocardiography especially transoesophageal echocardiogram
(TOE/TEE) and newer imaging modalities in the diagnosis of IE and its
complications are detailed in Section 3.3.
• To improve and optimise the treatment of IE:
>
>
As the clinical manifestations of IE can be varied, a good outcome
depends on the combined management of a multidisciplinary team, which
should include specialists such as cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons,
infectious disease (ID) physicians and other relevant medical subspecialties.
>
>
Early referral to a Specialist Centre (SC) for those patients with complicated
IE is strongly recommended. A centre designated as a SC should have
available expertise in basic and advance cardiac imaging with specialised
cardiology and cardiothoracic services (refer Section 4.1.4).
>
>
The section on antimicrobial therapy (refer Section 4.2) covers both
paediatric and adult dosing regimes. Included is a focus on therapy for
BCNIE and empirical therapy based on our local setting and experiences.
Appropriate antimicrobials should be started promptly once 3 specimens
of blood cultures have been taken, as delayed treatment could have poorer
outcomes.
>
>
The sections on indications and timing of surgery (refer Chapter 5.0) offer
a paradigm shift as earlier surgical intervention has been shown to have a
better outcome in IE patients in whom surgery is indicated.
>
>
We have also included the management of IE in some specialised patient
groups e.g. patients with CHD, cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED)
and transcatheter implantable valves to accommodate the advances in
medical interventions.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
• To initiate appropriate antimicrobial prophylaxis:
>
>
The committee has developed evidence-based recommendations for the
prophylaxis of IE based on the predisposing risks and types of invasive
procedures found in the local setting.
>
>
The current emphasis is on maintaining good dental and gum hygiene, and
preventing oral disease.
The recommendations developed in this CPG were based on the latest available
data and evidence, taking into account the local healthcare system structure and
patients. Though there are certain areas that would require a shift from the norm,
the committee hopes that these evidence-based recommendations will not only
serve to effectively manage IE patients but to also improve their outcomes.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The annual incidence of IE in the adult population ranges between 3-9 per 100,000
subjects per year.2-4 However, as most of the available data come from developed
countries, its true incidence in developing countries is unknown. Variability in the
epidemiology of IE also exists between countries and continents with regards to
patient profile, microbiological aetiology, treatment and outcomes.
In the developed countries, IE tends to affect patients between the ages of 5060 years, in contrast to developing countries where it is commonly seen in the
20-40 years old age group. This is primarily due to a more ageing society in
developed countries that relies on increasing invasive medical care, the presence
of degenerative valve disease and co-morbidities.4-6 In developing countries,
rheumatic heart disease is still the most common predisposing cause of IE.6-9 About
50% of IE in developing countries occur in patients with no known history of valve
disease.4,8 Healthcare associated IE (refer to Appendix 1) is increasing with some
studies reporting incidence of up to 25%.5,10 The gender distribution of IE is male to
female case ratio of more than 2:1.4,5
IE commonly affects native valves, usually involving the left-sided heart valves (2/3rd
of the cases) with the mitral valve commonly affected.5 Streptococcus species
(spp.) is the most common microorganism causing IE in developing countries, in
the younger age group and in those with pre-existing structural heart disease6-8
compared to developed countries where Staphylococcal spp. tend to be more
common.4,5,11
Complication rates of IE have been reported to be high (16-33%) leading to high
mortality rates of up to 39% in certain studies.5 In a prospective multicentre study,
the following risk factors were shown to increase mortality in IE patients:5
• Paravalvular complications (odds ratio; OR: 2.25).
• Pulmonary oedema (OR: 1.79).
• Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) infection (OR: 1.54).
• Prosthetic valve involvement (OR: 1.47).
• Increasing age (OR: 1.30).
• Mitral valve vegetation (OR: 1.34).
2.0
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Although surgery can be associated with high risks,12 it has been shown to reduce
mortality in complicated cases (hazard ratio; HR 0.33).6 Based on the available
evidence, surgical intervention was required in about 50% of IE patients.5,13
Prendergast et al. stated surgery was required in 25-50% of cases during acute
infection and in 20-40% during convalescence.12
A recent local study done in Hospital Kuala Lumpur14 (a tertiary inner city hospital)
reported 36 cases of definite IE diagnosed over a period of 2 years (20132014). Eighty percent were male (male to female ratio 4:1) and the median age
at presentation was 36 years (interquartile range; IQR 23). The predominant race
affected was the Malays (60%). In this urban inner city cohort,14 IE mainly affected
normal valves (39%), and intravenous drug use (IVDU) was the commonest
predominant risk factor (36%).
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) was the predominant
microorganism grown from blood cultures (30%). All patients were treated with
antimicrobials; with 91% on antimicrobial therapy for a duration of 42 days or less.
Five patients died (13.9%) primarily due to overwhelming sepsis. Fifty-three percent
of patients had indications for surgical intervention, however none had surgery
within the index hospitalisation.14
2.0 EPIDEMIOLOGY
3.0
DIAGNOSIS
As this disease affects multiple organ systems, patients with IE can present with
very diverse clinical presentations making its diagnosis challenging. The clinical
course of the disease can vary from subacute to acute infection, and each will
manifest differently. Patients often visit multiple health practitioners before a correct
diagnosis is made.
Making a clinical diagnosis of IE requires:
• Careful and thorough clinical history taking and physical examination.
• Laboratory investigations.
• Microbiological investigations.
• Histopathological examinations; HPE (when possible).
• Imaging, namely echocardiography and radiological investigations.
In difficult cases, consultation with other experts such as ID specialists, cardiac
imaging specialists and microbiologists may be required.
3.1 Clinical evaluation of suspected infective endocarditis
The most common symptom at presentation (up to 87%) is fever associated with
chills, poor appetite and weight loss. Heart failure may be present at admission (up
to 58%) and there may be a new or altered cardiac murmur (50-85%).15,16 Embolic
events may also cause presenting symptoms (27-30%) and these events may be
singular or multiple in nature.13,16,17
3.1.1 Pre-existing risk factors
A high level of suspicion of IE is warranted in patients with fever and pre-existing risk
factors who present with non-specific symptoms. These are:15,18-21
• Previous history of IE.
• Pre-existing cardiac disease.
• Presence of prosthetic valves or prosthetic cardiac material.
• Presence of intracardiac devices.
• History of IVDU.
• Presence of chronic intravenous access (e.g. haemodialysis catheters,
chemoports and neonate/paediatric patients with indwelling central venous
catheters).
• Presence of CHD (refer Section 7.1).
• Elderly or immunocompromised patients.22
• Co-existing conditions such as diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection and malignancy.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.1.2 Clinical manifestations
Patients do not often present with classic textbook manifestations of subacute or
chronic endocarditis. Therefore medical personnel should bear in mind that the
symptoms and signs of IE can be general and/or system specific as presented in
Table 3.1 below.
Table 3.1: Symptoms and signs of IE
Symptoms and signs
Site
Comments
General
• Night sweats and chills
• Weight loss
• Fatigue
• Body aches
• Poor appetite
• Fever
• Temperature may be normal
or subnormal in:
>
> Subacute cases
>
> Elderly
>
> Immunocompromised
patients
• Fever is usually very high in
acute IE
• Anaemia
• In subacute cases this
may be anaemia of chronic
disease or microcytic
anaemia
Peripheral
• Splinter haemorrhages
• Nail beds of the
fingers or toes
• Examine all digits of upper
and lower limbs
• Exclude workplace trauma
• Osler’s nodes
>
> Painful subcutaneous
nodules (red-purple,
slightly raised, tender
lumps and with a pale
centre)
• Pulps of the
fingers or toes
• Pain precedes the
development of the visible
lesion by up to 24 hours
• Can occur at any time during
the course of endocarditis
(usually subacute)
• Lasts from hours to several
days
• Janeway lesions
>
> Non-tender lesions
>
> 1-4 mm in diameter
>
> Often haemorrhagic
• On the palms
and soles
• Lasts days to weeks
• Commonly seen in acute
endocarditis
• The histology is usually
consistent with septic
microembolism
Symptoms and signs
Site
Comments
• Digital clubbing
• Usually seen in patients who
have an extended period of
untreated IE23
• Subconjunctival
haemorrhages
• Examine both eyes
• Generalised petechiae
• Conjunctivae
• Dorsa of the
hands and feet
• Anterior chest
wall
• Abdominal wall
• Oral mucosa
• Soft palate
• Embolic lesions
• Fingers and
toes
• Arthritis
• Asymmetrical
• Single or multiple joints
Central
• Roth spots (whitecentred retinal
haemorrhages)
• Retina
• Examine both eyes
• Splenomegaly
• Occurs with long-standing
subacute disease
• May not resolve after
treatment
• Haematuria
• Due to glomerulonephritis
• Septic embolisation
• Lung
embolisation
• Occurs in right-sided IE
causing pneumonia or lung
abscess
• Abdominal
embolisation
• Splenic abscesses or infarcts
Cardiac
• Murmurs
• Appearance of new murmur
• Usually regurgitant
• Right-sided IE may not have
a murmur
• Heart failure
• Usually due to valve
dysfunction/regurgitant
lesions
• Bradycardia
• Indicates aortic root abscess
interfering with cardiac
conduction pathways
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Symptoms and signs
Site
Comments
Neurological
• Focal signs: hemiparesis,
aphasia and others
• Cerebral septic
embolisation
• May be due to ischaemic/
haemorrhagic lesions or
cerebral abscess
• Delirium in meningitis,
meningoencephalitis and
encephalopathy
• Occurs from purulent
meningitis especially with
acute IE
• Intracranial bleeding
>
> Manifests as:
»» Confusion
»» Drowsiness
»» Reduced
consciousness
»» Vomiting
»» Seizures
It is very rare for IE patients to present with the full spectrum of physical signs and
there may be only one or two of these clinical features present. For the primary
care physician, general practitioner or emergency room physician, the diagnosis
of IE may be missed or delayed because of the failure to recognise certain clinical
manifestations of the disease.
In the presence of fever, IE should be considered as part of the differential diagnosis
in the following conditions:
• Unexplained embolic phenomena to the brain, liver or spleen (left-sided IE), or
to the lung (right-sided IE).
• Focal neurological signs of unknown aetiology.
• Heart failure that cannot be accounted for.
• Haemorrhages in unusual locations.
KEY MESSAGE:
1. IE can present with very diverse clinical presentations which
makes its diagnosis challenging.
2. A high level of suspicion of IE is warranted in patients with fever
and pre-existing risk factors who present with non-specific
symptoms.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.2 Investigations
3.2.1 Laboratory investigations
Laboratory tests for infection may aid the diagnosis of IE. These include:
• Inflammatory markers:
>
>
Elevated C-reactive protein (CRP).
>
>
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).
>
>
Procalcitonin (PCT):
»»
> 2 and < 10 ng/ml: severe systemic inflammatory response or sepsis.
»»
> 10 ng/ml: severe bacterial sepsis or septic shock.
PCT is available in Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (HUKM) and University Malaya
Medical Centre (UMMC).
• Complete blood count (CBC)/full blood count (FBC):
>
>
Raised white cell count.
>
>
Low haemoglobin.
• Urine full examination and microscopic examination (UFEME):
>
>
Microscopic haematuria.
• Blood culture and sensitivity (refer Section 3.2.2).
With the exception of blood cultures, the above tests are not specific and may
indicate other causes of sepsis.
3.2.2 Microbiological diagnosis
The microbiological diagnosis of IE can be divided into:
• Blood culture positive IE.
• Blood culture negative IE.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.2.2.1 Blood culture positive infective endocarditis
Blood cultures should be taken before the commencement of empiric
antimicrobial agents as it is critical to the diagnosis and treatment of
patients with IE. In order to obtain high yield of positive blood cultures,
the following considerations are crucial:24
A. Timing of blood cultures
• The blood cultures can be obtained at anytime:24
>
>
This is due to the continuous nature of bacteraemia associated
with IE.
>
>
There is no necessity to wait for spikes of fever.
>
>
Blood cultures should be taken at 30-minute intervals between
samples.24
B. Number of blood culture sets and the blood volume
• At least three sets of blood cultures:25
>
>
To distinguish between ‘false positive’ blood cultures due to skin
contaminants from ‘true positive’ blood cultures.
>
>
Increases the volume of blood cultured, which is the most
important factor in the recovery of microorganisms from blood.
• Microorganisms that are skin contaminants include:
>
>
Coagulase negative staphylococci.
>
>
Bacillus spp.
>
>
Corynebacterium spp. (diphteroids).
>
>
Propionibacterium spp., viridans group of streptococci (VGS).
>
>
Aerococcus spp.
>
>
Micrococcus spp.
These microorganisms may be considered as significant pathogens
when they are cultured from 2 or more blood cultures drawn on separate
occasions.
• If the initial 3 blood culture sets are negative at 24 hours, obtain 2
more sets of cultures, for a total of 5 sets overall.25
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
• A set includes 1 aerobic and 1 anaerobic bottle25 with samples taken
from a single venepuncture site:
>
>
The anaerobic culture is vital for the growth of nutritionally variant
streptococci (NVS) and facultative anaerobic microorganisms such
as Enterobacteriaceae (refer Appendix 2).
• Each bottle should contain 10 ml of blood for adults and 1-3 ml of blood
for paediatric patients (using the appropriate paediatric blood culture
bottles).
>
>
Adequate volume is the most important factor in the recovery of
microorganisms in IE.
• If the blood cultures are negative, BCNIE should be considered (refer
Section 3.2.2.2).
C. Sampling sites of blood cultures
• Strict aseptic techniques should be observed (refer Appendix 3).
• Blood should be sampled from separate peripheral venepuncture sites.
• Avoid sampling from central venous or indwelling catheters. Catheterdrawn blood cultures have increased risk of contamination25 and thus
may give rise to misleading interpretation.
D. Duration of incubation of blood cultures
• Within 5 days, most clinically important microorganisms including
Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans,
Cardiobacterium, Eikinella and Kingella (HACEK) will be isolated.26
• If all blood cultures are negative at 5 days and the diagnosis of IE is still
being pursued consider:
>
>
BCNIE (refer Section 3.2.2.2).
>
>
Fungal IE.
• Longer incubation time for a total of 2 weeks and appropriate selective
culture media may be required when fungaemia or bacteraemia caused
by fastidious microorganisms e.g. Legionella, Brucella or Nocardia spp.
is suspected.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
E. Identification of the microorganisms and antimicrobial
susceptibility testing
• Identification must be rapid and done up to the level of the bacterial
species.
• A newly available state-of the-art technology in rapid bacterial
identification is based on peptide spectra by matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF)
which is able to provide direct identification of bacteria in the blood
culture supernatant.27 This has improved the turnaround time of
bacterial identification tremendously.
• For decisions on optimal therapy in IE, especially for infections involving
streptococci spp. and multidrug resistant microorganisms, it is
recommended to test for susceptibility of antimicrobials by determining
the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the drug.
3.2.2.2 Blood culture-negative infective endocarditis
In general, BCNIE indicates IE which has no microorganism grown following
inoculation of at least 3 independent blood samples when using the usual
currently available culture methods in clinical laboratories after 5 days of
incubation.
• BCNIE can be due to 3 main reasons:
>
>
Partially treated IE by previous antimicrobial treatment, which is the
most common cause (usually due to usual endocarditis-causing
bacteria, i.e. streptococci, more rarely staphylococci, or enterococci).
>
>
For the isolation of fastidious bacteria such as Brucella, Nocardia
spp., NVS and fungi other than yeasts, blood culture incubation
may need to be extended for two weeks before a negative result
is released. Specimens other than blood, e.g. excised tissue and
aspirated intracardiac pus, incubation of the inoculated agar media
beyond 48 hours may be needed. Special media and prolonged
incubation is required for the isolation of Legionella pneumophilia.
>
>
“True” BCNIE due to intracellular bacteria that cannot be routinely
cultured in blood with currently available techniques (e.g. Bartonella
spp., Coxiella burnetti and Tropheryma whipplei).
• Diagnosis of BCNIE (refer to Table 3.2):
>
>
Serological testing and molecular techniques such as polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) assay aid in establishing the causative agent in
BCNIE.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
However limitations when using such assays are as follows:
• Serology:
>
>
Cross reaction of serological assays (e.g. IE caused by Bartonella
and Chlamydia spp. are often indistinguishable).28
• PCR:
>
>
Low sensitivity of PCR when using blood specimens. It is however
more sensitive when performed directly on cardiac valvular
tissue16,29-31 or surgical material.
>
>
PCR findings should not be used to guide duration of therapy and
should be interpreted in the context of other clinical information. This
is due to persistence of bacterial deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) even
after eradication of viable microorganisms, causing false positive
results.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Table 3.2: Fastidious and intracellular microorganisms,
epidemiology and investigations
Microorganism
Predisposing risk factors,
epidemiology and exposure
risks
Laboratory investigation
Aspergillus and
other non- Candida
fungi
Prosthetic valves
Culture: Blood culture
Serology: Galactomanan
PCR: Blood or cardiac valvular tissue/
vegetations
HPE**: Cardiac tissue or emboli
Bartonella spp.
Cat contact or ownership
(Bartonella henselae), chronic
alcoholism, contact with human
body louse and homeless shelters
(Bartonella quintana)
Culture: Blood culture
Serology: IgG/IgM/total antibodies
HPE**: Cardiac valvular tissue
Brucella spp.
Ingestion of unpasteurised
milk or cheese, contact with or
occupational exposure to farm
animals
Culture: Blood culture (requires
extended incubation as 80% of
cultures become positive with an
incubation time of 4-6 weeks) and
tissue
Serology: IgG/IgM and total antibodies
PCR: Blood
Coxiella burnetti
Ingestion of unpasteurised
milk or cheese, contact with or
occupational exposure to farm
animals, or visit to farms
Serology: IgG/IgM
HPE**: Cardiac valvular tissue/
vegetations
Legionella spp.
Prosthetic valves
PCR: Cardiac valvular tissue/
vegetations
HPE**: Cardiac valvular tissue/
vegetations
Nutritionally variant
streptococci
Slow indolent course
Culture: Blood culture (culture on
supplemented media or growth as
satellite colonies around S. aureus
streak)
**HPE consists of:
•
Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) stain for basic morphology.
•
Special stains which aid in the identification of the causative microorganisms of IE (refer Table
3.3).
IgG: immunglobulin G; IgM: immunoglobulin M; HPE: histopathological examination.
Adapted from Mandell JE, et al. 2015.32
The directory of laboratories that perform the serological and PCR tests of
the rare aetiological agents of IE is given in Appendix 4.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.2.3 Histopathological diagnosis
Patients with IE often undergo surgery to repair or replace their heart valve.
Histopathology when available is of diagnostic value.33,34 If excised tissue is obtained
during cardiac surgery, it must be sent for HPE and culture.
Tissue specimens that can be sent are:
• Resected valvular tissue.
• Endocardial vegetation.
• Excised intracardiac abscess wall.
A diagnosis can be made from the pathological specimens if:
• Microorganisms are demonstrated by culture or on HPE.
• HPE shows active endocarditis.
The various special stains that are used to detect the infectious agents of interest
in valvular tissue are shown in Table 3.3. For the preparation and transportation of
cardiac tissue for HPE refer Appendix 5.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Processes to ensure successful microbiological diagnosis:
1. At least 3 sets of blood cultures to be taken at least 30 minutes apart. In
adult patients, each bottle should contain 10 ml of blood. [IIa/C]
2. For optimal recovery of diverse aetiological agents, each set of blood
cultures should include paired aerobic and anaerobic blood culture
bottles. [IIa/C]
3. Sampling should be obtained from a peripheral vein rather than from a
central venous catheter. [IIa/C]
4. An incubation period of blood cultures for 5 days is adequate for the
detection of the majority of pathogens including those from the HACEK
group. [IIa/C]
5. Pathological specimens obtained during cardiac surgery which are of
diagnostic value, should be sent for HPE. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
Table 3.3: Special stains which aid in the identification of the
causative microorganisms of IE from cardiac tissue specimens
Tissue stain
Detected microorganism
General stain
Acridine orange
Any bacterium
Giemsa
Any bacterium
Tissue Gram
Brown-Hopps
Brown- Brenn
Gram-positive bacteria
Gram-negative bacteria
Specific stains
Periodic acid-Schiff
Tropheryma whipplei
Fungi
Warthin-Starry
Bartonella spp.
Ziehl-Nielsen
Acid-fast bacilli
Gimenez
Coxiella burnetti
Legionella spp.
Specific stains
Kinyoun, Machiavello
Chlamydia spp.
Gomori-Grocott
Fungi
Adapted from P. Houpikian, D. Raoult 2003.33
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Figure 3a: Approach to microbiological diagnosis of IE
Suspect IE
3 x blood culture
Culture positive
Yes
No
Culture negative
Start empirical antimicrobials
(refer Section 4.2.3)
Identification of microorganisms
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing
Response to empirical antimicrobials
Adjust antimicrobials accordingly
Elicit risk factors for fastidious/
intracellular pathogens** and send
for appropriate serological tests
as indicated (refer Table 3.2).
If no history of recent
antimicrobial use or if there
are risk factors for fastidious/
intracellular pathogens**, request
for prolonged incubation^
Consider non-bacterial thrombotic
endocarditis such as underlying
malignancy, systemic lupus
erythomatosis (SLE) and, test for
rheumatoid factor and antinuclear
antibodies
If the patient is undergoing
surgery, send the valve
or annulus (for prosthetic
valves) for HPE and/or
PCR (if available)
Send serology for Brucella,
Coxiella, Bartonella and
Legionella, and blood PCR
if available**
**Refer Table 3.2 for the risk factors for fastidious/intracellular pathogens.
^Legionella, Brucella, Nocardia spp., fungi and NVS e.g. Gemella, Grnaulicatella and Abiotrophia may
require longer incubation periods.
Adapted from Habib G, et al. Eur Heart J. 2015.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.3 Imaging
3.3.1 Echocardiography
3.3.1.1 Echocardiography in diagnosis of infective endocarditis
Echocardiography plays a key role in the diagnosis of IE. The first line imaging
investigation in suspected IE is usually transthoracic echocardiography
(TTE) as it is non-invasive and widely available. TEE should be performed
subsequently if indicated.
• In native valves, the sensitivity of TTE in diagnosing vegetations is 4463%.35-38
• For prosthetic valves, the diagnostic yield of TTE is much lower, 36-69%
due to acoustic shadowing from the prosthetic material and a higher
chance of annular infection which cannot be seen clearly on TTE.38
• TEE enhances diagnostic sensitivity between 90-100% for native valves
and 86-94% for prosthetic valves.38
• The specificity of TTE and TEE exceeds 90% for both native and
prosthetic valves whilst the specificity of TEE for vegetation on
prosthetic valves is 88-100%.38
Indications for TEE in patients with IE or those with pre-existing risk factors
include:39
• Poor or suboptimal transthoracic window (e.g. morbid obesity, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; COPD and previous sternotomy).
• High clinical suspicion of IE but negative TTE (e.g. typical microorganism
of IE found on blood cultures).
• Staphylococcal bacteraemia if community acquired without an obvious
focus of infection (e.g. cellulitis).40,41
• All cases of IE with prosthetic valves and prosthetic material such as
conduits.
• High-risk features for complications (e.g. new atrioventricular; AV block
on electrocardiogram; ECG which may indicate a periannular extension
of infection).
• Perioperative TEE to assess mechanism and severity of valve
dysfunction, perivalvular extensions and the success of surgery/
presence of residual lesions.42
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Echocardiographic findings suggestive of IE include (refer Table 3.4):1,43
• Vegetation.**
• Abscess.**
>
>
Abscess formation is a dynamic process, which starts with aortic
root thickening that can be seen on TEE. If this finding is noted, a
TEE should be repeated at a later time to confirm the diagnosis as
the lesion progresses with formation of a cavity with no flow within.
• Pseudoaneurysms.
• New dehiscence of a prosthetic valve.
• Fistula.
• Perforation.
• Valve leaflet aneurysm.
** Documentation of vegetation or abscess sizes should be made by
measuring their largest diameters in at least 2 dimensions rather than
measuring the circumference. The view in which the measurement was
made should also be documented.
Other important information to gather from an echocardiogram include:
• Haemodynamic and ventricular functional assessments:
>
>
Transthoracic Doppler echocardiogram is used to assess
haemodynamic dysfunction as it is more reliable and reproducible
compared to TEE.
>
>
For left ventricular systolic dysfunction, assessment of ejection
fraction by using modified Simpson’s method and others such as
tissue Doppler imaging is recommended.
>
>
For diastolic function, using pulse wave Doppler and tissue Doppler
imaging is recommended. However, in situations where there are
significant regurgitant lesions, the estimation of ventricular filling
pressures by Doppler method is not accurate.
>
>
For right ventricular function, assessing systolic function visually or
by using quantitative parameters, e.g. tricuspid annular systolic plane
excursion (TAPSE) or fractional area change (FAC) can be used.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
• Pulmonary artery pressure assessment by estimation of:
>
>
Right atrial pressure.
>
>
Tricuspid regurgitation peak velocity.
>
>
Pulmonary regurgitation end diastolic velocity.
• Assessment and quantification of valve regurgitation.
• Presence and quantification of pericardial effusion.
3.3.1.2 Interpretation of echocardiography
Echocardiography in IE can be challenging. This may be due to the absence
of vegetations despite a high index of clinical suspicion or the presence of
masses on the endocardial surface that are not due to infective vegetation.
Therefore the results of the echocardiographic study must be interpreted
with caution, taking into account the patient’s clinical presentation and the
likelihood of IE. The limitations of echocardiography in the diagnosis of IE
should be noted as follows:
• The sensitivity and specificity of TTE and TEE are not 100%.
• A negative echocardiogram does not rule out IE.
• In some situations, a repeat TTE or repeat TEE may be necessary.
• Results of an echocardiogram must be interpreted with caution, as it is
possible to have a false positive study (refer Table 3.5).
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Table 3.4: Findings suggestive of IE and their anatomical and
echocardiographic definitions
Surgical or autopsy findings
Echocardiography findings
Vegetation
Infected mass attached to an
endocardial structure or on
implanted intracardiac material
Oscillating or non-oscillating
intracardiac mass on valve or
other endocardial structures, or on
implanted intracardiac material
Abscess
Perivalvular cavity
with necrosis and purulent material
not communicating with the
cardiovascular lumen
Thickened, non-homogeneous
perivalvular area with echodense or
echolucent appearance
Pseudoaneurysms
Perivalvular cavity communicating
with the cardiovascular lumen
Pulsatile perivalvular
echocardiographic-free space, with
colour-Doppler detected
Perforation
Interruption of endocardial tissue
continuity
Interruption of endocardial tissue
continuity traversed by colourDoppler
Fistula
Communication between two
neighbouring cavities through a
perforation
Colour-Doppler communication
between two neighbouring cavities
through a perforation
Valve aneurysm
Saccular outpouching of valvular
tissue
Saccular bulging of valvular leaflet
tissue
Dehiscence of a
prosthetic valve
Dehiscence of the prosthesis
Paravalvular regurgitation identified
by TTE/TEE, with or without rocking
motion of the prosthesis
Adapted from Habib G, et al. Eur J Echocardiogr. 2010.43
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Table 3.5: Challenges in echocardiography interpretation in the
context of IE
False positive echocardiogram
(“vegetation” seen but diagnosis is
NOT IE)
False negative echocardiogram
(“vegetation” not seen but diagnosis
IS IE)
This may be due to:
• Thrombus
• Papillary fibroelastoma
• Lambl’s excrescences
• Cusp prolapse
• Chordal rupture
• Degenerative or myxomatous valve disease
• Strands
• Systemic lupus (Libman-Sacks) lesions
• Primary antiphospholipid syndrome
• Rheumatoid lesions or marantic vegetations
• Prominent Chiari network or Eustachian valve
in the right atrium
This may be due to:
• Vegetations that have embolised
• Initial/incipient abscess (if imaged early in
the disease may appear like non-specific
thickening)
• Presence of pre-existing valvular lesions such
as mitral valve prolapse and degenerative
calcified valve disease
• Prosthetic valves
• Small vegetations (< 2-3 mm)
• Non-vegetant IE
• Intracardiac devices (this is difficult even with
the use of TEE)
• Sutures, suture pledgets and free floating
chords in post-surgical patients (discuss with
the operating surgeon)
If the clinical suspicion is high but initial
imaging is negative, a repeat TTE or TEE is
warranted within a week or even earlier in
cases positive for S. aureus.
TEE: Transoesophageal echocardiography; TTE:
Transthoracic echocardiography; ECHO: echocardiogram.
Refer Section 3.3.1 for positive and negative findings.
**E.g. a patient with fever and known heart murmur but with
no other signs or symptoms of IE
§Includes presence of prosthetic valves, various CHD, appearance of new murmur, presence of heart failure,
or other signs and symptoms of IE
Adapted from Baddour LM, et al. Circulation. 2015.
Figure 3b: Use of echocardiography in the diagnosis and
management of IE
Suspect IE
Initial TTE as soon as possible
Positive TTE findings
Treat for IE
TEE
TEE
Consider repeat TEE/
TTE within a week
Positive TEE
findings
Positive TEE/
TTE findings
Negative TEE/TTE
findings
Negative TEE
findings
Treat for
IE
Negative TTE findings
High predisposing risk§
High clinical suspicion
Poor echocardiographic
window/difficult to image
on TTE
Continue treatment and monitor
for complications
Repeat TEE or TTE/other
imaging where necessary
Surgical intervention when
indicated (refer Chapter 5.0)
Pre-discharge ECHO to document baseline
findings (refer Section 4.1.4 and Chapter 6)
Low risk**
Low clinical
suspicion
Low predisposing risk
Good response to
treatment
Repeat TTE as
indicated and before
discharge
Worsening clinical course
High predisposing risk§
Echocardiographic
findings suggest possible
complications
Investigate for
other sources of
fever and treat
accordingly
If high clinical suspicion
persists, start empirical
treatment (refer Section
4.2.3)
Consider advanced microbiological
assessment and other imaging
modalities (refer Figures 3a and 3c)
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
The use of echocardiography in diagnosing IE:
1. Echocardiography should be performed as soon as possible in all patients
suspected of having IE. [I/B]
2. If there is a high suspicion of IE despite an initial negative TTE/TEE, then
a repeat TTE/TEE is recommended within a week or if clinical findings
change. [I/C]
3. TEE should be done if initial TTE images are negative or inadequate in
patients for whom there is a persistent suspicion for IE. [I/B]
4. TEE is advised in cases with prosthetic valves, prosthetic cardiac material
or cases with high-risk features. [I/B]
5. The echocardiographic measurement of the size of the vegetation
at its longest diameter is preferable rather than its circumference.
Documentation of the window in which the measurement was done will
be useful. [IIa/C]
6. Intraoperative TEE recommended for all cases of IE undergoing surgery.
[I/B]
7. It may be reasonable to perform TTE at the time of antimicrobial therapy
completion to record baseline features. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.3.2 Other imaging modalities
A. Multislice computed tomography
Multislice computed tomography (MSCT) in the context of IE maybe useful
in the following situations:
• To:
>
>
Detect abscesses/pseudoaneurysms in the heart.44,45
>
>
Assess the extent and consequences of any perivalvular extension,
including the anatomy of pseudoaneurysms, abscesses and
fistulae.44,45
• To detect and assess extracardiac complications:
>
>
Concomitant pulmonary disease, e.g. abscesses and infarcts in
right-sided/pulmonary endocarditis.
>
>
Evaluation for central nervous system (CNS) lesions (e.g. mycotic
aneurysm).
>
>
Intra-abdominal lesions (e.g. silent splenic abscesses).
>
>
Peripheral vascular complications of IE (e.g. extracerebral mycotic
aneurysms) and their follow-up.46
• To aid in surgical planning:
>
>
Pre-operative coronary assessments in unstable patients who are to
undergo cardiac surgery for IE complications.47
>
>
To define the size, anatomy and calcification of the aortic valve, root
and ascending aorta, in cases of IE affecting the aorta.
Limitations of MSCT:44
• Exposure to radiation.
• Nephrotoxicity associated with contrast dye.
• Relative lack of sensitivity to demonstrate valve perforations.
B. Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a higher sensitivity than computed
tomography (CT) in detecting cerebral embolic events, majority of which are
clinically silent.48 Studies have shown that systematic cerebral MRI during
acute IE has consistently reported frequent cerebral embolic lesions, in 6080% of patients.48-50
Most commonly seen abnormalities are:50
• Ischaemic lesions (50-80%).
>
>
Small ischaemic lesions are more frequent than larger territorial
infarcts.
• Parenchymal or subarachnoidal haemorrhage (≤ 10%).
• Abscesses or mycotic aneurysms (< 10%).
In IE patients with neurological symptoms:51
• Cerebral MRI has no impact on the diagnosis of IE.
• It is often abnormal and more sensitive than CT in detecting lesions
causing stroke, transient ischaemic attack (TIA) and encephalopathy.
• MRI may impact the therapeutic strategy, particularly the timing of
surgery.
However in IE patients with no neurological symptoms:
• At least 50% show cerebral lesions on MRI, mostly ischaemic in nature.
• The detection of cerebral lesions on MRI adds 1 minor Duke criteria.52,53
Systematic abdominal MRI:53
• Has shown to detect lesions in one of three IE patients.
• Lesions occur most often in the spleen and commonly include splenic
infarcts, abscesses and haemorrhagic lesions.
Whenever cerebral MRI findings are present, abdominal MRI is not indicated
for the diagnosis of IE. However, it may play a role in further management
(e.g. to detect intra-abdominal occult abscesses although CT abdomen
would be the preferred investigation for this).
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
C. Nuclear imaging
New modalities in nuclear imaging like single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT)/CT and positron emission tomography (PET)/
CT are evolving as important supplementary assessments for patients
with suspected IE and diagnostic difficulties. Several reports have shown
promising results for radiolabelled white blood cell (WBC) SPECT/CT and
fluorine-18 (F-18) fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG); 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging in
IE. Nuclear imaging may be of added value in refining a ‘possible IE’ to a
‘definite IE’ based on the Duke criteria by detecting peripheral embolic and
metastatic infectious lesions.54,55 There is also growing evidence that cardiac
nuclear imaging can play a key role in the diagnosis and management of
patients with suspected prosthetic valve endocarditis. Recent European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines for the management of IE updated
in 2015 have added 18F-FDG PET/CT or radiolabelled WBC SPECT/CT
as a new major criterion if abnormal uptakes are found around the area of
prosthetic valve implantation in patients with a prosthesis implanted for more
than 3 months.16 However, the limited availability of these modalities in the
local setting also limits its usage in the diagnosis and management of IE (refer
Appendix 6).
KEY MESSAGE:
1. MSCT can be used to assess for perivalvular extensions and
extracardiac complications and/or embolism.
2. MRI is more sensitive than CT in diagnosing cerebral embolic
lesions many of which are silent.
3. Radiolabelled WBC SPECT/CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT may have a
supplementary role in detecting peripheral embolic or metastatic
infectious lesions in those with high clinical suspicion of IE and
diagnostic difficulties. They may also be useful in diagnosing
prosthetic valve endocarditis.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.4 Diagnostic criteria
3.4.1 The modified Duke criteria and its limitations
The Duke criteria was first proposed in 1994 by Durack et al. from the Duke
University Medical Centre, North Carolina, United State of America (USA). This was
a diagnostic schema that stratified patients with suspected IE into 3 categories;
definite, possible and rejected. In the year 2000, taking into account further
evidence, the Duke criteria was refined further into the modified Duke criteria56 (refer
Table 3.7) which is currently widely used in clinical practice.
The Duke criteria should be used as a research tool rather than a clinical tool for
diagnosing IE, therefore clinicians should treat each individual patient appropriately.
In very ill patients and patients in whom the diagnosis of IE is likely, empirical treatment
should be started before blood culture results are available. This classification has a
sensitivity of approximately 80% overall, when the criteria are evaluated at the end
of patient follow-up in epidemiological studies.57
Table 3.7: Definition of IE according to the modified Duke criteria
Definite IE
Pathological criteria:
Microorganisms demonstrated by culture or HPE of a vegetation, a vegetation
that has embolised, or an intracardiac abscess specimen;
or pathological lesions; vegetation or intracardiac abscess confirmed by HPE
showing active endocarditis
Clinical criteria:
2 major criteria
or
1 major criterion and 3 minor criteria
or
5 minor criteria
Possible IE
1 major criterion and 1 minor criterion
or
3 minor criteria
Rejected IE
Firm alternative diagnosis explaining evidence of IE
or resolution of IE syndrome with antimicrobial therapy for ≤ 4 days
or no pathological evidence of IE at surgery or autopsy with antimicrobial
therapy for ≤ 4 days
or does not meet criteria for possible IE as above
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Major Criteria
Blood culture
positive for IE
Typical microorganisms consistent with IE from 2
separate blood cultures:
• VGS, Streptococcus bovis, HACEK group, S. aureus
• Or community-acquired enterococci in the absence of
a primary focus
• Or microorganisms consistent with IE from persistently
positive blood cultures defined as follows:
>
> At least 2 positive cultures of blood samples drawn
> 12 hours apart
>
> Or all of 3 or a majority of ≥ 4 separate cultures of
blood (with first and last sample drawn at least 1
hour apart)
• Single positive blood culture from Coxiella burnetii or
phase 1 IgG antibody titres > 1:800
Evidence of
endocardial
involvement
Echocardiogram positive for IE defined as follows:
• Oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting
structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, or on
implanted material in the absence of an alternative
anatomic explanation
• Abscess
• Or new partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve
• Or new valvular regurgitation (worsening or changing
or pre-existing murmur not sufficient)
(TEE is recommended for patients with prosthetic
valves rated as at least possible IE by clinical
criteria, or complicated IE (paravalvular abscess)
Minor criteria
Predisposition: predisposing heart condition or IVDU
Fever: temperature > 38°C
Vascular phenomena: major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts, mycotic
aneurysm, intracranial haemorrhage, conjunctival haemorrhages and Janeway
lesions
Immunological phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth spots and
rheumatoid factor
Microbiological evidence: positive blood cultures but does not meet a major
criterion as noted above (excludes single positive cultures for coagulasenegative staphylococci and microorganisms that do not cause endocarditis) or
serological evidence of active infection with microorganism consistent with IE
Adapted from Li JS, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2000.56
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
Limitations of the modified Duke criteria include a lower diagnostic accuracy
especially in:
• Early diagnosis.
• Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) with sensitivity of TTE 36% and TEE 82%.58
• Pacemaker or defibrillator lead IE with sensitivity of TTE 23% and TEE 94%.59
In cases where clinical suspicion is high but the application of the Duke criteria
yields “possible IE”, some other investigations that can be pursued include:
• Repeat TTE/TEE and proceed with advanced microbiological testing.
• Cardiac CT to look for periannular extension.
• Cerebral MRI to look for silent embolic events.
• SPECT/CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT especially for the assessment of prosthetic
valve endocarditis.
KEY MESSAGE:
1. The modified Duke criteria are used as a guide to diagnose
definite, possible and rejected IE.
2. For patients with possible or rejected IE in whom there is a
high clinical suspicion of IE, it is advisable to consider further
microbiological testing or other imaging modalities to guide in the
diagnosis.
3. Clinicians should treat each individual patient accordingly.
Figure 3c: The use of modified Duke criteria in diagnosing IE
Clinical suspicion of IE
Modified Duke Criteria55
Revise diagnosis
Definite IE
Definite IE
Treat as IE
Low clinical suspicion
Look for other causes
Treat as bacteraemia
High clinical suspicion
Repeat TTE/TEE
Additional microbiological investigations
(refer Figure 3a)
Send cardiac tissue for HPE if available
**Consider other imaging modalities
Possible IE
Possible IE
Rejected IE
Rejected IE
**Other imaging modalities:
• Cardiac CT (detect pseudoaneurysms,
abscesses and fistulae) especially in patients
with prosthetic valves/ conduits (major
criteria).47,48
• Screen for silent septic emboli:
> CT/MRA brain: infarct/mycotic aneurysm
(detection of cerebral lesions on MRI in
patients with no neurological symptoms
or signs adds 1 minor Duke criteria).
> CTPA (pulmonary infarcts/abscesses/
mycotic aneurysm) in right-sided IE.
• CT abdomen: splenic infarct.
• 18F-FDG PET/CT and radiolabelled leucocyte
SPECT/CT to detect silent metastatic
infectious lesion/peripheral embolism.
18F-FDG: fluorine-18 (F-18) fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG); CT: computed tomography; CTPA: CT
pulmonary angiogram; IE: infective endocarditis;
MRA: magnetic resonance angiogram; MRI:
magnetic resonance imaging; PET: positron
emission tomography; SPECT: single photon
emission computerised tomography; TEE:
transoesophageal echocardiography; TTE:
transthoracic echocardiography.
Adapted from Habib G, et al. Eur Heart J. 2015.
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
3.0 DIAGNOSIS
4.0
MANAGEMENT
4.1 Clinical management
The major goals of management of IE are:
• To eradicate the infectious agent from the endocardium.
• To address the complications of the infection, both intra and extracardiac.
The mainstay of treatment for IE is appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Factors which
maximise treatment success include:
• Early diagnosis.
• Accurate microorganism identification.
• Reliable susceptibility testing.
• Prolonged intravenous administration of bactericidal antimicrobial therapy.
• Proper monitoring of potentially toxic regimens.
• Aggressive surgical management of correctable mechanical complications.
4.1.1 Monitoring
Whilst in the ward, general management steps include the monitoring of:
• Clinical condition:
>
>
Fever:
»»
Fever usually resolves in a few days after commencement of appropriate
antimicrobials.
»»
However, fever may return after this initial period in 30% of cases.
»»
If fever persists after 10 days of treatment, the patient should be
evaluated for suppurative complications (e.g. abscess collections in the
abdomen, lungs or intracardiac abscess).
>
>
The patient should be examined regularly for symptoms and signs of the
following:
»»
Heart failure: symptoms should be treated with standard medical
therapy and its severity regularly assessed. Heart failure may persist
despite microbiological resolution.
»»
Embolic events.
»»
Ongoing sepsis.
»»
Neurological sequelae.
• ECG:
>
>
Should be done daily to monitor heart rhythm and to look for conduction
defects. This is especially important in cases of prosthetic valve IE or
native valve IE as they are at higher risk for extension of infection to the
conduction pathways which can occur very abruptly.
>
>
Conduction defects may be a sign of perivalvular extension of infection
especially in cases involving the aortic valve.
• Blood investigations:
>
>
General investigations:
»»
Regular levels of inflammatory markers e.g. CRP and ESR (daily in the
acute period and at least twice weekly thereafter once the patient is
more stable).
»»
Regular FBC for total white cell count, haemoglobin and platelet count
(thrombocytopaenia).
»»
Blood urea and electrolytes for signs of acute renal failure. Renal failure
is a complication of IE and haemodialysis may be required.
»»
Liver function tests.
»»
Coagulation profile in patients on anticoagulation.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
>
>
Blood cultures:
»»
Should be taken 3-4 days after the commencement of treatment to
document the eradication of bacteraemia.
»»
If the blood cultures remain positive despite adequate levels of
appropriate antimicrobials, metastatic infection should be looked for.
• Echocardiography (refer Figure 3b):
>
>
TTE should be repeated if there is any change to the patient’s clinical
condition.
>
>
During the course of management of IE, assess for:
»»
Haemodynamics and/or cause of heart failure.
»»
Causes of uncontrolled infection: paravalvular abscess,
pseudoaneurysms or fistulae (using TEE).
»»
Echocardiographic features for risk of embolisation (refer Section
4.1.2.3).
»»
Monitor vegetation:
Resolution of IE: vegetations gradually reduce in size, decrease
in mobility and increase in echogenicity. In the long-term, these
vegetations may not disappear or even change in size, even with
clinical treatment success.
Risk of embolisation: vegetations increase in size60,61 and mobility.
»»
Monitor for rarer complications: e.g. purulent pericarditis (presence
of fluid in the pericardial space), coronary obstruction (regional wall
motion abnormality corresponding to coronary artery distribution) and
myocarditis (general hypokinesia).
>
>
In uncomplicated cases, a baseline, pre-discharge TTE should be
performed.
• Antimicrobial peak and trough levels should be done as appropriate. Patients
should be assessed for clinical features of antimicrobial toxicity.
4.1.2 Complications
It is important to recognise the common and serious complications of IE, as cardiac
surgery should be considered in circumstances involving such complications. The
main complications of IE are:
• Heart failure.
• Persistent infection and perivalvular extension.
• Systemic embolism.
• Neurological complications.
All IE patients who develop cardiac complications should be referred to a SC (a
centre with cardiology and cardiothoracic surgery services; refer Section 4.1.4)
as most would need more advanced imaging, surgical intervention and cardiac
intensive services.
4.1.2.1 Heart failure
Heart failure is the most common complication of IE, which occurs in up
to half of all cases.62 It is the most important predictor of mortality. In most
cases of IE, heart failure is usually caused by valvular dysfunction and not
myocardial failure.63 Heart failure is more commonly associated with aortic
valve dysfunction compared to mitral valve dysfunction.64 Less commonly,
intracardiac fistulae may also cause heart failure.65 The clinical presentation of
heart failure includes dyspnoea, pulmonary oedema and cardiogenic shock.
The management of heart failure in infective endocarditis
A. Imaging and monitoring in heart failure
Echocardiography (TTE or TEE) is important in the evaluation of:
• Acute valve regurgitation: if symptoms or signs of heart failure occur, an
echocardiogram should be performed immediately to diagnose possible
acute valve regurgitation, which carries a very high mortality. In acute
regurgitation, the size of the chamber may be normal or only slightly
enlarged. Ejection fraction may be normal. There may be findings of:
>
>
Extensive destruction of the valve leaflets.
>
>
Massive regurgitation.
>
>
Abscess or pseudoaneurysms.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
However in cases of chronic valve regurgitation with superimposed IE, the
size of the cardiac chamber may be enlarged with impaired systolic function.
• Valve perforation.
• Secondary mitral lesions.
• Aneurysms/fistula (are best assessed using TEE).43
• Haemodynamic consequences of valvular dysfunction:
>
>
Measurement of pulmonary artery pressure.
>
>
Detection of pericardial effusion.
>
>
Assessment and monitoring of left ventricular systolic function.43
B. Heart failure marker
• N-terminal pro brain-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) is useful in
diagnosing heart failure and effectiveness of medical therapy.66
C. Medical management (refer to 3rd edition of Management of Heart
Failure CPG 2014, Section 7.1 available at http://www.moh.gov.my/
penerbitan/CPG)
• Pharmacotherapy:
>
>
Diuretics (e.g. furosemide).
>
>
Intravenous diuretics are indicated for patients with symptoms of
acute pulmonary oedema or fluid overload (raised jugular venous
pressure; JVP and ankle oedema).
>
>
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
>
>
Beta-blockers:
»»
Although beta-blockade in acute heart failure may cause
harm and beta-blockers should also not be used in
aortic regurgitation as this will increase diastolic time and
regurgitation volume.
D. Surgical management (refer Chapter 5.0)
• Indication and timing:
>
>
All cases of IE with acute heart failure should be stabilised with
medical management and referred for consideration of surgery.
>
>
Although surgery is urgent, the timing should be agreed with the
surgical team in order to optimise the patient’s condition to minimise
surgical risk.
4.1.2.2 Persistent infection and perivalvular extension
If after 7-10 days of antimicrobial therapy, there is persistent fever and
positive blood cultures, assess for the following possibilities and manage
accordingly:
• Inadequate or inappropriate antimicrobial therapy.
• Resistant microorganisms.
• Complications: perivalvular extensions and extracardiac septic
embolisation.
• Thrombophlebitis/infected intravenous lines.
In cases of both suspected persistent infection and perivalvular extension,
the following should be considered:
• Regular (e.g. daily) ECG to monitor for conduction abnormalities e.g. AV
block.
• Perform a TEE in cases of persistent fever especially in those with
prosthetic valves, aortic valve IE and S. aureus infection, or new AV
block.
• Perform an ECG-gated cardiac CT scan to assess for aortic root
abscess or perivalvular extension in cases when TEE facilities are not
available.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.1.2.3 Systemic embolism
The risk of systemic embolism is very high in IE (20-50%) and life-threatening
complications are often related to the migration of cardiac vegetations. The
risk is highest during the first days following the initiation of antimicrobial
therapy and rapidly decreases subsequent to that.61,67 Frequent sites for
embolisation in left-sided IE are the brain and spleen whilst pulmonary
embolism frequently occurs in native right-sided and pacemaker lead IE.68
Stroke is a major complication and is associated with increased morbidity
and mortality.68
Factors associated with an increased risk of embolism are:
• Vegetation size > 10 mm (higher risk if > 15 mm).69
• Mobility of vegetations.69
• Location of the vegetation on the anterior mitral valve leaflet.
• Increase in the size of the vegetation under antimicrobial therapy.60
• S. aureus60 and Streptococcus bovis70 infection.
• Fungal endocarditis.
• Previous embolism.61
• Multivalvular IE.71
• Biological markers (e.g. elevated CRP).72
Embolisation may occur before diagnosis, usually within the first 2-4 weeks
of therapy or after antimicrobial therapy.68 Late embolisation can occur up to
15-30 weeks after diagnosis usually due to poor response to antimicrobial
treatment. In order to predict the risk of embolic events, several features can
be assessed with the use of echocardiography. They are usually related to
the size, mobility and the location of the vegetation.60,68
Distal emboli may lead to metastatic infection or abscesses.63 Emboli may
also involve other systemic organs such as the liver, kidneys and abdominal
mesenteric vessels.63 Osteomyelitis is estimated to occur in 2-6% of cases of
IE and is more common in intravenous (IV) drug abusers.73 18F-FDG PET/CT
imaging in IE has been useful in detecting peripheral embolic and metastatic
infectious events in some cases where other diagnostic imaging has not
identified foci.54
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.1.2.4 Neurological complications
IE can have profound and devastating neurological consequences. Neurological
complications can occur before or during the diagnosis of IE, but they can
also occur later in the clinical course of IE. Symptomatic neurological events
develop in 25-40% of patients with IE.4,46,74
Most neurological complications occur early in the course of IE and they
are most common in left-sided IE. The most common complications are
ischaemic and haemorrhagic complications.
Diagnosis of neurological complications
It is important to make the diagnosis of neurological complications early, as
well as to assess the severity of the complication. Intracerebral events are
diagnosed by history-taking, clinical examination, and by imaging modalities.
Imaging modalities commonly used for the assessment of intracerebral
events include:
• CT scan, with or without contrast agents (most commonly performed).
• MRI, with or without gadolinium enhancement (better detection in
patients with focal neurological lesions and may also detect lesions in
patients without symptoms e.g. microbleeds). In addition to normal
sequences, diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI)/T2weighted (T2W) gradient-echo (GRE) sequences are important to show
asymptomatic infarcts or small microbleeds respectively.
• Cerebral angiography is advisable when there is strong clinical suspicion
of mycotic aneurysm despite negative findings on non-invasive imaging
modalities.
Imaging investigations should be done as soon as clinical features appear,
preferably within 24 hours. The presence of neurological complications, its
type and severity is important as it will impact the optimal management of IE.
It is of particular importance to be specific when describing and grading
the neurological complications of IE (refer Table 4.1).
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Table 4.1: Description of neurological complications
Neurologic
complication
Epidemiology
Clinical
manifestation
in IE
Management
Implications for
cardiac surgery if
indicated
Ischaemic
Clinically present
in 20-40% of
patients with IE.
Asymptomatic
ischaemia can
be found in an
additional 30-40%
of patients with IE.
Can be divided into:
• Small ischaemic
complications
such as TIA or
minor infarction
affecting < 30%
of a brain lobe
or clinically silent
infarcts.
• Moderate-severe
ischaemic
complication
such as multiple
cerebral
embolisms or a
single embolism
affecting ≥ 30% of
a brain lobe.
Focal deficits,
encephalopathy
and seizures.
Avoid IV tissue
plasminogen
activator (tPA) or
streptokinase,
antiplatelet agents
and warfarin.75-77
Decision to withhold
anticoagulation
should be
individualised and
dependent on the
multidisciplinary
team (IE team).
As the evidence
is not yet strong
enough to
make a uniform
recommendation,
these decisions
should be
individualised in
consultation with all
members of the IE
team.
Clinically silent or
small lesions should
not delay cardiac
surgery.
Larger infarcts may
warrant a delay
(refer Chapter 5.0).
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Neurologic
complication
Epidemiology
Clinical
manifestation
in IE
Management
Implications for
cardiac surgery if
indicated
Haemorrhagic
Present in 4-27% of
patients with IE.
These include:
• Primary
intracerebral
haemorrhage.
• Haemorrhagic
infarction
(transformation).
• Subarachnoid
haemorrhage.
• Microhaemorrhage is
present in up to
57% of patients
with IE.
Focal deficits,
headache,
encephalopathy
and seizure.
Native valve: avoid
all antiplatelets and
anticoagulants.
Prosthetic valves:
stop anticoagulation
with close
monitoring and
evaluation of the
patient’s clinical
condition for at least
2 weeks.78
Consider magnetic
resonance
angiogram (MRA)
in this group of
patients and refer
for Neurology
consult (for
best timing to
recommence the
anticoagulation).
Consider conversion
to heparin in
anticipation of
surgical intervention.
As the evidence
is not yet strong
enough to make a
uniform recommendation, these
decisions should
be individualised in
consultation with
all members of the
specialist team.
Postpone cardiac
surgery for 4
weeks following
clinically significant
haemorrhage.79,80
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Neurologic
complication
Epidemiology
Clinical
manifestation
in IE
Management
Implications for
cardiac surgery if
indicated
Mycotic
aneurysms
Present in at least
2-4% of patients
with IE.
Headaches,
seizures,
focal deficits,
encephalopathy,
opthalmoplegia
and rarely
proptosis.
Antimicrobials
and serial imaging
for stable, small,
unruptured
aneurysms.
Endovascular repair
of large or enlarging
unruptured
aneurysms, if
suitable. Open
surgical clipping for
large or enlarging
unruptured
aneurysms not
amenable to
endovascular
repair or in areas
where surgical
anastomoses may
spare function.
Any anticoagulation
should be stopped
and the decision
to restart should
be made in
consultation with all
members of the IE
team.
Postpone cardiac
surgery for 1-2
weeks following
aneurysmal repair.
Cerebral
abscess
Present in 1-7% of
patients with IE.
Focal deficits,
headache,
encephalopathy,
unresolved
sepsis and
seizures.
Antimicrobials
alone for small
or multifocal
abscesses.
Surgical drainage
for abscesses
that are large or
do not respond to
antimicrobials.
Neurosurgical
intervention as
appropriate for
hydrocephalus or
significant mass
effect.
Typically will not
interfere with
surgical planning.
Prioritise
neurosurgical
intervention in
the setting of
hydrocephalus or
significant mass
effect.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Neurologic
complication
Epidemiology
Clinical
manifestation
in IE
Management
Implications for
cardiac surgery if
indicated
Meningitis
Present in 1-20% of
patients with IE.
Headache,
encephalopathy,
seizures,
neck/back
pain, nuchal
rigidity and
photophobia.
At least 4 weeks of
antimicrobials.
Typically will not
interfere with
surgical planning.
Adapted from Morris et al. Neurohospitalist. 2014.81
• Patients at highest risk of morbidity and mortality are those who had
moderate-severe ischaemic strokes and intracranial haemorrhage.
• Antimicrobial therapy should be started as soon as possible as the rate
of neurological complications reduces significantly after one week of
treatment.
• Anticoagulation therapy (warfarin or heparin) should be reviewed and
adjusted according to clinical status (e.g. S. aureus IE in the presence of
a mechanical prosthetic valve).
• However, despite antimicrobial therapy, patients with large vegetations
(> 10 mm) should be considered for early surgical intervention (refer
Chapter 5.0).
Management of neurological complications
A. General Principles
Some general measures in the management of neurological complications:
• Antimicrobial therapy should be started as soon as diagnosis is made to
reduce the development of complications in the first week.
• The duration of antimicrobial therapy will depend on the type of
complication and microorganism involved (refer Section 4.2).
• In the event of any neurological complication, it is advisable to refer to a
neurologist for consultation and further management.
• Referrals to a neurosurgeon and interventional radiologist may be
needed in the event of an intracerebral bleed, mycotic aneurysm or
brain abscess.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
B. Management of ischaemic and haemorrhagic complications
Ischaemic stroke and haemorrhagic events are associated with higher
mortality. Therefore, it is crucial to anticipate the potential risk in patients
with predisposing factors for embolisation (refer Section 4.1.2.3), make a
rapid diagnosis and initiate appropriate antimicrobials as soon as possible to
prevent a first or recurrent neurological event.80
C. Management of mycotic aneurysms
An aneurysm is a focal arterial dilatation involving all three layers of the
arterial wall. Anuerysmal degeneration secondary to bacteraemia or septic
embolisation is called a mycotic aneurysm. They are thin walled, friable
and rupture easily resulting in intracranial haemorrhage. Cerebral mycotic
aneurysms are a rare and deadly type of aneurysm that have no definitive
treatment guidelines and represent 0.7-5.4% of all cerebral aneurysms. The
mortality rate after rupture could reach as high as 80%.82 The diagnosis of
mycotic aneurysm is made by magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or
cerebral angiography.
The evolution of mycotic aneurysms is unpredictable even after antimicrobial
therapy and variable outcomes have been reported.83 Predictive factors for
aneurysmal rupture have not been ascertained up to date.
The treatment of mycotic aneurysms should be tailored according to
response to antimicrobial therapy, location of aneurysm and clinical
status of the patient. They can be treated surgically, endovascularly or
by watchful waiting. Cerebral mycotic aneurysms should be treated
by a multidisciplinary team in a tertiary centre. This team consists of
cardiologists, neurosurgeons, interventional neuroradiologists, neurologists
and intensivists. In addition, this centre must have facilities and expertise to
manage cerebral mycotic aneurysm patients. There are many factors which
determine the choice of management, either open surgery or endovascular
management. However, the most important are the following:82
• The morphology and location of the aneurysm.
• Whether it is possible to sacrifice the parent artery.
• Whether the patient needs or has received valve replacement surgery.
• The patient’s overall status.
Decisions by the multidisciplinary team should be followed after discussion
with the patient and family members.
In the management of complications in IE:
1. Surgery should be considered in patients with acute heart failure due to
mechanical complications (refer Chapter 5.0). [I/B]
2. Further imaging should be considered in patients with persistent infection
or high-risk for systemic embolisation. [IIa/C]
3. A multidisciplinary team inclusive of a neurologist with or without a
neurosurgeon is recommended in the management of patients with IE and
neurological complications. [I/C]
4. If cardiac surgery is indicated in the presence of cerebral mycotic
aneurysm, pre-operative endovascular or neurosurgical intervention may
be considered. [IIb/C]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
If cardiac surgery is needed in the presence of a mycotic aneurysm, preoperative endovascular intervention may be considered. Endovascular
intervention involves occluding the aneurysm with a coil or other occluder
materials (such as autologous clots or polyvinyl alcohol microparticles) and
can be done safely with good outcomes in centres with available expertise.83
The role for routine MRA or cerebral angiography in all patients with left-sided
IE is unknown as is the role of prophylactic coiling of all asymptomatic
mycotic aneurysms.
D. Management of brain abscess, meningitis or encephalitis.
In the event of these complications, consultation from a neurologist and ID
specialist should be sought.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.1.3 Issues with anticoagulation
Cerebral injuries occur in 20-40% of patients during the active course of IE.84 These
include ischaemic stroke, TIA or intracerebral haemorrhage. The management
of ischaemic stroke due to IE is different to ischaemic strokes from non-infective
causes with regards to anticoagulation.
Anticoagulation in the setting of IE raises concerns of intracerebral haemorrhage,
an often fatal event. Cerebral haemorrhage in endocarditis occurs through one of
three mechanisms:
• Acute pyogenic arteritis secondary to uncontrolled infection.
• Haemorrhagic transformation of embolic infarcts.
• Rupture of dilated mycotic aneurysms.
Antiplatelet therapy
The potential role of antiplatelet therapy such as aspirin to reduce cerebrovascular
events in IE has been investigated.
• Aspirin has not been shown to be of clear benefit as an adjunctive treatment in
reducing mortality or morbidity in IE75,85 and initiation of aspirin as treatment for
IE is not recommended.
• In patients who were on aspirin long-term prior to the diagnosis of IE, it may be
continued if there are no bleeding complications.86
• The role of other antiplatelet agents such as clopidogrel has not yet been
extensively investigated.
Anticoagulation with warfarin
Cerebral haemorrhage is a major determinant of poor clinical outcome in IE.
A. Native valve infective endocarditis
• No evidence of a cerebrovascular ischaemic or haemorrhagic event.
>
>
Warfarin may be continued for those who are on anticoagulation with
warfarin for non-valvular indications (e.g. atrial fibrillation and deep vein
thrombosis).87
• Presence of a cerebrovascular ischaemic or haemorrhagic event.
>
>
Warfarin should be stopped to prevent haemorrhagic transformation (in the
case of ischaemic stroke) or expansion of the haemorrhagic event.88
>
>
Warfarin may be recommenced 2-3 weeks after the event or until the
period of sepsis is over.89
>
>
The role of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and new oral
anticoagulants (NOAC) in this context is not known. It is advisable to stop
all forms of anticoagulation such as NOAC or LMWH in the event of an
ischaemic stroke or intracerebral haemorrhage in IE patients.81
B. Mechanical prosthetic valve infective endocarditis
Patients with mechanical prosthetic valves require anticoagulation with warfarin
because of the risk of thromboembolic complications. Mechanical prosthetic
valve IE (MPVIE) carries a higher mortality and poorer prognosis compared
to native valve IE (NVE).90,91 In MPVIE, the risks of cerebral haemorrhage with
continued anticoagulation need to be weighed against the risk of thromboembolic
complications from the mechanical prosthesis if anticoagulation is stopped.
The thromboembolic risk is higher with certain features such as:92
• Prosthetic mitral valves rather than aortic valves.
• Non-bileaflet valves.
• Early post-operative period (< 3 months) rather than late post-operative period.
• Presence of atrial fibrillation.
• Left ventricular dysfunction.
• Left atrial dilatation.
• Previous thromboembolic events.
• Hypercoagulable conditions (e.g. pregnancy).
In the event that a major ischaemic cerebral event occurs in MPVIE, it is reasonable
to:
• Stop warfarin for at least 2-3 weeks during the period of highest risk for
haemorrhagic transformation.
• Unfractionated heparin may be used from the 2nd week after stopping warfarin
under close monitoring to reduce the thromboembolic complications from the
mechanical valve prosthesis.
• Patients with77,80 MPVIE due to S. aureus have been shown to be at much
higher risk for cerebral haemorrhage. In these cases, even if there is no
neurological complication, once diagnosis of IE is made warfarin can be
stopped and substituted with unfractionated heparin for 2 weeks.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
In the event of intracranial bleeding occurring in MPVIE:
• Anticoagulation should be stopped.
• Anticoagulation should be avoided during the first 2 weeks as the risk of
further bleeding and expansion of the intracerebral haemorrhage is highest
during this period.
• It is reasonable in most cases to restart anticoagulation with caution using
unfractionated heparin after 2 weeks as the risk of further intracranial bleeding
is low after 2 weeks, while the risk of thromboembolic complications in
mechanical prosthetic valves without anticoagulation increases.89,93
• In cases where the risk of further intracranial bleeding after 2 weeks is judged
to be high by the neurosurgical team, this must be balanced with the risk of
thromboembolic complications from the mechanical prosthetic valve without
anticoagulation, and a consensus decision made by the team.
• In those patients with MPVIE who may require imminent surgery it is advisable
to discontinue warfarin at the time of diagnosis until the management plan is
elucidated.
• If surgery is not indicated and the patient is deemed stable without
contraindications or neurologic complications, warfarin can be restarted with
caution.94
Restarting anticoagulation should be done very cautiously starting with intravenous
unfractionated heparin guided by activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
monitoring and subsequently with dose adjusted warfarin. The role of LMWH in
this context is not known. There are currently no guidelines on the use of NOAC for
mechanical prosthetic valves. A Phase II trial on dabigatran in mechanical valves
was terminated early due to excess bleeding in the dabigatran arm.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
On the use of anticoagulants in IE patients with neurological
complications:
1. In the event of intracranial bleeding, anticoagulation should be stopped. [I/B]
2. In MPVIE complicated by a major ischaemic cerebral event, it is
reasonable to stop anticoagulation with warfarin for 2-3 weeks and
cautiously substitute with intravenous unfractionated heparin after 2
weeks. [IIa/C]
3. In MPVIE due to S. aureus, it may be reasonable to stop warfarin
and substitute with unfractionated heparin for 2 weeks, even with no
neurological complication. [IIa/C]
4. In the event of intracranial bleeding, it is reasonable to stop warfarin for
2 weeks and anticoagulate with unfractionated heparin after 2 weeks in
most cases. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
4.1.4 Referral for specialist care
IE is an unusual disease for a few reasons:
• The clinical manifestation, predisposing risk factors and epidemiology of IE can
be very variable.
• Despite being relatively rare, it has significant morbidity and mortality.
• Ideal management of IE requires multiple, highly specialised expertise in one
centre which is often not widely available. These include but are not limited to:
echocardiologists, ID specialists, cardiac surgeons, interventional radiologists,
neurologists, neurosurgeons and microbiologists.
To ensure a good outcome and to prevent complications, it is important to establish
an accurate diagnosis early and institute appropriate treatment. It is recommended
to have a multidisciplinary team approach in the management of patients with IE
especially those with high-risk features. Where indicated, these patients may need
additional subspecialty consultation or referral to a specialist centre. A Specialist
Centre (SC) is defined here as a hospital with cardiothoracic, cardiac imaging and
specialised cardiology services (refer Appendix 7).
Referral to a SC is recommended in the following situations (refer Table 4.2):
• Strong clinical suspicion of IE but TTE negative.
>
>
Requires TEE and/or other imaging modalities to diagnose IE and to
monitor for complications.
• Patients with high predisposing risks.
>
>
Prosthetic valves or material (e.g. conduit IE, prosthetic shunts and
intracardiac devices).
>
>
Transcatheter valve implantation (e.g. transcatheter aortic valve
implantation; TAVI and pulmonary valve implantation; PVI).
>
>
CIED infections.
>
>
CHD.
• Patients with indications for cardiac surgery (refer Section 5.1).
• Patients with cardiac complications.
>
>
Valvular dysfunction especially of the left-sided valves.
>
>
Cardiac abscess (confirmed or suspected).
>
>
Congestive heart failure.
>
>
Metastatic infection.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Specific situations that may need other non-cardiac consultations:
• ID and microbiology:
>
>
BCNIE.
>
>
Persistent infection that is not responding to treatment.
• Neurology/neurosurgery:
>
>
Patients with neurological complications.
• Haematology:
>
>
Patients who are on anticoagulation with coagulopathies and haemorrhagic
complications.
Patients with non-complicated IE can be managed in a centre with internal medicine
specialists. These are patients with:
• Mild-moderate abnormality of cardiac valvular function with no heart failure.
• Native valves only.
• Not more than mild ischaemic neurological complications (involving < 30% of a
lobe).
However, in the event that complications arise they should be referred to a SC.
Table 4.2: Specific clinical situations needing referrals/specialised
consultation
Complicated IE (requires transfer to a SC if
possible or constant consultation with a SC)
Non-complicated IE (manage in centre with
internal medicine specialists but refer to SC
in the event complications arise)
• Heart failure
• Perivalvular extensions
• Embolic complication
• Neurological complication**
• Metastatic or uncontrolled infection#
• CHD
• Prosthetic valve
• CIED
• Transcatheter implantable valves or devices
• Mild-moderate abnormality of cardiac valvular
function with no heart failure
• Native valves only
• Not more than mild ischaemic neurological
complications (involving < 30% of a lobe)
Additional consultation with non-cardiac subspecialties: **neurology/neurosurgery; #ID and
microbiology.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
A Specialist Centre (SC) is defined as a centre with cardiothoracic, cardiac
imaging and specialised cardiology services.
Patients with high predisposing risk for complications, with indications for
cardiac surgery and with cardiac complications should ideally be referred
to a SC.
For referral of IE patients for specialist care:
1. IE should be preferably managed by a multidisciplinary team with the
necessary expertise in endocarditis management. [IIa/B]
2. Patients with complicated IE should be considered for referral to a SC.
[IIa/C]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.1.5 Pre-discharge management
All patients who have experienced an episode of IE remain at high-risk for recurrent
infection indefinitely (refer Appendix 1). Those with significant valvular regurgitation
and/or cardiac lesions who have completed successful antimicrobial therapy may
require eventual cardiac surgery. The assessment for timing of surgical intervention
can be guided by the clinical status and serial echocardiographic evaluation.
Therefore, prior to discharge, patients who have had appropriate and effective
medical treatment and surgery (if necessary) should undergo the following:
• Detailed physical assessment to document the clinical status (blood pressure,
heart rate and rhythm should be documented).
• Laboratory investigations e.g. inflammatory markers, FBC and serology
(improving trend/resolution of infection).
• Echocardiography to establish a new baseline (most often TTE is adequate).
• Evaluation of toxicity resulting from prolonged antimicrobial use such as renal
function, ototoxicity and diarrhoea (refer Section 4.2).
• Counselling or rehabilitation for IVDU.
• Education and counselling on:
>
>
Recognition of relapsing infection e.g. fever, chills, rigors and the need for
blood cultures BEFORE starting any antimicrobials (even oral ones).
>
>
Heart failure signs and symptoms in case of mechanical deterioration of
cardiac function.
>
>
Good oral hygiene and when indicated, antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to
dental procedures (refer Chapter 8).
For pre-discharge assessment of IE patients:
1. Pre-discharge echocardiogram is recommended to establish a new
baseline. [IIa/C]
2. Education to patients on recognising relapses, complications and oral
hygiene is recommended. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
4.2 Antimicrobial therapy: principles and methods
4.2.1 General principles
General principles for the treatment of IE include:
• Parenteral antimicrobials in high dose to sustain antibacterial concentrations
for treatment success.
• Bactericidal antimicrobials are necessary for effective treatment.
• Adequate duration is required to prevent relapses.
4.2.2 Suggested regimes for treatment of native or prosthetic valve
infective endocarditis
The choice of antimicrobials will depend on the type of microorganism isolated
and whether it is a native or a prosthetic valve IE. These are presented in the
tables below. All doses quoted are for patients with normal renal function. For
dosing adjustment in patients with renal impairment refer to Appendices 8 and 9.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.2.1 Streptococcus viridans
Table 4.3: Endocarditis due to penicillin-susceptible viridans group
streptococci (VGS) and S. gallolyticus (bovis)95-98
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Penicillin-susceptible VGS and S. gallolyticus (bovis) (MIC ≤ 0.125 µg/ml) – native and
prosthetic valve
Benzyl
penicillin
(Crystalline
penicillin)
3MU** every 4
to 6 hourly or
12-18 MU/day
as a continuous
infusion
**MU = mega
unit; 600 mg =
1 MU
200,000
-300,000 units/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses (up to 1218 MU daily)
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
Ampicillin
2 g IV 4 hourly
300 mg/kg/day
IV in 4-6 equally
divided doses
Ceftriaxone
2 g IV once daily
100 mg/kg/day
IV in 1-2 equally
divided doses
(maximum
4 g/day)
Vancomycinb,c
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual
body weight)
IV every 8-12
hourly; not to
exceed 2 g/dose
40 mg/kg/day
IV in 2-3 equally
divided doses
(maximum 2g/
day)
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
Vancomycin therapy
is recommended
only for patients
with immediatetype penicillin
hypersensitivity.
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Relatively resistant to penicillin VGS and S. gallolyticus (bovis) (MIC > 0.125 to 2 µg/ml) –
native valve endocarditis
Benzyl
penicillin
(Crystalline
penicillin)
OR
Ceftriaxone
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicin4
4 MU**
4 hourly or
24 MU/day
as continuous
infusion
**MU =
megaunit;
600 mg = 1 MU
2 g IV
once daily
3 mg/kg/day IV
once daily
200,000 -
300,000 units/
kg/day IV in
4-6 equally
divided doses
(up to 12-18 MU
daily)
100 mg/kg/day
IV in 1-2 equally
divided doses
(maximum
4 g/day)
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
2 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
Cephalosporins may be
substituted for penicillin
in patients whose
penicillin hypersensitivity
is not of the immediate
type
See notes below on
how to monitor for
gentamicin toxicity
Vancomycinb,c
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual
body weight)
IV every 8-12
hourly; not to
exceed
2 g/dose
3 mg/kg/day IV
once daily
40 mg/kg/day
IV in 3 equally
divided doses
(maximum
2g/day)
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
2 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
Vancomycin therapy
is recommended
only for patients
with immediate-type
penicillin hypersensitivity
See notes below on
how to monitor for
gentamicin toxicity
a. Paediatric doses should not exceed the max of normal adult dose.
b. Vancomycin: aim for serum trough level of 10-15 mg/l.
c. Vancomycin dose should be adjusted in patients with renal impairment. Refer Appendices 8 and
9 for dosing recommendations.
d. For patients on gentamicin:
• Monitor gentamicin level and renal function weekly. There should be a low threshold for
stopping gentamicin in patients with deteriorating renal function or other signs of toxicity.
• When given in a single daily dose give infusion over 30 minutes. Aim for pre-dose (trough)
serum level of < 1 mg/l.
• Consider biweekly clinical screening for ototoxicity:
> Check baseline visual acuity using a Snellen pocket card.
> To screen for ototoxicity, have patient shake head and reread the card.
> Consider formal audiology test if patient loses 2 lines of visual acuity.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
For antimicrobials in Streptococcus viridans infection:
1. For penicillin susceptible (MIC ≤ 0.125 µg/ml) streptococcus viridans,
monotherapy with benzyl penicillin, ampicillin or ceftriaxone is adequate.
[IIa/B] Duration of therapy is for 4 weeks for NVE and 6 weeks for
prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE). [IIa/C]
2. For penicillin relatively resistant (MIC > 0.125 to 2 µg/ml) streptococcus
viridans, gentamicin has to be added to the regime. [IIa/B] Duration of
gentamicin is for 2 weeks for NVE and 6 weeks for PVE. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.2.2 Nutritionally variant streptococci
Table 4.4: Abiotrophia defective and Granulicatella species (both
formerly known as nutritionally variant streptococci; NVS)99, 100
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Ampicillin
OR
Benzyl penicillin
(Crystalline
penicillin)
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
2 g IV 4 hourly
4 MU** IV
4 hourly or
24 MU/day as
a continuous
infusion).
**MU = megaunit;
600 mg =
1 MU
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
300 mg/kg/day
IV in 4-6 equally
divided doses
300,000 units/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
6
2
Follow susceptibility
test results, if available
See notes below on
how to monitor for
gentamicin toxicity
Ceftriaxone
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
2 g IV
once daily
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
100 mg/kg/day
IV in 1-2 equally
divided doses
(maximum
4 g/day)
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
6
2
Ceftriaxone is
preferred if clinically
not responding with
penicillin
Vancomycinb,c
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual body
weight) IV every
8-12 hourly; not
to exceed
2 g/dose
40 mg/kg/day
IV in 2-3 equally
divided doses
(maximum
2g/day)
6
Vancomycin therapy
is recommended
only for patients
with immediatetype penicillin
hypersensitivity
4.0 MANAGEMENT
For antimicrobials in NVS infection:
NVS are fastidious and slow growing making it technically difficult to
determine antimicrobial susceptibility. Combination treatment of penicillin,
ampicillin or ceftriaxone with gentamicin for at least the first 2 weeks,
followed by continuation of chosen antimicrobial without gentamicin for 6
weeks is recommended. [II/B]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
a. Paediatric doses should not exceed the max of normal adult dose.
b. Vancomycin: aim for serum trough level of 10-15 mg/l.
c. Vancomycin dose should be adjusted in patients with renal impairment. Refer Appendices 8 and 9
for dosing recommendations.
d. For patients on gentamicin:
• Monitor gentamicin level and renal function weekly. There should be a low threshold for
stopping gentamicin in patients with deteriorating renal function or other signs of toxicity.
• Aim for pre-dose (through) serum level of < 1 mg/l.
• Consider biweekly clinical screening for ototoxicity:
> Check baseline visual acuity using a Snellen pocket card.
> To screen for ototoxicity, have patient shake head and reread the card.
> Consider formal audiology test if patient loses 2 lines of visual acuity.
4.2.2.3 Staphylococcus aureus and Coagulase-negative
staphylococcus (CoNS)
Table 4.5: Native valve endocarditis due to S. aureus (rightsided)101-105
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Methicillin-susceptible staphylococci (MSSA) – left-sided
Cloxacillin
12 g/day IV
in 4-6 equally
divided doses
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
4- 6
Methicillin-susceptible staphylococci (MSSA) – right-sided; tricuspid valve
Cloxacillin
12 g/day IV
in 4-6 equally
divided doses
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
2-4;
see comments
2 weeks regime is sufficient
provided the patient fulfils all
the following criteria:
• MSSA
• Good response to
treatment
• Absence of metastatic
sites of infection or
empyema
• Absence of cardiac
and extracardiac
complications
• Absence of associated
prosthetic valve or leftsided valve infection
• < 20 mm vegetation
• Absence of severe
immuno-suppression (<
200 CD4 cells/ml) with or
without acquired immune
deficiency syndrome
(AIDS)
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Regimens for β-lactam allergic patients – both left-sided and right-sided
Cefazolin
2 g IV 8 hourly
100 mg/kg/day
IV in 3 equally
divided doses
4-6
Cephalosporins should
be avoided in patients
with immediate-type
hypersensitivity to
penicillin. Cefazolin has
inadequate blood-brain
barrier penetrability. In
cases of brain abscesses
complicating MSSA IE,
watch out for treatment
failure.
Vancomycinb,c
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual
body weight)
IV every 8-12
hourly; not to
exceed
2 g/dose
60 mg/kg/day
IV in 2-3 equally
divided doses
(maximum
2 g/day
unless unable
to achieve
therapeutic
range)
4-6
Loading dose of 25-30 mg/
kg (actual body weight) may
be considered for seriously
ill patients.
Vancomycin is inferior to
cloxacillin for treatment of
MSSA.
Vancomycin therapy
is recommended
only for patients with
immediate-type penicillin
hypersensitivity
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci (MRSA) – left-sided and right-sided
Vancomycinb,c
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual
body weight)
IV every 8-12
hourly; not to
exceed
2 g/dose
60 mg/kg/day
IV in 2-3 equally
divided doses
(maximum
2 g/day
unless unable
to achieve
therapeutic
range)
4-6
Loading dose of 25-30 mg/
kg (actual body weight) may
be considered for seriously
ill patients
Daptomycin
10 mg/kg IV
daily
10 mg/kg IV
daily
4-6
Daptomycin is superior
to vancomycin for
MRSA bacteraemia with
vancomycin MIC > 1 mg/l
Table 4.6: Staphylococcal endocarditis in the presence of a
prosthetic valve or other prosthetic material
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Methicillin-susceptible staphylococci (MSSA)
Cloxacillin
PLUS
Rifampicin
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
2 g IV 4 hourly
300-450 mg PO
12 hourly**
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
20 mg/kg/day
PO in 3 divided
doses
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
≥ 6
≥ 6
2
Allergy to penicillin but
not immediate- type
hypersensitivity use
cefazolin or vancomycin
Immediate-type
hypersensitivity to penicillin
use vancomycin
**Rifampicin has better
penetration. However to
avoid the development of
resistance, it should be
started after 3-5 days of
effective initial cloxacillin
therapy and/or once the
bacteraemia has been
cleared.
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci (MRSA)
Vancomycinb,c
PLUS
Rifampicin
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual body
weight) IV every
8-12 hourly; not
to exceed
2 g/dose
300-450 mg PO
12 hourly**
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
60 mg/kg/day
IV in 2-3 equally
divided doses
(maximum
2 g/day unless
unable to achieve
therapeutic
range)
20 mg/kg/day
PO in 3 divided
doses
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
≥ 6
≥ 6
2
For adults, loading dose of
25-30 mg/kg (actual body
weight) may be considered
for seriously ill patients.
**Rifampicin has better
penetration. However to
avoid the development of
resistance, it should be
started after 3-5 days of
effective initial vancomycin
therapy and/or once the
bacteraemia has been
cleared.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
a. Paediatric doses should not exceed the max of normal adult dose.
b. Vancomycin: aim for serum trough level of 15-20 mg/l.
c. Vancomycin dose should be adjusted in patients with renal impairment. Refer Appendices 8 and
9 for dosing recommendations.
d. For patients on gentamicin:
• Monitor gentamicin level and renal function weekly. There should be a low threshold for
stopping gentamicin in patients with deteriorating renal function or other signs of toxicity.
• Aim for pre-dose (trough) serum level of < 1 mg/l.
• Consider biweekly clinical screening for ototoxicity:
> Check baseline visual acuity using a Snellen pocket card.
> To screen for ototoxicity, have patient shake head and reread the card.
> Consider formal audiology test if patient loses 2 lines of visual acuity.
For antimicrobials in S. aureus and CoNS infections:
1. Addition of gentamicin for native valve staphylococcus endocarditis is not
recommended. [III/B]
2. Addition of gentamicin and rifampicin is recommended for PVE. [I/C]
Recommendations
4.2.2.4 Enterococcus species
Table 4.7: Endocarditis due to enterococcus-native and prosthetic
valve106
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Fully penicillin-susceptible strains (penicillin MIC ≤ 8 mg/l)
Ampicillin
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
2 g IV 4 hourly
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in
4-6 equally
divided doses
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
4 or 6
depending on
duration of
symptoms and
type of valve;
see comments
2 or 6
depending on
duration of
symptoms and
type of valve;
see comments
Duration of symptoms
< 3 months and native
valve:
Ampicillin duration
- 4 weeks
Gentamicin duration
- 2 weeks
Duration of symptoms
> 3 months or
prosthetic valves:
Ampicillin duration
- 6 weeks
Gentamicin duration
- 6 weeks
See notes below on how
to monitor for gentamicin
toxicity
For patients who
develop renal impairment
or ototoxicity secondary
to gentamicin switch to
ampicillin/ceftriaxone
regime
Ampicillin
PLUS
Ceftriaxone
2 g IV
4 hourly
2 g IV
12 hourly
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in
4-6 equally
divided doses
100 mg/
kg/day IV in
1-2 equally
divided doses
(maximum
4 g/day)
6
Preferred in patients
with renal impairment
(≤ 50 ml/min) or elderly
Ceftriaxone should
not be used alone for
enterococcus infection,
as they are intrinsically
resistant
This combination is
not active against E.
faecium
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Sensitive to penicillin and vancomycin but high level resistance to gentamicin (MIC > 500
mg/l)
Ampicillin
PLUS
Ceftriaxone
2 g IV 4 hourly
2 g IV 12 hourly
300 mg/kg/
day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
100 mg/
kg/day IV in
1-2 equally
divided doses
(maximum
4 g/day)
6
Ceftriaxone should
not be used alone for
enterococcus infection,
as they are intrinsically
resistant
This combination is
not active against E.
faecium
Resistant to penicillin and susceptible to aminoglycosides and vancomycin
Vancomycinb,c
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual
body weight)
IV every 8-12
hourly; not to
exceed
2 g/dose
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
40 mg/kg/
day IV in 3
divided doses
(maximum
2 g/day
unless unable
to achieve
therapeutic
range)
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
6
6
a. Paediatric doses should not exceed the max of normal adult dose.
b. Vancomycin: aim for serum trough level of 10-20 mg/l.
c. Vancomycin dose should be adjusted in patients with renal impairment. Refer Appendices 8 and
9 for dosing recommendations.
d. For patients on gentamicin:
• Monitor gentamicin level and renal function weekly. There should be a low threshold for
stopping gentamicin in patients with deteriorating renal function or other signs of toxicity.
• Aim for pre-dose (trough) serum level of < 1 mg/l.
• Consider biweekly clinical screening for ototoxicity:
> Check baseline visual acuity using a Snellen pocket card.
> To screen for ototoxicity, have patient shake head and reread the card.
> Consider formal audiology test if patient loses 2 lines of visual acuity.
For antimicrobials in enterococcus infection:
1. In native valve enterococcus endocarditis, the duration of ampicillin and
gentamicin is dependent on the duration of symptoms before treatment
initiation. [IIa/C]
2. Combination therapy with ceftriaxone and ampicillin is recommended for
patients with gentamicin high-level resistance, the elderly and those with
renal impairment. [IIa/B]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.2.5 HACEK microorganisms
Table 4.8: Therapy for endocarditis due to HACEK microorganisms
(Haemophilus parainfluenza, Aggregatibacter aphrophilus,
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium
hominis, Eikenella corrodens and Kingella kingae) both native and
prosthetic valve
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatric
Ceftriaxone
OR
2 g IV once daily
100 mg/kg/day
IV in 1-2 equally
divided doses
(maximum
4 g/day)
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
HACEK-group
bacilli produce betalactamases; definitive
treatment should be
adjusted based on the
cultures
Ampicillin +
Sulbactam
OR
Ciprofloxacin
3 g IV 6 hourly
400 mg IV
12 hourly or
500 mg PO
12 hourly
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
(ampicillin
component)
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
4 (native)
6 (prosthetic)
May be an option if
isolate is susceptible
If unable to tolerate
cephalosporin and
ampicillin therapy
fluoroquinolones
generally not
recommended for
patients < 18 years old
4.0 MANAGEMENT
For antimicrobials in HACEK group of microorganism infection:
1. Ceftriaxone monotherapy is recommended for endocarditis due to
HACEK microorganisms. [IIa/B]
2. Alternative drugs such as ampicillin/sulbactam or ciprofloxacin may be
used provided the isolate is susceptible. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.2.6 Candida
Table 4.9: Therapy for Candida endocarditis (native and prosthetic
valve)107
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatric
Amphotericin B
deoxycholate
OR
Lipid formulation
Amphotericin B
with or without
Flucytosine
0.6-1.0 mg/
kg IV
once daily
3-5 mg/kg IV
once daily
25 mg/kg PO 6
hourly
1.0 mg/kg IV
once daily
3-5 mg/kg IV
once daily
100-150 mg/
kg PO in 4
equally divided
doses
At least
6 weeks
after surgery
At least
6 weeks
after surgery
Step down therapy:
fluconazole 400-800 mg
(6-12 mg/kg) orally daily for
susceptible microorganism
in stable patients with
negative blood cultures
(clearance of Candida from
blood stream)
For synergistic effect
Causes dose related
marrow toxicity
Avoid using in patients with
renal failure
Micafungin
Caspofungin
Anidulafungin
150 mg IV daily
150 mg IV daily
200 mg IV daily
At least
6 weeks
after surgery
Step down therapy:
fluconazole 400 -800 mg
(6-12 mg/kg) orally daily for
susceptible microorganism
in stable patients with
negative blood cultures
(clearance of Candida from
blood stream)
• Valve replacement is mandatory. Continue therapy for 6 weeks after replacement or longer in
patient with perivalvular abscess.
• The duration of therapy will depend on patient response and surgical intervention.
• For patients who cannot undergo valve replacement, long-term suppression with fluconazole at a
dosage of 400-800 mg (6-12 mg/kg) daily is recommended.
• For PVE, the recommendations above apply, and suppressive therapy should be lifelong if valve
replacement is not possible.
For management of Candida infection:
Valve surgery combined with antifungal therapy is required for adequate
treatment of Candida endocarditis. [I/B]
Recommendations
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.2.7 Non-HACEK Gram-negative microorganisms
This includes microorganisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia
coli and Salmonella. The choice of antimicrobials for these microorganisms
depends on antimicrobial susceptibility pattern. Commonly combination
therapy with β-lactam (column A) and aminoglycosides or fluoroquinolones
(column B) are used (refer Table 4.10). Medical therapy often needs to be
combined with cardiac surgery. The duration of therapy is 6 weeks.
Table 4.10: Antimicrobial choices for pseudomonas endocarditis (6
weeks duration) in adults^
Column A
Column B
Anti Pseudomonal β-lactams
Aminoglycosides
Ceftazidime 2 g IV 8 hourly
Gentamicin 5-7 mg/kg IV daily
Cefepime 2 g IV 8 hourly
Amikacin 15 mg/kg IV daily
Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g IV 6 hourly
OR
Flouroquinolones**
Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV 8 hourly
Levofloxacin 750 mg IV daily
**Flouroquinolones can be switched to appropriate oral dose if patient can tolerate oral medications.
^As there are very limited data on treating these infections in the paediatric population, a Paediatric
ID specialist consult is recommended for an appropriate treatment plan.
Adapted from Reyes MP, et al. Medicine (Baltimore). 2009.108
For antimicrobials in non-HACEK group of microorganism infections:
In non-HACEK Gram-negative IE a combination therapy with a β-lactam and
aminoglycoside or fluoroquinolone are used. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
4.2.2.8 Other microorganisms
Table 4.11: Therapy for other microorganisms (adults)**
Pathogen
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration of therapy
Brucella
spp.109
Doxycycline
PLUS
Rifampicin
ADD
Streptomycin
(For first 2-3 weeks only)
OR
Gentamicin
100 mg PO
12 hourly
300-600 mg PO daily
1 g IM daily
5 mg/kg IV daily
3-6 months
C. burnetii
(agent of Q
fever)110
Doxycycline
PLUS
Hydroxychloroquine
100 mg PO 12 hourly
600 mg PO daily or
200 mg PO 8 hourly
18-24 months based on
clinical and serological
response
Bartonella
spp.111,112
Doxycycline
PLUS
Gentamicin
100 mg PO 12 hourly
3 mg/kg IV daily
2 weeks
**As there are very limited data on treating these infections in the paediatric population, a Paediatric ID
specialist consult is recommended for an appropriate treatment plan.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.3 Empirical therapy
The initial empirical regime for endocarditis will depend on the following factors
(refer Figure 4a):
• Involvement of native or prosthetic valves.
• Duration following prosthetic surgery; early vs. late PVE (refer Appendix 1).
• Community acquired or healthcare associated (refer Appendix 1).
• Presence of risk factors for multidrug resistant microorganisms e.g. previous
antimicrobial use or colonisations (extended-spectrum β-lactamases; ESBL
producing microorganisms, Pseudomonas and MRSA).
• Risk factors/clinical clues for fastidious or intracellular pathogens (refer Table
3.2).
• Acute or subacute presentation.
Patients with subacute presentation are more likely to be infected with less virulent
microorganisms such as VGS, enterococci, HACEK Gram-negative or NVS.
Patients may present acutely due to:
• Infection with more virulent microorganisms such S. aureus and non-HACEK
Gram-negatives.
• Infection with less-virulent microorganisms such as VGS, enterococci and
HACEK Gram-negatives due to prolonged illness or immunocompromised
status.
Figure 4a: Antimicrobial coverage required for initial empirical
treatment
Suspected or confirmed IE
Native valve
Prosthetic valve
Healthcare associated
(nosocomial/non-nosocomial)
MRSA
Enterococci
Non-HACEK Gram-negative microorganisms
Subacute presentation:
Streptococcus
Enterococcus
HACEK Gram-negative organisms
Acute presentation:
The above and to cover MSSA
Community
acquired
Early
(< 12 months)
Late
(> 12 months)
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.0 MANAGEMENT
Proposed antimicrobial regimens for initial empirical treatment of infective
endocarditis (before pathogen identification) are presented in the table below.
Table 4.12: Therapy for initial empirical treatment of IE in acute
severely ill patients
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Community-acquired native valves or late prosthetic valves
(≥ 12 months post-surgery) endocarditis
Ampicillin
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
PLUS/MINUS
Cloxacillin**
12 g/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
3 mg/kg/day IV
once daily
12 g/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
200-300 mg/
kg/day IV in 4-6
equally divided
doses
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
200 mg/kg/day
IV in 4-6 equally
divided doses
**For patients with
suspected S. aureus
infections (such as
IVDU or patients
with prosthesis) and
acute presentation
Vancomycinb,c
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual body
weight) IV every
8-12 hourly; not to
exceed 2 g/dose
3 mg/kg/day IV
once daily
40 mg/kg/day IV in
2-3 equally divided
doses (maximum
2g/day unless
unable to achieve
therapeutic range)
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
For patients who are
allergic to β-lactam
antimicrobials
Antimicrobial
Dosage and route
Duration
of therapy
(weeks)
Comments
Adult
Paediatrica
Early PVE (< 12 months post-surgery) or nosocomial and non-nosocomial healthcare
associated endocarditis
Vancomycinb,c
PLUS
(Low dose)
Gentamicind
PLUS/MINUS
Rifampicin**
PLUS/MINUS
Cefepime^
15-20 mg/kg/
dose (actual body
weight) IV every
8-12 hourly; not to
exceed 2 g/dose
3 mg/kg/day IV
once daily
300-450 mg PO
12 hourly
2 g IV 8 hourly
60 mg/kg/day IV in
2-3 equally divided
doses (maximum
2g/day unless
unable to achieve
therapeutic range)
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
20 mg/kg/day
divided every
8 hourly (maximum
dose: 900 mg/day)
50 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
**Rifampicin is only
recommended for
PVE and it should
be started 3-5
days later than
vancomycin and
gentamicin
^Cefepime is
indicated if local
epidemiology
suggests for
non-HACEK
Gram- negative rod
infections (such as
Pseudomonas)
a. Paediatric doses should not exceed the max of normal adult dose.
b. Vancomycin: aim for serum trough level of 15-20 mg/l .
c. Vancomycin dose should be adjusted in patients with renal impairment. Refer Appendices 8 and
9 for dosing guide.
d. For patients on gentamicin:
• Monitor gentamicin level and renal function weekly. There should be a low threshold for
stopping gentamicin in patients with deteriorating renal function or other signs of toxicity.
• Aim for pre-dose (trough) serum level of < 1 mg/l.
• Consider biweekly clinical screening for ototoxicity:
> Check baseline visual acuity using a Snellen pocket card.
> To screen for ototoxicity, have patient shake head and reread the card.
> Consider formal audiology test if patient loses 2 lines of visual acuity.
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.3.1 Empirical antimicrobial therapy for infective endocarditis in
intravenous drug users
S. aureus is the most common cause of IE among IVDUs. However fungal
and Gram-negative bacilli such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa can also cause
IE in this population. Tricuspid valve involvement is the most common. Septic
pulmonary emboli and pneumonia are common complications of tricuspid
valve involvement and does not alter the duration of treatment (refer Section
4.2.2.3; Table 4.5 & 4.6).
4.0 MANAGEMENT
4.2.4 Outpatient parenteral antimicrobial therapy for infective
endocarditis
In carefully selected patients, outpatient parenteral antimicrobial therapy (OPAT)
can be a safe and effective means of completing therapy for IE. Patients require
minimum 2 weeks of inpatient therapy before being considered for OPAT. Beyond
2 weeks of treatment consider OPAT service if patient is:
• Medically stable.
• Has no heart failure.
• Has no neurological signs.
• Has no renal impairment.
• Has no high-risk cardiac features on echocardiogram (refer Section 3.3.1;
Table 3.4).
The hospital must have established OPAT services with trained staff and
protocols. Patients need to be reviewed daily by a trained nurse and by a doctor
once/twice a week. Some important parameters that should be reviewed are
presented in Appendix 10.
5.0
SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.1 Indications
Surgical intervention is indicated in the following cases of IE:113-116
• Severe valvular incompetence, haemodynamic instability or heart failure.
• Uncontrolled sepsis and paravalvular extension of infection.
• Fungal or multiresistant endocarditis.
• Large vegetations (> 10 mm for left-sided IE) and recurrent systemic
embolisation.
A. Severe valvular incompetence, heart failure or haemodynamic
instability
Valvular regurgitation in NVE occurs as a result of:
• Leaflet perforation.
• Rupture of the leaflet supporting apparatus.
• Interference of the vegetative mass with leaflet closure.
• Intracardiac and extracardiac fistulas.
• Valve obstruction of prosthetic valves by very large vegetations (rare).
When acute and severe, heart failure and haemodynamic instability ensues. Surgery
in these situations is life saving and has been shown to improve survival.114
B. Persistent infection, uncontrolled sepsis and paravalvular extension of
infection
Surgery is indicated when:
• Fever or positive blood cultures persist despite appropriate antimicrobial
treatment after 5-7 days.
• Extracardiac causes have been excluded.
Paravalvular extension of IE is the most frequent cause of uncontrolled infection and
is associated with a poor prognosis. Most of these patients undergo surgery with a
very high hospital mortality of up to 41%.117
Abscesses are more common in native aortic valve endocarditis compared to mitral
or tricuspid valve endocarditis and typically occur in the weakest part of the annulus
near the membranous septum and AV node.118
• Heart blocks are therefore a sign of abscess formation.
• Acute coronary syndromes can also occur.
• Abscesses are more common in PVE as the annulus rather than the prosthetic
valve is usually the primary source of the infection.119
• These abscesses may progress to fistulous tracts creating intracardiac or
pericardial shunts.117
C. Fungal or multiresistant endocarditis
Surgery is indicated in IE caused by the following microorganisms/infection:
• Fungal IE:
>
>
Responds poorly to medical treatment.
>
>
Reported mortality of up to 70%.120,121
>
>
Even with surgery, survival remains poor.
• Multiresistant microorganisms.
• Non-HACEK Gram-negative bacteria.
• S. aureus infection, if a favourable early response to antimicrobials is not
achieved.
D. Very large vegetations (> 10 mm) or previous systemic embolism
Surgery should be considered for vegetations > 10 mm in size particularly when
other risk factors for embolisation are present. These include:36,61,71,115
• Mobile vegetation.
• Increase in vegetation size despite treatment.
• Vegetation on the mitral valve (particularly the anterior leaflet).
• S. aureus, fungal and HACEK endocarditis.
• Previous systemic embolism.
Surgical intervention in IE is indicated for:
1. Severe valvular incompetence, heart failure or haemodynamic instability. [I/B]
2. Persistent infection, uncontrolled sepsis or paravalvular extension of
infection. [I/B]
3. Fungal or multiresistant endocarditis. [I/B]
4. Very large vegetations (> 10 mm) or previous systemic embolism. [I/B]
Recommendations
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.2 Timing of surgery
In general, when there is an established indication for surgery as discussed in
Section 5.1 above, surgical intervention should be undertaken as soon as practically
possible after completion of surgical workup.
Early surgical intervention in these patients:
• Improves survival.113,122,123
• Prevents the risk of progressive heart failure, cardiogenic shock and multiorgan
failure.124
• Decreases the progression of infection causing further structural damage with
abscess formation.
• Reduces systemic embolism of the vegetations.116
• Increases the likelihood of valve repair rather than replacement due to lesser
destruction of the native valve.125
The improved results with early surgery is seen in those with heart failure or
paravalvular complications. However in practice, surgery is often delayed in
endocarditis due to:
• High operative risk.
• Possible risk of the newly implanted prosthetic valve getting infected.
A recent meta-analysis involving 8,141 patients demonstrated that early surgery
within 2 weeks of diagnosis improved both early mortality and long-term survival
compared with non-early surgery.126 In patients with cardiogenic shock, surgery
should be undertaken much earlier, within 24 hours of diagnosis.127 However, it
may be reasonable to delay surgery for 48 hours in a patient with septic shock
to allow a period of stabilisation and better control of the sepsis with intravenous
antimicrobials as cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass in the presence of
septic shock carries an excessively high operative mortality.125,127
In selected patients, surgery can be carried out on an elective or semi-elective basis
in the subacute or healed phase of endocarditis where the operative risk and the
risk of infection of the implanted valve prosthesis is lower.68,128 This is applicable for
the following patients:
• Pre-existing chronic valvular regurgitation who are haemodynamically stable.
• Vegetation is < 10 mm in size.
• Well-controlled sepsis.
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
A multidisciplinary team approach, comprising cardiologists, cardiac surgeons and
ID specialists is recommended when deciding on the indication and optimal timing
for surgical intervention. This approach has lowered overall morbidity and mortality
for IE. Patients with an indication for surgical intervention should be transferred to
a SC at the earliest opportunity where such a multidisciplinary approach can be
offered.
5.2.1 Preventing systemic embolism
Most emboli occur before the diagnosis of endocarditis and in the first 2 weeks
thereafter; the embolic rate decreases significantly after 2-3 weeks of antimicrobial
therapy.17,61,67,129 There is emerging evidence for urgent surgery in preventing
embolic events in those with large vegetations > 10 mm.130
A randomised controlled trial of 76 patients with left-sided NVE comparing early
versus late surgery in IE with large vegetations (> 10 mm) reported a lower
composite rate of hospital deaths, embolic events and recurrent endocarditis at
6 months with early surgery within 48 hours (3% versus 23%). The difference
was largely due to a reduction in embolic events with early surgery.116 Surgery
undertaken for the prevention of systemic embolism should be performed urgently
during the first few days following initiation of antimicrobial therapy, as the risk of
embolism is highest at this time.
Timing of surgery
Clinical condition
The timing of surgical intervention in IE patients depends on the clinical condition of
the patient.
Emergency
(within 24 hours)
Cardiogenic shock from severe valve dysfunction. [I/C]
Urgent
(within 3-4 days)
Pulmonary oedema but not in cardiogenic shock. [I/B]
Very large vegetations (> 10 mm). [I/B]
Paravalvular abscess or heart block. [I/C]
Early
(within 1-2 weeks)
Fungal, S. aureus or other highly resistant microorganisms. [I/C]
Persistent infection. [IIa/B]
Persistent or enlarging vegetations despite antimicrobials. [IIa/B]
Recurrent emboli. [I/B]
Semi-elective
(after 2 weeks of
antimicrobial cover)
PVE and relapsing infection. [I/B]
Elective
(after 6 weeks of
antimicrobial therapy)
Well-tolerated chronic severe valvular regurgitation with
controlled infection. [I/C]
Recommendations
5.3 Surgery in specific conditions
5.3.1 Cerebral infarction or haemorrhage
Up to 80% of patients with left-sided endocarditis have cerebral embolism detected
by MRI. However, the majority of these are subclinical and clinical stroke is diagnosed
in only 25-29%.48,131
The risk of significant neurologic complications occurring as a result of cardiac surgery
performed early after a significant cerebral infarction is high:
• Approximately 20% in the first 3 days.
• 20-50% between 4 and 14 days.
• 6-10% between 15 and 28 days.
• < 1% after 28 days.
Hospital mortality is also dependent on the time of cardiac surgical intervention after
a cerebral infarction; 66% when surgery is performed within 24 hours of a stroke,
and gradually decreasing every week to 7% when surgery is performed more
than 4 weeks after a stroke.132 The risk of clinical deterioration is independently
associated with stroke severity.
The recommended timing for valve surgery if indicated, following a cerebrovascular
event is as follows:
• Without delay:
>
>
In the presence of subclinical cerebral emboli or small cerebral infarcts
without severe neurological damage.
>
>
Absence of cerebral haemorrhage.
• Delayed for at least 2 weeks:
>
>
In the presence of major ischaemic strokes, if more urgent surgery is
indicated e.g. due to congestive heart failure, progressive decline in cardiac
function or uncontrolled infection.
>
>
Absence of cerebral haemorrhage.
>
>
Areas of brain infarction are small.
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
• Delayed for at least 4 weeks:
>
>
In the presence of major ischaemic strokes.
>
>
In the presence of major intracranial haemorrhage (> 2 cm in diameter):
»»
This reduces the risk of cerebral haemorrhage during cardiac surgery on
cardiopulmonary bypass with systemic heparinisation.79
»»
In one study, hospital mortality was 75% when performed within 4
weeks of a haemorrhagic stroke compared to 40% when surgery was
performed after 4 weeks.80
Surgical indication for patients with cerebral infarction or
haemorrhage:
1. In the presence of subclinical cerebral emboli or infarcts without
haemorrhage, surgery can be undertaken without delay when indicated.
[IIb/B]
2. In the presence of major ischaemic strokes or intracranial haemorrhage,
surgery may be delayed for at least 4 weeks. [IIa/B]
3. In the presence of major ischaemic strokes without coma or intracranial
haemorrhage, surgery can be performed after 2 weeks if urgent surgery
is indicated e.g. due to congestive heart failure, deteriorating cardiac
function or uncontrolled infection. [IIa/B]
Recommendations
Surgical indication for right-sided IE:
1. Persistent infection despite 2 weeks of appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
[IIa/C]
2. Persistent vegetation size > 20 mm and recurrent septic pulmonary
emboli despite appropriate antimicrobials. [IIa/C]
3. Massive or worsening tricuspid regurgitation causing right heart failure
unresponsive to medical therapy. [IIa/C]
4. Failure or complications of percutaneous removal of infected pacing
wires. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.3.2 Right-sided endocarditis
Right-sided IE accounts for 5-10% of all cases of IE mostly involving the
tricuspid valve, while isolated pulmonary valve involvement is rare. Right-sided IE
resolves with conservative treatment in most cases and surgery is not commonly
performed. The insertion of a prosthetic valve is generally avoided as much as
possible in these cases as the majority of these patients are IVDUs and the risk
of subsequent infection of an implanted valve prosthesis is high with continued
intravenous drug use.
5.3.2.1 Indications for surgery
Surgery is indicated in the following situations:
• Persistent infection due to difficult to eradicate microorganisms not
responding to antimicrobial therapy beyond 2 weeks.133
• Persistent vegetation size > 20 mm and recurrent septic pulmonary
emboli despite appropriate antimicrobials.134,135
• Massive or worsening tricuspid regurgitation causing right heart failure
unresponsive to medical therapy.
• Failure or complications of percutaneous removal of infected pacing
wires.
S.aureus infections are often complicated with large vegetations, aggressive
valve destruction and embolic manifestations resulting in an increased risk
of mortality. In a recent meta-analysis, medical therapy of staphylococcal
endocarditis was associated with higher mortality than combined medical/
surgical therapy especially if multiresistant type of microorganism is present.
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.3.3 Prosthetic valve endocarditis
In addition to the indications for surgery in NVE mentioned above, surgery in PVE
is also recommended for:
• Staphylococcal endocarditis.
• Severe prosthetic valve dysfunction or dehiscence.
Only about half of patients with PVE undergo surgery, more commonly in those with
early PVE i.e. occurring in the first year after valve surgery. The risk of recurrent PVE
after surgery for PVE is significant and further surgery is required in up to 18% of
these patients.136,137
Most patients treated conservatively have uncomplicated non-staphylococcal
and non-fungal late PVE. However, these patients require careful follow-up because
of the risk of late events.138 Unlike in NVE, early surgery in PVE has not been shown
to improve survival except in those with the highest risk.18,139
Indications for surgery are:
1. As in NVE (refer Section 5.1).
2. Staphylococcal endocarditis. [I/C]
3. Severe prosthetic valve dysfunction or dehiscence. [I/C]
Recommendations
5.4 Principles of surgery
The surgical principles in IE are well established.
Pre-operative assessment and management would include:
• Investigating and treating the primary source responsible for the endocarditis.
• Treatment of extracardiac sepsis such as splenic and paravertebral abscesses
either by splenectomy140 or percutaneous drainage to avoid infection of the
new valve.
• Investigating and managing cerebrovascular events for those at risk.
• Dental consultation.
Pre-operative workup should therefore include imaging of the brain, chest, abdomen
and pelvis, and maxillofacial area.
Some important surgical strategies are:
• Wherever possible valve repair rather than replacement is preferred.
Valve repair:
>
>
Improves in-hospital and long-term survival.
>
>
Has better preservation of ventricular function.
>
>
Eliminates the risk of prosthetic valve-related complications compared with
valve replacement.
>
>
Decreases the risk of infection of the newly implanted prosthetic valve.79,141
• Complete removal and radical debridement of all infected and necrotic
material, leaving only healthy tissue, which will hold suture.
• To avoid excessive manipulation of the heart prior to going on cardiopulmonary
bypass to prevent embolisation of the vegetations.
• Reconstruction using autologous or bovine pericardium, or dacron, if
necessary, avoiding prosthetic material if possible.79,125,142
• Vegetations/cardiac tissue sent for Gram stain, cultures and for HPE (refer
Sections 3.2.2 & 3.2.3, and Appendix 5).
• The choice of valve prosthesis type is based on the usual considerations when
deciding between a mechanical or bioprosthetic valve i.e. age, life expectancy,
co-morbidities and compliance with anticoagulation therapy. There is no
difference in the risk of infection between mechanical or bioprosthetic
valves.79,142,143
• Bioprosthetic valve replacement rather than mechanical valve replacement
should be considered in the presence of mycotic cerebral aneurysms identified
by imaging studies pre-operatively to avoid the need for anticoagulation postoperatively.
• Post-operative anticoagulation management should be reviewed and managed
accordingly in those with cerebrovascular complications.
• Antimicrobials should be continued to complete a total course of 6 weeks in
most cases.
KEY MESSAGE:
MRA of the brain may be considered before cardiac surgery in patients
without neurological complications who are at high-risk of developing
mycotic aneurysm to aid with the surgical strategy.
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.4.1 Aortic valve
Due to the increased risk of embolisation, CT guided coronary angiography
instead of conventional catheter based coronary angiography is recommended to
assess for the presence of perivalvular extensions.
In the presence of periannular abscess, it may be necessary to reconstruct the
aortic annulus using autologous or bovine pericardium, or dacron. In most cases, it
is possible to suture a valve prosthesis onto the reconstructed annulus.
An aortic root replacement with a homograft or stentless root is a good option when
aortic root replacement is necessary.79,144
5.4.2 Mitral valve
Whenever possible, repair rather than replacement of destroyed mitral valves should
be undertaken. Successful repair of the mitral valve in IE is often possible with the
right expertise, which may require repair of the leaflet perforation or augmentation
with pericardial patch and use of artificial neochordae.
However, complete and radical debridement of all infected tissue remains the key
principle and should not be compromised to repair the mitral valve. If mitral valve
replacement is necessary, complete preservation of the subvalvular apparatus
should be performed.
5.4.3 Tricuspid valve
Whenever possible, repair rather than replacement of destroyed tricuspid valves
is preferable. When valve repair is not possible and replacement is necessary,
the choice of prosthesis should follow the same algorithm as in patients without
endocarditis. In IVDUs, it may be reasonable to use a bioprosthetic valve if there is
concern about compliance with anticoagulation medication.79
5.4.4 Periannular extension
Where abscess cavities are present, these must be drained, necrotic tissue excised
and any fistulous tracts closed where appropriate. These patients often require
temporary or permanent pacing.
Surgical principles in IE:
1. Complete removal and radical debridement of all infected and
necrotic material, leaving only healthy tissue, which will hold suture, is
recommended. [I/C]
2. Valve repair when possible is preferred rather than replacement. [IIa/C]
3. The choice of valve prosthesis type should be based on the standard
considerations when deciding between a mechanical or bioprosthetic
valve (e.g. age and childbearing females). [I/C]
Recommendations
5.5 Surgery for infective endocarditis in congenital heart disease
5.5.1 Indications for surgery
Although no paediatric specific surgical guidelines for acute IE exist, established
American Heart Association (AHA) adult guidelines have been endorsed by the
American Academy of Paediatrics (AAP).145
The determinant factors of surgical therapy for active IE in the paediatric population
are mentioned in Table 5.1.
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
Table 5.1: Determinant factors for surgical therapy
During active IE
Complications of IE
Vegetation
• Congestive cardiac failure
• Valvular complications such as progressive
valve dysfunction, perivalvular extension
(fistula and abscess) and valve perforations/
rupture
• Persistent infection despite optimal
antimicrobial therapy
• Unstable prosthesis
• History of embolisation depending on size and
site of vegetation (refer Sections 5.1 & 5.2)
>
> ≥ 1 embolic event during 1st 2 weeks of
antimicrobial therapy
>
> > 2 embolic events during or after the
antimicrobial therapy
• New heart block
• Anterior valve vegetation
• Vegetation size > 10 mm
• Increasing vegetation size despite 4 weeks of
antimicrobials
• Persistent vegetation after systemic
embolisation
• Microorganisms
>
> Fungal IE
>
> Staphylococcal infection
Following completion of treatment in uncomplicated
and haemodynamically stable patients
• In the presence of prosthetic material/conduits
• In unrepaired left-to-right shunts (e.g. ventricular septal defect; VSD and patent ductus
arteriosus; PDA) or obstructive lesions (e.g. infundibular stenosis and coarctation of aorta; CoA)
5.5.2 Timing of surgery
Early intervention in children with heart failure or S.aureus infection can be safely
performed in children with low post-operative mortality and accepted medium
to long-term outcome. Nomura and colleagues146 demonstrated that surgical
intervention during the active phase of infection might be a necessary adjunct to
antimicrobial therapy in certain subgroups. Cardiac surgery performed within 1 week
of diagnosis of a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) due to septic embolisation was
safe.147 Early surgical involvement in children with staphylococcal infection might
have an advantageous role in their treatment by minimising the risk of embolisation
and abscess formation, achieve native valve repair and potentially reverse the cause
of ventricular dysfunction.148
KEY MESSAGE:
Timing of surgery
Preferable clinical condition
For native and prosthetic valve endocarditis, the timing for intervention is
similar to that of adults.
Early
(within 1-2
weeks)
• Unrepaired congenital heart lesions with haemodynamic
instability
• Infected pacemakers/CIED
• Infected conduits with conduit failure causing haemodynamic
instability
• Infected conduit or intracardiac patches with enlarging
vegetations despite antimicrobial therapy and recurrent
embolisation
• Infected intracardiac patches with dehiscence
• Heart block secondary to IE
Semi-elective
(after 2 weeks
of antimicrobial
cover)
• Unrepaired CHD with persistent infection
• Infected conduit, devices, stents and intracardiac patches
with persistent infection
• Fungal, S. aureus or other highly resistant microorganisms
Elective surgery
(after 6 weeks
of antimicrobial
therapy)
• Infected conduit, devices, stents and intracardiac patches
with controlled infection and haemodynamic stability
• Unrepaired CHD with controlled infection and haemodynamic
stability
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
5.5.3 Surgical techniques
Surgical techniques are similar as in the adult patients with IE (refer Sections 5.15.4). However there are some important principles to consider in the paediatric or
CHD population.
• Preserving the native valve is important in children.
• Early intervention favours the preservation of the native annulus.
• Surgery aims at valve repair rather than replacement:
>
>
Mitral valve debridement and repair using Carpentier techniques offer
excellent survival, freedom from re-operation and late function status.147
>
>
If aortic valve replacement is required, the Ross operation is effective for
patients with annular or root abscesses.145
• Endocarditis involving the VSD patch should undergo replacement of the
patch.
• Right ventricular to pulmonary artery conduit have to be replaced to prevent
abscess formation and pulmonary embolisation.
The surgical mortality for IE in the group of CHD has been reported between 10-15%.
Mortality is higher in premature infants and in the presence of fungal endocarditis.149
Prophylactic surgery to prevent a primary embolic event is not recommended given
the lack of proven benefit and long-term risks of valve replacement in childhood.145
5.0 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
Principles of surgical intervention in the paediatric CHD patients:
1. Degree of illness not be considered a limitation to surgical intervention,
because the alternative, to delay or defer surgery, can have dire
consequences. [I/B]
2. Surgery may be considered for patients with relapsing PVE even if valvular
function remains intact after prolonged medical therapy. [II/B]
Recommendations
6.0
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
Following adequate antimicrobial therapy with/without surgery, resolution of the
infection occurs in most patients with IE. However close monitoring with clinical
examination and echocardiography is encouraged especially during the first year
post-IE.
The subsequent frequency of follow-up will depend on the following:
• Clinical status of patient on discharge.
• Residual valvular dysfunction (regurgitation).
• Presence and severity of intra and extracardiac complications e.g. heart failure
and neurological deficits.
Patients post-IE that require referrals back to a cardiac centre during follow-up
include those who:
• Develop relapse and reinfection.
• Require advanced imaging to further quantitate valvular and cardiac structural
insult.
• Require surgical intervention.
Surveillance with clinical and echocardiogram evaluation is recommended to
monitor for:
• Relapses or reinfection of IE (refer Appendix 1):
>
>
If patient presents with febrile illness, it is crucial to take 3 sets of blood
cultures before starting empirical antimicrobials.
• Worsening clinical status and progression of heart failure:
>
>
This may be due to on-going infection or progression of the valve
dysfunction.
• Severity and progression of the valvular regurgitation with regards to deciding
the timing of surgical intervention:
>
>
For those patients with stable valvular heart disease, recommendation for
valve surgery should follow the established guidelines for management of
valvular heart disease.1
• Delayed antimicrobial toxicity e.g. vestibular or audio toxicity (refer Section 4.2)
and Clostridium difficile colitis (diarrhoea).
• In those with IE associated with CHD, referral for surgical repair of uncorrected
CHD and residual lesions are recommended.
Other important areas to re-emphasise during follow-up are:
• Oral care and dental hygiene (refer Chapter 8).
• Rehabilitation for high-risk behaviour (e.g. IVDU).
• Good skin hygiene.
• Body piercing and tattoos should be discouraged.
Relapse and reinfection (refer Appendix 1) are rare (2-6%).150-152 Patient education
is important regarding subsequent febrile illness and prompt medical assessment
should be emphasised. Physicians should have a high clinical suspicion regarding
relapse or reinfection in such cases. A high rate of relapse is associated with:150-152
• S. aureus, enterococcus and Gram-negative microorganisms such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
• IVDU especially with pre-treatment symptoms of more than three months
duration.
• Previous episode of IE.
• Presence of prosthetic material and CHD.
6.0 OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
Factors associated with an increased rate of relapse include:16
• Inadequate antimicrobial treatment (duration, dose and resistant
microorganism).
• Polymicrobial infection in IVDU.
• Empirical antimicrobial treatment in BCNIE.
• Periannular extension.
• Persistent metastatic foci of infection (abscess).
• Prosthetic valve IE.
• Chronic dialysis.
In the case of relapse or reinfection, appropriate antimicrobial therapy is given
similar to patients with primary IE, which is up to 42 days.
6.0 OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
KEY MESSAGE:
1. On follow-up, patients should be monitored for recurrences of IE,
evaluation of side effects from medical therapy and development
of complications e.g. heart failure, and the timing and indication for
elective surgery.
2. For those patients with valve regurgitation, regular monitoring with
echocardiography is needed, following the established guidelines
for management of valvular heart disease.
3. Education on preventive measures e.g. good oral and skin
hygiene, and rehabilitation of high-risk behaviours should be
provided.
4. Risk of relapse is higher in those with inadequate initial
antimicrobial therapy, previous history of IE, prosthetic valves,
unrepaired CHD, IVDU and S. aureus IE.
7.0
SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.1 Infective endocarditis in congenital heart disease
Advances in imaging, congenital heart surgery and intensive care have changed
the spectrum of IE in paediatrics and CHD. More paediatric patients with CHD are
surviving to adulthood.153-155
Surgery may eliminate the risk of IE in patients with simple shunts with no residual
lesions. However, in complex congenital lesions, due to the use of prosthetic
material, palliative shunts and long-term sequelae of the post-operative course,
the risk of IE is increased.156-158 The risk of IE in patients with CHD increases with
age. The cumulative incidence of post-operative IE in adults with CHD ranges
between 1% and 6% at 10 and 25 years follow-up respectively, and varies based
on the different heart defects.157 Cumulative incidence of IE post-aortic valve
stenosis repair at 25 years was however, unusually high at about 13%.157 Based
on a prediction model of IE risk in adults with CHD, the cumulative observed
risk of IE is 2.4% at 40 years old and 4.7% at 60 years of age.159 In developing
countries, IE complicates unrepaired CHD, cyanotic heart defects and those who
have had palliative procedures.160-163
7.1.1 Epidemiology
Most available data are from single large centres, based on in-patient findings. A
population based review of the Quebec CHD Database from 1988 to 2010 reported
that the cumulative incidence of IE from birth to 18 years was 6.1 first cases per
1,000 children which corresponded to an incidence rate of 4.1 per 10,000 personyears,164 which is lower than the overall incidence of IE in adults with CHD, reported
as 11 per 10,000 person-years.159 In a Japanese survey of hospitalised patients
from 66 institutions (1997-2001), the prevalence of IE in CHD was 0.42%.165
The mean age of IE in children with CHD was 8.4 years (range 10 days-17 years)
and in the adult patient with CHD it ranged between 16.8-32.5 years.160,165,166 There
was a male preponderance (1.5:1).159,165,167 IE in CHD occurred more commonly on
the right side and was highest up to 6 months post-intervention.165,167,168
Gram-positive cocci are the common aetiological agents of IE in children; VGS is
most common followed by S. aureus especially in those patients with indwelling
catheters and prosthetic material.158
7.1.2 Mortality
IE in patients with CHD has significant morbidity and mortality. The overall inpatient mortality for IE in children and adults with CHD were 9.4-11% and 6-7.2%
respectively.165,166,168 Late mortality was 7.7%.167
Risk factors for in-hospital mortality in CHD were:149,161,169
• Vegetation size ≥ 20 mm.
• Age < 1 year.
• Presence of heart failure at diagnosis.
• S. aureus as a causative microorganism.
• Aortic valve involvement.
• Nosocomial/healthcare associated endocarditis.
Surgical intervention in selected cases decreased the in-hospital mortality.149
However, as surgery was performed in those who were more ill and/or had
complications, the mortality of surgery during active IE was high, ranging from 1114%.165,167
Predisposing risk factors for IE in CHD are:164,168
• Complex cyanotic CHD.
>
>
Unrepaired and/or palliated (e.g. aorto pulmonary shunts).
• Repaired CHD with prosthetic material including conduits, bioprosthetic
homograft and/or CIED.156
• Repaired CHD with residual lesions (refer Table 7.1).157
• Within 6 months following cardiac surgery or transcatheter device
interventions.170
• VSD with associated valve or outflow tract anomalies (aortic regurgitation, left
ventricle to right atrial shunt, subaortic ridge and infundibular stenosis).157,159,171
• Age of < 3 years.164
7.1.3 Lesion specific incidence of infective endocarditis in
congenital heart disease
Identifying patients who are at risk of IE allows for earlier diagnosis and treatment
as well as instituting infection prevention measures. Review of a population based
registry of all Oregon residents less than 19 years old who underwent surgery for
12 major CHD over a period of more than 30 years showed that the cumulative
risk of post-operative IE varied depending on the cardiac defect.157 The cumulative
incidence of post-operative IE based on different heart defects is shown in Table 7.1.
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
Table 7.1: Cumulative incidence of post-operative IE based on CHD
lesions
Type of repaired CHD
Cumulative incidence of IE at years postintervention
High to moderate risk
Valvular AS
13.3% at 25 years
20.6%* at 30 years
Pulmonary atresia and VSD
6.4%+ at 15 years
VSD
4.1%⁕ at 30 years
d-TGA
4.0% at 20 years
Primum ASD
2.8% at 20 years
CoA
3.5% at 30 years
Complete AVSD
1.1% at 15 years
TOF repair
1.3% at 30 years
Low risk
Secundum ASD
0.0%⁍
PS
0.0%
PDA
0.0%
* The risk of IE in the aortic valve was noted to be higher in post-interventional or prosthetic valve
compared to native valve with a 10-year incidence of 26% and 5% respectively. In the cohort with
aortic valve stenosis, risk of IE increased over time after surgery, with a cumulative incidence of
13.3% at 25 years.
+ For patients with pulmonary atresia and VSD the risk depended on the residual right ventricle to
pulmonary artery conduit stenosis.
⁕ IE in repaired/unrepaired VSD was higher when associated with valve anomalies or outflow
tract obstructions (aortic valve regurgitation and left ventricle to right atrial shunt). The estimated
lifetime risk of IE in unrepaired VSD was higher in the adult with CHD (9.7-12%).157 There was no
documented IE in repaired VSD without other associated lesions.
⁍ The risk of IE in secundum ASD is negligible. This risk increases in the presence of mitral valve
anomalies (mitral regurgitation from a cleft or prolapsed mitral valve).
AS: aortic stenosis; VSD: ventricular septal defect; d-TGA: dextro-transposition of the great arteries;
ASD: atrial septal defect; CoA: coarctation of the aorta; AVSD: atrioventricular septal defects; TOF:
tetralogy of Fallot; PS: pulmonary valve stenosis; PDA: patent ductus arteriosus.
Adapted from Morris CD, et al. JAMA. 1998.157
For patients with CHD followed up to 18 years from birth, the cumulative risk of IE
per 1,000 patient-years was noted to be highest in:164
• Cyanotic CHD.
• Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD).
• Left-sided lesions (aortic and mitral stenosis/regurgitation and coarctation of
aorta; CoA).
• Right-sided lesions (Ebstein anomaly, tricuspid or pulmonary valve anomalies).
7.1.4 Management of infective endocarditis in congenital heart
disease
The diagnostic and management principles of IE in CHD do not defer from the
general principles (refer Chapters 3,4 & 5). The management is mainly appropriate
antimicrobial treatment based on the respective microorganism. Surgery is limited
to those with failure of medical treatment, complications and prosthetic material IE
(refer Section 5.5). These patients preferably should be referred to a centre with
the expertise to diagnose (imaging and microbiological diagnosis) and manage
(medically and surgically) the IE as well as its complications.
However some specific considerations are suggested below:
• TTE is adequate for most patients. However TEE should be considered in
those with poor transthoracic echocardiography window, prosthetic material
and in those who have high clinical suspicion but normal TTE findings.
• In the context of complex CHD with or without prior surgical interventions,
cardiac MRI and cardiac CT are also powerful tools to assist in diagnosis.
• Following completion of IE treatment, patients with residual lesions or
uncorrected intracardiac shunts should be referred for surgical repair.
• Good oral and skin hygiene is crucial, and antimicrobial prophylaxis is limited to
high-risk lesions and following selective procedures (refer Chapter 8).
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
Management of adult paediatric CHD IE patients:
Referral to tertiary centres with expertise in CHD imaging, surgery and
intensive care is advisable. [IIa/C]
Recommendation
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.2 Infective endocarditis in paediatric patients
Frequency of IE in paediatric population is increasing due to:158,164,172
• Improved survival in children with CHD.
• Hospitalised neonates.
Rheumatic heart disease is currently not a common cause of IE in children except
in some developing countries.160-163,173 In a multicentre report, the annual incidence
rate of paediatric IE in the USA was reported to be between 0.05-0.16 per 1,000
hospital admissions from 2003-2010.167 Review of children hospitalised with IE from
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project Kids’ Inpatient Databases (KID) from 2000
and 2003 in the USA showed a bimodal pattern of admission, with peaks in infancy
(31 days-11 months of age) and late teenage period (17-20 years of age).174
IE in paediatric patients occurred in three groups of patients:
• Children with CHD (refer Section 7.1).
• Children with acquired valvular heart disease.
• Neonates with normal heart structures.
7.2.1 Infective endocarditis in neonates with normal heart
structures
Diagnosis of IE in the first month of life has been reported to be about 7.3-18%175
of total paediatric IE cases. This is due to the prolonged use of indwelling central
venous catheters in the management of neonates and infants with complex medical
problems in intensive care units.158,174,176 The mortality was highest in the premature
infant (31%) and those with S. aureus IE.174 The left-sided cardiac structures were
usually affected. Common microorganisms were S. aureus, Coagulase negative
staphylococcus strains, Gram-negative bacterial species and Candida spp.
Predisposing risk factors include:175,176
• Immunosuppressed patients such as premature babies, oncology patients
on chemotherapy, chronic diseases on prolonged steroid therapy and posttransplant on immunosuppressive drugs.
• Intravenous therapy within 4 weeks before the onset of endocarditis.
• Previous invasive procedure (cardiac surgery, cardiac catheterisation and noncardiac invasive procedure) within 8 weeks before IE onset.
• Presence of an indwelling central venous catheter 1 week before onset of
symptoms of IE.
7.2.2 Clinical presentation
Diagnosis of IE may be difficult as the clinical manifestations may be non-specific
and undistinguishable from septicaemia.175 The presentation may be indolent with
non-specific signs or, acute and fulminant.
The classical extracardiac manifestations (Osler’s nodes, Janeway lesions and
splinter haemorrhage) are not common in children. More commonly seen are
clinical manifestations of septic emboli to the abdomen, brain and lungs (refer Table
7.2). Complications of IE are similar to the adult patient e.g. congestive heart failure,
embolic phenomenon, heart block and valve dehiscence.175
Table 7.2: Common symptoms and signs in paediatric IE
Non-specific symptoms of sepsis
• Fever
• Poor feeding
• Reduced activity
• Vomiting and/or diarrhoea
• Weakness
• Weight loss
• Arthralgia
• Recurrent fever for > 4 weeks
Signs
• General:
>
> Tachypnoea
>
> Tachycardia
>
> Respiratory distress
>
> Pallor
• Cardiac:
>
> Signs of congestive heart failure
>
> New or changing murmur
• Septic emboli:
>
> Abdomen: splenomegaly
>
> Neurological: seizure, hemiparesis and meningitis
>
> Bone: osteomyelitis
>
> Lungs: pneumonia
Laboratory parameters
• Thrombocytopenia
• Neutrophilia/neutropenia
• Raised CRP and ESR
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.2.3 Management of paediatric infective endocarditis
7.2.3.1 Diagnosing infective endocarditis in paediatric patients
As in adults, the diagnosis of IE in children is made based on the modified
Duke criteria.56,177,178 Since the presentation in children can be non-specific, a
high clinical suspicion is necessary especially in those with predisposing risk
factors. A thorough history, physical examination and investigations (imaging,
blood cultures, microbiological tests and HPE) should be done to make the
diagnosis (refer Chapter 3.0).
S. Aureus bacteraemia is one of the major criteria in the modified Duke
criteria irrespective of the cause and is the most common pathogenesis of
bacteraemia in the presence of central venous catheters.56 Removal of the
central venous catheters in those with prolonged bacteraemia is advised
before the diagnosis of IE.179 The associated use of hyperalimentation and
high glucose concentrations with central venous catheter has contributed to
the increase in Candida spp. IE in neonates. BCNIE although less common,
can also occur. It is usually due to either previous antimicrobial treatment
or fastidious microorganisms. The diagnosis and management of BCNIE is
similar to the adult and is described in Chapters 3 and 4.
TTE is more sensitive (97%) in young patients (weight < 60 kg) compared to
adult patients in detecting endocarditis. However for those patients who are
obese, have prosthetic grafts, valves and conduits, chest deformities, and
in those with hyperinflated lungs or compromised respiratory function, TEE
serves as an important adjunct (refer Section 3.3).180
7.2.3.2 Treatment of infective endocarditis in paediatric patients
The management of IE in paediatric patients and IE in CHD is predominantly
by medical treatment and the choice of antimicrobials will depend on the
microorganism cultured (refer Section 4.2). It is important to use appropriate
dosing based on weight especially in the neonate. It is recommended to
remove or change all long-standing central venous catheters if present.
7.3 Infective endocarditis in transcatheter valve implantations
7.3.1 Transcatheter pulmonary valve implantation
Transcatheter (percutaneous) pulmonary valve implantation (TPVI) as an alternative
to open-heart surgery for right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) valve implantation
was first described in 2000 by Bonhoeffer et al.181 Similar to surgical valve series,
the incidence of early PVE has been reported to be ≤ 1%.182
IE in TPVI is a clinical diagnosis and requires a high index of suspicion, as patients
may present with non-specific symptoms. Patient characteristics, timing and
presentation of TPVI IE are quite complex.183
Early PVE is defined as occurring within the first 12 months after valve implantation/
replacement.
• High index of suspicion is required.
• In addition to Duke criteria, any degree of increase of RVOT gradient
(unexplained by a structural complication such as stent fracture), valvular
involvement and new onset of pulmonary regurgitation should raise a high
suspicion of IE.183
KEY MESSAGE:
1. IE in CHD is increased in post-operative/intervention patients with
prosthetic material, devices and residual lesions.
2. TEE in paediatric patients is recommended for those with poor
transthoracic echocardiographic windows and those with high-risk
of developing complications (abscesses and paravalvular leakage/
dehiscence) and those with prosthetic valve/conduit/material
endocarditis. [IIa/B]
3. Antimicrobial prophylaxis and infection prevention measures are
recommended in patients with high-risk of developing IE (refer
Chapter 8).
4. Consider other imaging modalities such as cardiac MRI or cardiac
CT in CHD.
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
Possible risk factors:183,184
• Male.
• Dental treatment.
• Septic skin wound.
• Reactivation of previously treated fungal infection.
• Previous history of medically treated IE.
• Multiple stents in RVOT.
• Distorted RVOT anatomy.
• Contegra conduit and Melody valve are at higher risk compared to homograft.
Buber et al. proposed life long pre-procedural prophylactic antimicrobials for TPVI
patients, with either a history of previous IE or a complex RVOT anatomy.185 Fever
(80%) and heart failure (22%) were the most common initial symptoms of PVE in the
transcatheter valve replacement group (aortic and pulmonary valve).
7.3.1.1 Management plan
• If TPVI endocarditis is suspected, the patient should be referred to a SC.
>
>
Medical management:182
»»
Antimicrobial treatment for at least 6 weeks, based on the
causative microorganism (usually S. aureus in TPV).
>
>
Surgical intervention:
»»
The in-hospital mortality rate associated with episode of PVE was
7.1%.
»»
Surgical ex-plantation of the infected conduit valve is
recommended considering the younger population of patients in
TPVI.182
• Post-discharge follow-up
>
>
Due to complexity of patient with TPVI IE, follow-up should be at a
SC (refer Section 4.1.4).
For the management of TPVI IE in children:
1. In addition to Duke criteria, any degree of increase of RVOT gradient
(unexplained by a structural complication such as stent fracture), valvular
involvement and new onset of pulmonary regurgitation should raise a high
suspicion of IE. [IIa/B]
2. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended prior to invasive procedures in
TPVI patients. [IIa/C]
Recommendations
7.3.2 Transcatheter aortic valve implantation/transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation/replacement (TAVI/TAVR) is an important
therapeutic option for the treatment of aortic valve stenosis in patients with high
operative risk. Although infrequent, one important complication of TAVI is IE. IE
for TAVI is classified according to the modified Duke criteria.186 Patients with high
clinical suspicion of TAVI related PVE should be referred to specialist centres
(refer Section 4.1.4). In patients who have had TAVI and who develop prolonged
fever, valve murmur or new valvular regurgitation, a TTE should be performed.
Since images may be suboptimal due to acoustic shadows, a TEE should also be
considered in order to obtain clearer views of the prosthetic valve.
In the major PARTNER (Placement of Aortic Transcatheter Valves) trial, PVE
occurred at a similar rate in the surgical and transcatheter groups (1.5% and 1.0%
respectively, p = 0.61).187 Two varieties of valves; the Edwards SAPIEN (Edwards
Lifesciences Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) and Medtronic CoreValve (Medtronic Inc.,
Minneapolis, MN, USA) have had reported cases of PVE.188
In IE with TAVI, patients have had positive blood cultures with a microbiological
profile typical to that previously documented in surgical bioprosthetic PVE;
Enterococcus spp.,CoNS, S. aureus and Streptococcus spp.188 The incidence
of PVE may also be increased by patient risk factors such as diabetes mellitus,
oral hygiene and adherence to antimicrobial prophylaxis for dental procedures.188
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for TAVI patients is recommended as in Chapter 8.0.
For TAVI related PVE, the first line of treatment is targeted antimicrobial therapy.
While conventional indications for operative intervention in the setting of PVE may be
less applicable to high-risk TAVI cohorts, surgical treatment remains an option to be
discussed in the context of complications related to IE.188
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
Management of patients with TAVI IE:
1. Patients with high clinical suspicion TAVI related PVE should be referred
to SC. [IIa/C]
2. Targeted antimicrobial therapy remains the first line of treatment for TAVI
related PVE. [IIa/B]
Recommendations
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.4 Infective endocarditis in cardiac implantable electronic devices
CIED IE is serious and is associated with high mortality.189 The precise incidence of
CIED IE is uncertain and varies widely between published series.190,191 Nonetheless,
rates are set to rise due to a wider range of cardiac devices available in the
market, and with increased implantation in the older population.191,192
Factors associated with a greater risk of CIED IE include:
• Immunosuppression (corticosteroids use, diabetes and renal failure).
• Oral anticoagulation use.
• Co-existing illness (ageing population).
• Periprocedural factors such as failure to use appropriate periprocedural
antimicrobial prophylaxis.
• Device revision/replacement.
• Amount of indwelling hardware.
• Operator experience.
• Microbiology of bloodstream infection (S. aureus).
Clinical presentation is often vague and non-specific and thus a high index of clinical
suspicion is mandated.193 CIED IE must always be considered in the presence of
unexplained fever in a patient with a CIED. Patients who develop fever or blood
stream infection with no obvious source, should be referred back to the primary
centre responsible for the implantation. Patients should be educated regarding
these risks.
Echocardiography and blood cultures (refer Sections 3.2 & 3.3) are the mainstay
for the diagnosis of CIED IE. TTE may identify lead vegetation and tricuspid valve
involvement. However, a negative TTE does not rule out CIED IE, hence it is
recommended to proceed to a TEE examination. TEE is more sensitive and specific
to TTE for diagnosis of lead-related endocarditis.
Considering their complementary role, it is preferable to perform both investigations
in cases of suspected CIED IE, as a TTE at time of diagnosis may be used as baseline
for additional studies during the course of the illness. In cases where the clinical
suspicion is still high but cardiac imaging with TTE and TEE yields no evidence of
endocarditis (false negative) other imaging modality such as radiolabelled leucocyte
scintigraphy and 18F-FDG PET/CT scanning may prove useful.194-196 Repeated TEE
is not necessary after completion of treatment.
For the management of patients with CIED IE:
1. Before initiation of antimicrobial therapy, 3 or more sets of blood cultures
should be taken. [I/C]
2. Patients with suspected CIED IE regardless of positive or negative blood
cultures, and independent of TTE findings require TEE to evaluate the
infection. [I/C]
3. In patients with suspected CIED IE with positive blood cultures and
negative echocardiographic findings, 18F-FDG PET/CT can be done. [IIb/C]
Recommendations
Staphylococcus (especially CoNS) account for 60-80% of CIED IE in
most reported
series.197,198 Methicillin resistance among staphylococci varies
among studies.198,199
Polymicrobial infection sometimes involves more than one species of CoNS,
Corynebacterium spp. and Propionibacterium acnes.198,200,201 Gram-negative bacilli
and Candida spp. are rarely identified as pathogens in CIED IE.198,200
At least 4-6 weeks of antimicrobials are recommended for CIED IE. In the
presence of lead vegetation on echocardiography, urgent referral back to the
primary implantation centre should be considered at this time point, if not done
so at priori. Complete hardware removal is advocated and if required, a temporary
device is implanted until the infection is resolved.189,202 Careful assessment of new
implantation strategy must be considered prior to removal in patients whom are
“device-dependent”. Blood cultures should be obtained within 24 hours after
hardware removal for evidence of microorganism clearance from bloodstream.
When a new device implantation is necessary, it should be done on the contralateral side to avoid new device infection.
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
When extraction and reimplantation of CIED is considered in CIED IE:
1. In definite CIED IE as well as isolated pocket infections, antimicrobials
before and after extraction and removal of device and leads are
recommended. [I/C]
2. When no other apparent source of infection is detected, complete
removal of devices should be considered. [IIa/C]
3. Reassessment for the need of reimplantation is recommended after
device extraction. [I/C]
4. Postponement of reimplantation for a few days or weeks during
antimicrobial therapy is recommended if possible. [IIa/C]
5. In pacemaker-dependent patients who require antimicrobials before
reimplantation, a “temporary” ipsilateral device can be considered. [IIb/C]
6. Temporary pacing is not routinely recommended. [III/C]
Recommendations
7.0 SPECIFIC SITUATIONS
7.5 Infective endocarditis in pregnancy
IE during pregnancy is rare. All pregnant patients who are diagnosed with IE
should be referred to a SC for assessment. A multidisciplinary team that includes
a cardiologist, ID physician, obstetrician, obstetric anaesthetist and neonatologist
should be involved in the management of the IE and the pregnancy from the onset
of the diagnosis. The management care plan should include:
• General management of IE (i.e. similar to non-pregnant patient).
• Timing and indication for cardiac intervention e.g. surgery where indicated.
Indications for surgery are as the non-pregnant patients (refer Chapter 5).
However, unlike non-pregnant patients, cardiac surgery should be delayed
wherever possible till post-delivery.
• A detailed pregnancy and delivery care plan.
The management of IE in pregnancy is addressed in the Heart Disease in Pregnancy
CPG (2016) (refer to its 2nd edition Section 4.10 which is available at https://www.
malaysianheart.org/?p=cpg&a=1107)
Cardiac patients at risk (of IE) must be given advice during pre-pregnancy counselling
sessions on the need for good skin and oral hygiene to minimise the risk of IE.
These patients must be referred for professional oral hygiene care throughout their
pregnancy.
KEY MESSAGE:
All pregnant women who have IE in pregnancy should be referred to
a SC with the appropriate expertise for the management of the IE and
pregnancy.
8.0
ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
8.1 Introduction
IE after interventional dental or other procedures is uncommon.203 For this reason,
the use of antimicrobial prophylaxis is only recommended for cardiac patients
associated with the highest risk of IE (the European Society of Cardiology; ESC,
AHA and National Antibiotic Guidelines).16,204,205 Many bacterial species are known
to cause IE, but in recent years staphylococci, commonly associated with healthcare contact and invasive procedures, have overtaken streptococci as the most
common cause of IE.148 As for antimicrobial prophylaxis, the National Institute
of Clinical Excellence (NICE) issued the CG64 in 2008 206 that effectively did not
recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis against IE for people undergoing dental
procedures (or other non-dental procedures) in the United Kingdom (UK). In the
ensuing years, whilst there was a very significant fall in antimicrobial prophylaxis
prescribing, there was also a significant increase in the incidence of IE. In 2016, NICE
reviewed the evidence and concluded that there was no requirement to change
the existing CG64 guidance and emphasised that antimicrobial prophylaxis against
IE is not recommended routinely for people undergoing dental, gastrointestinal
tract, genitourinary and respiratory tract procedures. Additionally, these guidelines
emphasised prevention rather than prophylaxis to reduce the incidence of IE.
It is however, the consensus view of this writing committee that antimicrobial
prophylaxis is administered to all patients at high-risk for IE including those with
established rheumatic heart disease who are undergoing invasive dental and
surgical procedures.
8.2 Cardiac conditions associated with the highest risk of infective
endocarditis
Patients with cardiac conditions listed in Table 8.1 are considered as being at
increased risk of developing IE and are indicated for antimicrobial prophylaxis.
Table 8.1: Cardiac conditions with increased risk of IE
• Prosthetic cardiac valves or prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair
• Native valvular heart disease including established rheumatic heart disease
• Previous IE
• Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and conduits
• Completely repaired CHD with prosthetic material or devices, for first 6 months after the
procedure
• Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or
device (which inhibit endothelialisation)
• Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac valvulopathy
Adapted from European Society of Cardiology, American Heart Association and Cardiac Society of
Australia and New Zealand infective endocarditis guidelines.16,204,207
Patients who require antimicrobial prophylaxis:
Antimicrobial prophylaxis must be indicated for patients with the highest risk
of IE and/or highest risk of adverse outcome from IE. [IIa/B]
Recommendation
8.3 Antimicrobial prophylaxis for specific procedures
Antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent IE is indicated in high-risk cardiac patients prior
to selected dental and non-dental procedures.
Any procedure where antimicrobial prophylaxis is indicated for surgical reasons,
the pre-procedural antimicrobial prophylaxis is normally adequate as IE prophylaxis
in high-risk cardiac cases. In procedures where pre-procedural antimicrobial
prophylaxis is not routinely given, cardiac patients considered as high-risk should
receive antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to procedures expected to produce
bacteraemia as discussed in Section 8.3.2.
8.3.1 Dental procedures
The estimated incidence of IE is about 1 per 150,000 dental procedures with
antimicrobials prophylaxis and 1 per 46,000 for procedures unprotected by
antimicrobials.208 For patients considered as high-risk (Table 8.1), antimicrobial
prophylaxis is recommended for invasive dental procedures that involve manipulation
of the gingival or periapical region of the teeth or oral mucosa. Routine antimicrobial
prophylaxis is not recommended for all patients undergoing dental procedures.
Table 8.2 provides a list of dental procedures where antimicrobial prophylaxis for
endocarditis may or may not be required for cardiac patients.
8.0 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
8.0 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Table 8.2: Dental procedures and recommendations for prophylaxis
of endocarditis
Prophylaxis always required
Prophylaxis required in
some circumstances
Prophylaxis not required
• Extractions
• Periodontal procedures
including surgery, subgingival
scaling and root planning
• Replanting avulsed teeth
• Other surgical procedures
(e.g. implant placement and
apicectomy)
Consider prophylaxis for
the following procedures if
multiple procedures are being
conducted, the procedure
is prolonged or periodontal
disease is present:
• Full periodontal probing for
patients with periodontitis
• Intraligamentary and
intraosseous local
anaesthetic injection
• Supragingival calculus
removal or cleaning
• Rubber dam placement with
clamps (where there is risk of
damaging gingiva)
• Restorative matrix band/strip
placement
• Endodontics beyond the
apical foramen
• Placement of orthodontic
bands or interdental wedges
• Subgingival placement
of retraction cords,
antimicrobial fibres or
antimicrobial strips
• Oral examination
• Infiltration and block local
anaesthetic injection
• Restorative dentistry
• Supragingival rubber dam
clamping and placement of
rubber dam
• Intracanal endodontic
procedures
• Removal of sutures
• Impressions and
construction of dentures
• Orthodontic bracket
placement and adjustment of
fixed appliances
• Application of gels
• Intraoral radiographs
• Supragingival plaque removal
Adapted from Therapeutic Guidelines: antibiotic version 13 and Therapeutic Guidelines: oral and dental
version 1. 2008.209
8.3.2 Non-dental procedures
8.3.2.1 Respiratory tract procedures
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for patients with increased risk
of IE (Table 8.1) who undergo an invasive respiratory tract procedure that
involve incision or biopsy of the respiratory mucosa.209,210 For procedures
involving an established respiratory tract infection, the antimicrobial must be
active against the causative microorganisms in addition to VGS.210
8.3.2.2 Gastrointestinal and genitourinary procedures
Routine pre-procedural antimicrobial prophylaxis is no longer recommended
for patients undergoing genitourinary or gastrointestinal tract procedures.
However, for high-risk cardiac patients who have an established
gastrointestinal or genitourinary infection, or for those who receive
antimicrobial therapy for surgical reasons, the antimicrobial regimen
should include an agent active against enterococci, such as ampicillin or
vancomycin.16,210
8.3.2.3 Other procedures
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is required for high-risk cardiac patients
undergoing these procedures:211
• Incision and drainage of local abscess in the brain, skin and
subcutaneous tissue (e.g. boils and carbuncles), eye (e.g.
dacryocystitis), epidura, lung, orbital area, perirectal area, liver (e.g.
pyogenic liver), tooth and surgical procedures through infected skin.
• Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
The indications for antimicrobial prophylaxis in high-risk patients:
High-risk procedures are usually those that cause bleeding or tissue
damage. VGS is the most common cause of endocarditis after dental or
upper respiratory procedures. [IIa/B]
Recommendation
8.4 Antimicrobial regimes for infective endocarditis prophylaxis
The most common pathogen for oral and respiratory tract procedures related
endocarditis is alpha-haemolytic streptococci. Antimicrobial regimens for
endocarditis prophylaxis are generally directed towards VGS.16,212
8.0 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Table 8.3: Antimicrobial prophylaxis for invasive dental procedures
Single dose administered 30 to 60 minutes before the procedure
Situation
Antimicrobial
Adults
Children
Reference
No allergy to penicillin
or ampicillin
Amoxicillin or
ampicillin
2 g orally or IV
50 mg/kg
orally or IV
ESC 201516
AHA 2007212
Allergic to penicillin or
ampicillin
Clindamycin
600 mg orally
or IV
20 mg/kg
orally or IV
ESC 201516
AHA 2007212
• Alternatively, cephalexin 2 g IV for adults or 50 mg/kg IV for children, cefazolin or ceftriaxone 1 g
IV for adults or 50 mg/kg IV for children.
• Cephalosporins should not be used in patients with anaphylaxis, angioedema or urticaria after
intake of penicillin or ampicillin due to cross-sensitivity.
• For genitourinary and gastrointestinal procedures antimicrobials should include an agent active
against enterococci, such as ampicillin or vancomycin.
Timing of antimicrobial prophylaxis in high-risk patients:
IE antimicrobial prophylaxis (when indicated) is administered as a single dose
30-60 minutes before the procedure. [IIa/B]
Recommendation
8.0 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
8.5 Preventive measures
8.5.1 Periodontal and dental disease
Periodontal and dental diseases can increase the risk of bacteraemia. Maintenance
of optimal oral hygiene may reduce the incidence of bacteraemia with daily activities
such as tooth brushing, flossing or use of oral irrigators, and is considered more
important than prophylactic antimicrobials for a dental procedure to reduce the risk
of IE.213,214 Cardiac patients should be reminded to practise good oral hygiene and
have a dental evaluation twice a year. Patients must be informed about the hazards
of tongue piercing as this procedure may increase the risk of IE and should be
discouraged.16,215
8.5.2 Cardiac implantable devices or prosthesis implantation
IE risk is high in patients undergoing procedures that involve implanting prosthetic
material/valves, CIED and transcatheter occluder devices/implantable valves.
Maintenance, and good oral and skin hygiene (this includes discouraging body
piercing and tattooing) are two of the most important aspects in the preventive
measures of IE.216 As it has been shown that the highest risk of developing IE
in these patients is during the periprocedure stage, the following measures are
recommended:
• Pre-operative screening and eradication of nasal and skin carriage of MRSA
using local mupirocin and chlorhexidine, is recommended before elective
cardiac surgery in order to treat carrier.217,218
• Treat and eliminate potential sources of sepsis at least 2 weeks prior to
procedure/surgery.219
• Pre-procedure antimicrobial prophylaxis before cardiac surgery or
transcatheter intervention.220,221
Preventive measures by high-risk patients are:
Cardiac patients must be advised on the importance of dental and
cutaneous hygiene. [IIa/B]
Recommendation
8.0 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS FOR INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
9.0
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES AND
RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS
The objective of this CPG is to enable the healthcare professionals who encounter IE
patients in the local setting to diagnose this disease early and manage it effectively.
Wide dissemination via soft copy (available from http://www.moh.gov.my, http://www.
acadmed.org.my, http://www.malaysianheart.org/) will facilitate the implementation
of this CPG. However, the limited knowledge in the effective management of the
disease and the varied treatment practice among HCP may be its main barriers.
The successful implementation of this CPG would require:
• Continuous medical education (CME) and training on the most effective means
of diagnosing IE in patients via regular seminars, lectures, CME meetings and
case sharing. These would include:
>
>
How to recognise findings in patients that should trigger high clinical
suspicion of IE.
>
>
How to effectively confirm the diagnosis of IE.
>
>
How and when to institute appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
>
>
When to refer patients to a SC for further management and cardiac surgery.
• Effort to set up an effective referral process in the different states from primary
care centres to SC (refer Section 4.1.4).
• The availability of this CPG to all healthcare professionals from primary care
centres to tertiary institutions offering speciality and subspecialty care through
electronic websites.
• The availability of Quick Reference (QR) guides both through printed copies
and electronic websites as an easy yet comprehensive tool for the prevention,
diagnosis and management of IE.
The measurement of specific performance measures (refer Appendix 11) affords an
effective method in tracking the success of the implementation of these guidelines.
The committee does not foresee any additional cost implications. The imaging
modalities, microbiological testing and surgery can be performed, and appropriate
antimicrobial therapy initiated in tertiary Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education
hospitals.
10.0
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: Classification and definition of infective endocarditis
IE according to localisation of infection and presence or absence of intracardiac material
• Left-sided native valve IE
• Left-sided PVE
>
> Early PVE < 1 year after valve surgery
>
> Late PVE > 1 year after valve surgery
• Right-sided native valve IE
• Device related IE
IE according to the mode of acquisition
Healthcare associated IE
Nosocomial
Non-nosocomial
IE developing in a patient
hospitalised > 48 hours prior to
onset of signs and symptoms
consistent with IE
Signs and symptoms of IE
starting < 48 hours after
admission in a patient with
healthcare contact defined as:
• Home-based nursing
or intravenous therapy,
haemodialysis, or intravenous
chemotherapy < 30 days
before the onset of IE
• Hospitalisation in an acute
care facility
< 90 days before the onset of
IE
• Resident in a nursing home or
long-term care facility
Community acquired IE
Signs and symptoms of IE starting < 48 hours after admission in a
patient not fulfilling the criteria for healthcare associated infection
Intravenous drug abuse
associated IE
IE in an active injection drug user with no alternative source of
infection
Active IE (at least one of the below)
Persistent fever and positive blood cultures
Inflammatory morphology findings during surgery
On antimicrobial therapy
Evidence of active infection on HPE
Recurrence
Relapse
Repeat episodes of IE caused by the same microorganism < 6
months after the initial episode
Reinfection
• IE infection with a different microorganism
• A repeat episode of IE caused by the same microorganism > 6
months after the initial episode
Adapted from European Society of Cardiology infective endocarditis guidelines. 2009.
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 2: Enterobacteriaceae
The family Enterobacteriaceae includes many genera that are Gram-negative rods.
They are also known as enteric Gram-negative rods or enteric bacteria (enteric
means pertaining to the intestines).
Enterobacteriaceae have the following characteristics:
• Gram-negative rods.
• Grow well on MacConkey agar and can be divided into lactose-fermenter or
non-lactose fermenters.
• Grow aerobically and anaerobically (are facultative anaerobes).
• Ferment glucose, often with gas production.
• Catalase-positive, oxidase-negative and reduce nitrate to nitrite.
The following are some of the Enterobacteriaceae microorganisms that can cause IE:
• Enterobacter aerogenes.
• Enterobacter cloacae.
• Escherichia coli.
• Klebsiella pneumoniae.
• Salmonella spp.
• Serratia liquefaciens.
• Serratia marcescens.
Reference:
Jawetz, Melnick and Adelberg’s Medical Microbiology. In: GF Brooks, JS Butel and AS Morse. New York; Lange
Medical Books/Mc_Graw Hill 27th Ed.
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 3: Blood culture collection
Strict aseptic technique should be used throughout the procedure.
1. Identify the site of venepuncture where blood is to be drawn.
2. Wash your hands using soap and water, then dry or apply an alcohol hand
rub.
3. Put on a pair of sterile gloves.
4. Cleanse the site of the venepuncture with 70% isopropyl alcohol, allowing it to
air dry.
5. Disinfect the skin of site on a circle approximately 5 cm in diameter with
chlorhexidine gluconate in alcohol, rubbing vigorously for at least 30 seconds.
Allow to air dry.
6. To prevent contamination, do not palpate the disinfected venepuncture site.
7. Perform venepuncture.
8. Draw blood using a sterile needle and syringe or a blood collection device.
9. Prior to use, examine the blood culture bottles for evidence of damage or
deterioration (discoloration).
10. Check the expiry date printed on each blood culture bottle. Discard bottles
that have expired.
11. Recommended volume of blood (OR follow manufacturer’s instruction):
a. Adult: 10 ml of blood into each culture bottle (aerobic/anaerobic bottles).
b. Paediatric: 1-5 ml of blood in paediatric blood culture bottle.
12. Disinfect the rubber septum on the blood culture bottles with 70% isopropyl
alcohol using fresh alcohol prep for each container. Allow bottle tops to dry to
fully disinfect.
13. Using a transfer device or a fresh sterile needle, aseptically transfer the blood
into the blood culture bottles as soon as possible.
14. If the amount of blood drawn is less than the recommended volume, the
blood should be inoculated into the aerobic bottle first, since aerobic and
facultative bacteria cause most bacteraemia. Any remaining blood should then
be inoculated into the anaerobic bottle.
15. Invert the blood culture bottles gently several times to prevent clotting.
16. Label each bottle with the appropriate specimen label that contains the
patient’s name, ID number and, date and time of collection.
17. Send the blood culture bottles to the laboratory within 2-4 hours of collection.
10.0 APPENDICES
1. Blood cultures should not be obtained from indwelling intravascular
access devices, e.g. intravascular catheters or ports, as it is associated
with higher contamination rates. When blood is obtained from a port or
line, blood drawn via a peripheral vein should also be taken for meaningful
interpretation.
2. Blood culture bottles should not be refrigerated after they have been
inoculated.
3. Do not leave the blood cultures at room temperature for more than
4 hours, as it will delay or impede the detection of growth by the
continuous-monitoring blood culture instrument.
Note:
References:
1. Principles and Procedures for Blood Cultures; Approved Guideline; CLSI document M47-A Vol. 27. No. 17.
2. BD BACTEC Package insert PP-105E 2001/01.
3. Blood culture: A key innovation for diagnosis of bloodstream infections. Biomerieux 2016.
10.0 APPENDICES
1. Interpretation of serological results in these rare aetiological agents of IE
can be difficult. Please consult an ID physician to guide treatment in
these cases.
2. PCR amplification of 16SrDNA gene and sequencing for the identification
of bacterial pathogen from bacterial isolate is provided at the
Department of Medical Microbiology PPUM.
Note:
Appendix 4: Directory of laboratories*
Table: Directory of main laboratories that provide serological
testing of rare aetiological agents of infective endocarditis
Microorganisms
Serology
IgG/IgM
Brucella spp.
IMR
HSB
Coxiella burnetti
IMR
HSB
Bartonella spp.
IMR
Legionella spp.
HKL
UMMC
PPUKM
IMR: Institute of Medical Research; HSB: Hospital Sungai Buloh; HKL: Hospital Kuala Lumpur; UMMC:
University Malaya Medical Centre; PPUKM: Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia.
*This list is not exhaustive and only include public institutions with the available facilities. For
a full list of accredited laboratories, please refer to Standards Malaysia website (www.jsm.
gov.my).
• PCR for Brucella is available
in IMR.
• HPE of the cardiac or
valvular tissue, or emboli
is available upon request at
State and major specialist
hospitals with anatomic
pathology services.
10.0 APPENDICES
The main laboratories and the contact details are as follows:*
Institution/hospital
Name of laboratory and address
Contact number
Institute for Medical
Research
Bacteriology Unit
Institute for Medical Research
Jalan Pahang
50588 Kuala Lumpur
03-26162666
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Microbiology Unit
Department of Pathology
Hospital Sungai Buloh
47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor
03-61454333
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Microbiology Unit
Department of Pathology
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Jalan Pahang
50586 Kuala Lumpur
03-26155590
University Malaya
Medical Centre
Department of Medical Microbiology
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Lembah Pantai
59100 Kuala Lumpur
03-79493039
Pusat Perubatan
Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia
Department of Medical Microbiology and
Immunology
Pusat Perubatan UKM
Jalan Yaacob Latiff
56000 Kuala Lumpur
03-91455555
Pusat Pakar Perubatan
UiTM
Anatomic Pathology Unit
Centre for Pathology Diagnostics and
Research Laboratories
Pusat Pakar Perubatan UiTM
Sungai Buloh Campus
47000 Sungai Buloh Selangor
03- 61265053
*This list is not exhaustive and only includes public institutions with the available facilities.
For a full list of accredited laboratories, please refer to Standards Malaysia website (www.
jsm.gov.my).
10.0 APPENDICES
If a cardiac specimen is also being collected for:
• Microbiological culture, place the specimen in a container with normal
saline.
• HPE, place another specimen in a different container with formalin.
Note:
Appendix 5: Guidelines on specimen collection
Instructions for specimen collection and transport for HPE of cardiac valvular/
tissue/emboli in the diagnosis of infective endocarditis.
A. Specimen collection
1. Place the cardiac specimen in a container containing 10% formalin with a
volume of approximately 3-4 times tissue volume (30 ml minimum).
2. Do not remove or scrape any tissue (e.g. clots and fibrins) attached to the
cardiac specimen.
3. Secure the sample container properly to avoid spillage.
B. Labelling of specimen container(s)
1. Label the specimen container(s) with the patient’s full name, a second patient
identifier, and the source/anatomical site and type of the specimen.
2. The label should be placed/written on the container and not on the cap.
3. If there is more than one sample, place multiple specimens in separate
containers.
4. Review the completeness and accuracy of the request form in comparison
with the label on the specimen container, against the patient’s ID prior to
leaving the procedural site.
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 6: Centres with PET and SPECT/CT WBC scan services*
PET scan
WBC SPECT/CT scan
Institut Kanser Negara
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Pusat Pengimejan Diagnostik Nuclear, Universiti
Putra Malaysia
Jabatan Pengimejan Molekul dan Perubatan
Nuklear, Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaaan Malaysia
Jabatan Pengimejan Molekul dan Perubatan
Nuklear, Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaaan Malaysia
Medical Physics Unit, University Malaya Medical
Centre
Medical Physics Unit, University Malaya Medical
Centre
Penang General Hospital
*This list is not exhaustive and only includes public institutions with the available facilities.
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 7: Centres with available cardiothoracic surgery services*
Johor
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor Bahru
Kelantan
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kubang Kerian
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kota Bahru
Lembah Klang (Klang Valley)
Hospital Serdang
Pusat Perubatan Pakar, Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM), Sungai Buloh
Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Cheras
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
National Heart Institute (IJN), Kuala Lumpur
Pahang
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan, Kuantan
Penang
Penang General Hospital
Sabah
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kota Kinabalu
Sarawak
Heart Centre, Kota Samarahan
*This list is not exhaustive and only includes public institutions with the available facilities.
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 8: Antimicrobial dosing in adults with renal impairment
Loading dose
The size of a loading dose (LD) is the product of the desired drug concentration
in the blood and the volume of distribution. It is independent of drug clearance.
Therefore, provided the desired drug concentration and volume of distribution are
unchanged, the size of the loading dose does not require modification in patients
with renal impairment. In cases where there is slight alteration in the volume of
distribution, e.g. those with low serum protein or fluid overload, some clinicians may
alter the loading dose of some drugs with narrow therapeutic index.1
Methods of dose reduction in renal impairment
Three common methods are used to maintain drug doses in patients with renal
impairment:1
• Interval method (I):
Maintain the size of the individual dose and increase the dose interval – used
where the size of the dose and the attainment of peak blood concentrations are
critical for drug efficacy.
• Dose method (D):
Reduce the size of individual dose and maintain the same dose interval – used
where the size of a dose and peak concentrations are not critical for drug activity.
• Combination method (D & I):
Uses a combination of the ‘Dose’ and ‘Interval’ methods – used for narrow
therapeutic index drugs where close control over blood concentrations should
be maintained.
Estimating creatinine clearance in adults
Check renal function before prescribing any drug that requires dose modification in
renal impairment, even if only mild impairment is likely.
Renal function and muscle mass both decline with age, hence elderly people
may have normal serum creatinine despite reduced renal function. Calculation
of creatinine clearance (CrCl) may be necessary to estimate renal function in
this population especially when prescribing renally excreted drugs with a narrow
therapeutic index.
10.0 APPENDICES
The Cockcroft-Gault equation estimates CrCl in ml/minute and has been successfully
used in the calculation of adults with renal impairment. Weight, age, gender and
serum creatinine are required. The formula below should not be used to estimate
CrCl in severe renal insufficiency, or with rapidly changing renal function.
Modified Cockcroft-Gault equation:
*If actual body weight (ABW) is < ideal body weight (IBW), use ABW; refer to table
for IBW.
CrCl
(mL/min)
(140 – Age) x IBW (kg)*
Serum Creatinine (µmol/l)
(x 1.04 for females) or
(x 1.23 for males)
=
Ideal body weight table for adults
Height
(inches)
Height
(cm)
Female
IBW (kg)
Male
IBW (kg)
Height
(inches)
Height
(cm)
Female
IBW (kg)
Male
IBW (kg)
5’ 0”
152 –
154
45.5 –
47.3
50.0 –
51.8
6’ 0”
183 –
184
73.4 –
74.3
77.9 –
78.8
5’ 1”
155 –
157
48.2 –
50.0
52.7 –
54.5
6’ 1”
185 –
187
75.2 –
77.0
79.7 –
81.5
5’ 2”
158 –
159
50.9 –
51.8
55.4 –
56.3
6’ 2”
188 –
190
77.9 –
79.7
82.4 –
84.2
5’ 3”
160 –
162
52.7 –
54.5
57.2 –
59.0
6’ 3”
191 –
192
80.6 –
81.5
85.1 –
86.0
5’ 4”
163 –
164
55.4 –
56.3
59.9 –
60.8
6’ 4”
193 –
195
82.4 –
84.2
86.9 –
88.7
5’ 5”
165 –
167
57.2 –
59.0
61.7 –
63.5
6’ 5”
196 –
197
85.1 –
86.0
89.6 –
90.5
5’ 6”
168 –
169
59.9 –
60.8
64.4 –
65.3
6’ 6”
198 –
200
86.9 –
88.7
91.4 –
93.2
5’ 7”
170 –
172
61.7 –
63.5
66.2 –
68.0
6’ 7”
201 –
202
89.6 –
90.5
94.1 –
95.0
5’ 8”
173 –
174
64.4 –
65.3
68.9 –
69.8
6’ 8”
203 –
205
91.4 –
93.2
95.9 –
97.7
5’ 9”
175 –
177
66.2 –
68.0
70.7 –
72.5
6’ 9”
206 –
207
94.1 –
95.0
98.6 –
99.5
5’ 10”
178 –
179
68.9 –
69.8
73.4 –
74.3
6’ 10”
208 –
210
95.9 –
97.7
100.4 –
102.2
5’ 11”
180 –
182
70.7 –
72.5
75.2 –
77.0
6’ 11”
211
98.6
103.1
Note: All doses recommended are for the treatment of infective endocarditis only.
10.0 APPENDICES
Antimicrobial doses in adults with renal impairment
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
AMINOGLYCOSIDES
Gentamicin2,3
1 mg/kg
8 hourly
I
CrCl 40-59:
1 mg/kg
12 hourly
CrCl: 20-39:
1 mg/kg daily
CrCl < 20:
1 mg/kg
ONCE (check
level in 24
hours and
redose when
serum level is
< 1 mg/l
(< 2 µmol/l)
1 mg/kg
ONCE (check
level in 24
hours and
redose when
serum level is
< 1 mg/l
(< 2 µmol/l)
• Monitor gentamicin
level and renal
function weekly.
There should be a low
threshold for stopping
gentamicin in patients
with deteriorating
renal function or other
signs of toxicity.
• When given in a
single daily dose,
give infusion over 30
minutes. Aim for predose (trough) serum
level of < 1 mg/l
(< 2 µmol/l).
• Trough levels should
be checked to
monitor for toxicity
in patients with renal
impairment.
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
CEPHALOSPORINS
Cefazolin2,4,5-7
2 g IV
8 hourly
I
2 g IV 8 hourly CrCl 35-54:
2 g IV
≥ 8 hourly
CrCl 11-34:
1 g IV
12 hourly
1 g IV
18-24 hourly
HD: 500 mg then 1 g IV
daily; give post-dialysis
on dialysis days
CAPD: 500 mg IV
12 hourly
CVVH: LD 2 g then
2 g IV 12 hourly
CVVHD/CVVHDF: LD
2 g then either 1 g IV
8 hourly or 2 g 12 hourly
Cefepime 2,6-9
2 g IV
8 hourly
(max. dose)
D & I
2 g IV 8 hourly CrCl 30-60:
2 g IV
12 hourly
CrCl: 11-29:
2 g IV daily
1g IV daily
HD: 1g initially then
500 mg-1 g daily; give
post-dialysis on dialysis
days
CAPD: 2 g IV
48 hourly
CVVH: LD 2 g then
1-2 g 12 hourly
CVVHD/CVVHDF: LD
2 g then either 1 g IV
8 hourly or 2 g 12 hourly
Ceftriaxone10,11
2 g IV daily
(max.
4 g/day)
-
2 g IV daily
2 g IV daily
2 g IV daily
(max. 2 g/day)
HD: 2 g IV daily; give
post-dialysis on dialysis
days
HDF/Highflux, CAPD:
Dose as in CrCl < 10
CAVHD/CVVHD/
CVVHDF: 2 g IV
12 hourly to daily
10.0 APPENDICES
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
FLUOROQUINOLONES
Ciprofloxacin6,7,12,13 500 mg PO
12 hourly
D
500 PO
12 hourly
50-75% of
usual dose
12 hourly
250 mg PO
12 hourly
HD: 500 mg PO or
400 mg IV daily; give
post-dialysis on dialysis
days
CAPD: max 500 mg PO
or 400 mg IV daily
CVVH/CAVHD/CVVHD/
CVVHDF: 500 mg PO
12 hourly or 400 mg IV
12 hourly6
400 mg IV
12 hourly
400 mg IV
12 hourly
50-75% of
usual dose
12 hourly
200mg IV
12 hourly
PENICILLINS
Ampicillin2,6,13,14
12 g/day
IV in 4-6
equally
divided
doses
I
12 g/day IV
in 4-6 equally
divided doses
2 g IV 6 to
12 hourly
2 g IV 12 to
24 hourly
HD: 2 g IV 12 to
24 hourly; give postdialysis on dialysis days
CAPD: 250 mg IV
12 hourly
CVVH: LD of 2 g then 2
g 8 to 12 hourly
CVVHD: LD of 2 g then
2 g 8 hourly
CVVHDF: LD of
2 g then 2 g 6 to
8 hourly
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Ampicillin (AM) +
Sulbactam (SB)
(IV 2:1)2,6,7,15.16
3 g IV
6 hourly
3 g IV 6 hourly CrCl 15-29:
3 g IV
12 hourly
CrCl < 15:
3 g IV daily
HD: 3 g 12 to
24 hourly; give postdialysis on dialysis days
CVVH: Initial 3 g then
3 g 8 to 12 hourly
CVVHD: Initial 3 g then
3 g 8 hourly
CVVHDF: Initial
3 g then 3 g 6 to
8 hourly
Cloxacillin17,18
2 g IV
4 hourly
-
2 g IV 4 hourly 2 g IV 4 hourly 2 g IV 4 hourly HD: Dosage adjustment
not needed
Benzyl
Penicillin2,6,7,13,19
(Crystalline
Penicillin)
3-4 MU IV
4-6 hourly
D
100%
75% of
normal dose
20-50% of
normal dose
(See
comments)
HD: up to 2 MU 4 to
6 hourly; give postdialysis on dialysis days
or supplement with
500,000 units postdialysis
Increased risk of
neurotoxicity (seizures)
in renal impairment
MISCELLANEOUS
Daptomycin6,7,20,21
10 mg/kg
IV daily
I
10 mg/kg IV
daily
CrCl < 30: 10 mg/kg IV
48 hourly
Dose adjustment is based on
case reports
HD/PD: Dose as in CrCl
< 30 (give post-dialysis
on dialysis days) or
normal dose after HD
3x/week
Monitor creatine
phosphokinase (CPK)
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Vancomycin6,7,22
15 mg/kg
12 hourly
based on
ABW; not
to exceed
2 g/day
unless
serum
levels are
monitored
D & I
Start with
15-20 mg/kg
8-12 hourly
CrCl 20-49:
start with
15-20 mg/kg
daily
CrCl < 20: will
need longer
intervals;
determine
by serum
concentration
monitoring
HD: LD then either
500 mg-1 g or
5-10 mg/kg after each
HD session based on
serum concentrations.
Measure pre-HD
serum level before 3rd
HD session. Consider
redosing for vancomycin
pre-HD levels as
follows:
• < 10 mg/l give
1000 mg
• 10-25 mg/l give
500-750 mg
• > 25 mg/l hold
Consider redosing for
vancomycin post-HD
levels < 10-15 mg/l give
500-1000 mg
PD (via PD fluid):
15-30 mg/l of PD fluid
PD (systemic): LD of 1 g
then 500 mg-1 g 48 to
72 hourly (monitor levels
closely)
CVVH: LD 15-25 mg/kg
then either 1 g 48 hourly
or 10-15 mg/kg
24 to 48 hourly
• In the critically ill
patient with renal
insufficiency, the
initial LD (25-30
mg/kg) should not
be reduced. Make
subsequent dose
adjustment based
on renal function
and trough serum
concentrations.
• Trough level
monitoring:
> Trough levels are
most accurate and
practical (unless
ESRD on HD).
> Trough levels
should be obtained
approximately
30 minutes of the
next dose before
the 4th dose.
> Once weekly
monitoring is
recommended for
patients with stable
renal function.
153
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
CVVHD: LD 15-25 mg/
kg then either 1 g daily
or 10-15 mg/kg daily
CVVHDF: LD
15-25 mg/kg then either
1 g daily or 7.5-10 mg/
kg 12 hourly
Note: Consider redosing
patients receiving
CRRT for vancomycin
concentrations
< 10-15 mg/l
> More frequent
monitoring is
recommended for
patients who are
haemodynamically
unstable and
changing renal
function.
Rifampicin23,24
300-450
mg PO
12 hourly
D
No dose
adjustment
CrCl ≤ 50 ml/
min:
50-100% of
the full dose
HD: Normal dose with
no supplement after
dialysis
PD: 50-100% of the full
dose, with an extra 50100% of the full dose
after PD
CRRT: Dose as in
normal renal function
Rifampicin is not
dialysed & excreted in
CAPD fluid causing an
orange/yellow colour
ANTIFUNGALS
Amphotericin B
deoxycholate25
0.6-1 mg/
kg/day IV
I
Avoid; if essential use normal dose (see
Comments)
If renal dysfunction is due to drug, the daily
total can be decreased by 50% or the dose
can be given every other day.
HD/CRRT: If essential
use normal dose
Amphotericin is
nephrotoxic; monitor
serum creatinine closely;
lipid formulations are
less nephrotoxic
154
10.0 APPENDICES
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Amphotericin B
lipid complex2,13,26
3-5 mg/kg
IV daily
-
3-5 mg/kg IV
daily
3-5 mg/kg IV
daily
3-5 mg/kg IV
daily
HD/PD/CRRT:
3-5 mg/kg IV daily
Amphotericin may be
nephrotoxic; monitor
serum creatinine closely
Anidulafungin27-29
200 mg IV
daily
-
200 mg IV
daily
200 mg IV
daily
200 mg IV
daily
HD/PD/CRRT: Dose as
in normal renal function
Caspofungin29-31
150 mg IV
daily
-
150 mg IV
daily
150 mg IV
daily
150 mg IV
daily
HD/PD/CRRT: No
supplemental or dose
adjustment necessary
Fluconazole28,29,32,33 400-800
mg (6-12
mg/kg) IV/
PO daily
D
Normal dose
LD of 400 mg
then 50% of
normal dose
LD of 400 mg
then 50% of
normal dose
HD: 100% of daily
dose after each dialysis
session: on non-dialysis
days patient should
receive a reduced dose
according to CrCl
PD: Dose as for CrCl
< 10
CVVH: LD of 400-800
mg then 200-400 mg
daily
CVVHD/CVVHDF:
Dose as in normal renal
function
Drug
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated CrCl (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Flucytosine29,34
25 mg/kg
PO 6 hourly
I
25 mg/kg PO
6 hourly
CrCl 20-40:
12.5 mg/kg
PO 6 hourly
CrCl 10-20:
6.25 mg/kg
PO 6 hourly
HD: 25 mg/kg 48 to 72
hourly
Micafungin29,35
150 mg IV
daily
-
150 mg IV
daily
150 mg IV
daily
150 mg IV
daily
HD: No supplemental
or dose adjustment
necessary
156
10.0 APPENDICES
10.0 APPENDICES
References:
1. Cervelli, M.J. ed. The renal reference guide. Adelaide, South Australia: Nexus Printing, 2007.
2. Gilbert D.N., et al. The Sanford guide to antimicrobial therapy. 45th ed. USA: Antimicrobial Therapy, Inc., 2015.
3. Cosgrove S.E., et al. Antibiotic guidelines 2015-2016: treatment recommendations for adult inpatients.The John
Hopkins Hospital Antimicrobial Stewardship Program 2015.
4. Cefazolin injection [Product Information]. Sandoz, Inc, Princeton, NJ, 2006.
5. Cefazolin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 11, 2016.
6. Heintz BH, Matzke GR, Dager WE. Antimicrobial dosing concepts and recommendations for critically ill adult patients
receiving continuous renal replacement therapy or intermittent hemodialysis. Pharmacotherapy. 2009;29:562–57.
7. Trotman RL, Williamson JC, Shoemaker DM, Salzer WL. Antibiotic dosing in critically ill adult patients receiving
continuous renal replacement therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;41:1159-1166.
8. MaxipimeTM intravenous injection, intramuscular injection, cefepime HCl intravenous injection, intramuscular
injection [Product Information]. Hospira, Inc (per FDA), Lake Forest, IL, 2013.
9. Cefepime. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 11, 2016.
10. Rocephin powder for injection, ceftriaxone sodium powder for injection [Product Information]. Roche
Pharmaceuticals, Nutley, NJ, 2007.
11. Cunha, B.A. Physicians’ Press Antibiotics Essentials. 10th ed. USA: Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011.
12. Ciprofloxacin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 11, 2016.
13. Aronoff GR, Bennett WM, Berns JS, et al. Drug prescribing in renal failure: dosing guidelines for adults and children.
5th ed. Philadelphia: American College of Physicians, 2007.
14. Ampicillin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 11, 2016.
15. Unasyn®, Sulbactam sodium/ampicillin sodium [Product Information]. Pfizer Italia S.r.l., N.Y., USA. Aug 2008.
16. Ampicillin/Sulbactam. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://
online.lexi.com. Accessed July 11, 2016.
17. Micromedex® 2.0, 2012. Cloxacillin (Drugdex® Evaluations) [online]. Accessed July 2016.
18. Cloxacillin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 11, 2016.
19. Benzylpenicillin sodium. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://
online.lexi.com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
20. Daptomycin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
21. Marchand S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of daptomycin in a patient with severe renal failure not receiving dialysis.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013;57(6):2898-2899.
22. Vancomycin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
23. Micromedex® 2.0, 2016. Rifampin (Drugdex® Evaluations) [online]. Accessed July 2016.
24. Rifampicin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
25. Amphotericin B (Conventional). Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at:
http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
26. Amphotericin B (Lipid Complex). Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
27. Eraxis®, Anidulafungin for injection [Product Information]. Pfizer Inc, NY, USA, Feb 2006.
28. Ashley, C., Currie, A. The renal drug handbook. 3rd ed. Radcliffe Medical Press Ltd, Oxon UK, 2009.
29. Pappas PG, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of candidiasis: 2016 Update by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Available at http://cid.oxfordjournals.org. Accessed February 2016.
30. Cancidas®, Caspofungin acetate IV injection [Product Information]. Merck and Co Inc, Whitehouse Station, NJ,
2009.
31. Caspofungin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
32. Diflucan®, Fluconazole [Product Information]. Pfizer, N.Y., USA, Sep 2009.
33. Fluconazole. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
34. Flucytosine. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
35. Micafungin. Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.
com. Accessed July 12, 2016.
CrCl
(ml/min)
k* x Height in cm
Serum Creatinine (µmol/l)
=
GFR
(ml/min/1.73m2)
38 x Height in cm
Serum Creatinine (µmol/l)
=
*k is a constant that varies with age and gender (see the following table):1
Age
k value
Preterm infants
29.2
Full-term infants
39.8
Children 2-12 years old
48.6
Adolescent females 13-21 years old
48.6
Adolescent males 13-21 years old
61.9
Counahan-Barratt:1,3
Ideal body weight table for paediatric and young adults4
Infants aged 0-24 months old (mo)
Age
0-6 mo
6-12 mo
12-24 mo
Infant boys
WTi = 0.733 Amo + 3.6
WTi = 0.433 Amo + 5.4
WTi = 0.183 Amo + 8.4
Infant girls
WTi = 0.667 Amo + 3.4
WTi = 0.400 Amo + 5.0
WTi = 0.183 Amo + 7.6
Children and young adults aged 2-20 years (yr)
Age
2-10 yr
10-16 yr
16-20 yr
Boys
WTi = 2.25 Ayr + 8.50
WTi = 5.00 Ayr + 19.0
WTi = 2.25 Ayr + 25
Girls
WTi = 2.38 Ayr + 7.25
WTi = 3.17 Ayr + 3.33
WTi = Ayr + 38
Note: All doses recommended are for the treatment of infective endocarditis only. *WTi: ideal body
weight (kg); Amo: age in months; Ayr: age in years.
Appendix 9: Antimicrobial dosing in children with renal impairment
Estimating creatinine clearance in paediatrics
There are 2 methods to calculate CrCl in children. Available data suggest that the
bias of Schwartz calculated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) increases at lower
levels of GFR. The Schwartz and Counahan-Barratt formulae can provide rapid
and convenient estimates of GFR, although clinicians should be aware of their
imprecision in this setting.1
Schwartz Method:1,2
10.0 APPENDICES
Antimicrobial doses in paediatrics with renal impairment
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
AMINOGLYCOSIDES
Gentamicin5-7
Infants,
children and
adolescents
1 mg/kg IV
8 hourly
D & I
All ages, give first dose as above and await
plasma level result before further dosing.
If trough level is still high after 36 hours
consider reducing dose.
Blood levels/TDM:
• Take level 6 hours before 3rd dose
(6 hours before 2nd dose if renal function
is unstable). Repeat daily until stable then
every 3 doses.
• Pre-dose (‘trough’) concentration
>
> < 2 µmol/ml (< 1mcg/ml for
paediatrics)
>
> < 4 µmol/ml (< 2mcg/ml for NICU/
PICU)
• Re-dose patient at 24 hours if trough
level achieved (at 36 hours if on 36
hour dosing). If trough is high, recheck
level 12 hours after that level was taken
and re-dose after that if level now in
range. Dosing adjustment is to avoid
accumulation, but do not delay at the
detriment of not treating the patient.
• In very overweight or grossly
oedematous patients, use lean body
weight for calculating dose.
159
10.0 APPENDICES
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
CEPHALOSPORINS
Cefazolin8-11
Infants,
children and
adolescents
100 mg/
kg/day IV
in 3 equally
divided
doses
D & I
GFR 40-70:
Normal initial
dose then
60% of total
daily dose
given in 2
equal doses
GFR 20-40:
Normal initial
dose then
25% of total
daily dose
given in 2
equal doses;
GFR 5-20:
Normal initial
dose then
10% of total
daily dose
daily
25 mg/kg IV
daily
HD/PD: 25 mg/kg
IV daily
CRRT: 25 mg/kg
IV 8 hourly
Cefepime7,12,13
Infants,
children and
adolescents
50 mg/kg
IV 8 hourly
(Max. single
dose 2 g)
D & I
Normal dose
25-50 mg/kg
IV 12 to 18
hourly
25-50 mg/kg
IV daily
HD: LD of 25-50
mg/kg IV on Day
1 then 12.5-25
mg/kg IV daily;
dose after HD or
give supplemental
same dose after
HD session
PD: Normal dose
daily
CRRT: Normal
dose 12 hourly
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Ceftriaxone5-7,10,12,13
Infants,
children and
adolescents
100 mg/
kg IV once
daily
-
Normal dose
Normal dose
Max 50 mg/
kg IV daily
(max. 2 g
daily)
HD/CAPD: 50 mg/
kg IV daily (max.
2 g daily)
On HD days
scheduled
doses should be
administered after
HD session
CRRT: Normal
dose
Ceftriaxone
should not be
administered
to premature,
acidotic, jaundiced
neonates or those
with impaired or
reduced bilirubin
binding.
PENICILLINS
Ampicillin7,10,14,15
Infants,
children and
adolescents
200-300
mg/kg/
day IV in
4-6 equally
divided
doses
(max.
12 g/day)
I
Normal dose
GFR 10-30:
Normal
dose 6 to 12
hourly
Normal dose
12 hourly
HD: Normal dose
12 hourly; dose
after HD or give
supplemental
same dose after
HD session
CVVH: Normal LD
then normal dose
8 to 12 hourly
CVVHD: Normal
LD then normal
dose 8 hourly
CVVHDF: Normal
LD then normal
dose 6 to 8 hourly
161
10.0 APPENDICES
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Ampicillin (AM) +
Sulbactam (SB)
(IV 2:1)10,15-17
Infants,
children and
adolescents
< 40 kg
200-300
mg AM/kg/
day IV in
4-6 equally
divided
doses
I
Normal dose
FR 15-29:
Normal dose
12 hourly;
GFR 5-14:
Normal dose
daily
Normal dose
daily
Dose expressed
as AM component
HD: Normal dose
12 to 24 hourly;
give after dialysis
on dialysis days
CVVH: Max dose
as LD then normal
dose 8 to 12
hourly
CVVHD: Max dose
as LD then normal
dose 8 hourly
CVVHDF: Max
dose as LD then
normal dose
6 to 8 hourly
Cloxacillin18
Children and
adolescents
200-300
mg/kg/
day IV in
4-6 equally
divided
doses
(max.
2 g/dose)
-
Normal dose
Normal dose
Normal dose
HD: Dosage
adjustment not
needed
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Benzyl
Penicillin6,10,19
(Crystalline
Penicillin)
Infants,
children and
adolescents
200,000300,000
units/kg/
day IV in
4-6 equally
divided
doses
I
Normal dose
Normal dose
8 to 12
hourly
Normal dose
12 hourly
HD: Normal dose
8 to 12 hourly;
give afer dialysis
on dialysis days
CAVH/CVVH/
CVVHD: Normal
dose 8 to 12
hourly
MISCELLANEOUS
Daptomycin10,20
Children
≥ 2 years
and
adolescents
10 mg/kg
IV daily
I
Normal dose
GFR 10-29:
67% of full
dose daily
67% of full
dose 48
hourly
HD/PD: 67% of
full dose 48 hourly
after dialysis
In paediatric
patients,
daptomycin is not
routinely used as
a 1st line therapy.
Avoid using in
< 12 months
due to
musculoskeletal,
neuromuscular
and nervous
system adverse
effects.
163
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Vancomycin6,10,21
Infants,
children and
adolescents
40-60 mg/
kg/day
IV in 2-3
equally
divided
doses
(Initial dose
is based on
actual body
weight;
subsequent
dosing
based on
serum
trough
levels)
Doses should be reduced in renal failure according to
blood levels
• Trough level monitoring:
>
> Only give subsequent doses when vancomycin
level reaches trough target
>
> Therapeutic level: Trough 7-10 umol/l (10-15
mg/l) or 10-14 umol/l (15-20 mg/l)
>
> Trough levels should be obtained approximately
30 minutes of the next dose
>
> Approx. time to steady state 1-2 days
>
> Peak levels are not usually required
HD/CAPD:
10 mg/kg IV as
needed per serum
concentration
monitoring
CRRT: 10 mg/kg
IV 12 to 24 hourly,
monitoring serum
concentration
Rifampicin10,22,23
Children and
adolescents
20 mg/kg/
day PO in
3 divided
doses
(max. 900
mg/day)
D
Normal dose
Normal dose
Normal dose
HD/CAPD/CRRT:
Normal dose
164
10.0 APPENDICES
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
ANTIFUNGALS
Amphotericin B
deoxycholate22,24
Infants,
children and
adolescents
After test
dose
1 mg/kg IV
daily
-
Avoid; use normal dose if only no
alternative
(see Comments)
If renal dysfunction is due to drug, the total
daily dose can be decreased by 50% or
the dose can be given every other day
HD/PD/CRRT:
If essential use
normal dose
Amphotericin
is nephrotoxic;
monitor serum
creatinine closely;
lipid formulations
are less
nephrotoxic.
Amphotericin B
lipid complex22,25
Infants,
children and
adolescents
3-5 mg/kg
IV daily
-
No dosage adjustment required in preexisting renal failure.
HD/PD/CRRT:
Normal dose;
consider standard
amphotericin due
to cost
Amphotericin is
highly nephrotoxic;
monitor serum
creatinine closely.
Fluconazole6,7,10,22,26
Infants,
children and
adolescents
6-12 mg/kg
PO/IV daily
D
Normal dose
Normal LD
then 50% of
normal dose
daily
Normal LD
then 50% of
normal dose
48 hourly
HD: 100% of
normal dose 3x/
week after HD
session or 50%
of normal dose
every 48 hours;
administer after
dialysis on dialysis
days
PD: 50% of
normal dose
48 hourly
CRRT: 6 mg/kg/
dose daily
Refer to product
information for
more dosing
details.
10.0 APPENDICES
Drug
Age
Dose for
normal
renal
function
Method
Adjustment for renal failure
Estimated GFR (ml/min)
Dose in patients
undergoing renal
replacement
therapies
Comments
> 50-90
10-50
< 10
Flucytosine5,10,27
Infants,
children and
adolescents
150 mg/kg/
day PO in
4 equally
divided
doses
-
Normal dose
GFR 30-50:
25-37.5 mg/
kg/dose
8 hourly
GFR 10-29:
25-37.5 mg/
kg/dose
12 hourly
GFR < 10:
25-37.5 mg/
kg/dose
daily
HD/PD: 25-37.5
mg/kg/dose daily
CRRT: 25-37.5
mg/kg/dose
8 hourly
References:
1. Use of estimated glomerular filtration rate to assess level of kidney function. The CARI Guidelines. Available at http://
www.cari.org.au/guidelines.php. Accessed July 2016.
2. Schwartz GJ, Haycock GB, Edelmann CM Jr, Spitzer A. A simple estimate of glomerular filtration rate in children
derived from body length and plasma creatinine. Pediatrics. 1976;58:259-263.
3. Counahan R, Chantler C, Ghazali S, Kirkwood B, Rose F, Barratt TM. Estimation of glomerular filtration rate from
plasma creatinine concentration in children. Arch Dis Child. 1976;51(11):875-878.
4. McMillan, J.A., Siberry, G.K., Dick, J.D and Lee, C.K.K., eds. The Harriet Lane handbook of pediatric antimicrobial
therapy. USA: Mosby Elsevie, 2009.
5. Baltimore RS, et al. Infective endocarditis in childhood: 2015 update. A scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:1487-1515.
6. Tomlin S, Kirk E. Guy’s and St Thomas’, King’s College and University Lewisham Hospitals Paediatric Formulary, 9th
edn. Revised Dec 2012, Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust London, UK, 2010.
7. Veltri MA, Neu AM, Fivush BA, et al. Drug dosing during intermittent hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement
therapy, special considerations in pediatric patients. Pediatr Drugs. 2004;6(1):45-65.
8. Cefazolin for injection, USP [Product Information]. Sagent Pharmaceuticals Inc., IL., USA. June 2012.
9. Ancef®, Cefazolin [Product Information]. GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC. April 2005.
10. Aronoff GR, Bennett WM, Berns JS et al. Drug prescribing in renal failure, dosing guidelines for adults and children.
5th edn. American College of Physicians, US, 2007.
11. Cefazolin. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
12. Cefepime for injection, USP [Product Information]. Sagent Pharmaceuticals Inc., IL., USA. March 2012.
13. Cefepime. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
14. Ampicillin. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
15. Heintz BH, Matzke GR, Dager WE. Antimicrobial dosing concepts and recommendations for critically ill adult patients
receiving continuous renal replacement therapy or intermittent hemodialysis. Pharmacotherapy. 2009;29:562–577.
16. Unasyn®, Sulbactam sodium/ampicillin sodium [Product Information]. Pfizer Italia S.r.l., N.Y., USA. Aug 2008.
17. Ampicillin/Sulbactam. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson,
OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
18. Cloxacillin. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
19. Benzyl Penicillin Sodium. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson,
OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
20. Daptomycin. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH.
Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
21. Vancomycin. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH.
Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
22. Levy J, Brown E, Daley C, Lawrence A. Oxford Handbook of Dialysis, 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
2009.
23. Rifampicin. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
24. Amphotericin B (Conventional). Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer
Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
25. Amphotericin B (Lipid Complex). Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer
Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
26. Fluconazole. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH.
Available at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
27. Flucytosine. Paediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs. Lexicomp® 2.3.5. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Hudson, OH. Available
at: http://online.lexi.com. Accessed July 15, 2016.
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 10: Weekly OPAT review checklist (for doctors)
General review of the patient and clinical examination (specifically look for)
Heart failure
Embolic events
Recurrence of fever or worsening of other septic parameters
New neurological signs or symptoms
Ask about side effects of antimicrobials such as rash
To check compliance of patient/difficulties faced with vascular device
To check branula/peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line for evidence of
thrombophlebitis
To check on control of co-morbidities such as diabetes and hypertension
Baselines blood investigations such as FBC, CRP, RP and LFT
Review the planned duration of antimicrobials
To ensure antimicrobials are ordered up to next hospital appointment
If required
ECG
Therapeutic drug monitoring
INR
Echocardiogram
10.0 APPENDICES
Appendix 11: Clinical indicators
Performance measures for this CPG is to monitor the implementation of these
guidelines with the aim of achieving the following within 5 years.
Performance indicators
Yes
No
Target to achieve
in 5 years
Decrease in the mortality caused by IE:
Number of deaths of IE patients due to IE or
its complications over a given time frame
Total number of patients diagnosed with IE
over the same time frame
By 50%
Surgery performed within 24 hours for patients with
emergency indication (as per the guidelines):
Number of IE patients requiring emergency
surgery receiving surgery within 24 hours
Total number of IE patients requiring
emergency surgery
50%
169
x 100%
x 100%
10.0 APPENDICES
REFERENCES
1.
Vahanian A, Alfieri O, Andreotti F, Antunes M, Barón-Esquivias G, Baumgartner H, et al. Guidelines on the
management of valvular heart disease (version 2012). Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2451-96.
2.
Correa de Sa D, Tleyjeh I, Anavekar N, Schultz J, Thomas J, Lahr B, et al. Epidemiological trends of infective
endocarditis: a population-based study in Olmsted County, Minnesota. Mayo Clin Prac. 2010;85(5):422-6.
3.
Sy R, Kritharides L. Health care exposure and age in infective endocarditis: results of a contemporary populationbased profile of 1536 patients in Australia. Eur Hear J. 2010;31(15):1890-7.
4.
Hoen B, Duval X. Clinical practice: infective endocarditis. N Engl J Med. 2013;11(368):1425-33.
5.
Murdoch D, Corey G, Hoen B, Miro J, Fowler VG J, Bayer A, et al. Clinical presentation, etiology, and outcome
of infective endocarditis in the 21st Century: the International Collaboration on Endocarditis-Prospective Cohort
Study. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(5):463-73.
6.
Simsek-Yavuz S, Sensoy A, Kasikcioglu H, Cekan S, Deniz D, Yavuz A, et al. Infective endocarditis in Turkey:
aetiology, clinical features, and analysis of risk factors for mortality in 325 cases. Int J Infect Dis. 2015;30:106-14.
7.
Mirabel M, Rattanavong S, Frichitthavong K, Chu V, Kesone P, Thongsith P, et al. Infective endocarditis in the Lao
PDR: clinical characteristics and outcomes in a developing country. Int J Cardiol. 2015;180:270-3.
8.
Gupta K, Jagadeesan N, Agrawal N, Bhat P, Nanjappa M. Clinical, echocardiographic and microbiological study,
and analysis of outcomes of infective endocarditis in tropical countries: a prospective analysis from India. J Heart
Valve Dis. 2014;23(5):624-32.
9.
Ferraris L, Milazzo L, Ricaboni D, Mazzali C, Orlando G, Rizzardini G, et al. Profile of infective endocarditis
observed from 2003-2010 in a single center in Italy. BMC Infect Dis. 2013;13(1):545.
10. Cabell C, Jollis J, Peterson G, Corey G, Anderson D, Sexton D, et al. Changing patient characteristics and the
effect on mortality in endocarditis. Arch Intern Med. 2002;162(1):90-4.
11. Pant S, Patel N, Deshmukh A, Golwala H, Patel N, Badheka A, et al. Trends in infective endocarditis incidence,
microbiology, and valve replacement in the United States from 2000 to 2011. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65(19):
2070-6.
12. Prendergast B, Tornos P. Surgery for infective endocarditis: who and when? Circulation. 2010;121(9):1141-52.
13. Tornos P, Iung B, Permanyer-Miralda G, Baron G, Delahaye F, Gohlke-Barwälf C, et al. Infective endocarditis in
Europe: lessons from the Euro heart survey. Heart. 2005;91(5):571-5.
14. Ismail I, Leong C, Yusof M. Unpublished data.
15. Netzer R, Zollinger E, Seiler C, Cerny A. Infective endocarditis: clinical spectrum, presentation and outcome. An
analysis of 212 cases 1980-1995. Heart. 2000;84(1):25-30.
16. Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes M, Bongiorni M, Casalta J, Del Zotti F, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the
management of infective endocarditis: The Task Force for the Management of Infective Endocarditis of the
European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS),
the European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM). Eur Heart J. 2015;36(44):3075-128.
17. Thuny F, Di Salvo G, Belliard O, Avierinos J, Pergola V, Rosenberg V, et al. Risk of embolism and death in infective
endocarditis: prognostic value of echocardiography: a prospective multicenter study. Circulation. 2005;112(1):
69-75.
18. Lalani T, Chu V, Park L, Cecchi E, Corey G, Durante-Mongoni E, et al. In-hospital and 1-year mortality in patients
undergoing early surgery for prosthetic valve endocarditis. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173(16):1495-504.
19. Chu V, Sexton D, Cabell C, Reller L, Pappas P, Singh R, et al. Repeat infective endocarditis: differentiating relapse
from reinfection. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;41(3):406-9.
20. Baumgartner H, Bonhoeffer P, De Groot N, de Haan F, Deanfield J, Galie N, et al. ESC Guidelines for the
management of grown-up congenital heart disease. (new version 2010). Eur Heart J. 2010;31(23):2915-57.
21. Knirsch W, Nadal D. Infective endocarditis in congenital heart disease. Eur J Pediatr. 2011;170(9):1111-27.
22. Perez dI, Zamorano J, Lennie V, Vázguez J, Ribera J, Macaya C. Negative blood culture infective endocarditis in
the elderly: long-term follow-up. Gerontology. 2007;53(5):245-9.
23. Gil M, Velasco M, Botella R, Ballester J, Pedro F, Aliaga A. Janeway lesions: differential diagnosis with Osler’s
nodes. Int J Dermatol. 1993;32(9):673-4.
24. Baddour L, Wilson W, Bayer A, Fowler V, Tleyjeh I, Ryback M, et al. Infective endocarditis in adults: diagnosis,
antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications: a scientific statement for healthcare professionals from
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:1435-86.
REFERENCES
25. Wilson M, Mitchell M, Morris A, Murray P, Reimer L, Reller L, et al. Principles and procedures for blood cultures:
approved guideline. Pennsylvania, USA: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute; 2007. Contract No.: 17.
26. Cockerill F, Wilson J, Vetter E, Goodman K, Torgerson C, Harmsen W, et al. Optimal testing parameters for blood
cultures. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;38(12):1724-30.
27. La Scola B, Raoult D. Direct identification of bacteria in positive blood culture bottles by matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry. PLoS One. 2009;4(11):e8041.
28. Raoult D, Fournier P, Drancourt M, Marrie T, Etienne J, Cosserat J, et al. Diagnosis of 22 new cases of Bartonella
endocarditis. Ann Intern Med. 1997;125(8):646-52.
29. Hamed K, Dormitzer P, Su C, Relman D. Haemophilus parainfluenzae endocarditis: application of a molecular
approach for identification of pathogenic bacterial species. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;19(4):677-83.
30. Podglajen I, Bellery F, Poyart C, Coudol P, Buu-Hoi A, Bruneval P, et al. Comparative molecular and microbiologic
diagnosis of bacterial endocarditis. Emerg Infect Dis. 2003;9(12):763-6.
31. Goldenberger D, Künzli A, Voqt P, Zbinden R, Altweqq M. Molecular diagnosis of bacterial endocarditis by broadrange PCR amplification and direct sequencing. J Clin Microbiol. 1997;35(11):2733-9.
32. Bennett J, Dolin R, Blaser M. Mandell’s, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and practice of infectious diseases. 8th
ed. Philadelphia, PA.: Elsevier.; 2015.
33. Houpikian P, Raoult D. Diagnostic methods. Current best practices and guidelines for identification of difficult-toculture pathogens in infective endocarditis. Cardiol Clin. 2003;21(2):207-17.
34. Katsouli A, Massad M. Current issue in the diagnosis and management of blood culture-negative infective and
non-infective endocarditis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(4):1467-74.
35. Shapiro S, Young E, De Guzman S, Ward J, Chiu C, Ginzton L, et al. Transesophageal echocardiography in
diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Chest. 1994;105(2):377-82.
36. Erbel R, Rohmann S, Drexler M, Mohr-Kahaly S, Gerharz C, Iversen S, et al. Improved diagnostic value of
echocardiography in patients with infective endocarditis by transesophageal approach. A prospective study. Eur
Heart J. 1988;9(1):43-53.
37. Shively B, Gurule F, Roldan C, Leggett J, Schiller N. Diagnostic value of transesophageal compared with
transthoracic echocardiography in infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;18(2):391-7.
38. Evangelista A, Gonzalez-Alujas M. Echocardiography in infective endocarditis. Heart. 2004;90(6):614-7.
39. Hahn R, Abraham T, Adam M, Bruce C, Glas K, Lang R, et al. Guidelines for performing a comprehensive
transesophageal echocardiographic examination: recommendations from the American Society of
Echocardiography and the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologist. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2013; 26(9):921-64.
40. Rasmussen R, Høst U, Arpi M H, C, Johansen H, Korup E, Schønheyder H, et al. Prevalence of infective
endocarditis in patients with Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia: the value of screening with echocardiography.
Eur J Echocardiogr. 2011;12:414-20.
41. Incani A, Hair C, Purnell P, O’Brian D, Cheng A, Appelbe A, et al. Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia: evaluation
of the role of transoesophageal echocardiography in identifying clinically unsuspected endocarditis. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis. 2013;32(8):1003-8.
42. Shapira Y, Weisenberg D, Vaturi M, Sharoni E, Raanani E, Sahar G, et al. The impact of intraoperative
transesophageal echocardiography in infective endocarditis. Isr Med Assoc J. 2007;9:299-302.
43. Habib G, Badano L, Tribouilloy C, Vilacosta I, Zamorano J, Galderisi M, et al. Recommendations for the practice
of echocardiography in infective endocarditis. Eur J Echocardiogr. 2010;11(2):202-19.
44. Feuchtner G, Stolzmann P, Dichtl W, Schertler T, Bonatti J, Scheffel J, et al. Multislice computed tomography in
infective endocarditis: comparison with transesophageal echocardiography and intraoperative findings. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2009;53(5):436-44.
45. Fagman E, Perrotta S, Bech-Hanssen O, Flinck A, Lamm C, Olaison L, et al. ECG-gated computed tomography:
a new role for patients with suspected aortic prosthetic valve endocarditis. Eur Radiol. 2012; 22(11):2407-14.
46. Snygg-Martin U, Gustafsson L, Rosengren L, Alsiö A, Ackerholm P, Andersson R, et al. Cerebrovascular
complications in patients with left-sided infective endocarditis are common: a prospective study using magnetic
resonance imaging and neurochemical brain damage markers. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;47(1):23-30.
47. Hekimian G, Kim M, Passefort S, Duval X, Wolff M, Leport C, et al. Preoperative use and safety of coronary
angiography for acute aortic valve infective endocarditis. Heart. 2010;96(9):696-700.
48. Cooper H, Thompson E, Laureno R, Fuisz A, Mark A, Lin M, et al. Subclinical brain embolization in left-sided
infective endocarditis: results from the evaluation by MRI of the brains of patients with left-sided intracardiac solid
masses (EMBOLISM) pilot study. Circulation. 2009;120(7):585-91.
49. Okazaki S, Yoshioka D, Sakaguchi M, Sawa Y, Mochizuki H, Kitagawa K. Acute ischemic brain lesions in infective
endocarditis: incidence, related factors, and postoperative outcome. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013; 35(2):155-62.
50. Iung B, Tubiana S, Klein I, Messika-Zeitoun D, Brochet E, Lepage L, et al. Determinants of cerebral lesions in
endocarditis on systematic cerebral magnetic resonance imaging: a prospective study. Stroke. 2013; 44(11):
3056-62.
51. Duval X, Lung B, Klein I, Brochet E, Thabut G, Arnoult F, et al. Effect of early cerebral magnetic resonance imaging
on clinical decisions in infective endocarditis: a prospective study. Ann Intern Med. 2010; 152(8):497-504.
52. Goulenok T, Klein I, Maziqhi M, Messika-Zeitoun D, Alexandra J, Mourvilier B, et al. Infective endocarditis with
symptomatic cerebral complications: contribution of cerebral magnetic resonance imaging. Cerebrovasc Dis.
2013;35(4):327-36.
53. Iung B, Klein I, Mourvilier B, Olivot J, Détaint D, Longuet P, et al. Respective effects of early cerebral and abdominal
magnetic resonance imaging on clinical decisions in infective endocarditis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging.
2012;13(8):703-10.
54. Saby L, Kaas O, Habib G, Cammilleri S, Mancini J, Tessonnier L, et al. Positron emission tomography/
computed tomography for diagnosis of prosthetic valve endocarditis: increased valvular 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
uptake as a novel major criterion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61(23):2374-82.
55. Van Riet J, Hill E, Gheysens O, Dymarowski S, Herregods M, Herigers P, et al. (18)F-FDG PET/CT for early
detection of embolism and metastatic infection in patients with infective endocarditis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2010;37(6):1189-97.
56. Li J, Sexton D, Mick N, Nettles R, Fowler VJ, Ryan T, et al. Proposed modifications to the Duke criteria for the
diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Clin Infect Dis. 2000;30:633-8.
57. Habib G, Dermeaux G, Avierinos J, Casalta J, Jamal F, Volot F, et al. Value and limitations of the Duke criteria for
the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33(7):2023-9.
58. Daniel W, Mügge A, Grote J, Hausmann D, Nikutta P, Laas J, et al. Comparison of transthoracic and
transesophageal echocardiography for detection of abnormalities of prosthetic and bioprosthetic valves in the
mitral and aortic positions. Am J Cardiol. 1993;71(2):210-5.
59. Klug D, Lacroix D, Savoye C, Goullard L, Grandmougin D, Hannequin J, et al. Systemic infection related to
endocarditis on pacemaker leads. Circulation. 1997;95(8):2098-107.
60. Rohmann S, Erbel R, Darius H, Görge G, Makowski T, Zotz R, et al. Prediction of rapid versus prolonged healing
of infective endocarditis by monitoring vegetation size. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 1991;4(5):465-74.
61. Vilacosta I, Graupner C, San Román J, Sarriá C, Ronderos R, Fernández C, et al. Risk of embolization after
institution of antibiotic therapy for infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39(9):1489-95.
62. Bashore T, Cabell C, Fowler VJ. Update on infective endocarditis. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2006;31(4):274–352.
63. Sexton D, Spelman D. Current best practices and guidelines. Assessment and management of complications in
infective endocarditis. Cardiol Clin. 2003;21(2):273-82.
64. Nadji G, Rusinaru D, Rémadi J, Jeu A, Sorel C, Tribouilloy C. Heart failure in left-sided native valve infective
endocarditis: characteristics, prognosis, and results of surgical treatment. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009;11(7):668-75.
65. Anguera I, Miro J, Vilacosta I, Almirante B, Anguita M, Muñoz P, et al. Aortocavitary-cavitary fistulous tract
formation in infective endocarditis: clinical and echocardiographic features of 76 cases and risk factors for
mortality. Eur Heart J. 2005;26(3):288-97.
66. Kahveci G, Bayrak F, Mutlu B, Bitigen A, Karaahmet T, Sonmez K, et al. Prognostic value of N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide in patients with active infective endocarditis. Am J Cardiol. 2007;99(10):1429-33.
67. Dickerman S, Abrutyn E, Barsic B, Bouza E, Cecchi E, Moreno A, et al. The relationship between the initiation of
antimicrobial therapy and the incidence of stroke in infective endocarditis: an analysis from the ICE Prospective
Cohort Study (ICE-PCS). Am Heart J. 2007;154(6):1086-94.
68. Thuny F, Beurtheret S, Mancini J, Garibodldi V, Casalta J, Riberi A, et al. The timing of surgery influences mortality
and morbidity in adults with severe complicated infective endocarditis: a propensity analysis. Eur Heart J.
2011;32(16):2027-33.
69. Di Salvo G, Habib G, Pergola V, Avierinos J-F, Philip E, Casalta J-P, et al. Echocardiography predicts embolic
events in infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;37(4):1069-76.
70. Pergola V, Di Salvo G, Habib G, Avierinos J, Philip E, Vailloud J, et al. Comparison of clinical and echocardiographic
characteristics of Streptococcus bovis endocarditis with that caused by other pathogens. Am J Cardiol.
2001;88(8):871-5.
71. Rohmann S , Erbel R, Görge G, Makowski T, Mohr-Kahaly S, Nixdorff U, et al. Clinical relevance of vegetation
localization by transoesophageal echocardiography in infective endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 1992;13(4):446-52.
72. Durante M, Adinolfi L, Tripodi M, Andreana A, Gambardella M, Ragone E, et al. Risk factors for “major” embolic
events in hospitalized patients with infective endocarditis. Am Heart J. 2003;146:311-6.
73. Lee K, Tsai Y-T, Lin C-Y, Tsai C-S. Vertebral osteomylitis combined streptococcal viridans endocarditis. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg. 2003;23:125-7.
74. Hess A, Klien I, Iung B, Lavallee P, Ilic-Habensus E, Dornic Q, et al. Brain MRI findings in neurologically
asymptomatic patients with infective endocarditis. Am J Neuroradiol. 2013;34:1597-84.
75. Chan K-L, Dumesnil J, Cujec B, Sanfilippo A, Jue J, Turek M, et al. A randomised trial of aspirin on the risk of
embolic events in patients with infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:775-80.
76. Walker K, Sampson J, Skalabrin E, Majersik J. Clinical characteristics and thrombolytic outcomes of infective
endocarditis-associated stroke. Neurohospitalist. 2012;2(3):87-91.
REFERENCES
77. Tornos P, Almirante B, Mirabet S, Permanyer G, Pahissa A, Soler-Soler J. Infective endocarditis due to
Staphylococcus aureus. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159:473-5.
78. Panduranga P, Al-Mukhaini M, Al-Muslahi M, Haque M, Shehab A. Management dilemmas in patients with
mechanical heart valves and warfarin-induced major bleeding. World J Cardiol. 2012;4(3):54-9.
79. Byrne J, Rezai K, Sanchez J, Bernstein R, Okum E, Leacche M, et al. Surgical management of endocarditis: the
Society of Thoracic Surgeons clinical practice guideline. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91(6):2012-9.
80. Garcia-Cabrera E, Fernadez-Hidalgo N, Almirante B, Ivanova-Georgieva R, Noureddine M, Plata A, et al.
Neurological complications of infective endocarditis: risk factors, outcome, and impact of cardiac surgery: a
multicenter observational study. Circulation. 2013;127(23):2272-84.
81. Morris N, Matiello M, Lyons J, Samuels M. Neurologic complications in infective endocarditis: identification,
management, and impact on cardiac surgery. Neurohospitalist. 2014;4(4):213-22.
82. Zanaty M, Chalouhi N, Starker R, Tjoumakaris S, Gonzalez L, Hasan D, et al. Endovascular treatment of cerebral
mycotic aneurysm: a review of the literature and single center experience. Biomed Res Int. 2013:Article ID
151643.
83. Chapot R, Houdart E, Saint-Maurice J-P, Aymard A, Mounayer C, Merland J-J. Endovascular treatment of
cerebral mycotic aneurysms. Radiology. 2002;222:389-96.
84. Heiro M, Nikoskelainen J, Engblom E, Kotilainen E, Marttila R, Kotilainen P. Neurologic manifestations of infective
endocarditis: a 17-year experience in a teaching hospital in Finland. Ann Intern Med. 2000; 160:2781-7.
85. Anavekar N, Schultz J, De Sa D, Thomas J, Lahr B, Tleyjeh I, et al. Modifiers of symptomatic embolic risk in
infective endocarditis. Mayo Clin Prac. 2011;86(11):1068-74.
86. Snygg-Martin U, Rasmussen R, Hassager C, Bruun N, Andersson R, Olaison L. The relationship between
cerebrovascular complications and previously established use of antiplatelet therapy in left-sided infective
endocarditis. Scand J Infect Dis. 2011;43(11-12):899-904.
87. Snygg-Martin U, Rasmussen R, Hassager C, Bruun N, Andersson R, Olaison L. Warfarin therapy and incidence of
cerebrovascular complications in left-sided native valve endocarditis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2011;30:151-7.
88. Delahaye J, Poncet P, Malquarti V, Beaune J, Garé J, Mann J. Cerebrovascular accidents in infective endocarditis:
role of anticoagulation. Eur Heart J. 1990;11(12):1074-8.
89. Yau J, Lee P, Wilson A, Jenkins A. Prosthetic valve endocarditis: what is the evidence for anticoagulant therapy?
Intern Med J. 2011;41(11):795-7.
90. Ivert T, Dismukes W, Cobbs C, Blackstone E, Kirklin J, Bergdahl L. Prosthetic valve endocarditis. Circulation.
1984;69:223-32.
91. Vongpatanasin W, Hillis D, Lange R. Prosthetic heart valves. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:407-16.
92. Pibarot P, Dumesnil J. Prosthetic heart valves: selection of the optimal prosthetis and long-term management.
Circulation. 2009;119:1034-48.
93. Chandra D, Gupta A, Grover V, Gupta V. When should you restart anticoagulation in patients who suffer an
intracranial bleed who also have a prosthetic valve? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2013;16(4):520-3.
94. Whitlock R, Sun J, Fremes S, Rubens F, Teoh K. Antithombotic and thrombolytic therapy for valvular disease:
antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidencebased clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(2(Suppl)):e576S-e600S.
95. Sexton DJ, Tenenbaum MJ, Wilson WR, Steckelberg JM, Tice AD, Gilbert D, et al. Ceftriaxone once daily for four
weeks compared with ceftriaxone plus gentamicin once daily for two weeks for treatment of endocarditis due to
penicillin-susceptible Streptococci. Clin Infec Dis. 1998;27(6):1470-4.
96. Francioli P, Etienne J, Hoigné R, Thys J, Gerber A. Treatment of streptococcal endocarditis with a single daily dose
of ceftraxone sodium for 4 weeks. Efficacy and outpatient treatment feasibility. JAMA. 1992;267(2):264-7.
97. Knoll B, Tleyjeh I, Steckelberg J, Wilson W, Baddour L. Infective endocarditis due to penicillin-resistant Viridans
group Streptococci. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44:1585-92.
98. Buchholtz K, Larsen C, Schaadt B, Hassager C, Bruun N. Once versus twice daily gentamicin dosing for infective
endocarditis: a randomized clinical trial. Cardiology. 2011;119(2):65-71.
99. Giuliano S, Caccese R, Carfagna P, Vena A, Falcone M, Venditti M. Endocarditis caused by nutritionally variant
streptococci: a case report and literature review. Infez Med. 2012;20(2):67-74.
100. Adam E, Focaccia R, Gualandro D, Calderaro D, Issa V, Rossi F, et al. Case series of infective endocarditis caused
by Granulicatella species. Int J Infect Dis. 2015;31(2015):56-8.
101. Carugati M, Bayer A, Miró J, Park L, Guimarães A, Skoutells A, et al. High-dose daptomycin therapy for leftsided infective endocarditis: a prospective study from the International Collaboration on Endocarditis. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. 2013;57(12):6213-22.
102. Kullar R, Casapao A, Davis S, Levine D, Zhao J, Crank C, et al. A multicentre evaluation of the effectiveness
and safety of high-dose daptomycin for the treatment of infective endocarditis. J Antimicrob Chemother.
2013;68(12):2921-6.
REFERENCES
103. Lemonovich T, Haynes K, Latenbach E, Amorosa V. Combination therapy with an aminoglycoside for
Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis and/or persistent bacteremia is associated with a decreased rate of
recurrent bacteremia: a cohort study. Infection. 2011;48(6):549-54.
104. Cosgrove S, Vigliani G, Campion M, Fowler V, Abrutya E, Corey R, et al. Initial low-dose gentamicin for
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia and endocarditis is nephrotoxic. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;48(6):713-21.
105. Korzeniowski O, Sande M. Combination antimicrobial therapy for Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis in patients
addicted to parenteral drugs and in nonaddicts: a prospective study. Ann Intern Med. 1982; 97(4):496-503.
106. Fernández-Hidalgo N, lmirante B, Gavaldà J, Gurgui M, Peña C, de Alarcón A, et al. Ampicillin plus ceftriaxone is
as effective as ampicillin plus gentamicin for treating enterococcus faecalis infective endocarditis. Clin Infect Dis.
2013;56(9):1261-8.
107. Smego RJ, Ahmad H. The role of fluconazole in the treatment of Candida endocarditis. Medicine (Baltimore).
2011;90(4):237-49.
108. Reyes M, Ali A, Mendes R, Biedenbach D. Resurgence of Pseudomonas endocarditis in Detroit, 2006-2008.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2009;88(5):294-301.
109. Koruk S, Koruk I, Erbay A, Tezer-Tekce Y, Erbay A, Dayan S, et al. Management of Brucella endocarditis: results
of th Gulhane study. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2012;40(2):145-50.
110. Raoult D, Houpikian P, Dupont H, Riss J, Arditi-Djiane J, Brouqui P. Treatment of Q fever endocarditis. Comparison
of 2 regimens containing doxycycline and ofloxacin or hydroxychloroquine. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159(2):167-73.
111. Raoult D, Fournier P-E, Vandenesch F, Mainardi J-L, Eykyn S, Nash J, et al. Outcome and treatment of Bartonella
endocarditis. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163(Jan 27):226-30.
112. Rolain J, Brouqui P, Koehler J, Maguina C, Dolan M, Raoult D. Recommendations for treatment of human
infections caused by Bartonella species. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004;48(6):1921-33.
113. Lalani T, Cabell C, Benjamin D, Lasca O, Naber C, Fowler VJ, et al. Analysis of the impact of early surgery on
in-hospital mortality of native valve endocarditis: use of propensity score and instrumental variable methods to
adjust for treatment-selection bias. Circulation. 2010;121(8):1005-13.
114. Vikram H, Buenconsejo J, Hasbun R, Quagliarello V. Impact of valve surgery on 6-month mortality in adults with
complicated, left-sided native valve endocarditis: a propensity analysis. JAMA. 2003;290(24):3207-14.
115. Alsip S, Blackstone E, Kirklin J, Cobbs C. Indications for cardiac surgery in patients with active infective
endocarditis. Am J Med. 1985;78(6B):138-48.
116. Kang D, Kim Y, Kim S, Sun B, Kim D, Yun S, et al. Early surgery versus conventional treatment for infective
endocarditis. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(26):2466-73.
117. Daniel W, Schroder E, Nonnast-Daniel BLichtlen P. Conventional and transoesophageal echocardiography in the
diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 1987;8:287-92.
118. Becher H, Hanrath P, Bleifield W, Bleese N. Correlation of echocardiographic and surgical findings in acute
bacterial endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 1984;5 suppl C:67-70.
119. Carpenter J. Perivalvular extension of infection in patients with infectious endocarditis. Rev Infect Dis. 1991;
13(1):127-38.
120. Benjamin DJ, Miro J, Hoen B, Steinbach W, Fowler VJ, Olaison L, et al. Candida endocarditis: contemporary
cases from the International Collaboration of Infectious Endocarditis Merged Database (ICE-mD). Scand J Infect
Dis. 2004;36(6-7):453-5.
121. Ellis M, Al-Abdely H, Sandridge A, Greer W, Ventura W. Fungal endocarditis: evidence in the world literature,
1965-1995. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32(1):50-62.
122. Bannay A, Hoen B, Duval X, Obadia J-F, Selton-Suty C, Le Moing V, et al. The impact of valve surgery on short-
and longterm mortality in left-sided infective endocarditis: do differences in methodological approaches explain
previous conflicting results? Eur Heart J. 2011;32(16):2003-15.
123. Sy R, Bannon P, Bayfield M, Brown C, Kritharides L. Survivor treatment selection bias and outcomes research: a
case study of surgery in infective endocarditis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2009;2(5):469-72.
124. Kiefer T, Park L, Tribouilloy C, Cortes C, Casillo R, Chu V, et al. Association between valvular surgery and mortality
among patients with infective endocarditis complicated by heart failure. JAMA. 2011;306(20):2239-47.
125. Evans C, Gammie J. Surgical management of mitral valve infective endocarditis. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc.
2011;23(3):232-40.
126. Liang F, Song B, Liu R, Yang L, Tang H, Li Y. Optimal timing for early surgery in infective endocarditis: a metaanalysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2016;22:336-45.
127. Gelsomino S, Maessen JG, van der Veen F, Livi U, Renzulli A, Lucà F, et al. Emergency surgery for native mitral
valve endocarditis: the impact of septic and cardiogenic shock. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93(5):1469-76.
128. Gammie J, O’Brien S, Griffith B, Peterson E. Surgical treatment of mitral valve endocarditis in North America. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2005;80(6):2199-204.
129. Steckelberg J, Murphy J, Ballard D, Tajik A, Taliercio C, Giuliani E, et al. Emboli in infective endocarditis: the
prognostic value of echocardiography. Ann Intern Med. 1991;114(8):635-40.
REFERENCES
130. Sanfilippo A, Picard M, Newell J, Rosas E, Davidoff R, Thomas J, et al. Echocardiographic assessment of patients
with infectious endocarditis: prediction of risk for complications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;18(5):1191-9.
131. Ruttmann E, Willeit J, Ulmer H, Chevtchik O, Hofer D, Poewe W, et al. Neurological outcomes of septic
cardioembolic stroke after infective endocarditis. Stroke. 2006;37:2094-9.
132. Eishi K, Kawazoe K, Kuriyama Y, Kitoh Y, Kawashima Y, Omae T. Surgical management of infective endocarditis
associated with cerebral complications. Multi-center retrospective study in Japan. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
1995;110(6):1745-55.
133. Akinosoglu K, Apostolakis E, Koutsogiannis N, Leivaditis V, Gogos C. Right-sided infective endocarditis: surgical
management. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42:470-9.
134. Hecht S, Berger M. Right-sided endocarditis in intravenous drug users. Prognostic features in 102 episodes. Ann
Intern Med. 1992;117(7):560-6.
135. Botsford K, Weinstein R, Nathan C, Kabine S. Selective survival in pentazocine and tripelennamine of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa serotype O11 from drug addicts. J Infect Dis. 1985;151(2):209-16.
136. Lytle B, Priest B, Taylor P, Loop F, Sapp S, Stewart R, et al. Surgical treatment of prosthetic valve endocarditis. J
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111(1):198-207.
137. Pansini S, di Summa M, Patane F, Forsennati P, Serra M, Del Ponte S. Risk of recurrence after reoperation for
prosthetic valve endocarditis. J Heart Valve Dis. 1997;6(1):84-7.
138. Truninger K, Attenhofer Jost C, Seifert B, Vogt P, Follath F, Schaffner A, et al. Long-term follow-up of prosthetic valve
endocarditis: what characteristics identify patients who were treated successfully with antibiotics alone? Heart.
1999;82(6):714-20.
139. Liang F, Song B, Liu R, Yang L, Tang H, Li Y. Optimal timing for early surgery in infective endocarditis: a metaanalysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2016;22:336-45.
140. Robinson S, Saxe J, Lucas C, Arbulu A, Ledgerwood A, Lucas W. Splenic abscess associated with endocarditis.
Surgery. 1992;112(4):786-7.
141. Feringa H, Shaw L, Poldermans D, Hoeks S, van der Wall E, Dion R, et al. Mitral valve repair and replacement in
endocarditis: a systematic review of literature. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):564-70.
142. David T, Gavra G, Feindel C, Armstrong S, Maganti M. Surgical treatment of active infective endocarditis: a
continued challenge. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133(1):144-9.
143. Moon M, Miller D, Moore K, Oyer P, Mitchell R, Robbins R, et al. Treatment of endocarditis with valve replacement:
the question of tissue versus mechanical prosthesis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71(4):1164-71.
144. El-Hamamsy I, Clark L, Stevens L, Sarang Z, Melina G, Takkenberg J, et al. Late outcomes following freestyle
versus homograft aortic root replacement: results from a prospective randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2010;55(4):368-76.
145. Baltimore R, Gewitz M, Baddour L, Beerman L, Jackson M, Lockhart P, et al. Infective endocarditis in childhood:
2015 update. A scientific statement from the American Health Association. Circulation. 2015; 132:1487-515.
146. Nomura F, Penny D, Menahem S, Pawade A, Karl T. Surgical intervention for infective endocarditis in infancy and
childhood. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60(1):90-5.
147. Hickey E, Jung G, Manlhiot C, Sakopoulos A, Caldarone C, Coles J, et al. Infective endocarditis in children:
native valve preservation is frequently possible despite advanced clinical disease. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg.
2009;35(1):130-5.
148. Selton-Suty C, Célard M, Le Moing V, Doco-Lecompte T, Chirouze C, Iung B, et al. Preeminence of
Staphylococcus aureus in infective endocarditis: a 1-year population-based survey. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;
54(9):1230-9.
149. Yoshinaga M, Niwa K, Niwa A, Ishiwada N, Takahashi H, Echigo S, et al. Risk factors for in-hospital mortality
during infective endocarditis in patients with congenital heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 2008;101(1):114-8.
150. Botelho-Neves E, Thuny F, Casalta J, Richet H, Gouriet F, Collat F, et al. Dramatic reduction in infective
endocarditis-related mortality with a management-based approach. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(14):1290-8.
151. Heiro M, Helenius H, Hurme S, Savunen T, Metsärinne K, Engblom E, et al. Long-term outcome of infective
endocarditis: a study on patients surviving over one year after the initial episode treated in a Finnish teaching
hospital during 25 years. BMC Infect Dis. 2008;8(49).
152. Martínez-Sellés M, Muñoz P, Estevez A, del Castillo R, García-Fernández M, Rodríguez-Créixems M, et al. Longterm outcome of infective endocarditis in non-intravenous drug users. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008; 83(11):1213-7.
153. Moons P, Bovijn L, Budts W, Belmans A, Gewillig M. Temporal trends in survival to adulthood among patients born
with congenital heart disease from 1970 to 1992 in Belgium. Circulation. 2010;122:2264-72.
154. van der Bom T, Bouma B, Meijboom F, Zwinderman A, Mulder B. The prevalence of adult congenital heart
disease, results from a systematic review and evidence based calculation. Am Heart J. 2012;164(4):568-75.
155. Marelli A, Mackie A, Ionescu-Ittu R, Rahme E, Pilote L. Congenital heart disease in the general population:
changing prevalence and age distribution. Circulation. 2007;115(2):163-72.
REFERENCES
156. Weber R, Berger C, Balmer C, Kretschmar O, Bauersfeld U, Pretre R, et al. Interventions using foreign material
to treat congenital heart disease in children increase the risk for infective endocarditis. Pediatr Infect Dis J.
2008;27(6):544-50.
157. Morris C, Reller M, Menashe V. Thirty-year incidence of infective endocarditis after surgery for congenital heart
defect. JAMA. 1998;279(8):599-603.
158. Ferrieri P, Gewitz M, Gerber M, Newburger J, Dajani A, Shulman S, et al. Unique features of infective endocarditis
in childhood. Pediatrics. 2002;109(5):931-43.
159. Verheugt C, Uiterwaal C, van der Velde E, Meijboom F, Pieper P, Veen G, et al. Turning 18 with congenital heart
disease: prediction of infective endocarditis based on a large population. Eur Heart J. 2011;32(15):1926-34.
160. Liew W, Tan T, Wong K. Infective endocarditis in childhood:a seven-year experience. Singapore Med J.
2004;45(11):525-9.
161. Siddiqui B, Muhammad T, Jadoon A, Murtazaa G, Syed A, Abid M, et al. Infective endocarditis in patients
with congenitally malformed hearts: characterization of the syndrome in a developing country. Cardiol Young.
2007;17(6):623-30.
162. Lertsapcharoen P, Khongphatthanayothin A, Chotivittayatarakorn P, Thisyakorn C, Pathmanand C, Sueblinvong V.
Infective endocarditis in pediatric patients: an eighteen-year experience from King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital.
J Med Assoc Thai. 2005;88 (Suppl 4):S12-6.
163. Wang W, Sun H, Lv J, Tian J. Retrospective studies on pediatric infective endocarditis over 40 years in a mid-west
area of China. Cardiology. 2014;128(2):88-91
164. Rushani D, Kaufman J, Ionescu-Ittu R, Mackie A, Pilote L, Therrien L, et al. Infective endocarditis in children with
congenital heart disease cumulative incidence and predictors. Circulation. 2013;128(13):1412-9.
165. Niwa K, Nakazawa M, Tateno S, Yoshinaga M, Terai M. Infective endocarditis in congenital heart disease:
Japanese national collaboration study. Heart. 2005;91(6):795-800.
166. Di Fillipo S, Delahaye F, Semiond B, Celard M, Henaine R, Ninet J, et al. Current patterns of infective endocarditis
in congenital heart disease. Heart. 2006;92(10):1490-5.
167. Knirsch W, Haas N, Uhlemann F, Dietz K, Lange P. Clinical course and complications of infective endocarditis in
patients growing up with congenital heart disease. Int J Cardiol. 2005;101(2):285-91.
168. Niwa K, Nakazawa M, Miyatake K, Tateno S, Yoshinaga M. Survey of prophylaxis and management of infective
endocarditis in patients with congenital heart disease: Japanese nationwide survey. Circ J. 2003; 67(7):585-91.
169. Fortún J, Centella T, Martín-Dávila P, Lamas M, Pérez-Caballero C, Fernández-Pineda L, et al. Infective endocarditis
in congenital heart disease: a frequent community-acquired complication. Infection. 2013; 41(1):167-74.
170. Sievert H, Babic U, Hausdorf G, Schneider M, Hopp H, Pfisterer M, et al. Transcatheter closure of atrial
septal defect and patent foramen ovale with ASDOS device (a multi-institutional European trial). Am J Cardiol.
1998;82(11):1405-13.
171. Shah P, Singh W, Rose V, Keith J. Incidence of bacterial endocarditis in ventricular septal defects. Circulation.
1966;34(1):127-31.
172. Rosenthal L, Feja K, Levasseur S, Alba L, Gersony W, Saiman L. The changing epidemiology of pediatric
endocarditis at a children’s hospital over seven decades. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;31(6):813-20.
173. Sadiq M, Nazir M, Sheikh S. Infective endocarditis in children: incidence, pattern, diagnosis and management in
a developing country. Int J Cardiol. 2001;78(2):175-82.
174. Day M, Gauvreau K, Shulman S, Newberburger J. Characteristics of children hospitalized with infective
endocarditis. Circulation. 2009;119:865-70.
175. Marom D, Ashkenazi, S, Samra Z, Birk E. Infective endocarditis in previously healthy children with structurally
normal hearts. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013;34:1415-21.
176. Marom D, Levy I, Gutwein O, Birk E, Ashkenazi S. Healthcare associated versus community associated infective
endocarditis in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30(7):585.
177. Tissières P, Gervaix A, Beghetti M, Jaeggi E. Value and limitations of the von Reyn, Duke, and modified Duke
criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis in children. Pediatrics. 2003;112(6):e467-e71.
178. Stockheim J, Chadwick E, Kessler S, Amer M, Abdel-Haq N, Dajani A, et al. Are the Duke criteria superior to the
Beth Israel criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis in children? Clin Infect Dis. 1998;27(6):1451-6.
179. Bendig F, Singh J, Butler T, Arrieta A. The impact of the central venous catheter on the diagnosis of infectious
endocarditis using Duke criteria in children with Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Pediatr Infect Dis J.
2008;27(7):636-9.
180. Penk J, Webb C, Shulman S, Anderson E. Echocardiography in pediatric infective endocarditis. Pediatr Infect Dis
J. 2011;30(12):1109-11.
181. Bonhoeffer P, Boudjemline Y, Qureshi S, Le Bidois J, Iserin L, Acar P, et al. Percutaneous insertion of the pulmonary
valve. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:1664-9.
182. Amat-Santos I, Revilla A, López J, Cortés C, Gutiérrez H, Serrador A, et al. Value of CT in patients undergoing
self-expandable TAVR to assess outcomes of concomitant mitral regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2015;
8(2):226-7.
REFERENCES
183. Patel M, Malekzadeh-Milani S, Ladouceur M, Iserin L, Boudjemline Y. Percutaneous pulmonary valve endocarditis:
incidence, prevention and management. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2014;107:615-24.
184. Lurz P, Coats L, Khambadkone S, Nordmeyer J, Boudjemline Y, Schievano S, et al. Percutaneous pulmonary
valve implantation: impact of evolving technology and learning curve on clinical outcome. Circulation. 2008;
117:1964-72.
185. Buber J, Bergersen L, Lock J, Gauvreau K, Esch J, Landzberg M, et al. Bloodstream infections occurring
in patients with percutaneously implanted bioprosthetic pulmonary valve: a single-center experience. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6(3):301-10.
186. Habib G, Hoen B, Tornos P, Thuny F, Prendergast B, Vilacosta I, et al. Guidelines on the prevention, diagnosis,
and treatment of infective endocarditis (new version 2009): the Task Force on the Prevention, Diagnosis, and
Treatment of Infective Endocarditis of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by the European
Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) and the International Society of Chemotherapy
(ISC) for Infection and Cancer. Eur Heart J. 2009;30(19):2369-413.
187. Makkar R, Fontana G, Jilaihawi H, Kapadia S, Pichard A, Douglas P, et al. Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement
for inoperable severe aortic stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(18):1696-704.
188. Mylotte D, Andalib A, Thériault-Lauzier P, Dorfmeister M, Girgis M, Alharbi W, et al. Transcatheter heart valve
failure: a systematic review. Eur Heart J. 2015;36(21):1306-27.
189. Rundström H, Kennergren C, Andersson R, Alestig K, Hogevik H. Pacemaker endocarditis during 18 years in
Göteborg. Scand J Infect Dis. 2004;36(9):674-9.
190. Baddour L, Bettman M, Bolger A, Epstein A, Ferrieri P, Gerber M, et al. Nonvalvular cardiovascular device–related
infections. Circulation. 2003;108(16):2015-31.
191. Baddour L, Epstein A, Erickson C, Knight B, Levison M, Lockhart P, et al. Update on cardiovascular implantable
electronic device infections and their management. A scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2010;121(3):458-77.
192. Greenspon A, Patel J, Lau E, Ochoa J, Frisch D, Ho R, et al. 16-year trends in the infection burden for
pacemakers and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators in the United States 1993 to 2008. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2011;58(10):1001-6.
193. Nof E, Epstein L. Complications of cardiac implants: handling device infections. Eur Heart J. 2013;34(3):229-36.
194. Sarrazin J, Philippon F, Tessier M, Guimond J, Molin F, Champagne J, et al. Usefulness of fluorine-18 positron
emission tomography/computed tomography for identification of cardiovascular implantable electronic device
infections. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(18):1616-25.
195. Erba P, Sollini M, Conti U, Bandera F, Tascini C, De Tommasi S, et al. Radiolabeled WBC scintigraphy in the
diagnostic workup of patients with suspected device-related infections. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013;
6(10):1075-86.
196. Ploux S, Riviere A, Amraoui S, Whinnett Z, Barandon L, Lafitte S, et al. Positron emission tomography in patients
with suspected pacing system infections may play a critical role in difficult cases. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8(9):1478-81.
197. Villamil C, Rodriguez F, Van der Eynde C, Jose V, Canedo R. Permanent transvenous pacemaker infections: An
analysis of 59 cases. Eur J Intern Med. 2012;18(6):484-8.
198. Bongiorni M, Tascini C, Tagliaferri E, Di Cori A, Soldati E, Leonildi A, et al. Microbiology of cardiac implantable
electronic device infections. Eurospace. 2012;14(9):1334-9.
199. Archer G, Climo M. Antimicrobial susceptibility of Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci. Antimicrob Agents and
Chemotherapy. 1994;38(10):2231-7.
200. del Río A, Anguera I, Miró J, Mont L, Fowler VJ, Azqueta M, et al. Surgical treatment of pacemaker and
defibrillator lead endocarditis: the impact of electrode lead extraction on outcome. Chest. 2003; 124(4):1451-9.
201. Cacoub P, Leprince P, Nataf P, Hausfater P, Dorent R, Wechsler B, et al. Pacemaker infective endocarditis. Am J
Cardiol. 1998;82(4):480-4.
202. Sohail M, Uslan D, Khan A, Friedman P, Hayes D, Wilson W, et al. Infective endocarditis complicating permanent
pacemaker and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator infection. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83(1):46-53.
203. Baddour L, Wilson W, Bayer A, Fowler VJ, Tleyjeh I, Rybak M, et al. Infective endocarditis. diagnosis, antimicrobial
therapy, and management of complications. A statement for healthcare professionals from the Committee on
Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the
Councils on Clinical Cardiology, Stroke, and Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2005;111(23):e394-e434.
204. Nishimura R, Otto C, Bomow R, Carabello B, Erwin III J, Guyton R, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cadiol. 2014.;63(22):e57-e185.
205. Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Antibiotic Guideline. 2014.
206. Thornhill M, Dayer M, Lockhart P, McGurk M, Shanson D, Prendergast B, et al. Guidelines on prophylaxis to
prevent infective endocarditis. Br Dent J. 2016;220(2):51-6.
207. The Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand. New Zealand guideline for prevention of infective endocarditis
associated with dental and other medical interventions. 2008.
REFERENCES
208. Duval X, Alla F, Hoen B, Danielou F, Larrieu S, Delahaye F, et al. Estimated risk of endocarditis in adults with
predisposing cardiac conditions undergoing dental procedures with or without antibiotic prophylaxis. Clin Infect
Dis. 2006;42(12):e102-e7.
209. Infective Endocarditis Prophylaxis Expert Group. Prevention of endocarditis. 2008 update from Therapeutic
guidelines: antibiotic version 13, and Therapeutic guidelines: oral and dental version 1. 2008.
210. Allen U. Infective endocarditis: Updated guidelines. Paediatr Child Health. 2010;15:205-8.
211. South Australian expert Advisory Group on Antibiotic Resistance (SAAGAR). Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis
guideline: prevention of endocarditis of infection of prosthetic implants or grafts. 2014. Document No.: CG084.
212. Wilson W, Taubert K, Gewitz M, Lockhart P, Baddour L, Levison M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis:
guidelines from the American Heart Association: a guideline from the American Heart Association Rheumatic
Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the
Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and
Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Circulation. 2007;116(15):1736-54.
213. Lockhart P, Brennan M, Sasser H, Fox P, Paster B, Bahrani-Mougeot F. Bacteremia associated with toothbrushing
and dental extraction. Circulation. 2008;117(24):3118-25.
214. Lockhart P, Brennan M, Thornhill M, Michalowicz B, Noll J, Bahrani-Mougeot F, et al. Poor oral hygiene as a risk
factor for infective endocarditis-related bacteremia. J Am Dent Assoc. 2009;140(10):1238-44.
215. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis. Antimicrobial
prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in adults and children undergoing interventional procedures.; 2008.
Document No.: CG64.
216. Duval X, Leport C. Prophylaxis of infective endocarditis: current tendencies, continuing controversies. Lancet
Infectious Disease. 2008;8(4):225-32.
217. van Rijen M, Bode L, Baak D, Kluythmans J, Vos M. Reduced costs of Staphylococcus aureus carriers treated
proplylactically with mupirocin and chlorhexidine in cardiothoracic and orthopaedic surgery. PLoS ONE.
2012;7(8):e43065.
218. Bode L, Kluytmans J, Wertheim H, Bogaers D, Vandenroucke-Grauls C, Roosendaal R, et al. Preventing surgicalsite infections in nasal carriers of Staphylococcus aureus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:9-17.
219. French Society of Oral Surgery. Management of oral dental foci of infection.
220. de Oliveira J, Martinelli M, Nishioka S, Varejao T, Uipe D, Pedrosa A, et al. Efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis
before the implantation of pacemakers and cardioverter-defibrillators: results of a large, prospective, randomized,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Circ Arrhythmia Electrophysiol. 2009;2:29-34.
221. Goldmann D, Hopkins C, Karchmer A, Abel R, McEnany M, Akins C, et al. Cephalothin prophylaxis in cardiac
valve surgery. A prospective, double-blind comparison of two-day and six-day regimens. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 1977;73(3):470-9.
REFERENCES
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The members of the CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION,
DIAGNOSIS & MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS development
committee would like to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for
their contribution:
• Panel of external (local and international) reviewers who reviewed and
contributed their expert feedback on the draft copy.
• Technical Advisory Committee, Clinical Practice Guidelines, Ministry of Health,
Malaysia for their valuable input and feedback.
• Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof of the Health Technology Assessment unit of
Ministry of Health, Malaysia for his guidance throughout the process.
• Mediconnexions Consulting Sdn Bhd for taking on the secretariat role.
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development of this
CPG.
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose. None hold
shares in pharmaceutical firms or act as consultants to such firms.
The development of the Clinical Practice Guidelines on the prevention, diagnosis
and management of IE was supported in its entirety by the National Heart
Association of Malaysia (NHAM) and was developed without the involvement of the
pharmaceutical industry.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
Nationa Haart Aesoition ot Malaya
el Heart Hoses
ical nade Malia
10, aan Tun Rak
Soto ra ene
‘waar