MANAGEMENT OF
(SECOND EDITION)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2018
MOH/P/PAK/411.18(GU)-e
Ministry of Health
Malaysia
Academy of
Medicine Malaysia
Family Medicine
Specialists
Association of
Malaysia
Malaysian Endocrine
& Metabolic Society
Malaysian Orthopaedic
Association
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Presint 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-61-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.moa-home.com
http://www.mems.my
http://fms-malaysia.org
https://marp.online
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2018 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2022) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations,
i
Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1. Screening of Diabetic Foot
x
Algorithm 2. Active Foot Problems (with Risk Stratification)
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
ASSESSMENT
2
2.1 Screening
2
2.2 Diagnosis
5
2.3 Investigation
6
2.4 Classification
8
2.5 Risk Stratification
8
3.
REFERRAL
10
3.1 Foot Protection Team
10
3.2 Multidisciplinary Foot Care Team
10
4.
PREVENTION
12
4.1 Patient Education
12
4.2 Metabolic Control
12
4.3 Preventive Foot Wear
13
4.4 Preventive Surgery
15
5.
TREATMENT
17
5.1 Pharmacotherapy
17
5.2 Wound Management
19
5.3 Rehabilitation
24
6.
MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
26
7.
CHARCOT NEUROARTHROPATHY
27
8.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
29
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
29
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
REFERENCES
31
Appendix 1. Example of Search Strategy
35
Appendix 2. Clinical Questions
35
Appendix 3. Semmes-Weinstein Monofilament Examination
38
Appendix 4. Diabetic Foot Assessment Form
39
Appendix 5. University of Texas Classification
41
Appendix 6. Patient Education Materials
42
Appendix 7. Footwear Advice
45
Appendix 8. Treatment of Neuropathic Pain
46
in Diabetic Foot
Appendix 9. Types of Infections in Diabetic Foot
50
and Suggestions of Treatment
Appendix 10. Types of Wound Dressings
55
in Diabetic Foot
List of Abbreviations
57
Acknowledgement
58
Disclosure Statement
58
Source of Funding
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
a.
Assessment
• Screening for diabetic peripheral neuropathy and peripheral arterial
disease (PAD) should be performed on all patients with diabetes at
diagnosis and repeated at least annually.
 Semmes-Weinstein
monofilament
examination
should
be
combined with another modality in the screening of peripheral
neuropathy.
 Palpation of foot pulses should be the initial screening method for
PAD.
• University of Texas Classification is the preferred classification for
diabetic foot.
b.
Referral
• Active or complicated diabetic foot problems should preferably be
managed by a multidisciplinary foot care team.
c.
Prevention
• Patient education should be an integral part in the management of
diabetic foot.
 It should be given at least annually and more frequent in higher
risk patients.
• Glycaemic control (with minimisation of hypoglycaemia) in the
prevention of diabetic foot should be individualised.
• Patients with diabetes should be advised on appropriate footwear
according to the foot risk.
• Preventive surgeries by orthopaedic surgeons trained in the
procedures may be considered to prevent ulceration or re-ulceration
in diabetic patients with foot deformity.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
d.
Treatment
• Appropriate analgesia should be considered in painful diabetic foot.
• Antibiotics should be used as an adjunct to surgical debridement in
infected diabetic foot.
• Advanced wound dressings may be offered in diabetic foot ulcer.
• Adjuvant therapy may be offered in delayed wound healing in diabetic
foot with good vascularity.
• Revascularisation should be offered in diabetic patients with
peripheral arterial disease.
• Surgical debridement by trained healthcare providers should be
considered in diabetic foot ulcer which:
 fails to respond to non-surgical debridement
 is deep and infected at presentation
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry
of Education. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary
Review Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans
and in English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature
and guidelines were searched further to identify relevant studies.
Experts in the field were also contacted to identify further studies. All
searches were conducted from 19 Mac 2017 to 18 May 2018. Literature
searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG
development process allowing any relevant papers published before
31 July 2018 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence
published after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can
be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on diabetic foot such as:
• Diabetic Foot Problems: Prevention and Management (National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2015)
• Diabetic Foot Australia guideline on footwear for people with
diabetes (Journal of Foot and Ankle Research, 2018)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of eight clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 33 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This
CPG is based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, metaanalyses and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/penerbitan/mymahtas/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of diabetic foot in the following aspects:
a. assessment
b. referral
c. prevention
d. treatment
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
All patients with diabetes mellitus who are at risk or have developed
diabetic foot
Exclusion Criteria
None
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of diabetic foot at any healthcare level including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients and their advocates
v. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Tharumaraja a/l Thiruselvam
Head of Department & Foot & Ankle Surgeon
Hospital Kulim, Kedah
Members (in alphabetical order)
vii
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health
Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd Idham Hassan
Foot & Ankle Surgeon
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mohd Yazid Bajuri
Head of Advanced Trauma, Foot &
Ankle Unit & Diabetic Foot Care Services
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Siti Norzalilah Abdul Majid
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Vijiya Mala Valayatham
Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru,
Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Aminudin Che Ahmad
Lecturer & Consultant Orthopaedic
Surgeon
International Islamic University Malaysia,
Pahang
Dr. Afiza Hanun Ahmad @ Hamid
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Hutan Melintang,
Perak
Dr. Ainol Haniza Kherul Anuwar
Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dr. Gurmeet Singh a/l Sewa Singh
Foot & Ankle Surgeon
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Hafizan Mohd Tajri
Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Masfiza Abdul Hamid
Pharmacist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
viii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Sri Dr. Premchandran a/l P.S. Menon
National Advisor of Orthopaedics Services, MoH
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Hospital Tuanku Ampuan Afzan, Kuantan
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director & Public Health
Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dato’ Dr. Mohammad Anwar Hau Abdullah
Senior Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
& Orthopaedic Oncology Surgeon
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Professor Dr. Tong Seng Fah
Lecturer & Consultant Family Medicine
Specialist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Wan Faisham Numan
Wan Ismail
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon &
Traumatology
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Professor Dr. Ya Mohd Hassan Shukor
Consultant Orthopaedic & Advanced
Trauma Surgeon
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Yong Yee Vern
Pharmacist
Pharmaceutical Services Programme
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Selangor
Datuk Dr. Zainal Ariffin Azizi
Head of Department & Senior Consultant
Vascular Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zanariah Hussein
Head of Department & Consultant
Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Ahmad Hafiz Zulkifly
Deputy Rector (Research and Innovation) & Senior Consultant of
Orthopaedics and Arthroplasty Surgeon
International Islamic University Malaysia Medical Centre, Pahang
Associate Professor Dr. Cheong Ai Theng
Head of Department & Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Dr. Feisul Idzwan Mustapha
Consultant Public Health Physician
Non-communicable Disease Section, Disease Control Division
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Hanif Hussein
National Advisor of Vascular Services & Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Husna Hanin
Family Physician
Klinik Anis, Shah Alam, Selangor
Ms. Junainah Jenal
Nursing Executive
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dato’ Dr. Mafauzy Mohamed
Professor of Medicine & Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
University Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Ms. Ou Yen Peng
Pharmacist
Hospital Sultan Haji Ahmad Shah, Pahang
Dr. Sri Wahyu Taher
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist & Head of Clinic
Klinik Kesihatan Simpang Kuala, Kedah
Dr. Yusniza Mohd. Yusof
National Advisor of Rehabilitation Services & Consultant Rehabilitation
Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM A. SCREENING OF DIABETIC FOOT
*Refer to Table 1 on Diabetic foot risk stratification
x
Active foot problems
(presence of any of the
below):
• ulceration
• spreading infection
• critical limb ischaemia
• gangrene
• suspicion of an acute
charcot neuroarthropathy
or an unexplained hot, red,
swollen foot with or without
pain
All patients with diabetes
Foot assessment:
• skin
• neurological
• vascular
• musculoskeletal
Active foot
problem?
Refer
Algorithm B
Previous history
of ulceration, amputation
or on renal replacement
therapy?
High risk*
Early referral to Foot
Protection Services
NO
YES
YES
NO
Deformity/
neuropathy/
non-critical
limb ischaemia
Moderate
risk*
Low
risk*
Refer to Foot
Protection Services
Callus alone
• Total contact insole
• Foot care education
• Yearly screening
Normal
findings
• Foot care education
• Yearly screening
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
xi
ALGORITHM B. ACTIVE FOOT PROBLEMS
(WITH RISK STRATIFICATION)
University of Texas Classification of Diabetic Foot
UT: University of Texas
* Refer urgently for admission if patients present with general illness
(e.g. sepsis or diabetic emergencies) irrespective of foot problems.
Active foot problems*
Without ulcer
(UT 0)
With ulcer
Superficial
(UT IA)
Infection
Ischaemia
(pulses not
palpable)
(UT IC/IIC/IIIC)
Infection
and
ischaemia
(UT ID/IID/IIID)
Superficial
ulcer not
requiring
surgical
intervention
(UT IB)
Deep ulcer
requiring
surgical
intervention
(UT IIB/IIIB)
Manage as
outpatient by
Foot
Protection
Services
Oral
antibiotics
Refer
Multidisciplinary
Foot Care Team
GRADE 0
GRADE I
GRADE II
GRADE III
STAGE A
Pre- or post-ulcerative
lesion completely
epithelialised
Superficial
wound,
not involving
tendon, capsule
or bone
Wound
penetrating to
tendon or capsule
Wound
penetrating to
bone or joint
STAGE B
With infection
With infection
With infection
With infection
STAGE C
With ischaemia
With ischaemia
With ischaemia
With ischaemia
STAGE D
With infection and
ischaemia
With infection
and ischaemia
With infection and
ischaemia
With infection
and ischaemia
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Diabetic foot can be defined as infection, ulceration or destruction
of tissues of the foot associated with neuropathy and/or peripheral
arterial disease of people with diabetes mellitus (DM).1 About 80%
of non-traumatic lower limb amputations in patients with diabetes are
preceded by a foot ulcer. Around 50% of patients with diabetes die
within five years of developing a foot ulcer, and up to 70% die within
five years after an amputation.2 It also accounts for substantial health
care resources. Thus, it is a major burden to the patient, carers and the
healthcare system.
According to World Health Organization, the global prevalence of
diabetes among adults of >18 years of age has risen from 4.7% (108
million) in 1980 to 8.5% (422 million) in 2014.3 According to the National
Health and Morbidity Surveys, the prevalence of diabetes has been
increasing from 11.6% in 2006 to 15.2% in 2011 and further 17.5% in
2015. The prevalence continued to increase in all age groups, from
5.5% among the 18 - 19 years of age, and reaching its highest at 39.1%
among the 70 - 74 years of age.4, level III Overall cost for management
of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in 2011 was RM1.40 billion
corresponded to 9.21% of the entire MoH budget.5, level III
The high prevalence of diabetes in adults increases the risk of foot
problems, mainly due to neuropathy and/or peripheral arterial
disease.2 Up to 50% of patients with diabetes are asymptomatic of
diabetic peripheral neuropathy6 and about one million amputations
are performed on diabetic patients each year worldwide.1 Diabetic foot
requires careful attention and coordinated management, preferably by
a multidisciplinary foot care team. Optimal management of diabetic foot
can reduce the incidence of infection-related morbidities, the need and
duration for hospitalisation, and the incidence of major limb amputation.7
Intensive efforts by all healthcare providers is required and guidelines
are needed to ensure standardisation in diabetic foot care.
This evidence-based CPG is an updated version replacing the first
edition of 2004. It is meant to address the main issues related to the
aspects of care for diabetic foot especially the variation in practices in
local setting. This CPG will help to identify patients with diabetes at risk
of foot complications and standardise the management in an evidencebased approach.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
2. ASSESSMENT
All patients with diabetes should be assessed for diabetes foot at risk.
They should be screened, diagnosed, investigated, classified and
stratified to ensure optimal management.
2.1 Screening
a. Peripheral Neuropathy
Peripheral neuropathy of the foot is a common complication in patients
with diabetes. It accounts for up to 50% of patients.8, level III It may involve
large fibre nerves (for touch, vibration, position perception and muscle
control), small fibre nerves (for thermal perception, pain and autonomic
function) or both. As half of the diabetic patients with peripheral
neuropathy are asymptomatic, screening is important to identify those
with diabetic foot at risk.6
Screening for peripheral neuropathy should be performed on all patients
with diabetes. Early detection and interventions of diabetic foot at risk
will minimise complications and healthcare cost.9 There are various
screening tools that can be used and these are discussed below.
• Semmes-Weinstein monofilament examination
Semmes-Weinstein monofilament examination (SWME) is easy to
perform and widely available locally. The examination uses a 5.07/10g monofilament which exerts a buckling force when it bends. Inability
to sense the touch/pressure indicates loss of protective sensation
(LOPS). Refer to Appendix 3 on Semmes-Weinstein Monofilament
Examination.
In patients with diabetes compared with nerve conduction study (NCS),
SWME had the following features in detecting diabetic peripheral
neuropathy:10, level III
 sensitivity: 57% (95% CI 44 to 68) to 93% (95% CI 77 to 99)
 specificity: 75% (95% CI 64 to 84) to 100% (95% CI 63 to 100)
In patients (aged <18 years old) with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM),
compared with NCS, SWME had a sensitivity and specificity of
19 - 73% and 64 - 87% respectively.11, level Ill
In a meta-analysis of 19 diagnostic studies, the pooled sensitivity and
specificity of SWME for detecting diabetic peripheral neuropathy in
patients with diabetes as compared with NCS were 0.53 (95% CI 0.32
to 0.74) and 0.88 (95% CI 0.78 to 0.94) respectively.12, level III
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
• Tuning fork
Tuning fork is used to detect the loss of vibration sense. The commonly
used tuning fork is 128-Hz. Refer to Appendix 3 on Tuning Fork
Examination.
In patients (aged <18 years old) with T1DM, compared with NCS,
tuning fork has a sensitivity and specificity of 1 - 19% and 87 - 99%
respectively.11, level III
In patients with diabetes compared to vibration perception threshold
(VPT), tuning fork has a sensitivity and specificity of 97% and 42%
respectively.13, level III
•
Neuropen
Neuropen consists of a 10-g monofilament at one end of the tool to
assess touch/pressure sensation and a NeurotipTM at the other end to
test pain sensation.
In adult patients with diabetes compared with VPT, Neuropen has
sensitivity and specificity of 74.0 - 81.6% and 68.0 - 83.0% respectively.14
- 15, level III
In adult patients with diabetes, compared with neuropathy disability
score (NDS), Neuropen has a sensitivity and specificity of 81.5% and
71.0% respectively.15, level III
•
Ipswich Touch Test
Ipswich Touch Test (IpTT) is performed by touching the tip of the index
finger for 1 - 2 seconds on the tips of the first, third and fifth toes of both
feet. The presence of LOPS is defined as having ≥2 insensate sites out
of the six sites.
In patients with diabetes, IpTT with ≥2 of six insensate areas, compared
with a VPT of ≥25 V which signifies at-risk feet, has a sensitivity of 76 -
85% and specificity of 90 - 92%.16 - 17, level III
In patients with diabetes, IpTT accuracy is comparable with SWME.
The sensitivities and specificities are:18, level III
 81.2% and 96.4% respectively if performed by healthcare
providers
 78.3% and 93.9% respectively if performed by caregivers
•
VibraTip
VibraTip provides a constant vibratory stimulus at 128-Hz for vibration
sense examination. VibraTip has a sensitivity and specificity of 79.0 -
92.0% and 82.0 - 94.0% respectively compared with VPT in diabetic
patients.14, level III; 19, level III
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
However, NICE medical technology guidance recommends that
high quality diagnostic accuracy study comparing VibraTip with 10-g
monofilament and calibrated tuning fork is needed to establish its
effectiveness.20
•
Neuropad
Neuropad is an indicator pad applied to both soles at the level of the
first through second metatarsal heads for 10 minutes. In the presence
of moisture from sweating, the time for colour to change from blue to
uniform pink in the indicator test is recorded. A colour change of >10
minutes indicates sudomotor dysfunction.
In adult patients with T2DM, compared with NDS, Neuropad has a
sensitivity and specificity of:21, level III
 95% and 75% respectively, if NDS ≥3 (mild neuropathy)
 91% and 96% respectively, if NDS ≥6 (moderate neuropathy)
 91% and 95% respectively, if NDS ≥9 (severe neuropathy)
Neuropathy should be assessed with 10-g monofilament and one other
modality (e.g. pin prick, vibration sense with 128-Hz tuning fork, etc.).
These increase the sensitivity of detecting peripheral neuropathy by
87%. Assessment of peripheral neuropathy should be performed at
diagnosis and repeated annually.22
b. Peripheral Arterial Disease
Screening of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) should be done annually
in all patients with diabetes. This includes a minimum of history taking
and complete physical examination especially palpating foot pulses.1
Use of bedside non-invasive tests to exclude PAD is recommended.
Among the tests that can be used are ankle brachial index (ABI), toe
brachial index (TBI) and continuous wave Doppler (CWD). PAD can be
excluded when:1
 ankle brachial index (ABI) is 0.9 - 1.3
 toe brachial index is ≥0.75
 there is presence of triphasic pedal Doppler arterial waveforms
(PDAW)
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Refer to Appendix 4 on Diabetic Foot Assessment Form.
Recommendation 1
• Screening for diabetic peripheral neuropathy and peripheral arterial
disease (PAD) should be performed on all diabetes mellitus patients
at diagnosis and repeated at least annually.
 Semmes-Weinstein
monofilament
examination
should
be
combined with another modality* in the screening of peripheral
neuropathy.
 Palpation of foot pulses should be the initial screening method for
PAD.
*pin prick or 128-Hz tuning fork
2.2 Diagnosis
a. History
Proper management of diabetic foot is initiated by good history taking.
It includes general, medical and local diabetic foot history.
Predictors for increased risk of foot ulceration in diabetes are:23, level I
• previous history of ulceration or lower extremity amputations
(OR=6.59, 95% CI 2.49 to 17.45)
• longer duration of diabetes (OR=1.02, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.04)
• at least one absent pedal pulse (OR=1.97, 95% CI 1.62 to 2.39)
• inability to feel a 10-g monofilament test (OR=3.184, 95% CI 2.65
to 3.82)
b. Physical Assessment
Physical assessment is an important step in screening and diagnosing
diabetic foot problems including the complications. This includes proper
inspection and palpation of the foot.
•
Skin
Skin changes due to vascular insufficiency such as skin atrophy,
nail atrophy, diminished pedal hair, prolonged capillary refill time (>2
seconds) and reduced skin temperature are important to be looked for
during skin assessment.9
•
Neurological
Monofilament test and vibration perception are used to assess peripheral
neuropathy, which is a major independent risk factor for diabetic foot
ulceration. Sensory examination with a 5.07/10-g SWME monofilament
is the single most practical and widely used assessment tool.9
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
•
Vascular
• Vascular assessment includes mandatory palpation of the femoral,
popliteal, posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis artery pulses.
Compared with colour flow duplex ultrasound (CFDU) as the reference
standard, non-invasive vascular assessment using CWD, ABI and TBI
for detecting peripheral arterial disease in diabetic foot show highest
sensitivity and specificity in CWD (74.19% and 92.86% respectively).
On the other hand, ABI has a sensitivity and specificity of 45.16% and
92.68%.24, level III In local setting, ABI is widely used due to its feasibility.
The results of ABI may be misleading due to calcification of the arteries
which give higher pressure ratio. The normal ratio is in the range of
0.9 - 1.3.
Critical limb ischaemia is defined as rest pain with ulcers or tissue loss
attributed to arterial occlusive disease. It is associated with great loss
of limb and life.25, level III Patients with this condition should be referred
urgently to specialist care.
•
Musculoskeletal
Musculoskeletal complications in diabetic foot include ulcers, infections
and deformities (e.g. Charcot Neuroarthropathy). These complications
have been given less attention compared to other complications.
Probe-to-bone test is a clinical technique used in diabetic patients with
a foot infection consisting of exploring the wound for palpable bone with
a sterile blunt metal probe. A positive test is defined as palpating a hard
or gritty substance that is presumed to be bone or joint space. It is a
useful clinical modality in the assessment of osteomyelitis in diabetic
foot. It has a sensitivity and specificity of 87% and 83% respectively,
when compared with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), bone
histopathology or bone culture.26, level III
Refer to Appendix 4 on Diabetic Foot Assessment Form.
2.3 Investigation
a. Laboratory
There is no evidence on laboratory investigation in supporting the
diagnosis of diabetic foot except in active infection.
b. Imaging
Imaging is part of management in diabetic foot presented with ulcers,
infections and deformities. The imaging modalities used are discussed
below.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
•
Conventional radiography
Conventional radiography is the initial imaging modality for diabetic foot
which is inexpensive and readily available. It is able to demonstrate
major structural changes and its anatomical distribution.27, level III Possible
findings are osteolysis, arterial calcification, gas shadow, malalignment
and peri-articular fragmentation.
Features of osteomyelitis may not be visualised in plain radiographs
until 10 - 21 days after the initial infection.28, level III
• It is important to note that osteomyelitis may be present in a person
with diabetes mellitus despite normal inflammatory markers, plain
radiographs or probe-to-bone testing.2
•
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is useful in the assessment of chronic
osteomyelitis as presence of sequestrum, cloaca and involucrum can
be seen in the images. However, it does not have significant advantage
over plain radiograph. It is also unable to detect bone marrow oedema
at early stage of infection.27, level III
•
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the primary imaging modality for
investigating infection in diabetic foot. In the diagnosis of osteomyelitis,
MRI can be considered when it is not detected by plain radiograph.2
MRI has a sensitivity and specificity of 93% and 75% in detecting
osteomyelitis when compared with bone histopathological or culture.29, level III
•
Others
Other modalities used in detection of osteomyelitis are:29, level III
 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDGPET)
 radiolabeled white blood cell scintigraphy (with 111In-oxine)
 radiolabeled white blood cell scintigraphy (with 99mTc-HMPAO)
 positron emission tomography (PET) scan has had limited use in
clinical practice due to high cost and poor availability; however, in
the future it may become more cost-effective as this modality has
demonstrated a high level of diagnostic value28, level III
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
2.4 Risk Stratification
Patient’s current risk of developing a diabetic foot or requiring an
amputation is assessed using the risk stratification as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Diabetic foot risk stratification
Source: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Diabetic Foot Problems:
Prevention and Management. London: NICE; 2015
• Patients with active diabetic foot problem should be referred urgently
and seen within 24 hours in secondary/tertiary care.
2.5 Classification
Diabetic foot is classified according to nature and severity of the
disease. The commonly used classifications are Meggitt–Wagner (MW)
and University of Texas (UT). Others include:
• Site, ischaemia, neuropathy, bacterial infection and depth
(SINBAD)
• Perfusion, Extent, Depth, Infection and Sensation (PEDIS)
• Diabetic ulcer severity score (DUSS)
• Depth of the ulcer, extent of bacterial colonisation, phase of ulcer
and association aetiology (DEPA)
Diabetic foot risk Findings
Normal
No abnormalities
Low Risk
Callus alone
Moderate Risk
Any of the following:
• deformity
• neuropathy
• non-critical limb ischaemia
High Risk
One of the following:
• previous ulceration
• previous amputation
• on renal replacement therapy
• neuropathy and non-critical limb ischaemia
• neuropathy with callus and/or deformity
• non-critical limb ischaemia with callus and/or deformity
Active Diabetic
Foot Problem
Any of the following:
• ulceration
• infection
• critical limb ischaemia
• gangrene
• suspicion of an acute Charcot neuroarthropathy, or an
unexplained hot, red, swollen foot with or without pain
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
• Size (area, depth), sepsis, arteriopathy, denervation system
[S(AD)SAD]
• Curative Health Services (CHS)
There is moderate agreement between healthcare providers in the
assessment of diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) using MW (κ=0.415, 95% CI
0.413 to 0.418) and UT (t=0.447, 95% CI 0.443 to 0.50).30, level III
Multiple observers of multidisciplinary healthcare professionals
improve reliability of three scoring systems (SINBAD, PEDIS and UT)
in assessment of DFU (κ=0.94 for UT, κ=0.91 for SINBAD and κ=0.800.90 for PEDIS).31, level III
All available systems (DUSS, UT, MW, DEPA and SINBAD) has
substantial accuracy (AUC >0.8) in prediction of amputation.32, level III
In a systematic review, the classification systems for DFU prediction
on lower extremity amputation had a wide range of sensitivity and
specificity:33, level II-2
• 45.2 - 97.4% and 65.0 - 85.8% respectively in MW (grade ≥3)
• 52.2% and 87.5% respectively in S(AD)SAD (score >9)
• 37.6 - 67.4% and 72.6 - 80.1% respectively in CHS wound grade
scale (grade ≥3)
• 100% and 49.2% respectively in DEPA (score ≥7)
Pooled accuracy on DFU characterisation variables, ranged from 0.65
(for gangrene) to 0.74 (for infection).
Of all the classification systems mentioned above, the UT and MW
systems are simple and easiest to use. However inclusion of stage in
UT system makes it a better predictor of outcome.34, level II-2 Refer to
Appendix 5 on University of Texas Classification.
Recommendation 2
• University of Texas Classification is the preferred classification for
diabetic foot.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
3. REFERRAL
Patients who are at moderate or high risk of developing a diabetic foot
problem are referred to the multidisciplinary professionals in the field of
podiatry, diabetology, biomechanics and orthoses, and wound care.2
Patients with a limb-threatening or life-threatening diabetic foot problem
should be referred urgently and managed under specialist care.
Examples of such conditions include:
• ulceration with fever or any signs of sepsis
• critical limb ischaemia [refer to Section 2.2. (b) on vascular
assessment]
• clinical concern that there is a deep-seated soft tissue or bone
infection (with or without ulceration)
• gangrene (with or without ulceration)
The recommended referral schedule for the diabetic foot is shown in
the following table.
Table 2. Recommended referral schedule
Refer to Table 1 on Diabetic foot risk stratification
3.1 Foot Protection Team
Foot protection team provides service in prevention of diabetic foot
problems for low, moderate and high risk feet and management of
simple active diabetic foot problems in the community that do not
require admission.2 Foot protection team should be led by a Family
Medicine Specialist or physician with special training in diabetic foot
problems and supported by podiatrists, diabetic team (including diabetic
educators), wound care team and rehabilitation services.
3.2 Multidisciplinary Foot Care Team
Presence of a multidisciplinary team may improve rates of amputation,
hospital admission and length of stay. It is recommended that each
hospital should have a multidisciplinary foot care team consisting of
Risk
Referral
Normal/Low risk
No referral needed. Yearly review at primary care
Moderate risk
Referral within three months to foot protection
services
High risk
Early referral within two weeks to foot protection
services
Active
Urgent referral within 24 hours to multidisciplinary
foot care team
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
specialists in diabetes management, orthopaedic surgeons, vascular
surgeons, rehabilitation physicians, occupational therapists, podiatrists,
diabetes educators, wound care team, etc. This team manages active
or complex diabetic foot problems according to available guidelines.2
• The multidisciplinary foot care team in the hospital is led by the
orthopaedic surgeon and/or physician. Subsequent referral to other
specialty is made according to the main problem presented by the
patient.
Recommendation 3
• Active or complicated diabetic foot problems should be preferably
managed by a multidisciplinary foot care team.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
4. PREVENTION
4.1 Patient Education
Patients with neuropathy tend to ignore signs of injury due to lack of
normal pain response. This can influence patient’s adherence to selfcare. Thus, intense education on foot care is necessary to reduce
diabetic foot complications. Education should be structured and done
at regular intervals repeatedly for the prevention of the foot problems.1
Patient education can be provided by a physician, podiatrist or skilled
healthcare practitioner providing dedicated time to explain the basic
care of the foot, callus and nail. This should be done at least annually.1
• Healthcare professionals providing foot-care education should
receive regular and updated education in the management of
patients at risk for foot ulceration.
Temperature monitoring as “self-assessment tool for high-risk diabetic
foot” significantly decreases risk of developing foot ulceration compared
with standard therapy and structured foot examination.35, level I However,
more evidence is required to show its effectiveness.
In prevention of ulcer recurrence, education as part of integrated foot
care programme, together with life-long observation, professional
foot treatment and adequate footwear, should be done one to three
monthly.1
Refer to Appendix 6 on Patient education materials.
Recommendation 4
• Patient education should be an integral part in the management
of diabetic foot at least annually and more frequent in higher risk
patients.
4.2 Metabolic Control
Hyperglycaemia causes increased risk of microvascular and
macrovascular complications in diabetes. This increased risk is
associated with foot ulcerations that may lead to limb amputations.
In a systematic review, intensive control [haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)
6 - 7.5%] compared with less intensive glycaemic control showed:36, level I
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
• decrease in risk of amputation (RR=0.65, 95% CI 0.45 to 0.94)
• slower decline in sensory vibration threshold (MD= -8.27, 95% CI
-9.75 to -6.79)
However, there was no effect on other neuropathic changes (RR=0.89,
95% CI 0.75 to 1.05) or ischaemic changes (RR=0.92, 95% CI 0.67
to1.26).
In a Cochrane systematic review on the prevention of diabetic
neuropathy, intensive glycaemic control (HbA1c <7.0%) compared
with less intensive glycaemic control significantly reduced the risk of
developing neuropathy in T1DM but not in T2DM at ≥12 months followup. However, this was associated with an increased risk of severe
hypoglycaemia, weight gain, hospitalisations and deaths in both T1DM
and T2DM.37, level I
Glycaemic control must be individualised.22 Targets of HbA1c
individualised to patient’s profile is shown in Table 3. Adequate
glycaemic control with minimisation of hypoglycaemia is advocated to
reduce the incidence of DFUs and infections, with subsequent risk of
amputation.36, level I
Table 3. Individualised HbA1c targets
Source: Malaysian Endocrine & Metabolic Society and Ministry of Health Malaysia.
Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (5th Edition). Kuala Lumpur:
MEMS & MoH; 2015
Recommendation 5
• Glycaemic control (with minimisation of hypoglycaemia) in the
prevention of diabetic foot should be individualised.
4.3 Preventive Foot Wear
Mechanical loading of the feet during activities, e.g. walking or standing,
exposes pressure on the plantar surface causing compression and shear
Individualised A1c targets and patient’s profile
Tight (6.0 - 6.5%)
6.6 - 7.0%
Less tight (7.1 - 8.0%)
• Newly diagnosed DM
• Younger age
• Healthier [long life
expectancy, no
cardiovascular disease
(CV) complications]
• Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
• Co-morbidities (coronary
disease, heart failure,
renal failure,
liver dysfunction)
• Short life expectancy
• Prone to hypoglycaemia
• All others
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
stress. The pressure and stress are aggravated by foot deformities (e.g.
hammer and claw toes) which are common in patients with diabetes.
Appropriate footwear is important for all patients with diabetes.
Its importance increases with higher risk of developing DFU.
Recommendations of footwear according to foot risk status are shown
in Table 4.38
• The following should be checked each time before and after wearing
the footwear:
 presence of foreign or penetrating objects
 signs of abnormal pressure, trauma or ulceration of the feet
• Patients and caregivers should be educated on the appropriate
footwear (covered shoes with breathable material) to prevent foot
ulceration.
• It is not advisable to wear thong slippers or shoes with toe box which
is too tight or too loose.
Table 4. Footwear advice
Adapted: van Netten JJ, Lazzarini PA, Armstrong DG, et al. Diabetic Foot Australia
guideline on footwear for people with diabetes. J Foot Ankle Res. 2018;1:2
In a systematic review on footwear and off-loading interventions in
diabetic patients with neuropathy:39, level I
• custom-made insoles showed fewer recurrent metatarsal head
ulcers compared with standard insoles at 15 months (p=0.007)
• custom-made footwear with in-shoe plantar pressure reduction
significantly reduced foot ulcer incidence when worn >80% daily
compared with custom-made footwear without in-shoe plantar
pressure reduction (25.7% vs 47.8%)
Risk status
Actions
• Advise on using footwear that fits, protects and
accommodates the shape of the feet (with socks). Refer to
Appendix 7 on Footwear Advice.
• Prescribe footwear with:
 custom-made in-shoe orthoses or insoles for people with
foot deformity or pre-ulcerative lesions
 off-loading orthoses or insoles for people with healed
plantar foot ulcer
• Review prescribed footwear periodically to ensure it still
fits, protects, and supports the foot
• Advise on wearing footwear at all times, both indoors and
outdoors
• Prescribe appropriate off-loading devices for ulcer healing
All foot
at-risk
Moderate
or high-risk
Foot
ulceration
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Intensive footwear therapy with prescribed footwear had significantly
reduced first/recurrent ulcer compared with ready-made footwear in
diabetes patients with neuropathy, deformity, previous ulceration and
minor amputation.
Recommendation 6
• Patients with diabetes should be advised on appropriate footwear
according to the foot risk.
4.4 Preventive Surgery
Preventive foot surgery is a procedure to prevent foot ulceration or reulceration in patients with diabetes. It is important to consider history
of previous ulceration and/or amputation when assessing a patient for
preventive surgery to set treatment strategy and determine prognosis.
a. Gastrocnemius-soleus fascia recession
Gastrocnemius-soleus fascia recession performed on plantar ulcers
under the metatarsal heads in diabetic foot patients with neuropathic
ulcer (Wagner grade 2 or 3):40, level II-3
• increases ankle dorsiflexion to 14.5° and mobility at two weeks
post-operation
• complete ulcer healing in 71% of patients at 20 days post-operation
and the remaining at 30 - 34 days post-operation
• no ulcer recurrences and remains free of new ulcers in other areas
at one year
Adverse events of the procedure are:
• subcutaneous hematoma (completely resolve within three weeks)
• neuropraxia of the sural nerve (persist for several months)
b. Achilles tendon lengthening (modified White’s technique)
Achilles tendon lengthening shows:
• no recurrence of ulcer and improved foot function in 92% of diabetic
foot patients with history of healed forefoot ulcers, neuropathy,
dorsiflexion of ≤18° and good vascularity41, level II-3
• significantly less recurrence of ulcers at seven months follow-up
in patients with total contact cast compared with those with total
contact cast alone (15% vs 59%) and persists at two years (38%
vs 81%)35, level I
• no major adverse events35, level I
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
c. Percutaneous Tenotomy
When percutaneous tenotomy is performed, the ulcers at the:
• tip of the toe without osteomyelitis heal within three weeks42, level III
• tip of the toe with osteomyelitis heal within eight weeks42, level III
• tip of the toe heal in 98% of ulcers43, level III
• dorsal aspect of the toes heal in in 92% of ulcers at four weeks
43, level III
• plantar metatarsal head do not heal43, level III
There are no serious complications following the procedure.42 - 43, level III
d. Osteotomy
Corrective surgery performed on metatarsal head ulcers shows
lower rate of recurrence and amputation compared with conservative
treatment (p=0.0013).35, level I
Preventive surgery should only be done by foot and ankle surgeons or
general orthopaedic surgeon privileged for these procedures.
Recommendation 7
• Preventive surgeries by orthopaedic surgeons trained in the
procedures may be considered to prevent ulceration or re-ulceration
in diabetic patients with foot deformity*.
*restricted ankle dorsiflexion, equinus contracture, claw toe, hammer
toe or mallet toe
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
5. TREATMENT
5.1 Pharmacotherapy
The main pharmacotherapies in diabetic foot are analgesics and
antimicrobial agents.
a. Analgesics
The causes of pain in diabetic foot are peripheral neuropathy, ischaemia
and infection. The treatment is similar with other painful conditions.
For mild to moderate pain, the WHO analgesic ladder recommends using
simple analgesics (e.g. paracetamol or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs). Additional weak opioids (e.g. tramadol or dihydrocodeine)
should be considered in moderate pain. Strong opioids (e.g. morphine)
should be offered to patients with moderate to severe pain.44
In neuropathic pain, adjuvants are used at all steps of the analgesic
ladder.44 Examples of the adjuvants are antidepressant (e.g.
amitriptyline or duloxetine) and anticonvulsant (e.g. gabapentin or
pregabalin).45 Refer to Appendix 8 on Treatment of Neuropathic Pain
in Diabetic Foot.
b. Topical antimicrobial
Wound treatments aim to alleviate symptoms, promote healing and
avoid adverse outcomes. Topical antimicrobial therapy has been
used on DFUs, either for treatment of clinically infected wounds or
for prevention of infection in uninfected wounds. There are two major
groups of topical antimicrobials which are discussed below. Refer to
Appendix 9 on Types of Infections in Diabetic Foot and Suggestions
of Treatment.
•
Antiseptics
Antiseptics are a type of disinfectant that can be used on intact skin and
some open wounds to kill or inhibit micro-organisms.
Iodine dressing is commonly used in infected wound in the local
setting. A systematic review showed that antiseptic effect of iodine was
not inferior to other antiseptic agents and did not impair wound
healing.46, level I
Although there is no recent evidence on chlorhexidine, it has been
widely used as wound antiseptics locally.
•
Topical antibiotics
Most topical antibiotics used in diabetic foot have efficacy against
gram-positive bacteria (e.g. bacitracin, mupirocin, retapamulin), with a
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
smaller number demonstrating efficacy against gram-negative bacteria
(e.g. neomycin, silver sulphadiazine). Some antibiotics that are used
systemically (e.g. gentamicin, metronidazole, clindamycin) have also
been formulated for topical use.47, level I
In a Cochrane systematic review, topical antimicrobial dressing was
more effective than non-antimicrobial dressing in wound healing of
diabetic foot (RR=1.28, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.45). However, there was no
significant difference in adverse events between topical antimicrobial
agent and non-antimicrobial agent.47, level I
The following topical antibiotics may be used in diabetic foot:47, level I
• bacitracin C
• metronidazole
• neomycin
• fusidic acid
• mupirocin
• silver sulphadiazine
• gentamicin
c. Systemic antibiotics
In a Cochrane systematic review, ertapenem with or without vancomycin
was more effective in clinical resolution of infections than tigecycline in
diabetic foot (RR=0.92, 95% CI 0.85 to 0.99). There was no significant
difference in clinical resolution rates of infection in comparison of other
antibiotics. There was also no significant difference in adverse events
between different antibiotics.48, level I
In another Cochrane systematic review, there was no significant
difference in MRSA eradication rate in non-surgical wounds (diabetic
foot) in any of the following comparisons:49, level I
• daptomycin vs vancomycin/semisynthetic penicillin (RR=1.13,
95% CI 0.56 to 2.25)
• ertapenem vs piperacillin/tazobactam (RR=0.71, 95% CI 0.06 to
9.10)
• moxifloxacin vs piperacillin/tazobactam followed by amoxycillin/
clavulanate (RR=0.87, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.36)
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
• Antibiotics should not be used unless there are local or systemic
symptoms of infection. Local treatment including surgical debridement
is important to be considered as part of the management. Antibiotic
used for treatment should be based on the most recent culture and
sensitivity (C&S) report.50
• In diabetic foot, antibiotics should be given according to the disease
severity, care setting, patient’s preference, clinical situation and
medical history. If more than one regimen is appropriate, regimen
with lowest cost should be selected. For moderate and severe
infections, broad spectrum antibiotics are used initially until C&S
results are available.2
• Antibiotics should not be given for:2
 prevention of infections in diabetic foot
 >14 days for the treatment of mild soft tissue infection in diabetic
foot
Recommendation 8
• Appropriate analgesia should be considered in painful diabetic foot.
• Antibiotics should be used as an adjunct to surgical debridement in
infected diabetic foot.
5.2 Wound Management
Wound care is important in the management of diabetic foot. Ideally,
it should alleviate symptoms, provide wound protection and facilitate
healing. Selection of interventions (e.g. dressings and adjuvant therapy)
will aid the healing process.
a. Non-surgical Intervention
i. Dressing
Appropriate wound dressing is done to maintain adequate moisture
and/or remove dead tissue. There are two types of dressing i.e. basic
and advanced. Refer to Appendix 10 on Types of Wound Dressings
in Diabetic Foot.
•
Basic wound contact dressings
Basic wound contact dressing is the minimal dressing for diabetic ulcer
in the absence of advanced wound dressings. It uses gauze with or
without paraffin coating.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
•
Advanced wound dressings
Advanced wound dressings are used for dry, sloughy and/or wet
wound. Two Cochrane systematic reviews of low to moderate quality
clinical trials compared different dressings as follows:
 Hydrogel dressing
Hydrogel dressing significantly increased ulcer healing compared
with basic wound contact dressings in diabetic foot.51, level I
 Alginate dressing
There was no significant difference in ulcer healing between
alginate and foam, silver-hydrofibre or basic wound contact
dressings in diabetic foot.51, level I
 Hydrofibre dressing
There was no significant difference in ulcer healing between
hydrofibre and iodine-impregnated or basic wound contact
dressings in diabetic foot.51, level I
 Foam dressing
There was no significant difference in ulcer healing between
foam and alginate, matrix-hydrocolloid or basic wound contact
dressings in diabetic foot.51, level I
 Hydrocolloid dressing
Fibrous-hydrocolloid dressings (with or without antimicrobial
components) and hydrocolloid-matrix dressings showed no
significant difference in the healing rates of DFUs compared with
alternative dressings (e.g. basic wound contact dressing, alginate
dressing or foam dressing).52, level I
 Other dressings
– Hyaluronic acid dressing significantly increased ulcer healing
compared with basic wound care dressings.51, level I
– There was no significant difference in ulcer healing between
iodine-impregnated dressing or protease-modulating matrix
dressing and basic wound contact dressings.51, level I
Meanwhile, silver-impregnated dressings should be reserved for use in
wounds with or at risk of high bioburden or local infection.53, level III
There was no serious adverse event reported in one of the above
reviews. It was concluded that there was no robust evidence on
differences between wound dressings for any outcome in DFUs. Thus,
healthcare providers may consider the cost of dressings and patient’s
preference when choosing the type of dressings for the patients.51, level I
Recommendation 9
• Advanced wound dressings may be offered in diabetic foot ulcer.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
ii. Adjuvant therapy
Adjuvant therapy is used to promote wound healing.
•
Negative pressure wound therapy
Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) is a procedure in which a
vacuum dressing is used to promote wound healing. It is used for clean
exudative wounds with poor granulation.
In DFU, when compared with advanced moist wound therapy (e.g.
hydrogels and alginate), NPWT shows:
 better wound healing54 - 55, level I
 decreased foot ulcer surface areas (p=0.006)56, level I
 shorter duration of therapy54 - 55, level I
 fewer amputations (RR=0.35, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.74)54, level I
 no significant difference in treatment-related complications
(i.e. infection, cellulitis and osteomyelitis)54, level I
•
Maggot debridement therapy
Maggot is used for debridement of wounds with necrotic tissues.
Maggot debridement therapy (MDT) shows better wound closure (>50%
of wound area) after 10 days compared with autolytic debridement with
hydrogel in DFU. However, there is no significant difference in complete
wound healing between both groups.57, level I
In a local technology review, MDT decreases wound size and prepares
the wound for faster closure compared with conventional therapy.
However, the rate of wound closure was not significantly higher than
conventional therapy. More clinical research is warranted to provide
further additional evidence on the effectiveness for its use in wound
healing.58
•
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) is used to increase oxygenation
and antimicrobial effect that can improve the healing of chronic ulcer.
Compared with hyperbaric air or standard care as adjunct treatment in
DFU, HBOT shows:57, level I
 faster healing rate (OR=14.25, 95% CI 7.08 to 28.68)
 reduction in amputation rate (OR=0.30, 95% CI 0.10 to 0.89)
HBOT is more effective than control in chronic DFUs in terms of:59, level I
 improvement in transcutaneous oxygen tensions after treatment
(RR=9.00, 95% CI 4.68 to 13.32)
 ulcers healing at six weeks (RR=4.61, 95% CI 2.3 to 9.08) and six
months (RR=2.71, 95% CI 1.53 to 4.83)
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
 reduction of ulcers area (MD=18.10, 95% CI 1.40 to 34.79)
 reduction of major amputations (RR=0.20, 95% CI 0.10 to 0.38)
In a local study, 86.7% of patients in HBOT group achieved complete
ulcer healing at six months follow-up compared with 60% in the control
group (p<0.001). It should be noted that HBOT is an adjunctive therapy
to the standard management of chronic DFU.60, level II-1
Recommendation 10
• Adjuvant therapy may be offered in delayed wound healing in
diabetic foot with good vascularity.
b. Surgical Intervention
•
Revascularisation
The prevalence of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is 24% among
urban high-risk Malaysian with diabetes.61 Revascularisation improves
the healing of ischaemic diabetes ulcer. Without revascularisation,
patients with DFU are at higher risk of having an amputation.
Revascularisation, when feasible, can be achieved either by bypass
surgery or endovascular procedures.62, level II-2
In a Cochrane systematic review on patients requiring revascularisation,
compared with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA), bypass
surgery had higher:63, level I
 technical success rates (OR=2.26, 95% CI 1.49 to 3.44)
 primary patency rate at one year (OR=1.94, 95% CI 1.20 to 3.14)
However, in the same review, bypass surgery and endovascular
treatment showed no difference in clinical improvement, amputation
rates, re-intervention rates or mortality within the follow-up period in
patients with chronic limb ischaemia. In patients with high surgical risk,
endovascular treatment may be advisable.63, level I
In another systematic review, open surgery showed higher limb salvage
rates and lower minor amputation rates compared with endovascular
procedure in diabetes patients with ulcerated foot. Major amputation
was only 3.5% within 30 days post-revascularisation.64, level II-1
There was also no significant difference between both intervention
modalities in terms of early post-interventional non-thrombotic and
peri-interventional complications.63, level I Special precautions should
be considered in patients with renal impairment in procedures where
intravascular contrast is used.65
A Cochrane systematic review of moderate quality primary papers which
included diabetes with PAD, antiplatelet therapy (with aspirin or aspirin
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
plus dipyridamole) vs placebo or no treatment after peripheral arterial
bypass surgery at 12 months showed better primary grafts patency
(OR=0.42, 95% CI 0.22 to 0.83) especially in prosthetic grafts.66, level I
Recommendation 11
• Revascularisation should be offered in diabetic patients with
peripheral arterial disease.
 Antiplatelet therapy should be considered as part of postrevascularisation treatment.
•
Debridement
Debridement is a process of removing necrotic or foreign tissue
from a wound to promote healing. There are three common types of
debridement which are autolytic, mechanical and sharp (surgical).
In a systematic review, an old randomised control trial (RCT) comparing
surgical debridement and conventional wound dressing in DFUs
showed:67, level I
 shorter healing time with surgical debridement (46.7 vs 128.9
days; p<0.001)
 no significant difference in healing rate, infective complications
and relapses of ulcerations
NICE guidelines recommend that debridement of DFU in either hospital
or community should only be done by healthcare professionals with
relevant training and skills.2
Although there is insufficient evidence, the CPG DG opines that surgical
debridement is a good option as it has shown good wound closure and
rapid wound healing based on clinical experience. It is done when the
non-surgical debridement fails or when the wound is deep and infected.
Recommendation 12
• Surgical debridement by trained healthcare providers should be
considered in diabetic foot ulcer which:
 fails to respond to non-surgical debridement
 is deep and infected at presentation
•
Reconstruction
Soft-tissue reconstruction in diabetic foot is a challenge and usually
delayed until the patient is optimised medically, and the infection is
well-controlled. Primary closure of the wound may not be feasible
and secondary healing may not be reliable if the infection is not wellcontrolled. Therefore, reconstruction surgery (e.g. skin grafts, flaps or
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
tissue expansion) is vital in the management for patients with diabetic
foot problems.
In a Cochrane systematic review, treatment of foot ulcers using skin
grafts/tissue replacements showed:68, level I
 higher incidence of complete closure (RR=1.49, 95% CI 1.21 to
1.85)
 lower incidence of lower limb amputations (RD= -0.06, 95% CI
-0.10 to -0.01)
 lower incidence of infections (RR=0.72, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.98)
 no significant difference in ulcer recurrence
Dermal or skin grafting should be considered as an adjunct to standard
care when the healing of DFU has not progressed with the advice of
multidisciplinary foot care team.2
Recommendation 13
• Skin grafting may be considered as an adjunct to standard care in
the management of diabetic foot ulcer.
c. Rehabilitation
•
Ulcer management
Off-loading is a key treatment strategy for the management of DFU. It
can be done by using non-removable [e.g. total contact cast (TCC) and
instant total contact cast] or removable (e.g. removable cast walker,
therapeutic footwear and padding) devices.
Non-removable off-loading devices are more effective in healing DFUs
compared with removable devices.39, level I; 69 - 70, level I
TCC or walkers rendered irremovable are more effective in healing
neuropathic plantar forefoot ulcers than walkers/footwear.39, level I TCC
has shorter healing time by 12 days than removable cast walker in the
management of DFU.67, level I
No adverse events has been reported in the use of non-removable or
removable off-loading devices.39, level I; 69, level I
Other available off-loading options include use of assistive devices e.g.
crutches, wheelchair, walking frames and canes.9
Surgical treatment is indicated for chronic DFU or deformed diabetic
foot with high plantar pressure which is not amenable to therapeutic
footwear or off-loading techniques.9
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
•
Post-amputation rehabilitation
Amputation is done to remove non-viable tissues due to infection and
gangrene. It is performed to allow optimum function of the affected
limb.9 Rehabilitation of amputees encompasses pre-amputation,
post-operative, pre-prosthetic and prosthetic stage, within which an
amputee is provided with prosthesis. It also includes subsequent longterm monitoring and follow-up. Multidisciplinary approach is required to
achieve successful re-integration of an amputee into the community.
The goals of rehabilitation for patients with amputations are as follows:71
•
musculoskeletal re-conditioning and cardiopulmonary training
•
contralateral limb preservation
•
emotional care related to concepts of loss, mourning and the
need for peer support and education
•
minimisation of systemic complications
•
social re-integration
•
setting realistic patient expectations and functional outcome
goals
Outcomes of patients with amputations as the following:72
•
Patients with more distal amputation have better longterm functional outcomes e.g. patients with transmetatarsal
amputation or toe amputation have increased ability to complete
activity of daily livings compared with patients with more proximal
amputation levels e.g. transtibial or transfemoral amputation.
•
Patients with transtibial amputation have better mobility and
decreased wheelchair used compared with patients with
transfemoral amputation, hence demonstrating better quality
of life. These observations were also noted in patients with
knee disarticulation compared with patients with transfemoral
amputation.
•
Longer residual limb length helps to optimise a patient’s ability
in ambulation. Preserving maximum residual limb length will
likely lead to improved rehabilitation outcomes for most patients.
Prosthesis will be prescribed for patients with good cognitive
function, vision, CV reserve and healed residual stump.
Recommendation 14
• Off-loading should be offered to patients with plantar diabetic foot
ulcer.
• All patients with diabetic foot who has amputation should be referred
for rehabilitation.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
6. MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
Frequency of monitoring of patients with diabetic foot depends on risk
stratification as shown below:
Modified: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Diabetic Foot Problems:
Prevention and Management. London: NICE; 2015
Consider:
•
training caregivers in foot assessment for patients who are unable
to check their own feet
•
the overall health of the patients and the progression/deterioration
of wound healing in deciding the frequency of follow-up as part of
the treatment plan
Ensure that the frequency of monitoring in the patients’ individualised
treatment plan is maintained whether the diabetic patients are being
treated in hospital or health clinic.
Low Risk Moderate Risk
High Risk
No immediate concern Immediate concern
Frequency Annually
1 - 2 weeks
1 - 2 months
3 - 6 months
Risk
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
7. CHARCOT NEUROARTHROPATHY
Charcot neuroarthropathy (CN) is common in patient with diabetes.
Foot ulceration develops in 34% of patients with CN, and is 12 times
more likely to undergo amputation when ulceration has developed.
73, level II-2 CN can be mistaken for cellulitis at early stage. It should be
suspected in diabetes patients with inflamed foot, profound neuropathy
and foot structural abnormalities in the absence of fever and elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate.74, level III
• CN is difficult to differentiate from osteomyelitis.
• Appropriate use of imaging studies, including conventional
radiographs, MRI, and nuclear medicine
studies can aid greatly in
diagnosis and treatment guidance of CN.
• Early detection and treatment of CN can lead to
better outcome,
patient satisfaction and, avoid deformity and subsequent amputation.
Imaging modalities are mainly used to differentiate between CN and
osteomyelitis. The findings are as following:
•
Conventional radiographs common findings include focal
demineralisation, periosteal reaction and cortical destruction
involving multiple joints.75, level III
•
CT has no additional value to conventional radiography in the
diagnosis of CN.27, level III
•
MRI is useful tools to differentiate CN from osteomyelitis and
should be done early in suspected patient.75, level III
•
Nuclear studies (PET scan) is valuable in differentiating CN with
infection, however it is difficult to access, technically demanding
and expensive to perform.27, level III
In the presence of an ulcer and unclear of the diagnosis, a biopsy is
indicated. Pathognomonic features of CN are multiple particles of bone
and soft tissue embedded in the deep layers of synovium.9
The aim of managing a CN of foot and ankle is to prevent structural
deformities and complications that ensues e.g. ulceration, osteomyelitis
and threatened limb.
In acute phase of CN, immobilise the foot using off-loading modalities
e.g. crutches, wheelchair and walking frame to reduce oedema
and skin temperature. Once it resolved, patients are allowed to use
protected weight bearing (e.g. removable walker and TCC) as it helps
to distribute foot pressure. Patients may be allowed to ambulate while
bony consolidation occurs.9
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
The aim of surgery is to create a stable, painless and plantigrade foot.
Surgical treatment is indicated for a severe unbraceable deformity,
deformity with recurrent ulceration, joint instability, exostosis and
malalignment associated with pain or potential to get skin ulceration.
76, level III Common surgical procedures for CN of the foot consist of:77, level III
•
exostectomy - relieves bony pressure that cannot be
accommodated with orthotics means
•
arthrodesis of ankle, tibiotalocalcaneal and midfoot - useful
for patients with instability, pain or recurrent ulceration that fail
conservative treatment
•
lengthening of the Achilles tendon or gastrocnemius muscle
- reduces forefoot pressure and improves the alignment of the
ankle and parts of the foot
Early surgical reconstruction in high risk patients can provide timely
restoration of a plantigrade and stable foot and improve quality of life of
the patient.78, level III
Recommendation 15
• Charcot neuroarthropathy should be referred to the orthopaedic
surgeons for immediate treatment.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
8. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of diabetic foot should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
•
wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to
healthcare providers
•
regular training and updates on diabetic foot management by
relevant stakeholders
•
public awareness campaigns on diabetic foot during World
Diabetes Day, etc.
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
•
limited exposure among healthcare providers (e.g. house officers,
nurses, etc.) involved in the management of diabetic foot
•
different levels of care and wide variation in practice due to
expertise, facilities and financial constraints
•
lack of awareness among patients with diabetes on the risk of
developing diabetic foot problems
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
•
ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
via printed and electronic copies
•
reinforce regular trainings with adequate funding for healthcare
providers
•
involve multidisciplinary team at all levels of health care
•
strengthen and maintain the National Diabetic Foot Registry
•
include diabetic foot problem as national health indicator
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of diabetic foot:
a.
Screening for diabetic foot problems
b.
Amputation rates
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
=
X 100%
Percentage of annual
diabetic foot screening
in patients with
diabetes (target>90%)
Total number of patients with
diabetes annually
Number of annual diabetic foot
screening in patients with diabetes
=
X 100%
Percentage of
diabetic-related major
lower limb amputation
Number of diabetic-related
major amputation in a period
Total number of patients with
active diabetic foot problems
in the same period
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
References
1. Bakker K, Apelqvist J, Lipsky BA, et al.; International Working Group on the
Diabetic Foot. The 2015 IWGDF guidance documents on prevention and
management of foot problems in diabetes: development of an evidence-based
global consensus. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2016;32 Suppl 1:2-6.
2. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Diabetic Foot Problems:
Prevention and Management. London: NICE; 2015.
3. World Health Organization. Global report on diabetes. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016
4. Tahir A, Muhammad FMY, Abdul AAG, et al (eds.). National Health and Morbidity
Survey: Non-Communicable Diseases, Risk Factors and other health problems.
Institute for Public Health. 2015.
5. Feisul IM, Azmi S, Mohd Rizal AM, et al. What are the direct medical costs of
managing Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Malaysia? Med J Malaysia. 2017;72(5):271277.
6. Pop-Busui R, Boulton AJ, Feldman EL, et al. Diabetic Neuropathy: A Position
Statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(1):136154.
7. Lipsky BA, Berendt AR, Deery HG, et al. Diagnosis and Treatment of Diabetic
Foot Infections. Infectious Diseases Society of America.Clin Infect Dis. 2004;
39(7):885-910.
8. Tesfaye S, Boulton AJ, Dyck PJ, et al. Toronto Diabetic Neuropathy Expert Group.
Diabetic neuropathies: update on definitions, diagnostic criteria, estimation of
severity, and treatments. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(10):2285-93.
9. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Diabetic Foot. Kuala Lumpur: MoH;
2004.
10. Feng Y, Schlösser FJ, Sumpio BE. The Semmes Weinstein monofilament
examination as a screening tool for diabetic peripheral neuropathy. J Vasc Surg.
2009;50(3):675-682, 682.e1.
11. Hirschfeld G, von Glischinski M, Blankenburg M, et al. Screening for Peripheral
Neuropathies in Children With Diabetes: A Systematic Review. Pediatrics.
2014;133(5):e1324-1330.
12. Wang F, Zhang J, Yu J, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of Monofilament Tests for
Detecting Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. Journal of Diabetes Research. 2017;2017:8787261.
13. Kästenbauer T, Sauseng S, Brath H, et al. The value of the Rydel-Seiffer tuning
fork as a predictor of diabetic polyneuropathy compared with a neurothesiometer.
Diabet Med. 2004;21(6):563-567.
14. Bracewell N, Game F, Jeffcoate W, et al. Clinical evaluation of a new device
in the assessment of peripheral sensory neuropathy in diabetes. Diabet Med.
2012;29(12):1553-1555.
15. Paisley A, Abbott C, van Schie C, et al. A comparison of the Neuropen against
standard quantitative sensory-threshold measures for assessing peripheral nerve
function. Diabet Med. 2002;19(5):400-405.
16. Rayman G, Vas PR, Baker N, et al. The Ipswich Touch Test: a simple and novel
method to identify in patients with diabetes at risk of foot ulceration. Diabetes
Care. 2011; 34(7):1517-1518.
17. Madanat A, Sheshah E, Badawy el-B, et al. Utilizing the Ipswich Touch Test
to simplify screening methods for identifying the risk of foot ulceration among
diabetics: The Saudi experience. Prim Care Diabetes. 2015; 9(4):304-306.
18. Sharma S, Kerry C, Atkins H, et al. The Ipswich Touch Test: a simple and
novel method to screen patients with diabetes at home for increased risk of foot
ulceration. Diabet Med. 2014; 31(9):1100-1103.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
19. Nizar H, Munro N, Nightingale P, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the VibraTip
in detection of diabetic peripheral neuropathy. British Journal of Diabetes.
2014;14(1):26-29.
20. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Medical Technologies
Guidance: VibraTip for testing vibration perception to detect diabetic peripheral
neuropathy; 2014. Available at: http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/mtg22.
21. Papanas N, Paschos P, Papazoglou D, et al. Accuracy of the Neuropad test for
the diagnosis of distal symmetric polyneuropathy in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Care. 2011;34(6):1378-1382.
22. Malaysian Endocrine & Metabolic Society and Ministry of Health Malaysia.
Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (5th Edition). Kuala Lumpur: MEMS &
MoH; 2015.
23. Crawford F, Cezard G, Chappell FM, et al. A systematic review and individual
patient data meta-analysis of prognostic factors for foot ulceration in people with
diabetes: the international research collaboration for the prediction of diabetic foot
ulcerations (PODUS). Health Technol Assess. 2015;19(57):1-210.
24. Tehan PE, Bray A, Chuter VH. Non-invasive vascular assessment in the foot with
diabetes: sensitivity and specificity of the ankle brachial index, toe brachial index
and continuous wave Doppler for detecting peripheral arterial disease. J Diabetes
Complications. 2016;30(1):155-160.
25. Slovut DP, Sullivan TM. Critical limb ischemia: medical and surgical management.
Vasc Med. 2008;13(3):281-291.
26. Lam K, van Asten SA, Nguyen T, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of Probe to Bone to
Detect Osteomyelitis in the Diabetic Foot: A Systematic Review. Clin Infect Dis.
2016;63(7):944-948.
27. Peterson N, Widnall J, Evans P, et al. Diagnostic Imaging of Diabetic Foot
Disorders. Foot Ankle Int. 2017;38(1):86-95.
28. Smith, MD, Brandon J.; Buchanan, MD, at al. A comparison of imaging modalities
for the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, Marshall Journal of Medicine. 2016;2(3):83-92.
29. Lauri C, Tamminga M, Glaudemans AWJM, et al. Detection of Osteomyelitis
in the Diabetic Foot by Imaging Techniques: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis Comparing MRI, White Blood Cell Scintigraphy, and FDG-PET. Diabetes
Care. 2017;40(8):1111-1120.
30. Santema TB, Lenselink EA, Balm R, et al. Comparing the Meggitt-Wagner and
the University of Texas wound classification systems for diabetic foot ulcers: interobserver analyses. Int Wound J. 2016;13(6):1137-1141.
31. Forsythe RO, Ozdemir BA, Chemla ES, et al. Inter-observer Reliability of Three
Validated Scoring Systems in the Assessment of Diabetic Foot Ulcers. Int J Low
Extrem Wounds. 2016; 15(3):213-219.
32. Jeon BJ, Choi HJ, Kang JS, et al. Comparison of five systems of classification
of diabetic foot ulcers and predictive factors for amputation. Int Wound J.
2017;14(3):537-545.
33. Monteiro-Soares M, Martins-Mendes D, Vaz-Carneiro A, et al. Classification
systems for lower extremity amputation prediction in subjects with active diabetic
foot ulcer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev.
2014;30(7):610-622.
34. Oyibo SO, Jude EB, Tarawneh I, et.al. A comparison of two diabetic foot
ulcer classification systems: the Wagner and the University of Texas wound
classification systems. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(1):84-8.
35. van Netten JJ, Price PE, Lavery LA, et al.; International Working Group on the
Diabetic Foot. Prevention of foot ulcers in the at-risk patient with diabetes: a
systematic review. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2016;32 Suppl 1:84-98.
36. Hasan R, Firwana B, Elraiyah T, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of glycemic control for the prevention of diabetic foot syndrome. J Vasc Surg.
2016;63(2 Suppl):22S-28S.e1-2.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
37. Callaghan BC Little AA, Feldman EL, et al. Enhanced glucose control for
preventing and treating diabetic neuropathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012;(6):CD007543.
38. vanNetten JJ, Lazzarini PA, Armstrong DG, et al. Diabetic Foot Australia guideline
on footwear for people with diabetes. J Foot Ankle Res. 2018;11:2.
39. Bus SA, van Deursen RW, Armstrong DG, et al. Footwear and offloading
interventions to prevent and heal foot ulcers and reduce plantar pressure in patients
with diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2016;32Suppl 1:99118.
40. vanBael K, van der Tempel G, Claus I, et al. Gastrocnemius fascia release under
local anaesthesia as a treatment for neuropathic foot ulcers in diabetic patients: a
short series. ActaChir Belg. 2016;116(6):367-371.
41. Batista F, Magalhães AA, Nery C, et al. Minimally invasive surgery for diabetic
plantar foot ulcerations. Diabet Foot Ankle. 2011;2.
42. Tamir E, McLaren AM, Gadgil A, et al. Outpatient percutaneous flexor tenotomies
for management of diabetic claw toe deformities with ulcers: a preliminary report.
Can J Surg. 2008;51(1):41-44.
43. Tamir E, Vigler M, Avisar E, et al. Percutaneous tenotomy for the treatment of
diabetic toe ulcers. Foot Ankle Int. 2014;35(1):38-43.
44. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Guidelines: 2nd Edition.
Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2013.
45. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Pain Management Handbook. Kuala Lumpur: MoH.
2013.
46. Vermeulen H, Westerbos SJ, Ubbink DT. Benefit and harm of iodine in wound
care: a systematic review. J Hosp Infect. 2010;76(3):191-199.
47. Dumville JC, Lipsky BA, Hoey C, et al. Topical antimicrobial agents for treating foot
ulcers in people with diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017; 6:CD011038.
48. SelvaOlid A, Solà I, Barajas-Nava LA, et al. Systemic antibiotics for treating
diabetic foot infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(9):CD009061.
49. Gurusamy KS, Koti R, Toon CD, et al. Antibiotic therapy for the treatment of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in non surgical wounds.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(11):CD010427.
50. Pharmaceutical Services Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Antibiotic
Guideline (Second Edition). Petaling Jaya: MoH; 2014.
51. Wu L, Norman G, Dumville JC et al. Dressings for treating foot ulcers in people
with diabetes: an overview of systematic reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015;(7):CD010471.
52. Dumville JC, Deshpande S, O’Meara S, et al. Hydrocolloid dressings for healing
diabetic foot ulcers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(8):CD009099.
53. International consensus. Appropriate use of silver dressings in wounds. An expert
working group consensus. London: Wounds International; 2012. Available at:
www.woundsinternational.com.
54. Dumville JC, Hinchliffe RJ, Cullum N, et al. Negative pressure wound therapy for
treating foot wounds in people with diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2013;(10):CD010318.
55. Noble-Bell G, Forbes A. A systematic review of the effectiveness of negative
pressure wound therapy in the management of diabetes foot ulcers. Int Wound J.
2008;5(2):233-242.
56. Akbari A, Moodi H, Ghiasi F, et al. Effects of vacuum-compression therapy on
healing of diabetic foot ulcers: randomized controlled trial. J Rehabil Res Dev.
2007;44(5):631-636.
57. Elraiyah T, Tsapas A, Prutsky G, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of
adjunctive therapies in diabetic foot ulcers.JVasc Surg. 2016;63(2 Suppl):46S58S.e1-2.
58. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Maggot debridement therapy. Kuala Lumpur: MOH;
2008.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
59. Kranke P, Bennett MH, Martyn-St James M, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for
chronic wounds. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(6):CD004123.
60. MohdYazid B, Ayesyah A, Nurhanani AB, et al. The Physiological, Biochemical
and Quality of Life Changes in Chronic Diabetic Foot Ulcer after Hyperbaric
Oxygen Therapy. Med & Health. 2017;12(2): 210-219.
61. Amudha K, Chee KH, Tan KS, et al. Prevalence of peripheral artery disease in
urban high-risk Malaysian patients. Int J ClinPract. 2003;57(5):369-372.
62. Heikkila K, Mitchell DC, Loftus IM, et al. Improving 1-Year Outcomes of
Infrainguinal Limb Revascularization: Population-Based Cohort Study of 104 000
Patients in England. Circulation. 2018;137(18):1921-1933.
63. Antoniou GA, Georgiadis GS, Antoniou SA, et al. Bypass surgery for chronic
lower limb ischaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;4:CD002000.
64. Hinchliffe RJ, Andros G, Apelqvist J, et al. A systematic review of the effectiveness
of revascularization of the ulcerated foot in patients with diabetes and peripheral
arterial disease. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2012;28Suppl 1:179-217.
65. Ministry of Health. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Kuala Lumpur: MoH;
2018.
66. Bedenis R, Lethaby A, Maxwell H, et al. Antiplatelet agents for preventing
thrombosis after peripheral arterial bypass surgery. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2015;(2):CD000535.
67. Elraiyah T, Domecq JP, Prutsky G, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of débridement methods for chronic diabetic foot ulcers. J Vasc Surg. 2016;63(2
Suppl):37S-45S.e1-2.
68. Santema TB, Poyck PP, Ubbink DT. Skin grafting and tissue replacement for
treating foot ulcers in people with diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2016;2:CD011255.
69. de Oliveira AL, Moore Z. Treatment of the diabetic foot by offloading: a systematic
review. J Wound Care. 2015;24(12):560, 562-570.
70. Lewis J, Lipp A. Pressure-relieving interventions for treating diabetic foot ulcers.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(1):CD002302.
71. Government of South of Australia. Guidelines for treatment, care and support
for amputees within the LSS living in the community. Available at: http://
lifetimesupport.sa.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/Amputee-Framework-Guidelines.
pdf.
72. VA/DoD. VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Rehabilitation of Individuals
with Lower Limb Amputation Version 2.0 - 2017. Available at: https://www.
healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/Rehab/amp/VADoDLLACPG092817.pdf.
73. Sohn MW, Stuck RM, Pinzur M, et al. Lower-extremity amputation risk after
charcotarthropathy and diabetic foot ulcer. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(1):98-100.
74. Frykberg RG, Zgonis T, Armstrong DG, et al.; American College of Foot and Ankle
Surgeons. Diabetic foot disorders. A clinical practice guideline (2006 revision). J
Foot Ankle Surg. 2006;45(5 Suppl):S1-66.
75. Womack J. Charcot Arthropathy Versus Osteomyelitis: Evaluation and
Management. Orthop Clin North Am. 2017;48(2):241-247.
76. Idusuyi OB. Surgical management of Charcot neuroarthropathy. Prosthet Orthot
Int. 2015;39(1):61-72.
77. Lowery NJ, Woods JB, Armstrong DG, et al. Surgical management of Charcot
neuroarthropathy of the foot and ankle: a systematic review. Foot Ankle Int.
2012;33(2):113-121.
78. Mittlmeier T, Klaue K, Haar P, et al. Should one consider primary surgical
reconstruction in charcot arthropathy of the feet? Clin Orthop Relat Res.
2010;468(4):1002-1011.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: Are the following preventive strategies safe and
effective for diabetic foot at risk? - Surgery
1.
DIABETIC FOOT/ (7869)
2.
(diabetic adj1 (foot or feet)).tw. (6918)
3.
foot ulcer, diabetic.tw. (8)
4.
diabetic foot ulcer.tw. (957)
5.
DIABETIC NEUROPATHIES/ (14576)
6.
diabetic autonomic neuropath*.tw. (752)
7.
(diabetic adj1 (neuralgia* or neuropath* or polyneuropath*)).tw.
(8053)
8.
painful diabetic neuropath*.tw. (710)
9.
DIABETIC ANGIOPATHIES/ (18723)
10. (diabetic adj1 (angiopath* or microangiopath* or vascular
complication* or vascular disease*)).tw. (3229)
11. Diabetic ulcer.tw. (178)
12. FOOT ULCER/ (1793)
13. ((foot or plantar) adj1 ulcer*).tw. (5346)
14. foot at risk.tw. (41)
15. feet at risk.tw. (14)
16. FOOT DEFORMITIES/ (1824)
17. ((foot or metatarsal) adj1 deformit*).tw. (1846)
18. ARTHROPATHY, NEUROGENIC/ (1733)
19. charcot* joint.tw. (200)
20. (neurogenic adj1 arthropath*).tw. (54)
21. (Ischemic adj1 (foot or feet)).tw. (131)
22. (Ischaemic adj1 (foot or feet)).tw. (63)
23. Neuroischaemic.tw. (33)
24. Neuroischemic.tw. (93)
25. (Diabetic adj1 (foot infect* or feet infect*)).tw. (742)
26. ((foot or feet) adj1 infect*).tw. (1321)
27. GANGRENE/ (8388)
28. gangrene*.tw. (10435)
29. OSTEOMYELITIS/ (20349)
30. osteomyelitis*.tw. (21182)
31. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14
or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or
26 or 27 or 28 or 29 or 30 (90421)
32. Prevent* surger*.tw. (369)
33. 31 and 32 (4)
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the accurate screening tests for diabetic foot at risk?
2. Are the following preventive strategies safe and effective for
diabetic foot at risk?
• Metabolic control
• Foot care
• Foot wear
• Surgeries
3. What are the clinical utilities and accuracy of the following tools for
diagnosing foot at risk?
• History taking
• Physical examination
 Musculoskeletal status
 Vascular assessment status
 Neurological status
• Investigations
 Biochemical investigation
 Imaging
 Vascular assessment
 Neurological assessment
 Assessment of plantar foot pressures
4. What are the practical clinical methods of stratification systems for
classifying the diabetic foot problems?
• International Working Group on the Diabetic Foot (IWGDF)
• University of Texas
5. Are the following classifications accurate for diabetic foot ulcers?
• Wagner
• University of Texas
• Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) / IWGDF
• PEDIS
• SINBAD
6. Are the following treatment strategies safe and effective for
neuropathic, ischaemic foot, neuroischaemic, diabetic foot
ulcers, diabetic foot infections and deformity (including Charcot
Neuroarthropathy)?
• Non-surgical
 Pharmacological (antibiotic regimens and antimicrobial
therapies)
 Wound management
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
 Rehabilitation (off-loading techniques, etc.)
 Adjuvant/alternatives treatment
• Surgical
 Debridement
 Reconstruction
 Revascularisation
• Amputation (and management of amputees)
7. What are the referral criteria for diabetic foot at risk?
8. What are the effective follow-up/monitoring of diabetic foot
problem?
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
SEMMES-WEINSTEIN MONOFILAMENT EXAMINATION
TUNING FORK EXAMINATION
Place
monofilament
perpendicular
to skin
Apply
pressure until
monofilament
buckles
Release
First
metatarsal
Third
metatarsal
Fifth
metatarsal
Sites shown to identify 90%
of patients with abnormal
monofilament test
Other recommended sites
Where to perform SWME?
How to perform SWME?
How to perform Tuning Fork Test
1. Ask patient to close his/her eyes.
2. Tap a 128 Hz tuning fork and place it on
patient’s sternum to confirm vibration.
3. Tap tuning fork and place it on bony
prominence of the foot (distal phalanx of the
great toe).
4. Ask patient to tell you when vibration is felt on
the foot and tell you when it stops.
5. If sensation is impaired, continue to assess
more proximally (e.g. mid-dorsal foot, medial
malleolus, midfibular, patella)
6. Repeat assessment on the other leg.
Note: Any bony prominence of the foot can be
tested. However, the best point for vibration test is
at the great toe.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
DIABETIC FOOT ASSESSMENT FORM
(Kindly the appropriate box)
DATE:
NAME:
IDENTIFICATION CARD NUMBER:
MEDICAL HISTORY
PERSONAL DATA
SYMPTOMS
FOOT
GENERAL EXAMINATION
Newly diagnosed (on admission)
Known case of Diabetes Mellitus
(DM)
High blood sugar:
Symptomatic:
Others:
Duration:
years
Date of diagnosis:
Type of DM:
Type 1
Type 2
Others:
Treatment:
Never seek medical treatment
Self-treated
Traditional/alternative treatment
Other medical condition:
Ischaemic Heart Disease
Stroke
Hypertension
Hyperlipidaemia
Complications:
Peripheral Arterial Disease
Neuropathy
Nephropathy
Others:
Others:
Current medical treatment:
Nil
Diet alone
Medication:
Oral Anti-Diabetic Agents:
Insulin:
Combined:
Paraesthesia (Pin & Needles)
Claudication/Rest pain
Foot ulcer
Amputation
Orthosis/Prosthesis
Footwear
Right
Left
Description
Indoor
Outdoor
Yes
No
Yes
No
Skin condition
Corns/callosities
Ulcers
Bunions
Lesser toe deformities
Charcot Joints
Right
Left
Description
Yes
No
Yes
No
RIGHT
LEFT
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
(Kindly the appropriate box)
Adapted : A Che-Ahmad, NF Mustafa, N Alias, et al. Evaluation of foot at risk among
diabetic patients using diabetic foot assessment protocol in Malaysia. IIUM
& MoH, 2012. (unpublished document)
Muscle wasting
Loss of proprioception
Right
Left
Description
Yes
No
Yes
NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION
Abnormal monofilament test
( >3/10 )
Loss of vibration perception
Atrophic skin changes
Dystrophic nails
Right
Left
Description
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
VASCULAR EXAMINATION
PALPABLE PULSE
Absence of hair
Abnormal temperature
gradient
Dorsalis Pedis Artery (DPA)
Right
Left
Description
Posterior Tibial Artery (PTA)
Popliteal Artery (PA)
Femoral Artery (FA)
Capillary refill >3 seconds
++ (Normal)
+ (Weak)
- (Absent)
++
++
+
-
++
+
-
++
Brachial (mmHg)
Dorsalis Pedis (mmHg)
Posterior Tibial (mmHg)
Right
Left
Description
ANKLE-BRACHIAL INDEX (ABI) ASSESSMENT
RISK STRATIFICATION
MANAGEMENT PLAN
ABI
Use either DPA or PTA whichever higher
Low risk
High risk
Moderate risk
Referral:
Orthopaedic
Vascular
Endocrine
Primary Care
Others:
Foot care education checklist:
Foot hygiene
Nail care
Foot wear advice
Routine foot check
Emollient use
Follow-up:
3 monthly
6 monthly
Yearly
Others:
Wound care
Recognising active foot
problems (e.g.
infection/erythema/ulcer)
Things to avoid (e.g. massage/
soak/reflexology/self-treatment)
Assessed by
Name:
Signature:
Date:
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS CLASSIFICATION OF DIABETIC FOOT
Source: Lavery LA, Armstrong DG, Harkless LB. Classification of diabetic foot wounds. J Foot Ankle Surg. 1996;35(6):528-531
GRADE 0
GRADE I
GRADE II
GRADE III
STAGE A
STAGE B
STAGE C
STAGE D
Pre- or post-ulcerative
lesion completely
epithelialised
Superficial wound,
not involving tendon,
capsule or bone
Wound penetrating to
tendon or capsule
Wound penetrating to
bone or joint
With infection
With infection
With infection
With infection
With infection and
ischaemia
With infection and
ischaemia
With infection and
ischaemia
With infection and
ischaemia
With ischaemia
With ischaemia
With ischaemia
With ischaemia
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
PATIENT EDUCATION MATERIALS
Personal foot care should be emphasised which includes:
• checking that feet are in good order
• keeping feet clean
• providing skin care
• keeping toenails at a good length
• choosing and wearing good fitting footwear
• getting help if a problem is noticed
Patient Education for Foot Care
Take proper care of diabetes by taking medications, following diet
plan, exercising regularly, monitoring blood sugar regularly and
attending appointments with the doctors. Ensure HbA1c, blood
pressure, cholesterol and weight are under control.
Do not smoke as it restricts blood flow in the feet. Get help in smoking
cessation if necessary.
Check feet every day in a brightly lit space looking at the top and
bottom of the feet, heels, and between each toe. Check for cuts,
blisters, redness, swelling or nail problems. Use a magnifying hand
mirror to look at the bottom of feet or ask someone else to check it.
Keep feet clean by washing them daily with a mild soap. Use only
lukewarm (below 37°C) and not hot water. Do not soak feet as
this can cause dry skin. Dry by blotting or patting and carefully dry
between the toes.
Keep skin soft and smooth by moisturising feet but not between
the toes. Use a moisturiser daily to keep dry skin from itching or
cracking over the dry areas – usually the top, the heel area and the
soles. Massage the cream using small circular movements. But don’t
moisturise between the toes which could risk an infection to occur.
Cut toenails carefully after washing and drying feet. Cut them straight
across and file the sharp edges. Don’t cut nails too short, as this
could lead to ingrown toenails.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Never self-treat corns or calluses. No “bathroom surgery” or
medicated pads. Visit your clinic for appropriate treatment.
Wear clean, dry socks that are not too tight and are light coloured.
Change socks daily. Make sure there are no holes. Consider socks
made specifically for patients with diabetes with extra cushioning,
no elastic tops, higher than the ankle and are made from fibers that
wick moisture away from the skin. Avoid socks that have seams as
they can cause rubbing or irritation leading to a blister or callus.
Keep feet warm and dry and, protect feet from hot and cold
temperatures. Wear shoes at the beach or on hot pavements to
protect feet from getting burnt. Don’t put feet into hot water. Never
use hot water bottles, heating pads or electric blankets as these can
cause burns.
Never walk barefoot indoors or outdoors. Always wear appropriate
shoes or slippers to avoid cuts or scratches over feet. Avoid shoes
with narrow box, high heels, stilettos or footwear that have straps
with no back support. Shake out shoes and feel the inside before
wearing.
Put feet up when sitting. Keep the blood flowing to feet by wiggling
toes and moving ankles for five minutes, 2 - 3 times a day. Don’t
cross legs for long periods of time.
Exercise regularly to improve circulation and balance and, reduce
the risk of falling. Wear athletic shoes that give support and are
made for specific activities.
Periodic foot examinations are necessary when visiting diabetes
clinics. Get sense of feeling and pulses checked at least once a
year.
Seek treatment if there is presence of calluses or ingrown toenails.
Urgent care is needed when there is presence of pain, noticeably
red or discoloured areas, unusually hot areas, discharges, bad
smell, an ulcer or blister or if feeling generally unwell with difficulty
controlling sugar levels.
Modified: Jabatan Kesihatan WP Kuala Lumpur & Putrajaya. Panduan Penjagaan
Kaki Bagi Pesakit Diabetes. JKWPKL&P, 2012 (unpublished document)
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Healthcare Providers’ Checklist for Footcare
1. Is the patient able to care for their feet and
nails?
2. Is the patient able to understand the need to
assess and care for their feet on a daily basis?
3. Is the patient able to see the bottom of their
feet?
4. Is there neuropathy, obesity or retinopathy
preventing foot care?
5. Do they understand what diabetic neuropathy
and peripheral arterial disease is?
6. Does the patient understand how managing
their blood glucose prevents irreversible
neuropathy that damages their feet? Do they
understand the link between elevated blood
glucose, neuropathy, ulcers and amputations
leading to death? Do they understand the
critical need to keep blood sugars at targeted
HbA1c?
7. Refer for diabetic education and foot care
nursing including toe nail care and, corn and
callus removal.
Yes
No
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
FOOTWEAR ADVICE
Features of an ideal footwear for diabetic foot at risk:
Image by: Dr. RoslanJohari, Director of Cheras Rehabilitation Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Firm heel counter
Insole
Breathable material
Rocker bottom
Outsole
Spacious toe
box
Seamless interior
Laced shoe or
velcro closure
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
TREATMENT OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN IN DIABETIC FOOT
ER = extended release; SNRI = serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor;
SSRI = selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA = tricyclic antidepressant
Adapted: Snyder MJ, Gibbs LM, Lindsay TJ. Treating Painful Diabetic Peripheral
Neuropathy: An Update. Am Fam Physician. 2016;94(3):227-34
Patient presenting with painful neuropathy
Initial evaluation
Rule out other causes of neuropathy
Establish treatment goals
Optimise glycaemic control
First-line therapy
Anticonvulsants
Antidepressants (TCAs and SNRIs)
Pregabalin
Amitriptyline
Gabapentin
Duloxetine
Second-line therapy
SNRIs
Opioid-like drugs
Topical treatments
Venlafaxine
Tramadol
Lidocaine 5% patch
or
or
or
Desvenlafaxine
Tapentadol ER
Capsaisin 0.075% cream
Third-line therapy
SSRIs
Opioids
Citalopram
Oxycodone controlled release
or
Paroxetine
or
Escitalopram
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
TREATMENT OF NEUROPATHIC PAIN IN DIABETIC FOOT (CONT.)
• Side effects include dizziness, sedation, gastro-intestinal
(GI) symptoms and mild peripheral oedema
• Should be used cautiously in:
o heart failure and concomitant use of thiazolidinediones,
because cases of decompensated heart failure with
pregabalin use have been reported
o renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance ≤30 ml/minute/1.73
m2) require dose adjustment
• Side effects include dizziness, sedation, GI symptoms and
mild peripheral oedema
• Dose adjustment is recommended in renal impairment
• Side effects include dry mouth, sedation, disturbed vision,
arrhythmia, palpitation, postural hypotension, urinary
retention and constipation
• Contraindicated in cardiovascular disease (including
unstable angina, recent myocardial infarction, heart failure
and abnormal cardiac conduction) and glaucoma.
• Caution in elderly patients
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
Anticonvulsants
Medication
Initial dosage
Maximum dosage
Comment
600 mg divided twice
daily
300 mg divided twice
daily
Pregabalin
150 mg daily at bedtime
or divided twice daily
10 mg daily at bedtime
Amitriptyline
3,600 mg divided thrice
daily
1,200 mg divided thrice
daily
Gabapentin
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
• Lowers seizure threshold and should be avoided in
epilepsy or at risk of seizures
• Side effects include nausea, vomiting, dry mouth,
constipation, decreased appetite, insomnia, dizziness,
somnolence, blurred vision, increased sweating and
fatigue
• Advise taking it with food to reduce the incidence of
nausea
Opioid-like medications
Topical medications
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
Medication
Initial dosage
Maximum dosage
Comment
225 mg daily
150 mg daily
Venlafaxine
1 patch daily
Four times daily
30 mg at bedtime applied
to bottom of feet
3 patches daily
NA
NA
Lidocaine 5% patch
Capsaicin 0.075%
cream
Isosorbide dinitrate
spray
250 mg twice daily
100 mg twice daily
Tapentadol ER
400 mg daily
200 mg daily
Desvenlafaxine
100 mg every 6 hours;
maximum 400 mg daily
50 mg every 4 to 6 hours
Tramadol
120 mg daily or divided
twice daily
60 mg daily or divided
twice daily
Duloxetine
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
• Should be used with caution because long-term use is
associated with numerous adverse effects and increased
morbidity and mortality
Opiods
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Medication
Initial dosage
Maximum dosage
Comment
40 mg twice daily
10 mg twice daily
Oxycodone
controlled release
10 mg daily
10 mg daily
10 mg daily
40 mg daily
40 mg daily
20 mg daily
Citalopram
Paroxetine
Escitalopram
ER = extended release; NA = not available
Source:
1. Snyder MJ, Gibbs LM, Lindsay TJ. Treating Painful Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy: An Update. Am Fam Physician. 2016;94(3):227-34
2. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Pain Management Handbook. Kuala Lumpur: MoH. 2013
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 9
TYPES OF INFECTIONS IN DIABETIC FOOT AND SUGGESTIONS OF TREATMENT
1. Diabetic Foot Infection
Antibiotics should not be used unless there are local or systemic features of infection. Local treatment including
surgical debridement is important. Antibiotic selection should be based on the most recent culture and sensitivity
report.
Infection/condition
and likely organism
involved
Suggested treatment
Preferred
Alternative
Mild infections
Comments
a. Local infection
involving skin and
subcutaneous
tissues
b. Erythema<2 cm
around the ulcer
c. No systemic signs
Cephalexin 500 mg PO
q6h
OR
Amoxycillin/Clavulanate
625 mg PO q8h
Clindamycin
300 - 450 mg PO q8h
OR
Trimethoprim/Sulphametoxazole
5 - 10 mg/kg PO q12h
Duration:1 - 2 weeks
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Infection/condition
and likely organism
involved
Suggested treatment
Preferred
Alternative
Moderate infections
Comments
a. Deep tissue
infection
b. Erythema >2 cm
around ulcer
c. No Systemic
Inflammatory
Response
Syndrome (SIRS)
If
pseudomonas
is
suspected
Ampicillin/Sulbactam
1.5 - 3 g IV q6 - 8h
OR
Ceftriaxone 1 – 2 g q24h
±Metronidazole 500mg
IV q8h
Piperacillin/Tazobactam
4.5 mg IV q6-8h
Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV q8-12h
PLUS
Clindamycin 600mg IV q8h
Duration: usually 2-4 weeks; modify according to
clinical response.
• If proven osteomyelitis: at least 4-6 weeks.
Shorter duration if the entire infected bone are
removed (3 to 5 days may be sufficient).
If antibiotic-resistant organisms are likely, treat as
severe infection.
All of the above and
presence of SIRS
Piperacillin/Tazobactam
4.5 g IV q6-8h
Vancomycin
15-20 mg/kg IV q8-12h
Cefepime 1-2g IV q8h
Linezolid 600mg IV/PO q12h
Add Vancomycin 1 g IV q12h if high risk for MRSA
Duration of treatment: 4-6 weeks.
Severe infections
MRSA
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
Infection/condition
and likely organism
involved
Suggested treatment
Preferred
Alternative
Polymicrobial Infections
Comments
Primarily
occurs
in
patients
who
are
immunocompromised
or have certain chronic
diseases e.g. diabetes
mellitus
Group A streptococcus
Piperacillin/Tazobactam
4.5 g IV q8h
Benzylpenicillin 2 – 4 MU
IV q4h
PLUS
Clindamycin 600 - 900
mg IV q8h
Cefotaxime 2 g IV q6h
PLUS
Metronidazole 500 mg IV q8h
Ampicillin/Sulbactam
1.5 g IV q8h
PLUS
Clindamycin
600 - 900 mg IV q8h
Add Vancomycin 1 g IV q12h if high risk for MRSA
Early aggressive surgical debridement essential
With septicaemia/severe infection refer to ICU
guidelines
APPENDIX 9 TYPES OF INFECTIONS IN DIABETES FOOT AND SUGGESTIONS OF TREATMENT (CONT.)
2. Necrotising Fasciitis
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 9 TYPES OF INFECTIONS IN DIABETES FOOT AND SUGGESTIONS OF TREATMENT (CONT.)
3. Osteomyelitis
Infection/condition
and likely organism
involved
Suggested treatment
Preferred
Alternative
Acute Osteomyelitis
Chronic Osteomyelitis
Comments
Staphylococcus aureus
(80%),
Group
A
Streptococcus pyogenes,
Rarely gram negative
bacilli
No open wound:
Cloxacillin 2 g IV q6h
If gram negative bacilli
by on gram stain:
Ciprofloxacin 400mg IV
q24h
OR
Ceftriaxone 2g IV q24h
Penicillin Allergy:
Clindamycin 300-600 mg IV q8h
followed by oral therapy (same
dose)
Duration: initial IV therapy for 2-4 weeks, followed
by oral therapy, to complete minimum of six weeks
Modify according to clinical response
(After three months of
appropriate antibiotic
therapy or presence of
dead bone on X-ray)
Commonest organism:
Staphylococcus aureus
Empirical treatment is not
indicated
Thorough surgical debridement
required (removal of dead
bone/ orthopaedic hardware)
Choice of antibiotic depends
on C&S result from tissue/
bone
Minimum length six weeks but usually >3 months
Treat until inflammatory parameters are normal
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 9 TYPES OF INFECTIONS IN DIABETES FOOT AND SUGGESTIONS OF TREATMENT (CONT.)
4. Suppurative Wound Infections
Infection/condition
and likely organism
involved
Suggested treatment
Preferred
Alternative
Suppurative Wound Infections
Comments
Suppurative
wound
infections
Change antibiotics accordingly after C&S result is
available
Topical antibiotics are not recommended for
treatment of wound infections as they may result in
the emergence of resistant organisms
Patient's tetanus immunisation status should
be assessed in all cases
If there is surrounding
cellulitis and/or presence
of systemic symptoms:
Cloxacillin 500 mg PO/IV
q6h
If
gram
negative
organisms suspected or
known to be involved:
Gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV
q24h
OR
As
a
monotherapy:
Cefuroxime 1.5 g IV q8h
g: gram; mg: milligramme; PO: oral administration; q6h: every 6 hours; q8h: every 8 hours; q12h: every 12 hours; q24h: every 24 hours; SIRS: Systemic
Inflammatory Response Syndrome; MRSA: methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus; IV: intravenous; MU: mega unit; ICU: Intensive Care Unit
Adapted: Pharmaceutical Services Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Antibiotic Guideline (Second Edition). Petaling Jaya: MoH; 2014.
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 10
TYPES OF WOUND DRESSING IN DIABETIC FOOT
No.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Indications
Contraindications
Review
intervals
Basic wound contact dressings
Advanced wound dressings
Types of dressing
Gauze/basic
absorbent
with paraffin or similar
(antiseptics or antibiotics)
• Reduces adherence
of dressing to the
wound
• Widely available
• Minimal exudate
absorption
• Requires
secondary dressing
All wounds
1.
Allergy
Daily
Hydrogel
• Provides moist
environment
• Acts as enzymatic
debridement
• Promotes
granulation
1.
• Sloughy wound
• Dry wounds
• Highly exudative
wounds
• Allergy
1 - 2 days
• Requires secondary
dressing
Alginate
• Forms gel on wound
and maintain moisture
• Acts as cavity filler
• Absorbent in exudative
wounds
• Promotes haemostasis
• Low allergenic
2.
• Moderately or
highly exudative
wounds
• Need for
haemostasis
• Dry wounds
• Allergy
2 - 3 days
• Requires secondary
dressing
• Gel can be confused
with slough or pus in
wound
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
No.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Indications
Contraindications
Review
intervals
Advanced wound dressings
Types of dressing
Hydrofibre
• Maintains moisture
• Longer wear time
• Non-traumatic upon
removal
• Reduces risk of
maceration
• Can be used on
infected wounds
3.
Moderately or
highly exudative
wounds
Allergy
2 - 5 days
• Not helpful for dry
wounds
• Requires secondary
dressings
Foam
• Maintains moisture
• Highly absorbent
• Cushioning property
4.
Moderately or highly
exudative wounds
• Dry wounds
• Wounds that need
frequent review
2 - 3 days
Limited size
Hydrocolloid
• Maintains moisture
• Cleans and debrides
by autolysis
• Easy to use
• Waterproof
5.
Mildly to moderately
exudative wounds
• Dry wounds
• Infection
• Highly exudative
wounds
2 - 3 days
Induces
peri-wound
maceration
Silver
• No known resistance
• Bactericidal
6.
Infective wounds
Allergy
3 - 5 days
Some silver dressings
discolour the wound
Others
Not widely used - some may be used in specialised centres e.g. collagen, matrix and regenerative
dressings (cultured epidermis, growth factors, stem cells, etc.)
7.
Adapted: Ministry of Health. Wound Care Manual. Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2014
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ABI
ankle brachial index
C&S
culture and sensitivity
CFDU
colour flow duplex ultrasound
CHS
Curative Health Services
CI
confidence interval
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CT
computed tomography
CV
cardiovascular
CWD
continuous wave doppler
DEPA
Depth of the ulcer, extent of bacterial colonisation, phase of ulcer
and association aetiology
DFU
diabetic foot ulcer
DG
development group
DM
diabetes mellitus
DUSS
Diabetic ulcer severity score
GFR
Gastrocnemius-soleus fascia recession
GI
gastro-intestinal
HbA1c
haemoglobin A1c
HBOT
hyperbaric oxygen therapy
IpTT
Ipswich Touch Test
LOPS
loss of protective sensation
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
MD
mean difference
MDT
maggot debridement therapy
MoH
Ministry of Health
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MW
Meggitt–Wagner
NCS
nerve conduction study
NDS
neuropathy disability score
OR
odds ratio
PAD
peripheral arterial disease
PEDIS
Perfusion, Extent, Depth, Infection and Sensation
PET
positron emission tomography
PTA
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty
RCT
randomised control trial
RD
risk difference
RR
relative risk
S(AD)SAD
Size (area, depth), sepsis, arteriopathy, denervation system
SINBAD
Site, ischaemia, neuropathy, bacterial infection and depth
SWME
Semmes-Weinstein monofilament examination
TBI
toe brachial index
T1DM
type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
T2DM
type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
TCC
total contact cast
VPT
vibration perception threshold
UT
University of Texas
vs
versus
Management of Diabetic Foot (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG and Health Technology
Assessment and CPG Council for their valuable input and feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Dr. Mohd Asni Alias, Orthopaedic Surgeon, Pantai Hospital, Manjung
• Dr. Noor Ayuni Bazura Muhamad, Principal Assistant Director,
MaHTAS
• Ms. Noormah Darus on critical appraisal in the CPG development
• Ms. Zamilah Mat Jusoh@Yusof and Mr. Abd Hafiz Abd Hamid on
retrieval of evidence
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Diabetic Foot (Second
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.