HORMONE THERAPY
_ purwe MENOPAUSE —
| “MALAYSIAN Womlény
COLLEGE OF OBSTETRICIANS & GYNAECOLOGISTS
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia
Clinical Practice Guidelines
on
“ Hormone Therapy during
Menopause in Malaysian Women ”
Collaborating agencies
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Malaysian Menopause Society
Obstetrical & Gynaecological
Academy of Family Physicians
Society of Malaysia of Malaysia
( MOH/P/PAK/207.10(GU) )
CLINICAL
PRACTICE
GUIDELINES on
HORMONE THERAPY
DURING MENOPAUSE
IN MALAYSIAN WOMEN
A project of the
College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia
CONTENTS
Page
Foreword
1-2
Committee Members
3-6
Title of CPG
7
Basis for development of CPG
7
Clinical questions addressed
8
Target group
8
Target population
8
Process
8-10
Appendix l - SIGN 50 criteria
11-12
Objectives
13
Definitions
13-14
Diagnosis of menopause
14-15
Clinical benefits of Hormone Therapy
15-22
Hormone Therapy and other systems
22-27
Patient perspectives
28-30
Clinical Practice Guidelines
30-37
Appendix ll
Hormone therapy preparations available in Malaysia
38-39
Appendix lll
Algorithm for initiation of hormone therapy
40
( based on symptoms )
Appendix lV
Algorithm for initiation of hormone therapy
41
( based on risk of osteoporosis )
References
42-56
FOREWORD
Hormone Therapy (HT) remains the most effective option for
menopausal symptoms. There are many good clinical data to
indicate that the use of HT started in early menopause is effective
and safe.
Despite all this, both doctors and the public are still apprehensive
and anxious about its continued use. Prevailing misconceptions and
misinterpretations about HT may be contributed by several factors,
including cultural practices, social mores, misinformation through
media, and differing practices of medical personnel based on
inconsistent
scientific
data.
Access
to
information
through
unmonitored media and internet has to some extent, contributed to
confusing information playing down the value of good scientific facts.
The HT users and prescribers have opened themselves to such
influences. What they really need to do is to broaden their
knowledge of the menopause and its treatment and assess its
appropriateness in the light of recent scientific evidence.
The results of the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study has initially
raised anxiety on HT use for the menopause, but it is prudent to
refer to the many international criticisms of this study, and its
relevance only to certain age groups with allied clinical profiles.
It is therefore timely to re-look at the current evidence available and
see how scientific data will impact on HT use in Malaysian
postmenopausal women. The production of these Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) is largely based on review of such data and
acceptable clinical practice.
The CPG Committee has carefully deliberated on much of the
available scientific data to come out with various Consensus
Statements and the CPG. Input has also been given by invited nongynaecology experts in the areas of bone, cardiovascular and breast
health. To further make this document credible, local and
international reviewers have been invited to critically review the
document before its final print.
The CPG Committee is made up of representatives from the College
of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists, Malaysia, the Obstetrical &
Gynaecological Society of Malaysia, the Malaysian Menopause
Society, the Academy of Family Physicians of Malaysia, and the
Ministry of Health of Malaysia, under the auspices of the College of
Obstetricians & Gynaecologists, Academy of Medicine of Malaysia.
Dr Hean-Choon Ong
Chairman, CPG Committee
College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Chairman
Dr Hean-Choon Ong,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist & Menopause Consultant,
KL Menopause Centre, Kuala Lumpur.
Email: dronghc@myjaring.net
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Academy of
Medicine Malaysia
1. Datuk Dr Johan A.M. Thambu,
President, College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists,
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
KPJ Tawakal Specialist Hospital, Kuala Lumpur.
E-mail: naztyem2323@yahoo.com
2. Dato' Dr N. Sivamohan,
Hon Secretary, College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists,
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Damansara Specialist Hospital, Petaling Jaya.
Email: smohan@tm.net.my
Malaysian Menopause Society
1. Dr Liew Fah Onn,
Immediate Past President, Malaysian Menopause Society,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Assunta Hospital, Petaling Jaya.
Email: liewfahonn@yahoo.com
2. Dr Ho Choon Moy,
President; Malaysian Menopause Society,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Pantai Hospital Cheras, Kuala Lumpur.
Email: drhochoonmoy@yahoo.com
Ministry of Health, Malaysia
1. Dato’ Dr K. Mukudan,
National Head of Obstetrics & Gynaecology,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecology,
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Ipoh, Perak.
Email: muku123@tm.net.my
2. Dr Tham Seong Wai,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Ipoh, Perak.
Email: thamsw1966@yahoo.com
Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society of Malaysia
1. Professor Dato’ Dr N. Sivalingam,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Division of Human Development & Population Health,
International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur.
Email: sivalingam_nalliah@imu.edu.my
Academy of Family Physicians Malaysia
1. Dr Hemendra Kumar Doshi,
Genito-Urinary Physician & Dermatologist,
Immediate Past-President,
Academy of Family Physicians, Malaysia.
Email: doshihk@streamyx.com
Invited Experts
1. Dr J. K. Lee,
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon,
Pantai Hospital, Kuala Lumpur.
Vice-President, Malaysian Osteoporosis Society.
2. Dr David Quek,
Consultant Cardiologist,
Pantai Hospital, Kuala Lumpur.
President, Malaysian Medical Association.
3. Professor Dr Yip Cheng Har,
Consultant Breast Surgeon,
University of Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur.
Local Reviewers
1. Dr Wong Wai Ping,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Pantai Hospital, Kuala Lumpur.
E-mail: wpwongpantai@yahoo.com
2. Dr Frank Tan,
Family Physician,
President,
Academy of Family Physicians of Malaysia.
E-mail: drfranktan@gmail.com
International Reviewers
1. Dr David Sturdee
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
President, International Menopause Society
United Kingdom
2. Professor Christopher Haines
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hon. Secretary,
Asia Pacific Menopause Federation
Hong Kong
CONTACT
College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists,
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia,
G-1, Medical Academies of Malaysia
210 Jalan Tun Razak
50400 Kuala Lumpur,
Tel. No. 03- 40234700, Fax No. 03- 40238100
E-mail: acadmed@po.jaring.my
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The CPG Committee members have no potential conflict of interests
to disclose.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
This CPG was made possible by an unrestricted educational grant
from Pfizer (M) Sdn Bhd.
COLLEGE OF OBSTETRICIANS & GYNAECOLOGISTS
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
“Hormone Therapy during Menopause in Malaysian Women”
I.
TITLE
The title of this document is
HORMONE THERAPY DURING MENOPAUSE IN MALAYSIAN
WOMEN.
II.
BASIS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF THIS CPG
Hormone Therapy (HT) has been the mainstay for treatment of
menopause. When the results of the Women’s Health Initiative
(WHI) study were published in 2002 and 2004, concerns were raised
about the safety of HT use and this caused anxiety and concern to
both medical professionals and the public.
There are, currently, many new research evidences available,
especially on the safe use of HT in early menopause.
The College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists, Academy of
Medicine of Malaysia, in line with its academic aspirations, decided
to produce an updated Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) in the
hope that this would benefit medical practitioners in Malaysia when
faced with the issue of menopause treatment in their clinical practice.
The College enlisted other relevant agencies to participate in this
venture, namely the Obstetrical & Gynaecological Society of
Malaysia, the Malaysian Menopause Society, the Academy of
Family Physicians of Malaysia, and the Ministry of Health Malaysia.
The CPG Committee was tasked with deliberation of the available
scientific data. Experts in the areas of bone health, cardiovascular
health and breast health were invited to give their input, and
evaluation of the final document by local & international assessors
was sought to lend credibility to this document.
III.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS ADDRESSED
When considering the use of HT in postmenopausal women,
medical practitioners may have important questions on their minds.
Such questions include:
•
what are the clinical benefits of HT ?
•
what are the risk situations in HT use ?
•
who would benefit from HT ?
•
when to start HT ?
•
how does one prescribe HT ?
•
what are the dose regimes ?
•
is there a time limit to its use ?
•
who cannot use HT ?
This Clinical Practice Guidelines will serve to answer many of the
above questions, and allow the medical practitioner more confidence
in the clinical use of HT in their practice.
IV.
TARGET GROUP
This CPG was developed for medical practitioners in Malaysia who
are involved in the management of postmenopausal women.
V.
TARGET POPULATION
This CPG was developed for the safe use of estrogen therapy and
estrogen-progestin therapy for postmenopausal women in Malaysia.
VI.
PROCESS
1.
This CPG Committee was established by the College of
Obstetricians & Gynaecologists, Academy of Medicine of
Malaysia on September 3, 2008.
2.
Representation into this committee was sought from the
Malaysian
Menopause
Society,
the
Obstetrical
&
Gynaecological Society of Malaysia, the Academy of
Family Physicians of Malaysia, and the Ministry of Health
Malaysia.
3.
The first meeting of the CPG Committee was held on 2202-09, and altogether the committee has had 7 monthly
meetings.
4.
Initially, during the meetings, the committee members
looked at various scientific evidence related to various
parameters pertaining to the menopause, and how
hormone therapy affected these.
5.
Scientific evidence was obtained through review of current
medical literature on hormone therapy and menopause
using search engines available online.
( The search engines include Yahoo Search, Medline, e
Medicine,
Google,
WebMD,
Search
Medica,
MdLinx.ObGyn,
Medscape.OB/GYN,
DocGuide,
ORGYN.com, websites of the International Menopause
Society, North American Menopause Society, British
Menopause Society, Australasian Menopause Society. )
( Key words used in the searches – menopause,
menopause-heart disease, -VTE, -stroke, -vagina, -quality
of life, -sexuality, -urinary tract, -breast cancer, -
menopausal symptoms, -depression, -sleep, -skin, -bone
health, -colon cancer.)
The committee looked at mainly meta-analysis, systematic
reviews, randomized controlled trials, longitudinal cohort
studies, and others.
International guidelines on the subject were also referred to.
6.
Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation used in
this CPG follow that of the SIGN50 criteria, revised edition
2008, Reference 82 in the list of references. The details of
the SIGN50 criteria are enclosed in this CPG document.
These were applied to the section on “ Clinical Benefits of
Hormone Therapy ” and the list of References.
7.
During the course of the meetings, experts in the areas of
cardiovascular, bone and breast health during menopause
were invited to participate in the discussions.
8.
The draft copy of this CPG was then produced by the CPG
Committee, and circulated to all its members for scrutiny
and feedback comments.
Following this, the final draft copy was produced.
9.
The final draft copy was then sent to 2 local reviewers for
their comments. These comments were reported to the
CPG Committee at its last meeting on 27-09-09, and
further modifications were made.
10. The modified final draft copy was then sent to 2
international reviewers and their comments sought.
11. After receiving the international reviewers comments, the
CPG document was then prepared
12. The CPG document was then sent to the Health
Technology
Assessment
Unit,
Medical
Development
Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia for assessment.
13. The CPG Committee had agreed that this CPG will be
reviewed in 3 years time and any new data pertaining to
the subject matter of this CPG will be reviewed, discussed,
and modifications made to the CPG wherever necessary.
No pharmaceutical company has been directly involved in the
preparation, discussion and finalization of this document.
The CPG Committee wishes to emphasise that this document
serves as a guideline for clinical practice in the use of HT for
menopause in Malaysian women. When in doubt, readers should relook at the references quoted and after re-evaluation of the data, act
appropriately for their patient’s benefit.
APPENDIX I
Levels of evidence & Grades of recommendation
according to the SIGN50 criteria, updated 2008
(Reference 82)
Key to evidence statements and grades of recommendations
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
1 ++
High quality meta-analysis, systematic review of RCTs, or
RCTs with a very low risk of bias
1+
Well conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews, or RCTs
with a low risk of bias
1-
Meta-analyses, systematic reviews, or RCTs with a high risk
of bias
2++
High quality systematic reviews of case control or cohort
studies
High quality case control or cohort studies with a very low
risk of confounding or bias and a high probability that the
relationship is causal
2+
Well conducted case control or cohort studies with a low risk
of confounding or bias and a moderate probability that the
relationship is causal
2-
Case control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding
or bias and a significant risk that the relationship is not
casual
3
Non-analytic studies, eg case reports, case series
4
Expert opinion
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
Note: The grade of recommendation relates to the strength of the
evidence on which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect
the clinical importance of the recommendation.
GOOD PRACTICE POINTS
( √ )
Recommended best practice based on the clinical
experience of the guideline development group
A
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review, or RCT rated
as 1++, and directly
applicable to the target population; or
A body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as
1+, directly applicable to the
target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of
results
B
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++, directly
applicable to the target
population, and demonstrating overall consistency of results;
or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++or 1+
C
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+, directly
applicable to the target
population and demonstrating overall consistency of results;
or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
D
Evidence level 3 or 4; or
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+
VII. OBJECTIVES
Overall Objective
The overall objective is to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
clinical care in the area of hormone therapy for menopause through
the identification of evidence-based good clinical practice and
desired clinical outcomes.
Specific Objectives
1.
To provide medical practitioners in Malaysia with a working
knowledge of the clinical benefits and risks of the use of
hormone therapy, i.e. estrogen therapy (ET) and estrogenprogestin therapy (EPT) for female menopause.
2.
To provide medical practitioners in Malaysia with practical
working guidelines on the use of ET and EPT for female
menopause.
VIII. DEFINITIONS
The following definitions will be used in this document:
Menopause
Menopause is a state of natural ovarian senescence with
accompanying estrogen deficiency. It also refers to states of ovarian
failure and ovarian destruction/removal with accompanying estrogen
deficiency.
Premature Menopause ( 15, 96, 97 )
This refers to menopause in a woman aged below 40 years.
Early Menopause
This refers to menopause in a woman aged 50 years to 59 years.
Late Menopause
This refers to menopause in a woman aged 60 years and over.
Surgical menopause refers to menopause occurring as a result of
surgical removal of both ovaries in a woman.
Medical menopause refers to menopause occurring as a result of
permanent damage to both ovaries in a woman following either
chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
( NB. Women with either surgical or medical menopause can be
allocated to one of the menopause groups above. )
Hormone Therapy (HT)
This refers to the use of estrogens (ET), estrogens plus progestins
(EPT) and androgens (AT).
Estrogen-Progestin Therapy (EPT)
This refers to therapy with estrogen in combination with a progestin.
This term is synonymous with the term “hormone replacement
therapy” (HRT).
Estrogen Therapy (ET)
This refers to therapy with estrogens alone.
This term is synonymous with the term “estrogen replacement
therapy” (ERT).
Standard Dose ET & EPT*
Essentially this refers to the dose of estrogen in the preparation, viz,
•
Conjugated equine estrogens 0.625mg
•
Estradiol valerate 2.0mg
Low Dose ET & EPT*
Essentially this refers to the dose of estrogen in the preparation, viz,
•
Conjugated equine estrogens 0.30mg or 0.45mg
•
Estradiol valerate 1.0mg
( NB * for the actual preparations available, please refer to
APPENDIX II and other relevant drug compendiums for details )
IX.
DIAGNOSIS OF MENOPAUSE
The diagnosis of menopause is mainly clinical, viz
a.
Clinical Criteria
1. age around menopause ( around 50 years )
2. no periods for 12 months
3. menopausal symptoms
( NB. All 3 clinical criteria need not be present for a diagnosis )
Laboratory diagnosis is generally not necessary for the diagnosis of
menopause. However, where in doubt, laboratory testing of FSH
may support the diagnosis, viz
b.
Laboratory Criterion
1. FSH level > 35miu/ml
(NB. estradiol levels can be tested for, but this is not
required for the establishment of diagnosis. )
X. CLINICAL BENEFITS OF HORMONE THERAPY
The following benefits of hormone therapy have been reported by
scientific studies:
(NB Grades of recommendations – A to D, follow the SIGN50 criteria,
reference 82, Appendix I )
a. VASOMOTOR SYMPTOMS
Hot Flushes
1.
ET and EPT are effective in reducing the frequency of hot
flushes. ( 1, 3-5, 12-13,18, 25, 30, 32 )
2.
ET and EPT are effective in reducing the severity of hot
flushes
( 1, 3-5,12-13,18, 25, 30,32 )
3.
Low-dose ET and EPT are also effective in reducing the
frequency and severity of hot flushes. ( 1, 3-5, 18, 25 )
Sweats / Night Sweats
1.
ET and EPT are effective in reducing the frequency of
sweats, including night sweats. ( 2, 3, 4, 30 )
2.
ET and EPT are effective in reducing the severity of
sweats, including night sweats. ( 2, 3, 4, 30 )
3.
Low-dose ET and EPT are also effective in reducing the
frequency and severity of sweats, including night sweats.
( 2, 3, 4, 30 )
Evidence Statements
i) Low-dose and standard dose ET are effective for relief of
hot flushes and/or sweating. (1+)
ii) Low-dose and standard dose EPT are effective for relief of
hot flushes and/or sweating. (1+)
Recommendation
i) Menopausal hot flushes and/or sweating are indications for
the use of ET and EPT. ( A )
b. VAGINA
1.
ET and EPT increase the vaginal maturation index and relieve
vaginal atrophy. ( 1, 3, 5, 18, 51, 54, 55 )
2.
ET and EPT reduce vaginal dryness. ( 3, 5, 51, 52, 53 )
EPT reduces the incidence of vaginal pain, dyspareunia,
vaginal discharge, and burning sensation. ( 49 )
3.
The above effects are also seen with low-dose ET and EPT.
( 1, 3, 5, 18, 45 )
4.
There is better relief of vaginal symptoms and greater
improvement in cytological findings with topical vaginal
estrogen therapy compared to oral estrogen therapy.
( 51, 52, 54 )
5.
Daily and twice weekly use of low dose estrogen cream was
equally effective in relieving symptoms of vulvo-vaginal atrophy.
( 99 )
Evidence statements
i)
Low-dose and standard dose ET are effective in relieving
vaginal atrophy, and its related symptoms, e.g. vaginal
dryness and dyspareunia ( painful coitus ).
(1+)
ii)
Low-dose and standard dose EPT are effective in
relieving vaginal atrophy, and its related symptoms, e.g.
vaginal dryness and dyspareunia ( painful coitus ). (1+)
iii)
The use of vaginal estrogen products for the treatment
of atrophic vaginitis is well-documented.
(1+)
iv)
Low dose vaginal estrogen therapy is also effective in
relieving symptoms of vaginal atrophy.
(1+)
Recommendation
i) Vaginal dryness due to vaginal atrophy during menopause
is an indication for the use of ET and EPT. ( A )
c. URINARY SYSTEM
1. EPT reduces the incidence of lower urinary symptoms, e.g.
dysuria, frequency of micturition, nocturia. ( 3, 18, 49, 50, 52,
53, )
NB. However, with regards to urinary incontinence, stress and urge
incontinence, most studies indicate that these conditions are not
benefited by ET and EPT, Instead ET and EPT use may
worsen the above conditions. ( 12, 13, 50 )
Evidence statements
i)
EPT is effective for relief of lower urinary tract
symptoms related to estrogen deficiency.
(1+)
ii)
Most studies show that in postmenopausal women with
urinary incontinence, ET and EPT are not beneficial and
may worsen the condition.
(1+)
Recommendation
i)
Lower
urinary
tract
symptoms
due
to
estrogen
deficiency during menopause are indications for the
use of ET and EPT. ( A )
d. DEPRESSIVE MOOD
1.
ET and EPT are effective in reducing depressive mood.
The same effect is seen with low-dose ET and EPT.
( 3, 4, 6, 18, 30, 32 )
Evidence statements
i) Low-dose and standard dose ET are effective in relief of
mood disorders, especially depressive mood.
(1+)
ii) Low-dose and standard dose EPT are effective in relief of
mood disorders, especially depressive mood.
(1+)
Recommendation
i) Depressed mood during menopause is an indication for the
use of ET and EPT. ( A )
e. SLEEP
1.
EPT reduces the incidence of difficulty in sleeping, sleep
disturbances, and sleep problems. ( 2, 3, 4, 5, 32, 33 )
2.
ET decreases the sum of time spent awake during sleep,
and increases the total time spent in rapid-eye-movement
sleep. ( 34 )
3.
Sleep improvements with EPT may, however, be
secondary to reduction in hot flushes. ( 4 )
Evidence statement
i) ET and EPT are associated with improved sleep patterns and
less sleeplessness.
(1+)
Recommendation
i) Sleep disturbance related to menopause, particularly
sleeplessness, is an indication for the use of ET and EPT.
( A )
f. SKIN
1. EPT improves various parameters associated with skin
aging, namely, decreases dryness, increases hydration,
elasticity and skin thickness. ( 22, 23 )
Evidence statement
i) EPT use improves skin health during menopause. (1+)
Recommendation
i) Improvement of skin health per se is not an indication for
the use of EPT. ( √ )
g. BONE
1. ET and EPT increase bone mineral density ( BMD ) at both the
hip and vertebral spine. ( 7, 9, 11, 18, 27 )
This response is dose-related for the vertebral spine. ( 18, 27 )
2. Low dose EPT plus calcium supplements is more effective in
increasing BMD compared to EPT alone. ( 18, 27 )
3. ET and EPT reduce bone turnover, as evidenced by bone
turnover markers. ( 11, 18 )
4. EPT reduces the risk of vertebral and non-vertebral ( hip &
lower arm ) fractures. ( 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 18, 27, 98 )
5. The effect of EPT on non-vertebral fractures is greater in
women below 60 years of age compared to those 60 and
above. ( 27 )
6. ET reduces the risk in women of having any arthroplasty, hip
and knee arthroplasty, while EPT reduces the risk of any
arthroplasty except for the hip. ( 29 )
Evidence statements
i)
Low-dose and standard dose ET are effective in
increasing bone mineral density (BMD), and reducing
bone turn-over. (1+)
ii)
Low-dose and standard dose EPT are effective in
increasing bone mineral density (BMD), reducing bone
turnover, and reducing the incidence of both vertebral
and non-vertebral fractures. (1+)
Recommendations
i) ET and EPT are first-line choices for the prevention of bone
loss in post-menopausal women. ( A )
ii) ET and EPT are first-line choices for the prevention of
fractures in post-menopausal women who have increased
risk for fractures. ( A )
NB The term “first-line choice” is not synonymous with “indication”.
In the context of bone health, besides HT, other first-line
choices include calcitonin, bisphosphonates, and raloxifene.
h. SEXUALITY
1. ET and EPT improve various aspects of female sexuality.
2. ET and EPT increase sexual desire, sexual arousal, sexual
activity & its frequency, frequency and intensity of orgasm,
sexual responsiveness, and overall sexual satisfaction. ( 36,
37, 45 )
ET and EPT also decrease the incidence of sexuality
problems. ( 37 )
3. The addition of testosterone to ET and EPT significantly
further improves on the female sexuality issues mentioned
above. ( 39, 43, 44, 46, 47 )
One study showed that the use of testosterone alone
improves on sexuality in postmenopausal women. ( 38 )
Evidence statements
i) ET and EPT improves female sexual desire, sexual activity
and overall sexual satisfaction in post-menopausal women.
(1+)
ii) Testosterone supplementation of ET and EPT further
improves various aspects of sexual function in postmenopausal women. (1+)
Recommendations
i) Decreased sexual functioning during menopause is not a
primary indication for the use of ET and EPT, but is a key
factor to be considered. ( √ )
ii) Testosterone therapy in post-menopausal women with
sexual problems is not universally accepted and should be
used with caution. ( √ )
i.
HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Health-Related Quality of Life ( HR-QOL ) measures includes
domains like vasomotor symptoms & mood changes,
physical symptoms (sleep, uro-genital symptoms, skin
changes), psycho-social aspects, and sexuality issues.
1. Overall, EPT improves HR-quality of life by its positive
effects on the above quality of life measures.
2. Some studies indicate that EPT improves many domains
of HR-QOL ( 4, 35, 48, 49 ).
3. Other studies indicate that EPT improves various
aspects of HR-QOL namely, mental health and
depressive symptoms ( 6 ), and physical functioning,
bodily pain, and sleep ( 2 )
Evidence statements
i) EPT use improves overall health-related quality of life. (1+)
ii) In essence, ET and EPT, by their positive effects on the
clinical benefits outlined above, definitely improve overall
health-related quality of life. (1+)
Recommendation
i) Health-related Quality of Life issue, is, in itself, not a primary
indication for the use of EPT, but is a key-factor to be
considered. ( √ )
j.
COLO-RECTAL
1. ET use is associated with a reduction in the risk of colo-rectal
cancer ( 24, 40, 41, 42 ).
2. EPT use is associated with a reduction in the risk of both
invasive colon cancer ( 26, 40, 41, 42 ) and rectal cancers
( 26, 41 ).
3. Some studies show the longer the duration of use of ET and
EPT, the higher the reduction in risk ( 24, 42 ), while others
do not show this ( 40, 41 ).
4. ET and EPT use are also associated with a reduction in the
risk of fatal colon cancer ( 40 ).
Evidence statement
i) ET and EPT use are associated with reduced incidences of
colon and rectal cancers.
(1+)
Recommendation
i) Prevention of colon / rectal cancers is not an indication for
the use of ET and EPT. ( √ )
XI
HORMONE THERAPY & OTHER SYSTEMS
a.
CORONARY HEART DISEASE
1. Overall, ET and EPT use are associated with a lower total
mortality rate in postmenopausal women, including mortality
from coronary heart disease. ( 12, 13, 57 )
2. In late menopausal women,
i)
EPT is associated with an increased risk of coronary
heart disease. ( 12, 57 )
ii)
With ET, there is no increased risk ( 13 )
3. In early menopausal women,
i)
EPT is associated with a decreased risk of coronary
heart disease ( 57, 58, 60 )
ii)
With ET, there is no increased risk. ( 13, 58, 59, 63 )
4. Considering timing of initiation
i)
When EPT is initiated within 10 years following onset
of menopause, there is no increased risk of coronary
heart disease ( 56, 58, 60 )
ii)
When EPT is initiated after 10 years or more following
onset of menopause, there is an increased risk of
coronary heart disease ( 56, 58, 60 )
5. Studies show that ET and EPT are not to be used for either
the primary or secondary prevention of coronary heart
disease. ( 61, 62 )
Evidence statements
i) ET use is not associated with any increase in risk of
coronary heart disease.
(1+)
ii) EPT use is not associated with an increase in risk of
coronary heart disease when used in post-menopausal
women in early menopause, and if started within 10 years of
menopause.
(1+)
iii) EPT use is associated with an increase in risk of coronary
heart disease when used in post-menopausal women in late
menopause, and if started after 10 years of the menopause.
(1+)
Recommendations
i) It is not recommended that ET or EPT be used for the
primary prevention of coronary heart disease in
postmenopausal women.
This is the current cautious approach and guideline. ( A )
ii) It is not recommended that ET or EPT be used for the
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in
postmenopausal women. ( A )
b.
Venous Thrombo-Embolism ( VTE )
1. ET and EPT increase the risks of VTE at least by 2-3 fold
( 12, 13, 64, 65, 66, 67, 89, 92 ).
2. With EPT, the risk of VTE has been shown to increase in
women with other risk factors for VTE, e.g. increasing
age, over-weight, obesity, presence of factor V Leiden
mutation.
( 64, 65, 92 )
3. With ET, VTE risk has been shown not to be increased
further in women by age, BMI or presence of other risk
factors for VTE. ( 92 )
4. With EPT, the risk is highest with the first year of use.
( 64, 67, 89, 92 ) and remains high for at least 5 years.
( 92 )
5. With ET, the risk has been shown to be greatest in the
first 2 years, and remains elevated after this. ( 92 )
6. Use of oral estrogens increases the risk of VTE.
( 64, 66, 67, 92 )
7. Use of transdermal estrogens does not appear to
increase the risk of VTE ( 64, 66, 67, 92 ), and has been
shown not to confer additional risk in women at high risk
of VTE. ( 67 )
Evidence statements
i) Oral ET and EPT use are associated with increased risks of
VTE. (1+)
ii) Transdermal estrogens do not appear to increase the risk of
VTE. (1+)
Recommendations
i) Oral EPT should not be used in post-menopausal women
who have a history of VTE or who are at high risk for VTE.
In such women, transdermal EPT should be considered.
( A )
ii) Oral ET should not be used in post-menopausal women who
have a history of VTE. In such women, transdermal ET
should be considered. ( A )
c.
STROKE
1. ET and EPT increase the risk of stroke.
( 12, 13, 58, 60, 89, 90, 91 )
2. ET increases the risk of ischaemic stroke in generally
healthy postmenopausal women, and this risk is present in
all subgroups of women, including younger and more
recently menopausal women. ( 91 )
3. Two studies showed that there is no increase in risk if HT is
used for less than 5 years in younger postmenopausal
women.
( 58, 68 )
Evidence statement
i) ET and EPT use are associated with increased risk of stroke.
(1+)
Recommendation
i) ET and EPT are not to be used in postmenopausal women
with high risk for stroke. ( A )
d.
BREAST
ET use
1. Overall, there is no increase in risk of breast cancer with
the use of ET ( 13, 70, 71, 74, 75, 77, 78 ). The WHI
study showed that this is true up to 7.1 years of use ( 13 ),
while other studies showed no increased risk up to 15
years ( 70, 95 ), and even up to 20 years of use. ( 75, 78 )
2. For ductal cancers, studies showed, overall, that there is
no increase in risk, even after 20 years of use of ET. ( 75,
76, 78 ). Any increase in risk of ductal cancer was entirely
restricted to lean women with BMI < 25. ( 69, 75, 78 )
3. For lobular cancers, one study showed that there is an
increased risk after 10 years of ET use. ( 78 )
4. One study showed that there was a statistically significant
increase in risk of estrogen receptor and progesterone
receptor positive cancers after 15 years of ET use. (75 )
EPT use
1. Overall, with the use of EPT, there is an increase in risk of
breast cancer. The WHI study showed that this increase in
risk is seen after 5 years. ( 12 ). In other studies, the
increased risk is seen after the first 2- 3 years of use. ( 69,
70, 71, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80 )
2. There is a suggestion that the increase in risk of breast
cancer is for lobular cancer, and not for ductal cancer. ( 71,
73, 76 )
3. The increase in risk of breast cancer with EPT use was
seen to be higher in the following situations:
* in lean women with BMI <25 ( 69 )
* in estrogen-receptor positive cancers ( 73 )
4. While some studies show that there is no increase in risk
with the use of transdermal EPT, ( 72, 77 ) others show no
difference in risk between oral vs transdermal estrogens.
( 74, 79 )
5. Some studies show that the relative risk of breast cancer is
not affected by a family history of breast cancer or other
risk factors. ( 12, 72 )
Other data
1. Studies of use of HT in women with a family history of breast
cancer showed no increase in breast cancer risk. ( 94 )
2. There is no increased breast cancer risk in women with a
history of benign breast condition. ( 94 )
3. There is no contraindication for the use of HT in women with
fibrocystic mastopathy. ( 93 )
4. While previous small observational studies showed no
increase risk of recurrence from the use of HT in breast
cancer survivors, one RCT showed a recurrence hazard
ratio of 3.3. ( 94 )
Evidence statements
i) Oral EPT increases the risk of breast cancer, especially
lobular cancer. (1+)
ii) Transdermal EPT may not increase the risk of breast
cancer. (2-)
iii) ET does not increase the risk of breast cancer. (1+)
Recommendations
i) HT can safely be used in women with history of benign
breast conditions. ( A )
ii) HT may be used for menopausal symptoms in a woman at
increased risk of breast cancer with appropriate
counseling and surveillance. ( B )
iii) Unless more evidence shows otherwise, it is prudent not
to use HT in breast cancer survivors. ( B )
XII PATIENT PERSPECTIVES
It is relevant to take into account patient perspectives when
considering hormone therapy for the postmenopausal woman. This
will give insight to the medical practitioner as to how best to counsel
the patient. The following conclusions are derived from a Malaysian
survey and surveys from other international communities. ( please
refer to references 83 – 88 in the “References” list )
1. The top 3 most common menopausal symptoms experienced by
Malaysian women are sleeplessness, headache and reduced
sex drive.
Nevertheless, the experience of menopausal symptoms can be
quite varied in different populations.
It is also seen that the more negative the attitude to menopause
and aging, the more likely is the woman to report presence of
symptoms.
2. In general, Malaysian women feel that menopause does affect
their life somewhat, the greatest impact coming from symptoms
such as joint aches and pains, followed closely by lack of
physical fitness.
3. The menopause experience in women is worse when associated
with perception of losses in life, e.g. loss of childbearing capacity,
loss of culture, threatened loss of children.
Menopause experience seems to focus on the difficult
experiences a woman undergoes in relation to family life and
work experiences.
4. Data shows that Malaysian women are not well informed about
menopause in general, but they agree slightly that severe
menopausal symptoms need to be treated.
Overall, postmenopausal women are poorly informed about the
menopause, and they also have a poor understanding of it. Low
awareness of HT is associated with its low prevalence of use.
5. Some of the most common sources of information that Malaysian
women use or have ever used to get information on menopause
are magazines, and newspapers, and the most sought-after
people for information are acquaintances and family doctors.
However, it has been shown that doctors and health-care
professionals provide little information about HT.
Nevertheless, women do have a genuine desire for more
information about menopause and its treatment.
6. HT is not the most common treatment for menopausal
complaints. For those who are currently using HT or had ever
used HT, they have a somewhat positive feeling about HT.
In Malaysia, only about 10% of postmenopausal women are
taking HT, while 30-40% are on herbal remedies.
Headache is the main menopausal symptom that prompted most
Malaysian women to seek treatment.
7. For Malaysian women who are on HT for their menopausal
symptoms, the gynaecologist is the influencer to most women in
starting HT.
Most women perceive HT only for short-term relief of symptoms,
rather than for its long-term benefits.
European women also believe that HT is good for the prevention
of osteoporosis.
8. Only 8% of women had stopped using HT once, and they were
advised by their family doctor to stop on medical grounds.
Other reasons for stopping HT include side-effects, concern
about long-term health, e.g. breast cancer and VTE,
disappearance of menopausal symptoms, and weight gain.
9. The main benefit women associate with HT use is alleviation of
symptoms, and the main risk associated with HT is developing
breast cancer.
In western countries, women also include prevention of
osteoporosis as a benefit.
10. Though most women have somewhat positive feelings about HT
in general, there is a significant number of women who are not
aware of the benefits and consequences of using HT.
Overall, women have both positive and negative benefits about
HT.
Women were more likely to use HT if they have symptoms.
11. The number one hurdle for women to start using HT is the fear of
breast cancer, and belief that HT cannot alleviate the symptoms.
Studies show that the reasons for refusal to start taking HT
include: belief that menopause is a natural event, hence, there is
no need for any treatment; that HT is unnatural and with potential
dangers; HT was never recommended to them; their doctor was
against HT use.
12. Data shows that gynaecologists and doctors can be the main
influencer of using HT.
On the other hand, it has also been shown that most of the
women were not recommended to use HT by their doctors.
In never-users, one reason for not using HT is that HT was never
offered to them.
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
The following Clinical Practice Guidelines have taken into account,
available scientific evidences and existing consensus statements &
guidelines of various international agencies.
In addition to data and information from the references listed under
“References”, the following documents have also been referred to in
the preparation of this section:
i)
Position Statement by the Executive Committee of the
International Menopause Society, “ Guidelines for the hormone
treatment of women in the menopausal transition and beyond ”
February 13, 2004
ii)
Guidelines for hormone replacement therapy of Asian women
during the menopausal transition and thereafter,
Delfin Tan et al, 2006, Climacteric, 9: 146-151
iii)
IMS Updated recommendations on postmenopausal hormone
therapy, Amos Pines et al, 2007, Climacteric, 10: 181-194
iv)
Asia-Pacific Menopause Federation Consensus Statement on
the management of the menopause, April 2008
v)
Position Statement of the North American Menopause Society
on Estrogen and progestogen use in postmenopausal women :
July 2008
vi)
British Menopause Society Council Consensus Statement on
Hormone Replacement Therapy, “Hormone replacement
therapy : Managing the menopause”. February 2008
vii)
SOGC Clinical Practice Guideline, January 2009
viii)
The Practice Committee of the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine, “Estrogen and progestogen therapy in
postmenopause”
Fertility & Sterility, 2006, 86 supple 4, pages S75-S88
ix)
Evidence-based review of therapies at the menopause
Alastair H MacLennan, 2009, 7: 112-123
1. Holistic Approach to Menopause Management
HT should be part of an overall approach to the management of
menopause. Other aspects of management include lifestyle
modifications, proper diet, regular exercise, cessation of smoking
and avoidance of alcohol abuse.
2. Indications for HT
HT should only be recommended when there is a definite and clear
indication. Indications can be classified as:
i)
presence of symptoms
ii)
the need for prevention of osteoporosis
Indications for the use of HT include the following situations in
relation to menopause:
i)
a. Relief of vasomotor symptoms ( hot flushes and/or sweating )
b. Relief of joint and muscle aches and pains.
c. Relief of sleeplessness and other sleep disturbances
NB
In Asian women, joint and muscle aches and pains, and
sleeplessness
are
the
commonest
complaints
in
postmenopausal women.
d. Relief of depressed mood
e. Relief of uro-genital symptoms, particularly vaginal dryness
f. Relief of sexual dysfunction, including decreased libido
g. Maintaining and improvement of quality of life
NB
Quality of life and sexuality are key factors to be considered
in the management of the aging individual.
ii)
a. As one of the first-line choices, for the prevention of bone loss in
postmenopausal women.
b. As one of the first-line choices, for the prevention of fractures in
postmenopausal women who have increased risk for fractures.
(This should be weighted against other available non-estrogen
medications for the same purpose.)
NB The initiation of HT for the sole purpose of prevention of
fractures is not recommended in women over 60 years of age.
3. Counselling and Decision-Making
Each woman should be counseled on current data regarding the
risks vs benefits of HT in simple terms; informed about the potential
side-effects, and any special concerns applicable to her particular
situation before starting HT.
Explanation on risks should be made in absolute numbers as this
would be more appropriate rather than in percentages or relative
risks, as follows:
* WHI ( 2002 ) Absolute risks of EPT ( ref 12 ) New cases Additional
absolute risks
heart disease
7
7 / 10,000
stroke
8
8 / 10,000
breast cancer
8
8 / 10,000
VTE
18 18 / 10,000
pulmonary embolism
8
8 / 10,000
* WHI ( 2004 ) Absolute risks of ET ( ref 13 ) New cases Additional
absolute risks
heart disease
-5
-5 / 10,000
stroke
12
12 /10,000
VTE
7
7 / 10,000
breast cancer
-7
-7 / 10,000
One should also take into account the woman’s own preferences
and expectations.
Only after this, can the woman make an informed, individual
decision on whether or not she would want to take HT.
4. Pre-treatment Evaluation
This should include taking a medical history, relevant family history,
doing a physical examination including weight, height, BMI, blood
pressure and breast examination.
Where possible, a bimanual vaginal examination and cervical
cytology should be done.
Relevant investigations can be considered, either laboratory or
imaging - these are not mandatory. These include mammography /
sonography, cardiovascular risk profiles including lipid profile,
diabetes screening, full blood count etc.
Mammography should be undertaken according to age and national
guidelines.
Assessment of bone mineral density (BMD) should be considered on
a case-to-case basis.
Other tests may be done on a case-to-case basis, e.g. liver function
tests, thyroid profiles, ultrasonography of the pelvis.
5. Contra-indications
Contra-indications to HT should be ruled out before starting HT.
These include the following:
•
history of breast cancer
•
history of VTE or stroke
•
undiagnosed uterine bleeding
•
significant cardiovascular disease
•
hypersensitivity to estrogen.
6. Timing of Initiation
Initiation of HT should be done in relation to proximity to menopause.
Thus, it is best to start HT between the ages of 50-59 years, or
within 10 years of the menopause.
After the age of 60 years, HT should not be initiated unless there is a
compelling indication.
For those with premature menopause, HT should be recommended
and started as soon as possible.
7. Dosages
As a principle, the lowest effective dose of estrogen consistent with
treatment goals should be used, with a corresponding low dose of
progestogen.
Low-dose HT has been shown to be as effective as standard-dose
HT for most of the indications mentioned above, and hence, should
be the first-line choice.
Lower doses of progestogen will have less negative effect on breast
cancer risk. For women with premature menopause, higher doses of
estrogen may be required for relief.
8. Addition of progestogen
In a woman with an intact uterus, progestogen is added to systemic
estrogen.
This provides endometrial protection from unopposed estrogen and
prevents the occurrence of endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma.
Progestogens should be given for 12-14 days for every 28 days of
estrogen ( cyclical ), or it can be given together with estrogen on a
daily basis ( continuous ).
When using low-dose vaginal estrogen for relief of uro-genital
atrophy, there is no necessity for added progestogen.
Progestogen supplementation is also not generally required in a
woman who has had a hysterectomy, and who is on ET.
9. Dose Regimes
There are multiple dosing regime options especially for endometrial
safety when adding progestogen to estrogen (EPT). There are also
multiple dosing regimes when using ET.
For ET, estrogens can be given as standard or low dose, viz:
estrogen
standard dose
low dose
conjugated equine estrogen
0.625mg
0.3mg
17β estradiol valerate
2.0mg
0.5mg – 1.0mg
micronised estradiol
1.0 – 2.0mg
0.25 – 0.5mg
transdermal estradiol
50-100mcg
25mcg
______________________________________________________________________________________
For EPT, progestogens should be added to the estrogen doses above, viz:
progestogen
standard dose
low dose
medroxyprogesterone acetate
2.5 – 5.0mg
1.5mg
norethindrone acetate
1.0 – 2.0mg
0.1 – 0.5mg
drosperinone
2.0mg
0.5mg
micronised progesterone
100mg
50mg
______________________________________________________________________________________
The dose and regime of HT need to be individualized.
This is the key to successful use of HT to provide health benefit with
minimal risks, thereby enhancing quality of life.
Older postmenopausal women generally require lower doses than
younger women.
10. Routes of administration
These include oral and transdermal routes.
Transdermal routes include the patch, gel and implant.
There is currently no symptomatic benefit of one route of
administration over the other for systemic ET. Both oral and non-oral
routes have advantages and disadvantages.
Transdermal routes have the advantage of avoiding the first-pass
liver effect, and may be more favourable than oral routes, especially
with regard to VTE and cardiovascular risks.
Estrogen administered vaginally
When used for the treatment of vulvo-vaginal symptoms,
consideration should be given to the use of local vaginal products.
The use of vaginal estrogen products for the treatment of atrophic
vaginitis is well documented.
Creams have the advantage over tablets in their ability to be applied
directly to the vulva and vulvo-vaginal area and provide flexibility in
dosing and frequency of administration. The most widely prescribed
local vaginal therapy for vaginal atrophy is conjugated equine
estrogens ( CE ) cream.
Studies have shown the effectiveness of CE cream in reducing the
sign of atrophic vaginitis as measured by effects on the vaginal
maturation index ( VMI ).
Even the use of low dose vaginal estrogens, given daily or twice
weekly have proven effective for the same purpose.
11. Duration of use
There is no mandatory limitation to the duration of HT use,
especially when HT is started during the menopause transition, and
the woman is symptom-free on HT.
HT should be given for as long as the woman wants, if the lowest
effective dose is used; the woman is aware of the potential benefits
and risks; and there is clinical supervision.
HT can be considered even in the absence of symptoms where
there is a genuine need for further prevention of osteoporotic
fractures and/or preservation of bone mass in women with
osteopenia when alternative therapies are not appropriate.
12. Follow-up Assessment & Frequency
Annual risk-benefit assessment should be carried out.
The same procedures as in the “Counselling” visit and the “PreTreatment Evaluation” should be considered.
Timely mammography is the key, including genital tract cancer
studies, e.g. cervical cytology and other investigations.
A 12-monthly follow-up assessment is recommended.
As for mammography, if the initial mammogram is normal, 2-3
yearly mammography is recommended.
13. Premature menopause
Women with premature menopause should be considered as a
group with special needs compared to those with natural
menopause.
Special counseling in various areas needs to be addressed.
Premature menopause is associated with a lower risk of breast
cancer, but with a higher risk and earlier onset of osteoporosis and
cardiovascular disease.
HT should be started as soon as possible.
HT is to be continued until the typical natural normal age of
menopause.
Higher doses of HT may be required in these women for symptom
relief.
The risks of HT attributable to these young women are likely to be
smaller and the benefits potentially greater than those in older
women.
Nevertheless, the merits of long-term use of HT need to be
assessed for each individual at regular intervals.
Conclusion
Besides the role of life-style modifications and dietary adjustments in
the prevention of menopause-related disease, HT ( hormone
therapy ) remains a principal tool in preventing menopause-related
illnesses and maintaining quality of life in the post-menopausal
woman.
APPENDIX II
Hormone Therapy preparations available in
Malaysia
as on August 31, 2009
Angeliq
estradiol hemihydrate
1.0mg
+ drosperinone
2.0mg
Climen
16 pills
estradiol valerate
2.0mg
12 pills
estradiol valerate
2.0mg
+ cyproterone acetate
1.0mg
Divigel gel
28 sachets
estradiol
1mg/g
Femoston
2/10
14 pills
estradiol
2.0mg
14 pills
estradiol
2.0mg
+ dydrogesterone
10.0mg
1/10
14 pills
estradiol
1.0mg
14 pills
estradiol
1.0mg
+ dydrogesterone
10.0mg
Femoston Contii
estradiol
1.0mg
+ dydrogesterone
5.0mg
Oestrogel gel
17β estradiol
1.5mg/2.5g gel
Premarin
conjugated equine estrogen 0.3mg, 0.625mg
Premarin Vaginal
Cream
conjugated equine estrogen
0.3mg/0.625mg/42.5g
Premelle 2.5
conjugated equine estrogen
0.625mg
+ medroxyprogesterone acetate
2.5mg
Premelle 5.0
conjugated equine estrogen
0.625mg
+ medroxyprogesterone acetate
5.0mg
Progynova
estradiol valerate
1.0mg
or
estradiol valerate
2.0mg
Progyluton
11 pills
estradiol valerate
2.0mg
10 pills
estradiol valerate
2.0mg
+ norgestrel
500mcg
APPENDIX III
ALGORITHM
for the initiation of HT in postmenopausal women
( based on symptoms )
no yes
yes no
no yes
Symptoms
of menopause
Contra-indications
to HT
* No HT
* Healthy
lifestyle
* Re-assess
yearly
* Alternative
approaches
* Reassess
yearly
Menopause
status
Hysterectomy
Menopause
status
ET
Early
Late
Early
EPT
* Do not start
EPT
* Alternative
approaches
* Reassess
yearly
Late
* Do not start
ET
* Alternative
approaches
* Reassess
yearly
APPENDIX IV
ALGORITHM
for the initiation of HT in postmenopausal women
( based on risk for osteoporosis )
no yes
no yes
no yes
Increased risk
of osteoporosis
Contra-indications
to HT
* No HT
* Re-assess
yearly
* Consider
bisphosphonates,
raloxifene, or
alternative
approaches
* Re-assess
yearly
Menopause
status
Hysterectomy
ET
Early
EPT
Late
XIV. REFERENCES
NB
Levels of evidence for the following references follow the
SIGN50 criteria, revised edition 2008.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. SIGN 50:
A
Guideline
Developer’s
Handbook.
Annexe
A.
AGREE
( Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation in Europe
)
Appraisal Criteria, 2004.
www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/50/annexa.html
( Ref 82, APPENDIX I )
1.
Wulf H. Utian, Donna Shoupe, Gloria Bachmann, Joanne V. Pinkerton, and
James H. Pickar,
Relief of vasomotor symptoms and vaginal atrophy with lower doses of
conjugated equine estrogens and medroxyprogesterone acetate,
Fertility & Sterility, 2001, 75: 1065-1079
( level of evidence – I+ )
2.
Jennifer Hays, Judith K. Ockene, Robert L. Brunner, Jane M. Kotchen,
Joanne E. Manson, Ruth E. Patterson, Aaron K, Aragaki M.S., Sally A.
Shumaker, Robert G. Brzyski, Andrea Z. LaCroix, Iris A. Granek and
Barbara G. Valanis for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators,
Effects of estrogen plus progestin in health-related quality of life,
New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348: 1839-54
( level of evidence – I- )
3.
R. Schurmann, T. Holler and N. Benda,
Estradiol and drosperinone for climacteric symptoms in postmenopausal
women: a double-blind, randomised, plaebo-controlled study of the safety and
efficacy of three dose regimens,
Climacteric, 2004, 7:189-196
( level of evidence – I+ )
4.
K. K. Limpaphayom, M.S. Darmasetiawan, R.I. Hussain, S.W. Burriss, C.F.
Holinka, and M.K. Ausmanas,
Differential prevalence of quality of life categories (domains) in Asian women
and changes after therapy with three doses of conjugated estrogens /
medroxyprogesterone acetate: the Pan-Asia Menopause (PAM) study,
Climacteric, 2006, 9:204-214
( level of evidence – I+ )
5.
N. Panay, O. Ylikorkala, D.F. Archer, R. Gut, and E. Lang,
Ultra-low-dose estradiol and norethisterone acetate: effective menopausal
symptom relief,
Climacteric, 2007, 10:120-131
( level of evidence – I+ )
6.
Mark A. Hlatky, Derek Boothroyd, Eric Vittinghoff, Penny Sharp, Mary A.
Whooley, for the HERS Research Group,
Quality of life and depressive symptoms in postmenopausal women after
receiving hormone therapy,
JAMA, 2002, 287: 591-597
( level of evidence – I- )
7.
J. Heikkinen, R. Vaheri, P. Kainulanen, and U. Timonen,
Long-term continuous combined hormone replacement therapy in the
prevention of postmenopausal bone loss. A comparison of high and low-dose
estrogen-progestin regimens,
Osteoporosis Int., 2000, 11:929-937
( level of evidence – I+ )
8.
David J. Torgerson, & Sally E.M. Bell-Syer,
Hormone replacement therapy and prevention of non-vertebral fractures, A
meta-analysis of randomized trials,
JAMA, 2001, 285:2891-2897
( level of evidence – I++ )
9.
Robert Lindsay, J. Christopher Gallagher, Michael Kleerekoper, and
James H. Pickar,
Effect of lower doses of conjugated equine estrogens with and without
medroxy-progesterone acetate on bone in early postmenopausal women,
JAMA, 2002, 287: 2668-2676
( level of evidence – I+ )
10. Jane A.Cauley, John Robbins, Zhao Chen, Steven R. Cummings, Rebecca
D. Jackson, Andres Z. LaCroix, Meryl LeBoff, Cora E. Lewis, Joan
McGovan, Joan Neuner, Mary Pettinger, Marcia L. Stefanick, Jean
Wactawski-Wende, Nelson B. Watts, for the Women’s Health Initiative
Investigators,
Effects of estrogen plus progestin on risk of fractures and bone mineral density,
JAMA, 2003, 290: 1729-1738
( level of evidence – I- )
11. L. Warming, P. Ravn, T. Nielsen, and C. Christiansen,
Safety and efficacy of drospirenone used in a continuous combination with 17β
estradiol for prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis,
Climacteric, 2004, 7:103-111
( level of evidence – I+ )
12. Principal Results from the Women’s Health Initiative Randomised
Controlled Trial. Writing Group for the Women’s Health Initiative
Investigators,
Risks and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal
women,
JAMA, 2002, 288: 321-333
( level of evidence – I- )
13. The Women’s Health Initiative Steering Committee,
Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in postmenopausal women with
hysterectomy. The Women’s Health Initiative Randomised Controlled Trial,
JAMA, 2004, 291: 1701-1712
( level of evidence – I- )
14. Issued on behalf of the Board of the International Menopause Society by
Amos Pines (President), David W. Sturdee (General Secretary), Martin H.
Birkhauser, (Treasurer), Hermann P.G. Schneider, Marco Gambacciani
and Nick Panay,
IMS Updated Recommendations on postmenopausal hormone therapy,
Climacteric, 2007, 10:181-194
( level of evidence – 4 )
15. A Pines, DW Sturdee, MH Birkhauser, T de Villiers, F Naftolin, A Gompel,
R Farmer, D Barlow, D Tan, P Maki, R Lobo, H Hodis, et al on behalf of the
International Menopause Society,
HRT in the early menopause: scientific evidence and common perceptions,
Summary of the First IMS Global Summit on menopause-related issues,
Climacteric, 2008, 11:267-272
( level of evidence – 4 )
16. British Menopause Society Council Consensus Statement on Hormone
Replacement Therapy 12 February 2008,
Hormone Replacement Therapy Managing the Menopause
( level of evidence – 4 )
17. Estrogen and Progestogen use in postmenopausal women: July 2008 position
Statement of the North American Menopause Society
Menopause, 2008, 15:584-602
( level of evidence – 4 )
18. K. Peeyananjarassri & R. Baber,
Effects of low-dose hormone therapy on menopausal symptoms, bone mineral
density, endometrium, and the cardiovascular system: a review of randomized
clinical trials,
Climacteric, 2005, 8:13-23
( level of evidence – I++ )
19. D. Tan, S. Darmasetiawan, C.J. Haines, K.E. Huang, U. Jaisamram, K.K.
Limpaphayom, S.Q. Lin, Y.S. Ling, T.N.P. Nguyen, K.H. Park, D. Shah, R.
Subramaniam, N. Taechakraichana, and S.M. King,
Guidelines for hormone replacement therapy of Asian women during the
menopause transition and thereafter,
Expert Panel on Menopause in Asian Women
Climacteric, 2006, 9:146-151
( level of evidence – 4 )
20. Estrogen and progestin therapy in postmenopausal women
The Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive
Medicine Revised June 2006 Fertility and Sterility, 2006, 86(suppl 4),
S75-88
( level of evidence – 4 )
21. SOGC Clinical Practice Guideline
The Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology Canada, No. 222, January 2009,
pages S1-S45
( level of evidence – 4 )
22. Pichai
Chotnopparatpattara,
Krasean
Panyakhamlerd,
Nimit
Taechakraichana,
Jaturon
Tantivatana,
Sukanya
Chaikittsilpa,
&
Khunying Kobchitt Limpaphayom,
An effect of hormone replacement therapy on skin thickness in early
postmenopausal women,
J Med Assoc Thai, 2001, 84:1275-1280
( level of evidence – 2+ )
23. P.G. Sator, M.O. Sator, J.B. Schmidt, H. Nahavandi, S. Radakovic, J.C.
Huber, and H. Honigsmann,
A prospective randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study on the
influence of a hormone replacement therapy on skin aging in postmenopausal
women,
Climacteric, 2007, 10:320-334
( level of evidence – I+ )
24. I. Csizmadi, J-P. Collet, A. Benedetti, J-F. Boivin, and J.A. Hanley,
The effects of transdermal and oral estrogen replacement therapy on colorectal
cancer risk in postmenopausal women,
British Journal of Cancer, 2004, 90:76-81
( level of evidence – 2+ )
25. Morris Notelovitz, John P. Lennan, Michelle McDermott, Irwin, J., Nayan
Nanavati, and Joan-Carles Arce,
Initial 17β-estradiol dose for treating vasomotor symptoms,
Obstet Gynecol, 2000, 95: 726-731
( level of evidence – I+ )
26. Rowan D. Chlebowski, Jean Wactawski-Wende, Cheryl Ritenbaugh, F
Allen Hubbell, Joao Ascensao, Rebecca J Rodabough, Carol A
Rosenberg, Victoria M Taylor, Randall Haris, Chu Chen, Lucile L AdamsCampbell, and Emily White, for the Women’s Health Initiative
investigators,
Estrogen plus progestin and colo-rectal cancer in postmenopausal women,
N Eng J Med, 2004, 350: 991-1004
( level of evidence – I- )
27. Maria W Greenwald, Oscar S Gluck, Eva Lang, and Viatcheslav Rakov,
Oral hormone therapy with 17β estradiol and 17β estradiol in combination with
norethindrone acetate in the prevention of bone loss in early postmenopausal
women: dose-dependent effects,
Menopause, 2005, 12: 741-748
( level of evidence – I+ )
28. Kalsa M Randall, Risto J Honkanen, Marja H Komulainen, Marjo T
Tuppurainen, Heikki Kroger, and Seppo Saarikoski,
Hormone replacement therapy and risk of falling in early postmenopausal
women – a population-based study,
Clinical Endocrinology, 2001, 54: 769-774
( level of evidence – 2+ )
29. Dominic J Cirillo, Robert B Wallace, LieLing Wu, and Robert A Yood,
Effect of hormone therapy on risk of hip and knee joint replacement in the
Women’s Health Initiative,
Arthritis and Rheumatism, 2006, 54: 3194-3204
( level of evidence – I- )
30. M. Gambacciani, AR Genazzani and D. Spielmann,
Efficacy on climacteric symptoms of a continuous combined regimen of 1mg
17β estradiol & trimegestone v 2 regimens containing 1mg or 2mg 17β
estradiol & norethisterone acetate,
Gynecological Endocrinology, 2005, 21:65-73
( level of evidence – I+ )
31. Onalan G, Onalan R, Selam B, Akar M, Gunenc Z, and Topcuoglu A,
Mood scores in relation to HRT during menopause: a prospective randomised
trial,
Tohoku J Exp Med, 2005, 207:223-31
( level of evidence – I+ )
32. Marco Gambacciani, Massimo Ciaponi, Barbara Cappagli, Patrizia
Monteleone, Caterina Benussi, Gemma Bevilaqua, Francesca Vacca, and
Andrea R Genazzani,
Effects of low-dose, continuous combined hrmone replacement therapy on
sleep in symptomatic postmenopausal women,
Maturitas, 2005, 50:91-97
( level of evidence – I+ )
33. Sarti CD, Chiantera A, Graziottin A, Ognisanti F, Sidoli C, Mincigrucci M,
and Parazzini F,
Hormone therapy and sleep quality in women around menopause,
Menopause, 2005, 12(5): 545-51
( level of evidence – 3 )
34. Irina A Antonijevic, Gunter K Stalla and Alex Steiger,
Modulation of the sleep electroencephalogram by estrogen replacement in
postmenopausal women,
Am J Obstet Gynecol, 2000, 182: 277-282
( level of evidence – 2+ )
35. Amanda J Welton, Madge R Vickers, Joseph Kim, Deborah Ford, Beverley
A Lawton, Alastair H MacLennan, Sarah K Meredith, Jeanett Martin, and
Tom W Meade, for the WISDOM team,
Health related quality of life after combined hormone replacement therapy:
randomised controlled trial,
BMJ, ( downloaded from bmj.com April 7, 2009 )
( level of evidence – I+ )
36. Marcelo Gonzales, Gloria Viafara, Fresia Caba, and Esteban Molina,
Sexual function, menopause and hormone replacement therapy,
Maturitas, 2004, 48: 411-420
( level of evidence – 3 )
37. Jeanne Leventhal Alexander, Krista Kotz, Lorraine Dennerstein, S.
Jerome Kutner, Kim Wallen and Morris Notelovitz,
The effects of postmenopausal hormone therapies on female sexual
functioning: a review of double-blind, randomised controlled trials,
Menopause, 2004, 11: 749-765
( level of evidence – I++ )
38. S Davis, M Rees, C. Ribot, A Moufarege, C Rodenberg, and D Purdie,
Efficacy and safety of testosterone patches for the treatment of low sexual
desire in surgically menopausal women,
Fert Steril, 2003, 80, suppl 3, Page S76
( level of evidence – I+ )
39. Camil Castelo-Branco, Juan J Vicente, Francesc Figueras, Alex Sanjuan,
Maria J Martinez de Osaba, Elena Casals, Francesca Pons, Juan Balasch,
and Juan A Vanrell,
Comparative effects of estrogens plus androgens and tibolone on bone, lipid
pattern and sexuality in postmenopausal women,
Maturitas, 2000, 34: 161-168
( level of evidence – 2+ )
40. Kavita Nanda, Lori A Bastian, Vic Hasselblad, and David L Simel,
Hormone replacement therapy and the risk of colo-rectal cancer: a metaanalysis,
Obstet Gynecol, 1999, 93: 880-888
( level of evidence – I+ )
41. Francine Grodstein, Polly A Newcomb, and Meir J Stampfer,
Postmenopausal hormone therapy and the risk of colo-rectal cancer. A review
and meta-analysis,
Amer J Med, 1999, 106: 574-582
( level of evidence – I++ )
42. Jill R Johnson, James V Lacey, DeAnn Lazovich, Melissa A Gelelr,
Catherine Schairer, Arthur Schatzkin, and Andrew Flood,
Menopausal hormone therapy and risk of colo-rectal cancer,
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev, 2009, 18: 196-203
( level of evidence – 2+ )
43. Rogerio A Lobo, Raymond C Rosen, Hwa-Ming Yang, Barbara Block and
Roland Gerritsen Van Der Hoop,
Comparative
effects
of
oral
esterified
estrogen
with
and
without
methyltestosterone on endocrine profiles and dimensions of sexual function in
postmenopausal women with hypoactive sexual desire,
Fert & Steril, 2003, 79: 1341-1352
( level of evidence – I+ )
44. G El-Hage, JA Eden and R Zoa Manga,
A double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial of the effect of testosterone
cream on the sexual motivation of menopausal hysterectomised women with
hypoactive sexual desire disorder,
Climacteric, 2007, 10: 335-343
( level of evidence - I+ )
45. Rossella E Nappi, Francesca Ferdeghini, Patrizia Sampaolo, Patrizia
Vaccaro, Christian De Leonardis, Francesca Albani, Andrea Salonia, and
Franco Polatti,
Clitoral circulation in postmenopausal women with sexual dysfunction: A pilot
randomised study with hormone therapy,
Maturitas, 2006, 55: 288-295
( level of evidence – I+ )
46. A Floter, J Nathorst-Boos, K Carlstrom and B von Schoultz,
Addition of testosterone to estrogen replacement therapy in oophorectomised
women: effects on sexuality and well-being,
Climacteric, 2002, 5: 357-365
( level of evidence – 2+ )
47. Jan L Shifren, Glenn D Braunstein, James A Simon, Peter R Casson, John
E Buster, Geoffrey P Redmond, Regula E Burki, Elizabeth S Ginsburg,
Raymond C Rosen, Sandra R Leiblum, Kim E Campbell and Norman A
Mazer,
Transdermal testosterone treatment in women with impaired sexual function
after oophorectomy,
New Eng J Med, 2000, 343: 682-688
( level of evidence – I+ )
48. S Voss, D Quail, A Dawson, T Backstrom, F Aguas, M Erenus, HS The, J
Bonnar, C De Geyter, M Hunter & T Nickelsen, for the Euralox
Investigators Group,
A randomised double-blind trial comparing raloxifene HCl and continuous
combined hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women: effects on
compliance and quality of life,
BJOG, 2002, 109: 874-885
( level of evidence – I+ )
49. J Huber, S Palacios, L Berglund, W Hanggi, SM Sathanandan, S Christau
and F Helmond,
Effects of tibolone and continuous combined hormone replacement therapy on
bleeding rates, quality of life, and tolerability in postmenopausal women,
BJOG, 2002, 109: 886-893
( level of evidence – I+ )
50. SD Quinn and C Domoney,
The effects of hormones on urinary incontinence in postmenopausal women,
Climacteric, 2009, 12: 106-113
( level of evidence – I+ )
51. Al-Baghdadi and A A A Ewies,
Topical estrogen therapy in the management of postmenopausal vaginal
atrophy: an up-to-date overview,
Climacteric, 2009, 12: 91-105
( level of evidence – I+ )
52. Long CY, Liu CM, Hsu SC, Wu CH, Wang CL, and Tsai EM,
A randomised comparative study of the effects of oral and topical estrogen
therapy on the vaginal vascularisation and sexual function in hysterectomised
postmenopausal women,
Menopause, 2006, 13: 737-43
( level of evidence – I+ )
53. Utian WH, Speroff L, Ellman H, and Dart C,
Comparative controlled trial of a novel oral estrogen therapy, estradiol acetate,
for relief of menopausal symptoms,
Menopause, 2005, 12(6): 708-715
( level of evidence – I+ )
54. Simunic V, Banovic I, Ciglar S, Jeren L, Pavicic Baldani D and Sprem M,
Local estrogen treatment in patients with urogenital symptoms,
Int J Gynae & Obst, 2003, 82:187-197
( level of evidence – 2+ )
55. Simon JA, Bouchard C, Waldbaum A, Utian W, Zborowski J and Snabes
MC,
Low dose of transdermal estradiol gel for treatment of symptomatic
postmenopausal women: a randomised controlled trial,
Obstet Gynecol, 2007, 109: 588-596
( level of evidence – I+ )
56. JoAnn E Manson, Judith Hsia, Karen C Johnson, Jacques E Rossouw,
Annlouise R Assaf, Norman L Lasser, Maurizio Trevisan, Henry R Black,
Susan R Heckbert, Robert Detrano, Ora L Strickland, Nathan D Wong,
John R Crouse, Evan Stein, Mary Cushman for the Women’s Health
Initiative Investigators,
Estrogen plus progestin and the risk of coronary heart disease,
New England J Medicine, 349 : 523-534
( level of evidence – I+ )
57. Shelley R Salpeter, Judith ME Walsh, Elizabeth Greyber and Edwin E
Salpeter,
Coronary heart disease events associated with hormone therapy in younger
and older women,
J Gen Intern Med, 2006, 21: 363-6
( level of evidence – I+ )
58. Francine Grodstein, JoAnn E Manson and Meir J Stampfer,
Hormone therapy and coronary heart disease: The role of time since
menopause and age at hormone initiation,
Journal of Women’s Health, 2006, 15: 35-44
( level of evidence – 2+ )
59. Judith Hsia, Robert D Langer, JoAnn E Manson, Lewis Kuller, Karen C
Johnson, Susan L Hendrix, Mary Pettinger, Susan R Heckbert, Nacy
Greep, Sybil Crawford, Charles B Eaton, John B Kostis, Pat Caralis, Ross
Prentice, for the Women’s Health Initiative,
Conjugated equine estrogens and coronary heart disease: The Women’s
Health Initiative,
Arch Intern Med, 2006, 166: 357-365
( level of evidence – I+ )
60. Jacques E Rossouw, Ross L Prentice, JoAnn E Manson, LieLing Wu,
David Barad, Vanessa M Barnabei, Marcia Ko, Andrea Z LaCroix, Karen L
Margolis, and Marcia L Stefanick,
Postmenopausal hormone therapy and risk of cardiovascular disease by age
and years since menopause,
JAMA, 2007, 297: 1465-1477
( level of evidence - I+ )
61. Deborah Grady, David Herrington, Vera Bittner, Roger Blumenthal,
Michael Davidson, Mark Hlatky, Judith Hsia, Stephen Hulley, Alan Herd,
Steven Khan, L Kristin Newby, David Waters, Eric Vittinghoff, Nanette
Wenger, for the HERS Research Group,
Cardiovascular disease outcomes during 6.8 years of hormone therapy: Heart
and estrogen/progestin replacement therapy follow-up (HERS II),
JAMA, 2002, 288: 49-57
( level of evidence – I+ )
62. Howard N Hodis, Wendy J Mack, Stanley P Azen, Roger A Lobo, Donna
Shoupe, Peter R Mahrer, David P Faxon, Linda Cashin-Hemphill, Miquel E
Sanmarco, William J French, Thomas L Shook, Thomas D Gaarder,
Anikumar O Mehra, Ramin Rabbani, Alex Sevanian, Asit B Shil, Mina
Torres, K Heiner Vogelbach, Robert H Selzer, for the Women’s EstrogenProgestin Lipid-Lowering Hormone Atherosclerosis Regression Trial
Research Group,
Hormone therapy and the progression of coronary artery atherosclerosis in
postmenopausal women,
New Eng J Med, 2003, 349: 535-545
( level of evidence – I+ )
63. Garnet L Anderson et al, for the WHI Steering Committee
Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in postmenopausal women with
hysterectomy: The Women’s Health Initiative randomised controlled trial,
JAMA, 2004, 291: 1701-1712
( level of evidence – I+ )
64. Pierre-Yves Scarabin, Emmanuel Oger, Genevieve Plu-Bureau, on behalf
of the EStrogen and ThromboEmbolism Risk (ESTHER) Study Group,
Differential association of oral and transdermal estrogen-replacement therapy
with venous thromboembolism risk,
Lancet, 2003, 362: 428-432
( level of evidence – 2+ )
65. Mary Cushman, Lewis H Kuller, Ross Prentice, Rebecca J Rodabough,
Bruce M Psaty, Randall S Stafford, Steven Sidney, Frits R Rosendaal for
the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators,
Estrogen plus progestin and risk of venous thrombosis,
JAMA, 2004, 292, 1573-1580
( level of evidence – I+ )
66. Marianne Canonico, Emmanuel Oger, Genevieve Plu-Bureau, Jacqueline
Conrad, Guy Meyer, Herve Levesque, Nathalie Trillot, Marie-Therese
Barrelier, Denis Wahl, Joseph Emmerich, Pierre-Yves Scarabin, for the
Estrogen and thrombo-embolism risk (ESTHER) study group,
Hormone therapy and venous thromboembolism among postmenopausal
women: Impact of the route of estrogen administration and progestogens. The
ESTHER study,
Circulation, 2007, 115: 840-845
( level of evidence – 2+ )
67. Marianne Canonico, Genevieve Plu-Bureau, Gordon DO Lowe and PierreYves Scarabin,
Hormone replacement therapy and risk of venous thromboembolism in
postmenopausal women: systemic review and meta-analysis,
BMJ, 2008, 336: 1227-1231
( level of evidence – I++ )
68. Francine Grodstein, JoAnn E Manson, Meir J Stampfer, and Kathryn
Rextrode,
Postmenopausal hormone therapy and stroke: Role of time since menopause,
and age at initiation of hormone therapy,
Arch Intern Med, 2008, 168: 861-866
( level of evidence – 2+ )
69. Catherine Schairer, Jay Lubin, Rebecca Troisi, Susan Sturgeon, Louise
Brinton, and Robert Hoover,
Menopausal estrogen and estrogen-progestin replacement therapy and breast
cancer risk,
JAMA, 2000, 283: 486-491
( level of evidence – 2- )
70. Ronald K Ross, Annlia Paganini-Hill, Peggy C Wan and Malcolm C Pike,
Effect of hormone replacement therapy on breast cancer risk: estrogen versus
estrogen plus progestin,
J Natl Cancer Inst, 2000, 92: 332
( level of evidence – 2- )
71. Christopher L Li, Noel S Weiss, Janet L Stanford, and Janet R Daling,
Hormone replacement therapy in relation to risk of lobular and ductal breast
carcinoma in middle-aged women,
Cancer, 2000, 88: 2570-7
( level of evidence – 2- )
72. B de Lignieres, F de Vathaire, S Fournier, R Urbinelli, F Allaert, M G Le,
and F Kuttenn,
Combined hormone replacement therapy and risk of breast cancer in a French
cohort study of 3175 women,
Climacteric, 2002, 5 : 332-340
( level of evidence – 2- )
73. Anne Tjenneland, Jane Christensen, Birthe L Thomsen, Anja Olsen, Kim
Overvad, Marianne Ewertz, and Lene Mellemkjaer,
Hormone replacement therapy in relation to breast carcinoma incidence rate
ratios. A prospective Danish cohort study.
Cancer, 2004, 100: 2328-2337
( level of evidence – 2- )
74. Agnes Fournier, Franco Berrino, Ello Riboli, Valerie Avenei, and
Francoise Clavel-Chapelon,
Breast cancer risk in relation to different types of hormone replacement therapy
in the E3N-EPIC cohort,
Int J Cancer, 2005, 114: 448-454
( level of evidence – 2- )
75. Wendy Y Chen, JoAnn E Manson, Susan E Hankinson, Bernard Rosner,
Michelle D Holmes, Walter C Willett, and Graham A Colditz,
Unopposed estrogen therapy and the risk of invasive breast cancer,
Arch Intern Med, 2006, 166: 1027-1032
( level of evidence – 2- )
76. Christopher L Li, Kathleen E Malone, Peggy L Porter, Thomas J Lawton,
Lynda F Voigt, Kara L Cushing-Haugen, Ming Gang Lin, Xiaopu Yuan, and
Janet R Daling,
Relationship between menopausal hormone therapy and risk of ductal, lobular,
and ductal-lobular breast carcinoma,
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarker Prev, 2008, 17: 43-50
( level of evidence – 2- )
77. L Opatrny, S Deli’Aniello, S Assouline, and S Suissa,
Hormone replacement therapy and variations in the risk of breast cancer,
BJOG, 2008, 115: 169-175
( level of evidence – 2- )
78. Eugenia E Calle, Heather Spencer Feigelson, Janet S Hildebrand, Lauren
R Teras, Michael J Thun, and Carmen Rodriquez,
Postmenopausal hormone use and breast cancer associations differ by
hormona regimen and histologic subtype,
Cancer, 2009,115 : 936-45
( level of evidence – 2- )
79. Heli Lyytinen, Eero Pukkala, and Olavi Ylikorkala,
Breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women using estradiol-progestogen
therapy,
Obstet Gynecol, 2009, 112: 65-73
( level of evidence – 2- )
80. Valerie Beral, on behalf of the Million Women Study collaborators,
Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy in the Million Women Study,
Lancet, 2003, 362: 427
( level of evidence – 2- )
81. Alastair H MacLennan,
Evidence-based review of therapies at the menopause,
Int J Evid Based Healthc, 2009, 7: 112-123
( level of evidence – 1++ )
82. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. SIGN 50. A Guideline Developer’s
Handbook. Annexe A. AGREE ( Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation in Europe ) Appraisal Criteria, 2004.
( www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/50/annexa.html )
83. P.A. Komesaroff, B Kafanelis, C Black, V Cable, K Sudhir and J Daly,
Experiences at menopause of women in a non-English-speaking community:a
qualitative study,
Climacteric, 2002, 5: 78-86
( level of evidence – 2- )
84. A Strothmann and HPG Schneider,
Hormone therapy: the European women’s perspective,
Climacteric, 2003, 6: 337-346
( level of evidence – 2+ )
85. S Vinker, B Kaplan, J Yaphe, O Cohen, V Shumla, G Shapira, J Shofty,
and E Kitai,
Use of hormone replacement therapy by menopausal women in six family
practice teaching clinics in Israel,
Climacteric, 2003, 6: 75-80
( level of evidence – 2- )
86. DL Buick, D Crook, and R Horne,
Women’s perceptions of hormone replacement therapy: risks and benefits,
(1980-2002) A literature review,
Climacteric, 2005, 8: 24-35
( level of evidence – 2++ )
87. JL Shea,
Chinese women’s symptoms relation to menopause, age and related attitudes,
Climacteric, 2006, 9:30-39
( level of evidence – 2+ )
88. Awareness of menopause, the benefits of treatment, and sexual functioning
after menopause in Malaysia
Survey conducted by Synovate Healthcare, 2006
( level of evidence – 2+ )
89. Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy for primary prevention of
chronic conditions: Recommendations and rationale. US Preventive Services
Task Force
Ann Intern Med, 2002. 137: 834-839
( level of evidence – 1++ )
90. Hormone therapy for the prevention of chronic conditions in postmenopausal
women. Recommendations from the US Preventive Services Task Force.
Ann Intern Med, 2005, 142: 855-860
( level of evidence – 1++ )
91. Susan L Hendrix, Sylvia Wassertheil-Smoller, Karen C Johnson, Barbara
V Howard, Charles Kooperberg, Jacques E Rossouw, Maurizio Trevisan,
Aaaron Aragaki, Alison E Baird, Paul F Bray, Julie E Buring, Michael H
Criqui, David Herrington, John K Lynch, Stephen R Rapp, James Torner,
for the WHI Investigators, Effects of conjugated equine estrogens in stroke in
the WHI,
Circulation, 2006, 113: 2425-2434
( level of evidence – 1+ )
92. D Rachon and H Teede,
Postmenopausal hormone therapy and the risk of venous thromboembolism,
Climacteric, 2008, 11: 273-279
( level of evidence – 1++ )
93. M C Yenen, M Dede, U Goktolga, T Kucuk, and R Pabuccu,
Hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women with benign
fibrocystic mastopathy,
Climacteric, 2003, 6: 146-150
( level of evidence – 1+ )
94. L Rippy, and J Marsden,
Is HRT justified for symptom management in women at higher risk of
developing breast cancer ?
Climacteric, 2006, 9: 404-415
( level of evidence – 1+ )
95. J M Foidart, J Desreux, A Pintiaux, and A Gompel,
Hormone therapy and breast cancer risk,
Climacteric, 2007, 10(suppl 2) : 54-61
( level of evidence – 1+ )
96. Asia-Pacific Menopause Federation Consensus Statement on the Management
of the Menopause, April 2008
( level of evidence – 4 )
97. Elizabeth Farrell,
Premature Menopause – ‘I feel like an alien’
Aust Fam Physician, 2002, 31(5): 419-421
( level of evidence – 4 )
98. Grady D, & Cummings, SR,
Postmenopausal hormone therapy for prevention of fractures: how good is the
evidence?
JAMA, 2001, 285(22): 2909-10
( level of evidence – 1+ )
99. Backmann, Gloria, Bouchard, Celine, Hoppe, Diana, Ranganath, Radhika,
Altomare, Corrado, Vieweg, Alberta, Graepel, Jay, and Helzner, Eileen,
Efficacy and safety of low-dose regimens of conjugated estrogens cream
administered vaginally,
Menopause, 2009, 16, No. 4, pp 719-727
( level of evidence – 1- )