fl)
Ill z -..I
Ill
Cl -::,
C,
Ill u -
II.
..I
-z -..I u
MOH/P/PAK/321.16(GU)
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
MANAGEMENT OF
THE PALATALLY ECTOPIC CANINE
(Second Edition)
June 2016
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be a guide for clinical
practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of development.
However, adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily lead to the best
clinical outcome in individual patient care. Healthcare providers are
responsible for the management of their patients based on the clinical
presentations and management options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
These guidelines were issued in June 2016 and will be reviewed in June
2021 or earlier if new evidence becomes available.
Published by:
Oral Health Technology Section
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E10, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is Oral Health Division, Ministry of
Health Malaysia (OHD). The contents may be reproduced in any format or
medium provided that acknowledgement to the OHD is included and the
contents are not changed, sold, used to promote or to endorse
any product(s) or service(s) or used inappropriately in misleading context.
As for Figure 7 (pg. 7), permission to use shall be granted from George
Warman Publications (UK) Ltd.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-56-1
Available on the following websites:

http://www.moh.gov.my

http://www.ohd.gov.my

http://www.acadmed.org.my

Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
TABLES OF CONTENTS
Title
Page
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE AND GRADES OF
RECOMMENDATION
i
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
iii
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
iv
TARGET POPULATION, TARGET GROUP/USER,
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
iv
MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
v
MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
vi
ALGORITHM FOR MANAGEMENT OF THE PALATALLY
ECTOPIC CANINE
vii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1 Aetiology
1
1.2 Sequelae of Canine Ectopia
2
2.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT
2
2.1 History and Examination
2
2.2 Visual Inspection
3
2.3 Palpation
3
2.4 Radiographic Examination
4
3.
TREATMENT
7
3.1 Interceptive Treatment by Extraction of Deciduous Canine
7
3.2 Surgical Exposure with or without Orthodontic Traction
10
3.3 Autotransplantation
12
3.4 Surgical Removal of PEC
14
3.5 No Intervention and Observation
14
4.
CONCLUSION
15
5.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
16
REFERENCES
17
GLOSSARY
22
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
26
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
27
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
27
SOURCE OF FUNDING
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
LEVEL
STUDY DESIGN
l
Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomised
controlled trial.
ll-1
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomization.
ll-2
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic
studies, preferably from more than one centre or research group.
ll-3
Evidence obtained from multiple time series studies, with or without
intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could
also be regarded as this type of evidence.
lll
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert committees.
Source: Adapted from Harris RP, Helfand M, Woolf SH, Lohr KN, Mulrow CD, Teutsch SM, Atkins D.
Current Methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: A Review of the Process. Am J Prev Med.
2001;20(suppl 3):21-35.
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
GRADE
STUDY DESIGN
A
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or Randomised
Controlled Trial (RCT) or evidence rated as good or directly applicable
to the target population.
B
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable to the
target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or
evidence extrapolated from meta-analysis, systematic reviews or
RCT.
C
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and/or clinical
experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence of directly
applicable clinical studies of good quality.
Source: Modified from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN 50). A guideline developer’s
handbook. Elliott House, 8 -10 Hillside Crescent Edinburgh EH7 5EA. Revised November 2011. ISBN 978
1 905813 25 4.
Note: The grades of recommendation relates to the strength of the evidence on
which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect the clinical importance of
the recommendation.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group for these Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) on Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine (PEC)
consisted of Orthodontists, a Paediatric Dental Specialist, Dental Public
Health Specialists, a general dental practitioner and a dental nurse. The
Review Committee was actively involved in the development process of
these guidelines.
The previous edition of the CPG on the Management of the Palatally Ectopic
Canine (2004) was used as the basis for the development of these
guidelines. Several improvements have been introduced in this edition. In
addition to the general text and photographic updates, new and updated
information have been included. In addition, clinical audit indicators have
also been identified for the purpose of monitoring referrals.
Evidences were updated from publications until June 2016. Literature search
was
carried
out
using
the
following
electronic
databases:
PUBMED/MEDLINE; Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews; ISI Web of
Knowledge; Health Technology Assessment and full text journal articles via
OVID search engine. In addition, the reference lists of all relevant articles
retrieved were searched to identify further studies. The following free text
terms or MeSH terms were used either singly or in combination to retrieve
the
articles:
“Palatally
ectopic
canine”,
“Impacted
maxillary
canine”,
“Deciduous dentition”, "Permanent dentition”, “Prevalence”,
“Epidemiology”, “Aetiology”, “Sequelae of canine ectopia”, “Signs and
symptoms”,
“Palatal”,
“Buccal”,
“Periapical”,
“Investigations”,
“Cone-Beam
Computed
Tomography”,
“Treatment
modalities”,
“Autotransplantation”,
“Interceptive
Orthodontics”,
“Interceptive
treatment”, “Orthodontic Treatment”, “Surgical removal”,
“Surgical
exposure”,
“No
intervention”,
“Observation”
“Complications”,
“Pathology”,
“Root
resorption”,
“Ankylosis”,
“Dilaceration”, “Cystic”,
“Prosthesis” and “Osseointegrate”. Only literatures written in English
were retrieved.
There were nine clinical questions which were assigned to members of
the development group. The group members met a total of eight
times throughout the development of this CPG. All literatures retrieved
were appraised by at least two members and presented in the form of
evidence tables
and
discussed
during
group
meetings.
All
statements and
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
recommendations formulated were agreed upon by both the development
group and review committee. These CPGs are based largely on the findings
of scientific evidence and adapted according to local practices. However,
where there was lack of evidence, recommendations were based on
consensus of group members. Although, ideally patients’ views and
preferences need to be considered in the development of CPGs, in this
instance, it was not feasible. Nevertheless, patient information leaflets would
be developed to facilitate the dissemination of important information to the
public.
The levels of evidence of the literature were graded using the modified
version from the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF),
while the grading of recommendations was based on the modified version of
the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN).
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a team of external reviewers and were
also posted on the Ministry of Health, Malaysia and the Academy of
Medicine, Malaysia websites for comments and feedbacks. These guidelines
were presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPGs, and finally
to the Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council MOH Malaysia for approval.
OBJECTIVE
To provide evidence-based guidelines in the management of the palatally
ectopic canine.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
i.
To disseminate and reinforce knowledge on the management of the
palatally ectopic canine among healthcare professionals.
ii.
To enable timely recognition and referral of the palatally ectopic canine
by healthcare professionals.
iii.
To provide appropriate management of the palatally ectopic canine by
healthcare professionals.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by these guidelines are:
1. What is the definition of palatally ectopic canine?
2. What is the prevalence of palatally ectopic canine?
3. What are the aetiological factors of palatally ectopic canine?
4. What are the complications associated with a palatally ectopic canine?
5. What are the clinical signs of palatally ectopic canine?
6. What are the routine investigations required to diagnose palatally
ectopic canine?
7. What further investigations may be recommended to diagnose
palatally ectopic canine?
8. What are the advantages and limitations of each diagnostic method?
9. What are the various treatment modalities available in managing a
palatally ectopic canine?
TARGET POPULATION
These guidelines are applicable to patients diagnosed with palatally ectopic
canine.
TARGET GROUP/USER
This guideline is meant for all oral healthcare providers who provide clinical
management of the palatally ectopic canine.
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and Specialist Oral Health care settings.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Secretary
Dr Norlian bt. Hj Daud
Consultant Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Bangsar
Jalan Bangsar
59200 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Malathi Deva Tata
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Besar Seremban
Jalan Zaaba
70100 Seremban, Negeri Sembilan
Members
Dr Siti Ena bt. Eden
Consultant Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Besar Seremban
Jalan Zaaba
70100 Seremban, Negeri Sembilan
Dr Yatimah bt. Othman
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Klang
Jalan Tengku Kelana
41000 Klang, Selangor
Dr Sarimah bt. Mohd Mokhtar
Pediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Tuanku Ja'afar
70300 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Dr Ainuddin Yushar b. Yusof
Lecturer and Orthodontist
Dental Faculty, Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Level 15-17,Tower B, Psrn MPAJ
Jalan Pandan Utama, Pandan Indah
55100 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Zainab bt. Shamdol
Dental Public Health Specialist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian KKM
Aras 5, Blok E10, Kompleks E, Presint 1
Pusat Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan
62590 Putrajaya
Dr Then Poh Kiun
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Petra Jaya
Off Jalan Siol Kanan, Petra Jaya
93050, Kuching, Sarawak
Dr Puvanendran a/l Balasingham
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Port Dickson
71000 Port Dickson
Negeri Sembilan
Dr Prethiba a/p Yugaraj
Orthodontist
Unit Orthodontik
Klinik Pergigian Dato’ Keramat
Off Jalan Enggang
54200 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Salleh b. Zakaria
Dental Public Health Specialist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian KKM
Aras 5, Blok E10, Kompleks E, Presint 1
Pusat Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan
62590 Putrajaya
Dr Asmak bt. Shaari
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Buntong
Persiaran Desa Rishah 2, Taman Desa Rishah
30100 Ipoh, Perak
Dr Sharihan bt. Khashim
Orthodontist
Klinik Pakar Ortodontik Alor Setar
Jalan Tunku Abdul Halim
05100 Alor Setar
Kedah
Dr Juhaida bt. Salleh
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Senawang
70450 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Dr Mohd Zambri b. Mohamed Makhbul
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria
Tkt 3, Bangunan Cahaya Suria
Jalan Tun Perak
50050 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Amalina bt. Adanan
Dental Officer
Klinik Pergigian Setapak
No. 26-1 & 28-1, Jalan 9/23A,
Jalan Usahawan Off Jalan Genting Klang
Setapak
53200 Kuala Lumpur
Matron Lim Lean Yeng
Dental Therapist
Majlis Pergigian Malaysia
E301, Aras 3, Blok 3440
Enterprise Building 1, Jalan Teknokrat 3
63000 Cyberjaya, Selangor
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
These guidelines were reviewed by a panel of independent local and
international reviewers. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of interpretation of the evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines. The following were the
reviewers:
INTERNAL REVIEWERS
Dr Syed Nabil b. Syed Omar
Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeon
Dept. of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Faculty of Dentistry, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz
50300 Kuala Lumpur
Associate Prof. Dr Zamri b. Radzi
Lecturer and Orthodontist
Dept. of Paediatric Dentistry & Orthodontics
Faculty of Dentistry, University of Malaya
50603 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Mimi Syazleen bt. Abdul Rahman
Paediatrict Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Sungai Buloh
47000 Sungai Buloh
Selangor
Dr Sh Maznah bt. Wan Mohammed
Periodontist
Unit Periodontik
Klinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria
Tkt 3, Bangunan Cahaya Suria, Jalan Tun Perak
50050 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Fatimah bt. Abdullah
Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Bandar Mentakab
Jalan Karak
28400 Mentakab
Pahang
Matron Too Bee Kiew
Dental Therapist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian
Jabatan Kesihatan Negeri Negeri Sembilan
Jalan Rasah
70300 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Professor Balvinder Singh Khambay
Clinical Chair Professor of Orthodontics
Faculty of Medicine and Health
School of Dentistry
Clarendon Way
Leeds LS2 9LU
United Kingdom
Professor Fraser McDonald
Head of Orthodontic Department
Orthodontic Department
Guy’s Hospital
King’s College London Dental Institute
Floor 22, Guy’s Tower, London SE1 9RT
United Kingdom
Dr Hashmat Popat
Specialist Orthodontist/Clinical Tutor
Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences
Melbourne Dental Clinic
University of Melbourne
723 Swanston St
Carlton VIC 3010
Australia
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
ALGORITHM FOR MANAGEMENT OF THE ECTOPIC CANINE
Canine bulge
seen or
palpable
8-10 year
old patient.
Check for
canines
Interceptive
treatment
(age 10-13 years)
Yes
No
No
Yes
Radiographic
investigations in
patients 10 years
old and above
Definitive
orthodontic
treatment if
required
Monitor eruption
for 1-1.5 years
(age <13 years)
Monitor eruption
for 12 months
Missing or
Pathology
Canine
present/
*Favorable
Yes
No
Tooth
Erupt
No
Yes
Refer for specialist
consultation and
management
Note: *Refer to section 3.2. If in doubt, please consult an orthodontist
Tooth
Erupt
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
1.
INTRODUCTION
The maxillary canine plays a vital role in the functional aspect of the
occlusion. It has a long root and good bony support and is often referred to
as the cornerstone of the maxillary arch. Missing or impacted canine will
affect the function and aesthetic appearance of the smile.
An impacted tooth can be defined as the failure of a tooth to erupt within the
specified time. An impacted canine is a canine that is prevented from
erupting into its normal functional position by bone, tooth or fibrous tissue.
Palatally ectopic canine (PEC) is defined as the developmental dislocation
of the upper canine to a palatal site often resulting in tooth impaction
requiring surgical and orthodontic treatments.1, level III
The erupting maxillary canine should be palpable in the buccal sulcus from
age of 10 to 11 years.2, level II-3 Eruption of maxillary canines after 12.3 years
of age in girls and 13.1 years of age in boys may be considered as late.3, level
III
Maxillary canine is the second most commonly impacted tooth after the third
molar. The prevalence of impaction of maxillary canines ranges from 0.8%
to 5.2%.4-5,7-8 level III; 6, level II-3 The crowns of ectopic maxillary canines are more
often palatally (61%), while 34% are placed in the line of the arch and 4.5%
are displaced buccally.9, level III Ectopic maxillary canines are twice as common
in girls. In about 8% to 10% of cases, canine impactions occur bilaterally.10,
level III Currently, there is no published data available on the prevalence of
impacted canines in the Malaysian population.
This CPG is focused on PEC based on the higher prevalence of its
occurrence, which requires complex and multidisciplinary management
compared to buccally ectopic canine.
1.1 Aetiology
Maxillary canine has the longest path of eruption into the occlusion and the
longest period of development. The aetiology of palatally ectopic maxillary
canine remains unclear. However, the following are some of the contributing
factors. These contributing factors may be either local or general. 11, level III
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
a)
General factors

Systemic diseases such as endocrine deficiencies

Febrile disease

Irradiation (a possible contributing factor)
b)
Local factors

Discrepancies between tooth size and arch length

Retained deciduous canine / failure of the primary canine root to
resorb

Early loss of the deciduous canine

Missing or peg shaped lateral incisors

Abnormal position of the tooth bud

The presence of an alveolar cleft

Ankylosis of the permanent canine

Cystic or neoplastic formation

Dilaceration of the root

Iatrogenic origin

Idiopathic condition
Some evidence of familial/genetic occurrence of the PEC has also been
found.12-13, level III
1.2 Sequelae of Canine Ectopia
The possible complications associated with a PEC include root resorption of
adjacent teeth, dentigerous cyst formation, infection and referred pain. 6, level
II-3; 10,14-17 level III It has been estimated that 0.6% to 0.8% of children aged 10
to 13 years have permanent incisors with root resorption caused by ectopic
canines.6, level II-3 80% of teeth with root resorption are lateral incisors.10, level III
Computed Tomography (CT) scanning has detected up to 48% of incisors
adjacent to ectopic canines with root resorption.15, level III Cone-Beam
Computed Tomography (CBCT) scanning has shown that 66.7% of
permanent lateral incisors adjacent to ectopic canines have root resorption
and 11.1% of central incisors.18, level III
Key Message 1
PEC may cause root resorption of adjacent teeth, dentigerous cyst
formation, infection and referred pain.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
2.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT
2.1 History and Examination
Palatally ectopic canine should be suspected if the canine is not palpable in
the buccal sulcus by the age of 10 to 11 years or if any asymmetrical eruption
pattern of canine is noted.2, level II-3 Early diagnosis and treatment of the PEC
is essential for a successful outcome.19, level II-1
Patients with an ectopic maxillary canine must undergo a comprehensive
assessment of the malocclusion including accurate localization of the ectopic
canine which is performed by visual inspection, palpation and radiographic
assessment.
Inspection and palpation in the canine region is recommended annually from
age 8 years onwards.19, level II-1 Clinicians should suspect ectopia 20, level III if:

the canine is not palpable in the buccal sulcus by the age of 10-11
years

palpation indicates an asymmetrical eruption pattern

the position of adjacent teeth implies a malposition of the permanent
canine
2.2 Visual Inspection
The absence and abnormal position of both the canine bulge and lateral
incisor can give an indication of canine ectopia (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Canine bulge
2.3 Palpation
Palpation of the buccal and palatal mucosa is recommended to assess the
position of the erupting maxillary canines. The absence of the canine bulge
Canine bulge: Palpable on the
palate
Canine bulge: Palpable on the
buccal
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
or presence of asymmetrical eruption (Figure 2) after the age of 10 years
may indicate that the canine is ectopic. 21, level III
Figure 2: Asymmetrical eruption
The upper right canine has
still not erupted even though
the upper left canine has
completed eruption more
than 6 months ago.
Key Message 2
Canine ectopia may be suspected by the absence of the canine bulge
or presence of asymmetrical eruption after the age of 10 years.
Position of PEC can be assessed via palpation of the buccal and palatal
mucosa.
Recommendation 1
Inspection and palpation in the canine region is recommended annually
from age 8 years onwards. (Grade C)
2.4 Radiographic Examination
Radiographs are indicated to confirm and localise the ectopic canine and
condition of the adjacent teeth. 2, level II-3 Radiographic examination should be
prescribed in patient aged 10 years and above as earlier radiographic
assessment provides little benefit.
2.4.1 Parallax technique
Parallax technique is the most routinely used radiographic assessment to
help localise the ectopic canine. This technique involves taking two
radiographs and using the principle of vertical or horizontal parallax 22-23, level
II-3 (Figure 3,4 & 5). Horizontal parallax is superior to vertical parallax in terms
of localising the PEC. 24, level III
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
a)
Horizontal Parallax
Anterior Occlusal and Periapical
or
Two Periapicals
or
Two Anterior Occlusals
b)
Vertical Parallax

Anterior Occlusal + Dental Panoramic Tomogram (DPT)
or
Periapical + DPT
Figure 3: Vertical parallax technique using DPT & anterior occlusal view
Figure 4: Horizontal parallax technique using two periapical views
The reference object for the parallax technique is normally the root of the an
adjacent tooth. The image of the tooth that is farther away, from the X-ray
tube moves in the same direction, whereas that the tooth closer to the X-ray
tube moves in the opposite direction to the tube (SLOB Rule- Same Lingual
Opposite Buccal). 25, level III
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Figure 5: Horizontal parallax technique using an Upper Anterior
Occlusal and a periapical view
2.4.2 Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
More recently, the use of Cone-Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT)
(Figure 6) has been described to aid in diagnosis and management of
palatally ectopic canine.18, level III CBCT is more accurate in localising the
position of the canine in three dimensions and for diagnosing lesions such
as root resorption of the adjacent teeth.26, level III Linear and angular
measurement on CBCT images are accurate and precise and can be use to
assess a precise position of PEC.27, level II-2 However, increased radiation
exposure and high costs restrict its routine use.28, level III CBCT should be
prescribed to overcome shortcomings of conventional radiographs when
deemed necessary.
The use of CBCT will allow accurate three-dimensional localisation of the
PEC as well as any root resorption of adjacent teeth. This may have effect
on the treatment planning process. The decision to request a small volume
CBCT scan should be made by an orthodontic specialist following full clinical
assessments and appropriate radiological support for reporting. 29-30, level III
Figure 6: Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Recommendation 2

Radiographic investigation is indicated for patient above 10 years old
with clinically missing maxillary canine. (Grade A)

Parallax radiographic technique should be used to determine the
position of the ectopic canine. (Grade C)
CBCT may be prescribed to overcome shortcomings of conventional
radiographs when deemed necessary. (Grade C)
3.
TREATMENT
There are various treatment modalities for the PEC. Patient and parent
should be counseled on the various treatment options available.
3.1 Interceptive Treatment by Extraction of Deciduous Canine
Timely extraction of deciduous canine in patients aged 10 to 13 years with
PEC has been found to normalise the eruptive path of canines within 12
months in 78% of cases 19, level II-1 and in 62% of cases. 31, level II-1
Recent studies also found similar results. Naoumova et al. 32, level I found 69%
in those aged 10 to 13 years had spontaneous eruption of the PEC, while
Bazargani et al. 33, level I found 67% of PEC normalised. It was noted that the
effect was significantly more pronounced in the younger patients (10 to 11
years) compared to older patients (12 to 14 years).
The efficacy of this procedure is supported by Naoumova et al. 34, level I This
randomised controlled trial (RCT) found that the greatest predictor on
eruption of the PEC was the timely removal of the deciduous canine. This
interceptive procedure may reduce treatment complexity, duration, cost and
potential complications involved with management of PEC.
3.1.1 Indications
Ericson & Kurol,19, level II-1 listed the following indications:
a) Patients aged between 10 to 13 years.
b) Uncrowded arch.
c) Ectopic canine root still developing.
d) Horizontal overlap of the ectopic canine crown is not beyond the
midline of the nearest lateral incisor root.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Power & Short,31, level II-1 reaffirmed the findings regarding the success rate
being affected when the horizontal overlap exceed beyond the midline of
incisor width. A 91% success rate was reported if the crown of the canine is
distal to midline of the lateral incisor and 64% success rate when the crown
is located mesial to midline of the lateral incisor.19, level II-1 Therefore, early
detection is important to ensure greater success rate.
3.1.2 Review
This should be done at 6 monthly intervals with follow-up radiographs until
the permanent canines erupt. If there is no improvement after 12 months,
other treatment options have to be considered.19, level II-1
3.1.3 Special considerations
a) In potentially crowded arches, space maintenance or space re-gaining
may be required. This can be achieved by appliances or extraction.
However, any decision to extract permanent teeth to allow the PEC to
erupt must only be undertaken after specialist consultation.
Maintenance of the perimeter of the upper arch is an important step
during the observation period, and the palatal arch is recommended as
a space-holding device. 33, level I
b) Bilateral extractions of deciduous canines may be required to prevent
midline shift.
3.1.4 Prognosis
Extraction of the deciduous maxillary canine does not guarantee correction
of the problem and therefore the prognosis should be explained to patient
and parent/s (Figure 7). A residual space may be present following
extraction of the deciduous canine if the PEC fails to erupt. They should also
be informed of the various options available in the event of an unsuccessful
outcome.
Prognosis is less favourable if:
a) arches are crowded which will most likely indicate complex appliance
therapy.31, level II-1
b) root of the ectopic canine is fully formed. 35-36, level III
c) horizontal overlap of the PEC exceeds beyond the midline of the lateral
incisor.31, level II-1
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Figure 7: Assessment of treatment prognosis for interceptive
treatment of PEC
Reproduced from Dental Update (ISSN 0305-5000), by permission of George Warman Publications (UK) Ltd
Even though the benefits of extraction of deciduous canine were questioned
by the Cochrane collaboration, 37-38, level I it is still a worthwhile interceptive
option if done based on sound clinical and radiographic selection criteria to
optimise the potential benefits to the patient. It is cost effective when
compared with that of complex orthodontic treatment and surgical
intervention required in management of PEC. 19, level II-1
Key Message 3
Treatment options and possible outcomes must be discussed with parents
and patients.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Recommendation 3
Extraction of deciduous canine as an interceptive management of PEC
should be based on sound clinical and radiographic selection criteria.
(Grade C)
Suitable age for extraction of deciduous canine is between 10 to 13
years old in the absence of crowding. (Grade A)
3.2 Surgical Exposure with or without Orthodontic Traction
The purpose of surgical exposure is to facilitate the eruption of the PEC into
the arch. There are three methods for exposure and alignment of the
canine;39, level III
a) Open surgical exposure and spontaneous eruption
b) Open surgical exposure and bonding of attachment for traction
(Figure 8)
c) Close surgical exposure and bonding of attachment for traction
Figure 8: Open surgical exposure and bonding of attachment for
traction
Indications:
a) Patient must be willing to wear fixed appliances.
b) Since the treatment time is normally prolonged, the general oral health,
the cooperation and motivation of the patient should be good.
c) When interceptive treatment by extraction of deciduous canine is not
feasible and/or not favourable.
d) Unsuccesful outcome of interceptive treatment.
e) When severe root resorption of the adjacent teeth necessitates extraction
of these teeth and alignment of the PEC into the arch.
f) When the position of PEC is favourable (Figure 9).
Traction of PEC after open
surgical exposure and bonding
Successful alignment of PEC
into the arch
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Figure 9: Favourable and unfavourable position of PEC for alignment
The success of orthodontic treatment depends on the degree of malposition
of the ectopic canine. The rate of success is inversely proportional to the
degree of malposition. The degree of malposition of the impacted canine
should not be so great that orthodontic alignment is impractical for example
close proximity to the midline, above the apices of the adjacent teeth and
horizontal angulation. 20, level III Fleming et al. 40, level II-2 found that, accurate
prediction of the treatment duration for orthodontic alignment of palatally
impacted maxillary canine is difficult. The mesiodistal position of the canine
may be a useful predictor of treatment duration.
The optimal time for surgical exposure and orthodontic treatment is during
adolescence.41, level III The success rate of the treatment procedure is quite
high. The prognosis for successful orthodontic resolution of an impacted
canine in an adult (69.5%) is lower than that in a younger patient(100%) and
the prognosis worsens with age. 42, level II-2
Favorable position
Unfavorable position
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Inaccurate three dimensional diagnosis of location and orientation of
impacted teeth and failure to appreciate anchorage demands were the major
reasons for failure in the treatment of impacted canines. 43, level II-3 Therefore
the specialist orthodontist should consider taking a small volume CBCT. 2930, level III
There are some clinicians who prefer open exposure and others who prefer
closed exposure of the PEC (Figure 10). There is no evidence to support
one surgical technique over the other in terms of dental health, aesthetics,
economics and patients factors. 44, level III; 45, level I The choice of technique is
best left to the personal choice of the orthodontist and surgeon.
A combination of surgical exposure followed by corticotomy has been shown
to produce a faster movement of the palatally ectopic canine tooth into the
arch and thus can reduce treatment time. 46, level III
Figure 10: Open and closed exposure
3.3
Autotransplantation
Autotransplantation (Figure 11) may be considered when orthodontic
alignment of PEC is not possible. This option should be explored prior to
surgical removal of the impacted canine. Indications for autotransplantation
are:
a) The canine is severely malpositioned and cannot be aligned
orthodontically,
b) There is a favorable donor tooth available i.e. a premolar or canine
(surgical repositioning),
c) There is sufficient space and bucco-palatal bone of the recipient site,
d) The surgical procedure is expected to be minimally traumatic.
Open exposure
Closed exposure
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Prognosis of autotransplantation is good if:
a) Patient is healthy, compliant and able to maintain a good oral
hygiene.47, level II-2; 48-49, level III
b) The ideal stage of the donor tooth is when the root has ¾’s formed, 5051, level II-2 and an it has an open apex of more than 1 mm. 50, 52, 54, level II-2;
53, level III
c) The ideal receptor alveolus has sufficient height and width to
accommodate the donor tooth. 55, level II-2; 56, level III
d) Surgical technique is meticulous and atraumatic, 52, 55, 57, level II-2; 48-49, 53,
level III with reduced extra-alveolar time. 47, 50, 55, level II-2 This is to preserve
the periodontal ligament and maintain the Hertwig’s Epithelial Root
Sheath so that root development is not compromised. Ankylosis, root
resorption and loss of epithelial adherence may also be avoided.
The patient regains a proprioceptive feeling in the transplanted teeth, with
normal periodontal healing, allowing a natural feel during chewing. 47, 57-58,
level II-2; 49, level III The induction of alveolar growth allows eruption process to
occur. 47, 50, 59, level II-2 Orthodontic treatment can be implemented if required,
50-51, 57, 60, level II-2; 48, 53, level III as opposed to other prosthetic replacement such
as an osseointegrated implant. Orthodontic tooth movement can be started
from 3-9 months after periodontal ligament (PDL) healing and before
complete alveolar bone repair.61, level II-2 It is our concern that earlier
orthodontic movement may inadvertently exert excessive forces that can
reduce the success of autotransplantation.
However, the success of autotransplantation is technique sensitive and
requires surgical expertise. Reports on success rate vary from 79% in a long
term cohort study 58, level II-2 to 100% 55, level II-2 depending on the duration of
follow up and criteria of success.
The most common complications of autotransplantation are ankylosis and
inflammatory root resorption. However, autotransplantation may still
preserve bone volume in a young patient for future implant procedure. 48, level
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Figure 11: Autotransplantation of impacted canine
PEC with retained
deciduous canine
During procedure
After procedure
3.4 Surgical Removal of PEC
Due to prolonged treatment time with surgical exposure and alignment,
surgical removal is another treatment of choice. 62, level II-2
Indications:
a) The patient refuses orthodontic treatment.
b) When the contact between the lateral incisor and first premolar is
acceptable.
c) When pathological changes associated with the ectopic canine or
radiographic evidence of early root resorption of the adjacent teeth are
present.
d) The ectopic canine is ankylosed and cannot be moved into the arch or
transplanted.
e) When the patient is willing to accept substitution of first premolar for
the canine and
f) Position of the ectopic canine is unfavourable. Prognosis for the
alignment of the ectopic canine depends on its three dimensional
position. 23, level II-3 It is unfavourable when:
the canine crown is tilted towards and near the midline of the arch,
the position of the crown tip is less than one third of the incisor
roots,
the inclination of the canine is more horizontal,
canine root apex is far away from its normal position.
Clinical experience would indicate that there is a large variation in the life
expentancy of retained deciduous canines. If necessary, fixed orthodontic
appliances can be used to bring the first premolar forward to simulate a
canine tooth or open space for a prosthetic replacement to ensure optimum
aesthetic and function.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Parents and patients should be informed of the possible risks and
complications associated with surgical removal of the impacted canine. A
common concern is possible damage to the root of adjacent teeth.
3.5 No Intervention and Observation
Indications:
a) The patient is not keen to undergo treatment.
b) There should be no evidence of root resorption of adjacent teeth or
other pathology.
c) Occlusion is acceptable with satisfactory alignment of the lateral incisor
and first premolar (Figure 12).
d) The retained deciduous canine has an acceptable appearance and
good prognosis.
e) Severely displaced palatally ectopic canines with no evidence of
pathology may be left in-situ, if the canine is remote from the dentition.
The clinician must ensure that the parents and patients understand that the
prognosis of the retained deciduous canine, if present, remains unknown and
a prosthesis would be required if the deciduous canine is eventually lost.
Radiographic evaluation of the ectopic canine which is left in situ is
recommended to monitor for pathological changes. 63, level III. Currently, no
guideline exists as to how frequent radiographic checks should be carried
out. 20, level III In view of radiation safety and cost considerations, annual
radiographic follow-up is recommended if clinically indicated.
Figure 12: No intervention
and observation
Occlusion is acceptable with
satisfactory alignment and good
contact between the lateral
incisor and first premolar.
Recommendation 4
Annual radiographic follow up for PEC that is left in-situ is recommended
to monitor pathological changes if clinically indicated.
(Grade C - Development Group’s Recommendation)
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
4. CONCLUSIONS
Accurate diagnosis is important to ensure appropriate management of PEC.
There
are
several
treatment
modalities
available
with
specific
indications. Factors such as patient's age, motivation and cost may affect
the definitive treatment plan. Parents and patient should be informed
of
the
various
treatment
options
available
based
on
existing
circumstances and possible outcomes of complications.
Early monitoring of canine eruption by inspection and palpation from the age
of 8 years is very important. If canine ectopia is suspected, the simple
method of extracting the deciduous canine may be intitiated as an
interceptive procedure in suitable cases. 2, level II-3 Inappropriate extraction of
deciduous canine should be avoided to maintain the arch perimeter and
prevent unnecessary trauma to the patient.
Adhering to the algorithm proposed will ensure a systematic management of
the patient and timely referral to the specialist for optimal outcome.
5. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of PEC at all healthcare levels
in Malaysia using an evidence-based CPG in order to manage PEC
appropriately. The successful treatment outcome is influenced by factors
such as maintaining an up to date understanding of PEC, the use of
appropriate examination techniques, treatment needs, patient records,
continuing professional education and patient expectations.
5.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitating factors for these recommendations include:
a) Wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare professionals through
printed and electronic copies.
b) Continuing professional education on the management of PEC for
healthcare professionals.
c) Widespread of facilities at primary care level for screening and
detection of PEC.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG include:
a) Poor understanding or limited knowledge of PEC.
b) Insufficient resources in the management of PEC particular at
specialist care.
c) Variation in treatment practice and preference.
5.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a) Ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare professionals.
b) Re-enforce training of healthcare professionals to ensure information
is up to date.
c) Healthcare professionals at primary care level to do screening and
multidisciplinary team at secondary care level to manage the PEC.
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed as
clinical audit indicator for quality management:
Percentage of timely
referral* of the palatally
ectopic canine
=
No. of timely referral of the
palatally ectopic canine
X 100
Total number of referral with
palatally ectopic canine
Note: *Timely referral is defined as a referral of patients between the ages of 10 to 13 years old with
an unerupted and non-palpable maxillary canine (Proposed terget=100%).
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
References
1. Peck S, Peck L & Kataja M. Site-specificity of tooth maxillary agenesis in subjects with canine
malpositions, Angle Orthod. 1996.66:473-476.
2. Ericson S & Kurol J. Longitudinal study and analysis of clinical supervision of maxillary canine eruption.
Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology. 1986;14:172–176.
3. Hurme V. Ranges of normality in the eruption of permanent teeth. Journal of Dentistry for Children,
1949;16:11–15.
4. Thilander B & Jakobsson S. Local factors in impaction of maxillary canines. Acta Odont Scand. 1968.
26:145–168.
5. Brin I, Becker A, & Shalhav M. Position of the permanent canine in relation to anomalous or missing
lateral incisors: a population study. Eur J Orthod. 1986.8:12–16.
6. Ericson S & Kurol J. Radiographic examination of ectopically erupting maxillary canines. American
Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 1987;91:483–92.
7. Baccetti, T. A controlled study of associated dental anomalies. Angle Orthod. 1998.68:267–274.
8. Chu FC, Li TK, Lui VK, Newsome PR, Chow RL, & Cheung LK. Prevalence of impacted teeth and
associated pathologies - a radiographic study of the Hong Kong Chinese population. Hong Kong Med
J. 2003.9:158–163.
9. Stivaros N & Mandall NA. Radiographic factors affecting the management of impacted upper
permanent canines. Journal of Orthodontics. 2000 June;7(2):169-73.
10. Bishara SE. Impacted maxillary canines: a review. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial
Orthopedics. 1992 Feb;101(2):159-71.
11. Cooke J & Wang HL. Canine Impactions: Incidence and Management. International Journal of
Periodontics & Restorative Dentistry. 2006 Oct;26(5):483-91.
12. Peck S, Peck L & Kataja M. The palatally displaced canine as a dental anomaly of genetic origin. The
Angle Orthodontist. 1994;64(4):249–256.
13. Camilleri S, Lewis CM, & McDonald F. Ectopic Maxillary Canines: Segregation Analysis and a Twin
Study. J Dent Res. 2008.87(6):580-583.
14. Rimes RJ, Mitchell CNT, & Willmot DR. Maxillary incisor root resorption in relation to the ectopic canine:
a review of 26 patients. Eur J Orthod. 1997.19:79–84.
15. Ericson S & Kurol J. Resorption of incisors after ectopic eruption of maxillary canines: A CT study.
Angle Orthodontist. 2000;70:415-423.
16. Ericson S, Bjerklin K, & Falahat B. Does the canine dental follicle cause resorption of permanent incisor
roots? A computed tomographic study of erupting maxillary canines. Angle Orthod. 2002. 72:95–104.
17. McSherry PF. The ectopic maxillary canine: a review. Br J Orthod. 1998.25:209–216.
18. Walker L, Enciso R & Mah J. Three-dimensional localization of maxillary canines with cone beam
computed tomography. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2005;128:
418–423.
19. Ericson S & Kurol J. Early treatment of palatally erupting maxillary canines by extraction of the primary
canines. European Journal of Orthodontics. 1988;10:283–295.
20. Husain J, Burden D, McSherry P, Morris D & Allen M. National clinical guidelines for management of
the palatally ectopic maxillary canine. British Dental Journal. 2012;213(4):25.
21. Richardson G & Russel KA. A review of impaction permanent maxillary cuspids. Diagnosis and
prevention. Journal of Canadian Dental Association. 2000;68(9):497-501.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
22. Jacobs SG. Localization of the unerupted maxillary canine: how to and when to. American Journal of
Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 1999;115:314–322.
23. Southall PJ, Gravely JF. Vertical parallax radiology to localize an object in the anterior part of the
maxilla. British Journal of Orthodontics. 1989;16:79–83.
24. Armstrong C, Johnston C, Burden D, Stevenson M. Localizing ectopic maxillary canines – horizontal
or vertical parallax? European Journal of Orthodontics. 2003;25:585–589.
25. Counihan K, Al-Awadhi EA & Butler J. Guidelines for the assessment of the impacted maxillary canine.
Dent Update. 2013;40:770–777.
26. Alqerban A, Jacobs R, Fieuws S & Willems G. Comparison of two cone beam computed tomographic
systems versus panoramic imaging for localization of impacted maxillary canines and detection of root
resorption. European Journal of Orthodontics. 2011;33:93-102.
27. Naoumova J, Kjellberg H & Palm R. Cone-beam computed tomography for assessment of palatal
displaced canine position. A methodological study. Angle Orthodontist. 2014b;84(3):459-466.
28. Isaacson KG, Thom AR, Horner K & Whaites E. Orthodontic Radiographs Guidelines. 3rd ed. London:
British Orthodontic Society. 2008.
29. Alqerban A, Jacobs R, van Keirsbilck PJ, Aly M, Swinnen S, Fieuws S & Willems G. The effect of using
CBCT in the diagnosis of canine impaction and its impaction the orthodontic treatment outcome. J
Orthod Sci. 2014 Apr;3(2):34-40.
30. Botticelli S, Verna C, Cattaneo PM, Heidmann J & Melsen B. Two- versus three-dimensional imaging
in subjects with unerupted maxillary canines. Eur J Orthod. 2011 Aug;33(4):344-9.
31. Power SM & Short MB. An investigation into the response of palatally displaced canines to the removal
of deciduous canines and assessment of factors contributing to favourable eruption. British Journal of
Orthodontic.1993;20:215-223.
32. Naoumova J, Kurol J & Kjellberg H. Extraction of the deciduous canine as an interceptive treatment in
children with palatally displaced canine. Part I: Shall we extract the deciduous canine or not? European
Journal of Orthodontics. 2014a;10:1093.
33. Bazargani F, Magnuson A & Lennartsson B. Effect of interceptive extraction of deciduous canine on
palatally displaced maxillary canine. Angle Orthodontist. 2014;84: 3-10.
34. Naoumova J, Kurol J & Kjellberg H. Extraction of the deciduous canine as an interceptive treatment in
children with palatally displaced canine. Part II: possible predictors of success and cut-off points for a
spontaneous eruption. European Journal of Orthodontics. 2015 Apr;37(2):219-29.
35. Kokich VG & Mathews DP. Surgical and Orthodontic Management of Impacted teeth. Dental Clinics of
North America. 1993;37:181-204.
36. Sigler LM, Bacetti T & McNamara JA. Effect of rapid maxillary expansion and transpalatal arch
treatment associated with deciduous canine extraction on the eruption of palatally displaced canine: A
2-center prospective study. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics.
2011;139:E235-E244.
37. O’ Neill J. Limited evidence for interceptive extraction of deciduous teeth to prevent permanent canine
impaction. Evidence Based Dentistry. 2013;14: 23-24.
38. Parkin N, Furness S, Shah A, Thind B, Marshman Z, Glenroy G, Dyer F & Benson PE. Extraction of
primary (baby) teeth for unerupted palatally displaced permanent canine teeth in children. Cochrane
Database
of
Systematic
Reviews
2012,
Issue
12.
Art.
No.:
CD004621.
DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD004621.pub3.
39. McSherry PF. The assessment of and treatment options for the buried maxillary canine. Dental
Update.1996;23(1):7-10.
40. Fleming PS, Scott P, Heidari N & DiBiase AT. Influence of Radiographic Position of Ectopic Canines
on the Duration of Orthodontic Treatment. Angle Orthodontics. 2009 May;79(3):442–446.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
41. Galloway I, Stirrup. The effect of age at the diagnosis on the complexity and treatment of palatally
impacted canine. British Journal of Orthodontics.1989;16:87-92.
42. Becker A & Chaushu S. Success rate and duration of orthodontic treatment for adult patients with
palatally impacted maxillary canines. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics,
2003 November; 124(5):509–514.
43. Becker A, Chaushu G & Chaushu S. Analysis of failure in the treatment of impacted maxillary canines.
American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2010 June;137(6):743-754.
44. Smailiene D, Kavaliauskiene A, Pacauskiene I, Zasciurinskiene E & Bjerklin K. Palatally impacted
maxillary canines: choice of surgical-orthodontic treatment method does not influence post-treatment
periodontal status. A controlled prospective study. European Journal of Orthodontics. 2013.
doi:10.1093/ejo/cjs102. Pg1-8.
45. Parkin N, Benson PE, Thind B, Shah A. Open versus closed surgical exposure of canine teeth that are
displaced in the roof of the mouth. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev. 2008; 4: CD006966.
46. Fischer TJ. Orthodontic Treatment Acceleration with Corticotomy-assisted Exposure of Palatally
Impacted Canines. Angle Orthodontist. 2007; 77(3): 417-420.
47. Kim E, Jung J-Y, Cha I-H, Kum K-Y & Lee Y-S. Evaluation of the Prognosis and Causes of Failure in
182 Cases of Autogenous Tooth Transplantation. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
2005;100:112-9.
48. Thomas S, Turner SR & Sandy JR. Autotransplantation of Teeth: Is There a Role. British Journal of
Orthodontics. 1998;25:275-282.
49. Aslan BI, Ucuncu N, Dogan A. Long Term Follow-up of a Patient with Multiple Congenitally missing
Teeth Treated with Autotransplantation and Orthodontics. Angle Orthodontist. 2010;80(2):396-404.
50. Tsukiboshi M. Autotransplantation of Teeth: Requirements for predictable success. Dental
Traumatology. 2002;18:157-180.
51. Jonsson T & Sigurdsson TJ. Autotransplantation of Premolars to Premolar Sites. A Long term Followup Study of 40 Consecutive Patients. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics,
2004 June;125(6):668-75.
52. Andreasen JO, Paulsen HU, Yu Z, Bayer T & Schwartz O. A long-term study of 370 autotransplanted
premolars. Part II. Tooth survival and pulp healing subsequent to transplantation. European Journal of
Orthodontics. 1990 Feb;12(1):14-24.
53. Mendes RA & Rocha G. Mandibular Third Molar Autotransplantation-Literature Review with Clinical
Cases. Journal of Canadian Dental Association. 2004;70(11):761-766.
54. Marques-Ferreira M, Rabaca-Botelho M-F, Carvalho L, Oliveiros B & Palmeirao-Carrilho E-V.
Autogenous Tooth Autotransplantation: Evaluation of Pulp Tissue Regeneration. Med Oral Patol Oral
Cir Bucal. 2011 Nov;16(7):e984-e989.
55. Kvint S, Lindsten R, Magnusson A, Nilsson P & Bjerklin K. Autotransplantation of Teeth in 215 patients
– A follow up study. Angle Othodontists. 2010;80(3):446-451.
56. Northway W. Autogenic Dental Transplant. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial
Orthopedics. 2002;121(6):592-593.
57. Diaz JA & Zaror CE. Long-term Evaluation and Clinical Outcomes of Children with Dental Transplants
in Temuco City, Chile. Eur J Paediatr Dent. 2014 Mar;15(1):6-12.
58. Czochrowska EM, Stenvik A, Bjercke B & Zachrisson BU. Outcome of Tooth Transplantation: Survival
and Success Rates 17-41 Years Post Treatment. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial
Orthopedics. 2002;121:110-119.
59. Paulsen HU, Andreasen JO. Eruption of Premolars Subsequent to Autotransplantation. A longitudinal
radiographic study. European Journal of Orthodontics. 1998;20:45-55.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
60. Andreasen JO, Paulsen HU, Yu Z & Schwartz O. A long-term study of 370 autotransplanted premolars.
Part III. Periodontal healing subsequent to transplantation. European Journal of Orthodontics. 1990
Feb; 12(1):25-37.
61. Paulsen HU, Andreasen JO, Schwartz O. Pulp and periodontal healing, root development and root
resorption subsequent to transplantation and orthodontic rotation: A long-term study of
autotransplanted premolars. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics.
1995;108(6): 630-640.
62. Sagne S & Thilander B. Transalveolar transplantation of maxillary canine: A follow up study. European
Journal of Orthodontics. 1990;12:140-147.
63. Houston WJB & Tulley WJ. A Textbook of Orthodontics. 1998: p187. Bristol Wright 2002.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Glossary
1. Irradiation
 Exposure or subjection to the action of radiation for diagnostic or
therapeutic purposes.
2. Ankylosis
 The periodontal ligament is obliterated in one or more localized areas,
and a bony bridge is formed by penetration of alveolar bone into the
cementum.
3. Dilaceration
 A developmental distortion of the form of a tooth, whereby the root or
the apex forms an angle with the long axis of the tooth (the tooth
appears sharply curved or bent).
4. Iatrogenic
 An unfavorable response or condition caused by medical or dental
personnel, diagnostic tests or treatment procedures.
5. Idiopathic
 Pain, disease or disorder of unknown etiology.
6. CBCT
 Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) is a diagnostic imaging
modality that provides high-quality, accurate three-dimensional (3D)
representations of the osseous elements of the maxillofacial
skeleton.
7. CT
 Computerised Tomography (CT) is an imaging method that employs
a narrowly collimated radiographic beam that passes through the
body and is recorded by an array of scintillation detectors.
8. Root resorption
 A loss of substance from the root tissues that normally are
mineralized such as dentin or cementum.
9. Extra-alveolar
 Alveolar - the bone making up the alveolar process of the jaws.
 Extra- alveolar - located outside the bone making up the alveolar
process of the jaws.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
10. Hertwig’s Epithelial Root Sheath
 Hertwig’s epithelial root sheath is an elongation of the cervical loop,
which helps determine the shape, size, and number of roots and
which influences the formation of dentin in the root area during the
developmental stages of a tooth.
11. Ectopic
 Located away from the normal position.
12. DPT
 Dental panoramic tomography (DPT) is a radiographic tomogram of
the jaws, taken with a specialized machine designed to present a
panoramic view of the full circumferential length of the jaws on a
single film.
13. Orthodontics
 The branch of dentistry concerned with facial growth with
development of the dentition and occlusion, and with the diagnosis,
interception and treatment occlusal anomalies.
14. Autotransplantation
 The transfer of teeth from one site to another in the same individual,
into extraction sites or surgically prepared sockets.
15. Deciduous dentition
 Primary teeth (baby teeth).
16. Neoplastic
 Relating to, or constituting a tumor or neoplasia.
17. Interceptive Orthodontics
 Any treatment which eliminates or reduces the severity of a
developing malocclusion in order to eliminate or simplify the need
for future treatment.
18. Cystic
 An abnormal membranous sac in the body containing a gaseous,
liquid, or semisolid substance.
19. Parallax technique
 The apparent displacement of an object that follows a change in the
position from which it is viewed.
20. Periapical
 Surrounding the apex of the root of a tooth.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
21. In-situ
 In its normal place; confined to the site of origin.
22. Prevalence
 The number of people in a population who have a disease at a given
time, the numerator is the number of existing cases of disease at a
specified time and the denominator is the total population. Time may
be a point or a defined interval, and is traditionally the former if
unspecified.
23. Aetiology
 Cause of disease.
24. Palatal
 Relating to the roof of the mouth.
25. Buccal
 In the direction of the cheeks.
26. Referred pain
 Pain perceived in an area distant to and unrelated to the true site of
origin.
27. Randomised controlled trial
 A trial in which participants are assigned by chance to receive either
an experimental or control treatment. When randomisation is done
properly, the effect of a treatment(s) can be studied in groups of
people who are:
i. The same at the outset, and
ii. Treated the same way, except for the intervention(s) being
studied. Any differences seen in the groups at the end can be
attributed to the difference in treatment alone, and not to bias
or chance.
28. Corticotomy
 A partial osteotomy, involving only the cortical plate, to weaken the
resistance of the bone to the application of forces.
29. Proprioceptive
 A sense providing knowledge of the position of those parts and
regions of the body.
30. Osseointegrate
 A direct structural connection between bone and the surface of a
structure.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
31. Cohort study
 In research and statistics, a group of individuals who share a
characteristic at some specific time and who are then followed
forward in time, with data being collected at one or more suitable
intervals.
32. Retrospective study
 A study which is conducted looking backward, or directed toward
the past.
33. Surgical exposure
 Surgical uncovering of an unerupted or impacted tooth.
34. Prosthesis
 A device that replaces missing body parts.
35. Pathology
 The form of medical science and specialty practice concerned with
all aspects of disease, but with special reference to the essential
nature, causes, and development of abnormal conditions, as well
as the structural and functional changes that result from the disease
processes.
36. Orthodontic Specialist
 A graduate of an accredited dental school who additionally has
followed a postgraduate full time academic program in orthodontics,
in accordance with the requirements of his/her national state, or
provincial law.
37. Algorithm
 A step-by-step method of solving a problem or making decisions, as
in making a diagnosis.
38. Clinically missing teeth
 The absence of teeth from the dentition because of congenital
factors, exfoliation or extraction.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
CBCT
CPG
CT
DPT
HTA
MOH
OHD
PEC
PDL
RCT
SIGN
USPSTF
Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Computed Tomography
Dental Panoramic Tomogram
Health Technology Assessment
Ministry of Health
Oral Health Division
Palatally Ectopic Canine
Periodontal Ligament
Randomised Controlled Trial
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
United States Preventive Services Task Force
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the development group of these guidelines express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
- Panel of internal and external reviewers
- Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
- Dr Noor Hasmin bt. Mokthar and Ms Zabidah bt. Othman for processes
involved in the publication
- Patients who have consented for the archiving of their clinical photos
- All others who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in
pharmaceutical firms or act as consultants to such firms. Details are available
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “Management of the Palatally Ectopic
Canine” was wholly supported financially by the Ministry of Health Malaysia
and was developed without any involvement of the pharmaceutical industry.
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
2016
Notes
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine
Management of the Palatally Ectopic Canine