CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MOH PAK I88 1560)
MANAGEMENT OF
NEONATAL JAUNDICE
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-XXXX
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and iOS Platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2015 and will be reviewed in 2019 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available. When it is due for updating,
the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of the related specialty
will be informed about it. A discussion will be done on the need for
a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary
team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used
by MaHTAS will be employed.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence & Formulation of Recommendation
v
Guidelines Development and Objectives
vi
Guidelines Development Group
viii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm on Management of Cervical Cancer
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1
3.
RISK FACTORS
2
4.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
2
5.
REFERRAL 3
6.
DIAGNOSIS
4
7.
STAGING
7
8.
TREATMENT
11
9.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
21
10. FOLLOW-UP
26
11.
RECURRENT DISEASE
28
12.
TREATMENT COMPLICATIONS
31
13.
PALLIATIVE CARE
33
14.
PSYCHOSEXUAL CARE AND SUPPORT
41
15.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
43
16.
REFERENCES
45
17.
Appendix 1 Examples of Search Strategy
51
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
52
Appendix 3 WHO histological classification of tumours
54
of the uterine cervix
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Appendix 4 Revised FIGO Cervical Cancer Staging 2009
56
Appendix 5 Modified Delgado Score for Cervical Cancer
59
Appendix 6 ECOG Performance Status
60
Appendix 7 Systemic Therapy of Cancer Protocol
61
Appendix 8 Malaysian Hospice Directory
62
Appendix 9 International Society of Lymphology (ISL) 55
Appendix 10 Distress Thermometer Screening Tool
52
Appendix 11 Medication List
56
Appendix 12 Reporting Proforma for Cervical Cancer
57
Excisional Cervical Biopsies/
Hysterectomy Specimens
List of Abbreviations
Acknowledgement
63
Disclosure Statement
64
Source of Funding
64
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is in the process of incorporating Grading
Recommendations,
Assessment,
Development
and
Evaluation
(GRADE) into its work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence
and its effect size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG
Development Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall
balances of the following aspects are considered in determining the
strength of the recommendations:-
• Overall quality of evidence
• Balance of benefits vs harms
• Values and preferences
• Resource implications
• Equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II -1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
ii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
The previous CPG entitled Management of Jaundice in Healthy Term
Newborns 2003 was used as the basis for the development of the
present guidelines. A literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N); Medline
via Ovid, Pubmed and Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews
(CDSR) (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The
inclusion criteria are all literature on neonatal jaundice occurring less
than two weeks, regardless of study design. The search was limited
to literature published in the last ten years, humans and in English. In
addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were
searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were
also contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted
from 29 May 2013 to 23 June 2014. Literature searches were repeated
for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process
allowing any relevant papers published before 31 August 2014 to be
included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after
this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other CPG on neonatal jaundice developed
by National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health
(2010)/National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE)
(2010) and American Academy of Pediatrics (2004 and 2009). The
CPG was evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as references.
A total of 14 clinical questions were developed under different sections.
Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within these
sections. (Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions) The DG
members met 18 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
The literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any differences in opinion
were resolved consensually. These guidelines were based largely on
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials,
with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines was graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft guidelines was reviewed by external reviewers.
It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback
from interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council MoH
Malaysia for review and approval.
OBJECTIVES
The objective of the CPG is to provide evidence-based guidance on the
management of NNJ, specifically addressing the following:
Diagnosis and Assessment
i.
Treatment
ii. Prevention of Severe Jaundice
iii. Referrals and Follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
•
All preterm and term babies with neonatal jaundice
Exclusion Criteria
Babies with:
•
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia
•
Prolonged jaundice (jaundice beyond 14 days in term babies and
21 days in preterm babies)
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management of
NNJ either in primary or secondary/tertiary care namely:-
i.
Medical officers and general practitioners
ii. Family Medicine Specialists
iii. Paediatricians and specialists from related disciplines
iv. Allied health professionals
v. Pharmacists
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
vi. Students (medical postgraduates and undergraduates, and allied
health students)
vii. Parents and carers
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Angeline Wan Seng Lian
Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Pakar Sultanah Fatimah, Johor
Members (alphabetical order)
v
Dr. Choo Yao Mun
Senior Lecturer & Consultant
Neonatologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Fazila Mohamed Kutty
Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Ms. Loong Ah Moi
Nursing Matron
CPG Unit, Health Technology
Assessment Section, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Marina Mohd Said
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Parit Raja, Johor
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Nazrul Neezam Nordin
Consultant Paediatric Gastroenterologist
Sunway Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Mdm. Noor Haslina Othman
Pharmacist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Dr. Noorzaitun Ariffin
Paediatrician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Dr. Pauline Choo Poh Ling
Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Suzaini Mat Daud
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Arau, Perlis
Dr. Tan Hui Siu
Paediatrician
Hospital Teluk Intan, Perak
Dr. Teh Siao Hean
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Miri, Sarawak
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines was reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Neoh Siew Hong
Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
vi
Dr. Aminah Bee Mohd Kassim
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Family Health Development Division
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Anna Padmavathy Soosai
Consultant Neonatologist
Prince Court Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Faridah Aryani Md. Yusof
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Pharmaceutical Services Division
MoH, Selangor
Dr. Hanihaselah Mohd. Saleh
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Tenggara
Johor
Dr. Jamaluddin Haji Mohamad
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Datuk Dr. Kuan Geok Lan
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Associate Professor Dr. Lai Nai Ming
Associate Professor of Paediatrics
School of Medicine, Taylor’s University
Lakeside Campus Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Rohana Jaafar
Professor of Paediatrics & Senior
Consultant Neonatologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
MoH, Putrajaya
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:-
vii
Dr. Alvin S M Chang
Consultant, Department of Neonatology
KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital
Singapore
Adjunct Assistant Professor, Department
of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore and
Adjunct Assistant Professor, DUKE-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore
Emeritus Professor Dr. Boo Nem Yun
Senior Professor of Department of
Population Medicine and
Deputy Dean for Academic Development
and Undergraduate Programmes
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Selangor
Mdm. Dir Rathna Masni Kamaruddin
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Krai, Kelantan
Dr. Farah Inaz Syed Abdullah
Consultant Neonatologist &
Lactation Consultant
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Irene Cheah Guat Sim
Senior Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Japaraj Robert Peter
Maternal Fetal Medicine Specialist &
Consultant Obstetrics & Gynecology, &
Head, Department of O & G
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Professor Dr. Jacqueline J Ho
Deputy Dean (Academic Affairs) &
Head of Department of Paediatrics
Honorary Consultant Neonatologist
Penang Medical College
Pulau Pinang
Dr. Kok Chin Leong
President, Malaysian Paediatric
Asssociation & Consultant Paediatrician
KPJ Puteri Specialist Hospital, Johor
Dr. Ng Hoong Phak
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Rozita Zakaria
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Pasir Gudang, Johor
Dr. See Kwee Ching
President, Perinatal Society of Malaysia &
Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Syahnaz Mohd Hashim
Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Department of Family Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
viii
ALGORITHM ON MANAGEMENT OF NEONATAL JAUNDICE
*If jaundice persists beyond 14 days in term babies and 21 days in
preterm babies, further evaluation for prolonged jaundice is needed.
G6PD Deficiency
Jaundice
Yes
No
Admit and observe
Phototherapy ± ET
Jaundice resolved
Monitor as scheduled
Discharge
and follow-up
Assess
risk factors
Need
admission
Monitor as
scheduled*
Need treatment
Jaundice
resolved
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
NNJ
>24 hours of life
<24 hours of life
Rebound
jaundice
Admit
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Neonatal Jaundice (NNJ) or neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia is one of the
most common medical conditions in newborn babies. All babies have a
transient rise in serum bilirubin but only about 75% are visibly jaundiced.
Jaundice is clinically detectable when the serum bilirubin levels are >85
μmol/L (5 mg/dl). NNJ is more common among Asian babies and varies
with races. There are also other risk factors that may be associated
with severe jaundice including prematurity, G6PD deficiency and ABO
incompatibility. Due to improving survival rates of preterm babies, and
better identification of risk factors over the years, there is a need to
address the management of jaundice in this group of babies.
Hyperbilirubinaemia is either unconjugated or conjugated. Without
treatment, high levels of unconjugated bilirubin may lead to acute and
chronic bilirubin encephalopathy. This may cause to neurodevelopmental
problems including athetoid cerebral palsy, hearing loss and visual
impairment.
The CPG on the Management of Jaundice in Healthy Term Newborns
was developed in 2003 as a guide to clinical practice, based on the
best available evidence at that time. Since then, novel techniques in
the assessment of NNJ, different modalities of treatment and newer
concepts of prevention have been introduced. Based on recent evidence,
this CPG aims to assist healthcare providers in clinical decision-making
and to provide a standard framework for the management of NNJ in
the country.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
2. RISK FACTORS
Physiological jaundice in babies:
• is due to excessive bilirubin production (higher haemoglobin content
and shorter red blood cell life span in newborn babies) and poor
bilirubin clearance (liver immaturity)
• usually appears two to four days after birth, resolving after one to
two weeks (three weeks if preterm)
• is not associated with underlying disease and is usually benign
Risk factors of severe NNJ are:-
• prematurity
• low birth weight
• jaundice in the first 24 hours of life
• mother with Blood Group O or Rhesus Negative
• G6PD deficiency
• rapid rise of total serum bilirubin
• sepsis
• lactation failure in exclusive breastfeeding
• high predischarge bilirubin level
• cephalhaematoma or bruises
• babies of diabetic mothers
• family history of severe NNJ in siblings
Physiological jaundice is usually benign and occurs in almost all
babies. It can be exacerbated by certain conditions such as inadequate
intake, cephalohaematoma and bruises. However, high levels of
bilirubin can lead to bilirubin encephalopathy. Therefore, it is important
to identify babies at risk of severe hyperbilirubinaemia and adverse
neurodevelopmental sequelae. Babies are more likely to develop
severe hyperbilirubinaemia if they have any of the following factors:
i. Low gestational age/late preterm
NNJ is common among babies delivered <37 weeks of gestation
(p<0.0001).1 - 2, level II-2 Babies born at 38 to 39 weeks gestation have
higher risk for developing severe NNJ compared with babies of ≥40
weeks gestation (OR=3.12, 95% CI 1.21 to 8.03).3, level II-2
ii. Low birth weight
In extremely low birth weight (ELBW) babies, an increasing level
of unconjugated bilirubin increases mortality and risk of adverse
neurodevelopmental outcomes (moderate to severe cerebral palsy,
blindness, severe bilateral central hearing loss or poor mental
developmental or psychomotor developmental index) (OR=1.18,
95% CI 1.02 to 1.38).4, level II-2
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
iii. Visible jaundice in the first 24 hours of life
Jaundice developing within the first 24 hours after birth is an
important risk factor for severe hyperbilirubinaemia.5 - 6
iv. Mother with Blood Group O or Rhesus Negative
Babies with rhesus incompatibility have increased risk of bilirubin
encephalopathy.7, level III Babies with ABO incompatibility and a
positive direct Coombs test have a greater risk for adverse outcome
than those with a negative test (OR=4.5, 95% CI 1.3 to 15.4).8, level II-2
v. G6PD deficiency
In a study of babies with total serum bilirubin (TSB)>20 mg/dL
(>340 µmol/L), G6PD-deficient babies had higher peak TSB levels
(p<0.001), were more likely to require phototherapy (p=0.004) or
exchange transfusion (ET) (p<0.01) and had a higher mortality rate
(p<0.05) compared to non-G6PD-deficient babies.1, level II-2; 8, level II-2
vi. Rapid rise of total serum bilirubin (TSB)
Babies with a rapid rise of TSB greater than 6 mg/dL/day (103
µmol/L/day) are at risk of developing severe hyperbilirubinaemia
(OR=2.94, 95% CI 1.46 to 5.92).3, level II-2
vii. Presence of sepsis
In a study among babies >34 weeks, proven sepsis greatly increased
the risk of bilirubin toxicity (OR=20.6. 95% CI 4.9 to 87.5).7, level III
viii. Excessive weight loss
Excessive body weight loss in the first three days after birth is a
predictor for significant hyperbilirubinaemia.9, level II-2
Refer to Subchapter 5.1 on Weight loss
ix. Exclusive breastfeeding
Using multivariate analysis, exclusive breastfeeding is a significant
predictor of TSB ≥25 mg/dL (425 µmol/L) with OR=2.03 (95% CI
1.03 to 3.99).3, level II-2
Refer to Chapter 12 on Impact of breastfeeding
x. High predischarge bilirubin level
A high predischarge bilirubin level is a predictor for development of
significant hyperbilirubinaemia with AUC ranging between 0.86 and
0.88.10 - 11, level II-2
Refer to Nomogram in Appendix 5.
xi. Cephalhaematoma or bruises
Babies with cephalhaematomas or bruises are at risk for
NNJ.3, level II-2; 6
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
xii. Babies of diabetic mothers
Macrosomic babies of diabetic mothers are at risk factor for NNJ.12
xiii. Family history of severe NNJ in siblings
A history of severe NNJ or ET among other siblings increases the
risk for severe hyperbilirubinaemia although it is not statistically
significant.3, level II-2; 11, level II-2
There is no good quality evidence on maternal consumption of traditional
herbs as a risk factor for NNJ.
A Malaysian study found that less than 50% of the mother included
in this study had good knowledge and awareness about the risks and
complications of NNJ. Although a majority of them (88.7%) knew that
jaundiced babies needed blood tests to monitor the severity of jaundice,
only 27.1% of them were aware that putting jaundiced babies under the
sun could result in dehydration and worsening of jaundice.13, level III
Recommendation 1
• Risk factors* for developing severe jaundice in babies need to be
identified during the antenatal and postnatal period.
• Health education on neonatal jaundice should be given during
antenatal and postnatal visits.
*Refer to the preceding text.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BILIRUBIN LEVEL, ACUTE BILIRUBIN
ENCEPHALOPATHY AND KERNICTERUS
Acute Bilirubin Encephalopathy (ABE)
ABE results in changes of mental (behavioural) status and muscle tone
during the neonatal period when the baby is having hyperbilirubinaemia.
These include drowsiness, poor feeding and hypotonia followed
by hypertonia affecting extensor muscles in particular, resulting in
retrocollis and opisthotonos.14
Classic kernicterus
Classic kernicterus may be seen in babies who survive from ABE.
The manifestations of ABE include dystonia, athetoid cerebral palsy,
paralysis of upward gaze, and sensorineural hearing loss. Post-mortem
icteric (yellow) staining of the basal ganglia, specifically the globus
pallidus is the hallmark of this condition.14
Bilirubin-Induced Neurologic Dysfunction (BIND)
BIND is a wider spectrum of disorders that not only includes classic
kernicterus and ABE, but also less severe forms of neuropathy,
including auditory neuropathy, fine and gross motor incoordination, gait
abnormalities, fine tremors, exaggerated extrapyramidal reflexes and
behavioural problems.14
Kernicterus is a rare condition due to severe neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia.
It is associated with a high mortality, and survivors usually suffer
sequelae such as athetoid cerebral palsy, intellectual disability and
high frequency hearing loss. Preventing and treating severe neonatal
hyperbilirubinaemia is crucial to prevent kernicterus.
In North America and Europe, the estimated incidence of kernicterus
ranges from 0.4 to 2.7 cases per 100,000 live births among term and
late preterm babies.15, level III In a Danish study, the incidence of acute
advanced and chronic bilirubin encephalopathy among babies more than
35 weeks was 0.6 per 100 000 live births (95% CI 0.1 to 1.7).16, level III
Risk factors for bilirubin neurotoxicity are isoimmune hemolytic
disease, G6PD deficiency, asphyxia, sepsis, acidosis and albumin
<3.0mg/dL.6 The risk may be increased by a prolonged exposure to
a certain TSB level. Due to limited published data, it is not possible
to provide specific recommendations for intervention based on the
duration of hyperbilirubinaemia.12
The exact bilirubin concentration associated with kernicterus in the
healthy term babies is unknown.8, level II-2; 16, level III The risk of acute
advanced and chronic bilirubin encephalopathy among term and late
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
preterm babies increases with higher TSB level.7 - 8, level II-2; 16 - 17, level III; 18, level II-2
ABE can occur with lower TSB levels in the presence of neurotoxicity risk
factors such as sepsis and rhesus incompatibility.7, level II-2
• The relationship between exact bilirubin level, ABE and kernicterus
in healthy term babies is unknown. However, the risk increases with
higher TSB levels.
• ABE can occur with lower TSB levels in the presence of other risk
factors.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
4. METHODS OF DETECTING JAUNDICE AND ASSESSING ITS
SEVERITY
TSB measurement is the gold standard for detecting and determining the
level of hyperbilirubinaemia. Visual assessment using Kramer’s rule is
still widely practised. Newer, non-invasive methods like transcutaneous
bilirubinometry have been introduced and are gaining wide acceptance.
i. Transcutaneous bilirubinometer (TcB)
The transcutaneous bilirubinometer is a hand-held device that
measures the amount of bilirubin in the skin.
•
Many studies, including a large health technology assessment,
showed a significant correlation (r ranging from 0.75 to 0.95)
between bilirubin measurements taken by TcBs (BiliCheck
and JM 103), with TSB measurements, in both term and
preterm babies. However, the TcBs tended to overestimate or
underestimate the bilirubin concentration when compared to
TSB.19, level II-2; 20 - 23, level III Overestimation can lead to unnecessary
invasive investigations and treatment. Underestimation, on the
other hand, can lead to missing babies at risk for developing
severe hyperbilirubinaemia.
•
TcB measurements have good correlation (r ranging from 0.85
to 0.97) with TSB measured by different types of chemistry
analysers.24 - 26, level III However the mean differences between the
TcB and TSB levels vary with each method 24 - 25, level III and TcB
measurement sites (sternum or forehead).25, level III
•
Mean differences between TcB measurements and TSB levels
are large when the bilirubin levels exceed 205 µmol/L (12 mg/
dL).19, level II-2; 26 - 27, level III
•
There has not been any major adverse effect associated with the
use of BiliCheck and JM-103 devices.19, level II-2
•
JM-103 as compared to Bilicheck offers some practical advantages.
It does not require any disposable material, has better accuracy
in identifying TSB levels >12 mg/dL (205 µmol/L), and is less
time consuming.28, level III
•
Phototherapy affects the accuracy of TcBs in detecting jaundice.
29 - 31, level III The correlation is better between TSB levels and
TcB measurements obtained from the areas unexposed to the
phototherapy as compared to the exposed areas.29 - 30, level III
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
ii. Icterometer
The icterometer is a non-invasive instrument which can be used
as a screening tool for NNJ. There is no good quality evidence to
indicate its reliability.
iii. Visual assessment
Visual assessment of jaundice is based on the assessment of
the extent and severity of yellow discolouration of the skin. It is
performed by blanching the skin with slight finger pressure and
noting the underlying colour of the skin. Jaundice is usually visible
when bilirubin levels are about 5 - 7 mg/dL (86 - 120 µmol/L) and
progresses from head to toe as the level of bilirubin rises. Kramer’s
rule describes the relationship between serum bilirubin levels
and the progression of skin discolouration (refer to Table 1 and
Figure 1).
Visual assessment is not reliable in monitoring jaundice for babies
on phototherapy.
Table 1. Visual Assessment of Neonatal Jaundice (Kramer’s rule)
Head and neck
Upper trunk (above umbilicus)
Lower trunk and thighs
(below umbilicus)
Arms and lower legs
Palms and soles
Area of the Body
Level
Range of Serum Bilirubin
µmol/L
mg/dL
1
2
3
4
5
68 - 133
85 - 204
136 - 272
187 - 306
≥306
4 - 8
5 - 12
8 - 16
11 - 18
≥18
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Figure 1. Visual Assessment of Neonatal Jaundice
(Kramer’s rule)
Source: Kramer LI. Advancement of dermal icterus in the jaundiced newborn. Am J
Dis Child. 1969 Sep;118(3):454-8
• Nurses’ visual assessment of jaundice extent moderately correlates
with TSB and is better in non-black compared to black babies,
although the difference is not significant. [rs=0.55 & 0.45 respectively
(p=0.13)]. However, correlation is weak (rs=0.29) among babies born
before 38 weeks of gestation.32, level III
• Visual assessment is unreliable as a predischarge screening tool to
predict the risk of significant hyperbilirubinaemia.32 - 33, level III However,
babies with complete absence of jaundice before discharge have a
low risk of developing significant hyperbilirubinaemia.32, level III
• Trained primary health care workers in a resource poor setting are
able to identify jaundiced babies with TSB >255 µmol/L (15 mg/dL)
with good sensitivity (83.3%) but poor specificity (50.5%).34, level II-3
• TcB is more accurate than visual assessment in detecting hyperbilubinaemia
in babies born after 34 weeks of gestation.19, level II-2; 35, level III A
combination of TcB and visual assessment improves the accuracy as
compared to visual assessment alone.19, level II-2
1
5
4
4
2
3
5
4
5
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Recommendation 2
• All babies should be visually assessed for jaundice at every
opportunity.
• Transcutaneous Bilirubinometer (TcB) should be used if jaundice is
detected. If TcB levels exceed 200 µmol/L (12 mg/dL), total serum
bilirubin (TSB) should be measured.
• When TcB is not available, TSB should be measured in babies with
jaundice.
• TcB should not be used to monitor bilirubin levels in babies on
phototherapy.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
5. ASSESSMENT COMPONENTS
When a baby presents with NNJ, it is important to identify the risk factors
and severity of hyperbilirubinaemia, to assess the general condition of
the baby and to observe signs of bilirubin toxicity. Proper assessment
is needed in deciding on subsequent management.
i. Excessive weight loss
Weight loss ≥7% of birth weight increases the risk of significant
hyperbilirubinaemia (OR=1.43, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.99).36, level II-2
In exclusively breast-fed babies:
•
weight loss ≥8% at day two of life and >11% at day three of life
predicts subsequent significant hyperbilirubinaemia [OR=1.45
(95% CI 1.06 to 1.97) and OR=2.01 (95% CI 1.16 to 3.46)
respectively].37, level III
•
weight loss ≥7% is a risk factor for developing severe
hyperbilirubinaemia [(TSB >20mg/dL (342 umol/l)] with OR=3.9
(95% CI 1.4 to 10.8).38, level III
Recommendation 3
• The adequacy of breastfeeding, weight and hydration status of all
babies should be assessed during the first week of life.
 Babies with weight loss >7% of birth weight should be referred for
further evaluation and closely monitored for jaundice.
Parameters to be assessed on adequate breastfeeding are shown as below:-
Parameter
Urine output
Appearance and frequency of stools
Baby’s colour, alertness and tone
Weight
Number of feeds in the last 24 hours
Baby’s behaviour during feeds
Sucking pattern during feeds
Length of feed
End of the feed
Baby’s behaviour after feeds
Normal
At least 5 - 6 heavy wet nappies in 24 hours
At least 2 in 24 hours; normal appearance
Normal skin colour, alert, good tone
Weight loss not more than 10% of birth weight
At least 8 - 12 feeds
Generally calm and relaxed
Initial rapid sucks changing to slower sucks
with pauses and soft swallowing
Feeding for 5 - 40 minutes at most feeds
Baby lets go spontaneously, or does so
when breast is gently lifted
Content after most feeds
Assessment of Breastfeeding Adequacy
Source: Breastfeeding assessment form (Internet communication, 2 December 2014 at
http://www.unicef.org.uk/BabyFriendly/Resources/Guidance-for-Health-Professionals/Formsand-checklists/Breastfeeding-assessment-form/)
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
ii. Assessment of ABE
a. Term babies
Serious consequences of NNJ include ABE, choreoathetoid cerebral
palsy, hearing impairment and death.14
BIND score
BIND score, which was first introduced by Johnson et al. in 1999 (as
shown in Table 2) quantifies the severity and progression of ABE.
Table 2. Bilirubin-Induced Neurologic Dysfunction
Adapted: Johnson L, Bhutani VK, Karp K, et al. Clinical report from the pilot USA
Kernicterus Registry (1992 to 2004). J Perinatol. 2009 Feb;29 Suppl 1:S2545
Mental Status
Normal
Sleepy but arousable; decreased feeding
Lethargy, poor suck and/or irritable/jittery with strong suck
Semi-coma, apnoea, unable to feed, seizures, coma
Muscle Tone
Normal
Persistent mild to moderate hypotonia
Mild to moderate hypertonia alternating with hypotonia,
beginning arching of neck and trunk on stimulation
Persistent retrocollis and opisthotonus - bicycling or
twitching of hands and feet
Cry Pattern
Normal
High pitched when aroused
Shrill, difficult to console
Inconsolable crying or cry weak or absent
TOTAL BIND SCORE
Clinical Signs
BIND
Score
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
Date:
Time:
Date:
Time:
Advanced ABE (score 7 - 9): urgent bilirubin reduction intervention is needed to prevent
further brain damage and reduce the severity of sequelae
Moderate ABE (score 4 - 6): urgent bilirubin reduction intervention is likely to reverse this
acute damage
Mild ABE (score 1 - 3): subtle signs of ABE
Note: An abnormal or ‘referred’ Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) is indicative of
moderate ABE. Serial ABR may be used to monitor progression and reversal of acute
auditory damage and could be indicative of the effectiveness of bilirubin reduction
strategy.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
BIND score or assessment of ABE was done in the following studies:
• In the Pilot USA Kernicterus Registry of 125 babies, 8% had subtle
ABE, 20% had moderate ABE and 70% had advanced ABE.39, level III
• In a Canadian study of 258 babies with severe hyperbilirubinaemia
[TSB >425 µmol/L (>25 mg/dL)], 32 babies had neurological
abnormalities, in which six had intermediate or advanced bilirubin
encephalopathy.17, level III
• In a study on term and late preterm babies with severe
hyperbilirubinaemia [TSB >25 mg/dL (428 µmol/L)], pretreatment
BIND score >6 was a good predictor of bilirubin encephalopathy at
the time of death or discharge.7, level III
• In a recent Chinese study of term babies, 12%, 72% and 16% had
subtle, moderate and severe ABE respectively during admission.
The severity of ABE correlated significantly with the peak TSB level
(p=0.03), bilirubin encephalopathy at the time of discharge (p=0.028)
and death (p=0.000).40, level III
The AAP 2004 guidelines recommends immediate ET in any infant who
is jaundiced and manifests the signs of the intermediate to advanced
stages of ABE even if the TSB is falling.12
Recommendation 4
• Bilirubin-Induced Neurologic Dysfunction score may be used in
babies with severe neonatal jaundice to assess the severity and
progression of acute bilirubin encephalopathy.
b. Preterm babies
Acute manifestations of bilirubin toxicity are often subtle and indistinct
in preterm babies. Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) is a useful
method to detect and monitor the progression of ABE in this group of
babies.41 - 43
In a small study of eight preterm babies with athetoid cerebral palsy,
none showed features of classical ABE during the neonatal period.
However, ABR measurements were abnormal in seven of the eight
babies.44, level III
In the pilot USA Kernicterus Registry, symptomatic apnoeic events were
reported in 50% of the late preterm babies with kernicterus.45, level III
Preterm babies with abnormal ABR measurements associated with
hyperbilirubinaemia have more apnoea (p=0.0009), more bradycardia
(p=0.02), require longer continuous positive airway pressure
support (p=0.007) and longer duration of methylxanthine use
(p=0.002).46, level II-2
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
• ABR is a useful method to detect and monitor the progression of ABE
especially in preterm babies.
• Preterm babies with ABE tend to have more frequent apnoea.
iii. Blood tests
a. Yield of tests
There is limited evidence on the role and yield of tests in babies with
NNJ. Clinical expertise is required to guide decision-making in this
area. In a study of babies admitted for phototherapy and received
full laboratory evaluation (complete blood count, blood cultures,
electrolytes, liver function test including total and direct bilirubin, direct
Coombs test and qualitative G6PD activity test), only 11.7% of them
had abnormal results. These were either a positive direct Coombs
test, high reticulocyte count or G6PD deficiency. Therefore, there was
no clinical benefit in conducting a full laboratory evaluation to identify
possible causes of severe hyperbilirubinaemia except in:47, level III
• early onset jaundice (<48 hours from birth) (p<0.001)
• rising TSB despite phototherapy
Recommendation 5
• In babies with severe hyperbilirubinaemia, early-onset neonatal
jaundice (<24 hours) or rapid rise of TSB (>8.5 µmol/L/h or >0.5
mg/dL/h), further laboratory evaluation may be required to ascertain
underlying cause and extent of haemolysis. This may include:
 G6PD testing (if not screened)
 mother’s and baby’s blood groups
 a direct Coombs test
 a full blood count ± peripheral blood picture
 a reticulocyte count
 a septic workup (if infection is suspected)
b. G6PD measurements
Malaysia has a universal newborn G6PD screening programme since
the 1980s. The Beutler’s modified fluorescent spot test (FST) method
is used as a screening method but it detects only cases with G6PD
<30% of normal levels.48 - 49 The mean level of G6PD enzyme activity
of normal babies in Malaysia was quoted as 8.4 IU/g Hb by Boo et al.50
The detection rates for G6PD deficiency with severe hyperbilirubinaemia
(TSB >300 µmol/L or 18 mg/dL) are 13.1% by FST and 19.6% by
enzyme assay (with cut-off level of <8.5 IU/g Hb defined as G6PD
deficiency). In addition, almost 10% of babies with normal FST has low
enzyme level of <8.5 IU/g Hb (false negative). Significant predictors of
severe hyperbilirubinaemia include G6PD enzyme levels of <8.5 IU/g
Hb (OR=5.3, 95% CI 2.4 to 11.4)49, level II-2
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Recommendation 6
• All
babies
should
be
screened
for
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. The results should be reviewed
within 24 hours.
• G6PD enzyme assays may be considered in babies suspected to
have G6PD deficiency but with normal/indeterminate Fluorescent
Spot Test.
c. Bilirubin/albumin ratio (B/A ratio)
Bilirubin in the plasma is bound to the albumin, and the portion of
unbound bilirubin (UB) is presumed to leave the intravascular space
readily and crosses the intact blood-brain barrier. The measurement of
this unbound bilirubin is complex and not available commercially. There
have been studies looking into B/A ratio as a surrogate measurement of
unbound bilirubin (UB).51
The AAP 2004 guidelines states that B/A ratio can be used as an
adjunct to the TSB level in the decision for ET.12 On the contrary,
NICE guidelines 2010 does not recommend the use of B/A ratio in the
management of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia.5
A Dutch multi-centre randomised controlled trial (BARTrial) showed
no difference in the neurodevelopmental outcome at 18 - 24 months
for preterm babies <32 weeks treated according to their B/A ratio in
conjunction with TSB levels when compared to babies treated based
on TSB levels alone.52, level I
In a study of babies >35 weeks gestation, B/A ratio correlated with UB
concentrations <0.6mg/dL (p<0.0001). The B/A ratio was underestimated
when the concentrations were >0.6 mg/dL (the UB phototherapy
threshold for Japan).53, level III
There is not enough evidence to support the use of bilirubin/albumin
ratio in the management of NNJ.
d. Unbound bilirubin (UB) or free bilirubin
Bilirubin-induced neurotoxicity depends on a complex interplay between
the developing brain, UB concentration and duration of CNS exposure.
UB concentration depends on:51, 54
• albumin concentration
• bilirubin production/elimination mismatch
• bilirubin-albumin binding affinity (k)
 this affinity depends on gestation, postnatal age, clinical
condition (acidosis/hypoxia/sepsis) and competing substrate.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
UB concentration is better than TSB in predicting bilirubin-induced
neurotoxicity.
• In both preterm and term babies, UB is a better predictor of ABR
than TSB (OR=3.3, 95% CI 1.8 to 6.1).55, level II-2
• In ELBW babies, UB significantly predicts death and various
neurodevelopmental outcomes in both stable and unstable
infants. However, TSB predicts these outcomes only in unstable
infants.4, level II-2
Currently, the measurement of UB is not commercially available and
the threshold for neurotoxic UB concentration is not known.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
6. INDICATIONS FOR TREATMENT
Guidelines for phototherapy and ET for babies ≥35 weeks gestation are
as shown in Table 3.
Table 3. TSB Levels for Phototherapy and ET in
Babies ≥35 Weeks Gestation
a. Start intensive phototherapy at TSB of 3 mg/dL (51 µmol/L) above
the level for conventional phototherapy or when TSB increasing at
>0.5 mg/dL (8.5 µmol/L) per hour.
b. Risk factors are isoimmune haemolytic disease, G6PD deficiency,
asphyxia and sepsis.
* Jaundice appearing within 24 hours of life is abnormal and needs
further evaluation.
The AAP exchange transfusion guidelines for babies ≥35 weeks
gestation recommend:
ET if baby shows signs of ABE or if TSB ≥5 mg/dL (85 µmol/L)
above the ET levels.
ET if TSB rises to ET levels despite intensive phototherapy in
hospitalised babies.
For readmitted babies without signs of ABE, if the TSB is above the
ET levels, repeat TSB every 2 - 3 hours and consider ET if it remains
above the levels indicated after intensive phototherapy for six hours.
Modified: American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Hyperbilirubinaemia.
Management of hyperbilirubinaemia in the newborn infant 35 or more
weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2004 Jul;114(1):297-316. Erratum in:
Pediatrics. 2004 Oct;114(4):1138)
For babies <35 weeks gestational age, refer to Appendix 3.
Age
LOW RISK
>38 weeks and well
MEDIUM RISK
>38 weeks with risk factors
or
35 - 37 weeks + 6 days and
well
HIGH RISK
35 - 37 weeks + 6 days
with risk factors
Hours
of life
Conventional
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Conventional
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Conventional
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
<24*
24
9 (154)
19
(325)
7 (120)
5 (86)
48
12 (205)
22
(376)
10 (171)
8 (137)
72
15 (257)
24
(410)
12 (205)
10 (171)
96
17 (291)
25
(428)
14 (239)
11 (188)
>96
18 (308)
25
(428)
15 (257)
12 (205)
17 (291)
19 (325)
21 (359)
22.5 (385)
22.5 (385)
15 (257)
17 (291)
18.5 (316)
19 (325)
19 (325)
i.
ii.
iii.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
7. PHOTOTHERAPY
Phototherapy is the mainstay of treatment in NNJ. There are many
types of devices that can be used to provide phototherapy such as
fluorescent tubes, Light Emitting Diode (LED), fibreoptic and halogen
bulbs.
Effective phototherapy consists of:
• blue light range (400 - 500 nm)
• irradiance of minimum of 15 µW/cm²/nm for conventional phototherapy
• irradiance of minimum of 30 µW/cm²/nm for intensive phototherapy
• distance of the light source not exceeding 30 - 50 cm from the baby
i. Type of phototherapy
a. LED phototherapy
In two meta-analyses, phototherapy based on LED and non-LED
light sources showed similar clinical efficacy as measured by duration
of phototherapy and rate of decline of TSB in term and late preterm
babies.56 - 57, level I
In preterm babies, the use of LED has a similar rate of decline but
significantly shorter duration of phototherapy compared with a nonLED light source.57, level I LED phototherapy does not induce significant
alterations on transepidermal water loss and cerebral blood perfusion
when compared to conventional phototherapy.58, level I
No study reported any major complications of LED phototherapy.56, level I
b. Fibreoptic phototherapy
Fibreoptic phototherapy units are less commonly used compared with
conventional/LED phototherapy. Common fibreoptic phototherapy units
used in studies include Biliblanket and Wallaby II.
A Cochrane systematic review showed that:59, level I
• In preterm babies, fibreoptic phototherapy was as efficacious as
conventional phototherapy in terms of duration of phototherapy
and percentage of serum bilirubin change in 24 hours.
• In term babies, fibreoptic phototherapy was efficacious in reducing
serum bilirubin; however its efficacy was less in comparison to
conventional phototherapy.
• A combination of fibreoptic and conventional phototherapy was
more efficacious compared to conventional phototherapy alone in
terms of less ET and less additional phototherapy, although this
was not statistically significant.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
ii. Methods of administration
Various methods of providing phototherapy have been used in order to
maximise the effectiveness of phototherapy especially in babies with
high serum bilirubin.
a. Use of reflecting curtains
White reflecting curtains significantly reduces TSB levels after four
hours of phototherapy and shortens median duration of phototherapy
by 22 hours.60, level I
The use of reflecting curtains shortens the duration of phototherapy and
achieves a faster reduction of TSB, although these were not statistically
significant.61, level I
The effectiveness of reflecting curtains in phototherapy depends on the
material and type of curtain used. However, the use of curtains may
impair observation of the babies.
b. Changing positions during phototherapy
There is no difference in the fall of TSB by changing baby’s position
(supine/prone vs supine alone) while receiving phototherapy.62, level I
In clinical practice, the supine position is preferred because the prone
position is associated with and increased risk of sudden infant death
syndrome.
c. Double vs triple phototherapy
There is no difference in the rate of bilirubin decline and length
of hospital stay between double and triple phototherapy in term
babies.63, level I
Effective phototherapy is achieved with optimal irradiance and
adequately exposed body surface area rather than the number of
phototherapy units.
d. Overhead vs underneath LED phototherapy
Duration of phototherapy is shorter and rate of decrease in TSB is more
rapid in overhead LED compared to underneath LED with no erythema
or any other complications in both groups.64, level II - 1
e. Aggressive vs conservative phototherapy
There is a reduction in neurodevelopment impairment (especially
profound impairment) in aggressive phototherapy on ELBW babies
especially ≥750 g, when babies are started on phototherapy at TSB
85 µmol/L (5 mg/dL) in the first week of life and 120 µmol/L (7 mg/dL)
during the second week of life.65, level I However, there is a need for more
vigilance in babies with birth weight under 750 g as there is a higher
risk of transepidermal water loss.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
f. Prophylactic phototherapy for preventing jaundice
In a Cochrane systematic review, prophylactic phototherapy (i.e.
initiation of phototherapy before TSB reached a pre-specified level)
in preterm and LBW babies reduced ET by 78%, reduced rate of
neurodevelopmental impairment (mainly severe hearing loss and
moderate/severe cerebral palsy) at 18 - 22 months by 15% and had
lower peak TSB during first seven days of life compared to control
group.66, level I
g. Fluid management
Presently, there is no good evidence to advocate extra fluids in the
management of NNJ.
Recommendation 7
• Phototherapy should be commenced when total serum bilirubin
reaches the phototherapy threshold for neonatal jaundice*.
• Irradiance of phototherapy units (non-Light Emitting Diode) should be
regularly checked.
• Overhead phototherapy is preferred to underneath phototherapy.
• Babies should be placed in the supine position with adequate
exposure.
• Phototherapy should be started at a lower threshold in preterm and
low birth weight babies.
• Light Emitting Diode phototherapy is preferred in preterm babies.
*Refer to Chapters on Risk Factors and Indications for Treatment.
Care of babies during phototherapy
• Babies should be regularly monitored for vital signs including
temperature and hydration status.
• Babies should be adequately exposed.
• Babies’ eyes should be covered to prevent retinal damage.
• Breastfeeding should be continued.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
8. EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION
ET is indicated when the TSB is above the recommended levels (refer
to Table 3 and Appendix 3).
ET is efficacious in reducing TSB levels by 45%. Amongst those who
have undergone ET, 93% have TSB levels below 342 µmol/L (20 mg/
dL) after the procedure.67, level III
There are various methods used in performing ET. These include
femoral vein (FV), umbilical vein (UV), umbilical artery/vein (UA/V)
and peripheral artery (radial artery)/peripheral vein. All methods are
comparable in terms of efficacy.68 - 69, level III With regard to safety, ET via
UA/V route have significantly increased incidence of thrombocytopenia
when compared to FV and UV.68, level III
The blood product used most commonly for ET is citrated fresh whole
blood. However, some centres use reconstituted blood products when it
is not available. Both citrated fresh whole blood and reconstituted blood
products are comparable in terms of efficacy and safety.70, level III
Adverse events occur up to 36.7% of patients who have undergone
ET.67, level III; 71 - 72, level III The adverse events include thrombocytopaenia,
hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemia, apnoea, infection, hypoglycaemia,
seizure, catheter malfunction, leg ischaemia, cyanosis, bradycardia,
hypotension, renal failure and necrotising enterocolitis.67, level III; 71 - 73, level III
Mortality has been reported at 2.3%.73, level III The rate has declined
since 1990s. In recent studies where a standardised ET protocol was
adhered to and the procedure attended by experienced personnel, no
mortality attributable to the ET procedure was reported.67, level III;
69, level III; 71 - 73, level III
Recommendation 8
• Exchange transfusion (ET) should be considered when total serum
bilirubin reaches the threshold levels in neonatal jaundice (NNJ).
• ET procedure should follow a standardised protocol and supervised
by experienced personnel. Babies undergoing ET should be closely
monitored.
• Reconstituted blood products may be used if citrated fresh whole
blood is not available for ET in NNJ.
Refer to Appendix 4 on Protocol on Exchange Transfusion.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
9. PHARMACOTHERAPY
There is limited good evidence on pharmacotherapy in NNJ.
i. Clofibrate
Clofibrate, an activator of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors,
is a lipid-lowering drug used in patients with hypercholesterolemia. In
NNJ, its presumed mode of action is by increasing bilirubin conjugation
and secretion.
Clofibrate is efficacious when compared to placebo in unconjugated
neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia in terms of the need for phototherapy
and ET, duration of phototherapy and peak TSB levels. No major sideeffects have been reported.74 - 76, level I
In Malaysia, clofibrate is not registered with the Drug Control Authority.
ii. Immunoglobulin
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) has been used to reduce the rate of
haemolysis in babies with rhesus hemolytic disease and other immune
hemolytic jaundice. It is a competitive inhibitor for antibodies that
causes red cell destruction.
In a meta-analysis of 12 studies, the efficacy of IVIg was inconclusive in
both Rh and ABO haemolytic diseases of the newborn as only studies
with high risk of bias showed benefit. No mortality or adverse reactions
were reported.77, level I
iii. Human albumin
It has been postulated that intravenous (IV) human albumin infusion
may be protective against bilirubin toxicity by providing more binding
sites, thereby reducing the levels of unbound bilirubin. It has also been
hypothesised that vascular bilirubin-albumin binding would cause a
shift of bilirubin from the extravascular to the intravascular compartment
following albumin administration.
In two small studies, babies were administered IV human albumin (20%,
1 g/kg) one hour prior to ET. In the treated group, the mean TSB levels
after ET were significantly lower than the control group. The treated
group required a significantly shorter duration of phototherapy postET.78, level II-1; 79, level I The duration of hospital stay was also significantly
shorter in the treated group.78, level II-1 However, the unbound bilirubin
was not measured in both studies. Human albumin is a pooled blood
product with a risk of blood-borne infection.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
iv. Tin-mesoporphyrin
In a Cochrane systematic review, there was no evidence that
hyperbilirubinaemia can be effectively prevented or treated with
tin-mesoporphyrin, a drug that inhibits bilirubin production through
blockage of heme oxygenase.80, level I
v. Phenobarbitone
In a meta-analysis of three RCTs of moderate quality, phenobarbitone
was efficacious in reducing peak serum bilirubin, duration and need
of phototherapy and need of ET in preterm babies with very low birth
weight. Further studies are warranted to evaluate adverse effects and
neurodevelopmental outcome.81, level I
• Further studies are required before clofibrate or its equivalent can be
recommended for use in NNJ.
• There is no conclusive evidence to support the use of IVIG, human
albumin and phenobarbitone in the management of NNJ.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
10. COMPLEMENTARY/ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE
There is no good quality evidence to support the use of complementary/
alternative medicine in the management of babies with NNJ.
11. MONITORING
This chapter is written based on the Paediatric Protocols for Malaysian
Hospitals (3rd Edition)82, level III and the Integrated Plan for Detection
and Management of Neonatal Jaundice83, level III developed by MoH
Malaysia. The documents were developed via consensus method by
experts in the field.
Home visits by community healthcare providers during the
postnatal period:83, level III
• Home visits should be done for all newborns on day 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8,
10 and 20. Special attention for jaundice must be given on day 2, 3
and 4 of life.
• If jaundice is detected, TSB should be measured and managed
accordingly.
Recommendation 9
• All babies discharged <48 hours after birth should be seen by a
healthcare provider in an ambulatory setting or at home within 24
hours of discharge.
• For babies with severe jaundice admitted for treatment, early followup is needed to detect rebound jaundice after discharge.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
12. IMPACT OF BREASTFEEDING
Breast milk provides the best nutrition for babies and its benefits
extend beyond basic nutrition. World Health Organization recommends
exclusive breastfeeding up to six months of age. There is evidence
that breastfeeding is associated with an increased incidence and
severity of early NNJ. This may be due to inadequate intake as a result
of poor lactation support but the exact mechanism remains unclear.
Further details on this issue are available in ABM Clinical Protocol #
22: Guidelines for Management of Jaundice in the Breastfeeding Infant
Equal to or Greater Than 35 Weeks’ Gestation.84, level III
In the USA Kernicterus Registry (1992 - 2004), lactation failure was
identified in over 90% of babies discharged on exclusive breastfeeding,
with a high incidence of excessive weight loss and dehydration.39, level III.
Breastfeeding is significantly associated with neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia,
1, level II-2; 36, level III; 85, level III; 86, level II-3 greater body weight loss,36, level III;
85, level III; 86, level II-3 higher peak bilirubin level, and longer mean days
of phototherapy and hospitalisation.86, level II-3 It is also associated
with reduced urine and stool output on the second and third day of
life.85, level III; 86, level II-3
In exclusively breastfed babies, those with lower gestational age
and greater weight loss percentage are significantly associated with
hyperbilirubinaemia.37, level III
Recommendation 10
• Breastfeeding, because of its benefits, should be continued in the
jaundiced babies.
• Adequate lactation/breastfeeding support should be provided to all
mothers, particularly those with preterm babies.
• In breastfed babies with jaundice associated with inadequate
intake, excessive weight loss or dehydration, supplementation with
expressed breast milk or formula may be considered.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
13. PREVENTION OF SEVERE NNJ
Late preterm, G6PD deficiency and isoimmune haemolytic disease
(ABO and Rhesus incompatibility) are well known factors for developing
severe NNJ. Phototherapy thresholds are lower for babies with these
factors (refer to Chapter on Phototherapy). Predischarge bilirubin
screening, clinical risk factor scoring, prophylactic phototherapy and
pharmacotherapy are among the strategies studied to prevent severe
NNJ.
Predischarge screening involves performing daily TcB screening until
discharge; this TcB value is referenced against the AAP hour-specific
bilirubin risk-zone nomogram stratified into low-, intermediate- and
high-risk zones (refer to Figure 2). TcB values ≥12 mg/dL (205 μmol/L)
are confirmed with a TSB. Clinical risk factors that have been studied
are gestational age (prematurity), the intent to exclusively breastfeed,
weight loss in the first two days of life and extent of jaundice.11, level II-2
Figure 2. Nomogram for Designation of Risk at ≥36 Weeks’
Gestational Age with Birth Weight ≥2000 g or ≥35 Weeks’
Gestational Age with Birth Weight ≥2500 g
Source: Bhutani VK, Johnson L, Sivieri EM. Predictive ability of a predischarge hourspecific serum bilirubin for subsequent significant hyperbilirubinaemia in
healthy term and near-term newborns. Pediatrics. 1999 Jan;103(1):6-14
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
i. Predischarge bilirubin and clinical risk scoring in both term
and late preterm babies
a. Late preterm babies
• The incidence of hyperbilirubinaemia [TSB ≥ 20mg/dL (342
μmol/L)] is reduced by almost 50% with the implementation of
predischarge screening programme.87, level II-3
• Predischarge screening results in a 0.41% readmission rate for
significant hyperbilirubinaemia, almost half of which did not have
a predischarge bilirubin determination as they were not deemed
sufficiently jaundiced at the time of discharge. The rate for ET is
1:18079.88, level II-3
• The AUC for strategies to assess the risk of significant
hyperbilirubinaemia are 0.91 (95% CI 0.86 to 0.97) for clinical risk
factors, 0.88 (95% CI 0.85 to 0.91) for predischarge bilirubin and
0.96 (95% CI 0.93 to 0.98) for combination of clinical risk factors
and predischarge bilirubin. Predischarge bilirubin and gestational
age are the two most important factors in predicting the risk of
significant hyperbilirubinaemia.11, level II-2
• Predischarge bilirubin in combination with gestational age
gives a higher predictability of risk in developing significant
hyperbilirubinaemia with AUC of 0.90 (95% CI 0.84 to 0.95)
compared to 0.86 (95% CI 0.80 to 0.92) if only predischarge
bilirubin being used.10, level II-2
• Predischarge TSB risk zone gives high predictability of risk in
developing significant hyperbilirubinaemia with area AUC of 0.83
(95% CI 0.80 to 0.86) compared to clinical risk factor score alone
0.71 (95% CI 0.66 to 0.76).89, level II-2
b. Term babies
• The institution of predischarge bilirubin results in significant
reduction of the incidence of bilirubin levels ≥25 mg/dL (425 μmol/L)
by 38% and TSB ≥30.0 mg/dL (513 μmol/L) by 65%. However,
this reduction in severe hyperbilirubinaemia is associated with
a small increase (0.7%) in the use of neonatal phototherapy
(p<0.001).90, level II-3
• Low predischarge bilirubin does not eliminate the risk of
readmission. The low risk group (≤40th percentile) has a 4.2%
readmission rate while intermediate low risk group (41 - 75th
percentile) has a 28% readmission rate. This give a RR for
readmission of 7.62 (95% CI 3.23 to 17.96) for intermediate low
risk group compared to the low risk group.91, level III
ii. Universal predischarge bilirubin screening
• Universal screening for hyperbilirubinaemia reduces readmissions
by 61% (p<0.001).92, level II-3
• The rate of ET after universal screening is 0.12%. Preterm babies
have ten times higher risk of ET compared to term babies. All
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
babies in the high risk zone require ET compared to 28% of
babies in the high intermediate zone.93, level II-2
iii. Prophylactic phototherapy
• Prophylactic phototherapy during the first day of life for babies
with Coombs-positive ABO incompatibility is associated with a
decrease in TSB within the first 48 hours of life (p=0.03) but does
not result in a sustained clinical benefit.94, level I
• Prophylactic phototherapy in preterm and LBW babies reduces
the need for ET, peak TSB and the rate of neurodevelopmental
disability at 18 - 22 months.66, level I
iv. Pharmacotherapy
• Prophylactic oral phenobarbital is not efficacious in reducing the
need for phototherapy in G6PD deficient babies.95, level I
• The effectiveness of IVIg is not conclusive in ABO and Rh
haemolytic diseases of newborn.77, level I
v. Monitoring in G6PD deficiency
• Most G6PD deficient babies with birth weight ≥2500 g (76%)
would require phototherapy by day four.96, level II-2
 Those with TSB <160 μmol/L (9 mg/dL), on day four of life,
with a rise of <30 μmol/L/day (2 mg/dL/day), are unlikely to
develop significant hyperbilirubinaemia (TSB >200 μmol/L
or 12 mg/dL) requiring phototherapy [NPV of 94.1% (95% CI
83.4 to 97.9)].
 A TSB ≥160 μmol/L (9 mg/dL) on day four predicts significant
hyperbilirubinaemia [PPV of 82.1% (95% CI 70.2 to 90.4)].
Recommendation 11
• Predischarge screening should be used to prevent severe neonatal
jaundice (NNJ) in late preterm and term babies.
 Clinical risk factor assessment or/and predischarge bilirubin levels
[transcutaneous bilirubin or total serum bilirubin (TSB)] can be
used as predischarge screening.
• Universal predischarge bilirubin screening may be considered for all
babies if resources are available.
• All G6PD deficient babies should be admitted and monitored for
NNJ during the first five days of life. A TSB should be done if there
is clinical jaundice.
• Term G6PD deficient babies with birth weights >2500 g may be
discharged earlier on day four of life if the TSB is <160 μmol/L (9
mg/dL), and followed-up closely.
Refer to Appendix 5 on Clinical risk factors and Algorithm for
Predischarge Screening.
Refer to Appendix 6 on Information on Prevention of NNJ.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
14. REFERRAL
This chapter is written based on Paediatric Protocols for Malaysian
Hospitals (3rd Edition)82, level III and Integrated Plan for Detection and
Management of Neonatal Jaundice83, level III developed by MoH Malaysia.
The documents were developed via consensus method by experts in
the field. Extrapolation from evidence in other chapters has also been
done.
Recommendation 12
• Babies should be referred to secondary/tertiary care when they
present with any of the following:-
 Onset of jaundice within 24 hours of life
 Rapidly rising total serum bilirubin of greater than 6 mg/dL/day
(103 µmol/L/day)
 Clinical jaundice below umbilicus, corresponding to total serum
bilirubin of 12 - 15 mg/dL (205 - 257 µmol/L)
 Clinical jaundice till the soles of the feet (urgent referral for
possibility of exchange transfusion)
 G6PD deficiency (if not previously hospitalised)
 Clinical symptoms/signs suggestive of sepsis
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
15. FOLLOW-UP
The estimated incidence of kernicterus among term and late preterm
neonates in North America and Europe is 0.4 to 2.7/100,000 live births
while the estimate for ABE is 0.9 to10/100,000 live births.18, level III;
39, level III; 97 - 98, level III
A systematic review revealed that the incidence of hearing loss ranged
from 13.2% to 83.3% at initial testing and 6.7% to 14.3% at three
months’ follow-up. The occurrence of ABR abnormalities was high at
TSB levels >20 mg/dL (342 μmol/L) but unpredictable at lower levels
of TSB. Greater hearing abnormalities were seen with rising TSB
levels.99, level II-2
Using the parent-completed Ages and Stages Questionnaire, there is
no association between non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia and overall
development in 1- to 5-year-old children who in the neonatal period
had TSB >25 mg/dL (428 μmol/L) with no or only minor neurologic
symptoms.100, level Il-2
Non-haemolytic neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia is not associated with
increased risk of cognitive or neuropsychiatric disability in young males
at the age of 18 - 20 years.101, level II-2
Term babies with haemolytic (ABO or Rh incompatibility or G6PD
deficiency) and non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia who are treated
aggressively with phototherapy (at TSB >15 mg/dL or 257 μmol/L)
or ET (at TSB >20mg/dL or 342 μmol/L) do not show any differences
in ABR and reversible mild motor delay/hypotonia at three months
old.102, level II-2
In ELBW babies, higher peak serum bilirubin levels in the first two
weeks of life is associated with risk of:103, level II-2
• death or neurodevelopment impairment (OR=1.07, 95% CI 1.03 to
1.11)
• hearing impairment (OR=1.13, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.30)
• lower psychomotor development index (OR=1.05, 95% CI 1.00 to
1.12)
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
Recommendation 13
• Babies with acute bilirubin encephalopathy should have long-term
follow-up to monitor for neurodevelopmental sequelae.
• Term and late preterm babies with TSB >20 mg/dL (342 μmol/L) or
exchange transfusions should have Auditory Brainstem Response
(ABR) testing done within the first three months of life. If the ABR is
abnormal, neurodevelopmental follow-up should be continued.
• Healthy term and late preterm babies with non-haemolytic
hyperbilirubinaemia and TSB <25 mg/dL (428 μmol/L) may be
followed-up at the primary care level.
• Preterm babies with jaundice should be followed-up for
neurodevelopmental sequelae as per follow-up plans for all preterm
babies.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
16. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of NNJ at all healthcare
levels in Malaysia by using an evidence-based CPG. This aims to
prevent long-term morbidity and mortality.
16.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:-
1. wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies
and softcopies)
2. regular continuous medical education on NNJ to healthcare
providers
3. reporting of cases with severe NNJ [TSB ≥20 mg/dL (342 µmol/L)]
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG are:-
1. poor assessment of NNJ and limited knowledge on its management
2. insufficient resources in the management of NNJ
3. variation in treatment practice and preferences
16.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong a commitment to:-
1. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
via printed and electronic copies.
2. strengthen training (with adequate funding) of healthcare providers
by regular seminars or workshops to ensure information is up-todate
3. ensure availability of equipment for measuring bilirubin levels and
managing NNJ in both health clinics and hospitals
4. ensure empowerment of caregivers via education materials
5. improve the current reporting system to include bilirubin
encephalopathy and other related parameters
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed
as clinical audit indicator for quality management:-
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH. They are such a Quick Reference and a Training
Module.
Incidence of
severe
NNJ*
=
X 10,000
Total number of live births in the same period
Number of babies with severe NNJ* in a month
*Severe NNJ is defined as TSB ≥20 mg/dL or ≥342 µmol/L
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Huang MS, Lin MC, Chen HH, et al. Risk factor analysis for late-onset neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
in Taiwanese infants. Pediatr Neonatol 2009 Dec;50(6):261-265.
2.
Jangaard KA, Fell DB, Dodds L, et al. Outcomes in a population of healthy term and near-term
infants with serum bilirubin levels of >or=325 micromol/L (>or=19 mg/dL) who were born in Nova
Scotia, Canada, between 1994 and 2000. Pediatrics. 2008 Jul;122(1):119-124.
3.
Kuzniewicz MW, Escobar GJ, Wi S, et al. Risk factors for severe hyperbilirubinemia among infants
with borderline bilirubin levels: a nested case-control study. J Pediatr. 2008 Aug;153(2):234-240.
4.
Oh W, Stevenson DK, Tyson JE, et al. Influence of clinical status on the association between
plasma total and unbound bilirubin and death or adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes in
extremely low birth weight infants. Acta Paediatr. 2010 May;99(5):673-678.
5.
National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health. Neonatal jaundice. London:
NCC-WCH; 2010.
6.
Maisels MJ, Bhutani VK, Bogen D, et al. Hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant > or =35
weeks’ gestation: an update with clarifications. Pediatrics. 2009 Oct;124(4 ):1193-1198.
7.
Gamaleldin R, Iskander I, Seoud I, et al. Risk factors for neurotoxicity in newborns with severe
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics. 2011 Oct;128(4):e925-931.
8.
Weng YH, Chiu YW, Cheng SW, et al. Risk assessment for adverse outcome in term and late
preterm neonates with bilirubin values of 20 mg/dL or more. Am J Perinatol. 2011 May;28(5):405412.
9.
Yang WC, Zhao LL, Li YC, et al. Bodyweight loss in predicting neonatal hyperbilirubinemia 72
hours after birth in term newborn infants. BMC Pediatr. 2013 Sep;21(13):145.
10.
Gonçalves A, Costa S, Lopes A, et al. Prospective validation of a novel strategy for assessing
risk of significant hyperbilirubinemia. Pediatrics. 2011 Jan;127(1):e126-131.
11.
Keren R, Luan X, Friedman S, et al. A comparison of alternative risk-assessment strategies for
predicting significant neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in term and near-term infants. Pediatrics. 2008
Jan;121(1):e170-179.
12.
American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Hyperbilirubinemia. Management of
hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2004
Jul;114(1):297-316.
13.
Boo NY, Gan CY, Gian YW, et al. Malaysian mothers’ knowledge & practices on care of neonatal
jaundice. Med J Malaysia. 2011 Aug;66(3):239-243.
14.
Bhutani VK, Stevenson DK. The need for technologies to prevent bilirubin-induced neurologic
dysfunction syndrome. Semin Perinatol. 2011 Jun;35(3):97-100.
15.
Maisels MJ, Newman TB. Prevention, screening and postnatal management of neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia. In: Stevenson DK, Maisels MJ, Watchko JF, Eds. Care of the jaundiced
neonate. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012.
16.
Ebbesen F, Bjerre JV, Vandborg PK. Relation between serum bilirubin levels ≥450 μmol/L and
bilirubin encephalopathy; a Danish population-based study. Acta Paediatr. 2012 Apr;101(4):384389.
17.
Sgro M, Campbell D, Barozzino T, et al. Acute neurological findings in a national cohort of
neonates with severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. J Perinatol. 2011 Jun;31(6):392-396.
18.
Manning D, Todd P, Maxwell M, et al. Prospective surveillance study of severe hyperbilirubinaemia
in the newborn in the UK and Ireland. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2007 Sep;92(5):F342-346.
19.
Institute of Health Economics. Transcutaneous Bilirubinometry for the Screening of
Hyperbilirubinemia in Neonates ≥35 Weeks’ Gestation. Edmonton AB: Institute of Health
Economics; 2013.
20.
Nagar G, Vandermeer B, Campbell S, et al. Reliability of transcutaneous bilirubin devices in
preterm infants: a systematic review. Pediatrics. 2013 Nov;132(5):871-881.
21.
Kitsommart R, Pornladnun P, Chomchai C, et al. Accuracy and precision of transcutaneous
bilirubinometry in postdischarge Asian neonates. Eur J Pediatr. 2013 Jun;172(6):781-786.
22.
Schmidt ET, Wheeler CA, Jackson GL, et al. Evaluation of transcutaneous bilirubinometry in
preterm neonates. J Perinatol. 2009 Aug;29(8):564-569.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
23.
Ahmed M, Mostafa S, Fisher G, et al. Comparison between transcutaneous bilirubinometry and
total serum bilirubin measurements in preterm infants <35 weeks gestation. Ann Clin Biochem.
2010 Jan;47(Pt 1):72-77.
24.
Karon BS, Wickremasinghe AC, Lo SF, et al. BiliChek transcutaneous bilirubin meter
overestimates serum bilirubin as measured by the Doumas reference method. Clin Biochem.
2010 Aug;43(12):1009-1012.
25.
Holland L, Blick K. Implementing and validating transcutaneous bilirubinometry for neonates. Am
J Clin Pathol. 2009 Oct;132(4):555-561.
26.
Grohmann K, Roser M, Rolinski B, et al. Bilirubin measurement for neonates: comparison of 9
frequently used methods. Pediatrics. 2006 Apr;117(4):1174-1183.
27.
Qualter YM, Allen NM, Corcoran JD, et al. Transcutaneous bilirubin-comparing the accuracy
of BiliChek® and JM 103® in a regional postnatal unit. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011
Feb;24(2):267-270.
28.
Romagnoli C, Zecca E, Catenazzi P, et al. Transcutaneous bilirubin measurement: comparison
of Respironics BiliCheck and JM-103 in a normal newborn population. Clin Biochem. 2012
Jun;45(9):659-662.
29.
Fonseca R, Kyralessa R, Malloy M, et al. Covered skin transcutaneous bilirubin estimation is
comparable with serum bilirubin during and after phototherapy. J Perinatol. 2012 Feb;32(2):129131.
30.
Tan KL, Dong F. Transcutaneous bilirubinometry during and after phototherapy. Acta Paediatr.
2003;92(3):327-331.
31.
Ozkan H, Oren H, Duman N, et al. Dermal bilirubin kinetics during phototherapy in term babies.
Acta Paediatr. 2003 May;92(5):577-581.
32.
Keren R, Tremont K, Luan X, et al. Visual assessment of jaundice in term and late preterm
infants. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2009 Sep;94(5):F317-322.
33.
Riskin A, Tamir A, Kugelman A, et al. Is visual assessment of jaundice reliable as a screening
tool to detect significant neonatal hyperbilirubinemia? J Pediatr. 2008 Jun;152(6):782-787, 787.
e781-782.
34.
Hatzenbuehler L, Zaidi AK, Sundar S, et al. Validity of neonatal jaundice evaluation by primary
health-care workers and physicians in Karachi, Pakistan. J Perinatol. 2010 Sep;30(9):616-621.
35.
Szabo P, Wolf M, Bucher HU, et al. Assessment of jaundice in preterm neonates: comparison
between clinical assessment, two transcutaneous bilirubinometers and serum bilirubin values.
Acta Paediatr. 2004 Nov;93(11):1491-1495.
36.
Huang A, Tai BC, Wong LY, et al. Differential risk for early breastfeeding jaundice in a multiethnic Asian cohort. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2009 Mar;38(3):217-224.
37.
Chang RJ, Chou HC, Chang YH, et al. Weight loss percentage prediction of subsequent neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia in exclusively breastfed neonates. Pediatr Neonatol. 2012 Feb;53(1):41-44.
38.
Salas AA, Salazar J, Burgoa CV, et al. Significant weight loss in breastfed term infants readmitted
for hyperbilirubinemia. BMC Pediatr. 2009 Dec;31(9):82.
39.
Johnson L, Bhutani VK, Karp K, et al. Clinical report from the pilot USA Kernicterus Registry
(1992 to 2004). J Perinatol. 2009 Feb;29 Suppl 1:S25-45.
40.
Bao Y, Chen XY, Shi LP, et al. Clinical features of 116 near term and term infants with Acute
Birubin Encephalopathy in Eastern China. HK J Paediatr. 2013;18:82-88.
41.
Amin SB. Clinical assessment of bilirubin-induced neurotoxicity in premature infants. Semin
Perinatol. 2004 Oct;28(5):340-347.
42.
Amin SB, Bhutani VK, JF W. Apnea in acute bilirubin encephalopathy. Semin Perinatol. 2014
Nov;38(7):407-411.
43.
Bhutani VK, Wong RJ. Bilirubin neurotoxicity in preterm infants: risk and prevention. J Clin
Neonatol. 2013 Apr;2(2):61-69.
44.
Okumura A, Kidokoro H, Shoji H, et al. Kernicterus in preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2009
Jun;123(6):e1052-1058.
45.
Johnson L, Brown AK, Bhutani V. BIND - A clinical score for bilirubin induced neurologic
dysfunction in newborns. Pediatrics 1999;104:Supplement 4 733-761.
46.
Amin SB, Charafeddine L, R G. Transient bilirubin encephalopathy and apnea of prematurity in
28 to 32 weeks gestational age infants. J Perinatol. 2005 Jun;25(6):386-390.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
47.
Besser I, Perry ZH, Mesner O, et al. Yield of recommended blood tests for neonates requiring
phototherapy for hyperbilirubinemia. Isr Med Assoc J. 2010 Apr;12(4):220-224.
48.
Kaplan M, Hammerman C. Neonatal screening for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency: biochemical versus genetic technologies. Semin Perinatol. 2011 Jun;35(3):155-161.
49.
Wang FL, Boo NY, Ainoon O, et al. Comparison of detection of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency using fluorescent spot test, enzyme assay and molecular method for
prediction of severe neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. Singapore Med J. 2009 Jan;50(1):62-67.
50.
Boo NY, Ainoon BO, Ooi LH, et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme activity
of normal term Malaysian neonates of different ethnic origins. J Paediatr Child Health. 1994
Jun;30(3):273-274.
51.
Watchko JF, Tiribelli C. Bilirubin-induced neurologic damage--mechanisms and management
approaches. N Engl J Med. 2013 Nov;369(21):2021-2030.
52.
Hulzebos CV, Dijk PH, van Imhoff DE, et al. The bilirubin albumin ratio in the management of
hyperbilirubinemia in preterm infants to improve neurodevelopmental outcome: a randomized
controlled trial--BARTrial. PLoS One. 2014 Jun;9(6):e99466.
53.
Sato Y, Morioka I, Miwa A, et al. Is bilirubin/albumin ratio correlated with unbound bilirubin
concentration? Pediatr Int. 2012 Feb;54(1):81-85.
54.
Ahlfors CE, Wennberg RP, Ostrow JD, et al. Unbound (free) bilirubin: improving the paradigm for
evaluating neonatal jaundice. Clin Chem. 2009 Jul;55(7):1288-1299.
55.
Ahlfors CE, Amin SB, Parker AE. Unbound bilirubin predicts abnormal automated auditory
brainstem response in a diverse newborn population. J Perinatol. 2009 Apr;29(4):305-309.
56.
Tridente A, De Luca D. Efficacy of light-emitting diode versus other light sources for treatment
of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Paediatr. 2012
May;101(5):458-465.
57.
Kumar P, Chawla D, Deorari A. Light-emitting diode phototherapy for unconjugated
hyperbilirubinaemia in neonates. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011;Issue 12.
Art. No.: CD007969.
58.
Bertini G, Perugi S, Elia S, et al. Transepidermal water loss and cerebral hemodynamics in
preterm infants: conventional versus LED phototherapy. Eur J Pediatr. 2008 Jan;167(1):37-42.
59.
Mills JF, Tudehope D. Fibreoptic phototherapy for neonatal jaundice. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2001;Issue 1. Art. No.: CD002060.
60.
Djokomuljanto S, Quah BS, Surini Y, et al. Efficacy of phototherapy for neonatal jaundice is
increased by the use of low-cost white reflecting curtains. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2006
Nov;91(6):F439-442.
61.
Sivanandan S, Chawla D, Misra S, et al. Effect of sling application on efficacy of phototherapy in
healthy term neonates with nonhemolytic jaundice: a randomized ontrolled trial. Indian Pediatr.
2009 Jan;46(1):23-28.
62.
Donneborg ML, Knudsen KB, Ebbesen F. Effect of infants’ position on serum bilirubin level
during conventional phototherapy. Acta Paediatr. 2010 Aug;99(8):1131-1134.
63.
Naderi S, Safdarian F, Mazloomi D, et al. Efficacy of double and triple phototherapy in term
newborns with hyperbilirubinemia: the first clinical trial. Pediatr Neonatol. 2009 Dec;50(6):266269.
64.
Tayman C, Tatli MM, Aydemir S, et al. Overhead is superior to underneath light-emitting diode
phototherapy in the treatment of neonatal jaundice: a comparative study. J Paediatr Child Health.
2010 May;46(5):234-237.
65.
Morris BH, Oh W, Tyson JE, et al. Aggressive vs. conservative phototherapy for infants with
extremely low birth weight. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct;359(18):1885-1896.
66.
Okwundu CI, Okoromah CAN, Shah PS. Prophylactic phototherapy for preventing jaundice in
preterm or low birth weight infants. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012;Issue 1.
Art. No.: CD007966.
67.
Salas AA, Mazzi E. Exchange transfusion in infants with extreme hyperbilirubinemia: an
experience from a developing country. Acta Paediatr. 2008 Jun;97(6):754-758.
68.
Weng YH, Chiu YW. Comparison of efficacy and safety of exchange transfusion through different
catheterizations: Femoral vein versus umbilical vein versus umbilical artery/vein. Pediatr Crit
Care Med. 2011 Jan;12(1):61-64.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
69.
Chen HN, Lee ML, Tsao LY. Exchange transfusion using peripheral vessels is safe and effective
in newborn infants. Pediatrics. 2008 Oct;122(4):e905-910.
70.
Gharehbaghi MM, Hosseinpour SS. Exchange transfusion in neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia:
a comparison between citrated whole blood and reconstituted blood. Singapore Med J. 2010
Aug;51(8):641-644.
71.
Davutoğlu M, Garipardiç M, Güler E, et al. The etiology of severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and
complications of exchange transfusion. Turk J Pediatr. 2010 Mar-Apr;52(2):163-166.
72.
Hosseinpour Sakha S, Gharehbaghi MM. Exchange transfusion in severe hyperbilirubinemia: an
experience in northwest Iran. Turk J Pediatr. 2010 Jul-Aug;52(4):367-371.
73.
Steiner LA, Bizzarro MJ, Ehrenkranz RA, et al. A decline in the frequency of neonatal exchange
transfusions and its effect on exchange-related morbidity and mortality. Pediatrics. 2007
Jul;120(1):27-32.
74.
Hamidi M, Zamanzad B, Mesripour A. Comparing the effect of clofibrate and phenobarbital on the
newborns with hyperbilirubinemia. EXCLI Journal. 2013;12:75-78.
75.
Xiong T, Chen D, Duan Z, et al. Clofibrate for unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in neonates: a
systematic review. Indian Pediatr. 2012 Jan;49(1):35-41.
76.
Ashkan MM, Narges P. The effect of low and moderate doses of clofibrate on serum bilirubin
level in jaundiced term neonates. Paediatric and Perinatal Drug Therapy. 2007;8(2):51-54.
77.
Louis D, More K, Oberoi S, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin in isoimmune haemolytic disease
of newborn: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed.
2014 Jul;99(4):F325-331.
78.
Ismael AS, Alrabaty AA. Role of Intravenous Human Albumin in Management of Neonatal
Hyperbilirubinemia. JSMC. 2013;3(1).
79.
Shahian M, Moslehi MA. Effect of albumin administration prior to exchange transfusion in
term neonates with hyperbilirubinemia-a randomized controlled trial. Indian Pediatr. 2010
Mar;47(3):241-244.
80.
Suresh G, Martin CL, Soll R. Metalloporphyrins for treatment of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia
in neonates. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2003;Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004207.
81.
Chawla D, Parmar V. Phenobarbitone for prevention and treatment of unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia in preterm neonates: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Indian Pediatr.
2010 May;47(5):401-407.
82.
Hussain Imam MI, Ng HP, Thomas T, et al. Malaysian Paediatric Protocol for Malaysian Hospitals
3rd Edition. Putrajaya: MoH; c2012.
83.
Division of Family Health Development, Ministry of Health. Integrated Plan for Detection and
Management of Neonatal Jaundice. Putrajaya: MoH; 2009.
84.
Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee. ABM clinical protocol #22: guidelines
for management of jaundice in the breastfeeding infant equal to or greater than 35 weeks’
gestation. Breastfeed Med. 2010 Apr;5(2):87-93.
85.
Chen CF, Hsu MC, Shen CH, et al. Influence of breast-feeding on weight loss, jaundice, and
waste elimination in neonates. Pediatr Neonatol. 2011 Apr;52(2):85-92.
86.
Lin YY, Tsao PN, Hsieh WS, et al. The Impact of Breast-Feeding on Early Neonatal Jaundice.
Clinical Neonatology. 2008;15:31-35.
87.
Eggert LD, Wiedmeier SE, Wilson J, et al. The effect of instituting a prehospital-discharge
newborn bilirubin screening program in an 18-hospital health system. Pediatrics. 2006
May;117(5):e855-862.
88.
Kaplan M, Bromiker R, Schimmel MS, et al. Evaluation of discharge management in the
prediction of hyperbilirubinemia: the Jerusalem experience. J Pediatr. 2007 Apr;150(4):412-417.
89.
Keren R, Bhutani VK, Luan X, et al. Identifying newborns at risk of significant hyperbilirubinaemia:
a comparison of two recommended approaches. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2005
Apr;90(4):415-421.
90.
Mah MP, Clark SL, Akhigbe E, et al. Reduction of severe hyperbilirubinemia after institution of
predischarge bilirubin screening. Pediatrics. 2010 May;125(5):e1143-1148.
91.
Bromiker R, Bin-Nun A, Schimmel MS, et al. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in the low-intermediaterisk category on the bilirubin nomogram. Pediatrics. 2012 Sep;130(3):e470-475.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
92.
Alkalay AL, Bresee CJ, Simmons CF. Decreased neonatal jaundice readmission rate after
implementing hyperbilirubinemia guidelines and universal screening for bilirubin. Clin Pediatr
(Phila). 2010 Sep;49(9):830-833.
93.
Flaherman VJ, Kuzniewicz MW, Escobar GJ, et al. Total serum bilirubin exceeding exchange
transfusion thresholds in the setting of universal screening. J Pediatr. 2012 May;160(5):796-800.
e791.
94.
Yaseen H, Khalaf M, Rashid N, et al. Does prophylactic phototherapy prevent hyperbilirubinemia
in neonates with ABO incompatibility and positive Coombs’ test? J Perinatol. 2005 Sep;25(9):590594.
95.
Murki S, Dutta S, Narang A, et al. A randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
prophylactic oral phenobarbital to reduce the need for phototherapy in G6PD-deficient neonates.
J Perinatol. 2005 May;25(5):325-330.
96.
Shah VA, Yeo CL. Identifying risk of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and early discharge for glucose6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient newborns in Singapore. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2007
Dec;36(12):1003-1009.
97.
Sgro M, Campbell DM, Kandasamy S, et al. Incidence of chronic bilirubin encephalopathy in
Canada, 2007-2008. Pediatrics. 2012 Oct;130(4):e886-890.
98.
Bhutani VK, Johnson LH, Jeffrey Maisels M, et al. Kernicterus: epidemiological strategies for its
prevention through systems-based approaches. J Perinatol. 2004 Oct;24(10):650-662.
99.
Akinpelu OV, Waissbluth S, Daniel SJ. Auditory risk of hyperbilirubinemia in term newborns: a
systematic review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Jun;77(6):898-905.
100. Vandborg PK, Hansen BM, Greisen G, et al. Follow-up of neonates with total serum bilirubin
levels ≥ 25 mg/dL: a Danish population-based study. Pediatrics. 2012 Jul;130(1):61-66.
101. Ebbesen F, Ehrenstein V, Traeger M, et al. Neonatal non-hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia: a
prevalence study of adult neuropsychiatric disability and cognitive function in 463 male Danish
conscripts. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2010 Aug;95(8):583-587.
102. Chen WX, Wong VC, Wong KY. Neurodevelopmental outcome of severe neonatal hemolytic
hyperbilirubinemia. J Child Neurol. 2006 Jun;21(6):474-479.
103. Oh W, Tyson JE, Fanaroff AA, et al. Association between peak serum bilirubin and
neurodevelopmental outcomes in extremely low birth weight infants. Pediatrics. 2003
Oct;112(4):773-779.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLES OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination, search was limit to English, human and 2001 to current:-
A. Phototherapy
1. Jaundice, Neonatal/
2. Hyperbilirubinemia, Neonatal/
3. (jaundice adj1 neonat*).tw.
4. (jaundice adj1 newborn*).tw.
5. (hyperbilirubin* adj1 neonat*).tw.
6. (hyperbilirubin* adj1 newborn*).tw.
7. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8. Phototherapy/
9. (Therap* adj1 light).tw.
10. Phototherap*.tw.
11. Light*.tw.
12. 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
13. 7 and 12
14. Limit 13
B. Exchange Transfusion
1. Jaundice, Neonatal/
2. Hyperbilirubinemia, Neonatal/
3. (jaundice adj1 neonat*).tw.
4. (jaundice adj1 newborn*).tw.
5. (hyperbilirubin* adj1 neonat*).tw.
6. (hyperbilirubin* adj1 newborn*).tw.
7. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8. Exchange Transfusion, Whole Blood/
9. (Exchange adj1 transfus*).tw.
10. Exchange transfus* whole blood.tw.
11. 8 or 9 or 10
12. 7 and 11
13. Limit 12
C. Pharmacotherapy
1. Jaundice, Neonatal/
2. Hyperbilirubinemia, Neonatal/
3. (jaundice adj1 neonat*).tw.
4. (jaundice adj1 newborn*).tw.
5. (hyperbilirubin* adj1 neonat*).tw.
6. (hyperbilirubin* adj1 newborn*).tw.
7. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8. Drug Therapy/
9. (drug adj1 therap*).tw.
10. pharmacotherap*.tw.
11. Clofibrate/
12. clofibrate.tw.
13. (chlorophenoxyisobutyrate adj1
ethyl).tw.
14. Immunoglobulins/
15. immunoglobulin*.tw.
16. (globulins adj1 immune).tw.
17. Albumins/
18. albumins.tw.
19. Metalloporphyrins/
20. metalloporphyrins.tw.
21. 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14
or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20
22. 7 and 21
23. Limit 22
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the risk factors for NNJ (including kernicterus)?
2. What is the relationship between bilirubin level, acute bilirubin
encephalopathy and kernicterus?
3. What is the accuracy and reliability of various methods of detecting
and assessing the severity of NNJ?
4. What should be included in the assessment of NNJ?
5. What are the indications for starting treatment in NNJ?
6. Is phototherapy effective and safe in NNJ?
7. Is exchange transfusion effective and safe in NNJ?
8. How to monitor babies with NNJ?
9. Is pharmacotherapy effective and safe in NNJ?
10. Is complementary/alternative medicine effective and safe in NNJ?
11. What is the impact of breastfeeding in early NNJ?
12. What are the effective and safe measures for preventing severe
NNJ?
*What information and support should be given to parents/carers of
babies with NNJ?
13. When should babies with NNJ be referred to secondary care?
14. How should babies with severe NNJ be followed-up?
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 3
TOTAL SERUM BILIRUBIN LEVELS FOR PHOTOTHERAPY AND
EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION IN
BABIES 23 - 34 WEEKS GESTATION
Source: National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health.
Neonatal jaundice. London: NCC-WCH; 2010) for recommended levels of
phototherapy and ET
*Jaundice appearing within 24 hours of life is abnormal & needs further evaluation.
Age
23 weeks
24 weeks
25 weeks
Hours of
life
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
<24*
24
48
72
96
4.1 (70)
5.9 (100)
7.6 (130)
7.6 (130)
7.6 (130)
10.5 (180)
13.5 (230)
13.5 (230)
4.1 (70)
6.5 (110)
8.2 (140)
8.2 (140)
7.9 (135)
10.9 (185)
14.0 (240)
14.0 (240)
4.7 (80)
6.5 (110)
8.8 (150)
8.8 (150)
8.2 (140)
11.1 (190)
14.6 (250)
14.6 (250)
Age
26 weeks
27 weeks
28 weeks
Hours of
life
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
<24*
24
48
72
96
4.7 (80)
7.0 (120)
9.4 (160)
9.4 (160)
8.2 (140)
11.7 (200)
15.2 (260)
15.2 (260)
4.7 (80)
7.6 (130)
10.0 (170)
10.0 (170)
8.2 (140)
12.0 (205)
15.8 (270)
15.8 (270)
5.3 (90)
7.6 (130)
10.5 (180)
10.5 (180)
8.8 (150)
12.3 (210)
16.4 (280)
16.4 (280)
Age
29 weeks
30 weeks
31 weeks
Hours of
life
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
<24*
24
48
72
96
5.3 (90)
8.2 (140)
11.1 (190)
11.1 (190)
8.8 (150)
12.9 (220)
17.0 (290)
17.0 (290)
5.6 (95)
8.5 (145)
11.7 (200)
11.7 (200)
8.8 (150)
12.9 (220)
17.5 (300)
17.5 (300)
5.9 (100)
9.1 (155)
12.3 (210)
12.3 (210)
9.1 (155)
13.5 (230)
18.1 (310)
18.1 (310)
Age
32 weeks
33 weeks
34 weeks
Hours of
life
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
Phototherapy -
TSB in mg/dL
(µmol/L)
ET -
TSB in
mg/dL
(µmol/L)
<24*
24
48
72
96
5.9 (100)
9.4 (160)
12.9 (220)
12.9 (220)
9.4 (160)
14.0 (240)
18.7 (320)
18.7 (320)
5.9 (100)
10.0 (170)
13.5 (230)
13.5 (230)
9.4 (160)
14.3 (245)
19.3 (330)
19.3 (330)
6.5 (110)
10.0 (170)
14.6 (240)
14.6 (240)
10.0 (170)
14.6 (250)
20.0 (340)
20.0 (340)
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 4
PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION
ET should preferably be done in Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) or
in a place where adequate resuscitation equipment is available. Babies
should be placed in an open bed radiant warmer where possible.
i. Preparation of Baby
• Obtain written informed consent from parent/caregiver.
• Ensure resuscitation equipment and medications are available.
• Stabilise and maintain temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure,
oxygen saturation and respiration.
• Obtain peripheral venous access for maintenance fluids.
• Apply gentle restraint and nurse in comfortable position.
• Continue feeding, omit only the last feed before ET. If less than
four hours from last feed, empty gastric contents by orogastric tube
before ET.
The procedure should be performed under aseptic technique using
gloves, gown and mask.
ii. Type of Blood to be Used
• Rh isoimmunisation: ABO compatible, Rh negative blood
• Other conditions: Cross-match with baby’s and mother’s blood
• In emergencies if blood type unknown: ‘O’ Rh negative blood
iii. Pre-ET Blood Investigations
• Full blood count including differential
• Bilirubin (total, direct and indirect) level
• Blood culture and sensitivity via peripheral venous blood
• Others as indicated
iv. Procedure for ET
• Volume to be exchanged is two times the baby’s total blood volume
(2 x 80 mls/kg).
• Use fresh whole blood <5 days old (preferably irradiated) or
reconstituted packed red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma in a
ratio of 3:1.
• Take baseline observations (either via monitor or manually) and
record down on the Neonatal Exchange Blood Transfusion Sheet.
The following observations are recorded every 15 minutes:
• Heart rate
• Blood pressure
• Respiratory rate
• Oxygen saturation
• Skin temperature
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
v. Methods of ET
• One Catheter Push-pull Technique – Umbilical Venous Catheter
(Refer to Malaysian Paediatric Protocol 3rd Edition for details)
• Two Catheter Push-pull Technique – Isovolumetric or Continuous
Technique
In
Out
Umbilical vein
Umbilical artery
Peripheral vein
Peripheral artery
Peripheral vein
Umbilical artery
vi. Post-ET Management
• Maintain intensive phototherapy.
• Monitor vital signs: hourly for 4 - 6 hours and 4 hourly subsequently.
• Monitor capillary blood sugar: hourly for 2 hours following ET.
• Check serum bilirubin: 4 - 6 hours after ET.
• Maintain strict input and output record.
• Monitor appearance of abdomen and lower limbs with routine
observations (3 - 4 hourly) for 24 hours.
• Listen for bowel sounds.
• Commence feeds after 3 - 4 hours if clinically stable, abdomen is soft
and not for repeat ET.
• Observe for signs of feed intolerance: gastric aspirate, vomiting,
abdominal distension.
vii. Post-ET Blood Investigations
• Full blood count including differential
• Bilirubin (total, direct and indirect) level
• Capillary blood sugar
• Serum electrolyte and calcium
• Others as indicated
Modified: Hussain Imam MI, Ng HP, Thomas T, editors. Malaysian Paediatric
Protocol for Malaysian Hospitals 3rd Edition. Putrajaya; MoH: c2012)
Refer to the above protocol for more details.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 5
CLINICAL RISK FACTORS AND
ALGORITHM FOR PREDISCHARGE SCREENING
A. Clinical risk factors to be considered with predischarge TcB
or TSB levels:
1. isoimmune (ABO or Rhesus) haemolytic disease, G6PD
deficiency or other haemolytic diseases
2. exclusive breastfeeding, if nursing is not going well, and/or
weight loss is >8 - 10%
3. previous sibling with jaundice
4. cephalhaematoma or significant bruising
5. East Asian race
Nomogram for Predischarge Screening
Figure 3. Nomogram for Designation of Risk at ≥36 Weeks’
Gestational Age with Birth Weight ≥2000 g or ≥35 Weeks’
Gestational Age with Birth Weight ≥2500 g
1. Babies with gestational age 35 – 37 weeks WITH clinical risk
factors in (A) and predischarge TcB/TSB in the following
risk zones:
Predisc arge
Tcb/TSB Risk Zone
Action
Interval to repeat TSB
High Risk
• Check
TcB/TSB
against
phototherapy guidelines
• Start phototherapy as needed
4 - 8 hours
High Intermediate Risk
• Check
TcB/TSB
against
phototherapy guidelines
• Start phototherapy as needed
4 - 24 hours
Low Intermediate Risk
If discharging in <72 hours, followup within two days
Within two days at
follow-up
Low Risk
If discharging in <72 hours, followup within two days
If jaundiced at follow-up
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
2. Babies with gestational age 35 – 37 weeks with NO clinical
risk factors in (A) OR with gestational age ≥38 weeks WITH
clinical risk factors in (A) and predischarge TcB/TSB in the
following risk zones:
3. Babies with gestational age ≥38 weeks with NO clinical risk
factors in (A) and predischarge TcB/TSB in the following
risk zones:
Predischarge
Tcb/T B Risk Zone
Action
Interval to repeat TSB
High Risk
• Check
TcB/TSB
against
phototherapy guidelines
• Start phototherapy as needed
4 - 24 hours
High Intermediate Risk
• Check
TcB/TSB
against
phototherapy guidelines
• Start phototherapy as needed
24 hours
Low Intermediate Risk
If discharging in <72 hours, followup within two days
If jaundiced at follow-up
Low Risk
If discharging in <72 hours, followup within two days
If jaundiced at follow-up
Predischarge
Tcb/TSB Risk Zone
Action
Interval to repeat TSB
High Risk
• Check
TcB/TSB
against
phototherapy guidelines
• Start phototherapy as needed
4 - 24 hours
High Intermediate Risk
Follow-up in two days
Two days
Low Intermediate Risk
If discharging in <72 hours, followup in 2 – 3 days
If jaundiced at follow-up
Low Risk
If discharging in <72 hours, follow-
up in 2 - 3 days
If jaundiced at follow-up
Adapted: Maisels MJ, Bhutani VK, Bogen D, et al. Hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn
infant > or =35 weeks’ gestation: an update with clarifications. Pediatrics.
2009 Oct;124(4):1193-8
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 6
INFORMATION ON PREVENTION OF NNJ
A. Parents and carers13, level III
Advice that should be given to parents/carers during antenatal and
postnatal visits include:
1. Look for jaundice daily during the first week of life.
2. Check the naked baby for jaundice in bright and preferably
natural light, by blanching the skin with gentle finger pressure
over the chest.
3. Presence of jaundice needs to be confirmed by healthcare
providers; blood tests may be required.
4. Jaundice in the first 48 hours of life needs urgent review by
healthcare providers.
5. Continue breastfeeding even if the baby is jaundiced. Contact a
healthcare provider for assistance with breastfeeding if needed.
6. Untreated jaundice may lead to deafness and brain damage.
7. Phototherapy is a safe and effective form of treatment for
neonatal jaundice.
8. Traditional and alternative methods of treating jaundice are
unproven and likely to be ineffective.
9. Exposing the baby to sunlight as a form of treatment may be
harmful due to dehydration and sunburn.
B. Healthcare providers
Healthcare providers should take note on the following in NNJ
management:
1. Antenatal education should include NNJ.
2. Routine postnatal visits should include the detection of NNJ.
3. Effectiveness of breastfeeding should be assessed during postnatal
visits. Individualised lactation support and help should be given to
breastfeeding mothers.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
µmol/L
micromol/litre
ABR
Auditory Brainstem Response
AAP
American Association of Pediatrics
ABE
Acute Bilirubin Encephalopathy
ABO
ABO blood group system
AUC
area under the curve
B/A
Bilirubin/Albumin
BIND
bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction
CI
confidence interval
cm
centimeter
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
DG
Development Group
dL
deci
ELBW
extremely low birth weight
ET
exchange transfusion
FST
fluorescent spot test
FV
femoral vein
g
gramme
G6PD
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
Hb
haemoglobin
IU
international unit
IV
intravenous
IVIg
intravenous immunoglobulin
kg
kilogramme
LBW
low birth weight
LED
light emitting diode
mg
miligramme
ml
mililitre
MoH
Ministry of Health
NICE
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
nm
nanometre
NPV
negative predictive value
OR
odds ratio
PPV
positive predictive value
r
correlation coefficient
rs
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient
RC
Review Committee
Rh
Rhesus blood group system
RR
relative risk
TcB
Transcutaneous Bilirubinometer
TSB
total serum bilirubin
UA/V
umbilical artery/vein
UB
Unbound Bilirubin
UV
umbilical vein
vs
versus
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of development group of these guidelines would like to express
their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms
or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon request
from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Neonatal Jaundice
(Second Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of
Health Malaysia.
Management of Neonatal Jaundice (Second Edition)