MANAGEMENT OF POSTNATAL CORTICOSTEROIDS
FOR THE PREVENTION OF CHROMIC
LUNG DISEASE IN PRETERM INFANTS
ft 8
Ministry of Health Malaysia ‘Academy of Medicine, Malaysia
tl Cre TP nd Trt fC ang Da Pr et
Statement of Intent
‘These guidelines are meant to be a guide fr clinical practice, based onthe best
available evidence atthe time of development. Adherence to these guidelines
‘may not necessarily ensure the best outcome in every case. Every health care
provider is responsible forthe management options available locally.
Review of the Guidelines
‘These guidelines were issued in July 2003 and willbe reviewed in July 2005 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available
PG Secretariat
fo Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
* Flor, Banguran PERKIM
Jalan Ipoh, 1200 Kuala Lumpur.
‘Available onthe following website _chap:// wwwmoh gov.ny/medicaliam,
-ngp:/! wwwacadmed.orgamy
wD
Participants
‘This Guidetine was formulated by and represents the views ofthe following
people:
Chairperson
Jacqueline Ho
Senior Lecturer
Perak College of Medicine
Ipoh
Representatives of Perinatal Society of Malaysia
LimNyok Ling
‘Consultan Paediatrician
Selayang Hospital
Koala Lumpur
J. Ravichandran
‘Consultant Obstetrician
‘Hospital Sutanah Aminah
Johor Bahru
‘Kalavathy Subramaniam,
Consultant Obstetrician
International Medical University
Seremban
Yong SinChuen
Lecturer in Paediatrics
‘National University of Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Representatives of the College of Paediatrics
hye Joon Kin
(Consultant Padiatician
Sunway Medical Centre
‘Bandar Sunway, Petaling Jaya
Lim WeiLing
Consultant Paediatrician
Sunway Medical Centre
‘Bandar Sunway, Petaling Jaya
Representative of Malaysian Paediatric Association
Irene G.S.Cheah
‘Consultant Paediatrician
PaediatricInstitute
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
By Invitation
Prof. BooNem Yum
Professor of Neonatology
National University of Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
crim
Professor in Neonatology
University of Malaya Medical Centre
‘Kuala Lumpur
Dr-S. Gunasegaran
Consultant Obstetrician
‘Damansara Specialist Hospital
‘Kuala Lumpur
Pepe
CONTENTS
Participants
Representatives of Perinatal Society of Malaysia
Representatives of the College of Paediatrics
Representative of Malaysian Paediatric Association
Early Postnatal Corticosteroids (<96 hours)
Benefits
Complications
Long Term Outcome
Conclusion
Moderately Early Postnatal Corticosteroids
(7-14 days)
Benefits
Complications
Long Term Outcome
Conclusion
Delayed Postnatal Corticosteroids (> 3 weeks)
Benefits
Complications
Long Term Outcome
Conclusion
Summary
Recommendations
References
Page
Postnatal Corticosteroids for the Prevention and Treatment of Chronic
Lng Disease in Preterm Infants
Clinical trial evidence fo the effectiveness of corcosteridsin the prevention
‘of CLD is strong andthe use ofthis treatment inthe clinical setting has become
popular, Follow up studies have started to appear inthe literature and have
suggested that there may be a danger in this practice'*, Thiselinical pectice
‘guideline attempts to provide some puidanc tothe practicing Paediatrician on
the interpretation of this evidence in the clinical setting.
1, Terminology
‘The term bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) was frst used by Northway in
1967 to describe a condition characterized by chronic respiratory failure in
‘neonates treated with mechanical ventilation fora primary lung disease Today
‘most neonates with chronic respiratory fulure are preterms with a bistory of
{reatment by mechanical ventilation for respiratory distress syndrome. The
disease tends to be ess severe and does not follow the clinical and X-ray
phases described by Northway.
‘Theres no diagnostic marker forthe condition so although the onset ofthe
conditions known o occu very early in postnatal if, the diagnosis made in
infants who remain oxygen dependent ain whom other conditions have been
«excluded. BPD is commonly defined as oxygen dependency at 28 days of|
age. Some definitions also include X-ray evidence of BPD or history of
‘mechanical ventilation in the fst week of life."” One ofthe weaknesses of
this definition isthatits very common for very preterm infants below 28 weeks
‘estaion to require oxygen for more than 28 days and most of these are
‘normal, Chronic lung disease (CLD) generally refers tinfans below 32 weeks
‘who remain oxygen dependent at 36 weeks postmensral age. This definition
hhasben found to bea more accurate predictor of long term outcome. Inthe
clinical sting the terms are often used interchangeably. This guideline wsesthe
termCLD and refers either definition above: thatis oxygen dependeney at
28 daysof life oF a 36 weeks postmenstrual age.
wm
However defined, chronic lung disease is an important problem. Severe cases
!have pulmonary hypertension and progress to cor pulmonale whichis usually
fatal. The treatment of CLD is costly. Most infants require a prolonged hospital
say and some continue with home oxygen therapy after discharge. Infans with
CLD require more frequent hospital admission and havea higher tsk of dying
during the first year of life. Poor growth and abnormal neurological
{development are additional problems that these infants may fae.
2. Incidence
‘The incidence of CLD depends onthe definition. Inthe Malaysian Paediatric
Association Very Low Bin Weight (VLBW) sty, 4% of 962 VLBW infants
‘born in 20 Malaysian hospitals were oxygen dependant at 28 days and had
X-ray evidence of BPD while 28% died and 689% were normal.” In
developed countries where the morality is lower BPD has reported in 11 10
'57% of survivors"! Survival of VLBW infants is rapidly improving in
Malaysia and it is reasonable to assume that CLD will become more
3. Corticosteroids
Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of CLD. This progresses
to lung destruction and abnormal repair, Corticosteroids have been Found to
reduce the inflammatory response and decrease airways resistance.
“There are 9 systematic reviews examining the evidence for systemic postnatal
corticosteroids, mainly dexamethasone, inthe prevention and treatment of chronic
Jung disease.” Inthe 3 most complete ofthese, more than 35 randomised
controlled trials are reviewed >>> These used courses of therapy ranging from
31042 days, A 12~ 14 day course seems tobe the most common.*** Early
post natal steroids refers to coticosteroids begun within the ist 96 hours after
birth; moderately eatly, 7-14 days after birth; and delayed 3 or more weeks
after birth
Corticosteroids have also been used in neonates for the prevention and
{treatment of post-extubation stridor and extubation failure and may have some
tenett™
a3)
Pl Cs Te Pio bn Ten fC ag De Pm et
4. Karly Postnatal Corticosteroids (<96 hours)
‘A Cochrane systematic review of 19 rials involving almost 2500 patients given
carly postnatal steroids or placebo found the following:
Benefits
Reduced oxygen dependency at 28 days and 36 weeks postmenstrual age,
‘reduced overall incidence of death or chronic lung disease, reduced failure to
cextubate and reduced need for later steroids, reduced pulmonary ar eak and
‘patent ductus arteriosus.” They did net show a reduction in overall mortality
Complications
‘There wasn inceasedriskof hyperglycaemia, hypertension and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. ineeased growth failure, increase gasto-itstinal bleeding
nd inestial perforation. There was noevidence of inceasedIVH, PVLROP,
NNEC, pulmonary haemorshage or infection.
Long Term Outcome
“Thereviewers were abe toocate two follow up studies Important ong term
complications were found and these included: increased risk of abnormal
neurological examination increased cerebral palsy and developmental delay
and increased death or development dela.
Conclusion
‘The reviewers of the review recommend further follow up studies but in the
‘mean time conclude thatthe benefits of early postnatal steroids may not
‘outweigh te risks. Early postal steroids are precluded as the treatment should
only be considered in infants who cannot be weaned from mechanical
‘ventilation. A Further multicentre study is underway.
Moderately Early Postnatal Corticosteroids (7-14 days)
‘There are 2 full systematic reviews addressing this question?” The most
‘complete, a cochrane systematic review of 7 trials involving almost 600
patients found the following:
Benefits
"There was reduced morality at 28 days, reduced CLD at both 28 days and 36
‘weeks postmenstrual age, reduced aggregated death or CLD at 36 weeks,
reduced failure to extubate.”
Complications
‘The following complications were found: increased hyperglycaemia,
hypertension, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, increased gastrointestinal
bleeding, and increased infection rate, There was no increase in [VH, NEC,
‘and ROP.
Long Term Outcome
‘The reviewers found only one long term study on 36 infants followed up for 15
‘months: This study was unable to show any inereasin abnormal neurological
‘examination and combined death or abnormal neurological examination.
Conclusion
“The reviewers concluded that there were both benefits and adverse effects and
‘hat there was no reliable evidence concerning the longterm effect of postnatal
corticosteroids, Clinicians must weigh up each individual case,
6. Delayed Postnatal Corticosteroids (> 3 weeks)
‘There are 9 rials involving over 550 subjects.
Benefits
‘A Cochrane systematic review found that there was reduced failure to
extubate, need for further late steroids, and need for home oxygen.”* Mortality
‘was not affected but there was a decrease in aggregated mortality and CLD.
ma
‘Pant Cnc Pr Prin rm Ch ane Pr it
Complications
Hypertension was increased but hyperglycaemia was not. Gastrointestinal
‘complications and infection were not increased.
Long Term Outcome
[Long term follow up was reported in one study:°"This showed an increase in
abnormal neurological examination bth overall ain survivors. There was no
significant increase in cerebral palsy or death and cerebral palsy.
Conclusion
“The authors concluded that the use of delayed steroids should be reserved for
ventilator dependant infants in whom it is felt tha steroids are essential to
facilitate extubation,
Summary
{In summary postnatal steroids do show benefits in weaning from mechanical
Yentlation and reducing CLD and possibly also mortality. However the
adverse effects are considerable and these include abnormal neurological
findings and cerebral palsy on follow up. Adverse effects may outweigh the
benefits
Recommendations
1. "The benefits and risks of postnatal corticosteroid use in oxygen
‘dependant preterm infants shouldbe weighed up in each individual case.
(Grade A)
2. Postnatal coticosteroids should be reserved for situations where there
‘evidence of chronic lng disease such a failure ofthe X-ray to clear
and continued high ventilator settings after 7 days and itis apparent that
‘weaning may not be possible without steroids.
(Grade A)
‘mat imo Te Pri dT Of Cn a De Pr
3. Postnatal corticosteroids forthe pupose of preventing or treating CLD
should not be given to infants below 7 days of age.
(Grade A)
4. A suggested regime would be a starting dose of O.Smgkg/day
tapering after 3 das, keeping the duration of treatment toa minimum,
Grade A)
5. These recommendations should be revised when data becomes
availabe from ongoing tials (DART Study, Doyle 2000).
(Grade A)
66. Each Paediatric department should develop its own written policy on
‘the indications of postnatal steroids
7. Antenatal corticosteroids remain proven and beneficial in reducing RDS
and their use should notbe influenced by these new recommendations
‘onthe use of postnatal steroids,
(Grade A),
“Grading of Recommendations based on AHCPR 1994.
References
Yeh TR, Lin YI, Huang CC et al. Barly dexamethasone therapy in
preterm infants: follow-up study. Peitrics 1998;101:B7.
Doyle LW, Davis PG. Postnatal corticosteroids in preterm infants
effects on mortality and cerebral palsy. Pediatr Res 1999;45:194
Jones R, Wincott E, Elbourne D, Grant A. Controlled trial of
‘dexamethasone in neonatal chronic ung disease: a3 year follow-up,
Pediatrics 1995;96:897-906,
Goldstein DJ, Waldrep EL, VanPelt JC, O'Shea TM. Developmental
‘outcome aS years following dexamethasone use for very ow birth
‘weight infants, Pediatr Res 2000;47:310 (Abstract 1832)
(O'Shea TM, Kothadia JM, Klinepeter KL, Goldstein DJ, Jackson
BG, Weaver RG, Dillard RG, Randomized placebo-controlled trial of
14-day tapering course of dexamethasone to reduce the duration of
ventilator dependency in very low birth weight infants: outcome of study
participants at L-year adjusted age, Pediatrics 1999;104:15-21
Sinkin RA, Dweck HS, Horgan M3, Callaher KJ, Cox C, Maniscalco
etal, Early dexamethasone — Attempting to prevent chronic lung
disease, Pediatrics 2000;105:542-48,
[Northway WH Jr, Rosan RC, Porter DY. Pulmonary disease following
respirator therapy of hyaline-membrane disease. N Engl J Med
1967:276:357.
Avery ME, Tooley WH, KellerJB. Is chronic lung disease in low bith
‘weight infants preventable? A survey of eight centres. Pediatries
1987;79:26-30.
Donoghue D, Cust A. Report ofthe Australian and New Zealand
‘Neonatal Network 1999,
<p)
10.
Sinkin RA, Cox C, Phelps DL. Predicting risk of bronchopulmonary
dysplasia selection criteria for clinical trials
Pediatrics 1990;86:728-36,
Singer L, Yamashita Lilien L, Collin M, Baley J. A Longitudinal
Study of Developmental Outcome of Infants With Bronchopulmonary
Dysplasia and Very Low Birth Weight. Pediatries 1997;100:987-93,
Merritt TA, Hallman M, Berry C, Pobjavouri M, Edwards DK 3%,
Jaaskelainen J etal. Randomised controlled tral of human surfactant
given at birth versus rescue administration in very low birth weight
infants with lang immaturity 5 Pediatr 1991;119:581-94,
Soll RF, Hockstra RE, Fangman JI, Corbet AJ, Adama JM, James,
LS, etal. Multicentre al of single-dose modified bovine surfactant
extract (Survanta) for prevention of respiratory distress syndrome.
Pediatrics 1990,85:1092-1102.
Bose C, Corbet A Bose G, Gaarcia-Prats J, Combardy L, Wold D, et
al. Improved outcome at 28 days of age for very low birth weight
infants treated with single dose of synthetic surfactant,
‘Pediatr 1990;117:947-53,
Liechty EA, Donovan E, Purohit, Githooly J,Fieldman B, Noguchi
‘etal. Reduction of neonatal mortality after multiple doses of bovine
surfactant in low birth weight neonates with respiratory distress
syndrome. Pediatrie 1991 ;88:19-28,
Long WA, Thompson T, Sundell H, Schumacher R, Volhers F, Guthrie
R_ Effects of two rescue doses of a synthetic surfactant on mortality
rate and survival without bronchopulmonary dysplasia in 700 0 1350
gram infants with respiratory distress syndrome. The American Exosurf
Stuy Group I.J Pediatr 1991;118:595-605.
vn.
18,
20,
2
2,
Fa
Hoekstra RE, Jackson JC, Myers TR, Frantz ID, Sten ME, Powers
WF etal, Improved neonatal survival following multiple doses of
bovine surfactant in very premature neonates at risk for respiratory
distress syndrome, Pediatrics 1991;88:10-18.
Shennan AT, Dunn MS, Oblsson A, Lennox K, Hoskins EM,
Abnormal pulmonary outcomes in premature infants: prediction from,
‘oxygen requirement in the neonatal perio,
Pediatrics 1988;82:527-32.
Malaysian VLBW Study Group. Repor of the Malaysian Paediatric
“Association Very Low Birth Weight Study 1996, MPA 1998.
‘Lemons JA, Bauer CR, Oh W, Korones SB, Papile LA, Stoll Beta
‘ery low birth weight outcomes ofthe National Iasiutes of Chil Heath
and Development Neonatal Research Network, January 1996 through
December 1996, Pediatrics 2001;107:e.
Fenton AC, Mason e, Clarke M, Field DJ. Chronic lung disease
{ollowing neonatal ventilation. Changing incidence ina geographically
defined population, Pdiats Pulmonol 1996;21:24-7,
Ehrenkranz RA, Mercurio MR. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. In
Sinclair JC, Bracken MB, eds. Effective Care ofthe Newborn Infant.
‘Oxford, England: Oxford University ress; 1992:399.424,
[Bhuta'T, Ohlsson A. Systematic review and meta-analysis of early
postnatal dexamethasone for prevention of chronic lung disease. Arch
Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 1998;79:F26-33,
‘Avias-Camison JM, Lau J, Cole CH, Frantz 1D. IIL, Meta-analysis of
‘dexamethasone therapy started in the first 1S days of life for prevention
‘of chronic lung disease in premature infants
Pediatr Pulmonol 1999,28:167-74,
~D
25,
2.
30.
31
22.
Doyle L, Davis P. Postnatal corticosteroids in preterm infants:
systematic review of effects on mortality and moto function. J Paediatr
(Child Heath. 2000;36: 101-7.
Halliday HL, Ehrenkranz RA. Early postnatal (<96 hours)
corticosteroids for preventing chronic lung disease in preterm infants
(Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Ise 2, 2001. Oxford:
Update Software.
Halliday HL, Bhrenkranz RA, Moderately early (7-14 days) postnatal
‘corticosteroids for preventing chronic lung disease in preterm infants
(Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 2, 2001. Oxford:
Update Software.
Halliday HL, Bhrenkranz RA. Delayed (>3 weeks) postnatal
corticosteroids For chronic lung disease in preterm infants (Cochrane
Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 2,2001. Oxford: Update
Software.
Shah ¥, Ohlsson A. Postnatal dexamethasone in the prevention of
chronic lung disease. In: David TJ, ed, Recent advances in Paediatrics
19. London, England; Churchill Livingstone: 2001:77-96.
Barrington KJ. The adverse neurodevelopmental effects of postnatal
steroid inthe preterm infant: a systematic review of RCTs. BMC
Pediatrics 200131: 1-14,
‘Markovitz BP, Randolph AG. Corticosteroids forthe prevention and
treatment of posteextubation stridor in neonates, children and adults
(Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Isue 2,2001. Oxford:
Update Software.
‘Cummings JJ, D'Eugenio DB, Gross $J. A controlled trial of
dexamethasone in preterm infants at high risk for bronchopulmonary
‘dysplasia. N Engl JMed 1989;320:1505-10.
Tw