'MOH/PIPAK/=96.2216Ue
MANAGEMENT OF
VULGARIS
SECOND EDITION
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN: 978-967-2887-47-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.dermatology.org.my/
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2022 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2026) or sooner if new evidence
becomes available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the
CPG or National Advisor of the related speciality will be informed. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed, and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which will be the definitive version at all times. This version
can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm on the Management of Acne Vulgaris
x
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK AND AGGRAVATING FACTORS
3
3.
DIAGNOSIS AND INVESTIGATIONS
8
4.
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY
10
5.
TOPICAL TREATMENT
13
5.1
Topical Benzoyl Peroxide
13
5.2
Topical Retinoids
15
5.3
Topical Antibiotics
18
5.4
Topical Azelaic Acid
20
5.5
Topical Salicylic Acid
20
5.6
Topical Dapsone
21
5.7
Topical Sulphur
21
5.8
Topical Clascoterone (Androgen Receptor Inhibitor)
21
5.9
Topical Olumacostat Glasaretil
21
(Sebum Controlling Agent)
5.10 Comparison of Various Topical Preparations for
22
Mild to Moderate Acne Vulgaris
5.11 Topical Fixed Combination Therapy
22
6.
SYSTEMIC TREATMENT
23
6.1
Oral Antibiotics
23
6.2
Oral Isotretinoin
28
6.3
Oral Hormonal Therapy
32
7.
PHYSICAL TREATMENT
36
7.1
Intralesional Corticosteroids Injection
36
7.2
Comedones Extraction
36
7.3
Chemical Peels
36
7.4
Energy-Based Devices
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
COSMECEUTICALS
46
8.1
Cosmeceutical Products
46
8.2
Active Ingredients in Cosmeceutical for Acne Vulgaris
48
9.
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINES
53
10. TREATMENT IN SPECIAL GROUP
55
10.1 Pregnancy and Lactation
55
10.2 Adolescents
58
11. COMPLICATIONS
60
12. QUALITY OF LIFE
62
13. REFERRAL
64
14. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
65
14.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
65
14.2 Potential Resource Implications
65
REFERENCES
67
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
74
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
75
Appendix 3 Glycaemic Index Classification of Food
77
Appendix 4 Clinical Images According to CASS Grading
79
Appendix 5 Complications of Acne Vulgaris
81
Appendix 6 Antibiotic Resistance
82
Appendix 7 Medication Dosage and Adverse Events
87
Appendix 8 Cardiff Acne Disability Index
98
List of Abbreviations
99
Acknowledgement
101
Disclosure Statement
101
Source of Funding
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work
process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size
is carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group.
In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
DIAGNOSIS AND INVESTIGATIONS
• Microbiological
and
endocrinological
investigations
may
be
performed to rule out other conditions that may mimic acne vulgaris.
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY
• Comprehensive Acne Severity Scale may be used for grading of
acne severity in clinical practice.
TREATMENT
a.
Topical treatment
• Topical benzoyl peroxide monotherapy or in combination with other
topical therapy should be given in mild to moderate acne vulgaris.
• Topical retinoids (e.g. tretinoin and adapalene) monotherapy should
be used in non-inflammatory acne vulgaris or in combination with
other therapies in inflammatory acne vulgaris.
• Topical antibiotics (e.g. clindamycin) should not be used as
monotherapy in acne vulgaris to prevent bacterial resistance.
• Topical azelaic acid may be used in acne vulgaris, especially in
patients with post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation.
• Combination topical therapy should be given in moderate acne
vulgaris.
b.
Systemic treatment
• Oral doxycycline, tetracycline or erythromycin should be used for
moderate to severe acne vulgaris.
 Response to these antibiotics should be evaluated at 6 - 8 weeks.
 Target duration of therapy should not exceed 3 - 4 months to
reduce resistance.
• Isotretinoin should be prescribed for nodulocystic or severe acne
vulgaris and treatment-resistant moderate acne vulgaris.
 It should only be prescribed by dermatologists.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
iii
c.
Physical treatment
• Chemical peels may be used as an adjunct in the treatment of acne
vulgaris.
 The preferred choices are salicylic acid and glycolic acid peels.
COSMECEUTICALS
• Cosmeceuticals may be used as an adjunct in the management of
acne vulgaris.
TREATMENT IN SPECIAL GROUP
a.
Pregnant and lactating women
• Hormonal therapy, tetracyclines, co-trimoxazole and isotretinoin
should be avoided in the treatment of acne vulgaris in pregnant and
lactating women.
b.
Adolescents
• Topical benzoyl peroxide and topical retinoids (tretinoin and
adapalene) may be used safely in adolescents with acne vulgaris.
• Oral tetracycline derivatives (e.g. tetracycline, doxycycline and
minocycline) should not be used in patients aged <8 years with acne
vulgaris.
• Oral isotretinoin can be used safely in patients aged ≥12 years with
severe acne vulgaris.
QUALITY OF LIFE
• Assessment for quality of life may be considered in the management
of patients with acne vulgaris.
REFERRAL
• Patients with moderate to severe acne vulgaris (e.g. nodulocystic
acne) should be referred early to a dermatologist.
• Patients with acne vulgaris who exhibit suicidal behaviour should be
referred urgently to a psychiatrist.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of
Higher Education and private sector. There was active involvement of
a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the electronic
databases mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database of Systemic
Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines International Network
(refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The common
search was limited to literature published on humans, all adults (19
plus years), publications from the year “2012 to Current” and English
language. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched, and experts in the field were contacted to
identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 29 May
2020 to 10 Sep 2020. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 10 February 2022 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on acne vulgaris e.g.:
• Acne Vulgaris: Management [National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE), 2021]
• Acne Management Guidelines by the Dermatological Society of
Singapore (2019)
• Guidelines of Care for the Management of Acne Vulgaris (American
Academy of Dermatology, 2016)
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 14 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 31 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed at each DG meeting. All statements and
recommendations formulated were agreed upon by both the DG and
RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations were made
by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG was developed largely
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
v
based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted for a month on the MoH Malaysia official
website for feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally
presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the
Health Technology Assessment and CPG Council MoH Malaysia for
review and approval. Details on the CPG development methodology
by MaHTAS can be obtained from the Manual on Development and
Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines
published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/
CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634).
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
vi
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide recommendations on the
management of acne vulgaris on the following aspects:
i. risk and aggravating factors
ii. clinical diagnostic criteria and severity grading
iii. treatment
iv. psychosocial impact and quality of life
v. indications for referral to dermatologists
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Adolescents and adults with acne vulgaris
Exclusion Criteria
• Acne variants for example acne conglobata, acne fulminans, acne
cosmetica, drug-induced acne and chloracne
• Rosacea
• Folliculitis
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care of both public and
private sectors in the management of acne vulgaris including:
i. medical professionals
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients and their advocates
v. professional societies
vi. policy makers
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Azura Mohd Affandi
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
vii
Dr. Evelyn Yap Wen Yee
Head of Department & Dermatologist
Hospital Pakar Sultanah Fatimah, Johor
Dr. Kwan Zhenli
Lecturer & Consultant Dermatologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Latha Selvarajah
Head of Department & Dermatologist
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit &
Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section, Ministry of Health,
Putrajaya
Dr. Norfaridah Masiran
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kampung Bandar,
Selangor
Ms. Noor Fadilah Kasim
Dietitian
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norliza Muksan
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kota Damansara,
Selangor
Dr. Nur Ashikin Ahmad
Dermatologist
Hospital Pakar An-Nur, Selangor
Ms. Ong Yin Sin
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Parveen Thanabalen
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Preamala Gunabalasingam
Head of Department & Dermatologist
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Vaani Valerie Visuvanathan
Lecturer & Dermatologist
International Medical University Healthcare
Clinic, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Wee Ai Leen
Paediatric Dermatologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
viii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Suganthi Thevarajah
National Advisor of Dermatology Services & Head of Department
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Fuziah Paimin
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Dr. Henry Foong
Consultant Dermatologist
Foong Skin Specialist Clinic, Ipoh,
Perak
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director &
Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section, Ministry of Health,
Putrajaya
Dr. Norazirah Md Nor
Consultant Dermatologist
KPJ Ampang Puteri Specialist Hospital
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Peter Ch’ng Wee Beng
Consultant Dermatologist
Gleneagles Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Tang Jyh Jong
Head of Department &
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Teh Rohaila Jamil
Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Wee Ai Sim
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Assoc. Professor Dr. Zahara Abdul Manaf
Lecturer of Dietetic Program &
Fellow of Centre of Healthy Ageing and
Wellness
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Assoc. Professor Dr. Adawiyah Jamil
Lecturer & Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Alexa Shipman
Consultant Dermatologist &
Editor-in-Chief of Clinical
and Experimental Dermatology
London, United Kingdom
Datin Dr. Asmah Johar
Consultant Dermatologist
Klinik Pakar Kulit Dahlia &
Hospital Islam Az-Zahrah
Bandar Baru Bangi, Selangor
Assoc. Professor Dr. Barakatun Nisak
Mohd Yusof
Lecturer & Dietitian
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Dr. Fathima Begum Syed Mohideen
Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Lynda Quah May Lu
General Practitioner & Medical Director
Revival Medical Clinic, Johor Bahru,
Johor
Dr. Ng Ting Guan
Head of Department &
Consultant Dermatologist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Dr. Oon Hwee Boon Hazel
Consultant Dermatologist
National Skin Centre
Singapore
Professor Dr. Pravit Asawanonda
Consultant Dermatologist
Chulalongkorn University
Bangkok, Thailand &
President, Dermatological Society of
Thailand
Ms. Rahiza Rasmien Che Rahim
Patient advocate
Dr. Sarah Nur Alya Mohd Sofian
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Padang Serai
Kedah
Dr. Shamin Mohd. Saffian
Lecturer & Pharmacist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ACNE VULGARIS
x
DIAGNOSIS & SEVERITY ASSESSMENT OF ACNE
[BASED ON COMPREHENSIVE ACNE SEVERITY SCALE (CASS)*]
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
PREDOMINANTLY
NON-INFLAMMATORY
LESION
PREDOMINANTLY
INFLAMMATORY
LESION
TOPICAL BENZOYL PEROXIDE
TOPICAL RETINOIDS**
COMBINATION OF ANY TWO TOPICAL AGENTS
i. Benzoyl peroxide (preferred)
ii. Retinoids
iii. Topical antibiotics
iv. Azelaic acid
v. Salicylic acid
COMBINATION OF TWO TOPICAL AGENTS AS ABOVE# + ONE ORAL ANTIBIOTIC
i. Doxycycline
ii. Tetracycliine
iii. Erythromycin
In female patients with evidence of hyperandrogenism, consider hormonal therapy.
#except topical antibiotics
No improvement after 3 months
No improvement after 3 months
*Severity assessment is based on CASS (mild
1 - 2, moderate 3, severe 4 - 5). Quality of life
assessment
should
be
taken
into
consideration.
**Topical retinoids are to be avoided in
pregnancy.
REFER DERMATOLOGIST for oral isotretinoin ± physical therapy
• Response to oral antibiotics should be
assessed at 6 - 8 weeks.
• Recommended duration of oral
antibiotics is 3 - 4 months.
MAINTENANCE THERAPY
with topical retinoids or topical benzoyl
peroxide once acne under control
No improvement after 3 months
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Acne vulgaris is a chronic inflammatory disease of the pilosebaceous
units, characterised by the formation of non-inflammatory (open and
closed comedones) and inflammatory (papules, pustules, nodules and
cysts) lesions. Commonly affected areas are the face and trunk, and it
usually affects adolescents and young adults. A common misconception
by the public is that acne vulgaris is a self-limiting teenage skin problem
and thus, does not warrant treatment. However, it has been found to
adversely affect the patients’ social life, self-esteem and body image.
It also has the potential to cause scarring in some patients and may
contribute to significant psychological distress, like depression and
anxiety, if left untreated.
The pathogenesis of acne vulgaris is multifactorial. Four key pathogenic
factors that play an important role in the development of acne
vulgaris are increased sebum production, altered follicular keratinisation
leading to comedones formation, follicular colonisation by Cutibacterium
acnes (C. acnes), previously known as Propionibacterium acnes,
and inflammation around pilosebaceous unit. There has been
recent evidence that microbiome and its interactions with the innate
immune system plays a factor in the development of acne
vulgaris.1, level III In acne vulgaris, the resident microbiome includes
C. acnes and Staphylococcus epidermidis, whereas the transient
microbiome includes Staphylococcus aureus. Microbial imbalance or
‘dysbiosis’ has been suggested to be involved in the pathophysiology of
inflammatory acne. The loss of balance between the different C. acnes
phylotypes, together with dysbiosis of the skin microbiome resulted in
acne development, rather than C. acnes hyperproliferation. The loss
of diversity of C. acnes phylotypes acts as a trigger for innate immune
system activation, leading to cutaneous inflammation. C. acnes
phylotype IA1 predominance has been observed, with a more virulent
profile in acne than in normal skin. Recent studies also showed that the
gut microbiome is involved in acne, through interactions with the skin
microbiome.1, level III
The Global Burden of Disease Study 2019 evaluated the trend of acne
vulgaris in 204 countries and territories from 1990 to 2019. Globally,
the number of incident cases of acne vulgaris increased by 47.9% from
79.7 million in 1990 to 117.4 million in 2019. On the other hand, the
number of prevalent cases also increased globally from 156.7 million
in 1990 to 231.2 million in 2019. The age-standardised prevalence rate
(ASPR) of acne vulgaris was highest in the high sociodemographic
index region across all years from 1990 to 2019. Western Europe, highincome Asia Pacific and East Asia were among the top three regions
with the highest ASPR in 2019 (from 41.1/1000 people to 55.8/1000
people). In contrast, the regions with the lowest ASPR were Central
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Europe, Tropical Latin America and Central Asia (from 17.2/1000
people to 20.5/1000 people). The ASPR of acne vulgaris in women was
1.3 times higher than in men in 2019 (34.9/1000 people vs 26.8/1000
people). The age-specific burden rate of acne vulgaris was highest in
adolescents aged 10 - 19 years, which dropped sharply after the age
of 20 years.2, level III
There is a wide variation in the prevalence of acne vulgaris among
various countries, depending on the study design and patient
characteristics. It is estimated that 35% to close to 100% of adolescents
have acne vulgaris at some point in their life.3, level III Among Asian
countries, the prevalence of acne vulgaris was reported to be 88%
in Singapore adolescents aged 13 - 19 years old. Another study in
Singapore reported higher acne prevalence among both female and
male secondary school students (92% - 95%). The prevalence was
also high at 91.4% among females aged 15 - 16 years old in Sri
Lanka. However, the prevalence was low (36.2%) in younger students
(aged 7 - 12 years old) in South Korea. In China, the prevalence of
acne vulgaris ranged from 51.3% - 62.7% in different population age
groups.3, level III Similar overall adjusted prevalence of 57.8% was found
in an online, self-reported survey involving seven European countries
(Belgium, Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, France, Italy, Poland and
Spain).4, level III
The prevalence of acne vulgaris in a Malaysian population-based study
among adolescents aged 13 - 17 years old, which was published in
2009, was 67.5%.5 Another recent cross-sectional study involving
secondary schools students reported a prevalence of acne vulgaris at
64.7%.6, level III This concurred with two local studies among university
students with a prevalence of 60.7 - 68.1%.7-8, level III
Variation in practice in the management of acne vulgaris warrants an
evidence-based guidelines to guide healthcare providers on the issue.
This is especially so when cosmeceutical products can be easily bought
over the counter by the patients. Advancement in the diagnosis and
treatment in acne vulgaris necessitate related updates to be addressed
in the new edition of the CPG. Thus, the updated version also addresses
the latest treatment modalities in the management of acne vulgaris. It
is hoped that the new CPG is helpful for healthcare providers from any
level of care to properly manage patients with acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
2. RISK AND AGGRAVATING FACTORS
A number of risk and aggravating factors for acne vulgaris have
been described in the literature. The studies included are those with
acceptable quality and the results are summarised below:
a. Age
A cross-sectional study showed that subjects aged 15 - 16 and
17 - 18 years old groups were associated with an increased risk of
acne (OR=2.38, 95% CI 1.95 to 2.92) and (OR=1.59, 95% CI 1.26 to
2.01) respectively. Older adolescents (aged 17 - 18 years old) were
significantly associated with acne severity.9, level III
b. Gender
Inconsistent associations have been found between gender and
likelihood of acne. A local study found males are more likely to develop
acne compared to females (OR=4.734, 95% CI 2.276 to 8.222). They
are also found to have a higher risk of developing moderate to severe
acne (p=0.001).8, level III
A more recent study however found females are more likely to have
acne compared with males with a prevalence ratio of 1.16 (95% CI 1.05
to 1.25).10, level III
Personal history of acne during adolescence is associated with adult
female acne (OR=5.44, 95% CI 3.43 to 8.61).11, level II-2
c. Family history
The role of genetics as a risk factor for acne vulgaris has been
proposed although the exact mode of inheritance remains unknown. A
significant positive family history of acne has been demonstrated where
acne is found in twins, mother, first degree relatives and multiple family
members.5
Two local studies revealed that family history was associated with acne
vulgaris among adolescents and young adults:
• family history of acne (p<0.001)12, level II-2
• history of acne among father (OR=1.852, 95% CI 1.072 to 3.201),
mother (OR=1.752, 95% CI 1.058 to 2.902) and both parents
(OR=3.056, 95% CI 1.153 to 8.094)8, level III
In addition, a case-control study showed a history of acne in firstdegree relatives of either parent (OR=3.02, 95% CI 1.80 to 5.06) or
siblings (OR=2.40, 95% CI 1.46 to 3.94) was also associated with adult
female acne.11, level II-2
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
However, family history was not found to be an aggravating factor for
acne severity.8-9, level III
d. Body Mass Index
Obesity is closely related to hyperandrogenism, hence individuals with
high body mass index (BMI) are at risk of developing acne vulgaris.5
There are several physiologic factors that potentially link obesity to acne
e.g. release of adipokine-driven inflammatory cytokines.13, level III However,
there is limited good evidence to show the association between high
BMI and acne vulgaris. The available evidence is also not consistent to
draw any association between BMI and acne vulgaris.
A
cross-sectional
study
showed
that
being
overweight
(BMI >25 kg/m2) increased the risk of acne vulgaris (OR=2.56, 95%,
CI 1.55 to 4.24).9, level III Another study also showed overweight
and obese teenagers were more likely to have acne vulgaris with a
prevalence ratio of 1.15 (95% CI 1.02 to 1.26) and 1.14 (95% CI 1.02 to
1.23) respectively.10, level III
In a nationwide, population-based study, overweight and obesity in
young adults were inversely associated with acne vulgaris.13, level III
However, two studies found that obesity was not a risk factor for acne
vulgaris or its severity.8, level III; 14, level III
e. Diet
It is postulated that dietary habits play some role in relation to acne
development or exacerbation. The following are studies showing the
association:
•
High glycaemic diet
Glycaemic index is a measure of the impact on blood glucose of
digestible carbohydrates of foods while the glycaemic load is an
important extension of the glycaemic index concept which makes
allowance for the quantity of available carbohydrates (net carbs) in the
consumed portion size of food.
A cohort study showed diet of patients with acne vulgaris had significantly
higher glycaemic load value (175 ± 35) compared with those without
acne (122 ± 28). The risk was 25 times higher in those consuming diet
with a glycaemic load value of ≥175 compared with <175.15, level II-2
•
Dairy products
Two local studies showed that milk consumption was associated with
acne occurrence. Daily intake of ≥2 glasses (OR=2.19, 95% CI 1.04
to 4.65)12, level II-2 or ≥1 weekly consumption of milk (OR=3.99, 95% CI
1.39 to 11.43) increased the risk of developing acne vulgaris.15, level II-2
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
A large cross-sectional study in France also showed the consumption
of milk was associated with current acne (OR=1.12, 95% CI 1.00 to
1.25).16, level III
However, the two local studies above found contradicting findings in
relation to chocolate and ice cream intake with acne vulgaris.
 One study demonstrated that chocolate intake had resulted
in the occurrence of acne vulgaris (OR=2.4, 95% CI 1.08
to 5.33)12, level II-2 while the other study showed no significant
association between them.15, level II-2
 In a study, consumption of ice cream ≥1/week elevated acne
vulgaris risk (OR=4.47, 95% CI 2.44 to 19.72).15, level II-2 However,
no significant association was found in the other study.12, level II-2
Yogurt and cheese consumption had not been found to be associated
with acne vulgaris.12, level II-2; 15, level II-2 There was also no association
between the consumption of low-fat milk and acne vulgaris.10, level III
•
Sweetened beverages and food
A study among Chinese adolescents with moderate to severe acne
vulgaris found increased risk of acne vulgaris with the following
sweetened beverages (sweetened tea, fruit-flavoured and carbonated
drinks):14, level III
 consumption of sweetened beverages (≥7/week) with sugar
intake ≥100 g/day (OR=3.12, 95% CI 1.80 to 5.41)
 consumption of sweetened tea (OR=2.52, 95% CI 1.43 to 4.43) or
fruit-flavoured drinks (OR=1.90, 95% CI 1.18 to 3.07)
 consumption of sweetened carbonated drinks (OR=1.61, 95% CI
0.96 to 2.72)
Another cross-sectional study also showed unhealthy sugar intake
resulted in increased acne vulgaris occurrence (OR=1.30, 95% CI
1.05 to 1.60). Frequent indulgence of pastries and cakes was also
associated with increased risk of acne vulgaris (OR=1.20, 95% CI 1.01
to 1.43).9, level III
In another recent large cross-sectional study, there was also a
significant association between current acne and consumption of
fatty and sugary products (OR=1.54, 95% CI 1.09 to 2.16) and sugary
beverages (OR=1.18, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.38).16, level III
However, no significant association was found between acne vulgaris
and carbonated drinks or sweets in a local study.12, level II-2
•
Unhealthy fat intake
A Turkish study showed increased risk of acne vulgaris among
adolescents who had the following dietary habits:9, level III
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
 unhealthy fat intake (OR=1.39, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.82)
 frequent consumption of sausages and burgers (OR=1.24, 95%
CI 1.03 to 1.48)
However, another study in Kuwait showed no association between
consumption of chips/fried food and acne vulgaris.10, level III A local study
also showed no significant association between potato chips and acne
vulgaris.12, level II-2
•
Nuts
Nuts intake has not been found to be associated with acne
vulgaris.12, level II-2; 15, level II-2
•
Fibre
A large cross-sectional study showed that consumption of <5 portions
of fruits and vegetables intake/day marginally increased risk of
acne.9, level III A case-control study also showed that lack of fruits
and vegetables intake (≤3 days/week) increased acne occurrence
(OR=2.33, 95% CI 1.20 to 4.53).11, level II-2
However, another study in Kuwait showed no association between the
amount of fruit consumption and acne vulgaris.10, level III
•
Fish
Lack of fresh fish intake (≤3 days/week) is associated with acne vulgaris
(OR=2.76, 95% CI 1.31 to 5.81).11, level II-2
Refer to the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 on the principles of
healthy eating (available at: https://nutrition.moh.gov.my/MDG2020/
mobile/index.html#p=150). Consider referring patients to the dietitian for
proper counselling on healthy eating with regards to the management
of acne vulgaris.
f. Lifestyle
A cross-sectional study highlighted lifestyle factors with adult female
acne occurrence which were:11, level II-2
• being an office worker (OR=2.24, 95% CI 1.24 to 4.06).
• no previous pregnancies (OR=1.71, 95% CI 1.06 to 2.78)
• high or very high level of reported psychological stress during the
last month (OR=2.95, 95% CI 1.57 to 5.53)
Another study among adolescents aged 13 - 18 showed face washing
≥3/day (OR=0.68, 95% CI 0.48 to 0.99) and living in urban area
(OR=0.67, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.79) were associated with decreased risk
for acne. However, living in semirural population had been shown to
aggravate acne severity (p<0.05).9, level III
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
There is a lack of retrievable evidence on smoking and alcohol
consumption as risk or aggravating factors for acne vulgaris. A local
study showed no significant association between acne vulgaris and
smoking.12, level II-2
g. Other risk and aggravating factors
Hirsutism is associated with adult female acne (OR=3.50, 95% CI 1.42
to 8.60).11, level II-2 while oily skin type is significantly associated with
acne severity.9, level III
• Healthy lifestyle which includes healthy eating is advised as part of
the management in acne vulgaris. List of food based on glycaemic
index is listed in Appendix 3.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
3. DIAGNOSIS AND INVESTIGATIONS
Acne vulgaris is diagnosed clinically based on the presence of:
• non-inflammatory lesions (NIL) – open (Figure 1) and closed
comedones (Figure 2)
• inflammatory lesions (IL) – papules, pustules (Figure 3), nodules
and cysts (Figure 4)
The lesions are usually located on the face and trunk. Untreated or
poorly-treated acne may result in scars (hypertrophic, keloid, ice-pick,
boxcar and rolling scars).
Investigations are rarely needed in the diagnosis of acne vulgaris. They
are only required to rule out other diseases which may be associated with
acne e.g. polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), Cushing’s syndrome or
androgen-secreting tumour. Microbiology and/or endocrinology testing
may be offered to exclude these conditions and discussed below.
Figure 1: Open comedones
Figure 2: Closed comedones
Figure 3: Papules & pustules Figure 4: Pustules, nodules
and cyst
a. Microbiology test
C. acnes (previously known as Propionibacterium acnes), a Grampositive anaerobic rod, is the primary bacterium implicated in acne
vulgaris. However, routine microbiologic testing for the bacteria is not
recommended in the diagnosis of acne vulgaris.17
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Microbiologic testing with a swab culture may be useful to exclude
certain infections that may exhibit acne lesions:17
• Staphylococcus aureus cutaneous infection
 may appear similar to acne vulgaris particularly in cases of
acute eruptions
• Gram-negative folliculitis
 presents as uniform and eruptive pustules usually at the
perioral and perinasal regions
 implicated bacteria are various e.g. Klebsiella and Serratia
 unresponsive to many conventional acne treatments
• Pityrosporum folliculitis
 prominent truncal involvement or monomorphic appearance
 caused by fungal infection
b. Endocrinology test
Most acne patients have normal hormone levels. Recalcitrant acne
vulgaris may be seen in patients with androgen excess. Endocrinology
evaluation is indicated in patients with clinical features or a history of
hyperandrogenism:17
• in prepubertal children, these features include acne, early-onset
body odour, axillary or pubic hair, accelerated growth, advanced
bone age and genital maturation
• in postpubertal females, clinical signs are infrequent menstruation,
hirsutism, androgenetic alopecia, infertility, polycystic ovaries,
clitoromegaly and truncal obesity
PCOS is the most common cause of elevated androgens of ovarian
origin.17-18 Referral to a gynaecologist for hormonal assessment and
pelvic ultrasound may be helpful in confirming PCOS.
In patients whom there is a suspicion of androgen excess, the following
hormonal tests may be considered and a referral to an endocrinologist
for further evaluation is warranted:17
• oestrogen
• androstenedione
• progesterone
• dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
• free and total testosterone
• prolactin
• luteinizing hormone
• cortisol
• follicle-stimulating hormone
• growth hormone
• sex-hormone binding globulin
• insulin-like growth factor
Recommendation 1
• Microbiological and endocrinological investigations may be
performed to rule out other conditions that may mimic acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
4. ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY
There are two broad approaches to the assessment of acne severity
which are global acne severity grading and lesion counting. Both have
some subjectivity involved. More objective methods for assessing the
severity of acne vulgaris include photography and advanced imaging
technologies.19, level III
There are at least 25 different acne severity grading systems,
comprising of both global grading and lesion counting.19, level III Global
severity gradings are usually based on comparisons of descriptive
texts or photographic standards. For acne lesion counting method, the
number of NIL (open and closed comedones), IL (papules, pustules
and nodules) and total lesions (TL) are counted. Currently, there is no
universally accepted grading system for acne.17
The South-East Asia Study Alliance (SASA) adopts the American
Academy of Dermatology Acne Consensus Conference (ACC) grading
system for acne severity. The ACC classification of acne severity is based
on the number and types of lesions, which is further classified into three
groups, which are mild, moderate and severe.20 The Dermatological
Society of Singapore18 and the first edition of Malaysian MoH CPG
on Management of Acne5 advocate the use of Comprehensive Acne
Severity Scale (CASS) for evaluating acne severity. CASS [modification
of an Investigator Global Assessment (IGA) of Acne Severity] is a
validated tool. It correlates strongly with the Leeds technique for face
(r=0.82), chest (r=0.85) and back (r=0.87).5 It is also simple to use in
clinical practice.
In a clinical research setting, lesion counting is better suited than grading.
Counts can distinguish between even small differences in therapeutic
response. The reliability of lesion counting has been evaluated and
shown intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) of 0.68 for NIL, 0.72
for IL and 0.65 for global grading. For intra-rater reliability, the ICCs
are 0.83, 0.79 and 0.69 for NIL, IL and global grading respectively.
These results suggest that lesion counting is more reliable than global
grading.19, level III
Recognising the concerns with existing measures of acne severity and
inadequate appraisals of acne severity scales to date, a review was
conducted on original published acne scales to formally evaluate their
quality against a set of predetermined criteria. The maximum quality
score was 13. The highest score of 6 was achieved by three measures,
which are the Leeds Revised Acne Grading (LRAG), The Global Acne
Severity Scale (GEA) and The Escala de Gravedad del Acné Española
(EGAE). CASS received a score of 5.21, level III
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Semi-automated or automated methods based on computational
imaging
techniques
have
been
used
for
acne
severity
assessment.22, level III Computational assessment is a more objective
method, which can reduce inter- and intra-rater variations. However,
such techniques have limitations e.g. high cost, use of complex and
sophisticated apparatuses, and time-consuming imaging process.
Table 1 shows the comparison among common Acne Severity Grading
Techniques based on the core psychometrics criteria.
Table 1: Comparison Among Common Acne Severity Grading
Techniques
6-point photonumeric scale
with descriptive
text
No
evidence
No
evidence
Strong
Strong
The Global
Acne Severity
Scale (GEA
Scale)23, level III
11-point scale,
supported by
black and white
images;
assessment in
situ
No
evidence
No
evidence
Strong
Strong
Leeds Grading
Technique
26, level II-1; 27, level III
6-point scale
with text
description of
each category;
assessment in
situ
No
evidence
No
evidence
Strong
Strong
Comprehensive
Acne Severity
Scale (CASS)
28, level III
Photo-numeric
scale with 13
categories
Weak
Weak
Weak
No
evidence
Leeds Revised
Acne Grading
Scale (LRAG)
24-25, level III
5-point severity
scale with
descriptive text
Strong
No
evidence
No
evidence
No
evidence
Investigators
Global
Assessment
Scale (IGA)
27, level III; 29, level III
Photographic
standard
8-point scale
supported by
text description,
and five black
and white
photographs;
remote
assessment
Weak
Strong
No
evidence
No
evidence
Cook Acne
Grading Severity
Scale30, level II-1
Grading
technique
Type of
assessment
Inter-rater
reliability
Intra-rater
reliability
Sensitivity
to change
Validity
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Modified: Agnew T, Furber G, Leach M, et al. A Comprehensive Critique and
Review of Published Measures of Acne Severity. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol.
2016;9(7):40-52
The CPG DG advocates the use of CASS for the assessment of acne
severity as it is simple to be used in clinical setting. Table 2 below
describes CASS assessment where inspection is done at a distance of
2.5 metres away for acne on the face, chest and back.
Table 2: Comprehensive Acne Severity Scale (CASS)
Refer to Appendix 4 for Clinical Images According to CASS Grading.
Recommendation 2
• Comprehensive Acne Severity Scale may be used for grading of
acne severity in clinical practice.
GRADE
DESCRIPTION
No lesions to barely noticeable ones. Very few scattered
comedones and papules.
Hardly visible from 2.5 metre away. A few scattered
comedones, few small papules and very few pustules.
Easily recognisable; less than half of the affected area is
involved. Many comedones, papules and pustules.
More than half of the affected area is involved. Numerous
comedones, papules and pustules.
Entire area is involved. Covered with comedones,
numerous pustules and papules, a few nodules and cyst.
Highly inflammatory acne covering the affected area, with
nodules and cyst present.
Clear
Almost
clear
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Very
severe
0
1
2
3
4
5
Grading
technique
Type of
assessment
Inter-rater
reliability
Intra-rater
reliability
Sensitivity
to change
Validity
No
evidence
No
evidence
No
evidence
No
evidence
5-point scale
based on most
prominent
lesion in any of
six regions,
multiplied by a
factor of 1, 2
or 3 to achieve
a global score
Global acne
grading system
(GAGS)
31, level III
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
5. TOPICAL TREATMENT
Treatment of acne vulgaris is based on the grade and severity of acne. Its
goals include resolution of lesions, reduction of psychological morbidity
and prevention of scars. Early intervention is important to prevent
complications. The treatment can be divided into pharmacological and
physical therapies.
Pharmacological treatment is the first-line management for acne
vulgaris. It can be divided into topical and systemic treatment. Refer
to Appendix 7 on Medication Dosage and Adverse Events. The
availability of these treatments in Malaysia is also stated in the appendix.
5.1 Topical Benzoyl Peroxide
Benzoyl peroxide (BPO) is an oxidising agent that has bactericidal,
mild anti-inflammatory and comedolytic properties. It is available in
concentrations of 2.5%, 5% and 10%.
A large Cochrane systematic review involving 120 randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) on 29,592 participants with acne vulgaris looked
into the effectiveness and safety of topical BPO and its combination.
Topical BPO monotherapy was more effective than placebo or no
treatment at long-term (>8 weeks) in:32, level I
• reduction of TL count (MD= -16.14, 95% CI -26.51 to -5.78)
• reduction of IL count (MD= -6.12, 95% CI -11.02 to -1.22)
• reduction of NIL count (MD= -9.69, 95% CI -15.08 to -4.29)
• achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ on the IGA-rated scale of
acne severity (RR=1.77, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.28)
Topical BPO with add-on treatment was also more effective in acne
vulgaris at long-term in the following comparisons:32, level I
• BPO/adapalene vs placebo or no treatment
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on IGA scale
(RR=2.45, 95% CI 2.07 to 2.9)
• BPO/clindamycin vs placebo or no treatment
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on IGA scale
(RR=2.29, 95% CI 1.79 to 2.93)
• BPO/adapalene vs adapalene
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on IGA scale
(RR=1.65, 95% CI 1.42 to 1.93)
• BPO/clindamycin vs clindamycin
 reduction in TL count (MD= -7.25, 95% CI -11.05 to -3.45)
 reduction in IL count (MD= -1.03, 95% CI -1.88 to -0.18)
 reduction in NIL count (MD= -3.97, 95% CI -5.81 to -2.13)
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on IGA scale
(RR=1.45, 95% CI 1.31 to 1.61)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• BPO/clindamycin vs adapalene/clindamycin
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on IGA scale
(RR=1.45, 95% CI 0.95 to 2.23)
However, there was no significant difference between topical BPO
monotherapy vs topical adapalene or topical clindamycin monotherapy
in IGA rated scale of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ for acne severity at longterm.32, level I
There was also no difference in the effectiveness of topical BPO of
various concentrations (2.5%, 5% and 10%) and in various vehicles
(alcohol, water, acetone, gel or lotion).5
In terms of safety, topical BPO monotherapy or with add on treatment
had higher percentage of any adverse events (AEs) compared with
their comparators at long-term as listed below:32, level I
• BPO monotherapy vs placebo or no treatment (RR=1.46, 95% CI
1.01 to 2.11)
• BPO/adapalene vs placebo or no treatment (RR=4.60, 95% CI
2.42 to 8.75)
• BPO/adapalene vs adapalene (RR=1.38, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.95)
• BPO vs clindamycin (RR=1.27, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.64)
• BPO/clindamycin vs clindamycin (RR=1.48, 95% CI 1.02 to 2.16)
However, topical BPO monotherapy or with add on treatment had less
AEs in the following comparisons:
• BPO vs adapalene (RR=0.77, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.25)
• BPO/clindamycin vs adapalene/clindamycin (RR=0.55, 95% CI
0.42 to 0.71)
When comparing the different concentrations of topical BPO, the
frequency of AEs was higher in BPO 10% compared with BPO 2.5%
and 5%.5
Most of the above AEs were mild to moderate. The most common ones
across trials included skin dryness, erythema, skin irritation, peeling,
stinging/burning sensation and pruritus.32, level I
On quality assessment, the included trials in the review were/had high
or unclear risk of bias, small sizes, inconsistent results and possible
publication bias.32, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• Practical advice on topical BPO:
 Start at a lower concentration of 2.5% and titrate gradually to
5 - 10% if no improvement
 Apply once a day on the affected areas only
 If skin irritation develops, withhold treatment and restart on
alternate days once the AE has subsided
 Concomitant use of moisturiser may improve tolerability
 Bleaching of clothes may occur and the patient should be advised
accordingly
Recommendation 3
• Topical benzoyl peroxide monotherapy or in combination with other
topical therapy should be given in mild to moderate acne vulgaris.
5.2 Topical Retinoids
Topical retinoids, synthetic derivatives of vitamin A, are used in the
treatment of both inflammatory and non-inflammatory acne. They
help normalise follicular keratinisation and decrease keratinocyte
cohesiveness, thus reducing follicular occlusion and comedones
formation. Topical retinoids include tretinoin, adapalene, tazarotene and
isotretinoin. A new agent that has been recently approved is trifarotene.
In Malaysia, only topical tretinoin and adapalene are currently available.
5.2.1 Topical tretinoin
Topical tretinoin/retinoic acid was the first topical retinoid used in the
treatment of acne. It is available in various concentrations (0.01% to
0.1%) and formulations.
A large systematic review of 54 clinical trials looked into the
effectiveness of topical tretinoin, adapalene and tazarotene, either as
monotherapy or combination therapy. At 12 weeks of assessment, the
following comparisons involving tretinoin showed:33, level I
• tretinoin gel microsphere (TGM) 0.04% and TGM 0.1% had no
significant difference in effectiveness based on modified Global
Acne Grading System (mGAGS)
• tretinoin 0.05% was more effective than adapalene 0.3% and
0.1% in reducing TL counts (p<0.001)
• tretinoin 0.04% and tazarotene 0.05% had no significant difference
in NIL, IL and TL counts, and IGA scale rating
• combination therapy (tretinoin 0.025%/clindamycin 1.2%) was
more effective than clindamycin 1.2% monotherapy, tretinoin
0.025% monotherapy and vehicle in terms of:
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
 reduction in NIL, IL and TL counts (p<0.05)
 achievement of 2-point reduction in Investigator’s Static Global
Assessment (ISGA) (p<0.001)
5.2.2 Topical adapalene
Topical adapalene is a naphthoic acid derivative which is a receptorselective retinoid analogue. It is available in two concentrations, 0.1%
and 0.3%, but only 0.1% is currently available in Malaysia.
In the same systematic review as above, the following comparisons at
12 weeks involving adapalene showed:33, level I
• adapalene 0.1% was more effective than vehicle in:
 achievement of 2-point reduction in IGA (p<0.001)
 reduction of NIL, IL and TL counts (p<0.001)
• adapalene 0.1% was non-inferior to tazarotene 0.1% in reduction
of TL counts
• adapalene 0.3% and tazarotene 0.1% had no significant difference
in NIL and IL counts
• adapalene combination therapy (adapalene/BPO) was more
effective than vehicle in:
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on IGA scale
(p<0.05)
 reduction in NIL and IL counts (p<0.05)
Comparison of effectiveness between various concentrations and
formulations of adapalene at week 12 showed that:
• adapalene 0.3% gel was superior to 0.1% in reduction of IL count
(p=0.015).5
• microsphere adapalene 0.1% and conventional adapalene 0.1%
had no significant difference in NIL, IL and TL counts.33, level I
5.2.3 Topical tazarotene
Topical tazarotene is a receptor-selective retinoid. It is available as gel
or cream in concentrations of 0.05% and 0.1%.
In the same systematic review as above, the following comparisons at
12 weeks involving tazarotene showed:33, level I
• tazarotene 0.1% was more effective than vehicle in:
 achievement of 2-point reduction in ISGA (p<0.001)
 achievement of ‘clear’ or ‘almost clear’ rating on ISGA scale
(p<0.001)
 reduction in NIL, IL and TL counts (p<0.001)
• tazarotene combination therapy (tazarotene 0.1% + dapsone 5%)
and tazarotene 0.1% monotherapy had no significant difference in
IL counts
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
There is no retrievable evidence of superiority between both
concentrations and preparations of tazarotene.5
5.2.4 Topical isotretinoin
Topical isotretinoin is not available in Malaysia. There is no recent
retrievable evidence on its effectiveness and safety.
5.2.5 Topical trifarotene
Topical trifarotene is a new gamma-selective retinoid cream that is
suitable for acne vulgaris on the face and trunk. It has comedolytic,
anti-inflammatory and anti-pigmenting properties, and is available in 50
μg/g strength.
Two similar RCTs, PERFECT 1 and PERFECT 2 involving 1208 and
1212 participants respectively showed that trifarotene was significantly
more effective than placebo for acne vulgaris at 12 weeks in:34, level I
• improvement of IGA-rated scale
• reduction in mean IL and NIL counts
Similarly, a single arm study demonstrated that 65.1% of participants on
trifarotene showed improvement in IGA rating for facial acne vulgaris at
52 weeks.35, level II-3
5.2.6 Summary of effectiveness and safety of various topical
retinoids
Based on the same large systematic review of 54 clinical trials that
looked into the effectiveness of topical tretinoin, adapalene and
tazarotene, either as monotherapy or combination therapy, all three
topical agents were effective. It was however difficult to rank the various
topical retinoids based on the limited number of comparative trials.33, level I
Limitations of the systematic review included small clinical trials, lack
of blinding, potential investigator grading bias and different duration of
clinical trials.
Topical retinoid is recommended as monotherapy in primarily
comedonal acne and as combination therapy with BPO or topical/oral
antimicrobials in mixed or primarily inflammatory acne lesions.17-18
In terms of safety, topical adapalene, tretinoin and tazarotene showed
mostly mild to moderate severity of treatment-related AEs which were
transient. Both adapalene and tretinoin had similar AEs like skin
irritation and erythema, while topical tazarotene was associated with
more scaling, stinging and burning sensation.33, level I On the other hand,
topical trifarotene was associated with erythema, scaling, dryness and
stinging/burning.34, level I; 35, level II-3
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• Practical advice on topical retinoids:
 It can cause photosensitivity, thus should be applied at night
 Apply a thin layer on the affected areas or the entire face
 If skin irritation develops, withhold treatment and restart on
alternate days once the AE has subsided
 Concomitant use of moisturiser may improve tolerability
 Adequate sun protection (e.g. using broad-spectrum sunscreen,
umbrella or hat) is advisable
Recommendation 4
• Topical retinoids (e.g. tretinoin and adapalene) monotherapy should
be used in non-inflammatory acne vulgaris or in combination with
other therapies in inflammatory acne vulgaris.
5.3 Topical Antibiotics
Topical antibiotics are useful in the treatment of mild to moderate
inflammatory acne. Topical clindamycin and erythromycin are the
most widely prescribed antibiotics. The use of topical antibiotics as
monotherapy should be avoided to prevent bacterial resistance.5, 17
A new topical antibiotic (topical minocycline foam 4%) has recently
been approved for moderate to severe acne vulgaris. The only topical
antibiotic available for the treatment of acne vulgaris in Malaysia is
clindamycin.
5.3.1 Topical clindamycin
Topical clindamycin is effective in reducing both NIL and IL counts.5
A large network meta-analysis of 40 clinical trials involving 18,089
participants showed that clindamycin monotherapy or in combination
was more effective than vehicle in:36, level I
• improving Patient Global Assessment for:
 clindamycin alone (OR=1.56, 95% CI 1.13 to 2.16)
 clindamycin + BPO (OR=2.98, 95% CI 2.22 to 4.01)
 clindamycin + tretinoin (OR=1.71, 95% CI 1.12 to 2.62)
• reducing TL count for:
 clindamycin alone (MD= -8.18, 95% CI -11.11 to -5.25)
 clindamycin + BPO (MD= -12.69, 95% CI -15.92 to -9.47)
 clindamycin + tretinoin (MD= -7.44, 95% CI -11.90 to -2.97)
• improving IGA for:
 clindamycin alone (OR=2.00, 95% CI 1.19 to 3.37)
 clindamycin + BPO (OR=3.12, 95% CI 1.82 to 5.37)
 clindamycin + tretinoin (OR=1.87, 95% CI 0.94 to 3.72)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
In a large Cochrane systematic review, topical clindamycin with addon treatment was also more effective in acne vulgaris at long-term (12
weeks) in the following comparisons:32, level I
• clindamycin + BPO vs placebo or no treatment
 ‘Clear’ or ‘Almost clear’ rated on the IGA scale of acne severity
(RR=2.29, 95% CI 1.79 to 2.93)
• clindamycin + BPO vs clindamycin
 reduced TL count (MD= -7.25, 95% CI -11.05 to -3.45)
The AEs of clindamycin, e.g. erythema, peeling, dryness, scaling,
stinging, burning and itching, were mild and transient.5; 32, level I
5.3.2 Topical erythromycin
Topical erythromycin is effective in reducing both NIL (25% to 74%) and
IL (42% to 74%) counts at 6 to 12 weeks of treatment.5
However, in a large network meta-analysis mentioned above, topical
erythromycin in combination with tretinoin or zinc was not more effective
than vehicle.36, level I
AEs of topical erythromycin, e.g. dryness, itching, burning, erythema,
scaling and dermatitis, were localised, mild and transient.5; 36, level I
5.3.3 Topical minocycline
Two large RCTs showed that topical minocycline foam 4% was more
effective than vehicle in moderate to severe acne vulgaris at 12 weeks
in terms of:
• reduction in IL count
 13.79 vs 10.94 (LSM difference=2.97, 95% CI 1.44 to 4.49]37, level I
 16.93 vs 13.40 (LSM difference=3.65, 95% CI 2.46 to 4.83)38, level I
• reduction in NIL count
 14.76 vs 8.64 (LSM difference=6.14, 95% CI 2.47 to 9.82)37, level I
 18.80 vs 15.89 (LSM difference=2.90, 95% CI 0.51 to 5.30)38, level I
• improvement in IGA
 11.51% vs 6.34% (RR=1.81, 95% CI 1.10 to 2.98)37, level I
 30.8% vs 19.6% (RR=1.58, 95% CI 1.32 to 1.88)38, level I
In terms of safety, the AEs were mainly mild to moderate. Reported
AEs included headache and skin-related changes (application site
discolouration and discomfort and yellowing of nails). No treatmentrelated hyperpigmentation was noted.37-38, level I
Recommendation 5
• Topical antibiotics (e.g. clindamycin) should not be used as
monotherapy in acne vulgaris to prevent bacterial resistance.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
5.4 Topical Azelaic Acid
Topical azelaic acid (AA) is an aliphatic dicarboxylic acid which has
both antimicrobial and anticomedonal properties. It is available
in various strengths (5 - 20%) and formulations (cream, gel and
lotion). It also inhibits tyrosinase, thus effective for post-inflammatory
hyperpigmentation (PIH).
A Cochrane systematic review which included 18 studies on AA at
various formulations and concentrations for the treatment of acne
vulgaris showed the following outcomes at long-term:39, level I
• significant reduction in NIL, IL and TL counts for AA compared
with placebo/no treatment
• no significant difference in participants’ global self-assessment
of acne improvement (PGA) scale of acne severity for AA
monotherapy vs clindamycin and tretinoin monotherapy
• AA monotherapy was less effective than BPO in PGA scale of
acne severity (RR=0.84, 95% CI 0.74 to 0.96)
In terms of safety, there was no significant difference in total minor
AEs between AA monotherapy with clindamycin, tretinoin and BPO
monotherapies. Most AEs reported, e.g. pruritus, burning, stinging and
tingling, were mild and limited to the application sites.39, level I
AA has also been shown to improve PIH in acne vulgaris.40, level III
Recommendation 6
• Topical azelaic acid may be used in acne vulgaris, especially in
patients with post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation.
5.5 Topical Salicylic Acid
Topical salicylic acid (SA) is an O-hydroxybenzoic acid which has
keratolytic and comedolytic effects. It is available in most over-thecounter acne preparations in various concentrations (0.5 - 3.0%) and
formulations (facial cleanser, cream and lotion).
In the similar Cochrane systematic review as above that also evaluated
18 studies on SA at various formulations and concentrations, there was
significant reduction in NIL, IL and TL counts for SA compared with
placebo/no treatment. In terms of safety, the AEs were mild and limited
to erythema, burning, peeling and itching.39, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
5.6 Topical Dapsone
Topical dapsone has both antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
properties. It is currently not available in Malaysia.
In a pooled analysis of two RCTs in mild-to-moderate acne vulgaris,
dapsone gel 7.5% was effective and safe when compared with vehicle
at 12 weeks as shown below:41, level I
• improvement of global acne assessment score (GAAS) (29.8% vs
21.1%, p<0.001)
• reduction of NIL count (-20.7 vs -18.0, p<0.001), IL count (-15.8 vs
-13.9, p<0.001) and TL count (-36.5 vs -32.0, p<0.001)
• comparable AEs (18.3% vs 18.8%); with commonest symptoms
being application site reactions, e.g. dryness, pruritus and pain,
which were mild to moderate in intensity
5.7 Topical Sulphur
Topical sulphur has long been used in the treatment of acne vulgaris.
It has anti-inflammatory and mild keratolytic properties. Sulphurcontaining preparations vary in concentrations from 1 - 10%, and
available in the form of soap, foam, cream, ointment and lotion.
In a Cochrane systematic review, there was no significant difference
between topical sulphur and placebo or no treatment in PGA score for
acne at eight weeks. Commonest reported AEs included skin dryness
and itchiness.39, level I
5.8 Topical Clascoterone (Androgen Receptor Inhibitor)
Clascoterone (cortexolone 17 α-propionate) is a novel, steroidal antiandrogen chemical that competes with dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
receptor in the skin, leading to reduction of sebum production and
proinflammatory cytokines. It is currently not available in Malaysia.
In a meta-analysis which included five RCTs comprising 2457 subjects
with acne vulgaris, topical clascoterone cream 1% was more effective
than vehicle at 12 weeks in:42, level I
• improving IGA-rated scale (RR=2.87, 95% CI 2.11 to 3.89)
• decreasing NIL counts (MD= -5.64, 95% CI -8.41 to -2.87)
It is well tolerated and showed no significant difference in the incidence
of drug-related AEs.
5.9 Topical Olumacostat Glasaretil (Sebum Controlling Agent)
There is no retrievable evidence on this agent.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
5.10
Comparison of Various Topical Preparations for Mild to
Moderate Acne Vulgaris
A recent network meta-analysis on monotherapies of adapalene,
tretinoin, BPO, clindamycin and AA, and combination therapies
of adapalene + BPO, clindamycin + BPO, clindamycin + tretinoin,
erythromycin + tretinoin and erythromycin + zinc showed that all
topical treatments were more effective than vehicle. Amongst them,
combination therapy of adapalene + BPO was the most effective with
the following results:36, level I
• reduction in TL count (MD= -20.96, 95% CI -25.02 to -16.90)
• improvement of IGA score (OR=3.83, 95% CI 2.40 to 6.10)
• improvement of Patient Global Assessment (OR=3.65, 95% CI
2.58 to 5.15)
However, adapalene + BPO combination had a slightly higher incidence
of withdrawal due to AEs (OR=2.93, 95% CI 1.69 to 5.08).
5.11
Topical Fixed Combination Therapy
Topical combination therapies can be prescribed as two separate
products or as a fixed combination. The available topical fixed
combination therapy includes clindamycin/BPO, adapalene/BPO,
erythromycin/BPO and clindamycin/tretinoin.
Combination preparations with topical BPO, retinoids or antibiotics are
more effective than either agent used alone.5; 32, level I However, there
is no evidence to demonstrate that combination therapy as separate
product is superior or inferior to a fixed combination.32, level I Topical fixed
combination therapy may improve compliance because of convenience
and faster speed of onset.43, level III
• Topical agents are the mainstay of treatment in mild to moderate
acne vulgaris.
 There is a variety of preparations available.
 The commonly used agents are topical BPO, retinoids, antibiotics
and fixed combination preparations.
• Combination treatment with either topical BPO, topical retinoid or
topical antibiotic is more effective than monotherapy in acne vulgaris.
Recommendation 7
• Combination topical therapy should be given in moderate acne
vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
6. SYSTEMIC TREATMENT
Refer to Appendix 7 on Medication Dosage and Adverse Events.
The availability of the treatments in Malaysia is stated in the appendix.
6.1 Oral Antibiotics
The effectiveness of oral antibiotics has long been established due to
their anti-inflammatory effects and antibacterial action against C. acnes.
Oral antibiotics are indicated for moderate to severe papulopustular/
inflammatory acne vulgaris.
Antibiotics must be used judiciously as recent decades have seen
increasing emergence of resistant strains of C. acnes. Resistance
can manifest as reduced response, no response or relapse. Limiting
the duration of antibiotic therapy and adequate patient education to
enhance compliance are paramount to reduce the risk of resistance
while achieving a satisfactory outcome. Topical retinoid, BPO or AA
should be used after discontinuation of antibiotic.44, level III
There are several antibiotics used in the treatment of acne
vulgaris namely tetracycline class, macrolides and trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole. The effectiveness and safety of the antibiotics are
discussed below.
6.1.1 Tetracycline class
The tetracycline class of antibiotics are considered first-line therapy
in moderate to severe acne, except where contraindicated (e.g.
pregnancy, lactation, age <8 years or allergic to tetracyclines). It inhibits
protein synthesis by binding the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome
and has multiple anti-inflammatory properties, mainly reduction of
neutrophil chemotaxis with inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines and
matrix metalloproteinases.
a. Doxycycline
Doxycycline is the first tetracycline derivative to be introduced and
remains one of the most commonly used antibiotics in the treatment of
acne vulgaris.
Doxycycline is effective in reducing both inflammatory and noninflammatory lesions.5 It is given at a dose of 100 - 200 mg daily.18 In a
systematic review, two RCTs showed that 100 mg OD doxycycline had
higher success rate (percentage of subjects scored ‘clear’ or ‘almost
clear’) after 12 weeks and 20 mg BD doxycycline reduced TL count
after 6 months of treatment compared with placebo.45, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
In an RCT on subantimicrobial dosing, doxycycline 20 mg BD
significantly reduced the number of IL, NIL and TL counts compared
with placebo at 12 weeks. While another RCT showed that modifiedrelease doxycycline 40 mg daily was significantly more effective than
placebo in mean reduction of IL and, median percentage reduction in IL
and TL counts.45, level I
The side effects of doxycycline were photosensitivity (dose-dependent),
gastrointestinal (GI) disturbance (nausea, vomiting and/or diarrhoea,
pill oesophagitis), vaginal candidiasis and pseudotumour cerebri.45, level I
• To reduce the side effects of doxycycline, patients should be advised
to:18
 take medication after meal with plenty of water
 practise adequate sun protection
b. Tetracycline
Tetracycline is prescribed at doses ranging from 500 to 1000 mg/
day and in two divided doses. In an RCT involving 51 patients with
acne vulgaris, oral tetracycline showed higher percentage of clinical
improvement compared with placebo after six weeks (p<0.01) and at
completion of three months of therapy (p<0.01).45, level I
Food and dairy products reduce the absorption of tetracycline; therefore,
the medication should be taken before food. Tetracycline should be
used with caution in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.18
The common side effects of tetracycline are GI disturbance (dyspepsia,
vomiting, diarrhoea), photosensitivity, pseudotumour cerebri, yellow
staining of developing teeth and vaginal candidiasis.18; 45, level I
c. Minocycline
Of the tetracycline group, minocycline is the most lipophilic, resulting in
increased penetration and accumulation in the sebaceous gland, where
C. acnes colonises. This also allows minocycline to be taken with food
and utilised at low doses. The recommended dose is 50 - 100 mg once
to twice daily.
In a Cochrane systematic review, minocycline was more effective than
placebo in reducing TL counts (MD=9.84, 95% CI 4.84 to 14.84) and
improving Investigator Global Severity (RR=1.89, 95% CI 1.26 to 2.82).
However, there was no evidence that it was superior to other commonly
used oral antibiotics (oxytetracycline, doxycycline, lymecycline,
roxithromycin and faropenem). The RCTs were generally small and low
quality.46, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
In another systematic review, two RCTs compared extended-release
minocycline 1 mg/kg daily and placebo in acne vulgaris. The antibiotic
group had higher percentage of treatment success based on Evaluator’s
Global Severity Assessment scale (p<0.001). In a dose-ranging RCT,
the dose of 1 mg/kg showed significant decrease in IL count compared
with placebo after 12 weeks.45, level I
In terms of safety, 17.4% of participants treated with minocycline
had experienced at least one AEs. Common AEs were blue-gray
cutaneous pigmentation (dose dependent), vestibular toxicity (vertigo,
dizziness), GI disturbances, lupus-like syndrome and hepatitis.45, level I
There was no significant difference in AEs between minocycline and its
comparators.45-46, level I
d. Lymecycline
Lymecycline is a semisynthetic antibiotic which is converted to
tetracycline in the GI tract.
An RCT showed that lymecycline 300 mg daily was more effective
in reducing IL (p=0.0005) and TL (p<0.0007) counts compared with
placebo at 12 weeks. Treatment with lymecycline has the advantages
over other tetracyclines, including a less frequent occurrence of GI and
dermatological side effects.45, level I
e. Sarecycline
Sarecycline is a novel tetracycline-derived oral antibiotic with a narrow
antibacterial spectrum. It was Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of
United States of America approved in October 2018 for treatment of
non-nodular inflammatory moderate to severe acne vulgaris in patients
≥9 years of age.
Two RCTs showed that oral sarecycline 1.5 mg/kg per day for 12 weeks
was significantly more effective than placebo in terms of IGA success
and mean reduction in percentage of IL count for facial and truncal acne.
AEs were mainly GI side effects, nasopharyngitis and headache.47, level I
Although sarecycline might be the preferred treatment of choice
in children aged 9 to 12 years, it comes with the same warnings of
tooth discolouration and impaired bone growth as other tetracycline
derivatives.48, level III
6.1.2 Macrolides
Macrolide is another antibiotic group commonly used in the treatment
of moderate to severe acne vulgaris. It is safe to be used in pregnancy
and lactation.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
a. Erythromycin
Erythromycin has bacteriostatic activity by binding to the 50S subunit
of the bacterial ribosome causing inhibition of RNA-dependent protein
synthesis. It also exhibits anti-inflammatory properties. Erythromycin
is available in two different formulations which are erythromycin ethyl
succinate (EES) (recommended dose 400 - 800 mg twice daily) and
erythromycin stearate (recommended dose 250 - 500 mg twice daily).5
However, widespread antibiotic resistance has rendered erythromycin
less useful in recent years.
In an RCT, there is no difference in effectiveness between erythromycin
and tetracycline at week 12 of treatment.45, level I
In view of increased risk of bacterial resistance, usage of erythromycin
should be limited to those in whom tetracyclines are contraindicated
(pregnant women or children <8 years of age).17
The
common
AEs
of
erythromycin
are
diarrhoea,
nausea,
abdominal
discomfort,
cardiac
conduction
abnormalities
and
hepatotoxicity.45, level I Potential drug interactions with carbamazepine,
theophylline and cyclosporine have also been reported.18
b. Azithromycin
Azithromycin is a derivative of erythromycin. The long half-life is
conducive to less frequent dosing which might improve compliance. It
has better bioavailability when taken on an empty stomach.
Numerous dosing regimens have been recommended, from three
times a week to four days a month. In a systematic review, an RCT with
different doses in patients with papulopustular acne vulgaris concluded
that azithromycin total dose of 4.5 g in seven weeks was significantly
less effective in decreasing the total of lesions and change over time
than total dose of 6.0 g in 10 weeks or 7.5 g in 13 weeks.45, level I
In the same systematic review, three RCTs showed comparable
effectiveness in lesion count and/or acne vulgaris severity between
different pulsed doses of azithromycin and doxycycline in moderate
inflammatory acne vulgaris.45, level I
A recent local RCT compared the effectiveness of azithromycin
250 mg three times a week plus BPO 5% and doxycycline 100 mg
daily plus BPO 5% in patients with moderate to severe acne vulgaris.
The effectiveness was comparable in both groups as assessed by
improvement of CASS score and lesion counts at week 12. There were
no significant differences in the incidence of diarrhoea and abdominal
pain, and none of the patients in the azithromycin group experienced
nausea.49, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
In terms of safety, azithromycin can cause GI disturbances but at a
lower incidence than erythromycin. However, it had been associated
with cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions.45, level I
6.1.3 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
Sulfamethoxazole is bacteriostatic by blocking bacterial synthesis of
folic acid which is necessary for cell division, while trimethoprim is a
folic acid analog that inhibits the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase.
In a systematic review, an RCT demonstrated a significant reduction
in acne scores after five weeks of therapy with trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole (400/80 mg once daily) compared with placebo.
In another RCT, trimethoprim 100 mg (three times per day for four
weeks, then twice daily for four weeks) was found to be as effective as
oxytetracycline 250 mg (three times per day for four weeks, then twice
daily for four weeks) in reducing lesion count.45, level I
The AEs of this antibiotic include GI upset, photosensitivity and the
potential for serious AEs e.g. Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal
necrolysis (SJS/TEN), bone marrow suppression,18 fulminant hepatic
necrosis and respiratory hypersensitivity.45, level I It is contraindicated
among individuals who are glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PD)-deficient.45, level I
Co-trimoxazole should only be used when other antibiotics have failed
or are contraindicated because of its potential serious AEs.
6.1.4 Antibiotic resistance
Increase in C. acnes resistance has been reported in all major regions
of the world. Seven studies explored the pattern of antibiotic resistance
and the results are summarised as below in Table 3.
Table 3: Resistance Rate of Antibiotics in Acne Treatment
Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Minocycline
Erythromycin
Clindamycin
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Co-trimoxazole)
Resistance rate (%)
Antibiotics
0 - 22
0 - 22
0 - 10
10.6 - 64
6.1 - 62.7
6.7 - 26.3
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Source:
1 Moon SH, Roh HS, Kim YH, et al. Antibiotic resistance of microbial strains isolated
from Korean acne patients. J Dermatol. 2012;39(10):833-7
2 Laochunsuwan A, Taweechotipatr M, Udompataikul M. In vitro Study of Antibiotic
Susceptibility of Propionibacterium acnes Strains Isolated from Acne Vulgaris
Patients. J Med Assoc Thai. 2017;100(10):24.
3 Yang SS, Long V, Liau MM, et al. A profile of Propionibacterium acnes resistance
and sensitivity at a tertiary dermatological centre in Singapore. Br J Dermatol.
2018;179(1):200-201
4 Zhang N, Yuan R, Xin KZ, et al. Antimicrobial Susceptibility, Biotypes and
Phylotypes of Clinical Cutibacterium (Formerly Propionibacterium) acnes Strains
Isolated from Acne Patients: An Observational Study. Dermatol Ther. 2019;9:735746
5 Mendoza N, Hernandez PO, Tyring SK, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility of
Propionibacterium acnes isolates from acne patients in Colombia. Int J Dermatol.
2013;52(6):688-92
6 Schafer F, Fich F, Lam M, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility and genetic
characteristics of Propionibacterium acnes isolated from patients with acne. Int J
Dermatol. 2013;52(4):418-25
7 Biswal I, Gaind R, Kumar N, et al. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
Propionibacterium acnes isolated from patients with acne vulgaris. J Infect Dev
Ctries. 2016;10(10):1140-1145
Refer to Appendix 6 on Clinical Characteristics of Acne Patients
in Studies on Antibiotic Resistance and Resistance Rates of
Systemic Antibiotics Used in Acne Vulgaris.
Oral antibiotic therapy should not exceed 3 - 4 months and that minimum
duration of 6 - 8 weeks is required to see clinical improvement in acne
vulgaris.18
• Oral antibiotic in combination with other topical treatment e.g. BPO,
retinoid and AA is advocated as it prevents development of bacterial
resistance, achieves faster resolution of lesions and targets multiple
pathogenesis of acne.
Recommendation 8
• Oral doxycycline, tetracycline or erythromycin should be used for
moderate to severe acne vulgaris.
 Response to these antibiotics should be evaluated at 6 - 8 weeks.
 Target duration of therapy should not exceed 3 - 4 months to
reduce resistance.
6.2 Oral Isotretinoin
Isotretinoin or 13-cis retinoic acid is the only acne therapeutic agent
that counteracts all four pathogenesis of acne vulgaris. It is converted
to all-trans retinoic acid, which penetrates the cell nucleus and binds to
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
two nuclear receptors which are Retinoic Acids Receptors (RARs) and
Retinoids X Receptors (RXRs). Isotretinoin reduces sebaceous glands
activity and size markedly, normalises follicular keratinisation, indirectly
inhibits C. acnes growth in hair follicle and exerts an anti-inflammatory
action.
In a Cochrane systematic review, three low quality RCTs assessed
the effectiveness of oral isotretinoin vs oral antibiotic plus topical
agent. However, heterogeneity of regimens and doses in the studies
precluded meta-analysis. There was no clear evidence that isotretinoin
improved acne vulgaris severity based on total IL count in the following
comparisons:50, level I
• isotretinoin vs oral minocycline plus AA in severe acne vulgaris
after 24 weeks
• isotretinoin vs oral doxycycline plus adapalene/BPO gel in severe
acne vulgaris after 20 weeks
• isotretinoin vs tetracycline plus topical adapalene in moderate to
severe acne vulgaris after 24 weeks
Numerous discussions have been raised in recent years regarding
optimal dosing and duration of treatment for isotretinoin. In the same
systematic review, three RCTs assessed the different doses/therapeutic
regimen of isotretinoin. However, heterogeneity between the doses
made comparisons of the studies impossible.50, level I
• In the first RCT on severe acne vulgaris, decrease in total IL count
was 79%, 80% and 84% for 0.05 mg/kg/daily, 0.1 mg/kg/daily and
0.2 mg/kg/daily of oral isotretinoin after 20 weeks.
• A second RCT compared three different doses of isotretinoin
in moderate acne vulgaris i.e. daily low dose (0.25 to 0.4 mg/
kg/day), daily conventional dose (0.5 to 0.7 mg/kg/day) and
intermittent dose (0.5 to 0.7 mg/kg/day, first week in every four
weeks) regimens for 24 weeks.
 Mean IL counts were lower in the daily low dose (MD=3.72
lesions, 95% CI 2.13 to 5.31) and daily conventional dose
(MD=3.87 lesions, 95% CI 2.31 to 5.43) compared with the
intermittent dose group.
 One year after the end of therapy, intermittent oral isotretinoin
had higher mean values of GAGS scores than either daily low
dose (MD=6.35, 95% CI 1.52 to 11.18) or daily conventional
dose (MD=7.93, 95% 3.33 to 12.53) groups.
 One year after the end of treatment, relapse rates were 13%
in conventional dose, 18% in low dose and 56% in intermittent
dose groups.
• The third RCT on severe acne vulgaris showed 95% improvement
in total IL count on the face and trunk at 58%, 80% and 90% with
isotretinoin at doses of 0.1 mg/kg/day, 0.5 mg/kg/day and 1 mg/
kg/day respectively after 20 weeks.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
In a longitudinal study on the effectiveness of isotretinoin at a dose of
0.37 ± 0.11 mg/kg/day in acne vulgaris, a decrease in GAGS score was
noted after 6 - 8 weeks of treatment (p<0.001).51, level II-3
An evidence-based guidelines recommends that low-dose isotretinoin
can be used effectively to treat acne vulgaris, and also reduce the
frequency and severity of medication-related AEs. This is based on
evidence of patients with treatment resistant or relapsing moderate
acne vulgaris where low-dose isotretinoin (0.25 - 0.40 mg/kg/day) was
effective and comparable to conventional dosing. Intermittent dosing of
isotretinoin is not recommended.17 As such, the CPG DG recommends
starting isotretinoin at a lower dose of 10 - 20 mg/day and titrating the
dose accordingly if there is no improvement after one to two months of
treatment.
Conventionally, a course of isotretinoin has been prescribed until a total
cumulative dose of 120 - 150 mg/kg is achieved.52 However, based on
the CPG DG’s experience and clinical judgement, isotretinoin may be
discontinued earlier (4 - 8 weeks after clearance of skin lesions). Acne
vulgaris may relapse after treatment discontinuation. Factors that have
been implicated as a higher risk for relapse include severe seborrhoea,
young age, family history of acne, prepubertal acne and truncal
acne.44, level III
Acne flare may occur after starting oral isotretinoin. Consider adding
a short course of oral prednisolone to reduce the inflammation.52
Prednisone can be given in doses of 0.5 - 1 mg/kg/day to prevent the
systemic and cutaneous manifestations of isotretinoin-induced acne
fulminans-like eruptions.17 It can be tapered slowly over 4 - 6 weeks.
Isotretinoin is highly lipophilic and is best absorbed when taken with
food. Patients should be instructed to take isotretinoin with meals.17
AEs includes mucocutaneous (cheilitis, xerosis, erythema, pruritus,
desquamation, dryness of nasal mucosa, epistaxis, worsening or
triggering atopic dermatitis and telogen effluvium), musculoskeletal
(arthralgia and muscular cramps) and ophthalmic (dry eyes and
inflammation of the eyelids) systems. With standard courses, these
AEs are temporary and resolve without sequelae after discontinuation
of the drug.17
The causal link between isotretinoin and depression is controversial
with rates ranging from 1 - 11%, which are similar with the rates in oral
antibiotic control groups. Patients should be screened for symptoms of
depression before and during treatment.18
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Liver function tests and serum lipids should be checked before and 6 -
8 weeks after medication initiation or earlier if necessary.18 Laboratory
abnormalities include elevations of serum aspartate, alanine
transaminases and hypertriglycerides which all return to normal after
discontinuation of therapy.5
Isotretinoin is a teratogenic drug and should not be used in female
patients who are or may become pregnant. Contraception should be
discussed with the patients when considering isotretinoin. Female
patients who can become pregnant must be on contraception while on
isotretinoin and until one month after discontinuation of the treatment.
There is an extremely high risk that severe birth defects may result
if pregnancy occurs while taking isotretinoin. These include external
abnormalities e.g. skull abnormality, ear abnormalities (anotia,
micropinna, small or absent external auditory canals), eye abnormality
(microphthalmia), facial dysmorphia and cleft palate. Documented
internal abnormalities include central nervous system abnormalities
(cerebral abnormalities, cerebellar malformation, hydrocephalus,
microcephaly, cranial nerve deficit), cardiovascular (CV) abnormalities,
thymus gland abnormality and parathyroid hormone deficiency. There
is also an increased risk of spontaneous abortion and premature birth.
If pregnancy occurs during treatment, isotretinoin must be discontinued
immediately and patient should be referred to an obstetrician for further
evaluation and counseling.53, level III
All patients on isotretinoin should also be counselled not to donate
blood while taking the medication and for at least one month after the
last dose.53, level III
Guidelines has recommended the usage of oral isotretinoin in
nodulocystic or severe acne vulgaris, treatment-resistant moderate
acne vulgaris and acne causing physical scarring or psychosocial
distress.17-18; 44, level III
Due to the teratogenicity and other AEs related to isotretinoin, adequate
counselling and patient consent are required prior to its treatment. It
should be used with caution and prescribed only by dermatologists.
• Isotretinoin is teratogenic and strict contraceptive practice is required
for females who may become pregnant.
Recommendation 9
• Isotretinoin should be prescribed for nodulocystic or severe acne
vulgaris and treatment-resistant moderate acne vulgaris.
 It should only be prescribed by dermatologists.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
6.3 Oral Hormonal Therapy
Hormonal therapy is a treatment option for managing acne vulgaris in
women. This option can be considered in women with hyperandrogenism
e.g. PCOS.
6.3.1 Combined oral contraceptive
Several mechanisms are postulated on acne improvement with
combined oral contraceptive (COC), like decreased free testosterone
levels, increased sex hormone-binding globulin and prevention of the
conversion of free testosterone to DHT.
A Cochrane systematic review of 31 RCTs supported the effectiveness
of COCs in reducing inflammatory and non-inflammatory facial acne
lesions. The following are the important results of the review:54, level I
• levonorgestrel-containing COC was more effective than placebo
in:
 decreasing TL count (MD= -9.98, 95% CI -16.51 to -3.45)
 decreasing IL count (MD= -2.95, 95% CI -4.97 to -0.93)
 decreasing NIL count (MD= -6.75, 95% CI -12.56 to -0.94)
 improving clinician assessment of “clear” or “almost clear”
lesions (OR=1.56, 95% CI 1.13 to 2.18)
 improving participant self-assessment of improved acne
lesions (OR=2.13, 95% CI 1.47 to 3.09)
• norgestimate-containing COC was more effective than placebo
in:
 reducing TL count (MD= -9.32, 95% CI -14.19 to -4.45)
 reducing NIL count (MD= -3.44, 95% CI -5.43 to -1.44)
 reducing comedones counts (MD= -5.81, 95% CI -9.77 to
-1.85)
 improving clinician assessment on improved acne lesions
(OR=3.86, 95% CI 2.31 to 6.44)
• drospirenone-containing COC was more effective than placebo
in investigator’s assessment of “clear” or “almost clear” skin
(OR=3.02, 95% CI 1.99 to 4.59)
Evidence of effectiveness comparing different COCs were scarce and
less clear.
There was no strong evidence showing the superiority of cyproterone
acetate COC over other progestins, although it had been traditionally
used for acne treatment. COCs that contained chlormadinone
acetate or cyproterone acetate improved acne better than those with
levonorgesterol and desogestrel, but this apparent advantage was
based on limited data or conflicting results.54, level I The poor quality and
heterogeneity of primary papers in the review make interpretation of the
results difficult.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
AEs of oral hormonal therapy include nausea, vomiting, breast
tenderness,
headaches,
menstrual
disturbances
and
venous
thrombosis.5
• Combined oral contraceptives may be beneficial in the treatment
of acne vulgaris in female patients, particularly in those with
hyperandrogenism.
6.3.2 Spironolactone
Spironolactone is an anti-androgen and aldosterone antagonist. It
competes with DHT for androgen receptors in the skin.
In a systematic review on the effectiveness of spironolactone in adult
female with acne:55, level I
• one RCT showed spironolactone was more effective than placebo
in reduction of at least 50% IL count (RR=3.75, 95% CI 1.51 to
9.34)
• another RCT showed that spironolactone plus desogestrelcontaining COC vs cyproterone acetate-containing COC had
similar effectiveness in reducing acne severity score
• a 3-arm RCT compared spironolactone plus norgestimatecontaining
COC
with
norgestimate-containing
COC
and
cyproterone acetate-containing COC plus 10 mg/day additional
cyproterone acetate demonstrated no significant difference in the
Burke and Cunliffe acne grading system between the three arms
after 12 months
The commonest reported AE was menstrual irregularities which was
dose related. Quality of the primary papers was very low.55, level I
In another recent randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial
of low-dose spironolactone (25 mg and 50 mg daily) and topical BPO in
adult female acne:56, level I
• the proportion of patients who achieved a “clear/almost clear”
grade and at least a 2-grade improvement as measured by the
Adult Female Acne Scoring Tool at week 12 was higher in the 50
mg spironolactone group compared with placebo (75% vs 30% for
both rates, OR=7.0, 95% CI 5.6 to 8.3)
• patients who received 50 mg spironolactone had a higher rate
of menstrual irregularities (p=0.013) and dizziness (p=0.039)
compared with placebo
• other AEs e.g. breast tenderness, breast enlargement, fatigue
and weight gain were non-significant between groups
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
6.3.3 Metformin
Metformin, an oral antihyperglycaemic agent, enhances peripheral
tissue sensitivity to insulin, hence reducing androgenic hormones and
insulin-like growth factor-1 levels.
A meta-analysis evaluated the effectiveness of metformin for treatment
of PCOS-related acne. Metformin at doses of 500 - 2,000 mg daily
as an adjuvant therapy to conventional treatment of acne vulgaris led
to greater improvement of acne scores compared with conventional
treatment (SMD= -0.256, 95% CI -0.439 to -0.074).57, level I However,
quality of primary papers was low.
A systematic review examined the use of metformin as an adjunct
therapy on moderate and severe acne in patients not diagnosed with
PCOS or androgen excess. Three RCTs showed that metformin was
effective as an adjunct therapy:58, level I
• One RCT comparing a group with metformin (500 mg twice
daily), hypocaloric diet and symptomatic anti-acne treatment
vs symptomatic anti-acne treatment alone showed that GAGS
significantly decreased in the metformin group.
• Another RCT evaluating metformin (500 mg thrice daily) as an
adjunct to lymecycline (300 mg once daily), adapalene and BPO
gel showed significantly higher mean reduction rates of TL and IL
counts in the metformin group compared with the group without
metformin.
• A local trial evaluated metformin (850 mg daily) as an adjunct
treatment to topical BPO and oral tetracycline (200 mg twice daily)
showed significantly higher percentage of patients with Global
Assessment Score of 0 or 1 or improvement of two grades from
baseline in the metformin group compared with the group without
the adjunct treatment.
However, there was no quality assessment reported in the review.
• Metformin may be beneficial as an adjuvant treatment in acne
vulgaris.
A summary on the role of various topical and systemic acne vulgaris
treatment based on the pathogenic factors is described in Table 4.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Table 4: Mode of Action of Topical and Systemic Treatments in
Acne Vulgaris
Topical BPO
Topical retinoid
Topical antibiotic
Topical azelaic acid
Topical salicylic acid
Topical sulphur
Topical androgen
receptor inhibitor
(clascoterone)
Oral antibiotics
Oral isotretinoin
Oral hormonal
therapy
Abnormal
sebum
production
C. acnes
follicular
colonisation
Abnormal
keratinisation
Inflammation
Medication
Pathogenic factors
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
7. PHYSICAL TREATMENT
7.1 Intralesional Corticosteroids Injection
In the first edition of Malaysian MoH CPG on the Management of Acne
Vulgaris, intralesional corticosteroids injection was recommended
to be used selectively for acne nodules/cysts without replacing the
conventional treatment.5 It is recommended to use intralesional
triamcinolone acetonide at a dose of 10 mg/ml and may be diluted with
sterile normal saline to 5 or 3.3mg/ml for nodular acne.17
Systemic absorption leading to adrenal suppression has been reported
following higher doses of intralesional corticosteroids injection of >15
mg per session. The suppression persists for 2 - 3 days with 20 - 35
mg dose and at least for five days with 50 mg dose. Local AEs include
skin atrophy, pigmentary changes, telangiectasia, haematoma and
infection.5
7.2 Comedones Extraction
Physical therapy e.g. comedones extraction can provide immediate
clinical improvement and patient satisfaction. However, there is no
latest published evidence on the effectiveness and safety of comedones
extraction.
In the first edition of Malaysian MoH CPG on the Management of
Acne, comedones extraction using Shamberg or Saalfeld comedones
extractor was effective in superficial acne but not in cystic acne. Another
method using cautery and standard dissecting forceps for closed
macrocomedones >3 mm in diameter showed that all patients tolerated
the procedure and judged the cosmetic results as very good. The
disadvantages of comedones extraction include incomplete extraction,
tissue damage and recurrence.5
• Intralesional triamcinolone acetonide may be used for acne nodules/
cysts.
• Comedones extraction may be used in the treatment of NIL in acne
vulgaris.
7.3 Chemical Peels
Chemical peels have been used in the management of active acne
vulgaris both as an adjunct to medical therapy or as maintenance
therapy after improvement or clearance has been achieved. They are
classified based on the depth of penetration:59, level III
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• superficial (epidermis-papillary dermis)
• medium (papillary to the upper reticular dermis)
• deep (mid-reticular dermis)
SA, glycolic acid (GA), Jessner’s solution (JS), resorcinol and
trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peels are the most commonly used superficial
peels in the treatment of active acne lesions.60, level I However, in
recent years, other peels have emerged proving to be useful in the
management of active acne of various clinical severity e.g. AA, pyruvic
acid (PA) and combination peels.
a. Salicylic acid peel
SA is a beta-hydroxy acid used for superficial peeling due to its strong
keratolytic and comedolytic properties. It is available at a concentrations
of 20 - 30%. It promotes the shedding of epidermal cells and due to its
lipophilic properties, it can penetrate comedones and pores to prevent
clogging and neutralise bacteria.
A systematic review on RCTs looked into the effectiveness of chemical
peels for treating acne vulgaris. Three RCTs compared different
concentrations of SA with other treatments in mild to moderate acne
vulgaris:61, level I
• 20% or 30% SA vs 5% or 10% lipohydroxy acid
Both peels applied once every two weeks for 12 weeks were
equally effective in reducing comedones. They were well tolerated
but the global tolerance was better for the SA peel (p=0.028).
• 30% SA vs 50% PA
The two peels done every two weeks for five sessions had
similar effects for reducing comedones, papules and pustules.
The achievement of an excellent or good improvement in all
lesions was comparable for both SA and PA peels (66.7% and
60% respectively). In terms of safety, the burning sensation was
seen in >85% in both peels with no significant hyperpigmentation
between them.
• 10% SA vs phototherapy
There was no difference between both treatments given once every
week for a total of 10 sessions in the reduction of comedones and
papules. However, the number of pustules reduction was higher
in the phototherapy group (MD= -7.00, 95% CI -10.84 to -3.16).
In a recent RCT, 30% SA peel was compared with 45% mandelic acid
(MA) peel (applied every two weeks for a total of six application) in mild
to moderate acne vulgaris and showed the following findings at week
12:62, level I
• comedones reduction was higher in SA peel compared with MA
peel (73.4% vs 59.7%, p=0.044)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• papule reduction was higher in MA peel compared with SA peel
(86.0% vs 76.9%, p=0.004)
• no difference between both peels in pustule reduction and
Michealson Acne Score (MAS) reduction
The two peels were well tolerated. Post-peel burning and stinging
sensation were the commonest AEs which were higher in SA peel.
• The following are advised on the use of SA peels in patients with
acne vulgaris:17
 Very superficial: 20% SA
 Superficial: 30% SA
 Applied for 2 - 4 minutes depending on the intensity of clinical
response
 Treatment with isotretinoin should be avoided within the last six
months
 Patients should not have an active infection or open wounds (e.g.
herpes simplex, excoriations or open acne cysts)
b. Glycolic acid peel
GA is available at a concentration of 20 - 70%. It is widely used as a
superficial peeling agent owing to its exfoliative properties. Exposure
of skin to GA leads to reduced corneocyte adhesion, correction of
abnormal keratinization in the infundibulum, decreased keratinocyte
plugging and ultimately decreased follicular occlusion.
In the same systematic review, four RCTs studied the effectiveness of
GA with the following results:61, level I
• 40% GA vs placebo in moderate to severe acne vulgaris
The two treatments applied every two weeks for five sessions
showed a significant reduction in the NIL, IL and TL counts with
good improvement in all lesions (RR=2.30, 95% CI 1.40 to 3.77)
in the GA group. The GA group had less mild dryness but an
increase in flare-up which was not significant.
• 20 - 70% GA vs 20 - 60% amino fruit acid in mild to moderate acne
vulgaris
Both treatments done every two weeks for 12 weeks showed
comparable effectiveness in reduction of IL and NIL acne lesions.
Oedema was more common for the GA peel (RR=1.83, 95%
CI 1.21 to 2.78) but no significant difference in the incidence
of frosting noted between the two groups. All patients reported
discomfort which negatively affected their daily life with the GA
peel.
• 30% GA vs 30% SA in mild to moderate acne vulgaris
Both treatments were done every two weeks for six sessions and
showed no significant difference in good or fair improvement in
total number of lesions at one month. However, the mean number
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
of all lesions was significantly higher on the GA-treated side
after a two-month follow-up with no treatment. Both peels were
safe and well tolerated and the most common AEs were scaling,
peeling and erythema.
• 70% GA vs JS in mild to moderate acne vulgaris
Both GA and JS peels done every two weeks for three sessions
had similar effects in improvement of acne scores by ≥0.5 and
self-reported by the patient. Erythema was common for both
peels. JS showed a significantly increased degree of exfoliation
compared with GA.
• The following are advised on the use of GA peels in patients with
acne vulgaris:17
 Very superficial peel: 30 - 50% applied for 1 - 2 minutes
 Superficial: 50 - 70% applied for 2 - 5 minutes
 Medium depth: 70% applied for 3 - 15 minutes
 Dosing interval: Once every 15 days for 4 - 6 months
 Treatment with isotretinoin should be avoided within the last six
months
 Patients should not have an active infection or open wounds (e.g.
herpes simplex, excoriations or open acne cysts)
• In local setting, a lower percentage of 20 - 35% GA for 2 - 5 minutes
is advisable in patients of skin of colour to reduce the risk of PIH.
c. Jessner’s solution
JS is a combination of 14% resorcinol, 14% SA, 14% lactic acid and
ethanol. The strength of the peel is determined by the number of layers
of the solution applied and is used in combination with other peels to
increase the depth of the overall peel. It is a useful peel for patients with
acne because of its SA and resorcinol components.
A local RCT comparing JS peel with SA 30% peel applied every two
weeks for three sessions in mild to moderate acne vulgaris showed that
both peels were equally effective in reducing the total NIL and IL at eight
weeks (p<0.001). However, SA peel showed an earlier reduction of total
IL at week 2 (p=0.036). Both groups also showed reduction of MAS
as early as week 2 (p<0.001) The AEs in both groups were burning
and stinging followed by exfoliation. The majority of the exfoliation was
reported as mild in both peels.63, level I
In an RCT of the systematic review on mild to moderate acne vulgaris,
30% SA peel was significantly more effective in reduction of comedones
and mean MAS compared with JS peel applied every two weeks for a
total of six sessions. In terms of safety, both peels were tolerated well.
However SA induced more but non-significant burning and stinging
sensation.61, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
d. Trichloroacetic acid
TCA is a self-neutralising peel that is used either as a superficial,
medium or deep peel depending on the concentration used. It causes
coagulation of epidermal and dermal proteins, and necrosis of
collagen up to the upper reticular dermis. The clinical effects of TCA
are due to the resultant increase in the dermal volume of collagen,
glycosaminoglycans and elastin.
Two RCTs on mild to moderate acne vulgaris in a systematic review
showed the following comparisons:61, level I
• 25% TCA vs 30% SA
Both peels done every two weeks for four sessions showed no
significant difference in the percentage of TL, NIL and IL count
reduction. There were no AEs in the SA group but four patients in
the TCA group reported hyperpigmentation which lasted for 3 - 4
weeks.
• TCA peel vs non-purpuric pulsed dye laser
The two treatments applied every two weeks for a total of six
sessions showed a non-significant difference in reduction of
mean acne severity score and clinical response. However, the
mean remission period was longer in the laser group (MD= -1.60
months, 95% CI -1.85 to -1.35). There were no severe AEs and
both treatments were well tolerated.
e. Azelaic acid peel
AA is a naturally occurring saturated dicarboxylic acid which has antiinflammatory and antibacterial properties.
A single-arm study using 30% AA peel, applied six times every two
weeks, on mild to severe acne vulgaris patients showed significant
reduction of total acne lesions, acne severity based on the IGA scale
and seborrhoea using the sebumeter.64, level II-3
In an RCT, both AA and PA peels applied every two weeks for six
sessions had comparable effectiveness in the treatment of mild to
moderate papulopustular acne vulgaris. Both peels were able to reduce
acne severity and desquamation compared with baseline (p<0.001).
The peels were also able to reduce the level of oiliness in the skin with
the PA peel showed a greater reduction of the oil level in the skin by
using the Nati Analyzer (p<0.05).65, level I
f. Combination peels
Combination peels allow clinicians to use lower concentrations of singleingredient peels. The high therapeutic response achieved could be
attributed to the synergistic action of the combined peels that enhances
the depth of peel without using a higher concentration of single peeling
agent. Various combinations have been used in the management of
acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
In a systematic review, an RCT compared 20% SA plus 10% MA
and 35% GA peel applied every two weeks for six sessions in mild
to moderate acne vulgaris. The combination peel was significantly
more effective than GA peel in reducing total acne score, comedones,
papules and pustules. There was no significant difference between
these two intervention groups in burning or stinging sensations, skin
dryness and acne flare-up. However, the combination induced more
visible desquamation (RR=2.00, 95% CI 1.12 to 3.57).61, level I
A split-face RCT using various combination of peels grouped into three
comparisons on mild to moderate acne vulgaris patients with Fitzpatrick
skin type III and IV demonstrated better effectiveness in combination
peel than single peel as shown below:66, level I
• Modified JS plus 20% TCA vs 30% TCA
 reduction in MAS score (p=0.0001) and sustained on followup (p=0.001)
 more favourable patient satisfaction (p=0.004)
• 20% SA plus 10% MA mixture vs 30% SA
 reduction in MAS score (p=0.006)
 more favourable patient satisfaction (p=0.009)
In the third comparison, there was no significant difference between
Modified JS plus TCA 20% vs 20% SA plus 10% MA mixture in MAS
score and patient satisfaction. In terms of safety, the reported side
effects were burning sensation, erythema and exfoliation but this
were well tolerated by all the patients. This RCT did not report on
randomisation and blinding of the patient.
Recommendation 10
• Chemical peels may be used as an adjunct in the treatment of acne
vulgaris.
 The preferred choices are salicylic acid and glycolic acid peels.
7.4 Energy-based Devices
Recently, there has been an increased use of energy-based devices
(EBD) in the treatment of active acne. The modalities include light
therapy, laser and radiofrequency (RF) devices. Examples of light
therapies are photodynamic therapy (PDT), intense pulsed light (IPL),
blue light, red light, mixed blue-red light and cool white light. Laser has
been an established treatment for acne scar. However, at present, there
is an increased usage of laser therapy in the treatment of active acne.
They include erbium glass laser, neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium
garnet (Nd:YAG), pulsed dye laser (PDL) and non-ablative fractional
laser (NAFL). Another recent modality that has been used to treat
active acne is RF device which utilises electric current to generate heat
instead of optical sources like laser and light devices.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
7.4.1 Light-based therapy
a. Visible light sources
i.
Blue light therapy
Blue light therapy has a shorter wavelength (407 - 420 nm) compared
with red light. It has a bactericidal effect on C. acnes via excitation of
bacterial porphyrins (coproporphyrin III and protoporphyrin IX) leading
to the release of singlet oxygen and reactive free radicals.
A meta-analysis on 14 RCTs involving 698 participants evaluated the
effectiveness and safety of blue light therapy in mild to severe acne
vulgaris. The blue light was compared with placebo, topical agents (e.g.
retinoids, BPO or antibiotics), oral antibiotics or isotretinoin. There was
no difference in:
 mean number of NIL at weeks 4, 8 and 10 - 12 with overall MD of
3.47 (95% CI -0.76 to 7.71)
 mean number of IL at weeks 4, 8 and 10 - 12 with overall MD of
0.16 (95% CI -0.99 to 1.31)
In terms of safety, AEs were generally mild and favoured blue light or
did not significantly differ between groups. They were skin irritation,
erythema, dryness, tightness, peeling, itching, burning, acne flare-ups
and changes in pigmentation. Most of the trials in the meta-analysis
were small, of short duration (<12 weeks) and with high risk of
bias.67, level I
ii. Red light therapy
Red light with a wavelength of 630 - 640 nm can penetrate deeper
tissues e.g. sebaceous gland and stimulate macrophages to release
various cytokines. This can lead to anti-inflammatory reaction and
promote skin repair.
A recent large meta-analysis of 13 RCTs involving 422 participants
with moderate to severe acne vulgaris on red light vs placebo and
combinations of red light with aminolevulinic acid (ALA), methyl
aminolevulinate (MAL), blue light, topical 1% SA and fractional erbium
glass laser showed no significant difference in IL and NIL counts. Most
of the AEs, e.g mild pain and erythema, were tolerable and recovered
rapidly.68, level I The primary papers were of moderate quality and small
in size.
b. Photodynamic therapy
PDT uses light-activated cream (photosensitiser) which is absorbed
into the pilosebaceous unit to amplify the response to light therapy.
Commonly used photosensitisers include ALA and MAL.5
A large Cochrane systematic review compared light therapies, including
PDT, with placebo, no treatment, topical treatment or other comparators
in moderate to severe acne. Three primary outcomes assessed were
as below.69, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• Participant’s global assessment of improvement
 An RCT showed no significant difference between 20% ALAPDT (activated by blue light) and vehicle plus blue light at six
weeks post-treatment.
 Another RCT demonstrated no significant difference between
ALA-PDT (activated by red light) of 20% and 15%. However,
ALA-PDT 20% was more effective than ALA-PDT of 10% and
5% at 24 weeks post-treatment. The NNTB was 6 (95% CI 3 to
19) and 4 (95% CI 2 to 6) for ALA-PDT 20% when compared
with ALA-PDT of 10% and 5% respectively.
• Investigator-assessed changes in lesion counts
 Three RCTs showed that MAL PDT (activated by red light) vs
placebo cream plus red light had no significant difference in
lesion count and percentage change in count for both IL and NIL.
• Investigator-assessed severe AEs
 There was no report on severe AE. Blistering had been
reported with the use of IPL, infrared light and PDT.
Studies comparing the effects of other interventions were inconsistent
or had small samples and high risk of bias.
c. Intense pulsed light
IPL therapy, which uses broadband light, creates short thermal pulses
that activate porphyrins synthesised and stored by C. acnes resulting
in production of free oxygen radicals. This reaction directly damages
sebaceous glands and destroy the blood supply which lead to decrease
in sebum output.
In the above Cochrane systematic review, conclusion on the
effectiveness and safety of IPL could not be derived due to limitations
in methodological quality and heterogeneity of the evidence.69, level I
A single-arm study on a novel IPL with dual-band (400 - 600 nm and
800 - 1,200 nm) filter (five sessions, 4-weekly) in inflammatory acne
patients showed its effectiveness rate of 76.19% based on 5-point
scale of investigator’s assessment, reduction in Hayashi acne grades
(p=0.022) and reduction on IL count (p=0.031) at one-month post followup. Minimal reversible AEs included transient PIH which resolved within
one month.70, level II-3
In a split-face RCT, combination of IPL (400 - 720 nm cut-off filter,
four sessions every two weeks) with topical cream (licochalcone
A, L-carnitine and decanediol applied twice daily for 10 weeks)
demonstrated significantly better effectiveness than IPL alone plus
vehicle in mild to severe acne vulgaris patients as shown below:71, level I
• reduction of IL at one month after fourth treatment
• reduction of NIL at three evaluation time points
• reduction of melanin index at one month after fourth treatment
The treatment was well tolerated with no serious AEs.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
An RCT compared combination of IPL (420 nm, biweekly session for
four weeks) plus isotretinoin (0.5 - 0.75 mg/kg/day for eight weeks)
and isotretinoin alone in facial acne vulgaris graded 2 - 4 based on
Global Evaluation Acne scale. Topical adapalene 0.1% gel was also
added into both groups. The combination group was significantly more
effective in improvement of acne severity based on Global Evaluation
Acne scale, reduction of both TL and IL counts, and percentage of TL
and IL reduction. Main AEs in intervention group were pain during IPL
treatment and dry and/or irritation of the skin. Dryness or irritation, lips
peeling and allergic reactions to adapalene 0.1% gel were present in
both groups with no significant difference.72, level I
7.4.2
Laser therapy
Mechanism of laser therapy in active acne is by photocoagulation/
photothermal injury, which is thought to have bactericidal effect on
C. acnes as well as reducing the size of sebaceous gland.
a. Erbium glass laser
In a split-face RCT, 1,550-nm erbium glass laser, given every two weeks
for a total of four sessions, was compared with no treatment. It was
significantly effective in reducing mean number of papules, pustules
and nodules based on the Burton scale on acne lesion counts at the
end of treatment and one year follow-up. Complete clearance of all
lesions after treatment and during follow-up was observed in 70.8% of
patients.73, level I
AEs noted were acute pustular reaction in two patients, which
cleared within three days, and erythema in all patients which faded
spontaneously within 2 - 24 hours.73, level I
b. Neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet laser
A split-face RCT comparing 1,064-nm Nd:YAG and IPL treatment given
monthly for three sessions in mild to severe acne showed no significant
difference in acne severity (Cunliffe’s grading) and lesion count at one
month after treatment completion.74, level I No AE was reported.
However, in another RCT, shorter treatment interval (2-weekly for three
sessions) of Nd:YAG (with higher energy fluence) and IPL showed
different outcomes. Nd:YAG was more effective in reducing NIL
(p=0.0099) and TL (p<0.014) count of acne lesions at one month posttreatment. There was no significant difference in erythema, oedema
and PIH except in crust formation.75, level I
c. Pulsed dye laser
An RCT compared combination of isotretinoin (0.25 mg/kg/day) and
PDL (5 sessions, biweekly), and isotretinoin monotherapy (0.5 mg/kg/
day) in moderate to severe facial acne. The combination treatment was
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
more effective in terms of acne severity improvement (p=0.04), Cardiff
Acne Disability Index (CADI) score (p=0.016) and erythema grading
(p=0.031) at six months. It also had less side effects which were mild
pain during the sessions and erythema that subsided within a few days.
No hyperpigmentation or scarring was reported.76, level I
d. Non-ablative fractional laser
In a split-face RCT on moderate to severe acne vulgaris comparing
1,550-nm NAFL (monthly for three months) with low-dose isotretinoin
(10 mg/day) and control, the intervention group had significantly lower
Leeds score and mean NIL count at three months. Patients also
reported discomfort after NAFL treatment i.e. pain (100%), sensation of
heat (100%), erythema (94.5%) and oedema (88.9%) which resolved
spontaneously within three days.77, level I
7.4.3
Radiofrequency treatment
RF device delivers high energy causing thermal injury to deep dermis
which leads to destruction of sebaceous glands. There are three major
types of RF treatments i.e. unipolar, bipolar and fractional RF.
An RCT comparing fractional microneedle radiofrequency (FMR) and
fractional carbon dioxide laser showed no significant difference in
Global Improvement scale, papules and pustules counts, and sebum
decrement at three months. However, FMR had milder AEs while
fractional carbon dioxide laser had longer duration of erythema and
higher pain score.78, level I
In a split-face RCT, FMR compared with bipolar radiofrequency (BR)
reduced acne severity based on Cunliffe’s grading system (p=0.02) and
IL counts (p=0.001) at four weeks. It also reduced NIL counts at day
28 (p=0.005) and reduced sebum excretion level at day 56 (p<0.001).
At the final visit (day 84), NIL count was further significantly reduced
in FMR-treated side. Apart from that, there was more acne grading
1 compared with BR-treated (90% vs 25%). In terms of safety, FMR
resulted in slight increase in Epithelization Scale at day 1 but became
comparable with BR-treated side at day 28. There was also consistent
elevated redness in the FMR compared with BR. However, there was
no serious AEs reported besides mild pain and oedema.79, level I
• Laser may be used as an adjunct treatment in acne vulgaris.
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of visible light and
radiofrequency treatment in acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
8. COSMECEUTICALS
Cosmeceuticals refers to cosmetics that contain non-medicinal
ingredients which are able to elicit functional effects on the skin. The
term cosmeceuticals is used interchangeably with dermocosmetics
and they are non-prescription items. In acne vulgaris, cosmeceuticals
targets various etiopathogenic factors by having antibacterial,
anti-inflammatory and sebum controlling properties. Examples of
cosmeceuticals include cleansers, moisturisers and sunscreen. These
products contain a wide variety of ingredients which can be classified
into corneolytics, sebum controller with anti-inflammatory properties,
anti-bacterials and anti-oxidants.
8.1 Cosmeceutical Products
a. Cleanser
Cleansers are used to remove makeup, oil, dirt, dead skin cells and
bacteria. They improve acne by removing the hair follicle plugs and
preventing the obstruction of hair follicles. Cleansers come in various
forms e.g. gels, liquids or creams which can be highly foaming or
rinseable. In patients with oily acne-prone skin, gentle cleansers that
are easily rinsed are generally preferred.
A systematic review on washing and cleansers in acne vulgaris showed
the following findings:80, level I
• An RCT on frequency of facial washing in mild to moderate facial
acne vulgaris showed that washing with a facial cleanser twice
daily for six weeks reduced open comedones and NIL counts
(p=0.03). On the other hand, once daily facial washing was
associated with increased lesion counts (p=0.01) while washing
four times daily demonstrated no change in lesion counts.
• In another RCT on grade I or II inflammatory acne vulgaris,
synthetic detergents (syndets) reduced IL count whereas true
soaps increased the count (p<0.0001).
• Gentle cleansers
 An RCT on grade I to II facial acne showed that the usage of
cleanser alone twice daily or in combination with a moisturiser
with or without skin tonic resulted in no significant reduction in
papules count at week 12.
 A 4-week, single-arm trial on mild to moderate facial acne
vulgaris showed improvement in acne lesion counts in patients
who used a cleanser which contained surfactant sodium acyl
glutamate along with an aqueous lotion and moisturising gel
(p<0.001).
 An open-label study on mild-to-moderate facial acne showed
that usage of a liquid cleanser formulated with sodium
laureth carboxylate and alkyl carboxylate improved clinicianassessed acne severity throughout the face after 28 days of
facial cleansing (p<0.01).
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• Antiseptics
A small RCT on mild to moderate facial acne vulgaris showed both 5%
BPO leave-on formulation and Hibiclens (4% chlorhexidine gluconate)
significantly reduced acne vulgaris counts compared with vehicle but
no significant difference between the two at week 12.80, level I
• Cleanser containing BPO
Three single arm studies showed that cleanser containing BPO reduced
C. acnes colony counts. However, two RCTs demonstrated conflicting
clinical effectiveness of BPO cleansers when used with other topical
treatment for acne vulgaris at 12 weeks.80, level I
• Cleanser containing alpha-hydroxy acids (AHA)
A 6-week single arm study of a 1% GA cleanser reported a decrease
in mean Leeds score and severity grade of the face, back and chest
(p<0.001) in acne vulgaris patients.80, level I
• Cleanser containing salicylic acid (SA)
A crossover trial on acne vulgaris showed that 2% SA cleanser reduced
lesion counts by week 2 (p<0.01) and slight worsening following two
weeks of BPO treatment (p<0.05). Subjects who underwent the reverse
regimen had opposite results with no significant improvement following
two weeks of BPO wash treatment first but improved only after switching
to SA cleanser (p<0.05).80, level I
b. Sonic cleansing device
Sonic cleansing devices have been developed to be combined with
cosmetic products to improve the cleansing process. These brushes
cleanse via oscillatory movements which may lead to deeper cleansing
of facial pores.80, level I
A split-face clinical trial showed no significant difference 90 minutes after
facial cleansing between manual and sonic cleansing in sebummetry
values, transepidermal water loss (TEWL) values, and thermography
and high frequency ultrasound evaluated parameters.81, level I
c. Moisturiser
Moisturiser is important in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Its use
improves tolerability of topical acne vulgaris treatment (e.g. retinoids
and BPO) by decreasing the dryness and stinging sensation associated
with barrier disruption. This could improve patients’ compliance to their
topical treatment.
An RCT on mild to severe acne showed that when compared to not
using a moisturiser, usage of a heparinoid containing moisturiser as an
adjunct to adapalene resulted in:82, level I
• improved adherence to adapalene treatment (p<0.001)
• reduced skin dryness in adapalene treatment (p=0.0018)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• reduced dropouts whilst on adapalene treatment (p=0.04)
• no significant difference in comedones number reduction
d. Sunscreen
Sun exposure contributes to exacerbation of acne vulgaris. Ultraviolet
B (UVB) rays cause inflammation, increase sebum production and
proliferation of keratinocytes.
An RCT comparing application of a UV-selective face cream vs placebo
in acne vulgaris patients with greasy skin and 10 - 25 comedones per
half face for eight weeks showed:83, level I
• no significant difference in number of comedones
• significant reduction in TEWL and sebum production in UVselective face cream group
• more patients reported improvement of their acne in UV-selective
face cream group (36% vs 2%)
• no AEs in both groups
e. Hydrocolloid acne patches
Hydrocolloid acne patches have been gaining popularity over the recent
years. Being skin coloured, many consumers find them cosmetically
acceptable. These patches also protect against touching of the acne
lesions.
In a split-faced RCT, compared with hydrocolloid acne patch, watersoluble herbal acne patch application for 11 days resulted in:84, level I
• shorter median time to resolution of inflammatory acne (HR=1.68,
95% CI 1.31 to 2.15)
• greater reduction of IL count (p<0.05)
• greater reduction in mean diameter of IL (p<0.05)
• greater reduction in erythema score (p<0.05)
8.2 Active Ingredients in Cosmeceutical for Acne Vulgaris
a. Corneolytics
In acne patients, follicular hyperkeratinisation causes dead skin cells
to clog the pilosebaceous glands, leading to formation of comedones.
Follicular hyperkeratinisation is caused by an increased rate of
keratinocyte proliferation, as well as reduced separation of the ductal
corneocytes. This theory supports the use of corneolytic agents in acne
as they target abnormal keratinisation.85, level III Topical corneolytics
induce comedolytic effect and may also facilitate skin absorption of
topical drugs. Examples include retinaldehyde, retinol, AHA (e.g. GA),
beta-hydroxy acids (e.g. SA) and polyhydroxy acids (e.g. lactobionic
acid and gluconolactone)
An RCT on mild to moderate acne vulgaris showed that a combination
cosmeceutical product containing 0.03% retinol compared with 0.1%
adapalene gel had no significant difference at 12 weeks in:86, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• NIL, IL and total lesion counts (TLC)
• acne grading (severity)
• physician-assessed global improvement
• patient self-assessment
There was significantly fewer erythema, scaling, burning and pricking
in the cosmeceutical group at week 2 but no significant difference was
found between the groups at the end of study.
In another RCT, 10% GA containing oil-in-water emulsión compared
with placebo in mild acne vulgaris showed improvement in Leed’s
score at day 45 (p=0.0004) but not at day 90 (p=0.078). There was no
significant difference of AEs between the groups.87, level I
b. Sebum controller with anti-inflammatory properties
Increased sebum production is a key factor in acne vulgaris
pathogenesis. Sebum controlling agents have been shown to absorb
and retain sebum, mattify the skin and decrease formation of comedones
and inflammatory acne lesions. An example is nicotinamide.
In an RCT on mild to moderate acne vulgaris, topical 4% nicotinamide
had no significant difference with 1% clindamycin at eight weeks
in reduction of facial papules/pustules, reduction of acne grade and
frequency of AEs. However, in subgroup analysis of patients with
oily skin, greater improvement in Cook’s acne grading was seen in
nicotinamide compared with clindamycin.88, level I
In women, premenstrual exacerbation of acne is most often linked to
increased sebum secretion and a change in its lipid composition after
ovulation. This results in alteration in the skin microbiome, triggering
activation of the innate immunity, leading to formation of papular
inflammatory lesions. An RCT (half-face trial) on women with Grade 2 or
3 acne with premenstrual flare-up using a combination cosmeceutical
containing nicotinamide plus lipohydroxyacid (SA derivative) and
piroctone-olamine (antifungal) for a month showed:89, level I
• reduced IL compared with placebo (p=0.01) and the difference
was most apparent with number of papules (p<0.01)
• reduced number of papules (p=0.002) and closed comedones
(p=0.01) at the end of the luteal phase of the interventional phase
compared with observational phase
• tolerance of the cosmeceutical formulation was rated as good or
excellent (96 - 100% by investigators and 88 - 94% by patients)
In a recent RCT on mild to moderate acne vulgaris, compared with
BPO 2.5%, a cream containing combination of herbal extracts (onion,
lavandula, mangosteen, aloe vera, paper mulberry and tea tree) and
4% niacinamide for 12 weeks resulted in:90, level I
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• non-inferiority in mean percent reductions of comedones,
inflammatory and total lesions
• non-significant difference in mean change in Dermatology Life
Quality Index (DLQI) scores
• non-significant
difference
in
patients’
satisfaction
with
effectiveness
• less glazing with peeling and cracking (12.82% vs 28.95%) and
erythema with minimal oedema or papular response (0% vs 7.89%)
c. Antibacterial agents
Antibacterial resistance in C. acnes has stimulated the discovery of
novel ingredients with antimicrobial properties to target this bacteria.91,
level III A number of these novel ingredients have since been incorporated
into many cosmeceutical products. Examples include tyrothricin, tea
tree oil, aloe vera, propolis, licochalcone A and cedar.
An RCT comparing topical tyrothricin 0.1% (antimicrobial peptide)
against active comparator for 25 days in mild to severe acne
papulopustulosa showed:92, level I
• tyrothricin was less effective in reducing IL (p=0.038), NIL
(p=0.022) and TL (p=0.011) count compared with clindamycin +
BPO 5%
• tyrothricin was less effective in reducing NIL (p=0.018) and TL
(p=0.045) count compared with BPO 5% but showed no significant
difference in reduction of IL count
In dermal tolerability and safety assessments, local intolerances
(scaling, erythema, itching, burning and stinging) was found in 62.5%
in tyrothricin 0.1%, 75.0% in clindamycin + BPO 5% and 91.7% in BPO
5% groups.
The essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia, also known as tea tree oil
or Melaleuca oil, has been used medicinally for more than 80 years.
It is known to possess broad spectrum antibacterial activity. In an
RCT involving patients with mild to moderate acne vulgaris, compared
with erythromycin cream, a cream containing combination of propolis,
tea tree oil and aloe vera for 30 days resulted in significant reduction
in:93, level I
• erythema scars (p=0.003)
• acne severity index (ASI) (p=0.0368)
• total lesion count (p=0.001)
An RCT on mild to severe acne vulgaris demonstrated that compared
with adapalene gel, topical gel of tea tree oil nanoemulsion containing
adapalene for 12 weeks resulted in significantly greater reduction
in:94, level I
• mean TLC reduction (MD= -8.832 ± 1.5189, p<0.001)
• mean NIL count reduction (MD= -5.473 ± 1.1429, p<0.001)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• mean IL count reduction (MD= -3.282 ± 0.5989, p<0.001)
• mean ASI reduction (MD= -5.79 ± 1.020, p<0.001)
AEs were more in the tea tree oil nanoemulsion containing adapalene
gel group.
Licochalcone A is an oxygenated chalcone isolated from the roots
of Chinese plant liquorice.95, level III It is known to have potent antiinflammatory effects. In a split-faced RCT, moisturiser containing
Licochalcone A in combination with decanediol, L-carnitine and SA for
12 weeks led to a significantly reduction in mean NIL, IL and TL counts
compared with placebo.96, level I
Cedar (Ziziphus spina-christi) has been used topically for the treatment
of skin problems in Persian Medicine. Apart from having antibacterial
and anti-inflammatory effects against C. acnes, it also contains flavonoid
which is an antioxidant. An RCT comparing the use of cedar solution
vs placebo in combination with topical 1% clindamycin amongst mild to
moderate acne vulgaris patients for eight weeks showed a significantly
reduction in mean TLC, NIL counts, IL counts and ASI in the intervention
group.97, level I
d. Antioxidant
Oxidative stress contributes to the pathogenesis of acne vulgaris.
C. acnes release chemotactic factors which leads to neutrophils
accumulation. These neutrophils then release reactive oxygen species
that attack deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and/or membrane lipids,
causing oxidation of these lipids. Lipid peroxidation products are
pro-comedogenic and have been found to be highly concentrated in
open and closed comedones. These suggest the possibility of using
antioxidants in order to improve acne.
Green tea, from fresh leaves of Camelia sinensis contains several
polyphenols of the catechin family. Green tea extract (GTE) has been
postulated to have anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory effects, and their
benefits have been demonstrated in numerous skin diseases including
photo-inflammation, skin aging and skin cancer.
In a systematic review on oral and topical GTE compared with placebo
in acne vulgaris:98, level I
• topical GTE reduced
 IL count (MD= -11.39, 95% CI -15.91 to -6.86)
 NIL count (MD= -32.44, 95% CI -39.27 to -25.62)
• oral GTE showed
 minimal IL reduction (MD= -1.40, 95% CI -2.50 to -0.30)
 non-effectiveness in reducing NIL (MD=0.20, 95% CI 0.00 to
0.40)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Even though this systematic review showed favourable results
with topical GTE, the formulations of GTE in individual studies were
highly heterogeneous. Therefore, the CPG DG is unable to give any
recommendation with regards to its use in treating acne vulgaris.
Vitamin C, also known as ascorbic acid, is a potent antioxidant that
has been utilised extensively in cosmetic dermatology. In a small RCT
on patients with mild to moderate acne vulgaris, sodium L-ascorbyl2-phosphate, a stable Vitamin C derivative, significantly improved
IGA score, reduced IL and NIL counts, and improved Subjects’ Global
Assessment Score from baseline. However, there was no result
comparing sodium L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate and vehicle. In terms
of safety, four subjects in sodium L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate and four
subjects in vehicle reported mild treatment-related AEs.99, level I
• The existing studies on cosmeceuticals are small in sample sizes
and low in quality.
• They are also highly heterogenous in terms of ingredients.
• Some
studies
involve
products
that
contain
combination
of ingredients which lead to possible overestimation of the
effectiveness of a certain ingredient.
• Thus, stronger evidence is warranted before cosmeceuticals can be
recommended.
Recommendation 11
• Cosmeceuticals may be used as an adjunct in the management of
acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
9. COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINES
Complementary and alternative medicines (CAMs) have been practised
throughout the world including Malaysia. Examples of CAMs that have
been used locally to treat acne vulgaris include turmeric, cinnamon and
rice powder/water (“bedak sejuk”). However, there is no retrievable
strong evidence on their effectiveness in the treatment of acne vulgaris.
a. Herbal medicine and acupuncture
A large Cochrane systematic review of 35 trials of low quality on acne
vulgaris showed:100, level I
• lack of evidence to support the use of herbal medicine, acupuncture
or wet cupping therapy
• tea tree oil and bee venom significantly reduced total skin lesions
compared with placebo
• potential AEs reported from
 herbal medicines were nausea, diarrhoea and stomach upset
 acupuncture were itchiness, redness and pain
 tea tree oil were itchiness, dryness and flaking of the skin
In a meta-analysis of 10 RCTs with low methodological quality, external
application of herbal medicines in acne vulgaris showed improvement
in global assessment (MD= -2.62, 95% CI -4.84 to -0.40), IL count
(MD= -1.25, 95% CI -1.68 to -0.83) and NIL count (MD= -1.32, 95%
CI -1.75 to -0.90) compared with placebo. No severe AEs were
found.101, level I
Combination of medical-grade kanuka honey with 10% glycerine to
standard antibacterial soap treatment is not effective than antibacterial
soap alone in the treatment of acne vulgaris based on ≥2 improvement
in IGA score at week 12.102, level I
b. Prebiotics and probiotics
Supplementation with probiotics is increasingly being explored as
a potential treatment strategy for skin disorders. Both gut-skin axis
and dysregulation of insulin signalling have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of acne vulgaris.
Probiotics contain live microorganisms intended to maintain or improve
the normal microflora in the body whereas prebiotics act as food for
human microflora. Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium bifidum
and Lactobacillus rhamnosus are examples of different strains used as
probiotic for acne vulgaris.
An RCT comparing probiotics, minocycline and combination of
probiotics
(Lactobacillus
acidophilus,
Lactobacillus
delbrueckii
subspecies bulgaricus and Biftdobacterium bifidum) with minocycline
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
showed significant improvement in NIL, IL and TL counts in the group
at 12 weeks.103, level I
Another RCT showed an improvement in investigator’s global
improvement rating of adults with active inflammatory acne on probiotic
strain Lactobacillus rhamnosus compared with placebo (OR=28.4, 95%
CI 2.2 to 411.1).104, level I
Probiotic may become an important adjuvant therapy in the management
of acne vulgaris. However, there is currently lack of strong scientific
evidence to support this finding.
c. Zinc
A meta-analysis which compared zinc and other comparators (topical
clindamycin with BPO, topical BPO, topical erythromycin, topical
minocycline and tea extract) showed a reduction in the number of acne
papules in oral zinc compared with comparators (MD=3.489, 95% CI
1.048 to 11.617) at 6 - 12 weeks. However, there was no significant
difference between topical zinc and its comparator.105, level I
d. Omega-3 acid and γ-linoleic acid
An RCT showed that mean IL count, NIL count and acne severity were
significantly reduced in the omega-3 and γ-linoleic acid (GLA) groups
compared with control.106, level I
e. Vitamins
A meta-analysis found that serum vitamin D level was lower in patients
with acne vulgaris compared with controls, indicating the possible role
of vitamin D deficiency in acne pathogenesis. However, the precise role
still remain unclear.107, level I
There is no retrievable evidence to support the usage of oral vitamin C
and E supplements in the management of acne vulgaris.
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of CAMs in
acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
10. TREATMENT IN SPECIAL GROUP
10.1 Pregnancy and Lactation
The treatment of acne vulgaris in this special population requires
consideration for safety in both the mother and foetus/infant. Hormonal
therapy, tetracyclines, co-trimoxazole, and both oral and topical
retinoids should be avoided.18
A meta-analysis comparing a total of 654 pregnant women exposed
to topical retinoids and 1,375 unexposed pregnant women did not
detect increases in rates of major congenital malformation (OR=1.22,
95% CI 0.65 to 2.29), spontaneous abortion (OR=1.02, 95% CI 0.64 to
1.63), low birthweight (OR=1.01, 95% CI 0.31 to 3.27) or prematurity
(OR=0.69, 95% CI 0.39 to 1.23). However, the statistical power of this
meta-analysis was not adequate to justify the use of topical retinoids
during pregnancy. The results of this study may be used primarily to
reassure pregnant women who were inadvertently exposed to topical
retinoids during their pregnancy.108, level II-2
The safety of various topical, systemic and physical treatments in
pregnancy and lactation are summarised in Table 5 and Table 6.
Table 5. Safety of various acne treatments in pregnancy and
lactation
TREATMENT
FDA PREGNANCY
CATEGORY1
LACTATION (LACTMED)2
TOPICAL TREATMENT
Benzoyl peroxide
C
Low risk
Topical retinoids
- tretinoin
- adapalene
- tazarotene
- trifarotene
C
C
X
No information
Low risk
Low risk
No study on use in
breastfeeding;
if used, avoid ingestion/
direct contact between
infant’s skin and treated
maternal skin
No information
Topical antibiotics
- erythromycin
- clindamycin
- minocycline
B
B
D
Low risk
Low risk
No risk
Azelaic acid
B
Low risk
Salicylic acid
C
Safe to use
Dapsone
C
No study on use in
breastfeeding;
manufacturer states not
to be used during nursing
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Source:
1. United States Food & Drug Administration (US FDA) categorisation of risk of drug use in
pregnancy.
2. LactMed, Drugs and Lactation Database, National Library of Medicine (U.S.).
TREATMENT
FDA PREGNANCY
CATEGORY1
LACTATION (LACTMED)2
Sulphur in petrolatum3
Safe to use
Sulphur 5% to 10% in
a petrolatum base is safe
for topical use in
nursing mothers
Clascoterone
No information
No information
SYSTEMIC TREATMENT
Oral antibiotics
- doxycycline
- tetracycline
- minocycline
- sarecycline
- lymecycline4
- erythromycin
- azithromycin
- trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole
(co-trimoxazole)
D
D
D
No information
Avoid use
B
B
D
Avoid use
Avoid use
Avoid use
No information
Avoid use
Low risk – monitor infant for
possible effects on GI flora
Low risk – monitor infant for
possible effects on GI flora
Low risk in healthy, full-term
infant; avoid use in G6PDdeficient infant
Isotretinoin
X
No information available;
alternative topical
treatments are preferred
Hormonal therapies
- combined oral
contraceptives
- spironolactone
X
C
Avoid in <6 weeks
post-partum
Low risk
Metformin
B
Should be used with caution
while nursing newborn and
premature infants, and
those with renal impairment
Oral corticosteroids
(prednisolone – short-term)
C
Low risk
PHYSICAL TREATMENT
Intralesional corticosteroids
injection (triamcinolone
acetonide)
C
No information available;
would not be expected
to cause adverse effects in
breastfed infants
Chemical peel5
- salicylic acid
C; Avoided or
use with caution
Generally safe
- glycolic acid
- lactic acid
- jessner’s solution
- trichloroacetic acid
- azelaic acid
Safe to use
Safe to use
Avoided or use with caution
Avoided or use with caution
No information
Generally safe
Generally safe
Generally safe
Generally safe
No information
Intense pulsed light5
Safe to use
Generally safe
Laser treatment5
Safe to use
Generally safe
Photodynamic therapy
- aminolevulinic acid
- methyl aminolevulinate
C
C
No information available
No information available
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
3. Salavastru CM, Chosidow O, Boffa MJ, et al. European guideline for the management of
scabies. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2017;31:1248-1253.
4. Package Leaflet: Information for The User. 300 mg Hard Capsules Lymecycline.
5. Trivedi MK, Kroumpouzos G, Murase JE. A review of the safety of cosmetic procedures during
pregnancy and lactation. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2017;3:6-10.
Table 6. Summary of U.S. Food and Drug Administration
categories for medication use in pregnancy
Source: Monthly Index of Medical Specialities (MIMS). Safety of Drugs in Pregnancy.
(Available at: https://www.mims.com/pregdef).
Category
Description
B
C
D
Controlled studies in women fail to demonstrate a risk to the foetus
in the first trimester (and there is no evidence of a risk in later
trimesters) and the possibility of foetal harm remains remote.
Either animal-reproduction studies have not demonstrated a foetal
risk but there are no controlled studies in pregnant women or
animal-reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect (other
than a decrease in fertility) that is not confirmed in controlled
studies in women in the first trimester (and there is no evidence of
a risk in later trimesters).
Either studies in animals have revealed adverse effects on the
foetus (teratogenic or embryocidal or others) and there are no
controlled studies in women or studies in women and animals are
not available. Drugs should be given only if the potential benefit
justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
There is positive evidence of human foetal risk, but the benefits
from use in pregnant women may be acceptable despite the risk
(e.g. if the drug is needed in a life-threatening situation or for a
serious disease for which safer drugs cannot be used or are
ineffective).
X
Studies in animals or human beings have demonstrated foetal
abnormalities or there is evidence of foetal risk based on human
experience or both, and the risk of the use of the drug in pregnant
women clearly outweighs any possible benefit. The drug is
contraindicated in women who are or may become pregnant.
A
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Type of treatment
Medication
Topical treatment
Benzoyl peroxide
Topical antibiotics (clindamycin)
Azelaic acid
Salicylic acid
Systemic treatment Macrolides (erythromycin, azithromycin)
Physical treatment
Chemical peel (glycolic acid, lactic acid)
Light-based therapy (intense pulsed light, blue- or
red-light phototherapy)
In summary, the treatment choices that are safe in pregnant and
lactating women are listed in Table 7.
Table 7. Treatment options in pregnant and lactating women
Recommendation 12
• Hormonal therapy, tetracyclines, co-trimoxazole and isotretinoin
should be avoided in the treatment of acne vulgaris in pregnant and
lactating women.
10.2 Adolescents
Acne vulgaris is common in adolescents, defined by World Health
Organization (WHO) as individuals between ages 10 and 19. The
majority of clinical trials for acne treatment are conducted in patients
aged 12 years or older.
The safety of the various acne vulgaris treatments in adolescents is
summarised below:109, level III
• Topical treatments
 Topical BPO at various concentrations is safe and effective
treatment.
 Topical retinoids
- Tretinoin gel 0.05% is FDA-approved in patients aged ≥10
years.
- Fixed combination therapy of adapalene and BPO gel
0.1%/2.5% is safe in patients aged ≥9 years.
 Topical antibiotics (e.g. clindamycin)
- Safety and effectiveness in patients aged <12 years have
not been established.110, level III
- Topical 5% dapsone gel is FDA-approved in patients aged
≥12 years.
 Topical clascoterone cream 1% is FDA-approved in patients
aged >12 years.111, level III
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
• Systemic treatments
 Oral antibiotics
- Tetracycline derivatives (e.g. tetracycline, doxycycline and
minocycline) should not be used in patients aged <8 years.
- Lymecycline is FDA-approved in patients aged >12
years.112, level III
- Sarecycline is FDA-approved in patients aged ≥9
years.113, level III
- Erythromycin is safe to be used in adolescents.
 Oral isotretinoin is safe to be used in patients ≥12 years old
but may be used in younger patients at physician’s discretion.
 Hormonal therapy
- Norgestimate/ethinyl estradiol (EE) is FDA-approved for
females aged >15 years.
- Norethindrone acetate/EE is FDA-approved for females
aged >15 years.
- Drospirenone/EE is FDA-approved for females aged >14
years.
Recommendation 13
• Topical benzoyl peroxide and topical retinoids (tretinoin and
adapalene) may be used safely in adolescents with acne vulgaris.
• Oral tetracycline derivatives (e.g. tetracycline, doxycycline and
minocycline) should not be used in patients aged <8 years with acne
vulgaris.
• Oral isotretinoin can be used safely in patients aged ≥12 years with
severe acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
11. COMPLICATIONS
Acne vulgaris is a chronic inflammatory skin condition that causes
not only profound psychosocial impact but also clinically relevant
sequelae, e.g. post-acne erythema (PAE), PIH and scarring. Acne and
acne-related complications can have detrimental impacts on the QoL
and lead to feelings of embarrassment and low self-esteem. These
complications are frequently considered cosmetically unacceptable
and can have a lasting impact on the patients.
• Post-acne erythema
PAE is a common sequelae of acne vulgaris. It clinically presents
as telangiectasia and erythema post-acne treatment. Although PAE
lesions may improve over time, some remain and causes undesirable
aesthetic effects to the patients.
• Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
PIH is a common problem affecting acne vulgaris patients with a
prevalence of 45.5 - 87.2%. The commonest site involved is the cheeks
(67.9 - 81.2%)114, level II-2; 115-116, level III and a total of 69.5% patients
had moderate severity.114, level II-2 PIH may last for >1 year duration in
65.2% of patients.115, level III It may result in psychosocial impact, e.g.
embarrassment, in more than half of patients (54%) while up to 46% of
patients reported using makeup daily to camouflage the lesions. This
was more prominent among the females (88% of women used makeup
vs 18% of men; p<0.001).117, level III The frequency of PIH was also noted
to be higher among acne vulgaris patients with melasma compared
with those without it (66.8% vs 24.1%; p<0.001).116, level III
• Acne scars
A cross-sectional survey reported that acne scars were present in
73% of acne vulgaris patients and 55% of them were located on the
face.118, level III Acne scars can be divided into atrophic, hypertrophic or
keloid scars. The sub-types of atrophic scars are icepick, rolling and
boxcar scars (refer to Figure 5 and Table 8).
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Figure 5. Types of Atrophic Acne Scars and its Depth
Source: Kravvas G, Al-Niaimi F. A systematic review of treatments for acne
scarring. Part 1: Non-energy-based techniques. Scars Burn Heal. 2017;
3:2059513117695312
Table 8. Atrophic Acne Scar Subtypes Characteristics
Modified: Boen M, Jacob C. A Review and Update of Treatment Options Using the
Acne Scar Classification System. Dermatol Surg. 2019;45(3):411-422
Refer to Appendix 5 for images on Complications of Acne Vulgaris.
The scope of this CPG does not include the treatment of acne vulgarisrelated complications.
Icepick
<2 mm and narrow
Tapers as extends to deep dermis
Rolling
4 - 5 mm wide
Sloped and shallow borders
Caused by dermal tethering of otherwise
normal skin
Boxcar
1.5 - 4 mm wide
Round to oval depressions with sharply
demarcated vertical edges
Can be shallow (0.1 – 0.5 mm) or
deep (≥0.5 mm)
Atrophic Acne Scar
Subtypes
Description
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
12. QUALITY OF LIFE
Acne vulgaris is a chronic disease that may result in profound negative
psychological and social effects on the quality of life (QoL) of the
patients. Due to the visibility of acne and the potential to cause scarring
in some patients, significant psychological distress may develop if acne
vulgaris is left untreated.
There are various tools available for the assessment of QoL in patients
with acne vulgaris, which can be divided into general and acne specific
assessment tools. Examples of a general assessment tool is DLQI and
acne specific tools are CADI (refer to Appendix 8) and Acne Quality of
Life (AQOL).
• Acne vulgaris can affect QoL and the assessment tools which can
be used are DLQI, CADI and AQOL.
a. Impairment of QoL
In a local study on mild to severe acne vulgaris patients in a dermatology
clinic, CADI score was related to depression (p=0.012), anxiety
(p=0.015) and stress (p=0.001).119, level III
A cross-sectional study conducted locally in secondary schools
assessing the perception and psychosocial impact of acne vulgaris
among students using the CADI showed that the majority had mild
QoL impairment based on CADI score with a mean of 3.5±2.5.
When individual CADI domain with score ≥1 was analysed, 79.5%
perceived acne as a problem, 76.4% were concerned, depressed and
felt miserable while 69.4% had some degree of feeling aggressive,
frustrated and embarrassed due to acne vulgaris.6, level III
In another cross-sectional study on students with mild to severe acne
vulgaris using different tools, perceived stigma was associated with
health-related QoL (p<0.001), psychological distress (p<0.001) and
somatic symptoms (p<0.001).120, level III
There is increasing evidence regarding the role of difficulties in emotion
regulation (DER) in acne vulgaris patients, thus psychological wellbeing assessment is recommended. A cross-sectional study showed
that DER was significantly higher in acne vulgaris patients than controls.
It was also associated with anxiety and depressive symptoms based on
the Hospital Anxiety and Depressive scale (p<0.01) and impaired QoL
based on AQOL (p<0.01).121, level III
In a recent large meta-analysis of 42 observational studies, acne
vulgaris was significantly correlated with depression (r=0.22, 95% CI
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
0.17 to 0.26) and anxiety (r= 0.25, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.31).122, level II-2 There
was no report on the quality of primary papers.
b. Predictive factors of QoL
Factors that have been identified in the impairment of QoL in acne
vulgaris in several observational studies are discussed below.
• Severity of acne vulgaris
There was a significant correlation between the impairment of QoL and
the severity of acne vulgaris:
 r=0.51 between CADI score and acne severity based on lesion
count123, level III
 ρ=0.550 on objective severity and ρ=0.620 on subjective severity
in relation to DLQI124, level III
 r=0.13 for relationship, r=0.21 for avoidance behaviours and
r=0.16 for the perception of acne on patient’s QoL and acne
severity based on Global Echelle de Cotation des Lésions d’Acné
score.125, level III
• Gender
Females with acne vulgaris had a higher risk of depression which was
linked with the significantly higher usage of concealers to camouflage
their spots.117, level III; 126, level III
• Age
University students with acne vulgaris experienced a higher impact of
acne vulgaris on their life based on CADI than school students (p<0.05)
especially among the female gender (p<0.01).127, level III
• Acne relapse
The CADI score was higher among patients >20 years old who had
relapse than those without relapse (p<0.01). Based on multivariate
analysis, acne relapse was a significant determinant of absenteeism/
productivity loss.128, level III
Recommendation 14
• Assessment for quality of life may be considered in the management
of patients with acne vulgaris.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
13. REFERRAL
The urgency for referral of patients with acne vulgaris is divided into the
following categories:5
• urgent: within 24 hours
• seen early: within 2 weeks
• non-urgent: based on available appointment date
a. Urgent referral
Refer patients urgently to a dermatologist if the patient is suspected to
have acne fulminans.52 Acne fulminans is a rare skin disorder. It presents
as an acute, painful, ulcerating, and haemorrhagic form of acne and,
may be associated with systemic symptoms e.g. fever and polyarthritis.
It may also cause bone lesions and laboratory abnormalities.
Urgent referral to a psychiatrist should also be made if the patient has
major depression or exhibiting suicidal behaviour.5, 52
b. Seen early5
i. Moderate to severe acne (e.g. nodulocystic acne)
ii. Severe social or psychological problems including a morbid fear of
deformity (dysmorphophobia)
c. Non-urgent5
i. Diagnostic uncertainties, examples:
• Suspected rosacea
• Suspected drug-induced acne
• Suspected occupational causes
• Suspected underlying endocrinological cause (e.g. PCOS)
requiring further assessment
• Suspected Staphylococcus folliculitis, pityrosporum folliculitis or
gram-negative folliculitis
• Rare variants of acne e.g. acne excoriae and chloracne
ii. Dermatologist consultation and services:
• Failed oral antibiotic therapy
• Resistance or intolerance to current treatment
• Scarring or pigmentary changes
• Pregnancy with moderate and severe acne vulgaris
• Indication for specialised physical treatment (e.g. incision,
drainage of cysts and laser)
Recommendation 15
• Patients with moderate to severe acne vulgaris (e.g. nodulocystic
acne) should be referred early to a dermatologist.
• Patients with acne vulgaris who exhibit suicidal behaviour should be
referred urgently to a psychiatrist.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
14. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The implementation of this CPG is the responsibility of the healthcare
providers. The management of acne vulgaris should be guided by
evidence-based approach in order to provide safe and optimum care
for the patients. The following are the factors that may influence the
implementation of the recommendations in this CPG:
14.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing this CPG are:
i. wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to
healthcare providers
ii. annual dermatology update course for primary care doctors
The limiting factors in the implementation are:
i. availability and cost of treatment
ii. variation in treatment practice and preferences
14.2 Potential Resource Implications
Acne vulgaris may be seen as not important compared with other
medical diseases and thus not given priority in provision of medications
as recommended by the CPG. It has to be noted that, as emphasised
by the CPG, inadequately treated acne vulgaris may lead to various
physical and psychological complications that affect QoL of the patients.
Assessment of the severity of acne vulgaris is important as it determines
the appropriate medications to be prescribed. The use of assessment
tool e.g. CASS requires training to the healthcare providers. This may
cause small resource implication. Another important issue related to
resource implication is the availability of recommended treatment
in the healthcare facilities. It has to be pointed out that even simple
medications like topical BPO which is strongly recommended in CPG is
not easily available in the health clinic.
To enhance the utilisation of this CPG on Management of Acne Vulgaris
(Second Edition), the following clinical audit indicators for quality
management are proposed:
Percentage of
patients with mild
to moderate acne
vulgaris treated
with topical BPO
as monotherapy
or in combination
with other topical
therapy
=
Total number of patients with mild to
moderate acne vulgaris in the same period
Number of patients with mild to moderate acne
vulgaris treated with topical BPO as
monotherapy or in combination with other
topical therapy in a period
x100%
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage
of patients
with moderate
to severe
acne vulgaris
treated with
oral antibiotics
(doxycycline,
tetracycline or
erythromycin)
=
Total number of patients with moderate to
severe acne vulgaris treated
in the same period
Number of patients with moderate to severe
acne vulgaris treated with oral antibiotics
(doxycycline, tetracycline or erythromycin)
in a period
x100%
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Dréno B, Dagnelie MA, Khammari A, et al. The Skin Microbiome: A New Actor in
Inflammatory Acne. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2020;21(Suppl 1):18-24.
2.
Chen H, Zhang TC, Yin XL, et al. Magnitude and temporal trend of acne vulgaris
burden in 204 countries and territories from 1990 to 2019: an analysis from the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Br J Dermatol. 2021;186(4):673-683.
3.
Heng AHS, Chew FT. Systematic review of the epidemiology of acne vulgaris.
Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):5754.
4.
Wolkenstein P, Machovcová A, Szepietowski JC, et al. Acne prevalence and
associations with lifestyle: a cross-sectional online survey of adolescents/young
adults in 7 European countries. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018;32(2):298306.
5.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Acne. Putrajaya: MoH Malaysia;
2012.
6.
Kwan JW, Lee HL, Low D-E, et al. Perception and Psychosocial Impact of Acne
Vulgaris Among Secondary School Adolescents in Ipoh, Malaysia. Malaysian
Journal of Dermatology. 2019;42:20-24.
7.
Say YH, Heng AHS, Reginald K, et al. Modifiable and non-modifiable
epidemiological risk factors for acne, acne severity and acne scarring among
Malaysian Chinese: a cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2021;21:601.
8.
Muthupalaniappen L, Tan H, Puah JWD, et al. Acne prevalence, severity and risk
factors among medical students in Malaysia. Clin Ter. 2014;165(4):187-192.
9.
Koku Aksu A, Metintas S, Saracoglu Z, et al. Acne: prevalence and relationship
with dietary habits in Eskisehir, Turkey. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol.
2011;26(12):1503-1509.
10. AlKhabbaz M, Al-Taiar A, Saeed M, et al. Predictors of Acne Vulgaris among
Adolescents in Kuwait. Med Princ Pract. 2020;29(4):310-317.
11. Di Landro A, Cazzaniga S, Cusano F, et al. Adult female acne and associated
risk factors: Results of a multicenter case-control study in Italy. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2016;75(6):1134-1141.
12. Suppiah TSS, Sundram TKM, Tan ESS, et al. Acne vulgaris and its association with
dietary intake: a Malaysian perspective. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2018;27(5):11411145.
13. Snast I, Dalal A, Twig G, et al. Acne and obesity: A nationwide study of 600,404
adolescents. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;81(3):723-729.
14. Huang X, Zhang J, Li J, et al. Daily Intake of Soft Drinks and Moderate-to-Severe
Acne Vulgaris in Chinese Adolescents. J Pediatr. 2019;204:256-262.e3.
15. Ismail NH, Manaf ZA, Azizan NZ. High glycemic load diet, milk and ice cream
consumption are related to acne vulgaris in Malaysian young adults: a case
control study. BMC Dermatol. 2012;12:13.
16. Penso L, Touvier M, Deschasaux M, et al. Association Between Adult Acne and
Dietary Behaviors: Findings From the NutriNet-Sante Prospective Cohort Study.
JAMA Dermatol. 2020;156(8):854-862.
17. Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the
management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945-973. e33.
18. Oon HH, Wong S-N, Aw DCW, et al. Acne Management Guidelines by the
Dermatological Society of Singapore. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2019;12(7):34-50.
19. Becker M, Wild T, Zouboulis CC. Objective assessment of acne. Clin Dermatol.
2017;35(2):147-155.
20. Goh CL, Abad-Casintahan F, Aw DCW, et al. South-East Asia study alliance
guidelines on the management of acne vulgaris in South-East Asian patients. J
Dermatol. 2015;42(10):945-953.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
21. Agnew T, Furber G, Leach M, et al. A Comprehensive Critique and Review of
Published Measures of Acne Severity. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2016;9(7):40-52.
22. Ramli R, Malik AS, Hani AFM, et al. Acne analysis, grading and computational
assessment methods: an overview. Skin Res Technol. 2012;18(1):1-14.
23. Dréno B, Poli F, Pawin H, et al. Development and evaluation of a Global Acne
Severity Scale (GEA Scale) suitable for France and Europe. J Eur Acad Dermatol
Venereol. 2011;25:43-48.
24. Guerra-Tapia A, Puig-Sanz L, Conejo Mir J, et al. Feasibility and Reliability of the
Spanish Version of the Leeds Revised Acne Grading Scale. Actas Dermosifiliogr.
2010;101(9):778-784.
25. O’Brien S, Lewis J, Cunliffe W. The Leeds revised acne grading system. J
Dermatol Treat. 1998;9:215-220.
26. Burke BM, Cunliffe W. The assessment of acne vulgaris—the Leeds technique.
Br J Dermatol. 1984;111(1):83-92.
27. Bergman H, Tsai KY, Seo S-J, et al. Remote assessment of acne: the use
of acne grading tools to evaluate digital skin images. Telemed J E Health.
2009;15(5):426-430.
28. Tan JK, Tang J, Fung K, et al. Development and Validation of a Comprehensive
Acne Severity Scale. J Cutan Med Surg. 2007;11(6):211-216.
29. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). Guidance for Industry Acne
Vulgaris: Developing Drugs for Treatment. Rockville, MD: FDA; 2005.
30. Cook CH, Centner RL, Michaels SE. An acne grading method using photographic
standards. Arch Dermatol. 1979;115(5):571-575.
31. Doshi A, Zaheer A, Stiller MJ. A comparison of current acne grading systems and
proposal of a novel system. Int J Dermatol. 1997;36(6):416-418.
32. Yang Z, Zhang Y, Mosler EL, et al. Topical benzoyl peroxide for acne. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2020;(3):CD011154.
33. Kolli SS, Pecone D, Pona A, et al. Topical Retinoids in Acne Vulgaris: A
Systematic Review. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2019;20:345-365.
34. Tan J, Thiboutot D, Popp G, et al. Randomized phase 3 evaluation of trifarotene
50 μg/g cream treatment of moderate facial and truncal acne. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2019;80(6):1691-1699.
35. Blume-Peytavi U, Fowler J, Kemény L, et al. Long-term safety and efficacy of
trifarotene 50 μg/g cream, a first-in-class RAR-γ selective topical retinoid, in
patients with moderate facial and truncal acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol.
2020;34(1):166-173.
36. Stuart B, Maund E, Wilcox C, et al. Topical preparations for the treatment of mildto-moderate acne vulgaris: systematic review and network meta-analysis. Br J
Dermatol. 2021;185(3):512-525.
37. Gold LS, Dhawan S, Weiss J, et al. A novel topical minocycline foam for the
treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris: results of 2 randomized, doubleblind, phase 3 studies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(1):168-177.
38. Raoof TJ, Hooper D, Moore A, et al. Efficacy and safety of a novel topical
minocycline foam for the treatment of moderate to severe acne vulgaris: A phase
3 study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(4):832-837.
39. Liu H, Yu H, Xia J, et al. Topical azelaic acid, salicylic acid, nicotinamide, sulphur,
zinc and fruit acid (alpha-hydroxy acid) for acne. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2020;(5):CD011368.
40. Searle T, Al-Niaimi F, Ali FR. The top ten cosmeceuticals for facial
hyperpigmentation. Dermatol Ther. 2020;33(6):e14095.
41. Thiboutot DM, Kircik L, McMichael A, et al. Efficacy, Safety, and Dermal
Tolerability of Dapsone Gel, 7.5% in Patients with Moderate Acne Vulgaris: A
Pooled Analysis of Two Phase 3 Trials. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2016;9(10):18-27.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
42. Alkhodaidi ST, Al Hawsawi KA, Alkhudaidi IT, et al. Efficacy and safety of
topical clascoterone cream for treatment of acne vulgaris: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Dermatol Ther.
2021;34(1):e14609.
43. Gamble R, Dunn J, Dawson A, et al. Topical Antimicrobial Treatment of Acne
Vulgaris: An Evidence-Based Review. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2012;13:141-152.
44. Thiboutot DM, Dréno B, Abanmi A, et al. Practical management of acne for
clinicians: An international consensus from the Global Alliance to Improve
Outcomes in Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;78(1):1-23.
45. Bienenfeld A, Nagler AR, Orlow SJ. Oral Antibacterial Therapy for Acne Vulgaris:
An Evidence-Based Review. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2017;18(4):469-490.
46. Garner SE, Eady A, Bennett C, et al. Minocycline for acne vulgaris: efficacy and
safety. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(8):CD002086.
47. Moore A, Green LJ, Bruce S, et al. Once-Daily Oral Sarecycline 1.5 mg/kg/day
Is Effective for Moderate to Severe Acne Vulgaris: Results from Two Identically
Designed, Phase 3, Randomized, Double-Blind Clinical Trials. J Drugs Dermatol.
2018;17(9):987-996.
48. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). Labeling: SEYSARATM.
Rockville, MD: FDA; 2018.
49. Chandrasakaranpillay D, Ng TG. A Randomised Study Comparing the Efficacy
of Low-Dose Oral Azithromycin versus Doxycycline in Combination with Topical
Benzoyl Peroxide in the Treatment of Moderate to Severe Acne Vulgaris.
Malaysian Journal of Dermatology. 2021;47:2-11.
50. Costa CS, Bagatin E, Martimbianco ALC, et al. Oral isotretinoin for acne.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;(11):CD009435.
51. Van TLT, Minh PN, Thuy PTT, et al. Efficacy of Oral Low-Dose Isotretinoin in
the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris in Vietnam. Open Access Maced J Med Sci.
2019;7(2):279-282.
52. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Acne Vulgaris: Management.
London: NICE; 2021.
53. iPLEDGE REMS: Prescriber Guide. [Available at: https://ipledgeprogram.com/
ResourceDownloadRaw/GuideBestPractices/attachment].
54. Arowojolu AO, Gallo MF, Lopez LM, et al. Combined oral contraceptive pills for
treatment of acne. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(7):CD004425.
55. Layton AM, Eady EA, Whitehouse H, et al. Oral Spironolactone for Acne
Vulgaris in Adult Females: A Hybrid Systematic Review. Am J Clin Dermatol.
2017;18(2):169-191.
56. Patiyasikunt M, Chancheewa B, Asawanonda P, et al. Efficacy and tolerability
of low-dose spironolactone and topical benzoyl peroxide in adult female
acne: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Dermatol.
2020;47(12):1411-1416.
57. Yen H, Chang Y-T, Yee F-J, et al. Metformin Therapy for Acne in Patients with
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Am J Clin
Dermatol. 2021;22(1):11-23.
58. Lee JK, Smith AD. Metformin as an adjunct therapy for the treatment of moderate
to severe acne vulgaris. Dermatol Online J. 2017;23(11):5.
59. Castillo DE, Keri JE. Chemical peels in the treatment of acne: patient selection
and perspectives. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2018;11:365-372.
60. Handog EB, Datuin MS, Singzon IA. Chemical Peels for Acne and Acne Scars in
Asians: Evidence Based Review. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2012;5(4):239-246.
61. Chen X, Wang S, Yang M, et al. Chemical peels for acne vulgaris: a systematic
review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open. 2018;8(4):e019607.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
62. Dayal S, Kalra KD, Sahu P. Comparative study of efficacy and safety of 45%
mandelic acid versus 30% salicylic acid peels in mild-to-moderate acne vulgaris.
J Cosmet Dermatol. 2020;19(2):393-399.
63. How KN, Lim PY, Wan Ahmad Kammal WSL, et al. Efficacy and safety of
Jessner’s solution peel in comparison with salicylic acid 30% peel in the
management of patients with acne vulgaris and postacne hyperpigmentation
with skin of color: a randomized, double-blinded, split-face, controlled trial. Int J
Dermatol. 2020;59(7):804-812.
64. Szymańskaa A, Budzisz E, Erkiert-Polguj A. Efficacy of 30% azelaic acid
peel in the nonpharmacological treatment of facial acne. J Dermatol Treat.
2019;32(3):291-296.
65. Chilicka K, Rogowska AM, Szyguła R, et al. A comparison of the effectiveness
of azelaic and pyruvic acid peels in the treatment of female adult acne: A
randomized controlled trial. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):12612.
66. Nofal E, Nofal A, Gharib K, et al. Combination chemical peels are more effective
than single chemical peel in treatment of mild-to-moderate acne vulgaris: A split
face comparative clinical trial. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2018;17(5):802-810.
67. Scott AM, Stehlik P, Clark J, et al. Blue-Light Therapy for Acne Vulgaris: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Ann Fam Med. 2019;17(6):545-553.
68. Wu Y, Deng Y, Huang P. Application of red light therapy for moderate-to-severe
acne vulgaris: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cosmet Dermatol.
2021;20(11):3498-3508.
69. Barbaric J, Abbott R, Posadzki P, et al. Light therapies for acne: abridged
Cochrane systematic review including GRADE assessments. Br J Dermatol.
2016;178(1):61-75.
70. Chen S, Wang Y, Ren J, et al. Efficacy and safety of intense pulsed light in the
treatment of inflammatory acne vulgaris with a novel filter. J Cosmet Laser Ther.
2019;21(6):323-327.
71. Wanitphakdeedecha R, Tavechodperathum N, Tantrapornpong P, et al. Acne
treatment efficacy of intense pulsed light photodynamic therapy with topical
licochalcone A, l-carnitine, and decanediol: A spilt-face, double-blind, randomized
controlled trial. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2019;19(1):78-87.
72. Li Y, Zhu J, Zhang Y, et al. Isotretinoin plus 420 nm intense pulsed light versus
isotretinoin alone for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a randomized, controlled
study of efficacy, safety, and patient satisfaction in Chinese subjects. Lasers Med
Sci. 2021;36(3):657-665.
73. Moneib H, Tawfik AA, Youssef SS, et al. Randomized Split-Face Controlled Study
to Evaluate 1550-nm Fractionated Erbium Glass Laser for Treatment of Acne
Vulgaris—An Image Analysis Evaluation. Dermatol Surg. 2014;40(11):11911200.
74. Mohamed EE, Tawfik K, Elsaie M. Intense Pulsed Light Versus 1,064 LongPulsed Neodymium: Yttrium–Aluminum–Garnet Laser in the Treatment of Facial
Acne Vulgaris. J Clin Diagn Res. 2016;10(7):WC01-WC03.
75. Monib KME-D, Hussein MS. Nd:YAG laser vs IPL in inflammatory and
noninflammatory acne lesion treatment. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2019;19(9):23252332.
76. Ibrahim SM, Farag A, Hegazy R, et al. Combined Low-Dose Isotretinoin and
Pulsed Dye Laser Versus standard-Dose Isotretinoin in the Treatment of
Inflammatory Acne. Lasers Surg Med. 2020;53(5):603-609.
77. Xia J, Hu G, Hu D, et al. Concomitant Use of 1,550-nm Nonablative Fractional
Laser With Low-Dose Isotretinoin for the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris in
Asian Patients: A Randomized Split-Face Controlled Study. Dermatol Surg.
2018;44(9):1201-1208.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
78. Shin JU, Lee Sh, Jung JY, et al. A split-face comparison of a fractional
microneedle radiofrequency device and fractional carbon dioxide laser therapy
in acne patients. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2012;14(5):212-217.
79. Min S, Park SY, Yoon JY, et al. Comparison of fractional microneedling
radiofrequency and bipolar radiofrequency on acne and acne scar and
investigation of mechanism: comparative randomized controlled clinical trial.
Arch Dermatol Res. 2015;307:897-904.
80. Stringer T, Nagler A, Orlow SJ, et al. Clinical evidence for washing and cleansers
in acne vulgaris: a systematic review. J Dermatolog Treat. 2018;29(7):688-693.
81. Aiello LM, Vergilio MM, Monteiro e Silva SA, et al. Skin effect of facial cleansing
combined with an electric sonic device. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021;20(11):35373544.
82. Hayashi N, Kawashima M. Study of the usefulness of moisturizers on adherence
of acne patients treated with adapalene. J Dermatol. 2014;41(7):592-597.
83. Cestone E, Michelotti A, Zanoletti V, et al. Acne RA-1, 2, a novel UV-selective face
cream for patients with acne: Efficacy and tolerability results of a randomized,
placebo-controlled clinical study. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2017;16(2):265-270.
84. Jaturapisanukul K, Montree Udompataikul, Silada Kanokrungsee, et al. Efficacy
and safety of a novel water-soluble herbal patch for acne vulgaris treatment:
A randomized, assessor-blind controlled, intra-individual split-face comparative
study. Dermatol Ther. 2021;34(3):e14925.
85. Araviiskaia E, Lopez Estebaranz JL, Pincelli C. Dermocosmetics: beneficial
adjuncts in the treatment of acne vulgaris. J Dermatol Treat. 2019;32(1):3-10.
86. Lee HE, Ko JY, Kim YH, et al. A double-blind randomized controlled comparison
of APDDR-0901, a novel cosmeceutical formulation, and 0.1 adapalene gel in the
treatment of mild-to-moderate acne vulgaris. Eur J Dermatol. 2011;21(6):959965.
87. Abels C, Kaszuba A, Michalak I, et al. A 10% glycolic acid containing oil-in-water
emulsion improves mild acne: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
trial. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2011;10(3):202-209.
88. Khodaeiani E, Fouladi RF, Amirnia M, et al. Topical 4% nicotinamide vs.
1% clindamycin in moderate inflammatory acne vulgaris. Int J Dermatol.
2013;52(8):999-1004.
89. Saint-Jean M, Khammari A, Seite S, et al. Characteristics of premenstrual acne
flare-up and benefits of a dermocosmetic treatment: a double-blind randomised
trial. Eur J Dermatol. 2017;27(2):144-149.
90. Lubtikulthum P, Kamanamool N, Udompataikul M. A comparative study on the
effectiveness of herbal extracts vs 2.5% benzoyl peroxide in the treatment of
mild to moderate acne vulgaris. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2019;18(6):1767-1775.
91. Araviiskaia E, Dréno B. The role of topical dermocosmetics in acne vulgaris. J
Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30(6):926-935.
92. Richter C, Trojahn C, Hillmann K, et al. Reduction of Inflammatory and
Noninflammatory Lesions with Topical Tyrothricin 0.1% in the Treatment of Mild
to Severe Acne Papulopustulosa: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. Skin
Pharmacol Physiol. 2016;29(1):1-8.
93. Mazzarello V, Donadu M, Ferrari M, et al. Treatment of acne with a combination
of propolis, tea tree oil, and Aloe vera compared to erythromycin cream: two
double-blind investigations. Clin Pharmacol. 2018;10:175-181.
94. Najafi-Taher R, Eslami Farsani V, Mehdizade Rayeni N, et al. A topical gel of
tea tree oil nanoemulsion containing adapalene versus adapalene marketed gel
in patients with acne vulgaris: a randomized clinical trial. Arch Dermatol Res.
2021;314:673-679.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
95. Barfod L, Kemp K, Hansen M, et al. Chalcones from Chinese liquorice inhibit
proliferation of T cells and production of cytokines. Int Immunopharmacol.
2002;2(4):545-555.
96. Kulthanan K, Trakanwittayarak S, Tuchinda P, et al. A Double-Blinded,
Randomized, Vehicle-Controlled Study of the Efficacy of Moisturizer Containing
Licochalcone A, Decanediol, L-Carnitine, and Salicylic Acid for Prevention of
Acne Relapse in Asian Population. Biomed Res Int. 2020;2020:1-11.
97. Shakiba R, Nilforoushzadeh MA, Hashem-Dabaghian F, et al. Effect of Cedar
(Ziziphus spina-christi) topical solution in mild to moderate acne vulgaris: a
randomized clinical study. J Dermatolog Treat. 2021;32(2):197-202.
98. Kim S, Park TH, Kim WI, et al. The effects of green tea on acne vulgaris: A
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Phytother
Res. 2020;35(1):374-383.
99. Woolery-Lloyd H, Baumann L, Ikeno H. Sodium L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate 5%
lotion for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a randomized, double-blind, controlled
trial. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2010;9(1):22-27.
100. Cao H, Yang G, Wang Y, et al. Complementary therapies for acne vulgaris.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(1):CD009436.
101. Sung S-H, Choi G-H, Lee N-W, et al. External Application of Herbal Medicines for
Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review and Meta Analysis. J Pharmacopuncture.
2020;23(1):8-17.
102. Semprini A, Braithwaite I, Corin A, et al. Randomised controlled trial of topical
kanuka honey for the treatment of acne. BMJ Open. 2016;6(2):e009448.
103. Jung GW, Tse JE, Guiha I, et al. Prospective, Randomized, Open-Label Trial
Comparing the Safety, Efficacy, and Tolerability of an Acne Treatment Regimen
with and without a Probiotic Supplement and Minocycline in Subjects with Mild
to Moderate Acne. J Cut Med Surg. 2013;17(2):114-122.
104. Fabbrocini G, Bertona M, Picazo Ó, et al. Supplementation with Lactobacillus
rhamnosus SP1 normalises skin expression of genes implicated in insulin
signalling and improves adult acne. Benef Microbes. 2016;7(5):625-630.
105. Yee BE, Richards P, Sui JY, et al. Serum zinc levels and efficacy of zinc
treatment in acne vulgaris: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Dermatol
Ther. 2020;33(6):e14252.
106. Jung JY, Kwon HH, Hong JS, et al. Effect of Dietary Supplementation with
Omega-3 Fatty Acid and Gamma-linolenic Acid on Acne Vulgaris: A Randomised,
Double-blind, Controlled Trial. Acta Derm Venereol. 2014;94:521-525.
107. Wang M, Zhou Y, Yan Y. Vitamin D status and efficacy of vitamin D
supplementation in acne patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Cosmet Dermatol. 2021;20(12):3802-3807.
108. Kaplan YC, Ozsarfati J, Etwel F, et al. Pregnancy outcomes following first
trimester exposure to topical retinoids: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Br J Dermatol. 2015;173(5):1132-1141.
109. Eichenfield
LF,
Krakowski
AC,
Piggott
C,
et
al.
Evidence-Based
Recommendations for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Pediatric Acne.
Pediatrics. 2013;131(Suppl 3):S163-S186.
110. United States Food & Drug Administration. Draft Guidance on Clindamycin
Phosphate. [Available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/
psg/Clindamycin%20phosphate_Topical%20gel_NDA%20050615_RV%20
Nov%202018.pdf].
111. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). Labeling: WINLEVI(R)
Cream. Rockville, MD: FDA; 2020.
112. Package Leaflet: Information for The User. 300 mg Hard Capsules Lymecycline.
113. Habeshian KA, Cohen BA. Current Issues in the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.
Pediatrics. 2020;145(Suppl 2):S225-S230.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
114. Abanmi A, Al-Enezi M, Al Hammadi A, et al. Survey of acne-related post
inflammatory hyperpigmentation in the Middle East. J Dermatol Treat.
2018;30(6):578-581.
115. Abad-Casintahan F, Chow SKW, Goh CL, et al. Frequency and characteristics
of
acne-related
post-inflammatory
hyperpigmentation.
J
Dermatol.
2016;43(7):826-828.
116. Adalatkhah H, Bazargani HS. The Association Between Melasma and
Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation in Acne Patients. Iran Red Crescent Med
J. 2013;15(5):400-403.
117. França K, Keri J. Psychosocial impact of acne and postinflammatory
hyperpigmentation. An Bras Dermatol. 2017;92(4):505-509.
118. Tan JK, Tang J, Fung K, et al. Development and Validation of a Scale for
Acne Scar Severity (SCAR-S) of the face and trunk. J Cutan Med Surg.
2010;14(4):156-160.
119. How KN, Shamsudin N. The Psychological Impact and Functional Disability of
Patients With Acne Vulgaris in Hospital Serdang, Malaysia: A Cross Sectional
Analysis. Mal J Med Health Sci. 2019;15(2):56-61.
120. Davern J, O’Donnell AT. Stigma predicts health-related quality of life impairment,
psychological distress, and somatic symptoms in acne sufferers. PLoS One.
2018;13(9):e0205009.
121. Cengiz GF, Gürel G. Difficulties in emotion regulation and quality of life in
patients with acne. Qual Life Res. 2020;29(2):431-438.
122. Samuels DV, Rosenthal R, Lin R, et al. Acne vulgaris and risk of depression and
anxiety: a meta-analytic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;83(2):532-541.
123. Hosthota A, Bondade S, Basavaraja V. Impact of Acne Vulgaris on Quality of
Life and Self-esteem. Cutis. 2016;98:121-124.
124. Lukaviciute L, Navickas P, Navickas A, et al. Quality of life, anxiety prevalence,
depression symptomatology and suicidal ideation among acne patients in
Lithuania. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2017;31(11):1900-1906.
125. Saka B, Akakpo AS, Téclessou JN, et al. Acne in Lomé, Togo: clinical aspects
and quality of life of patients. BMC Dermatol. 2018;18:7.
126. Haroon MZ, Alam A, Ullah I, et al. Quality of Life and Depression Among Young
Patients Suffering From Acne. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2019;31(3):436440.
127. Pochynok T, Chernyshov IP, Asayevich N, et al. Quality of Life of School and
University Students with Acne. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2018;26(2):139145.
128. Dréno B, Bordet C, Seite S, et al. Acne relapses: impact on quality of life and
productivity. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2019;33(5):937-943.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effective and safe topical treatments
for acne vulgaris?
1.
ACNE VULGARIS/
2.
acne.tw.
3.
acne vulgaris.tw.
4.
pimple*.tw.
5.
comedone*.tw.
6.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5
7.
BENZOYL PEROXIDE/
8.
(benzoyl adj1 peroxide).tw.
9.
RETINOIDS/
10. retinoid*.tw.
11. CLINDAMYCIN/
12. clindamycin.tw.
13. clindamycin hydrochloride.tw.
14. ERYTHROMYCIN/
15. erythromycin.tw.
16. erythromycin a.tw.
17. (erythromycin adj1 (lactate or phosphate)).tw.
18. SALICYLIC ACID/ (7108)
19. (salicylic adj1 acid*).tw.
20. SULFUR/
21. sulfur.tw.
22. DICARBOXYLIC ACIDS/
23. (dicarboxylic adj1 acid*).tw.
24. azelaic acid.tw.
25. (clindamycin adj3 benzoyl peroxide).tw.
26. (benzoyl peroxide adj3 adapalene).tw.
27. olumacostat glasaretil.tw.
28. 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or
19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27
29. 6 and 28
30. limit 29 to (english language and humans and yr=”2020 -Current”
and “all adults (19 plus years)”)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the risk factors for acne vulgaris?
2. What are the aggravating factors for acne vulgaris?
• smoking
• diet
• stress
• skin care routine e.g. facial treatment
• hormonal changes
3. What is the diagnostic criteria for acne vulgaris?
• laboratory investigations to exclude other associated conditions
4. How is acne severity graded?
5. What are the effective and safe topical treatments for acne vulgaris?
• benzoyl peroxide
• retinoid
• topical antibiotic
• salicylic acid
• sulphur
• azelaic acid
• dapsone
• combination treatment
 clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide
 benzoyl peroxide and adapalene
• topical sebum controlling agents: olumacostat glasaretil
• topical androgen receptor inhibitor (clascoterone)
6. Is fixed combination preparation superior than monotherapy in acne
vulgaris treatment?
7. What are the effective and safe systemic treatments for acne
vulgaris?
• oral antibiotic
• oral hormonal therapy
• oral isotretinoin
• others: spironolactone and metformin
8. What are the effective and safe physical treatments for acne
vulgaris?
• intralesional corticosteroids injection
• comedones extraction
• chemical peel
• laser therapy
• light-based therapy
• photodynamic therapy
• radiofrequency treatment
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
9. Is traditional and complementary therapy safe and effective for
acne vulgaris?
• turmeric/honey/rice water etc
10. Are the following cosmeceuticals safe and effective for acne
vulgaris?
• cleanser
• scrub
• skin cleansing device
• facemasks
• toner
• moisturiser
• sunscreen
• antibacterial agents
• corneolytics (alpha hydroxy acids, salicylic acid, polyhydroxy
acid, retinaldehyde and retinol)
• niacinamide
11. What are the complications of acne vulgaris?
12. What are the safe and effective treatments for adolescents,
pregnant and lactating women with acne vulgaris?
13. How does acne vulgaris affect quality of life?
14. What are the referral criteria for acne vulgaris?
• urgent referral
• non-urgent referral
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
GLYCAEMIC INDEX CLASSIFICATION OF FOOD
Category
Low Glycaemic
Index
(<55)
Intermediate
Glycaemic Index
(55 - 70)
High Glycaemic
Index
(>70)
Rice
-
Basmati rice
Brown rice
Parboiled rice
Red rice
Glutinous rice
Jasmine rice
White rice
Instant porridge
Sago
Bread and cereal
products
All bran breakfast
cereals
Muesli
Wholegrain bread
varieties
Barley
Chapatti
Idli
Oatmeal
Wholemeal pita
bread
Wholemeal barley
flour bread
Cornflakes
Rice crackers
Sardine sandwich
Roti canai
White flour bread
Whole wheat flour
bread
Noodle and pasta
Lasagna pasta
sheets
Spaghetti - white,
boiled
Spaghetti -
wholemeal, boiled
Spaghetti - white,
durum wheat
semolina
Udon noodles - plain
Wheat noodles
Fried macaroni
Fried meehoon
Fried rice noodles
Rice noodle (kway
teow)
Bakery products and
snacks
Banana cake
Sponge cake - plain
Chocolate
High calcium cracker
Pastry
Popcorn
Potato crisps
Doughnut
Pretzel
Waffle
Scones
Pancake
Traditional kuih
Curry puff (potato)
Kuih bakar
Roti jala
Seri muka
Cucur bilis
Cekodok pisang
Keropok lekor
Popia goreng
Wajik
Popia basah
Milk and dairy
products
Full fat milk
Low fat milk
Skim milk
Soymilk (without
added sugar)
Yogurt
Ice cream
Sweetened
condensed milk
Teh tarik
Beverages
Fruit juices - freshly
made, unsweetened
Soft drink
Cordial drink
3 in 1 beverages
-
Sugar
Fructose
Sucrose
Honey
Glucose
Fruits
Apple
Mango
Orange
Plum
Banana
Dates
Papaya
Pineapple
Raisin
Lychee
Watermelon
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Source:
1. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Acne. Putrajaya: MoH Malaysia;
2012.
2. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (Sixth
Edition). Putrajaya: MoH Malaysia; 2020
3. Osman MH, Mohd Yusof BN, Ismail A. Glycaemic index and glycaemic load of
foods and food products in Malaysia: a review. Int Food Res J. 2021;28(2):217-229
Nuts
Cashew nuts
Peanuts
-
-
Category
Low Glycaemic
Index
(<55)
Intermediate
Glycaemic Index
(55 - 70)
High Glycaemic
Index
(>70)
Legumes
Baked beans
Chickpeas
Lentils
Mung beans
-
-
Tubers
Cassava - boiled
Sweet potato - boiled
Pumpkin - boiled
Sweet corn - boiled
Potato - boiled
Vegetables
Carrot - boiled
Broccoli
Cauliflower
-
-
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
CLINICAL IMAGES ACCORDING TO CASS GRADING
CASS 0
CASS 1
CASS 2
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
CASS 3
CASS 4
CASS 5
* Photos published with patient’s permission
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
COMPLICATIONS OF ACNE VULGARIS
Post-inflammatory
hyperpigmentation
Post-acne erythema
Rolling scar
Icepick scar
Hypertrophic and
keloid scars
Boxcar scar
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
A. Clinical Characteristics of Acne Vulgaris Patients in Studies on Antibiotic Resistance
No.
Authors/year of
publication/country
No. of
study
subjects
Study period
Prior antibiotic usage
Characteristic of patients
(including severity of
acne vulgaris)
Overall
resistance
rate of C.
acnes
1.
Moon SH et al., 2012,
South Korea
100
March -
September
2011
73 patients had been
previously treated with
antibiotics and 27 patients
were treatment naive
Age ranged 10 - 40 years old
54% patients were females
and 46% patients were males.
67 patients had acne more
than two years.
68 patients had Korean Acne
Grading System (KAGS) grade
1 or 2, and 32 patients had
KAGS grade 3 or 4.
36.7%
2.
Laochunsuwan A et
al., 2017, Thailand
95
October 2016 -
February 2017
62.1% received acne
treatment with antibiotics
and 37.9% with no prior
antibiotic treatment
72.6% patients were females
and
27.4%
patients
were
males.
Age ranged from 18 - 44 years
old.
Duration of acne ranged from
1 - 12 years.
69.5% had mild acne, 25.3%
moderate acne and 5.2%
severe acne according to
Leeds revised acne grading
system.
No information
available
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
No.
Authors/year of
publication/country
No. of
study
subjects
Study period
Prior antibiotic usage
Characteristic of patients
(including severity of
acne vulgaris)
Overall
resistance
rate of C.
acnes
3.
Yang SS et al., 2018,
Singapore
149
April -
December
2014
No information available
Age 21 years old.
Acne severity score of 0 - 3
(U.S. FDA investigator’s 5category global assessment
33%
scale).
4.
Zhang N et al., 2019,
China
100
October 2016 -
March 2017
31 patients received oral
antibiotics and 28 used
topical antibiotics
Age >18 years old.
57.1% were males and 42.9%
females.
Mean course of disease was
13.1 ± 1.1 months.
According to the Pillsbury
grading system, grade I was
noted in 5 patients, grade II in
16, grade III in 23 and grade IV
in 19.
No information
available
5.
Mendoza N et al.,
2013, Colombia
100
Jan 2005 -
May 2006
73% of patients received
oral antibiotics or
isotretinoin
53% were males and 47%
were females.
Age ranged 12 - 27 years old.
49% had moderate acne, 41%
mild acne and 10% severe
acne.
40%
6.
Schafer F et al., 2013,
Chile
83
June 2008 -
January 2009
66.3% had prior oral
antibiotics (doxycycline
being the most common)
and 65% used topical
antibiotics
58% were males and 42%
were females.
Average age was 19.1 ± 4.6
years old.
33.7%
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
No.
Authors/year of
publication/country
No. of
study
subjects
Study period
Prior antibiotic usage
Characteristic of patients
(including severity of
acne vulgaris)
Overall
resistance
rate of C.
acnes
Acne severity (Leeds revised
acne grading system) grade I
(6.2%), grade II (41.3%), grade
III
(35%)
and
grade
IV
(17.5%).
7.
Biswal I et al., 2016,
India
102
2010 - 2012
14% had history of
previous anti-acne
treatment
Age 11 - 29 years old.
According to Pillsbury grading,
32% of patients were grade 1,
while 26%, 30% and 12% were
grades 2, 3 and 4 respectively.
34.8%
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
*NA: Not available
Source:
1. Moon SH, Roh HS, Kim YH, et al. Antibiotic resistance of microbial strains isolated from Korean acne patients. J Dermatol. 2012;39(10):833-837
2. Laochunsuwan A, Taweechotipatr M, Udompataikul M. In vitro Study of Antibiotic Susceptibility of Propionibacterium acnes Strains Isolated from Acne
Vulgaris Patients. J Med Assoc Thai. 2017;100(10):24.
B Resistance Rates of Systemic Antibiotics Used in Acne Vulgaris
No. Authors/year of
publication/country
Resistance Rates of Systemic Antibiotics (%)
Doxycycline Tetracycline Minocycline Erythromycin Clindamycin
Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole
(Co-trimoxazole)
Others
1
Moon SH et al.,
2012, Korea
6.7
3.3
10.0
30.0
26.7
6.7
2
Laochunsuwan A et
al., 2017, Thailand
0
1.3
NA*
64.0
62.7
NA*
3
Yang SS et al.,
2018, Singapore
22.0
22.0
0
31.0
33.0
0
4
Zhang N et al.,
2019, China
NA*
0
0
49.2
28.6
NA*
5
Mendoza N et al.,
2013, Colombia
9.0
8.0
1.0
35.0
15.0
NA*
6
Schafer F et al.,
2013, Chile
0
0
NA*
12.5
7.5
26.3
7
Biswal I et al, 2016.,
India
NA*
9.2
0
10.6
6.1
NA*
Levofloxacin
0
Amoxicillin
0
Metronidazole
100
Ciprofloxacin
3
Penicillin
6.7
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
3. Yang SS, Long V, Liau MM, et al. A profile of Propionibacterium acnes resistance and sensitivity at a tertiary dermatological centre in Singapore. Br J
Dermatol. 2018;179(1):200-201
4. Zhang N, Yuan R, Xin KZ, et al. Antimicrobial Susceptibility, Biotypes and Phylotypes of Clinical Cutibacterium (Formerly Propionibacterium) acnes
Strains Isolated from Acne Patients: An Observational Study. Dermatol Ther. 2019;9:735-746
5. Mendoza N, Hernandez PO, Tyring SK, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility of Propionibacterium acnes isolates from acne patients in Colombia. Int J
Dermatol. 2013;52(6):688-692
6. Schafer F, Fich F, Lam M, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility and genetic characteristics of Propionibacterium acnes isolated from patients with acne. Int
J Dermatol. 2013;52(4):418-425
7. Biswal I, Gaind R, Kumar N, et al. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of Propionibacterium acnes isolated from patients with acne vulgaris. J
Infect Dev Ctries. 2016;10(10):1140-1145
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
MEDICATION DOSAGE AND ADVERSE EVENTS
A. Topical Treatments
Drug
Recommended
Dosage
Common Adverse Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Benzoyl peroxide
(BPO)
(2.5 - 10%)
Apply once to twice
daily
Increased sensitivity to
sunlight, skin peeling,
erythema, swelling,
dryness, mild burning
sensation, contact
dermatitis
Hypersensitivity to BPO
Avoid contact with eyes,
eyelids, lips and
mucous membranes
May bleach fabrics or hair
Tretinoin
(0.025 - 0.05%)
Apply once at night or
before bedtime
Initial exacerbation of acne
vulgaris, skin irritation,
stinging, oedema,
blistering, crusting,
erythema, scaling,
photosensitivity, transient
hypo/hyperpigmentation
Hypersensitivity to
tretinoin, eczema, broken
or sunburned skin,
personal or family history
of cutaneous epithelioma,
pregnancy
Avoid:
• contact with eyes, mouth,
angles of nose, mucous
membranes and open
wounds
• concomitant use of
topical keratolytic agents
• exposure to sunlight or
UV light
• use of topical
preparations with high
concentration of alcohol,
menthol, spices and lime
• facial scrub
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage
Common Adverse Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Adapalene
(0.1%)
Apply once at night or
before bedtime
Mild skin irritation, scaling,
erythema, dryness,
stinging, burning, pruritus
Hypersensitivity to
adapalene, pregnancy
Avoid:
• contact with eyes, lips,
angles of nose and
mucous membranes
• use on cuts, abrasions,
eczematous skin or
sunburned skin
• exposure to sunlight or
UV light
Tazarotene*
(0.1%)
Apply once at night or
before bedtime
Pruritus, burning, stinging,
erythema, skin peeling or
irritation, rash, dryness,
localised oedema,
desquamation, contact
dermatitis, skin
discolouration,
photosensitivity
Hypersensitivity to
tazarotene, eczema,
broken or sunburned skin,
pregnancy
Avoid:
• contact with eyes, mouth
and other mucous
membranes
• exposure to sunlight or
UV light
Women of child-bearing
potential should use
adequate contraception
when tazarotene is used
Trifarotene*
(0.005%)
Apply once at night or
before bedtime
Erythema, scaling,
dryness, stinging/burning,
sunburn
Hypersensitivity to
trifarotene, pregnancy
Avoid:
• use on cuts, abrasions,
eczematous or
sunburned skin
• exposure to sunlight or
UV light
Clindamycin
(1%)
Apply twice daily
Skin irritation, dryness,
stinging, erythema, contact
Hypersensitivity to
clindamycin or lincomycin,
ulcerative colitis, antibioticAlcohol base solution may
cause burning and irritation
of eyes especially in atopic
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage
Common Adverse Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
dermatitis
related colitis
individuals
Discontinue use if
significant diarrhoea occurs
Erythromycin*
(2 - 4%)
Apply once to twice
daily
Dryness, erythema,
burning, pruritus
Hypersensitivity to
erythromycin
Avoid contact with eyes
and other mucous
membranes
Minocycline*
(4%)
Apply once at night or
before bedtime
Headache,
photosensitivity, erythema,
dryness,
hyperpigmentation,
peeling, pruritus
Hypersensitivity to
tetracycline group
Avoid exposure to sunlight
or UV light
Azelaic acid
(20%)
Apply twice daily
Skin irritation, mostly
burning or pruritus,
occasionally erythema and
scaling, photosensitivity
Hypersensitivity to
propylene glycol
Avoid:
• use on broken skin,
mouth, eyes and other
mucous membranes
• exposure to sunlight or
UV light
Salicylic acid
(2%)
Apply twice to thrice
daily
Skin irritation, sensitivity,
excessive dryness
Hypersensitivity to salicylic
acid
Avoid:
• use on broken skin,
mouth, eyes and other
mucous membranes
• prolonged use in high
concentrations and over
large areas of the body
Dapsone*
(5 - 7.5%)
5%: Apply twice daily
7.5%: Apply once daily
Dryness, erythema,
oiliness, peeling
Hypersensitivity to
dapsone,
lactation
pregnancy and
G6PD deficiency,
methaemoglobinaemia,
Haemoglobin M
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage
Common Adverse Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
May stain the skin black
and emit foul smell when
applied concomitantly with
mercurial compounds
Clascoterone*
(1%)
Apply twice daily
Pruritus, burning,
erythema, peeling
None
Avoid:
• contact with eyes, mouth
and other mucous
membranes
• use on cuts, abrasions,
eczematous or
sunburned skin
Hypothalamus-pituitaryadrenal axis suppression
may occur during or after
treatment
Adapalene + BPO
(0.1%/2.5% &
0.3%/2.5%*)
Apply once daily
Skin irritation, dryness,
contact dermatitis, burning
None
Avoid exposure to sunlight
or UV light
Clindamycin + BPO
(1.2%/5%)
Apply once at night or
before bedtime
Erythema, peeling,
dryness, burning
Hypersensitivity to
clindamycin, BPO, or
lincomycin, regional
enteritis, ulcerative colitis
or antibiotic-associated
colitis
Avoid exposure to sunlight
or UV light
Discontinue use if
significant diarrhoea occurs
Sulphur and its
combinations
(1 - 8%)
Apply once to twice
daily
Skin irritation, contact
dermatitis
Hypersensitivity to sulphur,
infant <2 months
Avoid contact with eyes,
mouth and other mucous
membranes
*Currently not available in Malaysia
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Tetracycline
500 - 1000 mg daily in
2 divided doses for 3 -
4 months
GI disturbances,
discolouration of teeth and
nails, photosensitivity,
visual disturbances
Hypersensitivity to
tetracyclines, children 8
years old, pregnancy,
lactation, severe renal
impairment
Should be administered
with plenty of water, while
sitting or standing, 1 hour
before or 2 hours after
meals to avoid
oesophageal ulceration
Absorption is impaired by
food, milk, dairy products,
iron salts and antacids
Use with caution in
myasthenia gravis,
systemic lupus erythema
(SLE), hepatic and renal
impairment
Avoid co-administration
with oral retinoids to
prevent idiopathic
intracranial hypertension
Doxycycline
100 - 200 mg daily in 1
- 2 divided doses for 3 -
4 months
GI disturbances,
photosensitivity,
hypersensitivity,
permanent staining of
teeth, rash
Hypersensitivity to
tetracyclines, children 8
years old, pregnancy,
lactation
Should be taken after
meals with plenty of water
to avoid oesophageal
ulceration
Use with caution in
venereal disease,
B. Systemic Treatments
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Avoid co-administration
with oral retinoids to
prevent idiopathic
intracranial hypertension
Minocycline
50 - 100 mg once to
twice daily for 3 - 4
months
GI disturbances, vestibular
disturbances, abnormal
hyperpigmentation,
photosensitivity, teeth
discolouration in children
Hypersensitivity to
tetracyclines, children 8
years old, pregnancy,
lactation
Use with caution in
myasthenia gravis, SLE,
hepatic and renal
impairment
Avoid co-administration
with oral retinoids to
prevent idiopathic
intracranial hypertension
Sarecycline*
33 - 54 kg: 60 mg once
daily
55 - 84 kg: 100 mg
once daily
85 - 136 kg: 150 mg
once daily
for 3 - 4 months
Nausea, photosensitivity,
light-headedness,
dizziness, vertigo
Hypersensitivity to
tetracyclines, children ≤8
years old, pregnancy,
lactation
Should be administered
with plenty of water, while
sitting or standing, 1 hour
before or 2 hours after
meals to avoid
oesophageal ulceration
Avoid co-administration
with oral retinoids to
prevent idiopathic
intracranial hypertension
Avoid exposure to sunlight
or ultraviolet (UV) light
myasthenia gravis, SLE,
hepatic and renal
impairment
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
oesophageal ulceration
Use with caution in
myasthenia gravis, SLE,
hepatic impairment
Avoid co-administration
with oral retinoids to
prevent idiopathic
intracranial hypertension
Avoid exposure to sunlight
or UV light
Erythromycin
Erythromycin Ethyl
Succinate (EES):
400 - 800 mg twice
daily for 3 - 4 months
Erythromycin Stearate:
250 - 500 mg twice
daily for 3 - 4 months
GI disturbances, rash,
urticaria, headache,
dizziness
Hypersensitivity to
erythromycin, prolonged QT
interval, uncorrected
hypokalaemia or
hypomagnesaemia,
clinically significant
bradycardia
Use with caution in hepatic
and renal impairment,
concomitant therapy with
colchicine (toxicity) and
simvastatin
(rhabdomyolysis)
Azithromycin
Various regimens
ranging from 500 mg
thrice weekly to four
Neutropaenia, hearing
impairment, vertigo, GI
disturbances, abnormal
Hypersensitivity to
azithromycin or other
macrolides, hepatic
Use with caution in severe
renal and hepatic disease,
myasthenia gravis,
Lymecycline*
408 mg once daily
(equivalent to 300 mg
of tetracycline base) for
3 - 4 months
Headache, nausea,
diarrhoea, abdominal pain,
photosensitivity
Hypersensitivity to
tetracyclines, overt renal
insufficiency, children 8
years old, pregnancy,
lactation
Should be administered
with plenty of water, while
sitting or standing, 1 hour
before or 2 hours after
meals to avoid
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
consecutive days in a
month for 3 - 4 months
liver function, rash,
angioedema
dysfunction, jaundice
prolonged QT interval and
cardiac repolarisation
Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole
(Co-trimoxazole)
1 tablet daily
(trimethoprim 80 mg
and sulfamethoxazole
400 mg) for 3 - 4
months
GI disturbances, skin
rashes, hepatitis,
dizziness, headache,
erythema multiforme
Hypersensitivity to
sulfonamides or
trimethoprim, severe renal
and hepatic impairment,
megaloblastic anaemia due
to folate deficiency,
Use with caution in
haematological disorders,
elderly, G6PD deficiency,
folate deficiency
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Potentially serious AEs -
Stevens-Johnson
syndrome, toxic epidermal
necrolysis
Isotretinoin
0.1 - 1 mg/kg/day
Suggested starting
dose of 10 - 20 mg/day
Treatment should be
given until acne
clearance and
continued for another 4
- 8 weeks (estimated
duration up to 6
months)
Dryness of skin or
mucosa, exanthema,
pruritus, facial erythema/
dermatitis, hair thinning,
photosensitivity, muscle
and joint pain, headache,
dyslipidaemia
Potentially serious AEs -
Stevens-Johnson
syndrome, toxic epidermal
necrolysis, suicide ideation
Hypersensitivity to
isotretinoin or any of its
components, pregnancy
due to teratogenicity,
lactation,
hypervitaminosis A,
hyperlipidaemia, coadministration with
tetracyclines and vitamin A
(including dietary
supplements)
Use with caution in history
of depression or other
psychiatric disorders,
increased intracranial
pressure and seizures
Avoid blood donation
during treatment and within
one month after treatment
cessation
Chlormadinone +
ethinyl estradiol (EE)
(2mg/0.03mg)
1 tablet daily for 21
days, followed by 7
days of tablet free
period, for 6 - 12
months
Breakthrough bleeding,
spotting, headache, breast
discomfort, depressed
mood, nervousness,
irritability, dizziness,
Hypersensitivity to EE and
chlormadinone or any of its
excipients, known or
suspected malignancies,
hepatic impairment,
Use with caution in patients
with risk of venous and
arterial thromboembolism,
obesity, diabetes mellitus,
hypertriglyceridaemia,
pregnancy
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Desogestrel + EE
(0.15mg/0.02mg or
0.15mg/0.03mg)
1 tablet daily for 21
days, followed by 7
days of tablet free
period, for 6 - 12
months
Menstrual disturbances,
breast tenderness, pain,
nausea, vomiting,
headache, migraine,
depression, fluid retention,
weight changes
Hypersensitivity to EE and
desogestrel or any of its
excipients, suspected
oestrogen dependent
neoplasms, pregnancy and
lactation, thromboembolic
events
May increase risk of breast
cancer, glucose intolerance
and thromboembolism
Use with caution in familial
defects of lipoprotein
metabolism, CV or renal
impairment
1 tablet daily for 28
days, for 6 - 12 months
migraine, visual
disturbance, nausea,
vomiting, sensation of
heaviness, vaginal
discharge, dysmenorrhea,
amenorrhoea, lower
abdominal pain, fatigue,
oedema, weight gain,
increased blood pressure
pregnancy and lactation,
presence or risk of
thromboembolic events,
severe depression,
porphyria, unexplained
genital bleeding
renal insufficiency
Cyproterone acetate +
EE (2mg/0.035mg)
1 tablet daily for 21
days, followed by 7
days of tablet free
period, for 6 - 12
months
GI disturbances,
headache, depression,
breast tenderness, weight
changes
Hypersensitivity to EE and
cyproterone acetate or any
of its excipients, hepatic
impairment, genital tract or
breast carcinoma,
pregnancy and lactation,
thromboembolic events
Use with caution in patients
with risk of venous
thromboembolism,
hypertriglyceridaemia,
acute or chronic
disturbances of liver function
Emotional lability,
depression, migraine,
nausea, breast pain,
menstrual disturbances,
suspected sex-steroid
influenced malignancies,
undiagnosed vaginal
bleeding
Hypersensitivity to EE and
drospirenone or any of its
excipients, severe hepatic
disease, pregnancy and
lactation, thromboembolic
events
Use with caution in patients
with risk of venous and
arterial thromboembolism,
depression, diabetes
mellitus,
hypertriglyceridemia
Drospirenone + EE
(3mg/0.02mg or
3mg/0.03mg)
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
Levonorgestrel + EE
(0.1mg/0.02mg or
0.15mg/0.03mg)
1 tablet daily for 21
days, followed by 7
days of tablet free
period, for 6 - 12
months
GI and menstrual
disturbances, headache,
dizziness, breast
tenderness, weight
changes, fluid retention,
depression
Hypersensitivity to EE and
levonorgestrel or any of its
excipients, hepatic
impairment, genital tract or
breast carcinoma, arterial
disease, undiagnosed
vaginal bleeding and
porphyria, pregnancy and
lactation, thromboembolic
events
Use with caution in previous
ectopic pregnancy,
functional ovarian cysts,
history of CV or renal
impairment, diabetes
mellitus, depression
Norgestrel + estradiol
valerate (0.5mg/2mg)
Start on the 5th day of
menstrual cycle - 1 tab
daily for 21 days, then
stop for 7 days, for
6 - 12 months
Weight changes, headache,
abdominal pain, nausea,
rash, pruritus, uterine/
vaginal bleeding including
spotting (usually subside
during continued treatment)
Hypersensitivity to estradiol
and norgestrel or any of its
excipients, undiagnosed
vaginal bleeding, known or
suspected sex-steroid
influenced malignancies,
severe hepatic disease,
severe hypertriglyceridaemia,
pregnancy and lactation,
thromboembolic events
Use with caution in patients
with risk of venous
thromboembolism,
hypertension,
hypertriglyceridaemia,
obesity, diabetes mellitus,
hepatic impairment,
depression
Spironolactone
50 mg - 200 mg daily,
for up to 10 months
Hyperkalaemia,
gynecomastia,
hyperchloraemic metabolic
acidosis, worsened renal
function, nausea, vomiting
Hyperkalaemia, anuria,
acute renal insufficiency,
severe renal impairment
Use with caution in fluid or
electrolyte imbalance,
diabetes mellitus, porphyria,
menstrual abnormalities or
breast enlargement, renal
and hepatic impairment,
co-administration with other
potassium sparing diuretics
or potassium supplements,
best to avoid in pregnancy
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
Metformin
500 mg - 2000 mg
daily
Diarrhoea, nausea,
vomiting, flatulence,
asthenia, indigestion,
abdominal discomfort,
headache, vitamin B12
deficiency, lactic acidosis
(potentially fatal)
Hypersensitivity to
metformin, acute/chronic
metabolic acidosis, acute
conditions which may alter
renal function (e.g.
dehydration, severe
infection, shock), severe
renal impairment
Use with caution in patients
with risk factors for lactic
acidosis, stable heart
failure, dehydration, prerenal azotaemia, mild to
moderate renal
impairment, hepatic
impairment
Not indicated for use in
patient with type 1 diabetes
mellitus or with diabetic
ketoacidosis
Drug
Recommended
Dosage and Duration
Common Adverse
Events
Contraindications
Special Precautions
*Currently not available in Malaysia
Sources:
1. Monthly Index of Medical Specialities (MIMS) Malaysia Online (Available at http://www.mims.com/malaysia)
2. Ministry of Health Medicines Formulary (Updated April 2019) (Available at: https://www.pharmacy.gov.my/v2/en/apps/fukkm)
3. Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945-973.e33
4. Yen H, Chang YT, Yee FJ, et al. Metformin Therapy for Acne in Patients with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Am
J Clin Dermatol. 2021;22(1):11-23.
5. Product Package Insert
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
CADI score
Severity
1. As a result of having acne,
during the last month have you
been
aggressive,
frustrated
or
embarrassed?
2. Do you think that having acne
during the last month interfered
with your daily social life, social
events
or
intimate
personal
relationships?
3. During the last month have you
avoided public changing facilities or
wearing
swimming
costumes
because of your acne?
4. How would you describe your
feelings about the appearance of
your skin over the last month?
5. Please indicate how bad you
think your acne is now:
(a) Very much indeed
(b) A lot
(c) A little
(d) Not at all
(a) Severely, affecting all activities
(b) Moderately, in most activities
(c) Occasionally or in only some
activities
(d) Not at all
(a) All of the time
(b) Most of the time
(c) Occasionally
(d) Not at all
(a) Very depressed and miserable
(b) Usually concerned
(c) Occasionally concerned
(d) Not bothered
(a) The worst it could possibly be
(b) A major problem
(c) A minor problem
(d) Not a problem
0 - 5
6 - 10
11 - 15
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Appendix 8
THE CARDIFF ACNE DISABILITY INDEX
© Cardiff Acne Disability Index. R J Motley, A Y Finlay 1992 (2021 Updated Version)
Source: Abdelrazik YT, Ali FM, Salek MS, et al. Clinical experience and psychometric
properties of the Cardiff Acne Disability Index (CADI). Br J Dermatol.
2021;185,711-724.
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AA
azelaic acid
ACC
American Academy of Dermatology Acne Consensus Conference
AE(s)
adverse event(s)
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
AHA
alpha-hydroxy acids
ALA
aminolevulinic acid
AQOL
Acne Quality of Life
ASI
acne severity index
ASPR
age-standardised prevalence rate
BMI
body mass index
BPO
benzoyl peroxide
BR
bipolar radiofrequency
C. acnes
Cutibacterium acnes
CADI
Cardiff Acne Disability Index
CAMs
complementary and alternative medicines
CASS
Comprehensive Acne Severity Scale
CI
confidence interval
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CQ
clinical questions
COC
combined oral contraceptive
CV
cardiovascular
DER
difficulties in emotion regulation
DG
Development Group
DHT
dihydrotestosterone
DLQI
Dermatology Life Quality Index
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
EBD
energy-based devices
EE
ethinyl estradiol
EES
erythromycin ethyl succinate
EGAE
The Escala de Gravedad del Acné Española
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FMR
fractional microneedle radiofrequency
GA
glycolic acid
GAAS
global acne assessment score
GAGS
Global Acne Grading System
GEA
Global Acne Severity Scale
GI
gastrointestinal
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
GTE
green tea extract
G6PD
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
HR
hazard ratio
ICCs
intraclass correlation coefficients
IGA
Investigator Global Assessment
IL
inflammatory lesions
IPL
intense pulsed light
ISGA
Investigator’s Static Global Assessment
JS
Jessner’s solution
KAGS
Korean Acne Grading System
LRAG
Leeds Revised Acne Grading
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
LSM
least squares mean
MA
mandelic acid
MAL
methyl aminolevulinate
MAS
Michealson Acne Score
MD
mean difference
mGAGS
modified Global Acne Grading System
MoH
Ministry of Health
NAFL
non-ablative fractional laser
Nd:YAG
neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet
NICE
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NIL
non-inflammatory lesions
NNTB
‘number needed to treat’ for an additional beneficial
OR
odd ratio
PA
pyruvic acid
PAE
post-acne erythema
PCOS
polycystic ovarian syndrome
PDL
pulsed dye laser
PDT
photodynamic therapy
PGA
participants’ global self-assessment of acne improvement
PIH
post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
QoL
quality of life
RARs
retinoic acids receptors
RC
Review Committee
RCTs
randomised controlled trials
RF
radiofrequency
RR
relative risk
RXRs
retinoids X receptors
SA
salicylic acid
SASA
South-East Asia Study Alliance
SJS/TEN
Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis
SMD
standardised mean difference
SLE
systemic lupus erythema
TCA
trichloroacetic acid
TEWL
transepidermal water loss
TGM
tretinoin gel microsphere
TL
total lesions
TLC
total lesion counts
UV
ultraviolet
UVB
ultraviolet B
WHO
World Health Organization
Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The CPG DG members would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Dr. Junainah Sabirin, Consultant Public Health Physician on the
development of the CPG
• Mr. Wan Mohd Nor Fakarudin Wan Abdullah, Ms. Zamilah Mat
Jusoh and Ms. Subhiyah Ariffin on retrieval of evidence
• Dr. Tengku Noor Farhana Tengku Khalid for editorial work
• Ms. Shaveena Shoban Babu for the cover design
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Acne Vulgaris (Second
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.