CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MOHPIPAK05.15(GU)
MANAGEMENT OF
TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS IN
CHILDREN & ADOLESCENTS
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-40-0
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://mpaweb.org.my
http://www.mems.my
Also available as a mobile app for Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2015 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2019) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Guidelines Development and Objectives
ii
Guidelines Development Group
v
Review Committee
vi
External Reviewers
vii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
DIAGNOSIS
1
3.
RISK FACTORS
5
4.
CO-MORBIDITIES
6
5.
TREATMENT GOALS
7
5.1 Optimal HbA1c Levels
7
5.2 Range of Ideal Blood Glucose Levels
8
5.3 Growth and Puberty
10
6.
DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS
11
6.1 Diagnosis
11
6.2 Treatment
13
6.3 Morbidity and Mortality
18
6.4 Prevention of Recurrent DKA
20
7.
INSULIN THERAPY
21
7.1 Principles of Insulin Therapy
21
7.2 Insulin Formulation
23
7.3 Insulin Dosage
25
8.
INSULIN DOSE ADJUSTMENT
27
8.1 Insulin to Carbohydrate Ratio
27
8.2 Insulin Sensitivity Factor
28
9.
HYPOGLYCAEMIA
29
10.
MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPIES
32
10.1 Energy Balance, Energy Intake and Food Components 32
10.2 Nutritional Care, Education and Meal Planning
33
10.3 Dietary Recommendations for Specific Insulin Regimes 34
10.4 Nutritional Management of Physical Activities
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
No.
Title
Page
11.
PSYCHOSOCIAL SUPPORT
36
12.
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY (EXERCISE)
38
12.1 Benefits of physical activity
38
12.2 Risk of Hypoglycaemia Associated with
38
Physical Activity
12.3 Prevention of Hypoglycaemia during Physical Activity
39
13.
SELF-MONITORING BLOOD GLUCOSE
41
14.
SPECIAL SITUATIONS
44
14.1 Sick Day
44
14.2 Eating Out
46
14.3 Fasting during Ramadan
47
14.4 Schooling
49
14.5 Travelling
50
14.6 Surgery
51
14.7 Partial Remission Phase
55
15.
SUPPLEMENTS/COMPLEMENTARY MEDICATIONS
56
16.
LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS
57
16.1 Nephropathy
59
16.2 Retinopathy
60
16.3 Neuropathy
60
16.4 Macrovascular Complications
60
16.5 Other Complications
61
17.
REFERRAL
64
18.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
64
References
66
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
72
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
73
Appendix 3 Algorithm 1. Immediate Assessment in DKA
74
Appendix 4 Algorithm 2. Critical Observation in DKA
75
Appendix 5 Types of Insulin Preparations and their
76
Action Profiles
Appendix 6 Dietary Fibre Content of Common Foods
77
Appendix 7 Food Group and Exchange Lists for 15 g
78
Carbohydrate
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
No.
Title
Page
Appendix 8 Carbohydrate Exchange for Sugars
80
Glycaemic Index (GI) for
Local Malaysian Foods
List of Abbreviations
81
Acknowledgement
82
Disclosure Statement
82
Source of Funding
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit
of MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II -1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
ii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N); Medline via Ovid,
Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) and CINAHL via
EBSCOhost (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy).
The inclusion criteria are all literature on type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM)
regardless of study design although emphasis was put for systematic
review. The search was limited to literature published in the last 20
years, humans, “all child” (0 to 18 years) and English. In addition, the
reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to
further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted
to identify relevant studies. In certain situations, pivotal papers beyond
the scope of search were used in the CPG. All searches were conducted
from 23 January 2014 to 20 May 2015. Literature searches were
repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development
process allowing any relevant papers published before 31 August 2015
to be included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published
after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to a CPG entitled Pediatric Diabetes
developed by International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent
Diabetes (ISPAD) in 2014. The CPG was evaluated using the Appraisal
of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them
being used as references.
A total of 15 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 24 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. The literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion were resolved consensually. The CPG was
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines was graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence, while the
grading of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE
(refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and
CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the
CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual on
Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice
Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.gov.my/
index.php/pages/view/117).
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on T1DM in children and adolescents on the
following aspects:
a. Diagnosis
b. Management
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Children and adolescents (<18 years old) with T1DM
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide healthcare providers and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care who are in
contact with and making decisions concerning the care of children and
adolescents with T1DM including:
a. Doctors
b. Allied health professionals
c. Trainees and medical students
d. Professional societies
e. Patients, families and caregivers
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Janet Hong Yeow Hua
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Members (alphabetical order)
v
Dr. Cheah Yee Keat
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar,
Negeri Sembilan
Ms. Chow Yen Nee
Pharmacist
Klinik Kesihatan Batu, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Fuziah Md. Zain
Head of Department & Consultant
Paediatric Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Ms. Loong Ah Moi
Nursing Matron
Health Technology Assessment Section,
MoH
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section,
MoH
Associate Professor
Dr. Muhammad Yazid Jalaludin
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Paediatric
Endocrinologist
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norzaihan Hassan
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Kota Bharu,
Kelantan
Dr. Suhaimi Hussain
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Paediatric
Endocrinologist
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Rozaidah Jaafar
Psychiatrist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Selangor
Dr. Sharipah Fotimah Syed Abdullah
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Mentakab,
Pahang
Ms. Suriawati Abu Aziz
Dietitian
Klinik Kesihatan Jinjang, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zahidah Mohd. Kasim
Paediatrician
Hospital Kajang, Selangor
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
vi
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines was reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Professor Dr. Wu Loo Ling
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Hew Fen Lee
Consultant Endocrinologist
Sime Darby Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Noor Khatijah Nurani
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Bainun, Perak
Dr. Mastura Ismail
Consultant Family Medicine
Klinik Kesihatan Seremban 2
Negeri Sembilan
Dato’ Hjh. Rahimah Dato’ Hj. Ahmad
Patient Advocate
Diabetes Malaysia
Ms. Siti Hawa Mohd Taib
Dietitian
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Subramaniam A/L Kalimuthu
Patient Advocate
Diabetes Malaysia
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
vii
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Mr. Albert Ting Siong Hung
Pharmacist
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dato’ Dr. Hussain Imam Haji Mohammad Ismail
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Institut Pediatrik, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Kim Donaghue
Co-Head, Institute of Endocrinology & Diabetes
Head of Diabetes Services & Senior Staff Endocrinologist
The Children’s Hospital at Westmead
Professor, University of Sydney, Australia
Dr. Kok Juan Loong
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Associate Professor Dr. Ragnar Hanas
Consultant Pediatrician
Uddevalla Hospital, Uddevalla, Sweden &
President
International Society of Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes
Associate Professor Dr. Rahmah Rasat
Senior lecturer & Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sri Wahyu Taher
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Simpang Kuala, Kedah
Professor Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Dietitian
Faculty of Medicine & Health
International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zainah Shaikh Hedra
Consultant Paediatician
Hospital Sultanah Nora Ismail, Johor
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
1. INTRODUCTION
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is the most common type of diabetes
mellitus in children and adolescents. The incidence of T1DM is very
low in Asia, which is approximately 2 to 5 per 100,000 person-years.1 -
3, level II-2 In Malaysia, the incidence of T1DM was not reported by the
Malaysian Diabetes in Children and Adolescents Registry (DiCARE)
2006 - 2008 report due to several limitations. There were 34 sites that
reported 408 patients to DiCARE from 2006 - 2008. Among children
and adolescents under the age of 20 years with diabetes mellitus,
71.8% were diagnosed with T1DM. The median age of diagnosis was
7.6 (IQR 4.6, 10.8) years and majority (58.3%) presented with diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA).4, level III However, the sample size of DiCARE was
small and could not represent the population.
T1DM is a chronic disease which is associated with various complications
including retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy and cardiovascular
morbidity. Studies have shown that good glycaemic control early in the
disease results in lower frequency of chronic diabetes complications. In
order to reduce health care cost due to the complications, appropriate
treatment should be started early. Accurate classification of diabetes
and proper management of these children to achieve glycaemic target
is of utmost importance. DiCARE reported a mean HbA1c of 10.8%
reflecting poor metabolic control.4, level III
Therefore, these clinical practice guidelines aim to provide evidencebased guidance to those who are involved in the management of
children and adolescents with T1DM.
2. DIAGNOSIS
TIDM is primarily due to pancreatic islet β-cell destruction leading
to severe insulin deficiency and manifested by low or undetectable
plasma concentration of C-peptide. Markers of the immune-mediated
β-cell destruction process include glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)
antibody, insulin autoantibodies (IAA), anti-islet antibody (ICA), protein
thyrosine phosphatase antibody (ICA512 or IA2A) and zinc transporter
8 (ZnT8).5, level III More than 90% of patients with newly diagnosed
T1DM have more than one of these autoantibodies. T1DM patients
with absence of islet β-cell antibody or so called type 1B diabetes
have no evidence of β-cell autoimmunity. However, patients with false
negative antibodies can be due to diminished titre over the course of
the disease.6, level III
The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus should be made based on the
presence or absence of symptoms and biochemical criteria according
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
to World Health Organization Diagnostic Criteria (1999). Diagnosis of
diabetes can be made when:7, level III
1. classic symptoms and signs are present and
2. fasting venous plasma glucose concentration is ≥7.0 mmol/L, and/or
the random venous plasma glucose concentration ≥11.1 mmol/L
The diagnosis must be confirmed by repeat blood glucose testing in the
absence of unequivocal hyperglycaemia.
Patients with T1DM can present acutely with severe symptoms, and
frequently with ketoacidosis. The diagnosis can be confirmed quickly
with blood glucose (BG) value without waiting for another day as urgent
treatment is needed.
In the presence of mild symptoms, the diagnosis of diabetes should
never be made on a single abnormal BG value. Oral glucose tolerance
test (OGTT) is rarely required, except in very early disease, in which
most BG values are normal and the diagnosis of diabetes is uncertain.
The role of HbA1c alone in the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus remains
unclear and diabetes cannot be excluded when the value is <6.5%.8
Blood investigations that reflect β-cell function and immune-mediated
β-cell destruction can be used to identify the aetiology and type of
diabetes.7, level III Additional support for the diagnosis of T1DM include:
9, level III
i. low or undetectable C-peptide levels
ii. presence of diabetes-associated autoantibodies (GAD/IAA/
ICA512/IA2/ZnT8)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• Diagnostic criteria of diabetes mellitus:7, level III
i. classic symptomsa of diabetes or hyperglycaemic crisis, with
plasma glucose concentration ≥11.1 mmol/L
OR
ii. fasting plasma glucoseb ≥7.0 mmol/L
OR
iii. two hour post-load glucose ≥11.1 mmol/L in OGTTc
OR
iv. HbA1c >6.5%d
aclassic symptoms consist of thirst, polyuria, polydipsia, recurrent infection
and weight loss
b fasting is defined as no caloric intake for at least eight hours
cthe test should be performed using a glucose load containing the
equivalent of 75 g anhydrous glucose dissolved in water or 1.75 g/kg of
body weight to a maximum of 75 g
dthe test should be performed in a laboratory using a method that is National
Glycohaemoglobin Standardisation Programme certified and standardised
to the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) assay
• The diagnosis must be confirmed by repeat blood glucose testing in
the absence of unequivocal hyperglycaemia.
• The role of HbA1c alone in the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus remains
unclear and diabetes cannot be excluded when the value is <6.5%.
Classification of diabetes mellitus:
i. type 1 diabetes mellitus
ii. type 2 diabetes mellitus
iii. gestational diabetes mellitus
iv. other specific types
Clinical presentation of T1DM
Clinical features of T1DM in children and adolescents are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Clinical features of T1DM in children and adolescents
Age of onset
Six months to young adulthood
Clinical presentation
Most often acute, rapid onset of symptoms
Autoimmunity
Present
Ketosis
Common
Body habitus
Usually lean but can be overweight following
population frequency
Acanthosis nigricans Typically absent
Classically, T1DM children and adolescents present with history of
polyuria, polydipsia and weight loss over 2 - 6 weeks. Some of them
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
can have rapid onset of symptoms within days and present in diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA), while others can have a slower onset of symptoms
over several months. The clinical presentation of T1DM varies from
non-emergency to emergency situations such as acute shock in DKA.8
• Non-emergency presentation
 Recent onset of enuresis in previously toilet-trained children
 Vaginal candidiasis especially in pre-pubertal girls
 Chronic weight loss or failure to gain weight in growing children
 Recurrent skin infections
• Emergency presentation
 Moderate to severe dehydration
 Frequent vomiting
 Abdominal pain
 Continuing polyuria despite the presence of dehydration
 Weight loss due to fluid loss, and loss of muscle and fat
 Acetone-smelling breath
 Hyperventilation
 Decreased level of consciousness
 Hypotension
 Shock
Diagnostic difficulties may lead to late diagnoses resulting in higher
mortality and morbidity. Symptoms of T1DM may be misinterpreted:
• hyperventilation during DKA may be misdiagnosed as pneumonia
or asthma
• abdominal pain associated with DKA can be mistaken as acute
abdomen leading to unnecessary surgical referral
• polyuria and enuresis may be misdiagnosed as a urinary tract infection
• polydipsia may be thought to be psychogenic in origin
• vomiting may be misdiagnosed as gastroenteritis or sepsis
• impaired level of consciousness can be misdiagnosed as
meningitis/encephalitis
Therefore, healthcare providers should have a high index suspicion of
diabetes mellitus/DKA when managing such sick children.
Recommendation 1
• The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents
should be made based on clinical features and biochemical criteria
(World Health Organization criteria*).
• Autoantibodies testing (glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody,
anti-islet antibody, insulin autoantibodies and protein tyrosine
phosphatase antibody) should be done to confirm the diagnosis of
type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
*Refer to preceding yellow box
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
3. RISK FACTORS
It is important to identify the risk factors of T1DM to assist in early
disease detection and possibly disease prevention.
Important risk factors associated with the development of T1DM are:
• genetics: the most susceptible haplotypes are the DRB1*0301DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 and the DRB1*0405-DQA1*0301-DQB1
*0302, DRB1*0401-DQA1*0301-DQB*0302, and DRB1*0402DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 with OR ranging from 3.63 to 11.37
10 - 11, level III
• presence of GAD antibody and/or IA-2A12, level II-2
Other risk factors that have been studied include:
• high birth weight (>4 kg) with OR=1.17 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.26)13, level II-2
• early introduction of cow’s milk before three months of age
(OR=1.53, 95% CI 1.1 to 2.2)14, level II-2
• rapid growth within first two years of life [OR in height=1.36 (95%
CI 1.17 to1.58) and body mass index (BMI)=1.35 (95% CI 1.15 to
1.57)15, level II-2
• enterovirus infection (OR=9.8, 95% CI 5.5 to 17.4)16, level II-2
• high energy food intake especially disaccharides and sucrose
(OR=5.23, 95% 1.67 to 16.38)17, level II-2
Breastfeeding of any duration15, level II-2 and vitamin D supplementation
in early childhood18 - 19, level II-2 are possible protective factors against
T1DM.
Maternal pre-eclampsia20, level II-2 and childhood vaccination21, level II-2 are
not associated with T1DM.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
4. CO-MORBIDITIES
Co-morbidites are medical conditions that co-exist with T1DM.
Patients with T1DM have higher prevalence of autoimmune diseases
compared with patients without diabetes.22, level III The prevalence of
high anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (aTPO) and/or anti-thyroglobulin
antibody ranges between 4.5% and 29.4%. Females are more affected
than males (p<0.001).23 - 24, level III Children above 12 years old with T1DM
have a higher mean thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) compared with
the younger patients and half of them are seropositive at diagnosis
(p<0.001).23, level III The longer the duration of T1DM, the higher the
tendencies of developing thyroid autoimmunity (p<0.001).24, level III
In ISPAD guidelines, screening of thyroid function by measurement of
TSH and aTPO antibody is recommended at the diagnosis of diabetes
and biennially thereafter in asymptomatic individuals without goitre or in
the absence of thyroid autoantibodies.8
Coeliac disease is mostly asymptomatic in patients with T1DM. The
disease can only be detected in these patients by serologic screening
using anti-endomysium antibody and/or tissue transglutaminase
antibody, and confirmatory diagnosis using intestinal biopsy. Most of the
coeliac disease (60%) is detected at the onset of T1DM while the rest
a few years after diagnosis.25, level III The prevalence of coeliac disease
ranges from 1 to 10% in children with diabetes.8 However, coeliac
disease prevalence is unknown in Malaysia and therefore screening
for the disease should be done in suspected cases. Primary adrenal
insufficiency has also been found in T1DM with a prevalence of 0.7%.
22, level III Although the prevalence is low, clinicians should be aware of
the symptoms and signs of adrenal insufficiency in patients with T1DM.
Recommendation 2
• Screening of thyroid function and measurement of antithyroid
peroxidase antibody should be done at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes
mellitus.
 If thyroid function is normal and antibody is absent, repeat
screening every two years.
 In patients with goitre or positive for thyroid antibody, repeat
screening more frequently.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
5. TREATMENT TARGETS
Long-term macrovascular, microvascular and neurologic complications
cause major morbidity and mortality in patients with T1DM. Intensive
therapy effectively delays the onset and slows the progression of
diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy in patients with
T1DM by a range of 39% to 76%.26, level I
DCCT and similar studies, provide clear evidence in adults and
adolescents that better metabolic control, as measured by a lower
HbA1c level along with intensive management, is associated with fewer
and delayed microvascular complications.8
Treatment targets should include:8
• achievement of the ideal BG level (near physiological glucose
control)
• no significant hypoglycaemia or recurrent DKA through selfmonitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) and optimal HbA1c level
• absence of hypoglycaemia unawareness
• normal growth and development
• normal psychosocial development and adjustment in dealing with
a chronic disease
• prevention of long-term diabetic complications
5.1 Optimal HbA1c Levels
Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1/HbA1c) reflects the levels of glycaemia
over the preceding 4 - 12 weeks.8
HbA1c monitoring has been shown to be the most useful measure in
evaluating metabolic control and predicts long-term microvascular and
macrovascular outcomes. Every patient should have a minimum of one
measurement of HbA1c per year, ideally 3 to 6 measurements per year
depending on age and degree of glycaemic control.8 HbA1c may be
affected by a variety of genetic, haematologic and illness-related factors
such as haemoglobinopathy, certain anaemia and disorder associated
with accelerated red cell turnover such as malaria.27, level III
• The recommended HbA1c target for all patients younger than 18
years is <7.5% (58 mmol/mol).
• Each patient should have their targets individually determined with
the goal of achieving a value as close to normal as possible while
avoiding severe hypoglycaemia and minimising frequent mild to
moderate hypoglycaemia.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Glycated haemoglobin is currently expressed as a percentage (%) with
reference to the DCCT study. The International Federation of Clinical
Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) have produced a reference
material which will be used for the calibration of all laboratory machines
measuring HbA1c worldwide. The IFCC HbA1c is expressed in mmol/mol.8
HbA1c expressed in IFCC values (mmol/mol) can be converted to
DCCT values (%) by using the following equation:
HbA1c (%) = 0.0915 x IFCC HbA1c (mmol/mol) + 2.15
The conversion of HbA1c from DCCT to IFCC is presented in Table 2.
Table 2. DCCT and IFCC conversion tables
of glycated haemoglobin values
Source: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD). Pediatic
Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
5.2 Range of Ideal Blood Glucose Levels
Diabetes care includes performing SMBG. Frequent (4 - 6 times/day)
and accurate SMBG with concomitant optimal adjustment of insulin to
carbohydrate intake and exercise are required to attain and maintain
optimal metabolic control.8
There is little scientific evidence for age-related glucose targets.
Glycaemic targets of a child should be individually determined to
achieve normoglycaemia while avoiding all degrees of hypoglycaemia.
In patients beyond partial remission phase, the general rule is to achieve
>50% of the total SMBG readings within target range and <10% of the
readings below the range. Refer to Table 3 for target range.8
DCCT HbA1c (%)
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
11.0
12.0
13.0
14.0
IFCC HbA1c (mmol/mol)
42
48
53
58
64
69
75
80
86
97
108
119
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) through minimally invasive
devices that measure subcutaneous (SC) interstitial fluid glucose
every 1 - 5 minutes, may particularly benefit those with hypoglycaemic
unawareness. It can also identify times of consistent hyperglycaemia
and times of increased risk for hypoglycaemia. This enables immediate
corrections to keep BG in range. However, these devices are expensive.
CGM is beneficial in both patients using basal-bolus regimen and
insulin pump. Refer to Table 3 for target indicators of glycaemic control.
Table 3. Targets indicators of glycaemic control
*These population-based target indicators must be adjusted according to individual
circumstances. Different targets will be appropriate for various individuals such as
those who have experienced severe hypoglycaemia or those with hypoglycaemia
unawareness.
**These figures are based on clinical studies and expert opinion, but no strict
evidence-based recommendations are available. PG levels are given because BG
meters are internally calibrated to reflect the plasma glucose level.
***DCCT conventional adult cohort have a mean HbA1c value of 8.9%, and both
DCCT and Epidemiology of Diabetes Intervention and Complications (EDIC) have
shown poor outcomes with this level; therefore it seems prudent to recommend levels
below this value.
Adapted from: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
Pediatic Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
Clinical assessment
Symptoms of
hyperglycaemia
Symptoms of
hypoglycaemia
Biochemical
assessment*
SMBG values in
mmol/L
AM fasting or
pre-prandial
Post-prandial
Bedtime
Nocturnal
HbA1c DCCT (%)
HbA1c IFCC
(mmol/mol)
Assessment
Level of control
Ideal (nondiabetic)
Optimal
Sub-optimal
(action
suggested)
High risk
(action required)
No symptom
No symptom
3.6 - 5.6
4.5 - 7.0
4.0 - 5.6
3.6 - 5.6
<6.5
<48
No symptom
No severe
hypoglycaemia
4 - 8
5 - 10
6.7 - 10
4.5 - 9
<7.5**
<58
Polyuria,
polydipsia,
enuresis
Episodes
of severe
hypoglycaemia
>8
10 - 14
<4.2 or >9
<4.2 or >9
7.5 - 9.0**
58 - 75
Blurred vision, poor
weight gain, poor
growth, delayed
puberty, poor
school attendance,
skin or genital
infections, and
signs of vascular
complications
Episodes of severe
hypoglycaemia
>9
>14
<4.4 or >11
<4.0 or >11
>9.0***
>75
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
5.3 Growth and Puberty
T1DM is a chronic disease of childhood and it potentially affects the
growth, onset of puberty and pubertal development of the patients.
28 - 29, level III Thus, T1DM patients require monitoring of their growth and
physical development. This can be achieved by plotting anthropometric
measurements using appropriate percentile charts and mid-parental
height.
There is a significant impairment in growth during puberty in young
patients with T1DM and microalbuminuria which could be due to
suboptimal glycaemic control.30, level III Pubertal onset is delayed
in children and adolescents with less well-regulated T1DM and it
increases with higher HbA1c level and lower BMI standard deviation
score.28, level III
Conventional therapy (insulin injections twice daily) of diabetic
children is significantly associated with impairment of physical growth
and delayed sexual maturation.29, level III To promote optimal growth,
adequate insulin secretion and concentrations are needed. The use
of basal-bolus regimen, insulin analog and insulin pump have led to
more physiological circulating insulin concentrations, thus improving
growth. The effect of poor glycaemic control on growth appears to
be exacerbated during puberty when physiological insulin resistance
occurs.8
Mauriac syndrome, characterised by growth failure, delayed puberty,
cushingoid appearance and hepatomegaly, is an uncommon complication
in patients with poorly controlled T1DM.31, level III
Recommendation 3
• All patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) should aim to
achieve glycaemic targets to maintain normal growth and pubertal
development, while avoiding severe hypoglycaemia.
• Patients with T1DM and hypoglycaemia unawareness should
perform more frequent self-monitoring of blood glucose.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
6. DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS
The rate of DKA occurrence at onset of T1DM ranges from 15 - 70% in
Europe and North America.8 In Malaysia, it is at 57.5%.4, level III
The goals of therapy in DKA are: 8; 32, level III
• to correct dehydration, correct acidosis and reverse ketosis, and
slowly correct hyperosmolality
• to restore BG to near normal
• to monitor for complications of DKA and its treatment
• to dentify and treat any precipitating event
Risk factors for DKA in newly diagnosed diabetes include:33, level II-2;
34 - 35, level III; 36, level II-2
• young patient (<2 years old)
• delayed diagnosis
• low socioeconomic status
• children in countries with low prevalence of T1DM
6.1 Diagnosis
• The clinical symptoms and signs of DKA include:8
 nausea and vomiting
 abdominal pain
 confusion, drowsiness, progressive reduction in level of
consciousness and eventually, loss of consciousness
 dehydration
 tachycardia
 tachypnoea
 deep, sighing (Kussmaul) respiration; acetone-smell breath
• Prior to the above presentations, patient usually has classical
symptoms of diabetes mellitus.
The biochemical criteria for the diagnosis of DKA are:8; 32, level III
• hyperglycaemia [BG >11 mmol/L (≈200 mg/dL)]
• venous pH <7.3 or bicarbonate <15 mmol/L
• ketonaemia (>3 mmol/L) and/or ketonuria (>2+)
Blood ketone (β-hydroxybuterate/β-OHB) should be measured
whenever possible. A β-OHB level of 3 mmol/L corresponds to a
bicarbonate level of 18 mmol/L.37, level III
DKA is categorised by the severity of acidosis:8; 32, level III
• mild (venous pH <7.3, bicarbonate <15 mmol/L)
• moderate (venous pH <7.2, bicarbonate <10 mmol/L)
• severe (venous pH <7.1, bicarbonate <5 mmol/L)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• Estimation of the degree of dehydration in DKA generally shows fair
to moderate agreement among physicians.38, level II-2; 39, level III
• The three most useful signs for predicting ≥5% dehydration in young
children aged one month to five years are:8; 40, level III
 prolonged capillary refill time (normal capillary refill time is ≤1.5 - 2
seconds)
 abnormal skin turgor (‘tenting’ or inelastic skin)
 abnormal respiratory pattern (hyperpnoea)
Other useful signs include dry mucous membranes, sunken eyes,
absent tears, weak pulses and cool extremities. More signs of
dehydration tend to be associated with more severe dehydration.
• Presence of shock (weak or impalpable peripheral pulses,
hypotension and oliguria) suggest ≥10% dehydration.
• Shock is rare in paediatric DKA.8
• Emergency assessment in DKA should comply to the standard
paediatric resuscitation guidelines which include:8
 secure the airway and give oxygen to patients with circulatory
impairment or shock
 insert nasogastric tube to prevent aspiration in an unconscious
patient
 assess severity of dehydration and level of consciousness
 obtain venous access, at least two intravenous (IV) catheters
should be secured
 measure immediately BG, blood or urine ketones, serum
electrolytes, blood gases (venous) and full blood count
 monitor electrocardiography continuously for evidence of hyper-
or hypokalaemia
 catheterise for continuous bladder drainage in an unconscious or
a very ill young patient
 start antibiotics for febrile patients after obtaining samples for culture
 weigh the patient (this weight should be used in fluid calculation)
Patients should ideally be managed in centres experienced in the
treatment of DKA in children and adolescents. If management has to
be initiated in a centre with less experience and fewer resources, the
clinician in an experienced centre should be consulted on appropriate
management.
High risk patients should be managed in an intensive care unit
(paediatric if available). They are those with:8; 32, level III
• severe DKA (long duration of symptoms, compromised circulation
or depressed level of consciousness)
• increased risk of cerebral oedema (e.g. <5 years of age, severe
acidosis, low pCO2 or high blood urea nitrogen)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Clinical judgement must be used to optimise treatment of the individual
patient. Adjustments of treatment (insulin dose, electrolyte composition
and rate of infusion of rehydration fluids) should be based on careful
clinical and biochemical monitoring of the patient’s response.8
Recommendation 4
• Children and adolescents with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) should
be managed in hospitals with specialists experienced in the
management of the condition.
• Patients with severe DKA and at risk of cerebral oedema should be
managed in an intensive care unit (if the facility is available in local
setting).
The following recommendations are intended only as a general guide
to DKA management. As there is considerable individual variability in
presentation of DKA, some patients may require specific treatment
outside the range of options presented below.
6.2 Treatment
6.2.1 Fluid therapy
• Fluid replacement should begin 1 - 2 hours before starting insulin therapy.
• Patients with DKA have a deficit in extracellular fluid volume that is
usually in the range of 5 - 10%.8
• Clinical estimates of the volume deficit are subjective and inaccurate.
Therefore in moderate DKA, use 5 - <7% and in severe DKA,
7 - 10% dehydration.8
• Initial fluid therapy will depend on whether the patient is in:
 shock
 severe volume depletion but not in shock (7 -10% dehydration)
 mild to moderate volume depletion (5 - 7% dehydration)
a. DKA with shock
In patients with DKA in shock, infuse isotonic saline (0.9% saline) 10
- 20 ml/kg as quickly as possible to restore circulatory volume with
reassessment after each bolus.8 Each fluid bolus should be given in
10 ml/kg.
b. DKA with severe volume depletion but not in shock
In DKA patients with poor peripheral circulation but not in shock, infuse
10 - 20 ml/kg of isotonic saline over 1 - 2 hours. It may be repeated until
tissue perfusion is adequate (maximum 30 ml/kg).8; 32, level III Each fluid
bolus should be given in 10 ml/kg.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
For both (a) and (b) above, subsequent rehydration and maintenance
fluid should be calculated and infused over 48 hours.32, level III; 41 - 43, level II-2
Resuscitation boluses should not be included as part of the total fluid
requirement.8 The rate of fluid administration usually do not exceed 1.5
- 2 times the daily maintenance requirement.8; 32, level III
Use isotonic solution (rehydration and maintenance fluid) for at least 4 -
6 hours before switching to a solution that has a tonicity ≥0.45% saline.
41, level II-2; 43, level II-2; 44 - 47, level III The decision to switch solution depends on
the patient’s hydration status, serum sodium and osmolality. Oral intake
can be resumed within 24 hours except in severely ill patients.8
The measured serum sodium concentration is inaccurate in patients
with DKA due to:8
• dilutional hyponatremia as a result of high glucose in the
extracellular space
• elevated lipid fraction
Therefore it is important to monitor the trend of corrected serum sodium.
• Important calculations
Corrected sodium = Measured sodium + 2 (plasma glucose - 5.6) (mmol/L)
(mmol/L)8
5.6
Effective plasma
= 2 (plasma sodium) + Plasma glucose (mmol/L)
osmolality
(mosmol/kg)
c. DKA with mild to moderate volume depletion
Isotonic saline bolus infusion is not required in mild to moderate volume
depletion of DKA. In moderately dehydrated patients, rehydration and
maintenance fluid using isotonic saline should be infused over 48 hours.
The decision to switch solution or reduce the rate of infusion depends
on the patient’s hydration status, serum sodium and osmolality.8
In patients with mild dehydration, oral fluid can be continued as tolerated.
IV fluid may be needed to maintain total daily fluid requirement.8
• Clinical assessment of hydration status and calculated effective
osmolality are valuable guides to fluid and electrolyte therapy. The
aim is to gradually reduce serum effective osmolality to normal.
42, level II-2; 48, level III
• Serum sodium level should increase simultaneously as the serum
glucose level decreases (sodium should rise by 0.5 mmol/L for each
1 mmol/L decrease in glucose concentration).8
Refer to Algorithm 1 and 2 in Appendix 3 and 4.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
6.2.2 Potassium replacement
Children with DKA may have total body potassium deficits between 3
and 6 mmol/kg. The major loss of potassium is from the intracellular
compartment and this is further aggravated by vomiting and osmotic
diuresis.8
Potassium replacement is needed irrespective of the serum
potassium level unless renal failure is present (refer to Table 4).
Electrocardiogramme (ECG) may help to determine whether the child
has hypo- or hyperkalaemia*.8
*ECG changes:
Hypokalaemia: prolongation of PR interval, T-wave flattening and
inversion, ST depression, prominent U waves and apparent long QT
interval
Hyperkalaemia: tall, peaked and symmetrical T waves, and shortening
of the QT interval
Table 4. Potassium replacement
• IV potassium replacement must not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/hour.
Potassium replacement should continue throughout IV fluid therapy.
If hypokalaemia persists despite a maximum rate of potassium
replacement, the rate of insulin infusion may be reduced. Potassium
phosphate may be used together with potassium chloride or acetate
to avoid hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis or hypophosphataemia.8
Situation
(at presentation)
Normokalaemia
Hypokalaemia
Hyperkalaemia
Treatment
• Start potassium replacement after initial
volume expansion and before starting insulin
infusion.
• Commence with 40 mmol of potassium
per litre in the infusate (1.5 g potassium
chloride/500 ml).
• Subsequent
potassium
replacement
should be based on serum potassium
measurements.
• Potassium replacement should be started
at the time of initial volume expansion at not
more than 20 mmol/L of potassium in the
infusate and thereafter at 40 mmol/L during
rehydration.
• Start potassium replacement only after urine
output is documented.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
6.2.3 Insulin therapy
Insulin therapy in DKA should begin with a rate of 0.05 - 0.1 unit/kg/h
about 1 - 2 hours after starting fluid replacement therapy.8; 49 - 50, level III;
51, level II-2; 52, level III
Do not administer IV bolus of insulin at the start of therapy.8 It may
increase the risk of cerebral oedema48, level III; 51, level II-2 and exacerbate
hypokalaemia.8
The dose of insulin should remain at 0.05 - 0.1 unit/kg/h until DKA
resolves (pH >7.3, bicarbonate >15 mmol/L, β-OHB <1 mmol/L or
closure of the anion gap), which usually takes longer than normalisation
of BG levels. If no improvement is seen in pH, anion gap or β-OHB
concentration, reassess the patient, review insulin therapy and consider
other possible causes of impaired response to insulin such as infection
or errors in insulin preparation. For patients with marked sensitivity to
insulin (e.g. young children with DKA), the dose may be decreased
provided that metabolic acidosis continues to resolve.8
Duration and dose of insulin infusion should be kept in the lower range
to avoid severe hypokalaemia as insulin has an aldosterone-like effect
leading to increased urinary potassium excretion.8
• Adjustment of glucose administration:8
 BG level typically decreases at a rate of 2 - 5 mmol/L/hour,
depending on the timing and amount of glucose administration.
 When BG falls to approximately 14 - 17 mmol/L, 5% glucose
should be added to the IV fluid.
 If BG falls very rapidly (>5 mmol/L/hour) after initial fluid expansion,
consider adding glucose even before BG has decreased to 17 mmol/L.
 While correcting metabolic acidosis with insulin infusion, 10% or
even 12.5% dextrose may be needed to prevent hypoglycaemia.
If there is no improvement in biochemical parameters of DKA (pH, anion
gap and β-OHB level), reassess the patient, review insulin therapy
and consider other possible causes of poor response to insulin (e.g.
infection or errors in insulin preparation).
6.2.4 Introduction of oral fluids and transition to SC insulin injections
Allow oral fluids only when substantial clinical improvement has
occurred (mild acidosis/ketosis may still be present). Reduce IV fluid
accordingly when oral fluid is tolerated.8
The most convenient time to change to SC insulin is just before a
mealtime. The first SC injection should be given 15 - 30 minutes (with
rapid-acting insulin) or 1 - 2 hours (with short-acting insulin) before
stopping the insulin infusion to allow sufficient time for the insulin to be
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
absorbed. Frequent BG monitoring should be continued to avoid hyper-
and/or hypoglycaemia after transitioning to SC insulin.8
6.2.5 Bicarbonate therapy
Bicarbonate therapy may lead to paradoxical central nervous system
acidosis and rapid correction of acidosis with bicarbonate causes
hypokalaemia. Administration is not recommended except for treatment
of life-threatening hyperkalaemia.8
Recommendation 5
• In diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) patients with poor peripheral
circulation, only isotonic saline (0.9% saline) infusion should be
used in initial resuscitation but not exceeding 30 ml/kg in total.
 Fluid replacement (maintenance and deficit) should be given over
48 hours.
• Do not administer insulin as bolus at the start of therapy in DKA.
 Insulin infusion should begin about 1 - 2 hours after starting fluid
replacement therapy.
• The dose of insulin should remain at 0.05 - 0.1 unit/kg/h until DKA
resolves.
 Dextrose 5% should be added when blood glucose falls to 14 - 17
mmol/L.
 If blood glucose level falls too rapidly before DKA resolves,
dextrose concentration should be increased.
• Potassium replacement is needed in DKA irrespective of the serum
potassium level unless renal failure is present. Electrocardiography
helps to determine whether the patient has hypo- or hyperkalaemia.
• Bicarbonate should not be given in DKA except for treatment of lifethreatening hyperkalaemia.
• Monitoring of DKA:8
a. hourly (or more frequently as indicated) bedside monitoring
 vital signs (pulse rate, respiratory rate and blood pressure)
 neurological observations for warning signs and symptoms of
cerebral oedema
 capillary BG
 insulin dose
 accurate fluid input (including oral fluid) and output
b. two to four hourly (or more frequently) laboratory tests
 BG
 blood gases
 serum electrolytes
 blood urea nitrogen
 serum calcium, magnesium and phosphorus
 haematocrit
c. two hourly blood β-OHB (capillary blood)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
6.3 Morbidity and Mortality
The mortality rate from DKA in children is 0.15 - 0.30%. Cerebral oedema
accounts for 60 - 90% of all DKA mortality. Among the survivors, 10 -
25% have significant residual morbidity.53, level II-2; 54, level III Those without
overt neurological symptoms during DKA may have subtle brain injury,
especially memory deficits, after recovery from DKA.55, level II-2
Cerebral oedema
The occurrence of clinically overt cerebral oedema is <1.0%.53, level II-2;
54, level III However, newer studies show that approximately 15% of
children treated for DKA have a GCS score <14 and is associated with
cerebral oedema detected by neuroimaging.56, level III; 57, level II-3
• Risks of cerebral oedema include:
 younger age, new onset diabetes58, level III
 longer duration of symptoms, greater hypocapnia at presentation
after adjusting for degree of acidosis53, level II-2; 56, level III; 59, level III
 increased serum urea nitrogen at presentation53, level II-2; 56, level III; 60, level III
 severe acidosis at presentation61, level II-2; 62, level III
 bicarbonate treatment for correction of acidosis53, level II-2
 marked early decrease in serum effective osmolality48, level III; 61, level II-2
 attenuated rise in serum sodium concentration or an early fall in
glucose-corrected sodium during therapy53, level II-2; 61, level II-2; 63, level II-2
 administration of insulin in the first hour of fluid treatment62, level III
 greater (large) volumes of fluid given in the first four hours59, level III;
61, level II-2; 62, level III
• Warning signs and symptoms of cerebral oedema:8
 headache (variable severity)
 change in neurological status (restlessness, irritability, increased
drowsiness, incontinence)
 specific
neurological
signs
(e.g.
cranial
nerve
palsies,
papilloedema)
 slowing of heart rate
 rising blood pressure
 decreased oxygen saturation
Clinically significant cerebral oedema usually develops within the first
12 hours after treatment has started but can occur before treatment has
begun53, level II-2; 64, level II-2 or rarely may develop as late as 24 - 48 h after
the start of treatment.65, level III
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Clinical diagnosis based on bedside evaluation:66, level III
• one diagnostic criterion or
• two major criteria or
• one major and two minor criteria
These criteria have a sensitivity of 92% and a false positive rate of only
4%. Refer to Table 5 below.
Table 5. Diagnostic criteria for cerebral oedema
Diagnostic criteria
• Abnormal motor or verbal response to pain
• Decorticate or decerebrate posture
• Cranial nerve palsy (especially III, IV and VI)
• Abnormal neurogenic respiratory pattern (e.g. grunting, tachypnoea,
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, apneusis)
In patients with T1DM with multiple risk factors for cerebral oedema,
mannitol or hypertonic saline should be readily available and the dose
to be given calculated beforehand. If neurologic status deteriorates
acutely, treatment should be given immediately.8
Treatment of suspected cerebral oedema:8
• Prop the patient up at 30°.
• Reduce the rate of fluid administration by one-third.
• Give IV mannitol, 0.5 - 1 g/kg over 10 - 15 minutes, and repeat if
there is no initial response in 30 minutes to two hours.
• If there is no initial response to mannitol, hypertonic saline (3%)
2.5 - 5 mL/kg over 10 - 15 minutes may be used as an alternative.
• Consider intubating the patient if there is impending respiratory
failure.
• Cranial imaging may be considered after treatment for cerebral
oedema has been started.
Major criteria
• Altered mentation/fluctuating level
of consciousness
• Sustained heart rate deceleration
(decrease more than 20 beats/
min) not attributable to improved
intravascular volume or sleep state
• Age-inappropriate incontinence
Minor criteria
• Vomiting
• Headache
• Lethargy or not easily
arousable
• Diastolic blood
pressure >90 mmHg
• Age <5 years
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Recommendation 6
• To reduce the risk of cerebral oedema in diabetic ketoacidosis:
 large volumes of fluid should not be given after initial volume
expansion
 insulin should not be administered in the first hour of fluid treatment
 bicarbonate should not be used for the correction of acidosis
 intravenous fluids should be decreased when the patient begins
drinking
6.4 Prevention of Recurrent DKA
Recurrent DKA without a preceding febrile or vomiting illness is almost
always due to psychosocial problems and poor compliance to insulin
therapy.67, level I Thus, attempts to identify and treat the cause of DKA
are essential.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
7. INSULIN THERAPY
The aim of insulin therapy is to mimic physiological insulin replacement
as close as possible in all age groups.
The DCCT defines conventional therapy as administration of one or two
daily insulin injections while intensive therapy refers to three or more
injections/day.26, level I However, for this CPG, classification of insulin
therapy is based on the latest ISPAD guidelines which define intensive
regimens as four or more injections in a day.8
Most insulin regimens include a proportion of rapid-acting or shortacting insulin as prandial insulin and intermediate-acting insulin or longacting as basal insulin. Some children may only require basal insulin
during the partial remission phase.8
• The choice of insulin regimen will depend on many factors that
include:8
 age of patient
 duration of diabetes
 lifestyle (dietary patterns, exercise schedules, schooling, work
commitments, etc.)
 target of metabolic control
 preference of the patient/caregiver
7.1 Principles of Insulin Therapy
Common insulin regimen includes:
• intensive insulin therapy
 basal-bolus regimen
 pump therapy [Continuous Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion (CSII)]
 sensor-augmented therapy with basal-bolus regimen or pump
therapy
• less intensive insulin therapy
 three injections daily using a mixture of rapid-acting/short-acting
and intermediate-acting insulin pre-breakfast, rapid-acting/shortacting pre-dinner and intermediate-acting insulin pre-bed
 two injections daily that consists of a mixture of rapid-acting/
short-acting and intermediate-acting insulin pre-breakfast and
pre-dinner
Refer Appendix 5 for Types of Insulin Preparations and their Action
Profiles
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
7.1.1 Intensive insulin therapy
Intensive insulin therapy refers to four or more insulin injections per day
or CSII.
In DCCT, intensive insulin therapy compared with conventional insulin
therapy efficaciously delayed the onset and slowed the progression of
long-term (average follow-up of 6.5 years) diabetic complications in
patients with T1DM:26, level I
• Retinopathy
 Primary-prevention cohort: reduction in mean risk of retinopathy
by 76% (95% CI 62 to 85)
 Secondary-intervention cohort: delay the progression of
retinopathy by 54% (95% CI 39 to 66) and reduction in risk of
proliferative or severe non-proliferative retinopathy by 47% (95%
CI 14 to 67)
• Nephropathy
 Combined cohort: reduction in microalbuminuria by 39% (95% CI
21 to 52) and albuminuria by 54% (95% CI 19 to 74)
• Neuropathy
 Reduction in clinical neuropathy by 60% (95% 38 to 74)
The Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC)
study, an observational follow-up of the DCCT cohort, demonstrated
that further 3-step progression of retinopathy in adolescents at EDIC
year four follow-up was lower in the intensive group compared with the
conventional group (odds reduction of 72%, 95% CI 17 to 90) despite
similar HbA1c levels at entry of EDIC. However, this beneficial effect
was not seen at year ten follow-up (odds reduction of 0%, 95% CI -88
to 49).68, level II-2
Patients with T1DM on intensified insulin regimens have lower HbA1c
levels compared with less intensive regimen at two years follow-up and
this difference remains significant when adjusted for baseline HbA1c
(p<0.05).69, level II-2
Basal-bolus regimen
The basal-bolus regimen (intermediate-acting insulin/long-acting
basal once or twice daily and rapid-acting/short-acting boluses with
meals and snacks) mimics the physiological insulin secretion. Basal
insulin constitutes about 40 - 60% of the total daily insulin dose (TDD)
requirements; the remainder is pre-prandial rapid-acting/short-acting
insulin.8
Pump therapy
Insulin pump therapy is gaining popularity with a variable basal rate and
bolus doses with meals.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
CSII results in better metabolic control and lower TDD requirement
compared with multiple daily injection (MDI) in short-term:70, level I
• metabolic control, pooled WMD in HbA1c value of -0.29 (95% CI
-0.47 to -0.11) at three months and -0.24 (95% CI -0.41 to -0.07) at
one year
• insulin requirement, pooled WMD of -0.22 (95% CI -0.31 to -0.14)
There is no difference in hypoglycaemia and risk of DKA between CSII
and MDI.
Insulin pump use in children provides a sustained improvement in
glycaemic control (p<0.001) and reductions of severe hypoglycaemia
(p<0.001) and hospitalisation for DKA (p=0.003) compared with a
matched cohort using injections at seven years follow-up.71, level II-2
In young children 1 - 6 years old with T1DM, insulin pump therapy is
a safe and efficacious alternative compared with insulin injection. The
advantages include potential decrease in hypoglycaemic episodes and
improvement in quality of life.72, level I
7.1.2 Less intensive insulin therapy
Less intensive regimen consists of three or less injections a day.
Three injections daily consist of:8
• rapid-acting/short-acting and intermediate-acting insulin pre-breakfast
• rapid-acting/short-acting alone pre-lunch or pre-dinner
• intermediate-acting insulin pre-bed
Premixed insulin is not recommended for paediatric use because of its
fixed ratio of insulin components and does not allow flexibility of dosing.
However, if patients and their caregivers prefer less injections, selfmixed insulin (rapid-acting/short-acting and intermediate-acting insulin)
given twice a day may be acceptable.8
7.2 Insulin Formulation
7.2.1 Short-acting insulin
Short-acting insulin is still used as an essential component of most daily
replacement regimens either:
• in combination with intermediate-acting insulin in twice daily regimen
• as pre-meal bolus injections in basal-bolus regimen together with
intermediate-acting insulin/basal analog once or twice daily
• as rescue insulin during crisis
In a RCT on patients of 7 - 11 years of age with T1DM, the efficacy of
rapid-acting insulin and short-acting insulin was found to be similar.73, level I
However, in a later RCT on patients with a mean age of eight years
(pre-pubertal), short-acting insulin showed better fasting BG (p=0.012)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
and HbA1c (p=0.018) compared with the rapid-acting insulin. This study
suggested that short-acting insulin can assure better plasma insulin
levels between meals as compared with rapid-acting insulin in children
who did not administer pre-snack insulin injection.74, level I
7.2.2 Rapid-acting insulin
Rapid-acting insulin has a faster onset and shorter duration of action than
short-acting insulin.
Insulin aspart given post-prandially is non-inferior and safe compared
with pre-prandial administration in children and adolescents who
require flexibility in timing of injections and dose adjustment according
to meal.75, level I
Rapid-acting insulin given before the evening meal (as part of a thrice
daily insulin regimen) reduce the risk of early nocturnal hypoglycaemia
(p=0.01).73, level I
In patients on a twice daily insulin regimen (combination of intermediateacting insulin and rapid-acting/short-acting insulin), an additional
injection of insulin lispro before the afternoon meal (two hours before
dinner) reduces the pre-dinner BG (p=0.001).76, level I
7.2.3 Basal insulin
• Glargine
In children aged 2 - 6 years, a daily injection of insulin glargine is as
efficacious as twice daily injection of intermediate-acting insulin. Although
the rate of composite hypoglycaemia [symptomatic hypoglycaemia,
confirmed low CGM excursions (<3.9 mmol/L) and low fingerstick BG
(<3.9 mmol/L)] is significantly higher with insulin glargine, there is no
significant difference in severe and nocturnal hypoglycaemia between
the two types of insulin.77, level I
In children and adolescents with T1DM, insulin glargine is safe and
non-inferior compared with intermediate-acting insulin/Lente as basal
insulin options in MDI regimens. However in those with high baseline
HbA1c, insulin glargine is more efficacious than intermediate-acting
insulin/Lente in reducing HbA1c.78, level I In a similar age group, a daily
insulin glargine injection is equally efficacious either given pre-breakfast
or at bedtime.79, level I
• Detemir
Insulin detemir is equally efficacious in reducing HbA1c compared with
intermediate-acting insulin of a basal-bolus regimen in children with
T1DM at 26 weeks. However, it has a significantly lower and more
predictable fasting BG, lower weight gain and lower risk of nocturnal
hypoglycaemia.80, level I
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
In a study on children and adolescents aged 2 - 16 years, insulin detemir
given once or twice daily was non-inferior to intermediate-acting insulin
in glycaemic control at 52 weeks and was associated with a significantly
lower risk of hypoglycaemia and lower weight SD score.81, level I Similar
findings were observed in children aged 2 - 5 years.82, level I
7.3 Insulin Dosage
Insulin dosage depends on many factors:8
• age
• weight
• stage of puberty
• duration and phase of diabetes
• state of injection sites
• nutritional intake and distribution
• exercise duration and intensity
• daily routine
• SMBG and HbA1c level
• intercurrent illness
• The guidelines on TDD are as follows:8
 during partial remission phase, the TDD is often <0.5 IU/kg/day
 pre-pubertal children usually require 0.7 - 1.0 IU/kg/day
 during puberty, higher requirements may be needed, 1.2 - 2 IU/kg/
day
Children on twice daily regimens often require about two thirds of their
TDD in the morning and about one third in the evening. About one third
of each insulin dose is rapid-acting or short-acting insulin and about two
thirds is intermediate-acting insulin.8
Children on basal-bolus regimen require night-time intermediate-acting
insulin between 30% (if on short-acting insulin) and 50% (if on rapidacting insulin) of TDD; the remainder is pre-prandial rapid-acting/shortacting insulin.8
Refer to Appendix 5 on Types of Insulin Preparations and their
Action Profiles.
Refer to Appendix 5 on Insulin Approval by U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), and European Medicines Agency (EMEA)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Recommendation 7
• Intensive insulin therapy is the preferred regimen in patients with
type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
• Rapid-acting or short-acting insulin should be made available to
patients with T1DM for crisis management*.
• Comprehensive education appropriate for the age, maturity and
individual needs of the child should be offered to all patients with
T1DM and their caregivers.
*Refer to Chapter 14 on Special Situations (Sick Day).
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
8. INSULIN DOSE ADJUSTMENT
For patients with T1DM on basal bolus therapy, pre-meal insulin dose
may be adjusted based on insulin to carbohydrate ratio (ICR) or insulin
sensitivity factor (ISF). Detailed record of SMBG, carbohydrate intake and
insulin doses are crucial when making insulin dose adjustments.83, level III
8.1 Insulin to Carbohydrate Ratio
• ICR is defined as the amount of carbohydrate in gramme covered
by one unit (IU) of rapid-acting or short-acting insulin.
• It can be calculated by using the 500 (for rapid-acting insulin)
8; 83, level III and 450 (for short-acting insulin)84, level III rules.
• ICR for most children are 1:20 or 1:25.83, level III However in practice,
adolescents may require more insulin and thus giving a higher ICR
(e.g. 1:15). ICR is often higher for breakfast due to higher insulin
resistance.
• For very young children requiring <10 IU of insulin per day, the 300
- 450 rule may be used.83, level III
• The 500 rule for rapid-acting insulin:
ICR
=
500
Total daily insulin*
*basal and bolus insulin
For example, a child requires 6 IU of rapid-acting insulin for breakfast,
lunch and dinner, and 12 IU of basal insulin. The total daily insulin dose
is 30 IU (6 IU + 6 IU + 6 IU +12 IU) and the ICR is 16.7 g/IU (500
divided by 30 IU). Therefore, every 16.7 g of carbohydrate consumed
will require 1 IU of rapid-acting insulin.
• The 450 rule for short-acting insulin:
ICR
=
450
Total daily insulin*
*basal and bolus insulin
• Alternatively, ICR for individual meal can be calculated by dividing
the carbohydrate content in gramme by the insulin dose in IU. This
formula can only be used if the difference in BG level between the
pre- and post-meal is not more than 3 mmol/L.8
For example, a child consumes a meal with carbohydrate content of
45 g and requires 3 IU of insulin. The ICR is 15 g/IU (45 g divided by 3
IU). Therefore, every 15 g of carbohydrate consumed will require 1 IU
of rapid-acting insulin.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
8.2 Insulin Sensitivity Factor
• ISF is defined as the amount of BG in mmol/L reduced by one
unit (IU) of rapid-acting or short-acting insulin and used to correct
hyperglycaemia.
• The 100 rule for rapid-acting insulin:8; 83, level III
ISF
=
100
Total daily insulin*
*basal and bolus insulin
• The 83 rule is for short-acting insulin:8; 83, level III
ISF
=
83
Total daily insulin*
*basal and bolus insulin
For example, a child requires 6 IU of short-acting insulin for breakfast,
lunch and dinner, and 12 IU of basal insulin. The total daily insulin dose
is 30 IU (6 IU + 6 IU + 6 IU + 12 IU) and the ISF is 2.76 mmol/L/IU
(83 divided by 30 IU). Therefore, every 1 IU of short-acting insulin will
reduce the BG by 2.76 mmol/L.
If the BG level is persistently above the target during:8
• pre-breakfast - increase pre-dinner or basal insulin
• pre-lunch
- increase pre-breakfast rapid-acting or short-acting
insulin, or pre-breakfast basal insulin
• pre-dinner
- increase pre-lunch rapid-acting or short-acting
insulin, or pre-breakfast basal insulin
• post-meal
- increase pre-meal rapid-acting or short-acting insulin
Although evidence on insulin dose adjustments is based on guidelines
and a narrative review, ICR and ISF are the only objective methods
that are widely practiced at the moment. Thus, the DG CPG strongly
recommends its use for the purpose.
Recommendation 8
• Insulin dose adjustment may be done based on insulin to
carbohydrate ratio and insulin sensitivity factor in patients with type
1 diabetes mellitus on basal bolus regimen.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
9. HYPOGLYCAEMIA
Hypoglycaemia is common among patients with T1DM and is defined
as low BG level that predisposes patients to potential harm. Counterregulation begins at <4 mmol/L in a non-diabetic person. There is
no single numerical definition of hypoglycaemia for all patients and
situations. However, it is often defined as a BG level of <3.6 mmol/L but
the threshold for initiation of treatment is 3.9 mmol/L because of the risk
of it falling further.8
Hypoglycaemia can be symptomatic or asymptomatic. Signs and
symptoms of hypoglycaemia are due to adrenergic activation and
neuroglycopaenia as shown below.8
Autonomic
signs and
symptoms
• Shakiness
• Sweatiness
• Tremors
• Palpitations
• Pallor
Neuroglycopaenic
signs and
symptoms
• Poor
concentration
• Blurred or double
vision
• Disturbed colour
vision
• Difficulty in
hearing
• Slurred speech
• Poor judgment
and confusion
• Problems
with short-term
memory
• Dizziness and
unsteady gait
• Loss of
consciousness
• Seizure
• Death
Behavioural
signs and
symptoms
• Irritability
• Erratic behaviour
• Agitation
• Nightmares
• Inconsolable
crying
Non-specific
symptoms
• Hunger
• Headache
• Nausea
• Tiredness
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Precipitating and risk factors of hypoglycaemia are listed in the following
box.8
Treatment
The goal of hypoglycaemia treatment is to restore the BG to normal
level (5.6 mmol/L).8
• Mild/moderate hypoglycaemia8
If the BG level is low (3.3 - 3.9 mmol/L) and although patient is
asymptomatic, oral glucose of 0.3 g/kg (1 tablespoon≈10 g and
1 teaspoon≈5 g) will increase the BG level sufficiently. Check BG
after 10 - 15 minutes and repeat oral glucose administration if there
is no improvement. Thereafter, complex carbohydrates in the form
of fruit, bread, cereal or milk can be consumed to prevent recurrent
hypoglycaemia.
Patients should carry with them a hypokit consisting of glucose sachet
or glucose tablet and a serving of complex carbohydrates such as
biscuits.
If sucrose is used, a greater amount of it will be needed to provide the
same increase in BG level compared with glucose. Foods containing
fat will slow down the glucose absorption and should be avoided as the
initial treatment of hypoglycaemia.
• Severe hypoglycaemia8
Severe hypoglycaemia is defined as an event of low BG requiring
assistance of another person to reverse the condition. However in
young children, even mild to moderate hypoglycaemia often require
assistance of caregivers. Therefore, the above definition is not applicable
to them. Generally, severe hypoglycaemia in paediatric population is
defined as an event associated with severe neuroglycopaenia which
usually results in coma or seizure and requires parenteral therapy [SC/
intamuscular (IM) glucagon or IV glucose].
• Severe hypoglycaemia warrants urgent treatment.
 In the hospital environment, this can be safely and rapidly treated
by IV dextrose 10% (2 - 3 ml/kg) administration.
 If IV access is not available, SC/IM glucagon can be given (0.5 mg
for patients <12 years old and 1.0 mg for those >12 years old).
Precipitating factors
• Excess insulin
• Less food consumption
• Exercise
• Alcohol ingestion
Risk factors
• Young age
• Low HbA1c level
• Hypoglycaemia unawareness
• Previous severe hypoglycaemia
• Longer duration of diabetes
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Ideally, glucagon (SC/IM) should be accessible to all patients and
caregivers, particularly if there is high risk of severe hypoglycaemia.
Education on its administration is important.8 Although glucagon pen is
not available locally, hopefully it will be more readly available in future.
When parenteral dextrose and glucagon are not available, a practical
management is to administer a rapid-acting source of glucose such as
honey onto the buccal mucosa; however this is not based on scientific
evidence. In the recovery phase after treatment, close observation and
glucose monitoring is essential. Hypoglycaemia may recur and patients
may require oral glucose and/or IV infusion of dextrose.
• Nocturnal hypoglycaemia8
Nocturnal hypoglycaemia is common in patients with T1DM and often
undetected by the patients or their caregivers. During sleep, the counter
regulatory responses to hypoglycaemia are decreased in patients with
T1DM who are less likely to be awakened by this condition.
• Nocturnal hypoglycaemia should be suspected in the following
conditions:
 low pre-breakfast BG
 confusional states
 nightmares
 seizures at night
 impaired thinking, lethargy, altered mood or headaches upon
waking
Regular overnight BG monitoring should be done to detect nocturnal
hypoglycaemia especially in the presence of precipitating/risk factors.
Recommendation 9
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and their caregivers:
 should be able to recognise precipitating factors of hypoglycaemia
and take appropriate precautions
 must be able to recognise symptoms of hypoglycaemia and give
prompt treatment
 should always have hypokit consisting of glucose sachet or
glucose tablet and a serving of complex carbohydrates easily
accessible at all times
• Patients with T1DM and their caregivers should monitor overnight
blood glucose level on a regular basis to prevent nocturnal
hypoglycaemia.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
10. MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY
Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) is an essential component of
T1DM management. It involves nutritional assessment, diagnosis,
intervention, monitoring and evaluation.85 It is recommended for
all children and adolescents with T1DM. Glycaemic control can be
improved by implementing an individualised meal plan with appropriate
insulin adjustments.8
MNT consists of:8
• energy balance, energy intake and food components
• nutritional care, education and meal planning
• dietary recommendations for specific insulin regimes
• nutritional management of physical activities
The aims of MNT are:8
• to provide adequate energy intake and nutrients for optimal growth
and development while maintaining quality of life
• to achieve optimum glycaemic control by maintaining a balance
between food intake, energy expenditure and insulin action profiles
• to prevent and treat acute complications (hypoglycaemia,
hyperglycaemia, illness and exercise-related problems) and reduce
the risk of long-term complications
• to provide an individualised meal plan consisting of three meals a
day with appropriate healthy snacks (when necessary) in order to
have a framework for regular BG monitoring
10.1 Energy Balance, Energy Intake and Food Components
• Daily energy intake varies among children and adolescents, depending
on age, stages of growth, physical activities and type of food.
• Total calorie intake should be distributed as follows:8
 carbohydrate (carb) 50 - 55%
 fat 25 - 35%
 protein 15 - 20% [high protein diet (>25% total daily calorie intake)
are not recommended]
• Food components:8
 healthy sources of carbohydrate - e.g. whole grain breads and
cereals, legumes, fruits, vegetables and low-fat dairy products
(full-fat in children under two years)
 fat - reduce the intake of saturated fat and trans-fatty acids.
Substitute saturated fat with monounsaturated (MUFA) and
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to improve the lipid profile.
Examples of MUFA are olive, canola, sesame and rapeseed oil.
Examples of PUFA are sunflower, safflower, corn, soybean,
cottonseed, rice bran, peanut oil and oily marine fish [e.g. salmon,
toli shad (terubok), mackerel and anchovy]
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
 protein - intake should be similar to normal healthy children
 fibre - consume fruits and vegetables daily according to age
requirement. One serving of vegetable is equivalent to ½ cup of
cooked vegetable or 1 cup for raw vegetable. The recommended
amount of fibre per day follows the formula of:
Age in years + 5 = Amount of fiber per day (g) for patients more than
two years old
Refer to Appendix 6.
10.2 Nutritional Care, Education and Meal Planning
Carb counting is widely used in MNT for T1DM. It is a meal planning
approach for T1DM focusing on carbohydrate which is the primary
nutrient affecting post-prandial glycaemic response.8; 83, level III
Carb counting significantly improves metabolic control in children and
adolescents with T1DM compared to those without the intervention
at two years follow-up. It does not cause significant weight gain or
increase in insulin requirement.86, level I
Carb counting combined with nutritional education reduce HbA1c
without changing insulin requirement (p<0.001) and do not negatively
affect dietary habits and waist-to-height ratio (a relatively constant
anthropometric index in detecting central intra-abdominal obesity and
related cardio metabolic risk among children) at 18 months.87, level II-3
In calculating mealtime insulin to maintain post-prandial control,
carbohydrate estimations should be within 10 g of the actual meal
carbohydrate content.88, level I A deviation of more than 20 g in the
estimations will cause significant hyper- or hypoglycaemia.89, level II-3
Carb counting in gramme increments (e.g. 30 g) does not significantly
increase accuracy compared with portions or exchange estimations
(e.g. 2 exchanges). Large meals tend to be underestimated and snacks
overestimated.90, level III
The usual method of quantifying carbohydrate is to use a 15 g
carbohydrate exchange. Refer to Appendix 7 and Appendix 8.
Photographic materials is better than list materials in training
adolescents with T1DM to perform carb counting (p=0.03). It is easier
to be used for teenagers who have no experience in portioning of food
and parents with low educational level.91, level I
Recommendation 10
• Carbohydrate counting should be incorporated as part of the
management of type 1 diabetes mellitus patients.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
It is helpful to consider the glycaemic index (GI) and glycaemic load
of the food consumed in the management of T1DM. Low GI diet has
additional benefit to glycaemic control when practised together with
carb counting.8
Children on low GI diet together with carb counting achieve significantly
better HbA1c and less hyperglycaemia episodes compared with those
on carb counting alone at 12 months.92, level I A low GI day results
in significantly better glycaemic control but more episodes of
mild hypoglycaemia compared to a high GI day.93, level II-1 Refer to
Appendix 8.
10.3 Dietary Recommendations for Specific Insulin Regimes
10.3.1 Conventional therapy
Consistency in carbohydrate intake is required for patients on twice
daily insulin regimens to prevent hypoglycaemia during periods of
peak insulin action. However, this meal plan requires regular review
in a growing child. Patients/caregivers who can adjust the rapidacting/short-acting insulin (self-mixed insulin) have more flexibility with
carbohydrate consumption. Pre-bed carbohydrate intake is required to
prevent nocturnal hypoglycaemia.8
Patients on conventional therapies will require:
• fixed meal times
• consistent carbohydrate intake/meal/day
Patients may require snacks in between main meals to prevent
hypoglycaemia during the peak action of self-mixed insulin.
10.3.2 Intensive Insulin Therapy
Intensive insulin therapy mimics endogenous insulin production.
Individualised ICR using more flexible approach enables insulin dose
to be matched to carbohydrate intake. The need for snacking between
meals will be reduced due to the greater variety of food intake, which is
allowed at different meal times. Refer to Section 8.1.
10.4 Nutritional Management of Physical Activities
10.4.1 Unplanned and Spontaneous Activity
Hypoglycaemia commonly occurs during unplanned physical activities.
Nutritional strategies to avoid this are:8
• Quick acting carbohydrate (beverages) for a short duration activity
if necessary but this should not exceed the energy expenditure.
Example is isotonic sport drink containing 6 - 8% carbohydrate per
serving.
• Carbohydrate requirement depends on the:
 pre-exercise BG level
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
 the intensity and duration of the exercise
 the insulin regimen, and the time and dose of the last insulin
injection
 the age and weight of the patient
• BG testing need to be done after an activity to allow appropriate
management. Delayed hypoglycaemia can be prevented by reducing
the evening insulin doses and increasing carbohydrate intake.
• Nocturnal hypoglycaemia can be prevented by monitoring the pre-bed
and overnight BG and adding carbohydrate consumption at dinner and
pre-bed if necessary.
10.4.2 Planned or competitive sports
The planning for nutritional strategy prior to exercise includes
appropriate insulin adjustment, adequate nutrition and fluid intake:8
• Low-fat meal (carbohydrate-based) should be eaten 1 - 3 hours prior
to a sport to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal discomfort and make
digestion easier. Examples are fruit, milk, yoghurt, milkshake, sport or
cereal bars (check labels for carbohydrate and protein content) and
breakfast cereal with milk.
• Prior to and during strenuous exercise, additional ‘quick acting
carbohydrate’ as beverages may be needed.
• If aerobic exercise is performed during peak insulin action without
insulin adjustment, an intake of 1.0 - 1.5 g carbohydrate/kg/hour of
exercise may be required.
• Pre-exercise carbohydrate consumption should be tailored according
to pre-exercise BG. Consume 10 - 15 g of carbohydrate if BG is low or
alternatively adjust insulin dose.
• Adequate fluid intake is important to maintain optimal hydration.
• To prevent post-exercise hypoglycaemia, carbohydrate intake needs
to be adequate. Carbohydrate mixed with protein may be beneficial.
Recommendation 11
• Appropriate nutritional strategies should be tailored to the age,
insulin regimen and physical activities of the patient with type 1
diabetes mellitus.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
11. PSYCHOSOCIAL SUPPORT
Young patients with T1DM have higher prevalence of affective disorders
(anxiety and depression) compared to non-diabetics (p<0.001).94, level III
The prevalence of mild depression in T1DM youth is 14% while moderate
to severe depression at 8.6%. Depressed mood is associated with poor
glycaemic control and more frequent visit to emergency department
(p<0.005).95, level III Psychiatric co-morbidites (depressive disorders,
anxiety disorders and phobic disorders) in T1DM adolescents increase
the odds for repeat hospital admission for diabetes (OR=1.79, 95% CI
1.27 to 2.52).96, level III
There is also increased incidence of eating disorders among patients
with T1DM compared to non-diabetics.8; 96, level III The standardised
mortality rate in patients with concurrent T1DM and anorexia nervosa
patients is 2.18 (95% CI 1.15 to 4.42).97, level III
T1DM is an important risk factor for cognitive deficits. TIDM patients
with longer duration of diabetes, earlier age of diabetes onset and
DKA have lower test score in comprehension, abstract reasoning and
intelligent quotient compared to non-diabetics.98, level II-2
The relationship between psychological factors and metabolic control
is bidirectional. Therefore, psychosocial supports are important in
managing children and adolescents with T1DM.
• Psychosocial factors that predict poor metabolic control in T1DM
are:99 -100, level II-2
 low family support/cohesion
 single parent
 family stress/conflict
 presence of psychiatric disorder/eating disorder
 extreme peer pressure
 others:
- low conscientiousness
- low self-efﬁcacy
- avoidant emotion-focused coping style
- low executive functioning
Psychosocial interventions improve HbA1c in children and adolescents
with T1DM (SMD= -0.35, 95% CI -0.66 to -0.04).101, level I These
interventions also significantly improve the psychological distress in the
patients.101 - 102, level I
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
The psychosocial interventions involving parents/caregivers have
been shown to be efficacious in improving metabolic control. These
interventions include:101 - 103, level I; 104, level II-2
• psychoeducation
• problem solving skills
• coping skills
• supportive or counselling therapy
• family therapy
• cognitive behaviour therapy
The above psychosocial interventions are commonly carried out in
hospital outpatient and community settings such as diabetes summer
camps. Diabetes camps are shown to improve both diabetes knowledge
and metabolic control in patients with T1DM.102, level I Participation of the
patients in diabetes camp is a component of total diabetes care and it
should be encouraged.
Recommendation 12
• Periodic assessment should be performed in all patients with type 1
diabetes mellitus for early recognition of psychosocial problems and
referral to appropriate expertise.
• Diabetes team should consist of paediatrician, diabetes educator,
dietitian, pharmacist, psychiatrist/clinical psychologist/counsellor
and medical social officer.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
12. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY (EXERCISE)
Physical activity is an essential component in the management of
T1DM. Diabetic patients have higher risk of developing cardiovascular
disease.105 It is important for the patients to engage in regular physical
activity, together with insulin therapy and dietary adjustment.
Physical activity (exercise) can be divided into types:8
i. Aerobic (cardiovascular) exercise is a low intensity physical activity
that depends primarily on the aerobic energy-generating process
and the use of oxygen adequately to meet energy demands.
Examples of aerobic/cardiovascular exercise are medium to long
distance running/jogging, swimming, cycling, and walking.
Aerobic exercise tends to lower BG level both during (usually within
20 - 60 minutes from the start of exercise) and after the exercise.
ii. Anaerobic exercise is a high intensity physical activity. It is intense
enough to trigger lactate formation and performed in excess of 90%
maximum heart rate. Examples include weight training, sprinting
and burst training.
Although anaerobic exercise last only a short time (sometimes only
seconds), it may increase the BG level dramatically due to the release
of the hormones epinephrine and glucagon. This rise in BG is usually
transient, lasting typically 30 - 60 minutes, and may be followed by
hypoglycaemia a few hours after the exercise ends.
12.1 Benefits of Physical Activity
There are benefits of physical activity on HbA1c (SMD= -0.52, 95% CI
-0.97 to -0.07), triglyceride (SMD= -0.70, 95% CI -1.25 to -0.14), total
cholesterol (SMD= -0.91, 95% CI -1.66 to -0.17) and BMI (SMD= -0.41,
95% CI -0.7 to -0.12).106, level II-1
Physical activity that significantly improve glycaemic control are:107, level I
• duration of >60minutes per session
• higher frequency of >3 times in a week
• longer duration programme of >3 months
• combined aerobic and resistance training
12.2 Risk of Hypoglycaemia Associated with Physical Activity
Although hypoglycaemia is a common problem in children and adolescent
with T1DM, there is no significant severe hypoglycaemia reported in
post-physical activity.106, level II-1 It can occur during, immediately after or
several hours after (mainly 12 - 14 hours or longer) physical activity.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Possible reasons for hypoglycaemia are:8
• high intensity and long duration exercise (>30 - 60 minutes)
• >3 hours interval between the last meal and exercise
• not having a snack before and during exercise
• hyperinsulinemia during exercise (exercise during peak action of
insulin)
• If hypoglycaemia occurs during exercise:8
 stop physical activity immediately
 consume a rapid-acting 15 g carbohydrate
 take additional carbohydrate if hypoglycaemia persists
 monitor BG level until it is normal
Post-exercise hypoglycaemia and late onset hypoglycaemia can present
between four and 24 hours after exercise especially in prolonged and
moderate or high intensity physical activity. This is due to the late effect of
increased insulin sensitivity and, delay in replenishing liver and muscle
glycogen stores.8
12.3 Prevention of Hypoglycaemia during Physical Activity
Hypoglycaemia during physical activity can be prevented by adjustment
of insulin injections and carbohydrate supplement.
• Adjustment of insulin injections8
The use of insulin should be tailored to type and duration of exercise.
 Reduction in bolus insulin is required to prevent hypoglycaemia
during prolonged exercise. The usual recommendation is to reduce
rapid-acting insulin prior to exercise lasting longer than 30 minutes.
 Substitution of basal analog (long-acting insulin) given in the
evening with an intermediate-acting insulin if the patient is taking
part in all-day tournaments. Alternatively, split the TDD in half to
be given as basal analog. Take half of the basal analog in the
evening and then lower the second dose in the morning by 20 -
50% to compensate for the increased activity.
• Carbohydrate supplement
 Refer to Chapter 10 on Medical Nutritional Therapies
(Nutritional Management of Physical Activities)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• The following steps should be observed regarding physical activity:8
 Avoid strenuous physical activity if pre-exercise BG is high
(>14mmol/L) with ketonuria or ketonaemia.
 Increase the intensity and duration of physical activity in a
progressive manner.
 Do not inject insulin in the site that will be heavily involved in
muscular activity e.g. not to inject in the thigh before cycling.
 Avoid physical activity exercise at peak action of insulin.
 Consider reducing evening basal insulin.
 Monitor BG in evening and night after physical activity to avoid
nocturnal hypoglycaemia.
 Carry some sugar and drink more water.
Children with T1DM should be able to adjust insulin therapy before and after
physical activities to avoid major metabolic complications.108, level III During
unplanned physical activity, carbohydrate supplement before moderateintensity exercise can prevent dramatic drop in BG in adolescents.109, level III
Recommendation 13
• Physical activities should be performed regularly and in a safe manner*
in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
*Refer to the preceding text.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
13. SELF-MONITORING BLOOD GLUCOSE
SMBG is an important aspect of diabetes self-care practice and should
be practiced by all children and adolescents with T1DM. Maintaining BG
at or very near the normal range is known to decrease the progression
of microvascular disease in the affected young patients. SMBG is
conducted by measuring capillary BG via glucometer.
The aims of SMBG are:8
i. to accurately assess the level of glycaemic control of each individual
so that they can achieve their glycaemic targets
ii. to reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia, DKA, and chronic complications
of microvascular and macrovascular diseases
iii. to minimise the fluctuation of blood glucose and its effect on
cognitive function and mood
iv. to understand determinants of glycaemic control in each individual
and specific patient groups
Frequency of SMBG correlates with glycaemic control. It should be
prescribed at a frequency that can optimise patient’s diabetes control,
usually four to six times a day. The number and regularity of SMBG
should be individualised based on:8
• availability and cost of equipment
• type of insulin regimen
• ability of the patient to identify hypoglycaemia
• SMBG provides immediate documentation of glucose levels. It allows
prompt actions to be taken for optimal treatment and prevention of
hypo- or hyperglycaemia when it is performed at the correct timing
as suggested below:8
 To optimise basal insulin, blood testing should be done at bedtime,
during the night (e.g. 3 am to detect nocturnal hypoglycaemia and
hyperglycaemia) and after the overnight fast (pre-breakfast).
 For immediate adjustment of meal insulin dose, pre-meal blood
testing should be done. For subsequent adjustment of meal insulin
dose, blood testing should be done pre-meal and two hours postmeal to show levels of BG in response to the meal insulin.
 For glycaemic control during vigorous/prolonged exercise, blood
testing should be done before, during and several hours after the
exercise.
 Blood testing should be done when hypoglycaemia is suspected.
It should also be done during intercurrent illness to prevent
hyperglycaemia.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• It is a good practice to keep a diary to record glucose levels, insulin
dosages and dietary details for treatment adjustments. This diary
should be reviewed regularly by patients, families and healthcare
providers.
Recommendation 14
• Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) should be practised by all
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
• SMBG should be performed four to six times a day and more
frequent in certain conditions such as sick day or during exercise.
Continuous Glucose Monitoring System
Continuous Glucose Monitoring System (CGMS) uses minimally
invasive device to measure SC interstitial fluid glucose every 1 - 5
minutes (continuously). This device is expensive and not affordable to
most families.
In a multicentre RCT, there was no significant difference in HbA1c
reduction between continuous glucose monitoring and SMBG (>5 times
per day) in patients with T1DM aged 8 - 24 years old at 26 weeks
follow-up. However, in patients aged 8 to 14 years, secondary indexes
of glycaemic control (measured as relative reduction of ≥10% in HbA1c
level from baseline and HbA1c levels of <7.0%) significantly improved
in the continuous monitoring group compared with the control group.110, level I
In a small RCT on patients with T1DM and mean age of 11.4±3.7 years,
the HbA1c was significantly lower in the intervention group (adjustments
in therapy based on both CGMS and SMBG data) compared with
control group (adjustments based on SMBG data only) at six months
(p=0.02) without increasing the risk for hypoglycaemia.111, level I
Indications for CGMS are:112, level III
• failure to achieve individual’s glycaemic target (HbA1c) despite
optimal use of intensive insulin regimens
• suspected nocturnal hypoglycaemia and/or early morning
hyperglycaemia
• suspected unrecognised hypoglycaemia e.g. exceptionally low
HbA1c without reported hypoglycaemia
• recurrent severe hypoglycaemia and hypoglycaemia unawareness
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Self-monitoring of urinary or blood ketones
Urine or blood ketones measurement should be monitored during
episodes of uncontrolled hyperglycaemia, intercurrent illness (sick
days) and impending ketoacidosis:8
• especially with presence of abdominal pains, vomiting, drowsiness
or rapid breathing
• when there is persistent BG levels >14 mmol/L (250 mg/dL)
However in local setting, the blood ketone strips are expensive and
urinary ketone strips for self-monitoring are not widely available or
affordable.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
14. SPECIAL SITUATIONS
In children and adolescents with T1DM, there are special circumstances
when glucose metabolism is significantly altered, requiring additional
monitoring of BG and/or adjustment of the patients’ daily insulin
dose. The school or daycare setting also presents challenges in the
management of the patients with T1DM. The healthcare team needs
to provide clear guidance to patients and their caregivers on how to
manage these special situations.
14.1 Sick Day
Some illnesses, especially those associated with fever, raise BG levels
because of higher levels of stress hormones promoting gluconeogenesis
and insulin resistance. Illness often increases ketone body production
due to inadequate insulin levels leading increased insulin requirement.
The increased need for insulin may persist for a few days after recovery
from an illness due to insulin resistance.
In contrast, illness associated with vomiting and diarrhoea (e.g.
viral gastroenteritis) may lower BG with the increased possibility of
hypoglycaemia. Decreased food intake, poorer absorption and a slower
emptying of the stomach or overt diarrhoea with more rapid transit
during gastroenteritis may contribute to such hypoglycaemia.
Healthcare providers should provide clear guidance to patients and
their caregivers on the management of diabetes during intercurrent
illnesses. The patients and their caregivers should know the contacts
of emergency medical service during this period. Education on sick
day management should be given to patients and their caregivers
periodically to avoid complications such as DKA, dehydration, uncontrolled
hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia.8
The insulin dose usually needs to be increased when there is fever
or intercurrent illness, based on frequent BG and urine/blood ketone
measurements.8 Guidelines for insulin adjustment during sick days are
shown in Table 6.
• General Principles of Diabetes Sick Day Management:8
1. DO NOT STOP INSULIN.
2. Monitor BG and ketone (urine or blood) more frequently.
3. Monitor and maintain electrolytes and water balance.
4. Patients and their caregivers should be taught on sick day
management guidelines soon after diagnosis and periodically
thereafter.
5. Treat the underlying precipitating illness.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Table 6. Guidelines for insulin adjustment during sick days
Refer to Chapter 8 for the Insulin Dose Adjustment.
Modified: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
Pediatric Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
Ketones
Blood Glucose
Blood
ketones
mmol/L
<0.6
0.6 - 1.4
1.5 - 2.9
>3.0
Urine
ketones
Negative
or trace
Trace,
small to
moderate
Moderate
to large
Large
<5.5 mmol/L
• Do not
give extra
insulin
• Recheck
BG &
ketones in
2 hours
• Starvation
ketones
• Extra
carb &
fluid are
needed
• High
levels of
starvation
ketones
• Check BG
meter
• Recheck
BG &
ketones
• Extra carb
& fluid are
needed
• Very high
levels of
starvation
ketones
• Check BG
meter
• Recheck
BG &
ketones
• Extra carb
& fluid
are
needed
5.5 to 10
mmol/L
No insulin
adjustment
needed
• Starvation
ketones
• Extra
carb &
fluid are
needed
• No insulin
adjustment
needed
• High levels
of
starvation
ketones
• Extra
carb &
fluid are
needed
• Give 5% of
TDD or
0.05 IU/kg;
repeat
insulin
dose when
BG has
risen
• Very high
levels of
starvation
ketones
• Extra carb
& fluid are
needed.
• Give 5% of
TDD or
0.05 IU/kg;
repeat
insulin
dose when
BG has
risen
>10 to 14
mmol/L
Add correction
dose of
insulin
according to
ISF
• Extra carb
& fluid may
be needed
• Give 5 -
10% of
TDD or
0.05 - 0.1
IU/kg
• Extra carb
& fluid are
needed
• Give 10%
of TDD or
0.1 IU/kg
• Extra carb
& fluid are
needed
• Give 10%
of TDD or
0.1 IU/kg
>14 to 22
mmol/L
Give extra
5% of TDD or
0.05 IU/kg
Give extra 5 -
10% of TDD
or 0.05 - 0.1
IU/kg
>22 mmol/L
• Give extra 10% of
TDD or 0.1 IU/kg
• Repeat if needed
• Give extra 10% of
TDD or 0.1 IU/kg
• Repeat if needed
Give extra 10 - 20% of TDD or 0.1
IU/kg; repeat insulin dose after 2
hours if ketones do not decrease
Give extra 10 - 20% of TDD or 0.1
IU/kg; repeat insulin dose after 2
hours if ketones do not decrease
There is an immediate risk of ketoacidosis if the blood ketone level is ≥3.0 mmol/L.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Vomiting in a sick child or adolescent with diabetes should be considered
as a sign of insulin deficiency until proven otherwise. (Blood ketones
are preferred over urine ketones if available. Aim for a BG between 4
and 10 mmol/L and blood ketones below 0.6 mmol/L.8
Refer to Chapter 6 on Diabetes Ketoacidosis (Diagnosis).
• URGENT medical consultation must be obtained when a child or
adolescent with T1DM has the following features:8
 persistent fever or the underlying illness is unclear
 caregivers are uncomfortable in providing home care
 weight loss suggesting dehydration and potential circulatory
compromise
 persistent vomiting beyond two hours (particularly in young
children)
 altered neurological status (e.g. mental confusion and loss of
consciousness) and seizures which may indicate impending
cerebral oedema
Emergency medical consultation should be facilitated including transfer
of patients to the hospital.
Recommendation 15
• For management of patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus during sick
days:
 insulin should not be omitted
 blood glucose and blood/urine ketone should be monitored more
frequently
 insulin dose should be adjusted accordingly
14.2 Eating Out
Children and adolescents with T1DM should be allowed to eat out at
restaurant, festival, parties or “kenduri” to the same extent as their
friends. To ensure that target BG range is maintained when eating
out, patients and their caregivers should practise carb counting and
insulin adjustment based on the food consumed and level of physical
activities.113 - 114, level III
The following advice on eating out should be given to patients with
T1DM and their caregivers:113 - 114, level III
• occasional sugary food treats may not provoke hyperglycaemia if
 physical activity levels are high
 insulin dose adjustments are made based on carbohydrate
counting, ICR and ISF
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• additional (rapid-acting or short-acting) insulin may be useful to
prevent or treat hyperglycemia
• BG level should be checked before and after eating out, and the
results documented. This infomation will guide patients and their
caregivers in planning for similar future occasions
• when eating out, the meal may be served later than usual; to
avoid hypoglycaemia, adjust the administration of meal insulin in
accordance to the timing of carbohydrate consumption
Recommendation 16
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus having meals outside home
should adjust the dose and timing of meal insulin accordingly.
 Pre- and post-meal blood glucose should be checked when eating
out.
14.3 Fasting during Ramadan
Fasting from dawn till sunset, during the month of Ramadan is
obligatory for Muslims. During this period, one has to abstain from
eating and drinking. Islam has allowed various categories of people
to be exempted from fasting, for example young children, sick people
and travellers. Major risks associated with fasting in diabetic patients
include hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia, DKA, dehydration and
thrombosis. Nevertheless, many patients with T1DM insist on fasting
during Ramadan. Those who intend to fast should have good glycaemic
control, perform regular self-monitoring and be under professional
supervision.
Patients with T1DM and the following features are at very high risk for
complications during fasting:115, level III
• severe hypoglycaemia within three months prior to Ramadan
• history of recurrent hypoglycaemia
• hypoglycaemia unawareness
• poor glycaemic control
• DKA within three months prior to Ramadan
• acute illness
• pregnancy
• chronic dialysis
These patients are discouraged from fasting.
Management plan for patients with T1DM who intend to fast should be
individualised:115, level III
a. Ramadan-focused patient education
Ramadan-focused diabetes education includes the following:
• Meal planning and dietary advice
• SMBG
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• Adjustment and compliance to insulin therapy
• Focus on the causation, early recognition and emergency
management of hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia, dehydration
and impending DKA
• Timing and intensity of physical activity
b. Pre-Ramadan medical assessment
• Preferably undertaken 1 - 2 months before the fasting month
starts
• Include physical status, glycaemic status and appropriate blood
tests
• Evaluation for any acute and chronic complications, and individual
risk stratification to identify those not fit to fast
c. Diet and nutrition
• Avoidance of large amount of foods rich in carbohydrate and fat
during ‘iftar’
• Consumption of complex carbohydrate (slow-digesting foods)
during ‘sahur’ (taken as late as possible) will result in delayed
digestion and absorption
• Balanced diet with inclusion of fruits, vegetables, lentils, yogurt
and cereal
• Liberal fluid intake during non-fasting hours
d. Exercise and physical activity
• Maintain normal level of physical activity
• Avoid rigorous exercise during fasting hours
e. Monitoring glycaemic status
• Blood testing or insulin injection is allowed during fasting (under
Fatwa law)
• Encourage patients to do frequent SMBG
• Check urine/blood for ketone if BG is high (>14 mmol/L)
f. Indications to break the fast
• BG levels are low (<4 mmol/L) or experiences signs/symptoms of
hypoglycaemia
• BG level is >16.7 mmol/L
• Patient is unwell
g. Insulin regimens
Fasting during Ramadan in T1DM is safe with adjustment of insulin
dose and regular BG monitoring.116, level II-2; 117, level III
• Insulin adjustment in patients on basal-bolus regimen115, level III
 Reduction of basal insulin by 10 - 20% and further if needed.
 Use rapid-acting insulin with meal and perform carbohydrate
counting.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
 If glucose rises above 15 mmol/L, a correction dose of rapidacting insulin should be given.
 If long-acting and rapid-acting insulin are unavailable, it may be
sufficient to use intermediate-acting and short-acting insulin.
• Insulin adjustment in patients on two-dose insulin regimen
Premixed insulins are not recommended for paediatric use.8
In a small study, 60% of patients with T1DM on conventional twicea-day regimen were able to fast safely with proper education and
intensive follow-up.118, level III Patients are advised to change their
insulin dosages such that they take combined intermediate- and
short-acting insulin before iftar (break fast), which is their usual
morning dose, and only short-acting insulin before sahur (predawn meal) at a dose of 0.1 - 0.2 IU/kg.115, level III
• Insulin adjustment in patients on three-dose insulin regimen
115, level III
 Use short-acting insulin during sahur and iftar.
 Use intermediate-acting insulin in the late evening.
 Perform frequent SMBG especially
- before iftar and three hours afterwards
- before sahur and two hours afterwards
 Adjust insulin dose accordingly.
• Insulin adjustment in patients on insulin pump115, level III
Fasting during Ramadan can be successfully accomplished by
patients with T1DM if they are fully educated and metabolically
stable. Most will need to reduce their basal infusion rate while
adjusting the bolus doses to cover the sahur and iftar.
Recommendation 17
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus who intend to fast should receive
Ramadan-focused patient education and follow individualised
management plan.
14.4 Schooling
Schools and daycare centres have an important role in providing
appropriate diabetes care to ensure that patients with T1DM can
participate fully and safely in their activities and achieve optimal
academic performance.
Individualised diabetes medical management plan in school/daycare
centre include:119, level III
• blood glucose monitoring: frequency and circumstances
• insulin administration: doses/injection times
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• meals and snacks: food content, amounts and timing
• recognition and appropriate treatment of hypoglycaemia/
hyperglycaemia
• participation in physical activity
Schools/daycare centres need to provide the following:119, level III
• availability of knowledgeable person in the immediate treatment of
hypoglycaemia
• a suitable place for blood glucose monitoring and insulin
administration
• permission to carry equipment (including medic alert bracelet) and
medication
• permission to snack and drink anywhere if necessary
Hypoglycaemia can occur in patients with T1DM during and after
physical activities. It can be prevented by monitoring BG levels before
and after exercises, adjusting insulin doses and having supplemental
snacks.120, level III During long school examinations, blood glucose
should be checked immediately prior to and midway to detect hypo/
hyperglycaemia.8
Recommendation 18
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus should have individualised
diabetes medical management plan in school/daycare centre.
14.5 Travelling
During long distance travel, patients with T1DM need to plan in advance
and seek advice wherever necessary. They and their caregivers should
be offered education on the practical issues related to such travel.121
The differing conditions during travel such as sitting still for long hours
when in a plane or car, eating food with different carbohydrate contents
and the excitement of being in a new place may increase the BG
level.113, level III
High altitude, heat and humidity can sometimes affect meters and
test strips. Be aware of possible false readings.122, level III The pressure
differences in the cabin can lead to air bubbles accumulation in the
insulin cartridges. Leaving the needle on the pen during the flight will
allow for pressure equalisation. After landing, prime the insulin injection
device to remove any air bubbles before injection.113, level III
Management of insulin pump therapy during air travel:123, level III
• Before takeoff, disconnect the pump.
• At cruising altitude, take the cartridge out of the pump and remove
any air bubbles before re-connecting.
• After landing, disconnect the pump and prime the line with 2 IU of
insulin before re-connecting.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Practical advice for patients with T1DM who intend to travel long
distance:113, level III; 122, level III
• Bring a letter from the attending doctor certifying the condition and
treatment.
• Bring a diabetes identity card or medic alert bracelet if available.
• Take extra supply of insulin, needles, pens and SMBG equipment.
• If travelling with others, split the amount of insulin supply between
each passenger’s hand luggage just in case one of the luggage is
lost.
• Do not keep insulin in check-in luggage, as there may be extreme
temperature excursions at high altitudes.
• Bring a cool bag to store extra insulin.
• Bring carbohydrate (glucose tablets, sweets, snacks and juices) in the
hand luggage to cover any travelling delays in case of hypoglycaemia.
• Find out the types, formulations and strengths of insulin which are
available in the area of destination.
Adjustment of insulin doses during long distance air travel113, level III; 122, level III
During travelling, insulin adjustment for patients with T1DM is advised
as the following:
• Frequent BG monitoring
• Extra doses of mealtime insulin needs to be considered if extra
meals are taken
• Timing of insulin administration needs to be adjusted according to
the new time zone.
 Travelling north or south does not require any changes in 24hour schedule.
 Travelling east will shorten the day and therefore require less
insulin.
 Travelling west will lengthen the day and therefore require more
insulin.
Recommendation 19
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus who wish to travel should have
appropriate education and planning with their health care team*.
*Refer to yellow box above
14.6 Surgery
Surgery in children and adolescents with diabetes should be performed
at centres with appropriate personnel and facilities. Careful liaison
between surgical, anaesthetic and children’s diabetes care teams is
crucial before admission to the hospital for elective surgery and as soon
as possible after admission for emergency surgery.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Management of T1DM children and adolescents undergoing surgery
depends on whether the surgery is major or minor.8
a. Features of minor surgery/procedure:
• requires brief general anaesthesia (GA) or no GA
• duration of surgery usually <2 hours
• should not have a major impact on glycaemic control
• patients can usually be discharged from the hospital on the day of
surgery
• include common daycare surgical procedures
b. Features of major surgery:
• requires prolonged GA
• duration of surgery usually ≥2 hours
• greater risks of metabolic decompensation
• patients are unlikely to be discharged from the hospital on the day
of surgery
Pre-surgical assessment8
• Assessment of glycaemic control, electrolyte status and ketones
should be done several days before surgery.
• If necessary, delay the surgery until glycaemic control has improved.
• If surgery cannot be delayed, admit the patient to the hospital for
stabilisation of glycaemic control prior to surgery.
Pre-surgical care8
• Patients receiving GA must be admitted to the hospital.
• Schedule the surgery as the first case of the day.
• All patients will require insulin despite fasting to avoid DKA.
• In minor surgery, patients treated with basal/bolus insulin regimen
or CSII may initially receive an IV infusion without dextrose except
those treated with intermediate-acting insulin.
• In major surgery, IV infusion of dextrose (dextrose 5 - 10%) and
frequent BG monitoring are essential. Bedside monitoring of ketone
is useful to detect ketonaemia.
• In emergency surgery:
 check BG, blood/urine ketone concentration and serum electrolytes
 if ketone is positive or BG levels are high, check blood gases
 if DKA is present, treat the DKA and delay the surgery
Intraoperative care8
• Hourly BG monitoring
• Dextrose infusion and insulin need to be adjusted to maintain BG in
the range 5 - 10 mmol/L
• Constant IV insulin infusion is significantly better than SC insulin
regime in achieving glycaemic control in the perioperative period.
124, level II-1
For adjustment of insulin regimen during minor surgery, refer to Table 7.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Table 7. Adjustment of insulin regimen during minor surgery
*Commence IV fluids containing dextrose 5 - 10%, as necessary, to
prevent hypoglycaemia. Alternatively, IV insulin infusion may be started.
Modified: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
Pediatric Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
Adjustment of insulin regimen during major surgery:8
• on the evening before surgery, give the usual evening and/or bedtime
insulin(s) and bedtime snack
• omit the usual morning insulin dose
• start IV insulin infusion at least two hours before surgery and provide
IV maintenance fluids consisting of 5% dextrose and half-normal
saline [0.45% natrium chloride (NaCL)] (refer to Table 8)
Insulin regimen
Twice daily basal
(intermediate-acting
insulin, insulin
detemir or insulin
glargine) and rapidacting or short-acting
insulin
Twice daily with
premixed insulin
Basal-bolus regimen
CSII
Management (morning surgeries)
• On the morning of the procedure, give 50%
of the usual morning dose of intermediateacting insulin or the full usual morning dose
of long-acting insulin (detemir or glargine).
• Omit the rapid-acting or short-acting
insulin unless it is needed to correct
hyperglycaemia.*
• Give only 50% of the equivalent dose of
the basal (intermediate-acting insulin)
component.*
• If the usual basal insulin is in the morning,
give the usual dose of long-acting insulin
(glargine or detemir) in the morning of the
surgery.
• Consider reducing the dose of the longacting insulin by 20 - 30% if pre-surgical
assessment shows persistent low BG
levels in the morning.
• Omit the rapid-acting or short-acting insulin
unless needed to correct hyperglycaemia.*
• CSII may be continued during procedure.
• Secure the placement of SC infusion
cannula away from surgical site.
• Continue to infuse at the usual basal rate
of insulin if the GA is short (<2 hours).
• Avoid unnecessary bolus dose of rapidacting insulin.*
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Table 8. Fluid and insulin infusion guides
for surgical procedures
Example of fluid maintenance calculation:
(Maximum 2000 mL female, 2500 mL male)
Preparation of insulin dilution:
• Add soluble (short-acting) insulin 50 IU to 50 mL normal saline
(0.9% NaCl), making a solution of 1 IU insulin/mL; attach to syringe
pump and label clearly.
BG (mmol/L)
Infusion rate
<6 - 7
start infusion at 0.025 IU/kg/hour
8 - 12
0.05 IU/kg/hour
12 - 15
0.075 IU/kg/hour
>15
0.1 IU/kg/hour
• Adjust insulin infusion hourly to maintain blood glucose between 5
and 10 mmol/L.
• Monitor BG hourly.
• If BG <5 - 6 mmol/L, reduce the rate of insulin infusion but do not
stop the insulin infusion (to avoid rebound hyperglycaemia).
• If BG <4 mmol/L, the insulin infusion may be stopped temporarily
(not >15 min).
(i)
Maintenance fluid
Dextrose (for
major surgery and
any surgery when
intermediate-acting
insulin has been
given)
Sodium
Potassium
• Use 5% dextrose; 10% if there is concern
about hypoglycaemia.
• If BG >14 mmol/L, use half-normal saline
(0.45% NaCl) without dextrose and increase
insulin infusion.
• Once BG <14 mmol/L, add 5% dextrose.
• Use saline 0.45 - 0.9% (77 - 154 mmol/L).
• Change to 0.9% saline if plasma sodium
concentration is decreasing.
• Monitor electrolytes.
*There may be a risk of acute hyponatraemia
when hypotonic maintenance solutions (i.e.
<0.9% NaCl) are used.
• Add potassium chloride 20 mmol to each litre
of IV fluid after surgery.
• Add potassium only if infusion is required for
>12 hours.
For each kg between
For each kg between
For each kg over
Body weight (kg)
3 - 9
10 - 20
20
Fluid requirement per 24
hours
100 mL/kg
Add an additional 50 mL/kg
Add an additional 20 mL/kg
(ii) Insulin infusion
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Post-surgical care
• Resume patient’s usual diabetes regimen once tolerating orally.
Recommendation 20
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus who require surgery should be
referred to hospitals with appropriate personnel and facilities.
 Pre-operative assessment of glycaemic control, electrolyte status
and ketones should be done in advance.
 Surgery should be scheduled as the first case of the day.
 To avoid diabetic ketoacidosis, all patients will require insulin
despite fasting.
 Blood glucose monitoring during surgery should be performed
hourly and insulin infusion rate adjusted to maintain blood glucose
in the range of 5 - 10 mmol/L.
14.7 Partial Remission Phase
In many young patients with T1DM, insulin requirements decrease
transiently following initiation of insulin treatment. This partial remission
phase (honeymoon period) is defined as insulin requirements of <0.5
IU/kg/day with an HbA1c <7%. The onset starts within days or weeks of
insulin therapy initiation and may persist for weeks to months. BG levels
are frequently stable within the target range, despite fluctuations in diet
and exercise. The probability of partial remission phase is reduced in
those with DKA at presentation and young age.8
Recommendation 21
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and caregivers should receive
education on the transient nature of the partial remission phase.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
15. SUPPLEMENTS/COMPLEMENTARY MEDICATIONS
Complementary and alternative medicine may include medicinal (such
as herbal remedies, dietary supplements, vitamins and minerals,
naturopathic and homeopathic remedies) or nonmedicinal remedies
(such as chiropractic, osteopathy and naturopathy).
Patients with T1DM and their caregivers should be informed about the
danger of omitting insulin when seeking alternative treatments. DKA
and death due to insulin omission have been reported and therefore
patients should never reduce or omit insulin unnecessarily while on
alternative treatment.125, level III
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of supplements or
complementary medications in patients with T1DM. Unsupervised use
may cause adverse effects to the patients.
Recommendation 22
• Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and their caregivers should be
informed that unsupervised use of supplements or complementary
medications may cause adverse events.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
16. LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS
In Malaysia, the common T1DM complications detected in children
older than 10 years are microalbuminuria (7.3%), nephropathy (3.2%),
retinopathy (2.4%) and neuropathy (0.8%). Good metabolic control
(HbA1c <7.5%) is only seen in 25.0% of the patients while more than half
of them (54.2%) have poor metabolic control with HbA1c >10.0%.4, level III
Apart from that, only 11.3% carried the medic alert and almost all did not
keep glucagon at home. A substantial proportion of patients with T1DM
reported that they had consultation with the dietitian (41.1%), diabetes
nurse educator (30.7%), ophthalmologist (55.7%) and psychologist
(4.0%) in the past 12 months. Approximately 11.0% reported having
participated in diabetes camp in the past 12 months.4, level III
It is important to maintain good glycaemic control in patients with T1DM
to prevent long-term complications. The suggested screening schedule
is shown in the table below.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Table 9. Screening, risk factors and interventions
for vascular complications in T1DM
ACEi=angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB=angiotensin
receptor blocker; BMI=body mass index; blood pressure (BP)
Modified: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
Pediatric Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
Retinopathy
Nephropathy
Neuropathy
Macrovascular
disease
• Start at age
10 or at
onset of
puberty if
this is
earlier, after
2 - 5 years’
diabetes
duration
• Annually
thereafter
• Start at age
10 or at
onset of
puberty if
this is
earlier, after
2 - 5 years’
diabetes
duration
• Annually
thereafter
Unclear
After age 10
years
• Fundal
photography
or
• Mydriatic
ophthalmo-
scopy (less
sensitive)
• Urinary
albumin:
creatinine
ratio (ACR)
or
• First morning
urinary
albumin
concentration
or
• Timed urine
collections
for albumin
excretion
rates (AER)
History and
physical
examination
• Lipid profile
every 5
years
• BP annually
• Improved
glycaemic
control
• Laser therapy
• Improved
glycaemic
control
• ACEi or
ARB
• BP control
Improved
glycaemic
control
• Improved
glycaemic
control
• BP control
• Statins
• Hyperglycaemia
• High BP
• Lipid
abnormalities
• Higher BMI
• Hyperglycaemia
• High BP
• Lipid
abnormalities
• Smoking
• Hyperglycaemia
• Higher BMI
• Hyperglycaemia
• High BP
• Lipid
abnormalities
• Higher BMI
• Smoking
Complications
Risk factors
Screening
schedule
Screening
methods
Potential
interventions
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
16.1 Nephropathy
The incidence of persistent microalbuminuria was 4.6/1,000 patientyears (95% CI 3.3 to 6.1) in Australian youth with a mean HbA1c
of 8.4%. The group that developed microalbuminuria had a higher
HbA1c (9.1%); median diabetes duration at the onset of persistent
microalbuminuria was 9.3 years and the earliest case was 1.6 years
after diagnosis of diabetes.126, level II-3
Risk factors for microalbuminuria are:127, level III
• hypertension (p=0.001)
• higher HbA1c levels (p=0.001)
• longer diabetes duration (p=0.036)
• dyslipidaemia (p=0.034)
The first clinical sign of nephropathy is elevation of albumin excretion.
This is generally defined as any of those below:8
i. AER of 20 - 200 μg/min
ii. AER of 30 - 300 mg/24 hours
iii. albumin concentration of 30 - 300 mg/L (early morning urine sample)
iv. ACR 2.5 - 25 mg/mmol in males and 3.5 - 25 mg/mmol in females
(early morning urine sample)
Spot urine ACR is closely correlated with 24-hours urine albumin
excretion in patients with T1DM (R2=0.828, p<0.001).128, level III
Because of biological variability, two of three consecutive urine
collections over a period of 3 - 6 months should be used as evidence
of microalbuminuria. Abnormal screening tests should be repeated as
microalbuminuria may not be persistent.8
When interpreting urine microalbuminuria, false positive results should
be considered which may occur in the following conditions:8
• exercise
• menstrual bleeding
• infections
• fever
• kidney diseases
• marked hyperglycaemia
ACEi or ARB should be used in adolescent patients with persistent
microalbuminuria to prevent progression to proteinuria. An important
safety issue related to the use of both medications is the potential risk
of congenital malformation when used during pregnancy. Therefore,
adolescent girls need to be informed about this risk and advised on
contraception before starting medication.8 Patients with transient
microalbuminuria generally do not need to be treated with ACEi or ARB.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
16.2 Retinopathy
Assessment for retinopathy in patients with T1DM should be performed
by an ophthalmologist or any trained healthcare provider through
dilated pupils. Initial eye examination should also be considered to
detect major refractive errors or cataracts. The frequency of retinopathy
screening in general should be done annually and more frequently if
there are high risk features for visual loss. Biennial assessment by
fundal photography should be performed for those with:8
• diabetes duration <10 years
• minimal background retinopathy on fundus photography
• reasonable glycaemic control
The prevalence of diabetic retinopathy is higher in pubertal than in prepubertal patients, for any grade of diabetic retinopathy (p=0.002).129, level III
At 10 years follow-up in EDIC study, adults in the former intensive group
continued to show slower progression of diabetic retinopathy than those
in the conventional group (hazard reduction of 56%, p<0.0001). However,
this beneficial effect was not seen in adolescents (hazard reduction of
32%, p=0.13).68, level II-2
16.3 Neuropathy
Based on nerve conduction study, 57% of children with a mean
diabetes duration of 8.1+2.6 years and a mean HbA1c of 9.0+1.0% had
diabetic neuropathy. Using nerve conduction study as a gold standard,
the sensitivity and specificity of vibration perception thresholds were
62% and 65% respectively, while the sensitivity and specificity of tactile
perception thresholds were 19% and 64% respectively.130, level III
16.4 Macrovascular Complications
Aortic intima media thickness is greater in T1DM children compared with
control subjects (p<0.001). It is correlated with HbA1c (r=0.31, p=0.01)
and is independently associated with age (p=0.001) and low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol level (p=0.001). Vascular function is worse
in children with T1DM who have an aortic intima media thickness >95th
percentile compared with control subjects.131, level II-2
Factors independently correlated with carotid intima media thickness in
children are:132, level II-2
• type 1 diabetes (p<0.001)
• systolic blood pressure (p<0.001)
• LDL cholesterol level (p<0.001)
Age-adjusted pulse wave velocity-trunk (aorto-femoral) indicating vascular
stiffness is higher in subjects with T1DM than non-diabetic subjects
(p<0.05).133, level II-2
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Recommendation 23
• Screening for vascular complications of type 1 diabetes mellitus
should be done to detect early changes and reduce the risk of longterm complications.
 Screening for retinopathy and microalbuminuria should start from
10 years of age or at pubertal onset, with 2 - 5 year diabetes
duration*.
*Refer to Table 9.
16.5 Other Complications
i. Dyslipidaemia
Young patients with T1DM demonstrate significantly higher levels of
total cholesterol, LDL, triglyceride, lipoprotein(a) and apolipoprotein B
compared to non-diabetics.134, level III
Screening for dyslipidaemia should be done soon after diagnosis in
all children with T1DM aged >10 years old. If the result is normal, it
should be repeated every five years. In those with strong family history
of hypercholesterolaemia, premature cardiovascular disease or if the
family history is unknown, screening should be performed as early as
two years old.8 Refer to Table 9.
If the LDL is high (>2.6 mmol/L), intervention to improve metabolic
control, dietary changes and exercise should be emphasised. Although
long-term safety is not established, statin should be considered in
children >10 years old if LDL is >4.1 mmol/L (or >3.4 mmol/L if one
or more cardiovascular risk factors is present) despite the above
interventions.8
Recommendation 24
• Lipid profile should be screened every five years in patients with
type 1 diabetes mellitus aged >10 years old or at an earlier age
if there is family history of premature cardiovascular disease or
hypercholestrolaemia.
ii. Hypertension
Hypertension is defined as average systolic blood pressure and/or
diastolic pressure (measurements on ≥3 occasions) >95th percentile
for gender, age and height on three occasions. Confirmation of
hypertension may be assisted by 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure
measurements. Pre-hypertension is defined as BP that is between
90thand 95th percentile.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
The prevalence of hypertension in young patients with T1DM based
on ambulatory blood pressure monitoring is 28.4%.135, level III In a study
on patients with average HbA1c between 6.5 to 10.7%, the cumulative
mortality rate was 35% in adulthood from coronary artery disease
compared with 4 - 8% in the general population. Female adolescents
and young adults with T1DM have more centrally distributed fat than
male which increases their cardiovascular risk.136, level III ACEi are
recommended for use in children with diabetes and hypertension. They
have been shown to be effective and safe in children in short-term
studies but are not safe during pregnancy.8
BP should be measured with an appropriate cuff at least annually in
patients with T1DM. Refer to Table 9.
Recommendation 25
• Blood pressure should be measured at least annually in patients
with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
iii. Limited joint mobility
Limited joint mobility (LJM) is a bilateral painless contracture of the
finger joints and large joints, and associated with tight skin. It can be
demonstrated by asking the patient to approximate palmar surfaces of
the interphalangeal joints. Passive examination is essential to confirm
that inability to do so is due to LJM. This deformity usually appears
after the age of 10 years. The progression from mild to moderate or
severe changes ranges from a few months to four years, following
which stabilisation occurs. For every unit increase in average HbA1c,
there is an approximately 46% increase risk of developing LJM. LJM is
associated with a two- to four-fold risk for retinopathy, nephropathy and
neuropathy.8
iv. Lipodystrophy (lipoatrophy and lipohypertrophy)
Lipohypertrophy is a frequent complication of insulin therapy. It has
been found up to 48% in those with T1DM and is associated with higher
HbA1c, greater number of injections and longer duration of diabetes.
The lesion can be detected by both visualisation and palpation of the
injecting sites. The affected site cannot be pinched tightly together in
contrast to normal skin. The independent risk factors for lipohypertrophy
are:8
• lack of rotation in injection sites
• use of small injection zones
• reuse of needles
Insulin may be absorbed unpredictably from these areas, affecting
BG control. Treatment of lipohypertrophy involves avoidance of the
affected sites for at least 2 - 3 months, while prevention strategies
include avoidance of its risk factors as mentioned above.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
With the use of human insulin, lipoatrophy is now rarely seen and is
reported in <1% of patients with T1DM. It has also been associated
with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and coeliac disease resulting in speculation
that an immune complex-mediated inflammation may contribute to its
development.8
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
17. REFERRAL
The ongoing care of children and adolescents with T1DM requires
the care of a specialised diabetes team consists of paediatric
endocrinologists, paediatricians, paediatric diabetes nurses, dietitians,
psychologists/psychiatrists
and
often
consultations
with
the
ophthalmologists. In hospitals without these services, paediatric
endocrine specialists can provide consultation at intervals to guide the
management of complicated cases. The recommendations for referral
to paediatric endocrine service below are formulated based on the
expert opinion of the DG CPG.
Recommendation 26
• Referral of children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus
to paediatric endocrinologists should be made in the following
conditions:
 uncertainty with classification of diabetes
 difficult metabolic control
 concomitant co-morbidities and other management issues
 inadequate resources and expertise in management
18. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of T1DM at all healthcare
levels in Malaysia by using an evidence-based CPG. This aims to prevent
long-term morbidity and mortality.
a. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
i. wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hard- and
soft-copies)
ii. regular T1DM update for healthcare providers
iii. national T1DM registry (DiCARE)
iv. diabetes camp
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
i. poor
understanding/limited
knowledge
on
diagnosis
and
management of the T1DM
ii. insufficient resources in the management of T1DM:
• expertise: paediatric endocrinologist, pediatrician with a special
interest in diabetes, child psychiatrist, psychologist, clinical
paediatric nurse educator, paediatric-trained dietitian
• diagnostic tools: antibody testing and blood ketone monitoring
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
• medications: insulin analog
• medical equipments: glucometer, glucose testing strips, lancets,
insulin pump, CGMS
iii. variation in clinical management and preferences
b. Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:-
i. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare
providers via printed and electronic copies
ii. train (with adequate funding) healthcare providers by regular
seminars or workshops to provide up-to-date information
iii. provide sufficient resources in the management of T1DM
including expertise, diagnostic tools, medications and medical
equipment
iv. develop and disseminate patient education materials through
various activities such as diabetes camp
v. ensure sustainability of DiCARE
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are
proposed as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
*Target: 90%
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH. They are such as a Quick Reference and a Training
Module.
Percentage of patients
with T1DM who have
at least one HbA1c
per year*
Number of patients with T1DM
who have at least one HbA1c per year
=
in a period
x 100%
Total number of patients with T1DM
in the same period
Percentage of patients
with T1DM having
reduction in HbA1c by
at least 0.5%
from the previous
reading
Number of patients with T1DM
having reduction in HbA1c by at least 0.5%
= from the previous reading in a period x 100%
Total number of patients with T1DM
in the same period
Percentage of patients
with T1DM admitted
due to DKA*
Number of patients with T1DM
= admitted due to DKA in a period x 100%
Total number of patients with T1DM on
follow-up in the same period
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
References
1.
Zhao Z, Sun C, Wang C, et al. Rapidly rising incidence of childhood type 1 diabetes in Chinese
population: epidemiology in Shanghai during 1997-2011. Acta Diabetol. 2014;51(6):947-953.
2.
Lin WH, Wang MC, Wang WM, et al. Incidence of and mortality from Type I diabetes in Taiwan
from 1999 through 2010: a nationwide cohort study. PLoS One. 2014;9(1):e86172.
3.
Tajima N, Morimoto A. Epidemiology of childhood diabetes mellitus in Japan. Pediatr Endocrinol
Rev. 2012;10 Suppl 1:44-50.
4.
Fuziah MZ, Janet HYH, Wu LL, et al. 2nd Annual Report of the Diabetes in Children and
Adolescents Registry (DiCARE) 2006-2008. Kuala Lumpur: DiCARE; 2012.
5.
Brook CGD, Clayton P, Brown R, et al. Brook’s Clinical Pediatric Endocrinology, Sixth Edition
Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.
6.
Chiang JL, Kirkman MS, Laffel LM, et al. Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook Authors. Type 1 diabetes
through the life span: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care.
2014;37(7):2034-2054.
7.
World Health Organization. Definition and Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus and Intermediate
Hyperglycaemia. Geneva: WHO; 2006.
8.
International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD). Pediatic Diabetes. Oxford:
Wiley Blackwell; 2014.
9.
Diabetes in Children and Adolescents. (Available at http://www.msdmanuals.com/professional/
pediatrics/endocrine-disorders-in-children/diabetes-in-children-and-adolescents).
10.
Erlich H, Valdes AM, Noble J, et al. HLA DR-DQ haplotypes and genotypes and type 1 diabetes
risk: analysis of the type 1 diabetes genetics consortium families. Diabetes. 2008;57(4):10841092.
11.
Lambert AP, Gillespie KM, Thomson G, et al. Absolute risk of childhood-onset type 1 diabetes
defined by human leukocyte antigen class II genotype: a population-based study in the United
Kingdom. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89(8):4037-4043.
12.
Knip M, Korhonen S, Kulmala P, et al. Prediction of type 1 diabetes in the general population.
Diabetes Care. 2010;33(6):1206-1212.
13.
Harder T, Roepke K, Diller N, et al. Birth weight, early weight gain, and subsequent risk of type 1
diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169(12):1428-1436.
14.
Hyppönen E, Virtanen SM, Kenward MG, et al. Obesity, increased linear growth, and risk of type
1 diabetes in children. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(12):1755-1760.
15.
EURODIAB Substudy 2 Study Group. Rapid early growth is associated with increased risk of
childhood type 1 diabetes in various European populations. Diabetes Care. 2002;25(10):17551760.
16.
Yeung WC, Rawlinson WD, Craig ME. Enterovirus infection and type 1 diabetes mellitus:
systematic review and meta-analysis of observational molecular studies. BMJ. 2011;342:d35.
17.
Pundziute-Lyckå A, Persson LA, Cedermark G, et al. Diet, growth, and the risk for type 1 diabetes
in childhood: a matched case-referent study. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(12):2784-2789.
18.
Zipitis CS, Akobeng AK. Vitamin D supplementation in early childhood and risk of type 1 diabetes:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Dis Child. 2008;93(6):512-517.
19.
Hyppönen E, Läärä E, Reunanen A, et al. Intake of vitamin D and risk of type 1 diabetes: a birthcohort study. Lancet. 2001;358(9292):1500-1503.
20.
Henry EB, Patterson CC, Cardwell CR. A meta-analysis of the association between preeclampsia and childhood-onset Type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med. 2011;28(8):900-905.
21.
DeStefano F, Mullooly JP, Okoro CA, et al. Childhood vaccinations, vaccination timing, and risk
of type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pediatrics. 2001;108(6):E112.
22.
Kota SK, Meher LK, Jammula S, et al. Clinical profile of coexisting conditions in type 1 diabetes
mellitus patients. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2012;6(2):70-76.
23.
Shiva S, Ilkhchooyi F, Rezamand A. Thyroid autoimmunity at the onset of type 1 diabetes
mellitus in children. Open J Immunol. 2013;3(1):37-40.
24.
Kordonouri O, Klinghammer A, Lang EB, et al. Thyroid autoimmunity in children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: a multicenter survey. Diabetes Care. 2002;25(8):1346-1350.
25.
Barera G, Bonfanti R, Viscardi M, et al. Occurrence of celiac disease after onset of type 1
diabetes: a 6-year prospective longitudinal study. Pediatrics. 2002;109(5):833-838.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
26.
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. The effect of intensive treatment
of diabetes on the development and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 1993;329(14):977-986.
27.
World Health Organization. Use of Glycated Haemoglobin (HbA1c) in the Diagnosis of Diabetes
Mellitus. Geneva: WHO; 2011.
28.
Rohrer T, Stierkorb E, Heger S, et al. Delayed pubertal onset and development in German children
and adolescents with type 1 diabetes: cross-sectional analysis of recent data from the DPV
diabetes documentation and quality management system. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007;157((5):):647653.
29.
Elamin A, Hussein O, Tuvemo T. Growth, puberty, and final height in children with Type 1
diabetes. J Diabetes Complications. 2006;20(4):252-256.
30.
Marcovecchio ML, Heywood JJ, Dalton RN, et al. The contribution of glycemic control to impaired
growth during puberty in young people with type 1 diabetes and microalbuminuria. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2014;15(4):303-308.
31.
Fitzpatrick E, Cotoi C, Quaglia A, et al. Hepatopathy of Mauriac syndrome: a retrospective review
from a tertiary liver centre. Arch Dis Child. 2014;99(4):354-357.
32.
Dunger DB, Sperling MA, Acerini CL, et al. ESPE/LWPES consensus statement on diabetic
ketoacidosis in children and adolescents. Arch Dis Child. 2004;89(2):188-194.
33.
Usher-Smith JA, Thompson MJ, Sharp SJ, et al. Factors associated with the presence of diabetic
ketoacidosis at diagnosis of diabetes in children and young adults: a systematic review. BMJ.
2011;343:d4092.
34.
Szypowska A, Skórka A. The risk factors of ketoacidosis in children with newly diagnosed type 1
diabetes mellitus. Pediatr Diabetes. 2011;12(4 Pt 1):302-306.
35.
Rewers A, Klingensmith G, Davis C, et al. Presence of diabetic ketoacidosis at diagnosis of
diabetes mellitus in youth: the Search for Diabetes in Youth Study. Pediatrics. 2008;121(5):e12581266.
36.
Hanas R, Lindgren F, Lindblad B. Diabetic ketoacidosis and cerebral oedema in Sweden–a
2-year paediatric population study. Diabet Med. 2007;24(10):1080-1085.
37.
Sheikh-Ali M, Karon BS, Basu A, et al. Can serum beta-hydroxybutyrate be used to diagnose
diabetic ketoacidosis? Diabetes Care. 2008;31(4):643-647.
38.
Sottosanti M, Morrison GC, Singh RN, et al. Dehydration in children with diabetic ketoacidosis: a
prospective study. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97(2):96-100.
39.
Koves IH, Neutze J, Donath S, et al. The accuracy of clinical assessment of dehydration during
diabetic ketoacidosis in childhood. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(10):2485-2487.
40.
Steiner MJ, DeWalt DA, Byerley JS. Is this child dehydrated? JAMA. 2004;291(22):2746-2754.
41.
Toledo JD, Modesto V, Peinador M, et al. Sodium concentration in rehydration fluids for children
with ketoacidotic diabetes: effect on serum sodium concentration. J Pediatr. 2009;154(6):895900.
42.
Fiordalisi I, Novotny WE, Holbert D, et al. An 18-yr prospective study of pediatric diabetic
ketoacidosis: an approach to minimizing the risk of brain herniation during treatment. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2007;8(3):142-149.
43.
Harris GD, Fiordalisi I. Physiologic management of diabetic ketoacidemia. A 5-year prospective
pediatric experience in 231 episodes. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1994;148(10):1046-1052.
44.
Basnet S, Venepalli PK, Andoh J, et al. Effect of normal saline and half normal saline on serum
electrolytes during recovery phase of diabetic ketoacidosis. J Intensive Care Med. 2014;29(1):3842.
45.
White PC, Dickson BA. Low morbidity and mortality in children with diabetic ketoacidosis
treated with isotonic fluids. J Pediatr. 2013;163(3):761-766. Erratum in: J Pediatr. 2013
Sep;2163(2013):2927.
46.
Felner EI, White PC. Improving management of diabetic ketoacidosis in children. Pediatrics.
2001;108(3):735-740.
47.
Wagner A, Risse A, Brill HL, et al. Therapy of severe diabetic ketoacidosis. Zero-mortality under
very-low-dose insulin application. Diabetes Care. 1999;22(5):674-677.
48.
Hoorn EJ, Carlotti AP, Costa LA, et al. Preventing a drop in effective plasma osmolality to
minimize the likelihood of cerebral edema during treatment of children with diabetic ketoacidosis.
J Pediatr. 2007;150(5):467-473.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
49.
Al Hanshi S, Shann F. Insulin infused at 0.05 versus 0.1 units/kg/hr in children admitted to
intensive care with diabetic ketoacidosis. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12(2):137-140.
50.
Puttha R, Cooke D, Subbarayan A, et al. Low dose (0.05 units/kg/h) is comparable with standard
dose (0.1 units/kg/h) intravenous insulin infusion for the initial treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis
in children with type 1 diabetes-an observational study. Pediatr Diabetes. 2010;11(1):12-17.
51.
Edge JA, Jakes RW, Roy Y, et al. The UK case-control study of cerebral oedema complicating
diabetic ketoacidosis in children. Diabetologia. 2006;49(9):2002-2009.
52.
Butkiewicz EK, Leibson CL, O’Brien PC, et al. Insulin therapy for diabetic ketoacidosis. Bolus
insulin injection versus continuous insulin infusion. Diabetes Care. 1995;18(8):1187-1190.
53.
Glaser N, Barnett P, McCaslin I, et al. Risk factors for cerebral edema in children with diabetic
ketoacidosis. The Pediatric Emergency Medicine Collaborative Research Committee of the
American Academy of Pediatrics. N Engl J Med 2001;344(4):264-269.
54.
Edge JA, Hawkins MM, Winter DL, et al. The risk and outcome of cerebral oedema developing
during diabetic ketoacidosis. Arch Dis Child. 2001;85(1):16-22.
55.
Ghetti S, Lee JK, Sims CE, et al. Diabetic ketoacidosis and memory dysfunction in children with
type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr. 2010;156(1):109-114.
56.
Glaser NS, Marcin JP, Wootton-Gorges SL, et al. Correlation of clinical and biochemical
findings with diabetic ketoacidosis-related cerebral edema in children using magnetic resonance
diffusion-weighted imaging. J Pediatr. 2008;153(4):541-546.
57.
Glaser NS, Wootton-Gorges SL, Buonocore MH, et al. Frequency of sub-clinical cerebral edema
in children with diabetic ketoacidosis. Pediatr Diabetes. 2006;7(2):75-80.
58.
Edge JA, Ford-Adams ME, Dunger DB. Causes of death in children with insulin dependent
diabetes 1990-96. Arch Dis Child. 1999;81(4):318-323.
59.
Mahoney CP, Vlcek BW, DelAguila M. Risk factors for developing brain herniation during diabetic
ketoacidosis. Pediatr Neurol. 1999;21(4):721-727.
60.
Marcin JP, Glaser N, Barnett P, et al. Factors associated with adverse outcomes in children with
diabetic ketoacidosis-related cerebral edema. J Pediatr. 2002;141(6):793-797.
61.
Durward A, Ferguson LP, Taylor D, et al. The temporal relationship between glucose-corrected
serum sodium and neurological status in severe diabetic ketoacidosis. Arch Dis Child.
2011;96(1):50-57.
62.
Edge JA, Roy Y, Bergomi A, et al. Conscious level in children with diabetic ketoacidosis is related
to severity of acidosis and not to blood glucose concentration. Pediatr Diabetes. 2006;7(1):11-15.
63.
Hale PM, Rezvani I, Braunstein AW, et al. Factors predicting cerebral edema in young children
with diabetic ketoacidosis and new onset type I diabetes. Acta Paediatr. 1997;86(6):626-631.
64.
Lawrence SE, Cummings EA, Gaboury I, et al. Population-based study of incidence and risk
factors for cerebral edema in pediatric diabetic ketoacidosis. J Pediatr. 2005;146(5):688-692.
65.
Edge JA. Cerebral oedema during treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis: are we any nearer finding
a cause? Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2000;16(5):316-324.
66.
Muir AB, Quisling RG, Yang MC, et al. Cerebral edema in childhood diabetic ketoacidosis:
natural history, radiographic findings, and early identification. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(7):15411546.
67.
Grey M, Boland EA, Davidson M, et al. Coping skills training for youth with diabetes mellitus has
long-lasting effects on metabolic control and quality of life. J Pediatr. 2000;137(1):107-113.
68.
White NH, Sun W, Cleary PA, et al. Effect of prior intensive therapy in type 1 diabetes on 10-year
progression of retinopathy in the DCCT/EDIC: comparison of adults and adolescents. Diabetes.
2010;59(5):1244-1253.
69.
Pihoker C, Badaru A, Anderson A, et al. Insulin regimens and clinical outcomes in a type 1
diabetes cohort: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(1):27-33.
70.
Pańkowska E, Błazik M, Dziechciarz P, et al. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion vs.
multiple daily injections in children with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized control trials Pediatr Diabetes. 2009;10(1):52-58.
71.
Johnson SR, Cooper MN, Jones TW, et al. Long-term outcome of insulin pump therapy in children
with type 1 diabetes assessed in a large population-based case-control study. Diabetologia.
2013;56(11):2392-2400.
72.
Churchill JN, Ruppe RL, Smaldone A. Use of continuous insulin infusion pumps in young children
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. J Pediatr Health Care. 2009;23(3):173-179.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
73.
Ford-Adams ME, Murphy NP, Moore EJ, et al. Insulin lispro: a potential role in preventing
nocturnal hypoglycaemia in young children with diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med. 2003;20(8):656660.
74.
Cherubini V, Iannilli A, Iafusco D, et al. Premeal insulin treatment during basal-bolus regimen in
young children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(10):2311-2312.
75.
Danne T, Aman J, Schober E, et al. A comparison of postprandial and preprandial administration of
insulin aspart in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(8):23592364.
76.
Martin D, Licha-Müntz G, Grasset E, et al. Efficacy of Humalog injections before an afternoon
meal and their acceptance by children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med.
2002;19(12):1026-1031.
77.
Danne T, Philotheou A, Goldman D, et al. A randomized trial comparing the rate of hypoglycemia–
assessed using continuous glucose monitoring–in 125 preschool children with type 1 diabetes
treated with insulin glargine or NPH insulin (the PRESCHOOL study). Pediatr Diabetes.
2013;14(8):593-601.
78.
Chase HP, Arslanian S, White NH, et al. Insulin glargine versus intermediate-acting insulin as
the basal component of multiple daily injection regimens for adolescents with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. J Pediatr. 2008;153(4):547-553.
79.
Šimšek DG, Yıldız B, Asar G, et al. A randomized clinical trial comparing breakfast and bedtime
administration of insulin glargine in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J Clin Res
Pediatr Endocrinol. 2008;1(1):15-20.
80.
Robertson KJ, Schoenle E, Gucev Z, et al. Insulin detemir compared with NPH insulin in children
and adolescents with Type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med. 2007;24(1):27-34.
81.
Thalange N, Bereket A, Larsen J, et al. Insulin analogues in children with Type 1 diabetes: a
52-week randomized clinical trial. Diabet Med. 2013;30(2):216-225.
82.
Thalange N, Bereket A, Larsen J, et al. Treatment with insulin detemir or NPH insulin in children
aged 2-5 yr with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pediatr Diabetes. 2011;12(7):632-641.
83.
Kawamura T. The importance of carbohydrate counting in the treatment of children with diabetes.
Pediatr Diabetes. 2007;8 Suppl 6:57-62.
84.
Jabbour S, Stephens EA, editors. Type I Diabetes in Adults. Principles and Practice. Boca Raton:
CRC Press; 2008.
85.
Lacey K, Pritchett E. Nutrition Care Process and Model: ADA adopts road map to quality care
and outcomes management. J Am Diet Assoc. 2003;103(8):1061-72. Erratum in: J Am Diet
Assoc. 2003 Oct;103(10):1293.
86.
Gökšen D, AtikAltınok Y, Ozen S, et al. Effects of carbohydrate counting method on metabolic
control in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2014;6(2):74-78.
87.
Marigliano M, Morandi A, Maschio M, et al. Nutritional education and carbohydrate counting in
children with type 1 diabetes treated with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion: the effects
on dietary habits, body composition and glycometabolic control. Acta Diabetol. 2013;50(6):959964.
88.
Smart CE, Ross K, Edge JA, et al. Children and adolescents on intensive insulin therapy
maintain postprandial glycaemic control without precise carbohydrate counting. Diabet Med.
2009;26(3):279-285.
89.
Smart CE, King BR, McElduff P, et al. In children using intensive insulin therapy, a 20-g
variation in carbohydrate amount significantly impacts on postprandial glycaemia. Diabet Med.
2012;29(7):e21-24.
90.
Smart CE, Ross K, Edge JA, et al. Can children with Type 1 diabetes and their caregivers
estimate the carbohydrate content of meals and snacks? Diabet Med. 2010;27(3):348-353.
91.
Servilha Gandolfo A, Vasconcelos Bastos D, JaburMakluf BA, et al. Efficacy of photographic
educational materials for carbohydrate counting training of adolescents with diabetes mellitus.
Nutr Hosp. 2014;29(2):344-349.
92.
Gilbertson HR, Brand-Miller JC, Thorburn AW, et al. The effect of flexible low glycemic index
dietary advice versus measured carbohydrate exchange diets on glycemic control in children
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(7):1137-43. Erratum in: Diabetes Care. 2013
Apr;36(4):1056.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
93.
Nansel TR, Gellar L, McGill A. Effect of varying glycemic index meals on blood glucose control
assessed with continuous glucose monitoring in youth with type 1 diabetes on basal-bolus insulin
regimens. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(4):695-697.
94.
Sinnamon GC, Caltabiano M, Baune BT. Differentiating disordered affect in children and
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J Affect Disord. 2013;147(1-3):51-58.
95.
Lawrence JM, Standiford DA, Loots B, et al. Prevalence and correlates of depressed mood among
youth with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. Pediatrics. 2006;117(4):13481358.
96.
Garrison MM, Katon WJ, Richardson LP. The impact of psychiatric comorbidities on readmissions
for diabetes in youth. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(9):2150-2154.
97.
Nielsen S, Emborg C, Mølbak AG. Mortality in concurrent type 1 diabetes and anorexia nervosa.
Diabetes Care. 2002;25(2):309-312.
98.
Shehata G, Eltayeb A. Cognitive function and event-related potentials in children with type 1
diabetes mellitus. J Child Neurol. 2010;25(4):469-474.
99.
Neylon OM, O’Connell MA, Skinner TC, et al. Demographic and personal factors associated
with metabolic control and self-care in youth with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes
Metab Res Rev. 2013;29(4):257-272.
100. Tsiouli E, Alexopoulos EC, Stefanaki C, et al. Effects of diabetes-related family stress on
glycemic control in young patients with type 1 diabetes: Systematic review Can Fam Physician.
2013;59(2):143-9. Review. Erratum in: Can Fam Physician. 2013 Apr;59(4):354.
101. Winkley K, Ismail K, Landau S, et al. Psychological interventions to improve glycaemic control
in patients with type 1 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled
trials. BMJ. 2006;333(7558):65.
102. Hampson SE, Skinner TC, Hart J, et al. Effects of educational and psychosocial interventions for
adolescents with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. Health Technol Assess. 2001;5(10):179.
103. Katz ML, Volkening LK, Butler DA, et al. Family-based psychoeducation and Care Ambassador
intervention to improve glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes: a randomized trial. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2014;15(2):142-150.
104. Hood KK, Rohan JM, Peterson CM, et al. Interventions with adherence-promoting components
in pediatric type 1 diabetes: meta-analysis of their impact on glycemic control. Diabetes Care.
2010;33(7):1658-1664.
105. Soedamah-Muthu SS, Fuller JH, Mulnier HE, et al. High risk of cardiovascular disease in patients
with type 1 diabetes in the U.K.: a cohort study using the general practice research database.
Diabetes Care. 2006;29(4):798-804.
106. Quirk H, Blake H, Tennyson R, et al. Physical activity interventions in children and young
people with Type 1 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Diabet Med.
2014;31(10):1163-1173.
107. MacMillan F, Kirk A, Mutrie N, et al. A systematic review of physical activity and sedentary
behavior intervention studies in youth with type 1 diabetes: study characteristics, intervention
design, and efficacy. Pediatr Diabetes. 2014;15(3):175-189.
108. Toni S, Reali MF, Barni F, et al. Managing insulin therapy during exercise in type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Acta Biomed. 2006;77 Suppl 1:34-40.
109. Dubé MC, Lavoie C, Galibois I, et al. Nutritional strategies to prevent hypoglycemia at exercise
in diabetic adolescents. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(8):1427-1432.
110. Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group,
Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of type
1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(14):1464-1476.
111. Lagarde WH, Barrows FP, Davenport ML, et al. Continuous subcutaneous glucose monitoring
in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus: a single-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2006;7(3):159-164.
112. Continuous glucose monitoring: consensus statement on the use of glucose sensing
in outpatient clinical diabetes care (Available at https://www.bsped.org.uk/clinical/docs/
ContinuousGlucoseMonitoring.pdf).
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
113. Hanas R. Type 1 Diabetes in Children, Adolescents and Young Adults (6th Edition). London:
Class Publishing; 2015.
114. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD). ISPAD Consensus
Guidelines for the Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents. Zeist:
Medforum; 2000.
115. Azad K, Mohsin F, Zargar AH, et al. Fasting guidelines for diabetic children and adolescents.
Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2012;16(4):516-518.
116. Ibrahim AlAlwana, Abdulhameed Al Banyan. Effects of Ramadan fasting on children with Type 1
diabetes. Int J Diabetes Mellit. 2010;2(2):127-129.
117. Al-Khawari M, Al-Ruwayeh A, Al-Doub K, et al. Adolescents on basal-bolus insulin can fast
during Ramadan. Pediatr Diabetes. 2010;11(2):96-100.
118. Zabeen B, Tayyeb S, Benarjee B, et al. Fasting during Ramadan in adolescents with diabetes.
Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2014;18(1):44-47.
119. American Diabetes Association. Diabetes care in the school and day care setting. Diabetes Care.
2014;37 Suppl 1:S91-96.
120. Kollipara S, Warren-Boulton E. Diabetes and physical activity in school. School Nurse News.
2004;21(3):12-16.
121. National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health. Diagnosis and management
of type 1 diabetes in children and young people. London: RCOG Press; 2004.
122. Perkhidmatan Diabetes dan Endokrinologi, Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia. Practical guide to
Insulin Therapy in Type 2 diabetes Mellitus. Putrajaya: KKM; 2010.
123. King BR, Goss PW, Paterson MA, et al. Changes in altitude cause unintended insulin delivery
from insulin pumps: mechanisms and implications. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(9):1932-1933.
124. Kaufman FR, Devgan S, Roe TF, et al. Perioperative management with prolonged intravenous
insulin infusion versus subcutaneous insulin in children with type I diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes
Complications. 1996;10(1):6-11.
125. Gill GV, Redmond S, Garratt F, et al. Diabetes and alternative medicine: cause for concern.
Diabet Med. 1994;11(2):210-213.
126. Stone ML, Craig ME, Chan AK, et al. Natural history and risk factors for microalbuminuria in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a longitudinal study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(9):2072-2077.
127. Demirel F, Tepe D, Kara O, et al. Microvascular complications in adolescents with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013;5(3):145-149.
128. Chae HW, Shin JI, Kwon AR, et al. Spot urine albumin to creatinine ratio and serum cystatin C
are effective for detection of diabetic nephropathy in childhood diabetic patients. J Korean Med
Sci. 2012;27(7):784-787.
129. Salardi S, Porta M, Maltoni G, et al. Infant and toddler type 1 diabetes: complications after 20
years’ duration. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(4):829-833.
130. Nelson D, Mah JK, Adams C, et al. Comparison of conventional and non-invasive techniques for
the early identification of diabetic neuropathy in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes.
Pediatr Diabetes. 2006;7(6):305-310.
131. Harrington J, Peña AS, Gent R, et al. Aortic intima media thickness is an early marker of
atherosclerosis in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. J Pediatr. 2010;156(2):237-241.
132. Järvisalo MJ, Putto-Laurila A, Jartti L, et al. Carotid artery intima-media thickness in children with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 2002;51(2):493-498.
133. Urbina EM, Wadwa RP, Davis C, et al. Prevalence of increased arterial stiffness in children with
type 1 diabetes mellitus differs by measurement site and sex: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
Study. J Pediatr. 2010;156(5):731-737, 737.e731.
134. Glowinska B, Urban M, Koput A, et al. New atherosclerosis risk factors in obese, hypertensive
and diabetic children and adolescents. Atherosclerosis. 2003;167(2):275-286.
135. Basiratnia M, Abadi SF, Amirhakimi GH, et al. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in
children and adolescents with type-1 diabetes mellitus and its relation to diabetic control and
microalbuminuria. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2012;23(2):311-315.
136. Krishnan S, Fields DA, Copeland KC, et al. Sex differences in cardiovascular disease risk in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Gend Med. 2012;9(4):251-258.
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 1
Example of Search Strategy
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination, search was limit to English, humans, all child (0 to 18
years) and 1994 to current:-
1.
DIABETES MELLITUS, TYPE 1/
2.
diabetes adj1 (autoimmune or juvenile onset or juvenile-onset).tw.
3.
iddm.tw.
4.
diabetes mellitus adj1 (insulin dependent or insulin-dependent or
juvenile onset or juvenile-onset or type 1 or type i or ketosis prone
or ketosis-prone).tw.
5.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4
6.
INSULIN/
7.
INSULIN ASPART/
8.
INSULIN, ISOPHANE/
9.
INSULIN LISPRO/
10. INSULIN, LONG-ACTING/
11. INSULIN, REGULAR, HUMAN/
12. INSULIN, SHORT-ACTING/
13. insulin.tw.
14. insulin therapy.tw.
15. (insulin adj1 (soluble or regular or aspart or isophane or nph or
neutral protamine hagedorn or protamine zinc or lispro or long
acting or long-acting or regular human or rapid acting or rapidacting or short-acting or short acting)).tw.
16. novorapid.tw.
17. novolog.tw.
18. lispro.tw.
19. humalog.tw.
20. humulin s.tw.
21. humulin.tw.
22. 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18
or 19 or 20 or 21
23. 5 and 22
24. limit 23 to (english language and humans and “all child (0 to 18
years)” and (meta analysis or randomized controlled trial or
systematic reviews) and last 20 years)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
1.
How to diagnose T1DM?
2.
What are the risk factors of T1DM?
3.
What are the common co-morbidities in T1DM?
4.
What are the treatment goals in T1DM?
- optimal HbA1c levels
- range of ideal blood glucose levels
- growth and puberty
5.
How to treat newly diagnosed T1DM?
6.
What are the effective/safe insulin regimens in T1DM?
- pre-school children
- school going children
- adolescents
7.
How is self-adjustment of insulin dose done in T1DM?
8.
What are the effective/safe medical nutrition therapies in T1DM?
9.
Which are the personal and psychological factors associated with
metabolic control and self-care in TIDM?
What is the appropriate psychosocial support in T1DM?
10. Are physical activities safe/effective in T1DM?
11. What is the safe/effective home or self-monitoring blood glucose in
T1DM?
12. What is the safe/effective insulin therapy in special situations?
- sick day
- eating out
- fasting
- schooling
- travelling
- surgery
- exercise
- partial remission phase
13. Are supplements/complementary medications safe/effective in
T1DM?
14. What are the long-term complications of T1DM?
How and when to screen for the complications?
15. What are the referral criteria for T1DM?
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 3
Algorithm 1. Immediate Assessment in DKA
Modified: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
Pediatic Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
• Shock (reduced
peripheral pulses)
• Reduced conscious
level/coma
• Polyuria
• Polydipsia
• Weight loss
• Abdominal pain
• Tiredness
• Vomiting
• Confusion
Clinical history
• Hydration status
• Deep sighing
respiration
• Acetone-smell breath
• Lethargy/drowsiness
± vomiting
Clinical signs
Biochemical features
& investigations
• Ketonuria (>2+) or
ketonaemia (>3.0 mmol/L)
• Hyperglycaemia
(BG >11 mmol/L)
• Acidosis (venous pH <7.3
or bicarbonate <15 mmol/L)
• Blood urea & electrolytes
• Other investigations as
indicated
Confirmed DKA
Contact specialist
• Dehydration >5%
• Not in shock
• Acidotic
(hyperventilation)
• Vomiting
• Minimal dehydration
• Tolerating oral fluid
• Airway ± nasogastric
tube
• Breathing (100% O2)
• Circulation 0.9% saline
10 - 20 ml/kg over
1 - 2 hours (rapid bolus
if in shock) & repeat until
circulation is restored
but not >30 ml/kg
Resuscitation
IV fluid therapy
• Calculate fluid
requirements;correct
over 48 hours, use
saline 0.9%
• Do ECG for abnormal
T-waves
• Add 20 mmol
potassium for each
500 ml of fluid
• IV infusion/SC insulin
• IV fluid/oral hydration
Therapy
No improvement
DKA is categorised by the severity of acidosis:
• mild (venous pH <7.3, bicarbonate <15 mmol/L)
• moderate (venous pH <7.2, bicarbonate <10 mmol/L)
• severe (venous pH <7.1, bicarbonate <5 mmol/L)
Insulin therapy
• IV insulin infusion (0.05 - 0.1 unit/kg/hour) started at 1 - 2 hours after initial
fluid therapy
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 4
Algorithm 2. Critical Observation in DKA
Modified: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
Pediatic Diabetes. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell; 2014
• Hourly vital signs &
neurological status
• Hourly BG
• Hourly fluid input & output
• 2 - 4 hourly ketone, blood
gases & electrolytes after
starting IV therapy
• Monitor ECG for T-wave
changes
Critical observation
Acidosis not
improving,
deterioration
BG 14 - 17 mmol/L OR
BG falls >5 mmol/L/hour (after
initial volume expansion)
• Start SC insulin, then stop
IV insulin after an
appropriate interval
Neurological
Warning signs:
headache, slowing
heart rate, irritability,
decreased conscious
level, incontinence,
specific neurological
signs
• Add 5% dextrose in
the infusate
• Adjust type of IV fluid
based on serum sodium
concentration after 4 - 6 hours
Re-evaluate
• Recalculate
IV fluid
• Review insulin
delivery system
& dose
• Assess for the
need of
additional
resuscitation
• Consider
treatment for
sepsis
• Clinically well,
tolerating oral
fluids
Improvement
Suspect cerebral
oedema
• Give mannitol
0.5 - 1 g/kg or
hypertonic solution
• Restrict IV fluid by
one third
• Call specialist
• Transfer to ICU
• Consider cranial
imaging only after
patient treated and
stabilised
Management
No
No
Yes
Transition to SC insulin
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 5
Types of Insulin Preparations and their Action Profiles
Source: Perkhidmatan Diabetes dan Endokrinologi, Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia.
Practical Guide to Insulin Therapy in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Putrajaya: MoH;
2010
Insulin Approval by U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
and European Medicines Agency (EMEA)
Source: U.S. Food and Drug Administration (Available at http://www.fda.gov/)
European Medicine Agency (Available at http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/)
Rapid-acting insulin
• Aspart
• Lispro
• Glulisine
Short-acting
insulin
Intermediateacting insulin
[neutral protamine
Hagedorn (NPH)]
Long-acting insulin
• Glargine
• Detemir
Premixed human
(30% short-acting
insulin + 70% NPH)
Premixed analog
• 30% aspart +
70% aspart
protamine
• 25% lispro +
75% lispro
protamine
10 - 20 min
0 - 15 min
5 - 15 min
30 min
1 - 1.5 hour
2 - 4 hour
1 hour
30 min
10 - 20 min
0 - 15 min
Onset of
action
Generic name
1 - 3
1
1 - 2
1 - 4
4 - 12
Peakless
Peakless
Dual
Dual
Dual
Peak of
action (hour)
3 - 5
3.5 - 4.5
3 - 5
6 - 8
16 - 23
20 - 24
17 - 23
16 - 23
18 - 23
16 - 18
Duration of
action (hour)
5 - 15 min before
or immediately
after meals
30 min before
meals
Pre-breakfast/
pre-bed
Same time
everyday at
anytime of the
day
30 - 60 min
before meals
5 - 15 min
before meals
Timing of
injection
Type of Insulin
Insulin lispro
Insulin aspart
Insulin glulisine
Insulin detemir
Insulin glargine
Insulin degludec
Approved by FDA for
(studied from age)
“adults and children” (3 years)
“adults and children” (2 years)
“adults and children” (4 years)
“adults and children” (2 years)
“adults and paediatric patients”
(6 years)
“adults” (18 years)
Approved by EMEA
from age
“adults and children”
≥2 years
≥6 years
≥1 year
≥2 years
≥1 year
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 6
Dietary Fibre Content of Common Foods
Source: Malaysian Dietitians’ Association. Medical Nutrition Therapy Guidelines for
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Kuala Lumpur: MDA; 2013
Starchy Foods and
Cereals
Multi whole grain fibre
meal bread,1 slice
Cereals (ready-to-eat)
All bran R, ½ cup
100% bran R, ⅓ cup
Cooked cereals
Oat bran, 1 cup
Grains
Barley, cooked, ½ cup
Cookies/crackers
Rye crackers, 1 triple
Pastas
Whole-wheat pasta,
1 cup
Starchy vegetables
Dried beans, peas,
legumes, cooked,
½ cup
Fruits
Apple, raw with skin, 1
medium
Figs/dates, 10
Kiwi fruit, 2 medium
Mango, 1 medium
Pear, raw, 1 medium
Prunes, dried, 5
Vegetables
Green peas, fresh,
frozen or canned,
½ cup
Snow peas, 10 pods
Nuts and seeds
Almonds, 1 oz
High Fibre (5+ g)
Medium Fibre (2 - 4 g)
Rye bread, 1 slice
Whole-wheat, 1 slice
Whole-wheat pasta, ½ cup
Shredded wheat R, 1 biscuit
Oatmeal, 1 cup
Bran, natural 1 tablespoon (tbsp)
Brown rice, cooked, ½ cup
Wheat germ, 1 tbsp
Oat crackers, 2
Corn, canned, whole kernel, ½ cup
Corn-on-the-cob, 1 small
Potato, whole, cooked, with skin, ½
Sweet potato with skin, ½
Yam, cooked, ½ cup cubes
Miso, paste, 3 tbsp
Apple, raw, no skin, 1 medium
Orange, raw, 1 small
Raisins, 2 tbsp
Prune juice, 1 cup
Bean sprouts, ½ cup
Beans, string, ½ cup
Broccoli, ½ cup
Carrots, raw, ½ cup
Eggplant, ½ cup
Ladies fingers, ½ cup
Vegetables, mixed, ½ cup
Peanut butter, smooth, crunchy,
2 tbsp
Peanuts (15), 1 oz
Sunflower seeds, with kernels,
2 tbsp
Watermelon seeds, 2 tbsp
Sesame seeds, 2 tbsp
Low Fibre (<2g)
Hamburger/hotdog bun, ½
Plain dinner roll, 1 small
White bread, 1 slice
Rice krispies R, ⅔ cup
Special K R, 1 cup
Corn flakes, ¾ cup
White rice, cooked, ½ cup
Soda crackers, 6 pieces
Macaroni, noodles
Spaghetti, cooked, ½ cup
Corn, canned creamed, ½ cup
Potato, whipped, no skin, ½ cup
Potato, whole, no skin, ½ cup
Grapes, 8
Honeydew melon, 1 slice
Pineapple, raw, 1 slice
Watermelon, 5” triangle
Most fruits and vegetable-based
juice (apple, orange) 1 cup
Asparagus, cooked, 6 spears
Cabbage, raw, 1 cup
Lettuce, iceberg, 1 cup
Cauliflower, raw, ½ cup
Celery, raw, ½ cup
Cucumber, raw, ½ cup
Mushrooms, raw, ½ cup
Mustard greens, fresh cooked, ½ cup
Spinach, raw, 1 cup
Tomatoes, raw, 1 cup
Coconut, 2 tbsp
Walnuts, 2 tbsp
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Rice, white unpolished
(cooked), ½ cup or ⅓ chinese
rice bowl
Rice porridge, 1 cup
Putu mayam,1 piece (40 g)
Oats, uncooked, ½ cup or 3
rounded tbsp
Potato, 1 small
Barley, pearl, uncooked ¼ cup
Mee hoon, ½ cup or
⅓ chinese rice bowl
Kuey-teow, ½ cup or
⅓ chinese rice bowl
Mee, wet, ½ cup or
⅓ chinese rice bowl
Noodle, laksa, wet, ⅔ cup
Macaroni, cooked, ⅔ cup
Cornflakes, ½ cup
Biscuits, (plain, unsweetened),
3 pieces
Biscuits,
(small, thin, salted, 4.5 x 4.5 cm),
6 pieces
Bread
(wholemeal, high fibre, white/brown),
1 slice (30 g)
French bread, 2 pieces
Pumpkin, 1 cup (100 g)
Sweet potato, ½ cup
Cereals, Grain & Bread
Appendix 7
Food Group and Exchange Lists for 15 g Carbohydrate
Cereals, Grain Products and Starchy Vegetables
Each item contains 15 g carbohydrate, 2.0 g protein,
0.5 g fat and 75 calories
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Apple, 1 medium
Guava, ½ fruit
Limau, 1 medium
Orange, 1 medium
Pear, 1 medium
Pear, yellow, Chinese,
1 medium
Grapes, 8 pieces
Dates, dried, 3 small pieces
Chestnuts, 7 whole
Prune, 3 small whole
without seeds
Honeydew, 1 slice
Duku, 6 whole
Banana, 1 small (60 g)
Sapodilla (ciku), 1 medium
Jackfruit, 4 without seeds
Pineapple, 1 slice
Pumpkin, 1 cup (100 g)
Raisin, 1 dessert spoon,
heap (20 g)
Fruits
Fruits
Each item contains 15 g carbohydrate and 60 calories
Source: Malaysian Dietitians’ Association. Medical Nutrition Therapy Guidelines for
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Kuala Lumpur: MDA; 2013
Suzana S, Nik Shanita S, Zahara AM, et al. Malaysian Atlas of Food
Exchanges and Portion Sizes. Kuala Lumpur: MDC; 2015
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
Appendix 8
Carbohydrate Exchange for Sugars
Each item contains 15 g carbohydrate
Honey
: 1 tablespoon level (21 g)
Kaya
: 3 tablespoons level (30 g)
Jam
: 1 tablespoon level (21 g)
Sweets
: 1 - 2 pieces
Sugar (brown)
: 3 ½ teaspoons level (18 g)
Sugar (white)
: 3 teaspoons level (15 g)
Rose syrup
: 3 ½ teaspoons level (18 g)
Condensed milk
: 2 tablespoons level (30 g)
Cocoa/malt-based powder
: 1 ½ tablespoon level (21 g)
Source: Malaysian Dietitian’s Association. Medical Nutrition Therapy Guidelines for
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Kuala Lumpur: MDA; 2013
Glycaemic Index (GI) for Local Malaysian Foods
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2015
Food
Categories
Rice
Bread and
cereals
products
Noodle and
pasta
Milk
Fruit
Legumes
Tuber
Barley
All bran breakfast cereals
Muesli
Wholegrain bread varieties
Lasagne pasta sheets
Spaghetti, white, boiled
Spaghetti, wholemeal,
boiled
Full fat milk
Low fat milk
Skim milk
Soy milk (without added sugar)
Yogurt
Apple
Mango
Oranges
Plum
Baked beans
Chickpeas
Lentils
Mung bean
Cassava, boiled
Sweet potato, boiled
Glutinous rice
Jasmine rice
Instant porridge
White rice
Sago
Cornflakes
Rice crackers
Roti canai
White flour bread
Wholemeal (whole
wheat) wheat flour
bread
Fried macaroni
Fried meehoon
Fried rice noodles
Rice noodle (kueyteow)
Teh tarik
Lychee
Watermelon
Potato, boiled
Basmati rice
Brown rice
Parboiled rice
Red rice
Capati
Idli
Oatmeal
Pita bread, wholemeal
Wholemeal barley
flour bread
Spaghetti, white,
durum wheat semolina
Udon noodles, plain
Wheat noodles
Ice cream
Sweetened condensed
milk
Banana
Dates
Papaya
Pineapples
Raisin
Pumpkins, boiled
Sweet corn, boiled
High GI (>70)
Intermediate GI
(56 - 70)
Low GI (≤55)
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
βOHB
β-hydroxybuterate
µg
microgramme
ACEi
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor
ACR
albumin:creatinine ratio
ARB
angiotensin receptor blocker
AER
albumin excretion rates
aTPO
anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody
BG
blood glucose
BMI
body mass index
BP
blood pressure
carb
carbohydrate
CI
confidence interval
CGM(S)
Continuous Glucose Monitoring (System)
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CSII
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
DCCT
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
DG
Development Group
DiCARE
Malaysian Diabetes in Children and Adolescents Registry
DKA
diabetic ketoacidosis
dL
desilitre
ECG
Electrocardiogramme
EDIC
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications
g
gramme
GA
general anaesthesia
GAD
glutamic acid decarboxylase
GI
glycaemic index
HbA1c
glycated haemoglobin
IAA
insulin autoantibodies
ICA
anti-islet antibody
ICA512 or IA2A protein tyrosine phosphatase antibody
ICR
insulin to carbohydrate ratio
IFCC
International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
IM
intramuscular
IQR
interquartile range
ISF
insulin sensitivity factor
ISPAD
International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes
IU
international unit
IV
intravenous
kcal
kilocalorie
kg
kilogramme
L
litre
LDL
low-density lipoprotein
LJM
limited joint mobility
MDI
multiple daily injections
mg
milligramme
min
minutes
ml
millilitre
mmol
millimol
Management of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus in Children & Adolescents
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:-
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Former DG/RC members:
The late Professor Dr. Fatimah Harun, Senior Lecturer &
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist, Universiti Malaya
Ms. Khalizah Jamili, Dietitian, Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Sin Lian Thye, Nursing Matron, Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC have completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to
such firms. (Details are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Type 1 Diabetes
Mellitus in Children & Adolescents was supported financially in its
entirety by the Ministry of Health while the printing was funded by the
Malaysian Endocrine & Metabolic Society.
MUFA
monounsaturated fatty acids
MoH
Ministry of Health
NaCl
natrium chloride
NPH
neutral protamine Hagedorn
OGTT
oral glucose tolerance test
OR
odds ratio
pCO2
partial pressure of carbon dioxide
PUFA
polyunsaturated fatty acids
RC
Review Committee
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
SMBG
self-monitored blood glucose
SC
subcutaneous
SMBG
self-monitoring of blood glucose
SMD
standardised mean difference
T1DM
type 1 diabetes mellitus
tbsp
tablespoon
TDD
total daily insulin dose
TSH
thyroid stimulating hormone
WMD
weighted mean difference
ZnT8
zinc transporter 8