CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
moneana3e 2(6U)
ay 2012
Management of.
Otitis Media with Effusion
in Children
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN:978-967-0399-22-5
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.msohns.com
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2012 and will be reviewed in 2016 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
TITLE
Page
Level of Evidence Scale and Grades of
i
Recommendation
Guideline Development and Objectives
ii - iv
Guideline Development Group
v
Review Committee
vi
External Reviewers
vii
Algorithm 1: Management of Otitis Media with Effusion
viii
(OME) in Children
Algorithm 2: Management of OME in Special Children
ix
(Cleft Palate)
Algorithm 3: Management of OME in Special Children
x
(Down Syndrome)
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1
2.1 Prevalence
1
2.2 Risk Factors
2
3.
SCREENING
4
4.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
5
4.1 Symptoms
5
4.2 Otoscopic Findings
6
4.3 Parental Suspicion
7
5.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
8
5.1 Otoscopy
8
5.2 Pneumatic Otoscopy
8
5.3 Acoustic Immitance Measures
9
5.4 Pure Tone Audiometry
12
5.5 Otoacoustic Emissions
12
6.
PREVENTIVE MEASURES
14
7.
ACTIVE OBSERVATION
16
8.
MANAGEMENT
18
8.1 Non-surgical Interventions
18
8.2 Surgical Interventions
21
8.3 Complications of Ventilation Tube Insertion
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
TITLE
Page
9.
MANAGEMENT OF OME IN SPECIAL CHILDREN
27
9.1 Children with Cleft Palate
27
9.2 Children with Down Syndrome
29
10.
REFERRAL OF CHILDREN WITH OME
32
11.
PARAMETERS TO BE MONITORED DURING FOLLOW-UP 33
11.1 Otological Findings
33
11.2 Audiological Findings
33
11.3 Speech, Language and Academic Development
34
12.
LONG TERM SEQUALAE
35
13.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
36
REFERENCES
38
Appendix 1 Search Terms
45
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
47
Appendix 3 The Conduct of Distraction Test
48
Auditory and Speech Development
Appendix 4 Otoscopy Appearance
50
Appendix 5 Types of Tympanogram`
53
Audiogram
Appendix 6 List of Medication Dosages and Side Effects
55
in Children with Otitis Media with Effusion
Appendix 7 Advice to Parents of Children Post-Ventilation Tube
56
List of Abbreviations
58
Acknowledgements
59
Disclosure Statement
59
Sources of Funding
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
A
B
C
At least one meta analysis, systematic review, or RCT, or
evidence rated as good and directly applicable to the target
population
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable
to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency
of results; or evidence extrapolated from meta analysis,
systematic review, or RCT
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and /or
clinical experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence
of directly applicable clinical studies of good quality
Level
I
II -1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
i
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
SOURCE: MODIFIED FROM THE SCOTTISH INTERCOLLEGIATE GUIDELINES NETWORK
(SIGN)
Note: The grades of recommendation relates to the strength of the
evidence on which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect the
clinical importance of the recommendation.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The development group for this Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG)
is from the Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Higher Education
and private sector. The group consists of otorhinolaryngologists,
paediatrician, family medicine specialists, public health physicians,
audiologists, a pharmacist and an assistant medical officer. There was
active involvement of the multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC)
during the process of development of these guidelines.
Literature search was carried out at the following electronic databases:
Guidelines International Network (G-I-N), Pubmed/Medline, Cochrane
Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR), Database of Abstracts of
Reviews of Effectiveness (DARE), Journal full text via OVID search
engine, International Health Technology Assessment websites (refer to
Appendix 1 for Search Terms). In addition, the reference lists of all
retrieved articles were searched to identify relevant studies. Experts
in the field were also contacted to identify further studies. All searches
were officially conducted between 17 August 2010 and 11 August 2011.
Literature searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of
the CPG development process allowing any relevant papers published
up until 21 February 2012 to be considered. Future CPG updates will
consider evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of the
search strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG secretariat.
Search was limited to literature published in English.
Reference was also made to other guidelines on Otitis Media with
Effusion such as National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and
Children’s Health – Surgical Management of Children with Otitis Media
with Effusion (OME) (2008); American Academy of Pediatrics - Clinical
Practice Guideline, Otitis Media with Effusion. Pediatrics (2004);
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), American Academy
of Otorhinolaryngology-Head And Neck Surgery (AAO-HNS), Academy
of Pediatrics (AAP) Subcommittee on Otitis Media with Effusion -
Clinical Practice Guideline, Otitis Media with Effusion (2004); Scottish
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network - Diagnosis and Management of
Childhood Otitis Media in Primary Care (2003); National Institute for
Clinical Excellence - Referral Advice, Persistent Otitis Media With
Effusion (Glue Ear) In Children (2001). These CPGs were evaluated
using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE)
prior being used as references.
Fifteen clinical questions were developed under four sections and
members of the development group were assigned individual questions
within these subtopics (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
The group members met a total of 20 times throughout the development
of these guidelines. All literature retrieved was appraised using
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (Oxford) by at least two members
and presented in the form of evidence tables and discussed during
development group meetings. All statements and recommendations
formulated then were agreed upon by both the development group
and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations were
made by consensus of the development group and RC. These CPG are
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The articles used in theses guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was modified from grades of
recommendation of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
(SIGN).
On completion, the draft guidelines was sent for review by external
reviewers. It was posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
comment and feedback from any interested parties. These guidelines
had also been presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for
CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia for review and
approval.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
OBJECTIVES
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
•
To provide an evidence-based guidance in the management of otitis
media with effusion (OME) in children
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
•
To provide evidence-based guidance for early detection and referral
in preventing subsequent complication of OME at all levels of
healthcare
•
To provide evidence-based guidance in selecting the appropriate
diagnostic tool
•
To provide evidence-based guidance in selecting treatment options,
plan and preventive measures available in the treatment of OME
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Children with OME (12 years old and below)
Special consideration:
Children with Down syndrome and cleft palate
TARGET GROUP/USER
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals at all level
of health care system including:
•
Medical officers
•
General practitioners
•
Family Medicine Specialists
•
Paediatricians
•
Otorhinolaryngologists
•
Audiologists
•
Plastic surgeons
•
Dental officers
•
Allied health professionals
•
Pharmacists
•
Programme managers
•
Other healthcare providers involved in managing patients with OME
•
Healthcare provider trainees and medical students
•
Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community setting
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
v
Professor Dr. Asma Abdullah
Clinical Professor &
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Faculty of Medicine, Pusat Perubatan
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hafeza Ahmad
Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Ms. Jaclyn Teoh Pei Lee
Pharmacist
Bandar Puchong Jaya, Selangor
Mdm. Juliana Samsudin
Audiologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Mazapuspavina Md. Yasin
Senior Lecturer &
Family Medicine Specialist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Teknologi Mara, Selangor
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health
Dr. Nik Khairulddin Nik Yusoff
Head of Department &
Consultant Paediatrician (ID)
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kota Bharu, Kelantan
Dr. Norizzati Bukhary Ismail Bukhary
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Baru Bangi
Selangor
Dr. Philip Rajan
Otorhinolaryngologist (Otology)
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Ipoh, Perak
Dr. Rafidah Mazlan
Senior Lecturer & Audiologist
Faculty of Health Science
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Roza Sarimin
Public Health Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section, MoH
Mr. Shahrom Ab. Rahman
Audiologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kota Bharu, Kelantan
Datin Dr. Siti Sabzah Mohd. Hashim
Head of Department & Senior Consultant
Otorhinolaryngologist (Paediatrics ORL)
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah
Alor Star, Kedah
Dr. Sobani Din
Head of Department &
Otorhinolaryngologist (Otology)
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Mr. Suhaidie Manan
Assistant Medical Officer
Otorhinolaryngology Department
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Zulkiflee Salahuddin
Head of Department & Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist (Otology)
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kota Bharu, Kelantan
Members (alphabetical order)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
vi
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of independent expert
referees from both public and private sectors who were asked to
comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy in the
interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Abd. Majid Md. Nasir
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
Professor Dr. Din Suhaimi Sidek
Professor of Otorhinolaryngology & Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
School of Medical Science
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Hj. Md. Husain Hj. Said
Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Sime Darby Medical Centre Subang Jaya, Selangor
Mdm. Noraini Mohamad
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Practice and Development Section
Pharmaceutical Services Division, Ministry of Health
Dr. Norzila Zainuddin
Senior Consultant Paediatrician (Respiratory Paediatrics)
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section, Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health
Professor Dr. Siti Zamratol Maisara Mukhari
Professor of Audiology & Senior Consultant Audiologist, Faculty of Medicine
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sri Wahyu Taher
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Simpang Kuala, Alor Star, Kedah
Brigadier General Dato’ Pahlawan Dr. Zulkaflay Abd. Rahman
Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Angkatan Tentera Pangkalan TLDM, Lumut, Perak
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Hairel Anuar Selamat
Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Medical Faculty, Cyberjaya University College of Medical Sciences,
Selangor
Professor Dr. Henry Tan
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore
Dr. Matthew Yung
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
The Ipswich Hospital NHS Trust, Suffolk, United Kingdom
Dr. Mohd. Normani b. Zakaria
Lecturer & Audiologist
School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia
Dr. Nik Mazlina Mohamad
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kajang, Selangor
Dr. Noor Khatijah Nurani
President
Malaysia Paediatrics Association
Pn. Nur Azyani Amri
National Head of Audiology Services
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Patrick Sheehan
Consultant & Honorary Senior Lecturer in Paediatric Otolaryngology
Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital & North Manchester General Hospital /
School of Medicine, University of Manchester, United Kingdom
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
viii
ALGORITHM 1: MANAGEMENT OF OTITIS MEDIA WITH
EFFUSION (OME) IN CHILDREN
ORL & AUDIOLOGY
FOLLOW-UP
Primary care
Secondary & tertiary care
No
No
OME
Yes
No
Suspected children with
OME* or parents’/caregiver’s/
educator’s concern
PRIMARY CARE/PAEDIATRIC SETTING
• History
- Risk factors
- Clinical features
• General examination
• Ear, nose & throat examination
- Tuning fork : 512Hz (for aged above 4 years)
- Otoscopy OR preferably pneumatic otoscopy
- Tympanometry screener (optional)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Consider other
diagnosis
Indication
for referral
(refer Section 10)
ACTIVE OBSERVATION/
NON-SURGICAL TREATMENT:
Up to 3 months (refer Section 7)
OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY (ORL)
REFERRAL
RESOLVED
SURGICAL INTERVENTION
ORL ASSESSMENT
• History
• General examination
• Ear, nose & throat examination ± endoscopy
• Audiological assessment
• Indication for surgery (refer Section 8.2)
NON-SURGICAL INTERVENTION:
• Active observation for 3 months - newly
diagnosed OME
• Hearing amplification may be considered
• Pharmacotherapy:
o Short course (<6 weeks) intranasal
steroid for OME with concurrent allergic
rhinitis or adenoid hypertrophy
SURGICAL INTERVENTION:
• Myringotomy with ventilation tube insertion
• Adenoidectomy may be considered in children
with hypertrophied adenoids
DISCHARGE
No
* Symptoms suggestive of OME:-
• hearing impairment
• speech or language delay
• associated presentation such as
recurrent otalgia, upper respiratory
tract infection or acute otitis media
• poor school performance
• lack of concentration or attention
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
ix
ALGORITHM 2: MANAGEMENT OF OTITIS MEDIA WITH
EFFUSION (OME) IN SPECIAL CHILDREN
(CLEFT PALATE)
Yes
No
No
Children with cleft palate
Yes
REFER OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY (ORL)
• History
• General examination
• Ear, nose & throat examination ± endoscopy
• Audiological assessment
OME
SURGICAL INTERVENTION
SURGICAL INTERVENTION:
• Myringotomy with ventilation tube insertion
• Adenoidectomy (only performed in selected
cases due to risk of velopharyngeal insufficiency**)
MULTIDISCIPLINARY
FOLLOW-UP
(ORL, AUDIOLOGY,
SPEECH, PAEDIATRIC
& PLASTIC)
NON SURGICAL INTERVENTION:
• Consider hearing amplification
**Velopharyngeal
insufficiency is inability
to completely close the
velopharyngeal port
during speech. This
results in leakage of air
into nasal cavity and
produces hypernasal
voice resonance and
nasal air emission.
Primary care
Secondary & tertiary care
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
x
ALGORITHM 3: MANAGEMENT OF OTITIS MEDIA WITH
EFFUSION (OME) IN SPECIAL CHILDREN
(DOWN SYNDROME)
Yes
No
No
Children with Down
Syndrome (DS)
Yes
REFER OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY (ORL)
• History
• General examination
• Ear, nose & throat examination ± endoscopy
• Audiological assessment
OME
SURGICAL INTERVENTION
SURGICAL INTERVENTION:
• Myringotomy with ventilation tube (VT) insertion***
• Adenoidectomy may be considered in children with
hypertrophied adenoids
MULTIDISCIPLINARY
(ORL, AUDIOLOGY,
SPEECH, PAEDIATRIC)
FOLLOW-UP
NON SURGICAL INTERVENTION:
• Consider hearing amplification
Primary care
Secondary & tertiary care
Caution: ***Otorrhoea
following VT
insertion is
significantly higher
in children with DS
compared to normal
children. Thus,
benefits and risks
need to be weighed
accordingly.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
1. INTRODUCTION
Otitis media with effusion (OME) is a condition characterised by
a collection of fluid within the middle ear without signs of acute
inflammation.
It is common in young children, with a bimodal peak at two and five
years of age. Eighty percent of children have at least one episode of
OME by the age of 10 years.1 In Malaysia, the overall prevalence is
2.9% with an estimated cases of 761,962.2, level III These figures however
may not reflect the actual disease burden as confirmatory testing could
not be done in some children during the field survey. A study among
preschoolers found that the prevalence rate of OME was 18.3%.3, level IIII
This disease is also a common ear problem among children especially
those with craniofacial anomalies including cleft palate and Down
syndrome (DS). A local study conducted in 1992 showed that the
incidence of OME in children with cleft palate was 57.6%.4, level III
OME is known to be a fluctuating condition with symptoms that vary with
time and age. However, the problem may persist in certain percentage
of children. The main symptom of OME is impaired hearing.1; 5, level III
This condition is often underdiagnosed, leading to untreated hearing
impairment, which can cause speech and language developmental
delay and poor school performance.6
While most cases of OME will resolve spontaneously, some children
will need intervention in the form of educational and social action or
the provision of hearing aids because of the effects of hearing loss.1
Long-standing and untreated cases of OME may progress to serious
conditions such as adhesive otitis media, ossicular chain disruption,
retraction pockets and cholesteatoma.
Medical therapy has been widely used to treat the condition although
evidence-based benefit has yet to be established. Surgical treatment
options include myringotomy with or without ventilation tube (VT)
insertion, adenoidectomy or both. Opinions regarding the risks and
benefits of VT insertion vary and the management of OME therefore
remains controversial.7, level I; 8, level III
The need for a local evidence-based CPG is timely due to variation
in clinical practice, potential negative impact of OME on hearing and
cognitive function, and to assist healthcare providers in the management
of this condition.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
2.1 PREVALENCE
Prevalence of OME varies between 6.5% to 10.9% among children
in different countries.9, level II-2; 10, level III; 11, level II-3 Approximately 90% of
children have OME at some time before school age, most often between
six months and four years of age.12, level III
In Malaysia, findings from the National Hearing Survey for hearing and
ear disorder in 2005 showed that the prevalence of OME was 5.1% in
general population, 2.9% in children below ten years old and 2.6% in
children aged 10 to 19 years.2, level III These findings may not reflect the
actual prevalence of OME in children as the survey was conducted on
general population including adults. A study by A. Saim et al. reported
a OME prevalence of 13.8% among preschool children; it was higher
in Kuala Lumpur (17.9%) compared to the district of Kuala Selangor
(9.5%).3, level III Both studies reported higher prevalence among the
Malays and other Bumiputera as compared to the Chinese and Indians
communities.2 - 3, level III
2.2 RISK FACTORS
Significant non-medical risk factors for OME includes age (p<0.005),
family size (p<0.01), sibling’s history of OME (p<0.05), duration of
breast feeding (p<0.05), season (autumn/winter/spring) (p<0.001),
frequent swimming (p=0.034), and passive smoking (OR=1.46, 95%
CI 1.21 to 1.76) after adjustment for nasal infection.9, level II-2; 10, level III;
13 - 14, level II-2; 15, level III However, gender and birth weight are not related to
OME incidence.14, level II-2
Significant medical risk factors are previous acute otitis media (AOM)
episodes (OR=5.75, 95% CI 2.60 to 12.69), nasal obstruction (OR=1.67,
95% CI 1.01 to 2.75) and acute tonsillitis (OR=1.68, 95% CI 1.00 to
2.80).16, level II-2
Children with unilateral cleft lip and palate (CLP) demonstrate higher
prevalence of OME (74.7%) than those without cleft palate anomalies
(19.4%) with p<0.001.17, level II-2
The prevalence of OME (based on otoscopy, tympanometry and ageappropriate audiometry) among children with DS range from 92% at
age one to 73% at age five to six18, level III and 59% at age three.19, level III
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
In a local cohort study conducted in University Malaya Medical Centre
among children with DS, 55% had type B tympanogram which reflected
presence of OME.20, level II-2 Another recent local study from Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre found that out of a total of 224
DS children aged two months to 12 years old (mean 5.7 years), 71.4%
had conductive hearing loss (CHL), 16.1% sensori-neural hearing loss
(SNHL), 2.7% mixed hearing loss and 9.6% normal hearing. A total of
156 (69.6%) study subjects had type B tympanogram.21, level III
Other risk factors such as race, obesity, allergy and day care attendance
show inconsistent relationship with OME.9, level II-2; 13 - 14. level II-2; 22 - 23, level II-2
Risk factors for developing OME
•
Non-medical risk factors:
Ø young age (two to five years old)
Ø large family size
Ø history of OME in sibling
Ø short duration or no
breast feeding
Ø passive smoking
•
Medical risk factors:
Ø history of AOM
Ø nasal obstruction
Ø history of acute tonsillitis
Ø craniofacial anomalies
such as CLP and DS
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
3.
SCREENING
As hearing loss is one of the disabilities caused by OME, hearing
screening may play a role in detecting OME in children. However
to date, no study have been identified on the role of opportunistic
screening of OME and CHL in primary care. This is due to variation in
timing of screening and screening algorithm such as age at testing,
choice and combination of screening tools, type and training of the
tester, setting, location, failure criteria, frequency and interval of
retest.1; 6; 8, level III; 12, level III; 24, level II-2
Population-based screening for early detection of OME in asymptomatic
children has not been shown to improve outcomes in terms of
intelligence, receptive language or expressive language and thus has
not been recommended.8, level III; 12, level III; 14, level III; 24, level II-2
•
Screening for OME in general paediatric population is not
recommended.
•
Hearing assessment should be emphasised in the existing routine
child developmental assessment to detect hearing loss.
•
Hearing assessment may include distraction test, auditory and
speech development (refer to Appendix 3), and otoacoustic
emission.
Recommendation 1
•
Otitis media with effusion should be ruled out in a child suspected
of hearing loss. (Grade C)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
4.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Most children have middle ear effusions at some time during childhood
which are transient and often asymptomatic with fluctuating hearing
loss.1; 6
4.1 SYMPTOMS
Hearing impairment is the commonest presentation (90%) of OME
at home or in school. The hearing impairment is of conductive type.
Common associated presentations are otalgia (60%), upper respiratory
tract infection/URTI (40%), AOM (30%) and tonsillitis (18%).25, level III
In children with OME, reasons for referral to hospital are speech
problems (43%), hearing loss (41%) and speech delay (11%).26, level II-3
OME is an important cause of preventable hearing loss (57.1%), as
compared to chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM) and AOM (33.8%
and 9.1% respectively).27, level III Hearing loss in children with OME may
impair language and cognitive development. However, retrieved studies
showed conflicting outcomes between OME and speech and language
development.
A meta-analysis of cohort studies evaluated the association of early OME
on various aspects of speech and language. Receptive and expressive
language at preschool age (two to five years) were significantly better
in controls than in children with OME.28, level II-2
Two papers showed harmful effects of OME on language development
and academic performance. A study among urban Australian Aborigines
with OME and hearing loss demonstrated a deleterious effect on
the development of phonological awareness, reading and spelling
performance in year one schooling (p<0.01).29, level II-2 A local study by
Khairi M et al. showed that poor academic performance was associated
with mild hearing loss (p<0.001). OME accounted for 32.2% of the mild
hearing loss group.30, level III
However, other studies showed no association between hearing
loss due to OME and speech and language parameters in preschool
children (p=0.67)31, level II-2 or language development in the early school
years (p<0.10).32, level II-2 Roberts JE et al. similarly found no evidence
of OME on later language, cognitive and academic performance during
elementary school years.33, level II-2 ; 34, level II-3
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Hooper et al. in their paper noted no association between children
with OME-related hearing loss and attention outcomes. Further
subanalysis showed those from poor home environments experienced
greater difficulties on the attention tasks than those from good home
environments (p<0.05).35, level II-2 OME is a common cause of failed
newborn hearing screening (64.5%).36, level II-2
Balance-related symptom often encountered in young children may
result from chronic OME and this symptoms resolve following ventilation
of the middle ear. In Bruininks-Oseretsky tests for stability, 61% of
the study group performed below the expected scores for their age
as compared to 7% of the controls (p<0.001). A difference was found
between the results obtained before and after VT insertion in the tests
(p<0.001).37, level II-2 The presence of fluid in the middle ear impairs the
condition of the balance system in children. Postural stability and the
quantity of vestibulospinal reflexes seem to depend on the functional
condition of the middle ear.38, level II-2
Allergic symptoms are not associated significantly with OME in children
aged six to seven years, suggesting limited effect of allergy in the
pathogenesis of OME in this age group.39, level II-2
Recommendation 2
•
Otitis media with effusion (OME) should be ruled out in a child with
any of the following symptoms:
Ø hearing impairment
Ø speech or language delay
Ø associated presentation such as recurrent otalgia, upper
respiratory tract infection or acute otitis media
Ø poor school performance
Ø lack of concentration or attention
Ø balance difficulties (Grade C)
4.2 OTOSCOPIC FINDINGS
Normal otoscopy appearance showed pearly tympanic membrane (TM)
with cone of light and normal position of handle of malleus (refer to
Appendix 4).
The typical finding in OME is a dull TM due to distortion or loss of cone
of light following retraction of the TM. The retraction of TM is mainly
in the pars tensa with or without pars flaccida (attic or epitympanum)
retraction. The other findings are the presence of fluid level and/or air
bubble in the middle ear, variation in TM colour and immobility of TM on
pneumatic otoscopy (refer to Appendix 4).
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Retraction may be evident by indrawing handle of malleus or the
presence of prominent annular fold. Colour changes can be yellow,
amber or blue. Fluid level or air bubble is relatively uncommon.40, level III
Opacity (p=0.001) and retraction (p=0.018) are the two characteristics
of abnormal TM associated with elevated hearing threshold in
OME.5, level III
•
Otoscopic findings of OME:-
Ø dull TM
Ø retraction of TM
Ø fluid level or air bubble
Ø TM colour changes
Differences in clinical features and otoscopic findings between OME
and other common middle ear diseases such as acute otitis media
(AOM) and chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM) are illustrated in
table below.
Table 1: Clinical Features In Middle Ear Diseases
4.3 PARENTAL SUSPICION
Parental suspicion of hearing loss has a low sensitivity (19.7%) and
high specificity (97.0%), thus it is insufficient as a screening tool for the
diagnosis of mild hearing loss caused by OME.41, level II-2
Clinical
Features
Pain Fever Otorrhoea Otoscopic findings
Disease
No
(unless
with
secondary
infection)
Yes
No
No
OME
Acute otitis
media (AOM)
Chronic
suppurative
otitis media
(CSOM)
Cholestetoma
(URGENT
REFERRAL)
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
(scanty,
foul
smelling,
persistent)
• dull tympanic
membrane (TM)
• retraction of TM
• fluid level or air bubble
• TM colour change
• restricted TM mobility with
pneumatic otoscopy
• bulging TM
• inflammed TM
• perforated TM
• mucopurulent
discharge
• attic or marginal
perforation of
tympanic membrane
• presence of
keratin debris
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
5. DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
A few methods have been used for the diagnosis of OME which include
pneumatic otoscopy, tympanometry as well as acoustic stapedial reflex
testing, otoacoutic emission and audiometry testing.
Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests have variable sensitivity and
specificity in predicting conductive hearing loss associated with OME
in children less than 12 years of age. This is due to children being
less likely than adults to understand and complete the tuning fork
tests.42, level III
The presence of effusion during myringotomy was used as a gold
standard in the majority of studies in determining the test performance of
each diagnostic tool.43, level III; 44, level II-2; 45 - 47, level III; 48, level II-2 The sensitivity
and specificity of each diagnostic tool were assessed.
5.1 OTOSCOPY
There is no retrievable evidence on the use of clinical otoscopy alone
(without pneumatic component) in diagnosing OME in children. SIGN
found no evidence on the most commonly used primary care diagnostic
tool otoscopy (with or without tuning fork testing).6 National Institute
of Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommends otoscopy as part of clinical
examination.1
5.2 PNEUMATIC OTOSCOPY
Pneumatic otoscopy is used to determine the appearance and mobility
of the TM. It measures the mobility of TM by applying a positive and
negative pressure through a pneumatic bulb that attaches to a standard
otoscope.
A meta-analysis of cohort studies assessed the sensitivity and specificity
of pneumatic otoscopy in predicting the presence of OME by comparing
its outcomes with those of myringotomy. The results indicated that
pneumatic otoscopy had a sensitivity of 94% (95% CI 92 to 96) and
specificity of 80% (95% CI 75 to 86).49, level II-2 In another study on a
group of children aged one to ten years seeking medical treatment for
suspected OME, the sensitivity and specificity of pneumatic otoscopy
were 85% and 100% respectively. A similar study done among the
Australian Aboriginal children revealed a sensitivity of 89% and a
specificity of 69%.50, level III
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Rogers et al. found that the test performance of pneumatic otoscopy
are related to examiner’s experience. In this study, the sensitivity
and specificity of pneumatic otoscopy performed by staff pediatric
otolaryngologist were 68% (95% CI 58 to 78) and 81% (95% CI 74 to
89) respectively as compared to 58% (95% CI 47 to 69) and 78% (95%
CI 70 to 86) when performed by junior resident.43, level III
Earlier, Takahashi H et al. found that the aeration was correlated with
the eardrum mobility (p<0.01). These results indicate that eardrum
mobility was a good prognostic indicator of OME and best detected
using pneumatic otoscopy.51, level II-2
Accuracy on the pneumatic otoscopy test was noted uniformly greater
than accuracy with static test (otoscopy alone). The mean relative
improvement in sensitivity and specificity from static viewing to pneumatic
viewing were only 24% (95% CI 15% to 33%) and 42% (95% CI 27%
to 58%) respectively. Accurate identification of both the presence and
the absence of OME improved after pneumatic assessment of TM
mobility.52, level I
5.3 ACOUSTIC IMMITTANCE MEASURES
Acoustic immittance measurement is an objective technique of assessing
the integrity and function of the peripheral auditory mechanism.
Two commonly used acoustic immittance measures in clinical practice
are tympanometry and acoustic stapedial reflex (ASR). Both tests offer
a quick and objective assessment. They are routinely used to assess
the status of the TM and middle ear system. In addition, these two tests
have proven reliable measures for diagnosing middle ear pathologies
in children and adults.53, level III
Conventional tympanometry and ASR tests (probe tone of 226 Hz)
have become the standard practice in audiology clinics. However, the
use of 226 Hz tympanometry is not recommended in infants aged less
than seven months. In testing the middle ear function of young infants,
a high frequency probe tone tympanometry (probe tone of 678 Hz
and 1000 Hz) is recommended.54, level III This is because the infant’s
middle ear has a lower resonant frequency compared to older age
group.55, level III
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
5.3.1
Tympanometry
Tympanometry is an objective test to measure acoustic admittance of
the middle ear as a function of air pressure change in the external ear
canal.56, level III It consists of the application of a probe tone of 226 Hz
while the air pressure is changed within the ear canal. The resulting
display is called a tympanogram which shows a variation of acoustic
admittance against ear canal pressure.
Descriptions of the three common types of tympanogram are provided
in Appendix 5.
A. Conventional (226 Hz) Tympanometry
Tympanometry with a frequency of 226 Hz was found to have high
sensitivity and specificity in detecting OME in children aged one to ten
years compared to higher frequency tympanometry. The results of 226
Hz tympanometry revealed a sensitivity of 80% and a specificity of
100%. Although the sensitivity for 678 Hz and 1000 Hz was high (95%
and 100% respectively), the specificity for both frequencies was low at
54%.45, level III
In a multi-centre study involving 2,087 children, the sensitivity and
specificity of Type B and Type C2 tympanograms were investigated
against various level of hearing (≥15 dB HL, ≥20 dB HL, ≥25 dB HL
and ≥30 dB HL). The best combination to predict presence of OME
with sensitivity and specificity of 81% was hearing level of ≥20 dB HL
and Type B. However at the same hearing level, the inclusion of Type
C2 increased the sensitivity to 92% but reduced the specificity to
54%.57, level II-1 Another study showed the sensitivity and specificity of Type
B at hearing level of ≥25 dB HL were 90% and 68% respectively.50, level III
Using myringotomy as the gold standard, Nozza et al. found that the
best tympanometric variable for detecting OME was tympanometric
width >275 daPa as a fail criterion. The sensitivity and specificity of
these diagnostic criteria were in the range of 78 - 89% and 81 - 100%
respectively.47, level III In another study, the same authors found that
using gradient of ≤0.1 and absent ASR provide the best combination for
identifying OME with a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 86%.48, level II-2
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
B. High Frequency Tympanometry
i. 678 Hz Tympanometry
The use of 678 Hz tympanometry in cleft palate children aged between
two and seven months demonstrated an agreement between Type B
tympanogram and myringotomy findings in 96.3% of cases.58, level III
In a study conducted among 84 special care nursery neonates, 678
Hz tympanometry was found to be a useful diagnostic tool to measure
the middle ear status in this group of children. Abnormal 678 Hz
tympanograms was associated with failed transient evoked otoacoustic
emission (p<0.0001) and absence of ipsilateral ASR (p=0.0002).59, level III
ii. 1000 Hz Tympanometry
Williams et al. compared tympanometry findings obtained using three
different frequency probe tones in infants less than four months of
age with otomicroscopy and pneumatic otoscopy results as the gold
standard. The 1000 Hz tympanometry had the best agreement (κ=0.48
to 0.66) with the gold standard as compared to 678 Hz (κ=0.37 to 0.49)
and 226 Hz (κ=0.11 to 0.23).60, level III
A study involving 52 infants with OME found that the agreement
between computed tomography (CT) scan and 1000 Hz tympanometry
was almost perfect (κ=0.961) while the agreement between CT and
226 Hz was poor (κ=0.103).61, level III
5.3.2
Acoustic Stapedial Reflex
The Acoustic Stapedial Reflex (ASR) test is usually performed following
tympanometry to assess the function of the ear up to the brainstem
region. This test involves the presentation of tonal and/or noise stimuli
to elicit a reflex response from the stapedius muscle in the middle
ear.62, level III
Absent of ipsilateral ASR is associated with abnormal 678 Hz
tympanograms (p=0.0002) in detecting presence of OME in
neonates.59, level III
The sensitivity of ASR is 88% when compared with both myringotomy
and pneumatic otoscopy. While its specificity is 85% when compared
with myringotomy and 82% with pneumatic otoscopy.48, level II-2
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
•
Type B tympanogram is highly suggestive of OME.
•
Type C2 tympanogram combined with absence of ASR may also
suggest OME.
5.4 PURE TONE AUDIOMETRY
Pure Tone Audiometry (PTA) is a behavioural test which is commonly
used to establish hearing threshold across the range of audible
frequencies. The results are plotted in a frequency vs intensity graph
known as an audiogram. Description on the audiogram pattern is
provided in Appendix 5.
In children referred for suspected OME, an association was found
between PTA hearing thresholds and TM appearance obtained using
pneumatic otoscopy. The mean PTA of patients with OME and bubble
was lower than those without bubble (27.3 vs 37.4 dB HL, p=0.001).5, level III
In a study measuring PTA and 226 Hz tympanometry on subjects
diagnosed with persistent OME, the mean six frequencies of PTA air
conduction threshold (PTACT) was found to be greater in ears with
Type B tympanogram than those with Type A tympanogram (29.3 dB
HL vs 11.5 dB HL, p<0.001).63, level III
5.5 OTOACOUSTIC EMISSIONS
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are sounds generated from the cochlea
which can be recorded by a microphone fitted into the ear canal.
Hence, this test is commonly used to determine cochlear status. In
clinical setting, two types of acoustic stimuli are given to evoke the
OAEs, which are transient evoked otoacoustic emissions (TEOAEs)
and distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs).
As OAEs are transmitted from the cochlea to the external ear canal via
the middle ear, the condition of middle ear system directly influence
the OAEs findings. Therefore, presence of effusion in the middle ear is
associated with absent OAEs. Other cause of absence OAE is SNHL.
In two studies, high failure rates of OAEs were found in cases of
abnormal tympanograms. TEOAEs were absent in 93.5% of children
diagnosed with OME pre-operatively. Improvement of all TEOAEs
parameters were found six weeks (p<0.01) and six months (p<0.01)
post-operatively.44, level II-3 An association between TEOAEs failure and
abnormal tympanogram was noted in a group of special care neonates
(p<0.0001).59, level III
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Recommendation 3
•
Otoscopy should be performed in suspected cases of otitis media
with effusion (OME). Pneumatic otoscopy is preferred and should
be made widely available. (Grade C)
•
In all suspected cases of OME in places with trained personnel, the
following tests should be performed:
Ø Tympanometry (in infant less than seven months, high frequency
tympanometry [678 Hz or 1000 Hz] should be used if available).
(Grade C)
Ø Pure Tone Audiometry (measurement of both air and bone
conduction thresholds). (Grade C)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
6.
PREVENTIVE MEASURES
There are very few studies on prevention of OME in children.
These studies are limited to the role of pneumococcal and influenza
vaccination.
Two randomised controlled trials (RCTs) found that pneumococcal
vaccination did not protect children against OME (OR=0.90, 95% CI
0.69 to 1.19).64 - 65, level I It also did not prevent recurrence of OME in
those previously known to have persistent OME (RR=0.91, 95%CI 0.60
to 1.38).66, level I A subgroup analysis suggested benefit in children who
had not been exposed earlier to the infection such as children with no
older siblings (OR=0.58, 95%CI 0.38 to 0.91).65, level I
The role of influenza vaccine was studied in two prospective cohort
studies. These studies which were conducted among young children
attending day-care in temperate regions found that influenza vaccine
was significantly effective in reducing OME episodes especially during
influenza season.67 - 68, level II-2 The effectiveness of the vaccine in tropical
climate like Malaysia (where influenza season is not clearly identified)
has not been studied. In addition, influenza vaccination requires yearly
injection (to remain effective) and its cost-effectiveness locally need to
be studied.
•
Pneumococcal vaccination has no role in preventing otitis media
with effusion (OME) as opposed to acute otitis media. Influenza
vaccination is effective in preventing OME in temperate countries.
Avoidance of known risk factors such as passive smoking and bottle
feeding could theoretically reduce the risk of developing OME. A
meta-analysis of epidemiological studies found that passive smoking
increased risk of middle ear disease by 35% (OR=1.35, 95% CI 1.23
to 1.49) for household smoking and 46% (OR=1.46, 95% CI 1.21 to
1.76) for maternal smoking.69, level II-2 Formula-fed infants have 2-fold
increase risk of first OME compared with infants breastfed for six
months (RR=2.06, 95% CI 1.01 to 4.18).70, level II-2 Although there is no
direct evidence on modification to the above risk factors in reducing
OME, breastfeeding and avoidance of passive smoking in children are
advocated.
A cross-sectional study found that the risk of developing OME reduced
by 40% in those taking regular chewing gums (OR=0.60, 95% CI 0.39
to 0.93).71, level III However, no further studies were identified to support
this finding.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Recommendation 4
• Parents should be informed that breastfeeding for six months may
reduce the risk of otitis media with effusion (OME) in their children.
(Grade C)
• Parents should be advised that smoking may increase the risk of
middle ear disease. (Grade C)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
7.
ACTIVE OBSERVATION
A systematic review (SR) examined the natural history and spontaneous
resolution of OME in children. In children with newly diagnosed OME
of unknown duration, the study found cumulative resolution rates of
56%, 72% and 81% at three, six and nine months respectively (using
resolution criterion as change of tympanogram from type B to non-B).
Lower resolution rates were also noted using other criteria for resolution.
In contrast, children with documented chronic (defined as >3 months)
bilateral OME had much lower resolution rates (19%, 25% and 31% at
three, six and twelve months respectively).72, level II-2
A few RCTs examined the role of early vs delayed VT insertion. Some
of the trials involving children with persistent but uncomplicated OME
found prompt insertion of ventilation tube (VT) as compared to delayed
insertion (nine months) did not measurably improve speech, language,
cognition and psychosocial developmental outcomes.73 - 77, level I
However, two trials conducted in more severely affected children
[bilateral OME and significant hearing loss (25 - 75 dB) for >3 months]
found some benefits from early VT insertion for expressive language,
verbal comprehension and behavioural problems.78 - 79, level I The subtle
benefits appeared to persist up to age seven to eight years.80, level I
A period of continued observation will allow resolution of many cases
of OME without the need for surgical intervention. During this period,
parents and caregivers should be given advice on strategies to limit the
effects of hearing loss in the child.6; 8, level III
Active observation is a period whereby patient is being observed for
three months following diagnosis prior to surgical intervention.
Advice on educational and behavioural strategies to minimise
impact of hearing loss during active observation:-6; 8, level III
•
Face the child when speaking
•
Get the child’s attention before starting to talk
•
Reduce background noise to the minimal
•
Speak clearly with normal rhythm and volume; use visual cues
(such as hands and pictures) in addition to speech
•
Read to or with the child (explain pictures and ask questions)
•
Repeat words, phrases, and questions when misunderstood
•
In the classroom, the child should preferably be seated in the
front row or near the teacher
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Recommendation 5
•
Children with newly diagnosed otitis media with effusion (OME)
should undergo active observation for at least three months from
the time of diagnosis as spontaneous resolution of OME may occur.
(Grade A)
Ø Specific advice* to improve communication should be offered.
(Grade C)
•
Children with documented persistent OME (>3 months) and hearing
loss should be considered for surgical intervention. (Grade B)
* Refer to yellow box above
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
8.
INTERVENTION
Interventions in OME management consist of non-surgical and surgical
interventions.
8.1 NON-SURGICAL INTERVENTION
OME is a common condition in children which is usually mild
with spontaneous resolution occuring in 56% of cases at three
months.72, level II-2 However, it can be recurrent and persistent after that.
Non-surgical intervention is beneficial if it could speed the resolution
of an episode of OME. Medical therapy has been commonly used in
the practice as the first-line treatment with variation in the treatment of
choice.
8.1.1 Steroids
Topical intranasal steroid is beneficial either alone or with antibiotic
in treating OME at one month. At three months, there is conflicting
evidence in its effectiveness. However, the findings are not statistically
significant.81 - 82, level I
In a RCT on patients with OME and adenoid hypertrophy, intranasal
steroid spray was found to be effective at six weeks (p<0.001).83, level I
A Cochrane review showed faster resolution of OME when oral steroid
was used alone (OR=0.22, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.63) or in combination
with an antibiotic (OR=0.37, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.56) at two weeks when
compared to control. No evidence of benefit beyond two weeks of
treatment was noted.82, level I
In another RCT, no difference was demonstrated in the resolution rates
of OME at three months follow-up between steroid, antihistamine and
antibiotic alone or in combination (p>0.05).84, level I
No significant or lasting adverse events have been reported on topical
intranasal or short term oral steroid use.81 - 82, level I However, prolonged
use of oral steroid may lead to adverse side effects such as growth
retardation.
Refer to Appendix 6 for suggested medication dosages and side
effects.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
•
Intranasal steroid should not be used for children less than two
years old.
8.1.2
Antibiotics
Use of antibiotics leads to significantly lower rates in persistent OME in
both ears and one or both ears in the antibiotic group (53% and 77%)
compared to the controls (84% and 93%) after two weeks of followup.85, level I
However, a meta-analysis of 16 RCTs failed to support the continued
use of antibiotics in the treatment of OME. Placebo-controlled trials did
not show antibiotic efficacy (RD=0.043, 95% CI -0.001 to 0.086).86, level I
Short term use of antibiotics with oral steroid led to a faster resolution
of OME as compared to antibiotic alone (OR=0.37, 95% CI 0.25 to
0.56).82, level I
Both NICE and SIGN guidelines do not recommend the use of antibiotics
in children with OME.1; 6
8.1.3 Antihistamine or Decongestant
As OME may occur with allergic rhinitis, antihistamine and decongestant
are widely used as symptomatic treatment in children with OME in the
local practice.
However, a Cochrane SR in 2006 on children with OME showed no
benefit of its use:87, level I
• Decongestant alone did not resolve OME at one month or less
(RR=1.06, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.22).
•
Antihistamine or combination with decongestant up to three
months also did not resolve OME compared to placebo with
RR=0.94 (95% CI 0.65 to 1.36) and 0.97 (95% CI 0.89 to 1.04)
respectively.
•
Neither antihistamine, decongestant nor the combination
treatment lessened hearing loss at one month (RR=1.08, 95%
CI 0.93 to 1.27) or one year (RR=1.50, 95% CI 0.63 to 3.56). All
the treatment groups reported more side effects at or before one
month (RR=2.70, 95% CI 1.37 to 1.88).
An update of the above review in 2011 showed no statistical or clinical
benefit on the use of antihistamine or decongestant.88, level I
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Both NICE and SIGN guidelines do not recommend use of antihistamine
and decongestant in children with OME.1; 6
•
Continuous use of topical intranasal decongestant more than two
weeks may lead to rhinitis medicamentosa.
8.1.4
Autoinflation
A SR on autoinflation in children with OME showed no improvement in
tympanometry and audiometry outcomes:89, level I
•
Tympanometry at less than one month (RRI=1.65, 95% CI 0.49
to 5.61) or longer than one month (RRI=1.89, 95% CI 0.77 to
4.67)
•
Audiometry (WMD=7.02, 95% CI -6.92 to 20.96)
8.1.5 Homeopathy and Mucolytic
There is no good quality evidence for homeopathy and bromhexine in
children with OME.
8.1.6 Hearing Aid
Hearing aid is an option to amplify hearing in OME. It is generally
acceptable to parents and children as it provides a non-invasive way
of managing the problems associated with OME.90 - 91, level III However,
there is no evidence to support its use as the first line of treatment in
children with OME.
Hearing aid should be offered to children with persistent bilateral OME
and hearing loss as an alternative to surgical intervention where surgery
is contraindicated or not acceptable.1 However, potential noise trauma
is the main concern associated with continuous use after resolution of
OME.92, level III
•
There is no role of topical ear drops in treating otitis media with
effusion (OME).
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Recommendation 6
•
Short term (less than six weeks) intranasal steroid can be used for
otitis media with effusion (OME) with concurrent allergic rhinitis and
adenoid hypertrophy. (Grade A)
•
In children with OME, the following treatment is not recommended:
Ø oral steroid (Grade A)
Ø prolonged intranasal steroid (Grade A)
Ø antibiotic (Grade A)
Ø antihistamine or decongestant (Grade A)
Ø autoinflation (Grade A)
Ø homeopathy and mucolytic (Grade C)
•
Hearing aids may be considered in persistent bilateral OME and
hearing loss where surgery is contraindicated or not acceptable.
(Grade C)
8.2 SURGICAL INTERVENTION
The main reason for considering surgery in OME is persistence of
hearing loss. It is conducted to improve hearing and minimise the risk
of OME recurrence.
The mainstay of surgical intervention is myringotomy with VT insertion
to ventilate the middle ear. This will lead to normalisation of middle
ear pressure. The choice of surgical intervention must be balanced
between its risks and benefits.
Certain medical diseases such as bleeding disorder and other medical
conditions which render patient unfit for general anaesthesia should be
ascertained prior to surgery.
8.2.1 Timing of Surgical Intervention
OME exhibits a fluctuating pattern in its presentation and a number
of cases will resolve spontaneously. The duration of the disease at
first presentation is often uncertain. Thus, the decision for surgical
intervention in OME is based on several factors such as duration of
disease and presence of structural or functional complication.
Different guidelines and studies vary in their recommendations on
timing of surgical intervention. Waiting time of three to six months
before the intervention on persistent disease with hearing impairment
of more than 25 dB or structural changes to the tympanic membrane is
recommended.1; 8, level III; 93, level III; 94, level II-2
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
In children with significant hearing loss (>25 dB for three months or
more), there is some benefit from VT insertion in expressive language,
verbal comprehension and behavioural problems.78 - 79, level I
Recommendation 7
•
Surgical intervention should be considered after three months of
persistent otitis media with effusion with:
Ø hearing loss >25 dB (at three frequency average) (Grade A)
AND/OR
Ø *structural changes to the tympanic membrane or middle ear.
(Grade C)
* Refer to Appendix 4
8.2.2 Options of Surgical Intervention
A. Myringotomy
There is no retrievable evidence on myringotomy alone in the
management of OME.
B. Myringotomy with VT
VT improves the hearing level in persistent bilateral OME. The effect
of VT on hearing is significantly improved by 9 - 10 dB in the first six
months compared to watchful waiting (WW) and diminishes but remains
significance after this period.95 - 97, level I The improvement in hearing is
greater in those with hearing threshold of >25 dB compared to <25
dB.98, level I
Patients with VT have shorter mean time with effusion (p=0.0001)98, level l
and fewer bilateral OME in all visits97, level I up to 12 months of follow-up
compared to WW group.
Improvement in hearing level in children with VT is better in those aged
≤3 years attending day-care and those aged ≥4 years with a hearing
level of ≥25 dBHL in both ears persisting for at least 12 weeks.98, level I
There is no statistically significant difference in developmental outcomes
such as language, cognitive, behaviour and quality of life in VT insertion
compared with WW.95 - 96, level I
The percentage of functioning VT in situ reduce over time from 92%
to 30% (from three to 12 months follow-up).97, level I PhosphorylcholineManagement of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
coated fluoroplastic VT do not offer any advantages over uncoated
standard fluoroplastic tympanostomy tubes.99, level I
Repeated VT insertion for recurrent AOM or OME early in life will not be
detrimental in the long-term hearing outcome.100, level II-2
C. Myringotomy with VT plus adenoidectomy
Adjuvant adenoidectomy along with VT insertion is routinely performed
in many countries including Malaysia for recurrent episodes of OME
and chronic persistent OME.
The benefit of adenoidectomy in reducing the recurrent AOM or
persistent OME was found in patients with hypertrophied adenoids
abutting the torus tobaris (p<0.05). However, adenoidectomy had no
significant benefit in the nonabutting group.101, level I A cohort study
showed that VT with adenoidectomy or adenotonsillectomy reduced
risk of further VT surgery (p<0.001)102, level II-2
A meta-analyses showed that VT alone gave 6 to 9 dB hearing
improvement compared to an additional of 1 to 4 dB in VT with
adenoidectomy.96, level I
Adenoidectomy in young children aged 24 - 47 months does not add
any further benefit in the reduction of OME recurrence and average
rates of AOM or otorrhoea episodes, and requirement of additional
surgical procedure.103, level I
D. Long-term VT
Long-term VT may be indicated when short term VT and additional
measures such as adenoidectomy to improve eustachian tube function
fail. It should be used in selective and individualised basis as the rate of
complications such as recurrent otorrhoea and persistent perforation is
high.104 - 105, level III A meta analysis of cohort studies showed that longterm tube increased the risk of perforation (RR=3.5, 95% CI 1.5 to 7.1)
and cholestetoma (RR=2.6, 95% CI 1.5 to 4.4) compared to short term
tube.106, level II-2
E. Other options
Laser myringotomy is a safe method to treat chronic OME in children
and can be performed under local anaesthesia. However, laser
myringotomy alone is a less effective treatment than myringotomy with
VT.107, level I
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Refer to Appendix 7 on Advice to Parents of Children Post-Ventilation
Tube
Recommendation 8
•
Myringotomy with ventilation tube (VT) insertion is the treatment of
choice for surgical treatment in otitis media with effusion (OME).
(Grade A)
•
Myringotomy with VT insertion combined with adenoidectomy should
be considered in children with persistent OME and hypertrophied
adenoids abutting the torus tobaris. (Grade A)
8.3 COMPLICATIONS OF VENTILATION TUBE INSERTION
Complications of VT can be divided into early and late complications.
8.3.1
Early Complications
The prevalence of otorrhoea is 4.9% to 15% in children less than 13
years of age with myringotomy and VT.108, level III; 109, level II-2
Another complication with myringotomy and VT is OME recurrence
which has a prevalence of 11.2%.108, level III This complication is related
to extrusion time of VT. The longer the extrusion time, the lower is
the recurrence rate. The rate is 36.5% in group with retention time <6
months, compared to 17.7% in 6 - 12 months group (p=0.02) and 9.1%
in >12 months group (p=0.001).110, level III
8.3.2
Long-Term Complications
The prevalence of myringosclerosis is 32.3% in children aged 3 to 16
years. Initial age of VT insertion and gender are not significant factors
for the development of myringosclerosis after extrusion of VT.110, level III
VT increases the prevalence of myringosclerosis and late
atrophy109, level II-2; 111, level II-2 but these do not significantly affect
hearing.112, level II-1 Frequency of VT insertion is associated with
increased prevalence of myringosclerosis, retraction pocket and
negative tympanometric peak pressure (p=0.002, p=0.01, and p=0.008
respectively). However, the sequalae of VT such as myringosclerosis,
atrophy, TM perforation and hearing loss typically developed
earlier rather than later in disease and its treatment.111, level II-2
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Following VT extrusion, the prevalence of residual TM perforation is
only 1.7% to 3.0%.100, level II-1; 108, level III; 111, level II-2 In a study of 78 children
aged 2 to 10 years with myringotomy and VT, the prevalence of lateonset otorrhea was 16.1%.108, level III Intra-operative saline irrigation of
the middle ear has been described in a study as an effective mean in
preventing post-operative purulent otorrhea (p<0.005).113, level I However,
this is not practiced in local setting.
•
Recurrence of OME is part of the disease process which may occur
at any point of time and not a complication of VT insertion.
•
Advices to patients post-VT insertion:-
Ø Keep ear dry
Ø Use ear plug when swimming or bathing (especially when
washing hair using shampoo or soap)
Ø Do not insert object into the ear
8.3.3
Management of Complications
There is no specific treatment for myringosclerosis,110, level III as it does
not significantly affect hearing.112, level II-1
Children with residual perforation should be considered for
myringoplasty. In a cohort study, Yung M et al. found no difference in
the surgical outcome between the younger age group (4 to 8 years)
and the older age group (9 to 13 years) (p=0.23).114, level II-2 However in
another study, this operation was more likely to fail in younger children
(p<0.0047) and those with anterior TM perforation (p<0.0038).115, level III
Fat plug myringoplasty is an option for small perforation.116, level II-3 In
the local clinical practice, myringoplasty is offered to children above the
age of 10.
In post-VT otorrhoea with recurrent acute otitis media, topical antibiotic
is effective in children under three years of age with tube associated
otorrhea. Systemic oral antibiotic is indicated in the presence of fever
and otalgia. It is preferable to perform a bacterial culture of the discharge
before commencing antibiotics.113, level I; 117, level I
There is no retrievable evidence on when to remove VT in cases of
persistent otorrhoea. In the current practice, VT is removed when there
is persistent otorrhoea despite optimum medical treatment.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Recommendation 9
•
Myringotomy and ventilation tube (VT) insertion should be offered
to children with otitis media with effusion as it is a safe procedure.
(Grade C)
•
Myringoplasty may be considered in residual perforation of TM in
children. (Grade C)
•
In post-VT otorrhoea, topical and oral antibiotic should be instituted.
(Grade A)
Ø Following failure antibiotic treatment, removal of VT should be
considered. (Grade C)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
9.
MANAGEMENT OF OME IN SPECIAL CHILDREN
9.1 CHILDREN WITH CLEFT PALATE
Children with unilateral cleft lip and palate demonstrate higher prevalence
of OME (74.7%) than those without clefts (19.4%) with p<0.001.118, level II-2
A local study by Sakinah MS in 2007 found the prevalence of OME in
cleft palate children at 55.4%.119, level III
In children with cleft palate, failure of palatal fusion during development
results in abnormal insertion of the tensor veli palatine and levator veli
palatine muscles in the soft palate. This will lead to improper opening
of the eustachian tube which compromises ventilatory and muco-ciliary
clearance functions of the middle ear. Thus it predisposes the children
to early onset of OME. Despite palatal repair surgery, the functions of
the eustachian tube cannot be completely restored. Therefore these
children are at risk of persistent and longer course of OME.
OME in children with cleft palate is often intervened by early insertion of
VT to improve hearing impairment, speech and language development,
and to prevent long-term sequelae.
All children with cleft palate should be managed by a multidisciplinary
team comprising of professionals from otorhinolaryngology (ORL),
audiology, speech therapy, paediatrics, plastic and reconstructive
surgery, maxillo-facial surgery, occupational therapy and medical
genetics disciplines, and social welfare department.
9.1.1
Timing of VT
At six years follow-up, a cohort study of early placement of VT before
the age of seven months for both cleft palate and control groups showed
that hearing level improved with means PTA of 8.9 dBHL and 7.7 dBHL
respectively.120, level II-2 However in a recent SR of 18 papers with various
study design and quality, there was inconsistent evidence to support
the beneficial effect of early routine insertion of VT for treatment of
OME in children with cleft palate.121, level I
Good compliance to hearing aid was associated with good hearing,
speech and language development in 51.6% of children with cleft
palate either with or without VT. However, those with VT (38.4%)
were also found to have higher otological complications such as TM
perforation and persistent otorrhea compared to those without VT
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
(4.5%) with p<0.005.122, level III In another study, there was no difference
noted in otological outcomes (healed TM, retracted TM, perforated TM,
persistent OME and VT in situ) when comparison was made between
cleft palate and non-cleft group (p=0.2).120, level II-2
9.1.2
Hearing Threshold for VT
There is no good evidence retrieved on hearing threshold level to
decide on VT insertion in children with OME and cleft palate. However
in local practice, the threshold level to intervene is similar with normal
children with OME.
9.1.3
Numbers of VT
Children with cleft palate often require multiple insertions of VT. Means
number of VT insertions per ear are 1.7 and 2.1.122, level III; 123, level II-2
Greater number of VT insertions are associated with abnormal TM
appearance (p<0.05) and reduced hearing (p<0.05).123, level II-2
9.1.4
Use of Long-Term VT
There is no evidence to support the use of long-term VT in children with
cleft palate at the first VT insertion.122, level III; 123 , level II-2
9.1.5
Hearing Screening
Newborns with cleft palate are at higher risk of failing newborn hearing
screening compared with healthy neonates. Those who fail hearing
screening have higher incidence of permanent CHL or SNHL compared
to those who pass (43% vs 3%).124, level II-2
The incidence of SNHL in ears with OME in CLP or cleft palate children
is 1.8%.123, level II-2 Factors predicting persistent hearing impairment
include cleft palate alone, female and presence of an associated
syndrome.124, level II-2
9.1.6
CLP or cleft palate with associated syndrome
Associated syndrome is seen in 15.7% to 38.0% of CLP or cleft palate
children122, level III; 124, level II-2 with 5.4-fold higher risk of hearing loss
(p=0.05) compared to those without associated syndrome.124, level II-2
Thirty percent of infants with cleft palate and CLP associated syndrome
may have underlying SNHL.125, level II-2
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Recommendation 10
•
All children with cleft palate should be managed by a multidisciplinary
team. (Grade C)
•
Hearing assessment should be performed early and six-monthly in
all children with cleft palate or cleft lip and palate (CLP). (Grade C)
•
Early ventilation tube insertion should be performed at the time of
palatal repair in cleft palate or CLP infants with auditory brainstem
response threshold level of ≥25 dBHL and after otological
assessment. (Grade C)
•
Hearing amplification may be considered as an option in cases of
mixed (conductive and sensorineural) and moderate hearing loss in
children with cleft palate. (Grade C)
9.2 CHILDREN WITH DOWN SYNDROME
Down syndrome (DS) is the most common genetic disorders and
occuring in about 1 in 600 to 1 in 1000 live births. The incidence of
DS in Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia was 1 in 950 live births. The
incidence among Malays was 1 in 981, Chinese 1 in 940 and Indians
1 in 860.126 - 127, level III Various studies have shown that children with DS
had higher incidence of OME. Clin Mol Teratol.18 - 19. level III; 20, level II-2; 21, level III
Characteristically, children with DS have mid-face hypoplasia,
malformation of the eustachian tube, narrow nasopharynx, delayed
motor development, generalised hypotonia and delayed maturation of
immune system. These factors not only predispose them to develop
OME at early age but also persistent and longer episodes of OME.
In a retrospective study, the mean age of children with DS diagnosed
with OME referred to ORL clinic was 3.6 years (range 2 - 8). In these
children, the diagnosis of OME was the commonest secondary finding
(63.7%) and primary diagnosis of OME was only made in 17.2% of
cases.128, level III
Children with DS have a significant higher incidence of hearing loss
than the general population (37 - 78% vs 2.5%) and OME is the most
common cause of hearing loss among them. In this group, even a mild
degree of hearing impairment can have major consequences on speech
perception and language development.129, level III
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
9.2.1
VT insertion
In a cohort study conducted in Japan, the mean age of VT insertion in
children with DS was 5.4 ± 2.4 years (range 2 - 13).130, level II-2 In a later
study, 83% had first placement of VT at a younger age (range 6 and 18
months).131, level II-2
Many children with DS require multiple insertions of VT up to five
times.128, level III Slightly more than half need more than single VT insertion
(42.5% require two, 7.5% three and 5% four times).131, level II-2 The mean
interval between the first insertion and last extrusion of VT is 22.9±15.9
months in children with DS as compared to 27.5±23.6 months in normal
children.130, level II-2
Persistent hearing loss after VT insertion was noted higher in children
with DS (40%) when compared to normal children (9%).132, level II-2
However in another five-year longitudinal study, 98% of children with
DS achieved normal to borderline normal hearing level after meticulous
surgical or medical treatment. The study concluded that early diagnosis
and aggressive treatment, started soon after birth, provided improvement
in hearing.133, level II-2
Otorrhoea following VT insertion was found higher in children with
DS compared to normal children (p<0.01). Similarly, the incidence
of complications after extrusion of VT (cholesteatoma, permanent
perforation and atelectasis) was also higher among them than normal
children (p<0.05).130, level II-2 Another study showed that seven of 11
children with DS had persistent otorrhoea after VT insertion with limited
improvement in hearing.134, level III Following VT extrusion, only 26%
children with DS had normal TM appearance or slight retraction as
compared to 78% in normal children (p<0.05).130, level II-2
VT insertion in children requires general anaesthesia and can be done
as day care surgery. However, it is not suitable for children with DS due
to risk of developing complications such as poor oral intake and upper
airway obstruction.128, level III
The following factors should be considered in the child before VT is
offered as an option to hearing aids:1
• severity of hearing loss
• age
• practicality, risks and chances of early extrusion of VT
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
9.2.2
Hearing Amplification
Forty percent of children with DS have stenotic ear canals and 80% of
them have OME. Fitting of hearing aid in the stenotic ear canals is a
challenge and even when it is well-fitted, it can be difficult to achieve
compliance among them.135, level III
Hearing aids should normally be offered to DS children with hearing
loss.1 There is no retrievable evidence to compare the benefits of
conventional hearing aids to VT among children with DS and OME.
Bone conduction hearing aids and bone anchored hearing aid (BAHA)
are other forms of hearing amplification methods. Two studies showed
that OME was the second most common indication for BAHA after
chronic otitis media among children with DS. Most patients and parents
were satisfied with the result of better hearing with BAHA. Both studies
concluded that BAHA had a role in overall management of children with
DS after conventional hearing aids and/or ventilation tubes had been
considered.134, level III; 136, level III
Recommendation 11
•
All children with Down syndrome (DS) should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team. (Grade C)
•
Hearing assessment should be performed early and six-monthly in
all children with DS. (Grade C)
•
Hearing amplification should be considered in children with DS who
have otitis media with effusion (OME) and either:
Ø stenotic ear canal
Ø mixed hearing loss
Ø as an alternative to VT where necessary (Grade C)
•
VT should be considered in DS with OME after weighing its risks
and benefits. (Grade C)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
10. REFERRAL
To date, there is lack of direct evidence on referral of children with
OME. Therefore, recommendations are derived from several existing
guidelines, local expert consensus and other sections of these
CPG.1; 6; 8, level III; 12, level III; 137, level III
Recommendation 12
•
Children with any of the following features should be referred to
an otorhinolaryngologist for diagnosis and management of otitis
media with effusion (OME):
Ø hearing impairment or hearing loss due to uncertain causes
Ø recurrent episodes of acute otitis media or otalgia
Ø speech and language development not appropriate for age
Ø impaired social or educational development and behavioural
symptoms (lack of concentration or attention) associated with
hearing impairment
Ø underlying craniofacial anomalies, Down’s Syndrome and cleft
lip and/or palate
Ø otoscopic findings such as colour changes, opacity or retraction
of tympanic membrane and presence of fluid level or air
bubble persisted after three months of active observation.
(Grade C)
•
Children with persistent OME after active observation for three
months should also be referred to ORL. (Grade C)
•
URGENT REFERRAL is required in the presence of cholesteatoma
(refer to Appendix 4). (Grade C)
•
Features of cholesteatoma
Ø Persistent, scanty, foul-smelling ear discharge
Ø Attic or marginal perforation of tympanic membrane
Ø Presence of keratin debris
Ø Hearing impairment
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
11. PARAMETERS TO BE MONITORED DURING FOLLOW-UP
There are parameters that need to be monitored during follow-up of
children with OME following treatment. They are TM appearance,
presence of ear discharge, hearing level, middle ear impedance and
speech and language development, education and behaviour.
11.1
OTOLOGICAL FINDINGS
Majority (67.3%) of the VT-treated ears are healed after five years of
follow-up.112, level II-2 However, common abnormalities that have been
reported are TM atrophy, myringosclerosis, TM retraction and otorrhea.
Less common abnormalities include TM perforation, persistent OME
and VT in place.111 - 112, level II-2; 138, level Il-2
•
In post-VT, the presence of the following abnormalities require ORL
consultation:
Ø Otorrhea
Ø TM retraction
Ø TM perforation
Ø Persistent hearing loss (this may be due to SNHL or ossicular
erosion)
11.2
AUDIOLOGICAL FINDINGS
Audiological tests in combination with otoscopic examination play a
major role in diagnosing OME. The tests are as follows:
11.2.1 Pure Tone Audiometry
PTA shows improvement in hearing with mean difference of 10.3 dB
after myringotomy at five years follow-up (p<0.001). TM perforations,
ongoing episodes of OME and pars tensa retractions are associated with
mild conductive hearing loss (p<0.0005). Atrophy and myringosclerosis
of TM are not associated with hearing impairment.112, level II-2
11.2.2 Tympanometry
In a cohort study, an eight years follow-up post-VT showed the prevalence
of low static admittance (SA) and broad-peaked tympanograms (Type
B) declined from 38% to 8%, while high SA and narrow peaked
tympanograms (Type A) increased from 23% to 64%.111, level II-2
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
11.2.3 Auditory Brainstem Response
Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) is only available at certain
hospitals with audiology services.
ABR techniques are useful in estimating hearing loss in children with
OME who are difficult to be tested by behavioural audiometry.139, level II-2
Following VT insertion, ABR shows improvement in mean peak I, III and
V latencies in the effusion present group (p<0.0001). Mean hearing loss
improves from 22 dBnHL to 11 dBnHL after VT (p<0.0001).139, level II-2
11.3
SPEECH, LANGUAGE AND ACADEMIC DEVELOPMENT
RCTs conducted in children with severe OME children found some
benefits from early VT insertion for expressive language, verbal
comprehension and behavioural problems.78 - 79, level l
OME accounts for 32.2% of mild hearing loss, which is associated with
poor academic performance (p<0.001).30, level III
Recommendation 13
•
Children with otitis media with effusion (OME) should be followed-up
for otological and audiological assessment regularly. (Grade C)
•
Children with OME post-ventilation tube should be followed-up
within the first month of surgery followed by six-monthly interval till
recovery. (Grade C)
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
12. LONG-TERM SEQUELAE
There is no established time frame as to what constitutes long-term
sequelae. In Section 4 on clinical presentation, structural changes and
functional disability have been discussed in length.
The search for evidence on the long-term sequelae of OME without any
intervention provides no retrievable results. This is likely due to the fact
that the attending physician will intervene in cases with structural or
functional deficits to prevent complications.
Despite VT insertion, there is evidence of long-term structural and
functional sequelae. In a cohort study, organised OME (granulation
or cyst) in the mastoids on CT scan three months after VT insertion
was associated with a higher incidence of attic retraction, sclerotic and
poorly pneumatised mastoids (p<0.05). However, the study population
consisted of both children and adults.140, level II-2
In another study on patients who had VT insertion during their childhood,
higher prevalence of severe retraction (p=0.02), severe atrophy and
hearing loss (p<0.01) was noted after 9 to 23 years compared to four
years after treatment.141, level III
A review found that 20% of patients with cholesteatoma had a past
history of OME with VT insertion. Evolution of OME into cholesteatoma
occured in not more than 0.5% of OME cases, whether or not VT were
inserted.142, level III
•
OME can result in long-term structural changes to the tympanic
membrane and middle ear (such as severe retraction, cholesteatoma
and poorly developed mastoids) and functional impairment (such as
hearing loss).
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
13. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
In assisting healthcare provider and patient in the management of
specific clinical circumstances, it is important not only to develop valid
CPG by a sound methodology, but also to ensure the implementation
of the evidence-based recommendations in it. There is often a gap
between the development and implementation into practice of a CPG.
Each implementation strategy is effective under different circumstances
and a multifaceted approach is most likely to achieve change. The
approach should be tailored to suit local circumstances and address
local barriers. Successful strategies to change practice need to be
adequately resourced including people with adequate knowledge and
skills. Team work and co-operation between primary and secondary/
tertiary care is paramount to achieve this.
13.1
EXISTING FACILITATORS AND BARRIERS
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a. Hearing assessment in child developmental assessment in the
primary care and the School Health Programme
b. High Risk Newborn Hearing Screening Programme in hospitals
with ORL and audiology services
c. Universal Newborn Hearing Screening in selected hospitals
d. Database on OME based on National Hearing Registry
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
include:
a. Poor understanding/limited knowledge of OME
b. Inadequate training during undergraduate and housemanship
training
c. Insufficient resources in diagnosing OME
d. No specific data registry on OME
13.2
POTENTIAL RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS
To implement the recommendations in the CPG, the following factors
are identified to have potential resource implications:
a. Widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare personnel via
printed copies
b. Re-enforce training of healthcare personnel especially in
primary care via regular seminars or workshops to ensure active
dissemination of information
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
c. Improve resources to diagnose OME including trained personnel
and diagnostic and assessment tools such as:
i. pneumatic otoscope, noise stick and tympanometry screener
should be made available in all health clinics, School Health
Team and paediatric clinics. Although pneumatic otoscope
is a good instrument and easily used, it is not available in
all centres. Additional cost is implicated if a new set or an
accessory to the existing otoscope is required.
ii. multifrequency tympanometry and OAE/ABR screener
should be made available or adequate in all centres with
audiology service.
d. Develop multidisciplinary teams at secondary/tertiary care level
in the management of OME with CLP or DS
e. Facilitate the provision of hearing amplification device to the
required group of children with OME
f. Strengthen the database of OME as part of the National Hearing
Registry
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
* children: excluding Down syndrome
• Percentage of
hearing assessment
in children with cleft
palate/CLP/DS
=
Number of children with cleft palate/
CLP/DS screened for hearing in a year
x 100%
Total number of children with cleft palate/
CLP/DS diagnosed in the same period
• Percentage of
children with
documented
persistent OME (>3
months) and hearing
loss undergo
myringtomy and VT
=
Number of children* with newly
diagnosed persistent OME (>3 months)
with hearing loss undergo myringtomy
and VT in a year
x 100%
Number of children with newly diagnosed
persistent OME (>3 months) with hearing
loss in the same period
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
REFERENCES
1.
National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health. Surgical management of
otitis media with effusion in children. London: RCOG Press; 2008.
2.
Institute of Public Health, Malaysia. Findings of the national hearing and ear disorders survey.
Kuala Lumpur: IPH; 2009.
3.
Saim A, Saim L, Saim S, et al. Prevalence of otitis media with effusion amongst pre-school
children in Malaysia. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1997 Jul 18;41(1):21-8.
4.
Lokman S, Loh T, Said H, et al. Incidence and management of middle ear effusion in cleft
palate patients. Med J Malaysia. 1992 Mar;47(1):51-5.
5.
Ungkanont K, Charuluxananan S, Komoltri C. Association of otoscopic findings and hearing
level in pediatric patients with otitis media with effusion. Int J Pediatric Otorhinolaryngol. 2010
Sep;74(9):1063-6.
6.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Diagnosis and management of childhood otitis
media in primary care. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2003.
7.
Lous J, Burton MJ, Felding JU, et al. Grommets (ventilation tubes) for hearing loss associated
with otitis media with effusion in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2005(1):CD001801.
8.
Neff MJ, AAP, AAFP, et al. AAP, AAFP, AAO-HNS release guideline on diagnosis and
management of otitis media with effusion. Am Fam Physician. 2004 Jun;15(69(12)):2929-31.
9.
Gultekin E, Develioglu ON, Yener M, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for persistent otitis
media with effusion in primary school children in Istanbul, Turkey. Auris, Nasus, Larynx. 2010
Apr;37(2):145-9.
10.
Apostolopoulos K, Xenelis J, Tzagaroulakis A, et al. The point prevalence of otitis media
with effusion among school children in Greece. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1998 Aug
1;44(3):207-14.
11.
el-Sayed Y, Zakzouk S. Point prevalence of type B tympanogram in Riyadh. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 1995 Jan;31(1):53-61.
12.
American Academy of Family Physicians, American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head Neck,
Surgery, American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Otitis Media With Effusion. Otitis
media with effusion. Pediatrics. 2004 May;113(5):1412-29.
13.
Engel J, Anteunis L, Volovics A, et al. Risk factors of otitis media with effusion during infancy.
Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1999 May 25;48(3):239-49.
14.
Zielhuis GA, Heuvelmans-Heinen EW, Rach GH, et al. Environmental risk factors for otitis
media with effusion in preschool children. Scand J Prim Health Care. 1989 Mar;7(1):33-8.
15.
Royal College of Physicians. Passive smoking and children. London: Royal College of
Physicians; 2010.
16.
Tong MC, Yue V, Ku PK, et al. Risk factors for otitis media with effusion in Chinese schoolchildren:
a nested case-control study and review of the literature. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2006
Feb;70(2):213-9.
17.
Flynn T, Moller C, Jonsson R et al. The high prevalence of otitis media with effusion in children
with cleft lip and palate as compared to children without clefts. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol.
2009 Oct;73(10):1441-6.
18.
Barr E, Dungworth J, Hunter K, et al. The prevalence of ENT disorders in pre-school children
with Down Syndrome. Clin Otolaryngol. 2007 Dec;32(6):510-11.
19.
Schwartz DM, Schwartz RH. Acoustic impedance and otoscopic findings in young children with
Down’s syndrome. Arch Otolaryngol. 1978 Nov;104(11):652-6.
20.
Satwant S, Subramaniam KN, Prepageran N et al. Otological disorders in Down’s Syndrome.
Med J Malaysia. 2002 Sep;57(3):278-82.
21.
Zabri S. Hearing loss in Down Syndrome children (thesis). Kuala Lumpur: Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia; 2008.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
22.
Kim JB, Park DC, Cha CI, et al. Relationship between pediatric obesity and otitis media with
effusion. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007 Apr;133(4):379-82.
23.
Ilicali OC, Keles N, Deger K, et al. Relationship of passive cigarette smoking to otitis media.
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1999 Jul;125(7):758-62.
24.
New Zealand Health Technology Assessment (NZHTA). Screening programmes for the
detection of otitis media with effusion and conductive hearing loss in pre-school and new
entrant school children1998 Jun: Available from: http://www.otago.ac.nz/christchurch/research/
nzhta/.
25.
Shah N. Glue ear: diagnosis and management. Proc R Soc Med. 1975 Jan;68(1):37-8.
26.
Shah N. Otitis media and its sequelae. J R Soc Med. 1991 Oct;84(10):581-6.
27.
Olusesi AD. Otitis media as a cause of significant hearing loss among Nigerians. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Jun;72(6):787-92.
28.
Roberts JE, Rosenfeld RM, Zeisel SA, et al. Otitis media and speech and language: a metaanalysis of prospective studies. Pediatrics. 2004 Mar;113(3 Pt 1):e238-48.
29.
Walker N, Wigglesworth G. The effect of conductive hearing loss on phonological awareness,
reading and spelling of urban Aboriginal children. Aust N Z J Audiol. 2001;23:37-51.
30.
Khairi Md Daud M, Noor RM, Rahman NA, et al. The effect of mild hearing loss on academic
performance in primary school children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Jan;74(1):67-70.
31.
Serbetcioglu B, Ugurtay O, Kirkim G, et al. No association between hearing loss due to
bilateral otitis media with effusion and Denver-II test results in preschool children. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Feb;72(2):215-22.
32.
Johnson DL, McCormick DP, Baldwin CD. Early middle ear effusion and language at age
seven. J Commun Disord. 2008 Jan-Feb;41(1):20-32.
33.
Roberts J, Burchinal M, Zeisel S. Otitis media in early childhood in relation to children’s schoolage language and academic skills. Pediatrics. 2002 Oct;110(4):696-706.
34.
Robert J, Burchinal M, Medley L, et al. Otitis media, hearing sensitivity, and maternal
responsiveness in relation to language during infancy. J Pediatr. 1995 Mar;126(3):481-9.
35.
Hooper SR, Ashley TA, Roberts JE, et al. The relationship of otitis media in early childhood
to attention dimensions during the early elementary school years. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2006
Aug;27(4):281-9.
36.
Boone RT, Bower CM, Martin PF. Failed newborn hearing screens as presentation for
otitis media with effusion in the newborn population. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2005
Mar;69(3):393-7.
37.
Golz A, Angel-Yeger B, Parush S. Evaluation of balance disturbances in children with middle
ear effusion. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1998 Feb;43(1):21-6.
38.
Gawron W, Pospiech L, Orendorz-Fraczkowska K. An evaluation of postural stability and the
effects of middle-ear drainage on vestibulo-spinal reflexes of children with chronic otitis media
with effusion. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2004 Sep;68(9):1175-9.
39.
Souter MA, Mills NA, Mahadevan M, et al. The prevalence of atopic symptoms in children with
otitis media with effusion. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Jul;141(1):104-7.
40.
Browning GG. A step further than the NICE surgical otitis media with effusion guidelines; time to
consider ventilation tubes being a once only operation. Clin Otolaryngol. 2008 Dec;33(6):606.
41.
Lo PS, Tong MC, Wong EM, et al. Parental suspicion of hearing loss in children with otitis
media with effusion. Eur J Pediatr. 2006 Dec;165(12):851-7.
42.
Behn A, Westerberg BD, Zhang H, et al. Accuracy of the Weber and Rinne tuning fork tests in
evaluation of children with otitis media with effusion. J Otolaryngol. 2007 Aug;36(4):197-202.
43.
Rogers DJ, Boseley ME, Adams MT, et al. Prospective comparison of handheld pneumatic
otoscopy, binocular microscopy, and tympanometry in identifying middle ear effusions in
children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Oct;74(10):1140-3.
44.
Dragicevic D, Vlaski L, Komazec Z, et al. Transient evoked otoacoustic emissions in young
children with otitis media with effusion before and after surgery. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2010
Jun;37(3):281-5.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
45.
Harris P, Hutchinson K, Moravec J. The use of tympanometry and pneumatic otoscopy for
predicting middle ear disease. Am J Audiol. 2005 Jun;14(1):3-13.
46.
Lee D, Yeo S. Clinical diagnostic accuracy of otitis media with effusion in children, and
significance of myringotomy: diagnostic or therapeutic? J Korean Med Sci. 2004 Oct;19(5):73943.
47.
Nozza R, Bluestone C, Kardatzke D, et al. Identification of middle ear effusion by aural acoustic
admittance and otoscopy. Ear Hear. 1994 Aug;15(4):310-23.
48.
Nozza RJ, Bluestone CD, Kardatzke D, et al. Towards the validation of aural acoustic immittance
measures for diagnosis of middle ear effusion in children. Ear Hear. 1992 Dec;13(6):442-53.
49.
Takata GS, Chan LS, Morphew T, et al. Evidence assessment of the accuracy of methods
of diagnosing middle ear effusion in children with otitis media with effusion. Pediatrics. 2003
Dec;112(6 Pt 1):1379-87.
50.
Nienhuys TG, Boswell JB, McConnel FB. Middle ear measures as predictors of hearing loss in
Australian aboriginal schoolchildren. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1994 Jul;30(1):15-27.
51.
Takahashi H, Honjo I, Hasebe S, et al. The diagnostic and prognostic value of eardrum mobility
in otitis media with effusion. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 1999;256(4):189-91.
52.
Jones WS, Kaleida PH. How helpful is pneumatic otoscopy in improving diagnostic accuracy?
Pediatrics. 2003 Sep;112(3 Pt 1):510-3.
53.
Wiley TL & Fowler C. Acoustic Immittance Measures in Clinical Audiology. San Diego: Singular
Publishing Group; 1997.
54.
Madell JR & Flexer CA. Pediatric audiology: Diagnosis, technology, and management. New
York: Thieme; 2008.
55.
Holte L, Margolis RH, Cavanaugh RM Jr. Developmental changes in multifrequency
tympanograms. Audiology. 1991;30(1):1-24.
56.
American National Standards Institute. American national standard specifications for
instruments to measure aural acoustic impedance and admittance (aural acoustic immittance).
ANSI S3.391. New York: ANSI; 1987.57.
57.
Sensitivity, specificity and predictive value of tympanometry in predicting a hearing impairment
in otitis media with effusion. MRC Multi-Centre Otitis Media Study Group. Clin Otolaryngol
Allied Sci. 1999 Aug;24(4):294-300.
58.
Wimmer E, Toleti B, Berghaus A, et al. Impedance audiometry in infants with a cleft palate: the
standard 226-Hz probe tone has no predictive value for the middle ear condition. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Jun;74(6):586-90.
59.
Sutton GJ, Gleadle P, Rowe SJ. Tympanometry and otoacoustic emissions in a cohort of
special care neonates.[Erratum appears in Br J Audiol 1996 Apr;30(2):152]. Br J Audiol. 1996
Feb;30(1):9-17.
60.
Williams M, Purdy S, Barber C. High frequency probe tone tympanometry in infants with
middle ear effusion. Aust J Otolaryngol. 1995;2(2):169-73.
61.
Zhiqi L, Kun Y, Zhiwu H. Tympanometry in infants with middle ear effusion having been
identified using spiral computerized tomography. Am J Otolaryngol. 2010 Mar-Apr;31(2):96103.
62.
SA G. The acoustic reflex. In: Katz J. Handbook of clinical audiology. 5th ed. New York:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2002.
63.
Kazanas SG, Maw AR. Tympanometry, stapedius reflex and hearing impairment in children
with otitis media with effusion. Acta Otolaryngol. 1994 Jul;114(4):410-4.
64.
Le TM, Rovers MM, Veenhoven RH, et al. Effect of pneumococcal vaccination on otitis media
with effusion in children older than 1 year. Eur J Pediatr. 2007 Oct;166(10):1049-52.
65.
Straetemans M, Palmu A, Auranen K, et al. The effect of a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine on
the risk of otitis media with effusion at 7 and 24 months of age. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol.
2003 Nov;67(11):1235-42.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
66.
van Heerbeek N, Straetemans M, Wiertsema SP, et al. Effect of combined pneumococcal
conjugate and polysaccharide vaccination on recurrent otitis media with effusion. Pediatrics.
2006 Mar;117(3):603-8.
67.
Ozgur SK, Beyazova U, Kemaloglu YK, et al. Effectiveness of inactivated influenza vaccine for
prevention of otitis media in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2006 May;25(5):401-4.
68.
Clements DA, Langdon L, Bland C, et al. Influenza A vaccine decreases the incidence of
otitis media in 6- to 30-month-old children in day care. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1995
Oct;149(10):1113-7.
69.
Royal College of Physicians. Passive smoking and children. A report by the Tobacco Advisory
Group. London: RCP; 2010.
70.
Duffy LC, Faden H, Wasielewski R, et al. Exclusive breastfeeding protects against bacterial
colonization and day care exposure to otitis media. Pediatrics. 1997 Oct;100(4):E7.
71.
Kouwen HB, DeJonckere PH. Prevalence of OME is reduced in young children using chewing
gum. Ear Hear. 2007 Aug;28(4):451-5.
72.
Rosenfeld RM, Kay D. Natural history of untreated otitis media. Laryngoscope. 2003
Oct;113(10):1645-57.
73.
Paradise JL, Feldman HM, Campbell TF, et al. Tympanostomy tubes and developmental
outcomes at 9 to 11 years of age. N Eng J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):248-61.
74.
Paradise JL, Campbell TF, Dollaghan CA, et al. Developmental outcomes after early or
delayed insertion of tympanostomy tubes. N Eng J Med. 2005 Aug 11;353(6):576-86.
75.
Paradise JL, Feldman HM, Campbell TF, et al. Effect of early or delayed insertion of
tympanostomy tubes for persistent otitis media on developmental outcomes at the age of
three years.[Summary for patients in Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2002 Jul;2(4):295-6; PMID:
12044263]. N Eng J Med. 2001 Apr 19;344(16):1179-87.
76.
Rovers MM, Krabbe PF, Straatman H, et al. Randomised controlled trial of the effect of ventilation
tubes (grommets) on quality of life at age 1-2 years. Arch Dis Child. 2001 Jan;84(1):45-9.
77.
Rovers MM, Straatman H, Ingels K, et al. The effect of ventilation tubes on language
development in infants with otitis media with effusion: A randomized trial. Pediatrics. 2000
Sep;106(3):E42.
78.
Maw R, Wilks J, Harvey I, et al. Early surgery compared with watchful waiting for glue ear and
effect on language development in preschool children: a randomised trial.[Erratum appears in
Lancet 1999 Oct 16;354(9187):1392]. Lancet. 1999 Mar 20;353(9157):960-3.
79.
Wilks J, Maw R, Peters TJ, et al. Randomised controlled trial of early surgery versus watchful
waiting for glue ear: the effect on behavioural problems in pre-school children. Clin Otolaryngol
Allied Sci. 2000 Jun;25(3):209-14.
80.
Hall AJ, Maw AR, Steer CD. Developmental outcomes in early compared with delayed
surgery for glue ear up to age 7 years: a randomised controlled trial. Clin Otolaryngol. 2009
Feb;34(1):12-20.
81.
Williamson I, Benge S, Barton S, et al. Topical intranasal corticosteroids in 4-11 year old
children with persistent bilateral otitis media with effusion in primary care: double blind
randomised placebo controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;339:b4984.
82.
Thomas CL, Simpson S, Butler CC, et al. Oral or topical nasal steroids for hearing loss
associated with otitis media with effusion in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2006(3):CD001935.
83.
Cengel S, Akyol MU. The role of topical nasal steroids in the treatment of children with
otitis media with effusion and/or adenoid hypertrophy. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2006
Apr;70(4):639-45.
84.
Choung YH, Shin YR, Choi SJ, et al. Management for the children with otitis media with
effusion in the tertiary hospital. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Dec;1(4):201-5.
85.
van Balen FA, de Melker RA, Touw-Otten FW. Double-blind randomised trial of co-amoxiclav
versus placebo for persistent otitis media with effusion in general practice. Lancet. 1996 Sep
14;348(9029):713-6.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
86.
Cantekin EI, McGuire TW. Antibiotics are not effective for otitis media with effusion: reanalysis
of meta-analyses. Otorhinolaryngol Nova. 1998;8:214-22.
87.
Griffin GH, Flynn C, Bailey, RE, et al. Antihistamines and/or decongestants for otitis media with
effusion (OME) in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006(4):CD003423.
88.
Griffin GH, Flynn C, Bailey RE, et al. Antihistamines and/or decongestants for otitis media with
effusion (OME) in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011(9):CD003423.
89.
Perera R, Haynes J, Glasziou P, et al. Autoinflation for hearing loss associated with otitis media
with effusion. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006(4):CD006285.
90.
Jardine AH, Griffiths MV, Midgley E. The acceptance of hearing aids for children with otitis
media with effusion. J Laryngol Otol. 1999 Apr;113(4):314-7.
91.
Flanagan PM, Knight LC, Thomas A, et al. Hearing aids and glue ear. Clin Otolaryngol Allied
Sci. 1996 Aug;21(4):297-300.
92.
Gleeson MJ, Browning GG, Burton MJ, et al., eds. Scott-Brown’s Otorhinolaryngology, Head
and Neck Surgery. 7th ed. London: Hooder Arnolds; 2008.
93.
Lous J. Which children would benefit most from tympanostomy tubes (grommets)? A personal
evidence-based review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Jun;72(6):731-6.
94.
Buckley G, Hinton A. Otitis media with effusion in children shows a progressive resolution with
time. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 1991 Aug;16(4):354-7.
95.
Browning GG, Rovers MM, Williamson I, et al. Grommets (ventilation tubes) for hearing loss
associated with otitis media with effusion in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2010(10):CD001801.
96.
Lous J, Burton MJ, Felding JU, et al. Grommets (ventilation tubes) for hearing loss associated
with otitis media with effusion in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2005(1):CD001801.
97.
Rovers MM, Straatman H, Ingels K, et al. The effect of short-term ventilation tubes versus
watchful waiting on hearing in young children with persistent otitis media with effusion: a
randomized trial. Ear Hear. 2001 Jun;22(3):191-9.
98.
Rovers MM, Black N, Browning GG, et al. Grommets in otitis media with effusion: an individual
patient data meta-analysis. Arch Dis Child. 2005 May;90(5):480-5.
99.
Hong P, Smith N, Johnson LB, et al. A randomized double-blind controlled trial of
phosphorylcholine-coated tympanostomy tube versus standard tympanostomy tube in children
with recurrent acute and chronic otitis media. Laryngoscope. 2011 Jan;121(1):214-9.
100. Valtonen H, Tuomilehto H, Qvarnberg Y, et al. A 14-year prospective follow-up study of children
treated early in life with tympanostomy tubes: Part 2: Hearing outcomes. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2005 Apr;131(4):299-303.
101. Nguyen LHP, Manoukian JJ, Yoskovitch A, et al. Adenoidectomy: selection criteria for surgical
cases of otitis media. Laryngoscope. 2004 May;114(5):863-6.
102. Kadhim AL, Spilsbury K, Semmens JB, et al. Adenoidectomy for middle ear effusion: a study
of 50,000 children over 24 years. Laryngoscope. 2007 Mar;117(3):427-33.
103. Casselbrant ML, Mandel EM, Rockette HE, et al. Adenoidectomy for otitis media with effusion
in 2-3-year-old children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Dec;73(12):1718-24.
104. Van Heerbeek N, De Saar GM, Mulder JJ. Long-term ventilation tubes: results of 726 insertions.
Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 2002 Oct;27(5):378-83.
105. Prichard AJ, Marshall J, Skinner DW, et al. Long-term results of Goode’s tympanostomy tubes
in children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1992 Nov;24(3):227-33.
106. Kay DJ, Nelson M, Rosenfeld RM. Meta-analysis of tympanostomy tube sequelae. Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2001 Apr;124(4):374-80.
107. Koopman JP, Reuchlin AG, Kummer EE, et al. Laser myringotomy versus ventilation
tubes in children with otitis media with effusion: a randomized trial. Laryngoscope. 2004
May;114(5):844-9.
108. Escamilla Y, Aguila AF, Saiz JM, et al. [Tympanostomy tube placement in children with
secretory otitis media: analysis of effects and complications]. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2009
Mar-Apr;60(2):84-9.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
109. Caye-Thomasen P, Stangerup SE, Jorgensen G, et al. Myringotomy versus ventilation tubes
in secretory otitis media: eardrum pathology, hearing, and eustachian tube function 25 years
after treatment. Otol Neurotol. 2008 Aug;29(5):649-57.
110. Yaman H, Guclu E, Yilmaz S, et al. Myringosclerosis after tympanostomy tube insertion:
relation with tube retention time and gender. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2010 Dec;37(6):676-9.
111. Daly KA, Hunter LL, Lindgren BR, et al. Chronic otitis media with effusion sequelae in children
treated with tubes. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003 May;129(5):517-22.
112. Valtonen HJ, Qvarnberg YH, Nuutinen J. Otological and audiological outcomes five years after
tympanostomy in early childhood. Laryngoscope. 2002 Apr;112(4):669-75.
113. Kocaturk S, Yardimci S, Yildirim A, et al. Preventive therapy for postoperative purulent otorrhea
after ventilation tube insertion. Am J Otolaryngol. 2005 Mar-Apr;26(2):123-7.
114. Yung M, Neumann C, Vowler SL. A longitudinal study on pediatric myringoplasty. Otology &
Neurotology. 2007 Apr;28(3):353-5.
115. Kumar S, Acharya A, Hadjihannas E, et al. Pediatric myringoplasty: definition of “success” and
factors affecting outcome. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Dec;31(9):1417-20.
116. Liew L, Daudia A, Narula AA. Synchronous fat plug myringoplasty and tympanostomy tube
removal in the management of refractory otorrhoea in younger patients. International Journal
of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology. 2002 Dec 2;66(3):291-6.
117. Granath A, Rynnel-Dagoo B, Backheden M, et al. Tube associated otorrhea in children with
recurrent acute otitis media; results of a prospective randomized study on bacteriology and
topical treatment with or without systemic antibiotics. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2008
Aug;72(8):1225-33.
118. Flynn T, Moller C, Jonsson R, et al. The high prevalence of otitis media with effusion in children
with cleft lip and palate as compared to children without clefts. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol.
2009 Oct;73(10):1441-6.
119. Sakina MS. Retrospective review on the prevalence of middle ear effusion in cleft palate
children and management outcome In Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (thesis).
Kuala Lumpur: Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia; 2007.
120. Valtonen H, Dietz A, Qvarnberg Y. Long-term clinical, audiologic, and radiologic outcomes in
palate cleft children treated with early tympanostomy for otitis media with effusion: a controlled
prospective study. Laryngoscope. 2005 Aug;115(8):1512-6.
121. Ponduri S, Bradley R, Ellis PE, et al. The management of otitis media with early routine
insertion of grommets in children with cleft palate -- a systematic review. Cleft Palate Craniofac
J. 2009 Jan;46(1):30-8.
122. Maheshwar AA, Milling MAP, Kumar M, et al. Use of hearing aids in the management of
children with cleft palate. Intl J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2002 Oct 21;66(1):55-62.
123. Sheahan P, Blayney AW, Sheahan JN, et al. Sequelae of otitis media with effusion among
children with cleft lip and/or cleft palate. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 2002 Dec;27(6):494-500.
124. Chen JL, Messner AH, Curtin G. Newborn hearing screening in infants with cleft palates. Otol
Neurotol. 2008 Sep;29(6):812-5.
125. Andrews PJ, Chorbachi R, Sirimanna T, et al. Evaluation of hearing thresholds in 3-month-old
children with a cleft palate: the basis for a selective policy for ventilation tube insertion at time
of palate repair. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 2004 Feb;29(1):10-7.
126. Parker SE, Mai CT, Canfield MA, et al. Updated National Birth Prevalence estimates for
selected birth defects in the United States, 2004-2006. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol.
2010 Dec;88(12):1008-16.
127. Hoe TS, Boo NY, Clyde MM. Incidence of Down’s syndrome in a large Malaysian maternity
hospital over an 18 month period. Singapore Med J. 1989 Jun;30(3):246-8.
128. Mitchell RB, Call E, Kelly J. Ear, nose and throat disorders in children with Down syndrome.
Laryngoscope. 2003 Feb;113(2):259-63.
129. Sheehan PZ, Hans PS. UK and Ireland experience of bone anchored hearing aids (BAHA) in
individuals with Down syndrome. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2006 Jun;70(6):981-6.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
130. Iino Y, Imamura Y, Harigai S, et al. Efficacy of tympanostomy tube insertion for otitis media
with effusion in children with Down syndrome. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1999 Aug
5;49(2):143-9.
131. Shott SR. Down syndrome: common otolaryngologic manifestations. Am J Med Genet. 2006
Aug 15;Part C, Seminars in Medical Genetics. 142C(3):131-40.
132. Selikowitz M. Short-term efficacy of tympanostomy tubes for secretory otitis media in children
with Down syndrome. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1993 Jun;35(6):511-5.
133. Shott SR, Joseph A, Heithaus D. Hearing loss in children with Down syndrome. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2001 Dec 1;61(3):199-205.
134. McDermott A-L, Williams J, Kuo MJ, et al. The role of bone anchored hearing aids in children
with Down syndrome. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Jun;72(6):751-7.
135. Shott SR. Down syndrome: common otolaryngologic manifestations. Am J Med Genet C
Semin Med Genet. 2006 Aug 15;Part C, Seminars in Medical Genetics. 142C(3):131-40.
136. McDermott AL, Sheehan P. Bone anchored hearing aids in children. Curr Opin Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2009 Dec;17(6):488-93.
137. Gunasekera H, O’Connor TE, Vijayasekaran S, et al. Primary care management of otitis media
among Australian children. Med J Aust. 2009 Nov 2;191(9 Suppl):S55-9.
138. Pereira MB, Pereira DR, Costa SS. Tympanostomy tube sequelae in children with otitis media
with effusion: a three-year follow-up study. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol. 2005 Jul-Aug;71(4):41520.
139. Owen MJ, Baldwin CD, Swank PR, et al. Relation of infant feeding practices, cigarette smoke
exposure, and group child care to the onset and duration of otitis media with effusion in the first
two years of life. J Pediatr. 1993 Nov;123(5):702-11.
140. Hasebe S, Takahashi H, Honjo I, et al. Organic change of effusion in the mastoid in otitis
media with effusion and its relation to attic retraction. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2000 Jun
9;53(1):17-24.
141. Daly KA, Hunter LL, Levine SC, et al. Relationships between otitis media sequelae and age.
Laryngoscope. 1998 Sep;108(9):1306-10.
142. van Cauwenberge P, Watelet JB, Dhooge I. Uncommon and unusual complications of otitis
media with effusion. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1999 Oct 5;49 Suppl 1:S119-25.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 1
SEARCH TERMS
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination:
“Otitis Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR “middle ear effusion” OR “glue
ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “secretory otitis media” OR “OME”
AND “prevalence” OR “incidence”, “risk factors”, “Down Syndrome”,
“cleft palate”, “prevalence” OR “incidence” OR “risk factors”, AND
“screening programme” OR “mass screening” OR “screening method”,
“sensitivity and specificity”, AND “clinical presentation” OR “symptom”
OR “sign” OR “hearing loss” OR “hearing impairment”, OR “deafness”
OR “hypoacusis” OR “hypoacuses” OR “conductive hearing loss” OR
“poor school performance” OR “poor educational progress” OR “speech
delay” OR “delayed language development” OR “indistinct speech” OR
“language development disorder” OR “speech development disorder”
OR “semantic pragmatic disorder” OR “poor school performance” OR
“speech delay” OR “behavioral problems”.
“Otitis Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR “middle ear effusion” [All Fields]
OR “glue ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “secretory otitis media”
OR “OME” AND “tympanometry” OR “impedance audiometry” OR
“impedance acoustic test”, “acoustic admittance”, “pure tone audiometry”,
“acoustic reflex”, “pneumatic otoscopy”, “otoscopy”,”tuning fork tests”,
“Rinnes and Webers test”, AND “observ*” OR “watchful waiting” OR
conservative OR “natural history” AND “prevent*” OR “prevention” OR
“preventive measure” , “Vaccine” OR “vaccination” OR “immunization”
OR “immunization” , “Smok*” OR “tobacco” OR “cigarette”, “breastfeed*”
OR “breastmilk”, “pacifier” OR “teat” OR “dummies” OR “soother”,
“xylitol” OR “chewing gum”.
“Otitis Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR “middle ear effusion” [All Fields]
OR “glue ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “secretory otitis media”
AND “Steroids”[Mesh] OR “oral steroid” OR “nasal steroid”, “antibiotic”
OR “antimicrobial”OR “antibacterial” OR “antibacterial prophylaxis” OR
“amoxycillin” OR “clavulanic acid” OR “macrolide” OR “cephalosporin”,
AND “mucolytic agent” OR “Acetylcysteine”, AND “supplement” OR
“vitamin”, AND “homeopathy” OR “herbs” OR “acupuncture” OR
“traditional medicine” OR “complementary medicine”, AND “autoinflation
device” OR “hearing aids” OR “probiotics”, AND “antihistamine” OR
“decongestant”.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
“Otitis Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR “middle ear effusion” [All Fields]
OR “glue ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “secretory otitis media”
AND “time of surgery” OR “timing” OR “time of intervention”, AND
“surgery” OR “myringotomy”OR “myringotomy with ventilation tube”
OR “adenoidectomy” OR “adenoidectomy and myringotomy with
ventilation tube”. “Middle Ear Ventilation”[Mesh] OR “ventilation tube”
AND “serous otitis media” OR “middle ear effusion” OR “secretory otitis
media” OR “glue ear” OR “ventilation tube” AND “adverse event” OR
“complication”.
“cleft palate”[MeSH] AND “Otitis Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR
“glue ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “middle ear effusion” OR
“secretory otitis media. Otitis Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR “glue
ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “middle ear effusion” OR “secretory
otitis media” AND “down syndrome” “[MeSH]. “Otitis Media with
Effusion”[Mesh] OR “Middle Ear Ventilation”[Mesh]OR “Otitis Media
with Effusion”[Mesh]OR “glue ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR “middle
ear effusion” OR “secretory otitis media” OR “OME” AND ”Referral
and Consultation”[Mesh] OR “Physician Self-Referral”[Mesh]. “Otitis
Media with Effusion”[Mesh] OR “glue ear” OR “serous otitis media” OR
“middle ear effusion” OR “secretory otitis media” AND “follow up” OR
“audiological test” OR “hearing assessment” OR “Auditory Brainstem
Response”.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
A. INTRODUCTION
1. What are the epidemiological characteristics and risk factors for
OME in children?
2. What is the role of screening for OME in children?
B. ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
1. What are the clinical presentations or symptoms suggestive of
OME in children?
2. How to diagnose a child with OME?
3. What is the test performance of the various method of diagnosis?
(Diagnostic tests: tuning fork test, otoscopy, pneumatic otoscopy,
pure tone audiometry (PTA), tympanometry)
C. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
1. What is the role of preventive measures?
2. What are the treatment options?
2.1 Non surgical intervention
2.1.1 What is the role of active observation?
2.1.2 What are the roles, clinical effectiveness and safety
of various non surgical interventions? (steroids,
antihistamine
and/or
decongestants,
antibiotics,
autoinflation, hearing aids)
2.2 Surgical intervention
2.2.1 When is the appropriate time for surgical intervention?
2.2.2 What is the clinical effectiveness of various surgical
procedures:
i. Myringotomy
ii. Myringotomy with ventilation tube
iii. Myringotomy with ventilation tube and adenoidectomy
iv. Other options
2.2.3 What are the complications of ventilation tube insertion
and their management?
2.3 How OME in children with Down’s syndrome and cleft palate be
managed?
D. REFERRAL AND FOLLOW-UP
1. When should a patient with OME be referred to an otorhinolaryngologist?
2. What parameters are to be monitored during follow-up?
3. What are the long-term sequelae in OME patients?
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 3
THE CONDUCT OF A DISTRACTION TEST
The Distraction Test is a behavioural hearing test which is used as a
screening tool for babies of six to nine months. It may also be used
with older children if they are still at the developmental stage for the
test. Test techniques may have to be modified but the rigour must be
maintained.
ð
•
The child is required to sit on the parent’s lap.
•
Different signals, like speech sounds /s/, /sh/ and /m/, sounds
generated by noise stick, high frequency rattle, chime bar, drum,
cup and spoon are presented randomly at 0.5 to 1 meter distance,
next to the child’s ears.
•
Sharp and reliable head-turn responses or eye movements
towards the direction of sound source are expected to be noted
during the test.
•
The sound levels presented should be monitored and checked
using a sound level meter.
Sources:
•
Ewing IR, Ewing AWG. The ascertainment of deafness in infancy
and early childhood. J Laryngol Otol. 1944;59:309-338
•
McCormick B. 1994. Screening for Hearing Impairment in Young
Children. London: Whurr Publishers; 1994
•
Bellman S. Screening and Surveillance for Hearing-Impairment
in Young Children. Arch Dis Child. 1989 July; 64(7): 1100
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
AUDITORY AND SPEECH DEVELOPMENT
In utero
Birth - 3 months
4 - 6 months
7 months
- 1 year
1 - 2 years
2 - 3 years
3 - 4 years
4 - 6 years
• hearing develops early
in fetal development
and is fully functioning
at birth
• smile or quiet when
hear sounds
• startle when hear loud
noise
• moving the eyes to the
direction of sound give
different respond to
various sounds
• turning head to the
direction of sound
• identify body parts
when asked
• understanding two
words instruction e.g.
go toilet
• can answer simple
question for common
activities, e.g. playing
ball
• points to common
objects described by
their use
• answer simple ‘how?’
questions
• tell two events in order
of occurrence
• answer ‘why?’ question
with an explanation
-
• babble “ooing” or
“yooing”
• smiles at familiar
faces e.g. parents
• imitates different sounds
• saying one word e.g.
“mama”, “baba” or
“mummy”
• uses two words
sentences meaningfully
e.g. “nak makan”
• uses three words or
more
• names familiar
environmental
sounds
• asks questions, e.g.
what is this/that?
• uses four word
sentences or more
• able to carries on a
simple conversation
• uses last night
oryesterday
and tommorrow
meaningfully
• able to tell a simple
story
Chronological
age
Hearing development
Speech development
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 4
OTOSCOPIC APPEARANCE OF OME
Pneumatic otoscopy
Fig. 1 Normal otoscopy of
Left Tympanic Membrane (TM)
Translucent pearly white TM with a cone of
light reflex at the anterior-inferior quadrant:
1. Cone of light at the antero-inferior quadrant
2. Handle of malleus
3. Lateral process of malleus
Otoscopic findings in Otitis Media with Effusion (OME)
Fig. 2a Retracted Left TM
Prominent lateral process of malleus and
attic retraction
Fig. 2b Fluid in the right middle ear
The TM is retracted with a prominent
malleus (M) and incus (I) with dullness
of TM and loss of light reflex. The middle
ear cavity is filled with fluid (below the red
dotted line)
Fig. 2c Fluid with air bubbles in the
right middle ear
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Fig. 3 Right TM with VT in-situ
Otoscopic findings of other common middle ear diseases
Fig. 4 Myringosclerosis of left TM
Chalk-white patches on the TM (arrow)
Fig. 5 Acute otitis media
The TM is bulging and inflamed (arrow).
Patient may present with otalgia, fever and
URTI. As disease progress, the TM may
rupture resulting in mucopus otorrhoea
and pain relief.
Fig. 6 Perforated TM
Large central perforation of left TM
Fig. 7 Cholesteatoma of Right Ear
Foul smelling discharge with whitish keratin
debris from an attic (superior) perforation
(arrow). This case needs urgent referral.
Images courtesy of Dr. Philip Rajan, Dr. Sobani Din,
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Rahmat Omar & Prof. Dr. Prepageran Narayanan
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
CLASSIFICATION OF PARS TENSA RETRACTION (SADE)
CLASSIFICATION OF PARS FLACCIDA RETRACTION (TOSS)
Grade I
Slight retraction of the TM over
the annulus
Grade Il
The TM touches the long process
of the incus (arrow)
Grade III (Atelactasis)
The TM touches the promontory
(arrow)
Grade IV (Adhesive)
The TM is adherent to the
promontory (arrow)
Grade 0
Normal right TM
Grade 1
Slight dimple of pars flaccid, not
touching the neck of malleus (arrow)
Grade 2
Pars flaccida (Shrapnell’s
membrane) retracted
maximally & draped over
the neck of the malleus
(arrow)
Grade 3
Stage 2 + erosion of the
scutum (outer attic wall)
Grade 4
Full blown retraction
pocket (arrow). Deep
retraction, keratin cannot
be reached by suction
clearance.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 5
TYPES OF TYMPANOGRAM
(Jerger Classification 1970)
1. Type A tympanogram
In type A, the peak compliance
occurs at/or near atmosphere
pressure (0 daPa) indicating
normal pressure within the
middle ear.
This indicates normal middle
ear pressure.
2. Type B tympanogram
In type B, there is no sharp
peak (flat) with little or no
variation in the impedance.
This
indicates
presence
of fluid in the middle ear
(OME), tympanic membrane
perforation
or
ear
wax
occluding the external ear
canal.
In OME, the ear canal volume
is normal.
3. Type C tympanogram
In
type
C,
the
peak
compliance
is
significantly
below 0 (usually ≤ -150 daPa)
indicating negative pressure
within the middle ear.
This
indicates
Eustachian
tube dysfunction.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
AUDIOGRAM
The audiogram is a graph showing the results of the pure-tone hearing
tests. It illustrates the type, degree and configuration of hearing loss.
The frequency or pitch of the sound is referred to in Hertz (Hz). The
intensity or loudness of the sound is measured in decibels (dB). The
responses are recorded on a chart called an audiogram that shows
intensity levels for each frequency tested.
Sources:
•
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) Working
Group on Aural Acoustic-Immittance Measurements, Committee on
Audiologic Evaluation. Tympanometry. Available from http://www.
asha.org/docs/pdf/RP1988-00027.pdf
•
American
Speech-Language-Hearing
Association
(ASHA).
Audiometric Symbols. Available from http://www.asha.org/docs/
html/GL1990-00006.html
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 6
LIST OF MEDICATION DOSAGES AND SIDE EFFECTS IN
CHILDREN WITH OTITIS MEDIA WITH EFFUSION
Source:
•
Lacy C, Armstrong LL, Goldman MP. Drug Information Handbook
International (18th Edition). Hudson: Lexi-Comp; 2006
Drug
Recommended
Dosages
Side
Effects
Steroids
Intranasal
Mometasone
Furoate
1 spray (50 mcg)
in each nostril daily
Intranasal
Beclomethasone
Dipropionate
6 - 12 years of age:
start with 1 spray
(42 mcg) in each
nostril twice daily;
may increase to 2
inhalations in each
nostril.
Epistaxis,
localised
Candida
infection
May cause
growth
retardation in
children
Not
recommended
for children below
6 years of age
Intranasal
Fluticasone
Furoate
1 spray (27.5 mcg)
in each nostril daily
(TDD = 55 mcg).
Can increase to 2
sprays in each
nostril daily
(TDD=110 mcg)
Nasal
ulceration,
epistaxis,
cough,
nausea
Not
recommended
for children below
2 years of age
Drug
Class
Cautions and
Contraindications
Comments
Headache,
cough,
viral infection,
epistaxis
Not recommended
to be used in
children below 2
years old
May cause suppression
of hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis,
particularly in younger
children or in patients
receiving high doses
for prolonged
periods
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
Appendix 7
INFORMATION FOR PATIENT ON MYRINGOTOMY AND
VENTILATION TUBE INSERTION
What is myringotomy?
A myringotomy is the making of a small opening in the tympanic
membrane (eardrum). The operation is performed through the ear
without external incision.
What is a ventilation tube (grommet)?
A ventilation tube is a small tube (ranging from 1.04 - 1.54 mm in
diameter) which is inserted onto the tympanic membrane.
Why does a child need this operation?
This operation is performed to ventilate (aerate) the middle ear, to drain
the middle ear fluid and to prevent the fluid reaccumulation. This should
improve the hearing if the hearing loss is due to OME.
How long does the ventilation tube stay in-situ?
It depends on the type of ventilation tube. The short term ventilation
tube usually will come out on its own after 3 to 6 months.
What type of anaesthetic will a child require?
The operation is usually performed under general anaesthesia.
What should be expected after the operation?
The child may be drowsy for a few hours post-operatively.
What are the risks and consequences after the operation?
Most operations are safe; however there is a small chance of side
effects/complications such as:
•
Ear pain
There will be slight discomfort or mild ear pain which will usually
subsides within 1 - 2 days and does not require analgesics.
Paracetamol can be given for analgesia.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
•
Discharge from ears
Minimal blood-stained discharge may be present for a few days.
If mucopurulent discharge occurs, medical attention is required.
•
Side effects of anaesthesia
The child may feel drowsy, nauseated and vomiting due to the
anaesthetic medications.
•
Fever
A low grade fever (less than 38
0C) is normal after surgery.
What are the post-operative instructions?
•
Do not insert anything into the ear canal to clean the discharge.
Outer ear can be wiped with clean and dry cloth.
•
The ears should remain dry. Avoid water entering the ears by
plugging the ear with vaseline-smeared cotton or ear plug while
taking bath. Swimming should be avoided for a few weeks. After
that, children are encouraged to wear ear plugs and a properlyfitting cap whenever they are swimming.
•
Most children can return to day care or school once they are fully
recovered from the anaesthetic effect.
•
A child who develops upper respiratory tract infection should be
managed the usual manner. Minimal clear ear discharge can be
expected.
•
There is no contraindication for air travel. The ventilation tube will
protect the ears from any pressure-related pain
When should the child seen by a doctor?
•
High grade fever of more than 38
0C
•
Continuous ear bleeding or discharge
•
Severe pain not relieved with analgesics
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ABR
auditory brainstem response
AOM
Acute Otitis Media
ASR
acoustic stapedial reflex
CHL
conductive hearing loss
CI
confidence interval
CLP
cleft lip and palate
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CSOM
Chronic Suppurative Otitis Media
CT
computed tomography
daPa
dekapascal
dB
decibel
dB HL
decibel hearing level
dBnHL
decibel normalised hearing level
DPOAE(s)
distortion product otoacoustic emission(s)
DS
Down syndrome
Hz
hertz
mcg
microgram
MoH
Ministry of Health
NICE
National Institute for Clinical Excellence
OAE(s)
otoacoustic emission(s)
OME
Otitis Media with Effusion
OR
odds ratio
ORL
Otorhinolaringology
PTA
pure tone audiometry
PTACT
PTA air conduction threshold
RC
Review Committee
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RD
risk difference
RR
relative risk
RRI
relative risk of improvement
SA
static admittance
SIGN
Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network
SNHL
sensorineural hearing loss
SR
systematic review
TEOAE(s)
transient evoked otoacoustic emission(s)
TM
tympanic membrane
TDD
total daily dose
URTI
Upper respiratory tract infection
vs
versus
VT
ventilation tube
WMD
weighted mean difference
WW
watchful waiting
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Mdm Zalina Ahmad, Mdm Sin Lian Thye and Ms Loong Ah Moi of
Health Technology Assessment Unit, Medical Development Division,
MOH
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held shares
in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details
are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Otitis Media
with Effusion in Children was supported financially in its entirety
by the Ministry of Health Malaysia without any involvement of the
pharmaceutical industry.
Management of Otitis Media with Effusion in Children