CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MOH/P/PAK/294.15(GU)
Y
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-27-1
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.malaysiaoncology.org
http://www.themgcs.blogspot.com
Also available as an app for Android and iOS Platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2015 and will be reviewed in 2019 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available. When it is due for updating,
the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of the related specialty
will be informed about it. A discussion will be done on the need for
a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary
team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used
by MaHTAS will be employed.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence & Formulation of Recommendation
v
Guidelines Development and Objectives
vi
Guidelines Development Group
viii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm on Management of Cervical Cancer
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1
3.
RISK FACTORS
2
4.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
2
5.
REFERRAL 3
6.
DIAGNOSIS
4
7.
STAGING
7
8.
TREATMENT
11
9.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
21
10. FOLLOW-UP
27
11.
RECURRENT DISEASE
29
12.
TREATMENT COMPLICATIONS
32
13.
PALLIATIVE CARE
34
14.
PSYCHOSEXUAL CARE AND SUPPORT
42
15.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
44
16.
REFERENCES
46
17.
Appendix 1 Examples of Search Strategy
52
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
53
Appendix 3 WHO histological classification of tumours
55
of the uterine cervix
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 4 Reporting Proforma for Cervical Cancer
57
Excisional Cervical Biopsies/Hysterectomy
Specimens
Appendix 5 Revised FIGO Cervical Cancer Staging 2009
60
Appendix 6 Modified Delgado Score for Cervical Cancer
61
Appendix 7 ECOG Performance Status
62
Appendix 8 Systemic Therapy of Cancer Protocol 63
Appendix 9 Malaysian Hospice Directory
65
Appendix 10 International Society of Lymphology (ISL) 67
Appendix 11 Distress Thermometer Screening Tool
68
Appendix 12 Medication List
69
List of Abbreviations
Acknowledgement
70
Disclosure Statement
71
Source of Funding
71
No.
Title
Page
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit
of MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II -1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
ii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these CPG were
from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Education (MoE).
There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee
(RC) during the process of the CPG development.
The previous CPG entitled Management of Cervical Cancer 2003
was used as the basis for the development of the present guidelines.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N); Medline via Ovid,
Pubmed and Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR). Refer
to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The inclusion criteria
are all literature on women with cervical cancer, regardless of study
design. The search was limited to literature published in the last ten
years and on humans and in English. In addition, the reference lists of
all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to further identify
relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted to identify
relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 11 Jan 2013 to 20
Feb 2013. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical questions
at the end of the CPG development process allowing any relevant
papers published before 28 February 2015 to be included. Future CPG
updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date. The
details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from the
CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other CPG on cervical cancer developed
by Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) 2008. The CPG
was evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as references.
A total of 13 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions.
The DG members met 26 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literatures retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion are resolved consensually. These CPG are
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft guideline was reviewed by external reviewers.
It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback
from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the
Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council
MoH Malaysia for review and approval.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
iv
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations management of cervical cancer based on the
following aspects:-
i.
Diagnosis and staging of cervical cancer
ii. Treatment
iii. Referrals and Follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
•
All women with cervical cancer
Exclusion Criteria
•
Pre-invasive cervical disease
•
Screening of cervical cancer
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management of
cervical cancer either in primary or secondary/tertiary care namely:-
i.
Medical officers and general practitioners
ii. Allied health professionals
iii. Trainees and medical students
iv. Patients and their advocates
v. Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
v
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Yong Chee Meng
Consultant Gynae-oncologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Ana Fizalinda Abdullah Sani
Senior Principal Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
(HTA)
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Azura Deniel
Consultant Oncologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Carol Lim
Consultant Maternal Fetal Medicine
Hospital Sultan Haji Ahmad Shah,
Pahang
Ms. Chan Pek Har
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Cindy Teoh Cy Oun
Fellow in Palliative Medicine
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Faizatuddarain Mahmood
Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Kajang, Selangor
Dr. Fuziah Paimin
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Salak, Selangor
Ms. Gillian Phua
Pharmacist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah,
Kedah
Dr. Habshoh Hat
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Sungai Petani
Kedah
Dr. Hemlata Kumari a/p Gnanasegran
Pathologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ismail Aliyas
Consultant Gynae-oncologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
HTA Section, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd. Azam Mohd. Yusoff
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Pekan, Pahang
Dr. Nirmala Chandralega a/p Kampan
Lecturer & Obstetrician and Gynaecologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical
Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ros Suzanna Ahmad Bustamam
Clinical Oncologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rozita Abdul Malik
Lecturer & Clinical Oncologist
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
vi
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guideline was reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Ghazali Ismail
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Gynae-oncologist
Chairman of Gynae-oncology Services Sub Committee
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Members (alphabetical order)
Associate Professor Dr. Ho Gwo Fuang
Lecturer & Senior Consultant
Clinical Oncologist
Universiti Malaya Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. J. Ravichandran Jeganathan
Head of Department & Senior
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Lau Fenn Nee
Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Maimunah Mahmud
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jinjang, Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Mohd. Rushdan Md. Noor
Head of Department & Senior
Consultant Gynae-oncologist
Chairman of Malaysian Gynaecological
Cancer Society
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Associate Professor Dr. Noor Azmi Mat
Adenan
Lecturer &
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Universiti Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Razmin Ghazali
Senior Consultant Pathologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Richard Lim Boon Leong
Head of Department & Consultant
Palliative Medicine Specialist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri
Deputy Director
HTA Section, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Sharifah @ Mastura Syed Abu Bakar
Head of Department & Consultant
Radiologist
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Professor Dato’ Dr. Sivalingan Nalliah
Lecturer & Senior Consultant O&G
International Medical University
Seremban, Negeri Sembilan
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
vii
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:-
Associate Professor Dato’. Dr. Fuad Ismail
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Oncologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Ghauri Aggarwal
Head of Department Palliative Care
Concord Hospital, Australia
Dr. Jamil Bin Omar
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist (Gynae-oncologist)
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Murali Ganesalingam
Head of Department & Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Norsiah Md Noor
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Setar, Kedah
Associate Clinical Professor Dr. Subathra Sabaratnam
Consultant Pathologist
Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine & Health Sciences
Monash University Malaysia, Johor
Dr. Syazarina Sharis Osman
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Radiologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
viii
ALGORITHM 1. ASSESSMENT OF CERVICAL CANCER
Histologically
-confirmed cervical
cancer
Staging by a gynaecologist/gynae-oncologist
Visible lesion
• Pelvic examination
• Cervical conisation
• Laboratory tests as
indicated
• Pelvic examination ± anaesthesia
• Cystoscopy and sigmoidoscopy
if indicated
• Imaging assessment:
o CT/MRI
If above not feasible:
o CXR
o U/S KUB
o IVU
o Skeletal survey if indicated
• Laboratory test as indicated
No
Yes
Stage 1A
Treatment
Stage 1B
Stage ll
Stage lll
Stage lV
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 2. MANAGEMENT OF FIGO STAGE IA1
FIGO Stage IA1
Fertility
preservation
required
*If repeat conisation
is not feasible,
proceed with
trachelectomy
Yes
No
Cervical conisation
Repeat Conisation*
Treat as FIGO stage IB
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
Simple /extrafascial
hysterectomy
Margin positive
Margin positive
Yes
No
Yes
No
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 3. MANAGEMENT OF FIGO STAGE IA2
FIGO Stage 1A2
Fertility
preservation
required
*If repeat conisation is
not feasible, proceed
with trachelectomy
Yes
No
Treat as FIGO stage IB
Repeat conisation*
Follow-up
Consider adjuvant if
node positive
Simple/ extrafascial
hysterectomy +
pelvic lymphadenectomy
Cervical conisation
+ pelvic
lymphadenectomy
Node positive
Margin positive
Yes
No
Yes
No
Treat as FIGO stage IB
Follow-up
Margin positive
Yes
No
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 4: MANAGEMENT OF FIGO STAGE IB1 / IIA
FIGO Stage IB1 / IIA1
Nodal
involvement
on imaging
Yes
No
Radical hysterectomy +
pelvic lymph nodes
dissection
Microscopic FIGO
Stage IB1
Macroscopic FIGO
Stage IB1 (up to 2 cm)
Consider adjuvant in
high risk for
recurrence
Cervical conisation +
pelvic lymph
nodes dissection
Radical trachelectomy
+ pelvic lymph nodes
dissection
Concurrent
Chemoradiotherapy
(CCRT)
Fertility
preservation
Concurrent
Chemoradiotherapy
(CCRT)
Repeat conisation.
If margin still positive,
then treat as macroscopic IB1
Follow-up
Node positive
Margin positive
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Cervical cancer remains an important health issue among women in
Malaysia. Despite numerous screening programmes for early detection
of pre-invasive disease of the cervix, many women have been diagnosed
at invasive stage of cervical cancer. This has tremendous implications
to the patients, carers and healthcare system.
The first edition of CPG on Management of Cervical Cancer was
published in 2003. Many new development especially in the treatment
of the condition has emerged which lead to variation in clinical practice.
Based on these, the CPG have been updated using a systematic review
methodology. It aims to guide healthcare providers on the evidencebased management of invasive cervical cancer in the Malaysian
healthcare setting.
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY
There is an increasing trend of cancer worldwide. A total of 14.1 million
new cancer cases and 8.2 million cancer deaths occurred in 2012,
compared to 12.7 million and 7.6 million respectively in 2008. Cervical
cancer is the fifth (3.7%) common cause of cancer following prostate
(7.9%), colorectal (9.7%), breast (11.9%) and lung cancer (13.0%)
globally. It is the fourth (7.9%) common cause of cancer among women
after breast (25.2%), colorectal (9.2%) and lung cancer (8.8%). Seventy
percent of cervical cancer cases occur in low resourced countries.1, level III
In Malaysia, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer
among women following breast cancer.1 - 2, level III The age-standardised
rate is highest among Indians (10.3/100,000) followed by Chinese
(9.5/100,000) and Malays (5.3/100,000). The rate increases after 30
years of age and peaks at 65 - 69 years. Among all cancer deaths,
cervical cancer ranked fifth.3, level III
In the United States, a declining overall incidence of cervical cancer
has been reported; largely attributed to the decrease in the incidence
of squamous cell carcinoma. However, there is an unexplained rise of
adenocarcinoma (AC).4, level II-2 There is no published local data on the
trend of cervical cancer.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
3. RISK FACTORS
The primary cause of cervical cancer is infection with certain types of
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) which is transmitted sexually. Multiple
risk factors are associated with the development of the cancer:
• >3 sexual partners5, level II-2
• early sexual intercourse (<17 years old)5, level II-2
• >10 years’ use of oral contraceptive5, level II-2
• first delivery before age of 176, level II-2
• high parity (≥7 full term pregnancies)6, level II-2
• smoking6 - 7, level II-2
• lower socioeconomic status8, level II-2
4. CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The symptoms associated with cervical cancer are commonly
encountered at primary care. However, most data on clinical presentations
are based on research at secondary care.
Common presenting symptoms in cervical cancer are postmenopausal
bleeding (84.0%), vaginal discharge (72.0%), postcoital bleeding (PCB)
(64.0%) and abdominal pain (56.0%).9, level III The prevalence of PCB
in cervical cancer ranges between 0.7% to 39%.10, level III In patients with
PCB, cervical cancer is found in 3.6% of women with no record of smear
or with normal smear and 5% of women with abnormal smear.11, level III
• Most patients are asymptomatic. However, common presenting
symptoms that may suggest cervical cancer are:
 postmenopausal bleeding
 vaginal discharge
 post-coital bleeding
 abdominal pain
Among those with PCB:12, level III
• cervical cytology (conventional pap smear) has sensitivity,
specificity and positive predictive value (PPV) of 50%, 86.5% and
92.8% respectively for cervical cancer
• colposcopy has sensitivity and PPV of 78.6% and 23.4%
respectively for cervical cancer
Based on the Malaysian National Cancer Statistics 2007, 21% of
cervical cancer patients presented at stage I, 34.7% at stage II, 25.6%
at stage III and 18.7% at stage IV.3, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
5. REFERRAL
Appropriate referral mechanism can improve the quality of care given to
patients. Referral to gynaecology/gynae-oncology clinic after abnormal
cytology/pap smear is important to establish prompt diagnosis. The
proposed criteria and time frame for referral is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Time frame for referral of abnormal cytology to
gynaecology clinic
Modified:
1. Luesley D, Leeson S. editors. Colposcopy and Programme Management. Second
Edition. Sheffield; NHS Cancer Screening Programme: 2010
2. Division of Family Health Development, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guidebook
for Pap Smear Screening. Putrajaya; MoH: 2004
Once diagnosed with cervical cancer, patients should receive definitive
treatment within 31 days of agreeing to their care plan or within 62 days
on the referral pathway.13, level III
Time frame for
referral
Within 8 weeks
Within 4 weeks
Within 2 weeks
Criteria
• After three consecutive inadequate samples
• After three tests reported as inflammatory
smear in a series
• One test reported as AGC-US or AGC-H
• After two tests reported as LSIL or ASCUS*
* HPV DNA testing should be considered if
available. If positive for high risk HPV, to
refer for colposcopy.
• One test reported as HSIL
• One test reported as possible invasion
• One test reported as possible glandular
neoplasia
• Women with symptoms of postcoital bleeding
particularly >40 years, intermenstrual
bleeding and persistent vaginal discharge
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
6. DIAGNOSIS
a. Histopathological Examination
A definitive diagnosis of cervical cancer is made by histopathological
examination of cervical tissue. Type of cervical tumour is diagnosed
based on the World Health Organization (WHO) histological classification
of tumours of the uterine cervix (refer to Appendix 3).2, level III
Histological reports of cervical cancers in small resection (loop/cone
biopsies) and hysterectomy specimens should follow the minimum
Dataset for Histological reporting of cervical neoplasia (3rd edition) of
the Royal College of Pathologists. Meticulous and accurate reporting
of gross pathological and histological parameters determine treatment
and prognosis of the patients. Regular tumour board meetings are also
advocated to optimise patient management decisions.14, level III
There are numerous independent histopathologic prognostic factors
which are important in determining the patient’s management, which
includes lymph node status (p=0.0004), parametrial invasion (p=0.016),
lymph vascular space invasion (LVSI), p=0.046) and histology of pure
AC (p=0.012).15, level III
The presence of LVSI must be recorded for tumours of all types and
stages. It is the only significant prognostic factor for cumulative 5-year
survival rate in tumour confined to uterus (p=0.0078).15, level III
Based on survival analysis, patients can be stratified into three
prognostic risk groups.15, level III
• Low risk: Tumour confined to uterus not associated with LVSI
(estimated 5-year survival rate of 100 ± 0%).
• Intermediate risk: Tumour confined to uterus associated
with positive LVSI or squamous/adenosquamous carcinoma
associated with parametrial invasion or pelvic lymph node
metastasis (estimated 5-year survival rate of 85.5 ± 3.9%).
• High risk: Pure AC associated with parametrial invasion or
pelvic lymph node metastasis with common iliac/paraaortic node
metastasis (estimated 5-year survival rate 25.1 ± 9.7%).
All patients with lymph node micrometastasis (LNmM), regardless of
its size, are considered LVSI positive. LVSI (RR=2.64, 95% CI 1.67 to
5.49) and lymph node micrometastasis (LNmM) <2 mm (RR=2.44, 95%
CI 1.58 to 3.78) has double the risk of recurrence following surgical
resection of early-stage cervical cancer.16, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
• Histopathological reports of cervical cancer should include core
histological data, which are:14, level III; 16, level III; 17
 tumour type (based on WHO classification)
 tumour grade (based on modified Broders grading)
 tumour dimension (depth and maximal horizontal dimension)
 if tumour is multifocal in origin, to be indicated, staging is based on
the largest focus
 presence of LVSI
 status of resection margins (presence of tumour, distance of
tumour and location of the closest excision margin)*
 lymph node status (number of nodes retrieved and involved),
presence of micrometastases and extranodal spread*
 involvement of other organs or tissue*
 presence of involvement of endometrial cavity (endomyometrium)*
 presence of involvement of paracervical, parametrial and vaginal
tissue*
* included in post-surgical specimens
Refer to Appendix 4 for proposed Reporting Proforma for Cervical
Cancer in Excisional Cervical Biopsies/Hysterectomy Specimens.
There is preference for avoiding the term ‘microinvasive carcinoma’
and using the specific The International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO) stage as a descriptor.14, level III
Tumours should be staged according to the revised FIGO staging of
2009. The decision to use Tumour-Node-Metastases (TNM) as well as
FIGO staging for cervical cancer is left to the discretion of the pathologist
and the preference of their tumour board meetings.14, level III
b. Frozen Section Assessment
In most institutions, frozen section assessment is not used routinely
for the evaluation of resection margins. However it may be performed
on clinically suspicious lymph nodes to look for metastasis before
proceeding with or abandoning a radical surgery.14, level III
Intraoperative frozen examination of sentinel node (SN) accurately
predicts the status of pelvic lymph nodes and is effective for selecting
intraoperatively the group of patients who will benefit from radical
hysterectomy.18, level III
• Sensitivity and negative predictive value (NPV) of frozen section
pathological examination for the detection of macrometastatic
disease are 100%.
• Sensitivity for the detection for macrometastatic and micrometastatic
disease, excluding isolated tumour cells, and NPV are 88.9% and
98.8% respectively.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Refer to Chapter 8 on Treatment (Sentinel Nodes).
Recommendation 1
• In cervical cancer,
 reporting of histopathological examination for surgical specimens
of radical hysterectomy should be standardised and contained
core histological data*.
 frozen section assessment of suspicious pelvic or para-aortic
lymph nodes may be performed intra-operatively.
*Refer to the yellow box above.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
7. STAGING
a. Clinical Staging
Staging of cervical cancer plays an important role in determining further
investigations and treatment as well as survival of patients. Hence, an
adequate and appropriate staging is an integral part of management for
these patients.
There are two commonly used staging systems for cervical cancer
namely FIGO staging19, level III and TNM classification.20, level III The latest
revised FIGO staging of 2009 is currently the standard staging system
used in Malaysia for all histological types (refer to Appendix 5).
FIGO staging is based on clinical examination. A thorough pelvic
examination with/without anaesthesia is mandatory to provide
information for the staging. When there is doubt as to which stage a
particular cancer should be allocated, the lower stage is assigned.19, level III
The office pelvic examination has a weak but significant correlation
with the actual extent of disease in determination of vaginal (r=0.255,
p<0.01) and parametrial invasion (r=0.174, p<0.01). The overall
accuracy is 70.4% for vaginal involvement and 74.5% for parametrial
disease. It also has high accuracy in early FIGO stage cervical cancer
(85.4% for stage IB1 and 77.4% for stage IB2) but low accuracy in
FIGO stage II (35.5% for stage IIA and 20.5% for stage IIB).22, level III
The following examinations are permitted for the determination of FIGO
staging, as indicated by presenting characteristics: palpation, inspection,
colposcopy, endocervical curettage, hysteroscopy, cystoscopy, proctoscopy,
intravenous urography, and X-ray examination of the lungs and skeleton.
Blood tests should include full blood count, renal and liver function tests.
Syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus serology need to be
considered based on discussion with the patient about risk factors.21, level III
• Initial assessment of microinvasive disease
 Assessment of FIGO stage IA
Diagnosis of both Stage IA1 and IA2 should be based on microscopic
examination of excised tissue, including cone biopsy with negative
margins, trachelectomy or hysterectomy. If the margins of the cone
biopsy are positive for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia III or invasive
cancer, a second cone biopsy should be performed or the patient
treated as FIGO stage IB1 disease.21, level III
 Assessment of FIGO stage IB and above
Biopsy of the visible lesions is mandatory to confirm the diagnosis of
cervical cancer.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Chest X-ray and evaluation of hydronephrosis are mandatory in
grossly invasive disease. Evaluation of hydnonephrosis can be done
using renal ultrasound, intravenous urography, computed tomography
(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The bladder and rectum
are evaluated by cystoscopy and sigmoidoscopy only if the patient
is clinically symptomatic. The presence of bullous oedema alone on
the bladder or rectal mucosa should not be assigned as FIGO stage
IV. Suspected bladder or rectal involvement should be confirmed
histologically.21, level III
CT and/or MRI with/without positron emission tomography (PET) may
provide information on nodal status or systemic spread but are not
mandatory.21, level III Refer to section on Radiological Staging for further
details.
In our local context, as CT scan is widely available, the CPG DG suggests
it is a preferred modality as part of the assessment of cervical cancer.
In healthcare facilities where this modality is not readily available or if
patients are not suitable for contrast studies, other modalities such as
chest X-ray and ultrasound scan may be used.
• The staging of cervical cancer is determined at the time of the
primary diagnosis and cannot be altered, even at recurrence.
b. Radiological Staging
It is important to assess prognostic factors based on radiological
imaging such as tumour size, parametrial and pelvic side invasion,
adjacent organ invasion and lymph node metastases to complement
clinical assessment. Utilisation of different imaging modalities depends
on accessibility, patients’ clinical stage, clinicians’ preference and
cost, among others. Worldwide, CT and MRI are preferred over other
modalities in cervical cancer staging. However, radiological imaging is
not included in the revised FIGO staging.
In a meta-analysis of eight studies, MRI showed higher sensitivity
compared to CT in locally advanced cervical cancer (LACC) in
evaluating:23, level III
• parametrial invasion: 74% (95% CI 68 to79) vs 55% (95% CI 44 to
66), p=0.0027
• bladder invasion: 75% (95% CI 66 to 83) vs 64% (95% CI 39 to 82)
• rectal invasion: 71% (95% CI 53 to 83) vs 45% (95% CI 20 to 73%)
• lymph node involvement: 60% (95% CI 52 to 68%) vs 43% (95%
CI 31 to 57), p=0.047
However, heterogeneity is an issue in this study in terms of equipment
and techniques used in the primary papers.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
In a diagnostic study, MRI showed sensitivity of 100% and specificity of
85.7% to 90% in detecting vaginal infiltration and tumour extension to
cervical stroma with an accuracy of 92.2%.24, level III
Parametrial infiltration is an important parameter in determining
management options of apparent early stage cervical cancer. In a
diagnostic study, MRI appeared to perform better than examination under
anaesthesia (EUA) although not statistically significant (NPV of 76.9% vs
65.3%, p=0.162). This evidence is limited by measurement bias.25, level III
In cervical cancer FIGO stage IB1, preoperative MRI-measured tumour
diameter is significantly associated with pathological prognostic factors
namely parametrial involvement, lymph node metastasis, deep stromal
invasion and LVSI. Tumour diameter ≤20 mm may serve as a strong
predictor for absence of parametrial involvement (p=0.01).26, level II-3
The use of transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) has recently been advocated
in view of its accessibility and cost; however it is operator-dependent. In
early stage cervical cancer (FIGO stage IA2 to IIA):27, level II-3
• TVS has better sensitivity and specificity than MRI in residual
tumour detection and assessment of parametrial invasion. The
results are not affected by the status of prior cone biopsies.
• TVS is comparable to MRI in tumour size and stromal invasion
determination (κ of 0.81 and 0.77 respectively).
• TVS is excellent in classifying bulky tumours and detecting deep
stromal invasion (κ of 0.82 and 0.81 respectively).
Diagnostic performance of PET or PET-CT for the assessment of
para-aortic lymph nodes (PAN) metastases (prevalence of >15%) is
acceptable when performed in those with FIGO stage III or IV.28, level II-2
In normal-sized hypermetabolic lymph nodes, the diagnostic value of
PET-CT requires further evaluation.29, level III Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
PET/CT is useful for primary evaluation of locally advanced cervical
cancer (LACC), monitoring treatment response and others.30, level III
Pre-treatment PAN assessment surgically (laparoscopy or laparotomy)
in FIGO stage IIB - IVA cervical cancer planned for pelvic radiotherapy
(RT) does not offer additional survival benefit compared with standard
imaging techniques (CT scan or MRI).31, level I
In grossly invasive disease, CT or MRI with/without PET may provide
information on nodal status or systemic spread but such radiological
modalities are not mandatory. Compared with CT and MRI, PET-CT
is a more accurate imaging method for detecting nodal metastases
that are >10 mm. Isolated and unexpected areas of PET enhancement
should be confirmed histologically if possible, to confirm or exclude the
presence of distant metastatic disease.21, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
• The use of positron emission tomography computed tomography
requires further evidence before it can be recommended in early
stage cervical cancer.
In post-treatment LACC, there is a moderate correlation (r=0.68)
between clinical and MRI assessments at three months which improved
at six months (r=0.86).32, level II-3
The role of abdominal or pelvic CT, MRI PET or TVS as part of routine
follow-up has not been fully evaluated in prospective studies.33, level I
Recommendation 2
• Clinical staging with/without anaesthesia should be performed
before initiating cervical cancer treatment.
• In early stage cervical cancer, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
may be used to complement examination under anesthesia for
surgical decision-making.
• Computed tomography scan or MRI, when available, may be offered
to assess nodal status and systemic spread in grossly invasive
cervical cancer.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
8. TREATMENT
• Patients’ involvement in decision-making is essential in the management
of cervical cancer.
a. Primary Treatment
Surgery is the preferred modality of treatment for early stage cervical
cancer, if it is not contraindicated. Similar survival outcomes have been
reported in surgically treated early stage cervical cancer compared with
RT.34, level I It also has the advantage of preserving coital and ovarian
function in young patients.
i. Surgery
• Fertility-preserving surgery
Cervical cancer is the third most common cancer in women younger
than 40 years. Up to 42% of all cervical cancers are diagnosed in
women before the age of 45 years, and up to 40% of early cervical
cancers are diagnosed in young women who are potentially interested
in a fertility-preserving surgery.35, level III Therefore, simple and radical
trachelectomy has been increasingly used.35 - 36, level III
Fertility-preserving surgery may be considered in young patients with
early stage cervical cancer. The surgical options include cervical
conisation, large loop excision of transformation zone (LLETZ), simple
and radical trachelectomy via vaginal or abdominal approaches. These
procedures may be combined with pelvic lymph nodes dissection
(PLND).
Careful patient selection is important to ensure low complication rates
and optimal obstetric and oncologic outcomes. Cases should be
evaluated and managed by experienced gynae-oncologists. Careful
evaluation of the initial diagnostic specimens from cervical conisation
or trachelectomy by experienced pathologists is needed.35, level III
There is no evidence retrieved specifically for the treatment of FIGO
stage IA1 cervical cancer. In Malaysia, such condition is treated by
cervical conisation for those who want to preserve fertility or otherwise
simple hysterectomy. Pelvic lymphadenectomy is not recommended for
treatment in FIGO stage IA1 disease.17
Cold knife conisation or LLETZ combined with PLND may be offered
to women having FIGO stage IA2 and microscopic IB1 cervical cancer
with no LVSI requesting fertility preservation.17 A less radical surgery,
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
such as cervical conisation or simple hysterectomy, combined with
pelvic lymphadenectomy in this group of patients has 100% recurrencefree survival at median follow-up of 56 months and low post-operative
morbidity.37 level II-2
In women with FIGO stage IB1 cervical cancer who desire to
preserve fertility, radical trachelectomy in combination with PLND is
recommended, provided that the tumour diameter is less than 2 cm and
absence of LVSI.17 Techniques available include vaginal, abdominal,
laparoscopic and robotic approaches.35, level III Type II radical abdominal
trachelectomy (RAT) has similar obstetrics and oncologic outcomes as
type III RAT with better recovery of bladder function (p<0.01).36, level III
In FIGO stage IA to IB1, radical vaginal trachelectomy (RVT) is
associated with shorter hospital stay, less blood loss and significantly
fewer blood transfusions, compared with radical hysterectomy (RH).
The oncologic outcomes appear uncompromised. There is no statistical
difference in 5-year overall survival (OS) and 5-year progression-free
survival (PFS) between the two types of surgery.38, level I The recurrence
rate is low (4.2% at median follow-up of 48 months) and obstetrics
outcomes are good with 59% term delivery rate after RVT. First and
second trimester loss are 13% and 19% respectively.39, level III
RAT has similar surgical and pathological outcomes [i.e. histologic type,
residual disease in specimen, conversion to hysterectomy, median
hospital stay and the use of post-operative adjuvant RT or concurrent
chemoradiotherapy (CCRT)] with RVT. However, RAT allows a
significantly wider parametrial resection.40, level II-3
The following criteria can be used as a guide for choosing modality of
surgery when fertility preservation is required:
1. Cervical conisation
• FIGO stage IA1
• Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), AC or adenosquamous carcinoma
histological type
• Age 40 years old or younger.
2. Simple trachelectomy
• Age 40 years old or younger.
• FIGO stage IA2 or microscopic FIGO stage IB1
• Absent of LVSI
• SCC, AC or adenosquamous carcinoma histological type.
• No deep stromal invasion, endocervical or lower uterine segment
involvement, parametrial involvement and nodal metastasis on
pelvic MRI
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
3. Radical trachelectomy
• Age 40 years old or younger
• Small volume FIGO stage IB1 up to 2 cm tumour size
• SCC, AC or adenosquamous carcinoma histological type
• No deep stromal invasion, endocervical or lower uterine segment
involvement, parametrial involvement and nodal metastasis on
pelvic MRI
• Limited endocervical extension on colposcopic evaluation
Future pregnancy plan:35, level III
• It is advisable to wait for 6 to 12 months after radical trachelectomy
before attempting pregnancy to allow healing and to exclude early
cancer recurrence.
• Pregnancy after radical trachelectomy is at higher risk of cervical
stenosis, prematurity and obstetrics complications.
• Delivery is via caesarean section.
• Intra-operative frozen section is preferred to assess surgical margins
and suspicious nodes during simple and radical trachelectomy with
pelvic lymph nodes dissection in fertility-preserving cervical cancer
surgery.
Recommendation 3
• Women with early stage cervical cancer desiring fertility preservation
is preferably managed by gynae-oncologists and the following may
be offered:
 FIGO stage IA1: cervical conisation without pelvic lymph node
dissection (PLND)
 FIGO stage IA2: cold knife cervical conisation with PLND
 Microscopic FIGO stage IB1: simple trachelectomy with PLND
 FIGO stage IB1: radical trachelectomy with PLND
• Non-fertility-preserving surgery
Simple hysterectomy is the standard treatment for FIGO stage IA1
cervical cancer, while simple hysterectomy and PLND is the treatment
of choice for FIGO stage IA2.
RH and PLND is the preferred treatment for FIGO stage IB1 cervical
cancer, if there are no contraindications to surgery. Simple hysterectomy
and PLND may be an alternative for small volume (microscopic) FIGO
stage IB1 cervical cancer with excellent prognosis.37, level II-2
Controversy arises over the best primary management options for bulky
tumour >4 cm (FIGO stage IB2 and IIA2) which can be either surgery or
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
CCRT. There is no recent evidence addressing this issue but the CPG
DG favours CCRT, as the risk of nodal involvement is high and thus
requires post-operative chemoradiotherapy.
The outcome of early stage AC (FIGO stage IA to IIB) treated with either
primary RT/CCRT or surgery are comparable in terms of 5-year survival
(OR=0.67, 95% CI 0.20 to 2.26), disease-free survival (OR=0.43, 95%
CI 0.13 to 1.43) and complications (OR=3.32, 95% CI 0.61 to 18.12).
Although not statistically significant, the trend of survival rate favours
surgery.34, level I
Intra-operative detection of nodal metastasis in patients undergoing
RH for early stage cervical cancer raises a management dilemma i.e.
whether to proceed or abandon the surgery. These patients would still
require RT/CCRT. However, given the lack of well-designed randomised
controlled trials (RCTs), no definite conclusion can be made regarding
the superiority of one approach over another.41, level III; 42, level II-2
• Treatment for patients with intra-operative detection of nodal metastasis
should be individualised.
The incidence of ovarian metastasis in patients with early stage cervical
cancer is low (0.9% - 3.7%). The most significant factor associated with
the metastasis is the AC histological type.43 - 44, level II-2; 45, level III Other
factors are older age group (>45 years old), bulky tumour size (>4
cm), FIGO stage IB2 to IIA43, level II-2 and the presence of gross vascular
erosion.45, level III The incidence of ovarian metastases in FIGO stages IB
to IIB is higher in AC compared to SCC.44, level III
Ovarian preservation is safe during radical surgery in young patients
with early stage SCC of cervix.43, level II-2; 44 - 46, level III The incidence
of subsequent complication in the retained ovary is rare.46, level III
However in AC, bilateral salphingo-oophorectomy should be performed.
44, level II-2; 46, level III
There is no significant difference in survival rate between SCC and
AC in patients with confirmed metastasis on the removed ovaries
(p>0.05).44, level II-2
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Recommendation 4
• In women with early stage cervical cancer who do not require fertility
preservation,
 simple/extrafascial hysterectomy should be performed for FIGO
stage IA1 cervical cancer.
 simple/extrafascial hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy
may be performed for FIGO stage IA2.
 radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy is the preferred
treatment for FIGO stage IB1 cervical cancer.
 concurrent chemoradiotherapy is the preferred treatment for bulky
cervical cancer (FIGO stage IB2 and IIA2).
 ovarian preservation during radical surgery may be offered in
young patients with early stage squamous cell carcinoma of cervix.
However in adenocarcinoma, bilateral salphingo-oophorectomy
should be performed.
• Laparoscopic and Robotic Surgery
Laparoscopic and robotic surgeries in oncology are getting more
attention with the advancement in the field of minimally invasive surgery.
In a Cochrane systematic review, there was no reliable evidence in
the efficacy, safety and long term outcomes of laparoscopic-assisted
vaginal radical hysterectomy in the treatment of early stage cervical
cancer.47, level I
Laparoscopic radical hysterectomy and robotic radical hysterectomy,
compared with radical abdominal hysterectomy (RAH), are associated
with lesser blood loss (p<0.05), lower post-operative infectious morbidity
(p=0.005) and shorter hospital stay (p<0.05).48, level II-2 However, there is
no evidence on long-term oncologic outcomes.48, level II-2
There is insufficient evidence to support surgical assessment of paraaortic nodal status (laparoscopy or laparotomy) prior to pelvic RT.31, level I
• Laparoscopic and robotic radical hysterectomy has short-term
benefits but require further evidence on long term outcomes before
any recommendation can be made.
• Laparoscopic and robotic radical hysterectomy should be performed
by a trained persomels in the presence of a gynae-oncologist.
• Sentinel Nodes (SN)
Systematic lymphadenectomy followed by histological assessment
is the standard technique currently used to detect nodal spread. In
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
histologically proven nodal metastases, CCRT is the primary treatment.
According to the SN hypothesis, histologically tumour-negative SN
predicts that the remaining lymph nodes will be tumour-free.
There is a higher probability in determining lymph node status in
cervical cancer by SN biopsy compared with imaging methods such
as CT scan, MRI and PET scan (OR=18.49, 95% CI 3.59 to 95.17).49, level III In
a meta-analysis of 21 studies, the pooled sensitivity of positive SN
in detecting nodal metastasis was 89% (95% CI 83 to 94) with no
significant difference in detection techniques used (p=0.17).50, level III
There is no significant difference in the detection rate of SN using either
99mTc or blue dye and also in the methods in identifying and retrieving
SN (laparotomy versus laparoscopy).49, level III Combined 99mTc and blue
dye has a significantly higher SN detection rate compared to 99mTc or
blue dye alone (97%, 88% and 84% respectively).50, level III
Recommendation 5
• Sentinel nodes detection may be considered to detect nodal
metastasis in early stage cervical cancer where facilities are
available.
ii. Definitive Chemoradiotherapy/Radiotherapy
The role of definitive chemoradiotherapy in FIGO stage IB2 and
above is well established. The treatment consists of external beam
radiotherapy (EBRT) 45-50.4 Gray (Gy) in 25-28 fractions over five
to six weeks concurrent with weekly cisplatin-based chemotherapy
and brachytherapy. The recommended total tumour dose in 2 Gy per
fraction radiobiologic equivalence to Point A is 80 to 90 Gy, depending
on the initial stage of the disease.
Earlier RCTs have shown that CCRT is superior to RT alone for LACC.
This treatment has been the standard of care for LACC since 1999.
Two meta-analyses showed that CCRT improved OS, PFS and
disease-free survival compared to RT alone in FIGO stage IB to
IVA cervical cancer. Most of these trials were using platinum-based
chemotherapy.51 - 52, level I
In a systematic review of limited quality, CCRT caused significant
increase of acute haematological and gastrointestinal toxicities and no
significant difference in late toxicities.51, level I In view of the consistent
survival benefit from CCRT, the additional acute toxicities described
may be justified.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Extended field RT, which involves treating the pelvis and the PAN with or
without chemotherapy, may be considered for cervical cancer patients
with PAN involvement at the expense of increased but manageable
toxicities.53 - 54, level II-2 The decision for this treatment should be made at
the discretion of the treating oncologist.
Intracavitary brachytherapy (ICBT) is an essential part of RT for cervical
cancer, treating mainly the primary tumour. High doses of radiation can
be delivered to the tumour while the surrounding normal tissues, such
as rectum, are relatively spared. High dose rate (>12Gy/hour) ICBT is
as efficacious and safe as low dose rate (<2Gy/hour) ICBT in LACC
in terms of OS, disease specific survival, relapse free survival, local
regional recurrence and distant metastasis. The additional advantages
of high dose rate ICBT are convenient outpatient treatment and rigid
immobilisation for better accuracy of source applicator positioning.55, level I
The treatment time (from first fraction of RT to the last fraction of RT
or brachytherapy) should not be more than 56 days as this would
adversely affect the local control rate. However, this is not associated
with distant failure or disease-specific mortality.56, level II-1
Recommendation 6
• Concurrent chemoradiotherapy should be given as the primary
treatment in FIGO stage IB2 to IVA (locally advanced cervical
cancer). The treatment time should not exceed eight weeks.
• Intracavitary high dose rate or low dose rate brachytherapy should
be given in locally advanced cervical cancer.
b. Adjuvant Treatment
i. Surgery
The role of adjuvant post-radiation hysterectomy for patients with FIGO
stage IB2 cervical cancer has been a source of controversy since this
combined approach was first advocated. It is suggested that these bulky
tumours and the associated tumour hypoxia was better addressed by
hysterectomy than by additional intra-cavitary radiation.
In a large RCT, adjuvant surgery with extrafascial hysterectomy after
radiation in FIGO stage IB cervical cancer had no clinical benefit
compared with no adjuvant surgery. Even though there was a trend
towards reduction in progression of disease and death but it was nonsignificant (RR for progression=0.77, p=0.07; RR for death=0.89,
p=0.26). This may be due to lower cumulative incidence of local
relapse (14% vs 27%) but higher distant progression (20% vs 16%)
in the adjuvant surgery group at five years. Further analysis showed a
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
significant 28% reduction in progression of disease in bigger tumours
(4 to 6 cm) in the adjuvant surgery group. The rates of grade 3 and 4
adverse events were similar at 10% in both group.57, level I
In cervical cancer patients with localised residual disease after primary
radiation therapy, adjuvant hysterectomy is an effective salvage
procedure even in patients with FIGO stage III disease and in those
with non-SCC. The 5-year survival rate in the adjuvant surgery group is
significantly higher than the group without adjuvant surgery (68.6% vs
14.5%). Apart from that:58, level II-2
• there is no difference in survival between SCC and non-SCC
(p=0.6862).
• there is a trend for better survival of smaller tumours compared
with larger tumours, although non-significant (p=0.053).
Adjuvant hysterectomy after unsuccessful ICBT does not offer advantage
in recurrence-free and survival nor increase late toxicity.59, level II-2
• 50% of patients treated with pelvic EBRT alone have recurrent
disease, whereas none among adjuvant hysterectomy patients
(p=0.068).
• 43% of patients treated with pelvic EBRT alone have died of
disease recurrence, whereas none among adjuvant hysterectomy
patients (p=0.152).
• No patients develop late toxicity such as fistulae, wound
dehiscence or bowel stenosis.
Recommendation 7
• Adjuvant surgery should not be routinely offered in cervical cancer.
• Hysterectomy after primary radiation therapy may be offered as a
salvage procedure in cervical cancer with bulky primary tumour >4
cm or post-treatment localised residual tumour.
ii. Chemotherapy
Adjuvant chemotherapy is chemotherapy given after primary treatment.
In a multi-centered open label RCT, the addition of gemcitabine to
standard CCRT, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine
and cisplatin improved OS (HR=0.68, 95%CI 0.49 to 0.95) and PFS
(HR=0.68, 95% CI 0.49 to 0.95). The addition of gemcitabine increased
grade 3/4 acute haematological (neutropenia) and non-haematological
toxicities (vomiting and diarrhoea). When further analysed, the
gemcitabine-related toxicities occurred mostly during the preadjuvant
phase. There was no difference in the incidence of late toxicities with or
without gemcitabine.60, level I
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
In view of the different regime used as primary treatment in the RCT,
further studies are warranted before any recommendation can be made
on adjuvant chemotherapy in cervical cancer.
iii. Chemoradiotherapy/Radiotherapy
• Pathological factors that increase the risk of recurrence for early
cervical cancer following radical surgery:61 - 62, level I
 positive lymph nodes
 parametrial or vaginal margin involvement
 LVSI
 lower uterine segment involvement
 deep stromal invasion
 non-squamous histology
 high grade tumour
 tumours >4 cm in size
Adjuvant platinum-based chemoradiotherapy after radical surgery may
be required for high risk factors mentioned above. The modified Delgado
score is accepted to stratify the risk for adjuvant chemoradiotherapy
(refer to Appendix 6).63
Two meta-analyses have shown that chemoradiotherapy is more
efficacious than RT alone:
• Reduces the risk of death (HR=0.56, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.87) and
disease progression (HR=0.47, 95% CI 0.30 to 0.74) in early stage
cervical cancer (FIGO stage IA2 to IIA).62, level I
• Acute grade 4 toxicity occurred more frequently in the
chemoradiotherapy group (RR=5.66, 95% CI 2.14 to 14.98).
However, long term data is limited.62, level I
• Improves OS (RR=0.74, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.86) in locally advanced,
bulky FIGO stage IB or post-operative high-risk cervical cancer.64 level I
Adjuvant RT alone reduces risk of local recurrence (HR=0.6, 95% CI
0.4 to 0.9) without improvement of OS in FIGO stage IB cervical cancer
compared to no further treatment. Adverse events are not significantly
increased.61, level I
Recommendation 8
• Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy should be considered in cervical
cancer patients with high risk of recurrence* after radical surgery.
• Patients with cervical cancer who are medically unfit for
chemoradiotherapy may be offered adjuvant radiotherapy alone.
*Refer to Appendix 6
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
iv. Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy (NAC)
CCRT is the standard treatment for early stage cervical cancer with
bulky disease and locally advanced cervical cancer. NAC is used to
downstage the tumour prior to surgery.
In a Cochrane systematic review, NAC followed by surgery, with or
without RT, improved OS (OR=0.65, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.80) compared to
RT alone in FIGO stage IB - IVA cervical cancer.52, level I
In another Cochrane systematic review, NAC followed by surgery had
significantly better OS and PFS than surgery alone in early-stage or
LACC.65, level I However, in a more recent systematic review with a
well-defined study population (FIGO stage IB1 to IIA), there was no
difference in OS and PFS between NAC followed by surgery and
surgery alone.66, level I
NAC before surgery reduces the need of adjuvant RT by significantly
decreasing tumour size and distant metastasis,66, level I as well as
reducing nodal metastasis.65 - 66, level I In early stage or LACC, there is
less parametrial infiltration with NAC (OR=0.52, 95% CI 0.30 to 0.91).
65, level I
In one of the reviews, there was insufficient data for quantitative analysis
on the adverse effects of NAC. Three studies stated that surgical
morbidity was similar between the NAC and standard treatment groups
while one suggested lower surgical morbidity in the NAC group which
may be due to a lower frequency of urological events.65, level I In the
other review, data showed that serious late toxicity to the bladder,
gastrointestinal tract and vagina were similar in both study groups.52, level I
The addition of NAC may improve survival if given in shorter cycle length
(<14 days) and higher dose intensity (≥25 mg/m2/week).52, level I; 65, level I
Patients who achieved response to NAC before surgery have a
favourable prognosis, with significant improvement in PFS and OS up
to five years.67, level II-2
• Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is not routinely recommended for
patients in cervical cancer due to debatable evidence and the decision
should be made at the discretion of treating gynae-oncologist/
oncologist.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
9. SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
a. Pregnancy
Pregnancy does not worsen the prognosis of cervical cancer. Delaying
treatment while awaiting foetal maturity in patients with early-stage
disease diagnosed during first and second trimesters of pregnancy
does not seem to have a major impact on patients’ survival.68, level III
• Factors to be considered in the management of cervical cancer in
pregnancy:
 stage of disease
 tumour size
 nodal status
 histology subtype
 gestational week
 patient’s/couple’s desire for pregnancy preservation (if oncologically
safe)
FIGO staging is the same for non-pregnant and pregnant states. MRI
is the imaging procedure of choice for assessment of locoregional
spread.69, level III If required, CT scan can be offered and preferably
done after 15 weeks gestation. PET-CT is not recommended during
pregnancy.68, level III
Histological assessment of lymph node is the gold standard for nodal
status. Laparoscopic lymphadenectomy is feasible up to 20 weeks
gestation. Lymphatic mapping and SN detection are technically feasible
during pregnancy.68, level III
The following recommendations are modified from the French
Recommendations on the Management of Invasive Cervical Cancer
during Pregnancy.70, level III In the SCC and AC histological subtypes,
treatment is based on gestational age and the stage/size of tumour:
i. For FIGO stage IB1
• If tumour is diagnosed when foetal maturity is considered attained,
 deliver foetus, optimally by caesarean section followed by cervical
cancer treatment thereafter.
 consider radical hysterectomy during caesarean section for
women who are multiparous or completed family.
• If tumour is diagnosed >18 - 22 weeks gestation but before foetal
maturity and patient wishes to preserve pregnancy,
 for tumour size <2 cm, close follow-up is required including clinical
and radiological imaging.
 for tumour size of 2 - 4 cm, management should be individualised.
If tumour size is close to 4 cm, offer NAC and inform of the
treatment risks.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
 deliver foetus once maturity attained, followed by cervical cancer
treatment as per standard of care.
• If tumour is diagnosed <18 - 22 weeks gestation (when pelvic
laparoscopic lymphadenectomy is technically feasible and possible)
and patient wishes to preserve pregnancy,
 consider laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy for tumour size
<2 cm. In the absence of nodal involvement, follow-up closely
by clinical examination and imaging modality. If no disease
progression, start cancer treatment as soon as foetal maturity is
attained. In the presence of nodal involvement, consider termination
of pregnancy (TOP) and start chemoradiation therapy thereafter.
 consider TOP for tumour size 2 - 4 cm as there is a higher risk of
nodal involvement.
ii. For FIGO stage IB2 and above, CCRT is the standard treatment,
• If tumour is diagnosed when foetal maturity is considered attained,
 deliver foetus, optimally by caesarean section followed by cervical
cancer treatment thereafter.
 nodal staging surgery (pelvic nodes with/without para-aortic nodes
for tumor >4 cm or positive pelvic nodes) at the same sitting is
recommended.
• If tumour diagnosed >22 weeks gestation but before foetal maturity
is attained, and without extracervical spread, offer CCRT after
caesarean section once foetal maturity attained, and do not delay
treatment for >6 - 8 weeks. Dissect pelvic ± para-aortic lymph nodes
for tumour >4 cm or positive pelvic nodes during caesarean section.
• For tumour diagnosed <20 - 22 weeks gestation, offer CCRT after
uterus is evacuated (hysterotomy or other procedure) or with foetus
in utero (if expulsion impossible and bulky cervical cancer).
iii. For non-SCC and non-AC, such as the more aggressive SCC,
diagnosed during first or second trimester of pregnancy, treatment
is individualised and pregnancy preservation is not advisable.
Recommendations on treatment of cervical cancer in pregnancy are
based on expert opinion and discussion among the CPG DG members.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Recommendation 9
• Treatment of cervical cancer (squamous cell carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma) in pregnancy should be based on gestational age
and stage/size of tumour.
• If tumour is diagnosed when foetal maturity is attained, deliver foetus
followed by cancer treatment.
• If tumour is diagnosed before foetal maturity, for FIGO stage IB1:
 tumour <2 cm and patient wishes to preserve pregnancy, close
follow-up till maturity attained and deliver, followed by cancer
treatment.
 tumour 2 - 4 cm, consider termination of pregnancy followed by
cancer treatment.
• For FIGO stage IB2 and above:
 if tumour diagnosed <20 - 22 weeks gestation, consider termination
of pregnancy followed by concurrent chemoradiation therapy.
 if tumour diagnosed >22 weeks gestation and absence of
extracervical spread, offer concurrent chemoradiotherapy after
caesarean section once foetal maturity is attained.
• Neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be offered to a patient with operable
cervical cancer whose surgery is delayed more than six weeks to
allow optimal foetal maturity.
As cervical cancer in pregnancy is uncommon, the use of chemotherapy
during pregnancy is mostly described in case reports.
In a methodologically-limited systematic review of observational
studies, platinum derivatives especially cisplatin, may be used safely
during the second and third trimesters as its use in the first trimester
increases the risk of abortion or congenital anomalies.71, level II-2
Complete response (10%), partial response (63.4%) and stable disease
(23.3%) were achieved after chemotherapy, whereas progression was
observed in only 3.3% of cases. Chemotherapy was well tolerated with
no serious adverse outcomes to both mothers and babies.71, level II-2
Recommendation 10
• Platinum-based chemotherapy may be considered after the first
trimester in pregnant women with cervical cancer.
b. Tumour Arising from Cervical Stump
The incidence of cancer arising from the cervical stump in patients with
prior subtotal hysterectomy is approximately 2%.72 - 73, level II-3
Cancer of the cervical stump should be managed in the same way as
cervical cancer arising in an intact uterus.(17) This is supported by:
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
• Good OS (68% for 5-year survival rate) and low treatment
morbidity (10%) when treated with either surgery followed by
tailored adjuvant RT in operable disease, RT or CCRT.73, level II-3
• Prognosis is similar when managed with the same treatment
regimen.72, level II-3
Recommendation 11
• Cancer of the cervical stump should be managed in the same way
as cervical cancer arising in an intact uterus.
c. Cervical Cancer Diagnosed after Hysterectomy for Benign
Gynaecological Disorder
Cervical cancer may be diagnosed incidentally after hysterectomy
for benign gynaecological disease. Further management is based on
clinical and pathological parameter. The choices are include no further
treatment, further surgery with parametriectomy and lymphadenectomy
and chemoradiation therapy.
Cervical cancer of FIGO stage IA1 diagnosed after simple hysterectomy
can be followed up safely without further treatment regardless of LVSI
status.74, level II-2
In FIGO stage IA2 – IIA cervical cancer,
• adjuvant treatment such as RT, CCRT or surgery [radical
parametrectomy + paraaortic lymphadenectomy (RP + PLND)]
significantly increases 10- year DFS compared to observation alone
or chemotherapy; however, there is no significant difference in OS.74,
level II-2
• surgery vs RT/CCRT have comparable DFS and OS with lower
rate of late complications observed in surgery.74, level II-2
• post-operative radiotherapy gives high relapse-free and OS but
has high overall treatment related complications.75, level II-2
Surgery (RP + PLND) alone is a safe option and achieves good OS rate
in patients who fulfill these criteria,
• SCC, AC or adenosquamous cancer
• disease FIGO stage IA2 and IB1
• no evidence of deep invasion or tumour at margin and
• no clinical evidence of residual disease at vagina vault or
parametrium
It avoids radiation therapy in 83% of patients and hence, preserves
ovarian function and reduces sexual dysfunction.76, level II-2
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Recommendation 12
• In cervical cancer diagnosed after hysterectomy for benign
gynaecological disorder,
 followed up safely without further treatment in FIGO stage IA1.
 adjuvant treatment [radiotherapy, concurrent chemoradiotherapy
or surgery (radical parametrectomy + pelvic lymphadenectomy]
should be considered in FIGO stage IA2 - IIA.
d. Neuroendocrine Cancers
Most neuroendocrine cancers (NEC) of the cervix are small cell
carcinomas, which account for up to 2% of cervical cancers.77, level III; 78, level II-2
Median age of diagnosis is in the fifth decade. The usual presenting
symptom is vaginal bleeding and a cervical mass can often be identified
on examination. Some patients have abnormal pap smears.77, level IIl
In rare cases, patients may present with clinical or biochemical evidence
of ectopic hormone production including corticotropin (Cushing’s
syndrome), vasopressin (syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone
secretion), insulin (hypoglycemia), serotonin (carcinoid syndrome) and
parathyroid hormone (hypercalcemia) or myasthenia gravis.77, level II
There is an increased risk for LVSI and high rate of extrapelvic recurrence
in NEC which correlates with poor prognosis.77, level III; 79, level II-2 Most
common sites of extrapelvic metastasis are bone, supraclavicular
lymph nodes and lungs. Imaging evaluation generally includes CT scan
of thorax, abdomen and pelvis or PET/CT scan. Head CT scan is not
recommended on initial evaluation for small cell NEC of the cervix.
77 - 80, level III
Surgery is primarily used either to achieve a diagnosis and for resection
of early stage disease. RH, which is the standard surgery for FIGO
stage IB to IIA cervical cancer of the ordinary type, has been adopted for
the treatment of NEC. For early stage disease, patients with complete
surgical resection should be considered for adjuvant chemotherapy.
Recent data supports the use of platinum with or without etoposide
in small cell and large cell NEC in improving survival.77, level III; 79, level II-2
CCRT is offered in non-surgical candidates (such as locally
advanced disease, unfit for surgery, early disease with evidence of
lymphadenopathy or FDG-avid nodal metastasis) and it is typically given
with concurrent etoposide/cisplatinum.81, level II-2 For advanced stage
disease, metastatic sites are treated with platinum-based combination
chemotherapy. Extrapolating from small cell lung cancer, vincristine/
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide and topotecan are considered as
alternative or second-line therapies.77, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
In local practice, CCRT regime is similar to other histological types;
however additional adjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin/etoposide) is
given for 4 - 6 cycles.
NAC or adjuvant radiation does not improve survival. Multimodality
treatment appears to produce the best outcomes for this disease.
Primary tumours <4 cm and no clinical evidence of lymph node
metastasis have better prognosis.77, level III
The follow-up is similar to other histological types with particular
emphasis on periodic full body imaging with either CT or PET/CT. Brain
imaging should be considered if patient is symptomatic.77, level III
Recommendation 13
• Neuroendocrine cancer of cervix should be managed by gynaeoncologists/oncologists.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
10. FOLLOW-UP
The most appropriate follow-up strategy for clinically disease-free
cervical cancer patients after receiving primary treatment varies from
institution to institution.
There is modest low quality evidence to inform the most appropriate
follow-up strategy. The majority of cervical cancer recurrences (62%
to 89%) are detected within two years of primary treatment.82, level III A
total of 58% of cervical cancer recurrences occur in the pelvis. Most of
the patients (65%) are symptomatic at recurrence. Among them, 53%
are found by exclusive pelvic examination.83, leveI III All asymptomatic
pelvic recurrences are diagnosed by pelvic examination.84 - 85, level III
A high percentage (85%) of the cancer can be diagnosed by pelvic
examination and/or CT.83, leveI III
DFS for cervical cancer significantly correlates with site of relapse, type
of relapse and symptoms at relapse. A better OS from relapse is observed
in localised pelvic recurrence as compared to distant sites.83, leveI III
Follow-up is recommended for every three months in the first year,
every four months in the second year, every six months in the third to
fifth year and annually thereafter.83, leveI III
At a minimum, follow-up visits should include a complete physical
examination with a patient history to detect symptomatic and asymptomatic
recurrence.82, level III Cervical cytology or vault smears are not indicated
to detect asymptomatic recurrence as it does not permit earlier detection
of recurrence and does not increase survival.82, level III; 86, level III
Routine use of chest X-ray, abdominal and pelvic ultrasound, PET, CT,
MRI, intravenous pyelography or blood analysis/tumour markers (CA
125 and SCCA) is not recommended as their role has yet to be evaluated
in a definitive manner.82, level III MRI or CT should be considered initially
to assess potential clinical recurrence in symptomatic patients. A whole
body PET scan or PET-CT should be recommended on all patients in
whom recurrent or persistent disease has been demonstrated on MRI
or CT and in whom salvage therapy (either pelvic exenteration or RT)
is being considered.
Patients should return to annual population-based general physical and
pelvic examination after five years of recurrence-free follow-up.82, level III
Short-term hormone replacement therapy (HRT) does not appear to
have an adverse effect on oncologic outcome in most gynecologic
cancer survivors and improves quality of life (QOL). The treatment
appears to be safe although not as effective as HRT in the treatment of
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
vasomotor symptoms, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
and alpha-2 adrenergic agonists are reasonable alternatives.87, level II-2
Recommendation 14
• After primary treatment, patients with cervical cancer may be followed
up every three months in the first year, four months in the second
year, six months in the third to fifth year and annually thereafter.
 Physical examination including pelvic examination should be
performed during follow-up.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
11. RECURRENT DISEASE
a. Pelvic exenteration
In advanced and recurrent cervical cancer, the role of surgery is limited.
In this situation, pelvic exenteration may be an option in selected group
of patients.
Primary or secondary pelvic exenteration with curative or palliative
intention is an effective option with high percentage of long-term
survival in LACC FIGO stage IVA:
• Median survival between 29 – 30 months88, level II-1; 89, level II-2
• 5 - years OS ranging from 36.8% to 52%88, level II-1; 90 - 91, level II-2
Patients who have undergone pelvic exenteration of curative intent
have higher OS compared with those of palliative intent (5-year and
10-year OS are 64% and 57% for curative intent vs 19% and 18%
for palliative intent). There is no significant difference in 5-year OS
when pelvic exenteration is performed in SCC or AC cervical cancer
(p>0.05).92, level II-1
In a mixed population that includes cervical cancer, 61% 5-year OS is
achieved when resection margin is negative.93, level II-2
For cervical cancer patients who have undergone pelvic exenteration,
the following factors are significantly associated with lower OS:
• positive pelvic lympnode88, level II-1; 94, level II-2
• positive resection margin91, level II-2; 94, level II-2
• shorter time between primary treatment and recurrence91, level II-2
• surgery of palliative intent91, level II-2
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
In pelvic exenteration:
• the overall complication rates range between 51.6% and 66%.91, level II-2;
92, level II-1; 94, level II-2
• the early complication rates (≤30 days ) range between 44.8% and
50%.89 - 90, level II-2; 94 level II-2
• the late complication rates (>30 days) range between 48.5% and
74%.89 - 90, level II-2; 94, level II-2
• the rate of major complication requiring surgical treatment is 20%.95, level II-2
• the rates of infectious morbidity, intestinal obstruction and fistula are
86%, 33% and 23%.93, level II-2
• the rate of operative mortality is 5.5%.91, level II-2
• Contraindication for pelvic exenteration:
 distant metastasis/extra pelvic spread
 pelvic side wall involvement such as hydronephrosis/hydroureter
and lumbosacral plexopathy
 poor performance status
• Common complications for pelvic exenteration are infectious morbidity,
intestinal obstruction, fistula formation, anastomotic leak and
prolonged hospital stay.
Recommendation 15
• In patients with cervical cancer, pelvic exenteration may be considered
in locally advanced disease or in pelvic recurrence, after thorough
counselling on its benefits and risks.
b. Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy with palliative intent may be an option in patients with
recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer with Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status grades 0 to 2 (refer to
Appendix 7).
In recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer,
• there is no difference in response rates between platinumcontaining regimens and non-platinum-containing regimens
(RR=1.33, 95% CI 0.50 to 3.54).96, level I
• combination cisplatin-based chemotherapy has better response
(complete and partial response) and improve survival compared
to single-agent cisplatin chemotherapy.96 - 97, level I
• combination of paclitaxel and platinum chemotherapy has better
response compared to non-paclitaxel-containing combination
(RR=1.47, 95% CI 1.01 to 2.15).96, level I
• response rate towards platinum-containing chemotherapy is
better in out-of-radiotherapy-field (non-irradiated site) recurrence
compared to in-radiotherapy-field (irradiated site) recurrence.
(RR=0.62, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.83).96, level I
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
• combination chemotherapy has more toxicities compared to
single agent chemotherapy.96 - 97, level I
Recommendation 16
• Combination chemotherapy* may be offered to patients with recurrent
or metastatic cervical cancer with good performance status.
* Refer to Appendix 8 on Systemic Therapy of Cancer (revised edition
MoH and MoE Malaysia) for suggested chemotherapy regime.
c. Salvage Radiotherapy/Chemoradiotherapy
The treatment for recurrent cervical cancer depends on the mode of
primary treatment and the site and extent of recurrent disease. Salvage
RT or CCRT may be a feasible treatment option for locally recurrent
cervical cancer following surgery with high salvage rate (41 – 45 %) and
acceptable late complication rate.98 - 99, level II-2
Recommendation 17
• In radiotherapy naïve cervical cancer patients with local recurrence,
salvage radiotherapy to the pelvis may be offered.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
12. TREATMENT COMPLICATIONS
Radiation proctitis and cystitis are known complications of radiation
therapy. Acute radiation complication refers to radiation-induced injury
during the time of treatment and for up to 90 days after completion of
RT. This is a frequently occurring early adverse effect and the pathology
is of an inﬂammatory process affecting the rectal or bladder mucosa,
and is generally self-limiting.
Late radiation complications are complications occurring more than 90
days after completing radiotherapy treatment and are relatively rare.
The underlying pathology is of submucosal injury with a combination of
ﬁbrosis, ischaemia, and subsequent ulceration, which can be localised,
diffuse or full thickness penetrating the wall of the rectum. The
clinical presentation may have an inﬂammatory component producing
tenesmus, urgency, diarrhoea, constipation, anal sphincter dysfunction
(affecting the control of the bowels), mucoid or bloody discharge per
rectum or frank bleeding with ulceration which may perforate. These
chronic and episodic symptoms will cause impaired QOL of the patients.
At present, there is no recommended standard treatment for both late
radiation proctitis and cystitis in view of lack of evidence with regards
to effectiveness and impact on QOL by the treatment approaches or
methods. There is no recent evidence on the above issues and thus
the CPG DG has decided to use the best available evidence beyond
the scope of the search.
a. Radiation Proctitis
Late radiation proctitis is episodic and variable in nature. A Cochrane
systematic review on non-surgical interventions for the management of
late radiation proctitis had identified several treatment approaches with
varying results.100, level I
• Rectal sucralfate showed greater clinical improvement for proctitis
than anti-inflammatories (OR=14, 95% CI 1.46 to 134.26),
though no difference was seen for endoscopic improvement
(OR=2.74, 95% CI 0.64 to 11.76). Other effective medications
were combination of metronidazole and anti-inflammatory drugs,
and rectal hydrocortisone.
• Short chain fatty acid enemas did not appear to be efficacious
compared to placebo.
• Thermal coagulation therapy appeared to have clinical improvement
in the management of haemorrhagic radiation proctitis refractory
to other treatments.
• Hyperbaric oxygen therapy improved radiation proctitis compared
to placebo (RR=2.7, 95% CI 1.2 to 6.0; NNT=3).
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
b. Radiation Cystitis
Late radiation cystitis is relatively uncommon treatment complication.
The same Cochrane systematic review found no evidence from trials
determining the effects of non-surgical treatments for late radiation
cystitis. Therefore, there is no standard treatment in managing patients
with radiation cystitis.100, level I
• There is insufficient good quality evidence to recommend treatment
for late radiation proctitis and cystitis in cervical cancer. Therefore,
the treatment should be individualised according to the attending
doctor.
c. Lymphoedema
Refer to Chapter on Palliative Care (Lymphoedema).
d. Chronic Bladder Dysfunction
It is a common late complication of radical hysterectomy ranging
from 0-44% and the most distressing one, requiring voiding by the
clock with the help of abdominal muscles and in some cases, selfcatheterisation.101
Radicality of the surgery is closely related to post-operative bladder
dysfunction. Compared with the extent of lateral parametrial resection,
the extent of vaginal resection has stronger association with bladder
dysfunction.102
Direct, nerve-sparing radical hysterectomy is a technique that spares
the pelvic autonomic nerves without compromising radicality, providing
another approach to improve quality of life and reduce bladder and
bowel morbidity.103, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
13. PALLIATIVE CARE
There is an increasing trend of integration of modern cancer care with
palliative medicine. Palliative care focuses on preventing and relieving
suffering, optimising symptom control, preserving hope and improving
QOL.104
All healthcare providers should be trained to deliver basic palliative care.
Specialist palliative care providers may be required for management
of complex symptoms and end of life issues.105 Inpatient specialised
palliative care units and community hospices nationwide are listed in
Appendix 9.
This chapter aims to address some common issues experienced by
patients with advanced disease which include:
• pain
• malignant/malodorous wounds
• thrombosis and haemorrhage
• fistulae
• lymphoedema
• malignant ureteric obstruction
• end of life care
• Appropriate symptom management in advanced cervical cancer can
be complex and a clear understanding of prognosis is essential to
guide assessment and subsequent management.
a. Pain
Principles of pain management are described in the Clinical Practice
Guidelines for the Management of Cancer Pain by MoH.106
Patients with advanced cervical cancer may experience complex
neuropathic pain as a complication of RT or chemotherapy, or develop
lumbar plexopathy from nerve infiltration.107, level III
Management of selected pain syndromes may benefit from specialist
consultations for intrathecal or epidural procedures in addition to
conventional analgesic medications. A combination of opioids, local
anaesthetics and clonidine can be used for temporary neural blockade
while neurolytic agents such as alcohol are used for permanent
blockade.17
Malignant psoas syndrome refers to proximal lumbosacral plexopathy
by painful fixed flexion of the ipsilateral hip, with radiological or pathological
evidences of ipsilateral psoas major muscle malignant involvement.
Treatment options include opioids, agents for neuropathic pain, muscle
relaxants to counter psoas muscle spasm, agents to reduce peritumoural oedema and anti-tumoural agents if suitable.108, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
b. Malignant/Malodorous Wounds
Patients with malodorous malignant wounds often associate the
condition with advance, progressing disease. This not only causes
physical discomfort, but also significant psychological and social
impact, and negatively affects the woman’s body image and sense of
worth.107, level III
Malodorous discharges are generally caused by tissue breakdown from
ulcerating necrotic tissue, erosion into a hollow viscous such as the
bowel or urinary tract, and/or an added infection of the fluid. Benign
lesions such as pressure-related breakdown can also contribute to the
malodour.107, level III
Management involves treating infection, containing or removing fluid
loss, reducing local irritation and improving QOL.(17) There is limited
published evidence guiding the management of wounds in cancer
patients and no evidence regarding QOL improvement.109, level I
Surgical methods to manage malodour may include removal or
debridement of necrotic tissue, and nephrostomies or defunctioning
colostomies for fistula-related urinary or faecal incontinence. Tumour
burden may also be reduced by interventional radiology techniques to
reduce tumour circulation, palliative RT or chemotherapy.107, level III
Patients using topical metronidazole, mesalt dressing, activated carbon
dressing and curcumin ointment can control the odour of malignant
fungating wounds.110, level II-3 Other suggested methods include:17, level III;
107, level III
• systemic metronidazole
• aromatherapy
• pads and tampons
• vaginal douches
• topical steroids
• barrier creams to avoid local skin irritation and excoriation
• treatment of bacterial and fungal infections
• oral tranexamic acid 1000 - 1500 mg two to three times daily for
bleeding wounds
• octreotide and hyoscine butylbromide to reduce faecal loss from
enterovaginal fistulae
• suprapubic catheterisation for vesicovaginal fistulae
c. Fistulae
The risk to develop vesicovaginal and/or rectovaginal fistulae is high
(22 – 48%) after curative RT with or without chemotherapy in patients
with FIGO stage IVA cervical cancer.111, level III Fistula formation
occurs between six and 48 months after RT, with possible serious
complications occurring even after five years.107, level III The routine use
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
of EUA, cyctoscopy and proctoscopy at the time of initial diagnosis
helps in counseling women about the likelihood of this complication.
112, level III
Appropriate radiological investigations are often needed to establish the
fistula site and its complexity. Surgical interventions may include:17, level III;
107, level III
• fistula repair
• formation of ileal conduit
• stoma formation for enterovaginal fistulae
• colonic stenting in bowel obstruction
• percutaneous nephrotomies or internal ureteric stents for urological
fistulae
Primary exenteration surgery for selected patients in FIGO stage
IVA have been suggested to avoid morbidity associated with fistula
formation.111, level III
Patients with advance disease where non-surgical measures are more
appropriate may benefit from:17
• octreotide, hyoscine butylbromide or glycopyrronium to reduce
discharge volume
• codeine phosphate or loperamide to reduce motility and increase
stool consistency
• barrier creams to prevent local irritation and excoriation
• topical steroids
• tampons and pads
• low residue diet
d. Thrombosis and Haemorrhage
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) causes high mortality and morbidity in
patients with cancer, and is the second most common cause of death
after cancer progression.113, level III
The risk of thromboembolic events is up to seven times higher in cancer
patients, with the incidence being highest in the first few months of
diagnosis. Others at high risk are those with metastatic disease at
the time of diagnosis and after tumour recurrence.113, level III Cancer
patients receiving anticoagulant treatment for VTE also showed a two
to threefold increased risk of developing recurrent VTE.114 - 115, level I
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
The mechanisms of VTE in cancer patients can be summarised in the
following table:
Table 2. Mechanism of VTE in Cancer Patients
Source: Ministry of Health. Prevention and Treatment of Venous Thromboembolism.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2013
• Initial management of VTE
For the initial management of VTE in cancer patients, low molecular
weight heparin (LMWH) is superior to unfractionated heparin (UFH),
with reduced risk of mortality (RR=0.71, 95% CI 0.52 to 0.98) and no
significant difference in recurrent VTE events.114, level I Among various
LMWH regimes, once daily treatment is as safe and efficacious as twice
daily treatment, and is more convenient for the patient.116, level I
A Cochrane systematic review showed fondaparinux was as safe and
efficacious as UFH, and dalteparin as safe and efficacious as tinzaparin
in the initial management of VTE in cancer patients.114, level I
• Long-term management of VTE
For the long-term treatment of VTE in cancer patients, LMWH reduces
recurrent VTE events (HR=0.47, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.71) but not death
when compared with vitamin K antagonists (VKA).115, level I
If VKA is the choice of long-term treatment, current Malaysian VTE
guidelines recommend starting warfarin within 24 hours of diagnosis in
combination with LMWH or fondaparinux. Treatment with LMWH is to
be continued for five days or until International Normalised Ratio (INR)
is above 2 for at least 24 hours, whichever is longer. Anticoagulation
should be continued indefinitely or until cancer is resolved.117
Currently, there is insufficient evidence on the usage of novel
anticoagulants (such as dabigatran and rivaroxaban) in the management
of VTE in cancer patients.115, level I
Mechanism of VTE in Cancer Patients
Tumour-associated
• Extrinsic vascular compression and
invasion
• Tissue factor production
• Cancer pro-coagulant production
• Accentuated platelet activation
• Inflammation-mediated increases in
factor VIII, vWF and fibrinogen
• Impaired fibrinolysis due to high PAI-1
• Acquired deficiencies of natural
anticoagulants
Non-tumour associated
• Central venous access devices
• Anti-neoplastic mediated platelet
activation
• Anti-neoplastic mediated
endothelial cell damage
• Anti-angiogenesis therapy
• Anthracycline-induced congestive
heart failure
• Immobility
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
More than 50% of cancer patients have renal insufficiency, in turn
affecting treatment choices and dosages. In severe renal insufficiency,
UFH is used for the initial treatment, followed by VKA or long-term LMWH
with anti-Xa monitoring. Tinzaparin may be a safe option for the
treatment and prevention of VTE in cancer patients with renalfailure.
113, level III
Patients with Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) who receive home treatment,
compared with inpatient treatment, are less likely to have recurrence of
VTE (RR=0.61, 95% CI 0.42 to 0.90), have a lower mortality (RR=0.61,
95% CI 0.42 to 0.90) and show a trend for fewer major bleeding
complications but more minor bleeding complications.118, level I
Vena caval filter (VCF) usage for the prevention of pulmonary embolism
increases risk of long-term lower limb DVT (HR=1.52, 95% CI 1.02 to
2.27) with no significant improvement in mortality or reduction in the
rate of pulmonary embolism or DVT.119, level I Current Malaysian VTE
guidelines list only two indications for the insertion of a VCF which
are contraindication to anticoagulation and the presence of large free
floating iliocaval thrombus.
• Haemorrhage
Patients with cervical cancer may suffer from bleeding problems
due to advanced or metastatic disease. Chemotherapy causing
thrombocytopaenia and myelosuppression, vitamin K deficiency and
adverse drug effects are factors contributing to clotting and bleeding
problems.107, level III
Palliative RT for cervical carcinoma results in complete cessation
of vaginal bleeding in up to 45% of patients after the first radiation
fraction.120, level III Other methods suggested to treat minor haemorrhage
include fibrinolytic inhibitors such as oral or intravenous tranexamic
acid.17
e. Lymphoedema
In patients with cervical cancer, 12.2% of them have a clinical diagnosis
of lower limb lymphoedema. They are 3.5 times more likely to develop
lower limb lymphoedema if they receive pelvic RT and have 3.3 times
higher risk if pelvic lymph nodes are surgically removed.121, level III
Lymph node metastases, infiltrative carcinoma and pressure from large
tumours also contribute to secondary lymphoedema.
Patients report a poor QOL due to pain, changes in lower limb
sensation, appearance, restriction in activities and distress.17 Those at
risk of lymphedema should be identified early, monitored and taught
of self-care. Patients and carers should be offered information about
lymphoedema, its prevention and management.122, level III
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
General approaches to minimise the risk of developing lymphoedema
are:122, level III
• good care of skin and nails
• maintain optimal body weight
• eat a balanced diet
• avoid injury to area at risk
• avoid tight underwear, clothing, watches and jewellery
• avoid exposure to extreme temperatures
• use high factor sunscreen and insect repellent
• wear prophylactic compression garments, if prescribed
• perform exercise/movement and limb elevation
• wear comfortable, supportive shoes
Diagnosis criteria for lymphoedema have been identified as:17
• increase in limb circumference
• changes in sensation: fullness, tightness, heaviness, throbbing
and shooting pains
• reduce in limb flexibility
• palpable changes to the skin or subcutaneous tissue such as
fibrosclerosis that may be pitting or non-pitting
Severity of disease is classified into stages as described by the
International Society of Lymphology (refer to Appendix 10).
The evidence for treatment of lymphoedema is poor with no clear
conclusions on the efficacy of benzo-pyrones,123, level I and weak evidence
supporting usage of multi-layer bandaging over hosiery.124, level I
A consensus report outlines the approach to managing lymphoedema:
122, level III
• exercise and movement
• swelling reduction and maintenance by compression garments,
multi-layer bandaging, exercise and lymphatic massage
• skin care
• pain management
• psychosocial management
Lymphoedema is best managed by specialist lymphoedema practitioners,
usually physiotherapists, who are available at some healthcare
settings.122, level III
f. Malignant Ureteric Obstruction
Obstructive renal failure occurs due to locally advanced cervical cancer.
Patients may be asymptomatic, but may complain of pelvic pain or
uraemic symptoms due to renal failure.125, level II-2
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Treatment options are:17; 126, level II-2
• retrograde stenting
• percutaneous nephrostomy (PN) with/without antegrade stenting
• conservative management
Endoscopic placement of ureteral stents are often considered as the
first-line option for relieving ureteral obstruction.126, level II-2 If retrograde
stenting is unsuccessful, alternative options would be PN and/or
antegrade stenting.
PN can be of clinical benefit for patients with performance status 1
- 3 (refer to Appendix 7). High levels of morbidity (44%) have been
reported with median OS of 8.9 weeks after the surgery. Half of the
patients experience clinical benefit, as measured by recovery from
uraemic symptoms, lumbar pain or generally poor renal function.125, level II-2
Malignant ureteric obstruction indicates poor prognosis. Palliative
surgical interventions may be inappropriate if patients are terminally
ill with irreversible renal failure. The high morbidity associated with
palliative diversion may impair QOL. Treatment decisions should be
based on clear discussions of options, prognosis, cost, complications
and QOL, between patients and a multidisciplinary team.126, level II-2
g. Malignant Bowel Obstruction
The incidence of malignant bowel obstruction (MBO) in gynaecologic
cancer appears to be commonest in ovarian cancer (54.5%), followed
by cervical or endometrial cancer (27.3%).127, level II-3 Patients often have
high morbidity due to symptoms such as abdominal pain, colic, nausea
and vomiting, as well as from treatment such as surgery, nasogastric
tube insertion and intravenous therapy.
Management of MBO should be tailored to the underlying aetiology,
stage of disease and goals of care. Treatment options may include
surgical management with corrective or non-corrective laparotomies,
venting tubes and stent insertions, or medical management such as
symptomatic relief with opioids, anti-emetics, anti-spasmodics, antisecretory drugs and steroids.104, level III
In patients with advanced gynaecologic cancers who present with MBO,
treatment with dexamethasone (6 - 16 mg/day) may resolve bowel
obstruction but will not improve survival. A therapeutic trial of four to
five days is suggested.128, level I Octreotide may be considered in these
patients, and will reduce overall nausea, vomiting and nasogastric
drainage volume.127, level II-3
There are no clear recommendations for surgery in resolving symptoms
of MBO in advanced gynaecologic cancer.128, level I Consider medical
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
management for patients with advanced stage cancer and a shorter
time interval between cancer diagnosis and bowel obstructions.129, level III
h. End of Life Care
The final phase of terminal illness can be the most challenging time
for the patient, their carers and healthcare providers. Increased clinical
vigilance on symptom control, psychosocial and spiritual distress is
needed, along with sensitive communication and decision making.130, level III
Those closely affected by a death should be offered bereavement,
emotional and spiritual support appropriate to their needs and
preferences.131
Recommendation 18
• Patients with advanced cervical cancer should receive palliative
care and be referred to a specialised palliative team if necessary.
• Low molecular weight heparin should be used for the initial and
long-term treatment of venous thromboembolism in cervical cancer,
where available.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
14. PSYCHOSEXUAL CARE AND SOCIAL SUPPORT
In cervical cancer patients, psychological distress is often unrecognised.
Therefore, a simple and practical screening tool such as the Distress
Thermometer may help to identify underlying issues and make
necessary referrals. Refer to Appendix 11 for Distress Thermometer
Screening Tool.
Following diagnosis of cervical cancer, women often experience
distress in many domains of life such as:132, level III
• emotional (feelings of sadness, down or depressed, anxiety and
worry that treatment is beyond control)
• physical (lack of energy and unable to do things they used to do)
• psychological (fears about cancer returning and spreading)
• social (concerns about the worries of close ones)
Locoregional cervical cancer survivors report chronic fatigue after RT.
They also experience lower pleasure and QOL, higher discomfort and
higher levels of depression and anxiety, than those without chronic
fatigue.133, level III
Sexual dysfunction is a common problem after cervical cancer treatment.
Many factors contribute to this including the loss of psychologic selfesteem, distorted physical appearance, or deterioration of organ
function. Although most women resume sexual activity after radical
hysterectomy, 41% of them have decreased sexual satisfaction while
36% have increased dyspareunia.134, level III Physical intimacy and body
image are highly vulnerable to disruption after cancer diagnosis and
treatment.135, level I
Patients should be advised that their physical and psychological
functions are likely to deteriorate in the initial post-treatment period, but
they should anticipate improvement thereafter.17
Recommendation 19
• Psychosocial assessment should be performed in all cervical cancer
patients.
• Psychoeducation regarding potential deterioration and treatment
outcome-related to the cervical cancer should be offered after
diagnosis.
• The sexual health of women diagnosed with cervical cancer should
be assessed pre-treatment and monitored during the treatment.
Women with cervical cancer require help for various needs. These
needs should be identified early so that resources and intervention
can be put in place as promptly as possible.132, level III Many women
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
report an increase need for emotional and physical closeness with their
spouse.135, level I
Some women show concern about their sexual health, which include:134, level III
• potential harm from sexual activity on health
• appropriate time to resume sexual activity
• ways to relieve pelvic pain or increase sexual desire
• self-awareness of being feminine
Several psychological interventions for patients with cervical cancers
have been evaluated. Couple-focused intervention has stronger effects
compared to women-focused intervention. It improves most sexual
aspects including adjustment, drive, satisfaction and intimacy. It also has
strong effects for the male partners’ sexual drive and satisfaction.135, level I
Other psychological interventions with some positive effects:
• Cognitive Behavioural Therapy on changing unhelpful thoughts or
behaviour and coping skills.136, level I
• counselling on emotional distress including anxiety and depression.
136 level I
• relaxation and guided imagery on emotional distress and body
discomfort.137, level III
• information-based intervention on disease, treatment options and
coping strategies.136, level III
• social support (including family, friend and special person) is
associated with higher quality of life and lower rate of depression
and anxiety.137, level III
• In cervical cancer:
 couple-focused intervention is preferred over women-focused
intervention to improve sexual health.
 Cognitive Behavioural Therapy can reduce psychosocial distress.
 social support improves quality of life and reduces negative mood
symptoms, including depression and anxiety.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
15. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of cervical cancer at all
healthcare levels in Malaysia by using an evidence-based CPG. This
aims to prevent long-term morbidity and mortality.
a. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:-
• dissemination of CPG
 availability and dissemination of CPG to healthcare providers
(hardcopies and softcopies)
 conferences and updates on management of cervical cancer
• implementation of CPG
 public awareness via Cervical Cancer Awareness
 accessibility to relevant multidisciplinary teams
 active involvement of government and non-governmental
organisations
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:-
• limited awareness in managing and referrals among primary care
providers
• variation of practice and treatment at different levels of care
• limited facilities and human resources
• inadequate training at all levels of healthcare providers
• lack of networking between public and private health-care providers
b. Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be a strong commitment to:-
• distribute the CPG widespread to healthcare providers
• strengthen training on cervical cancer management for healthcare
providers
• establish a cervical cancer registry in Malaysia
• develop of multidisciplinary teams in secondary and tertiary care
levels
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
• Percentage
of patients
with cervical
cancer
receiving
definitive
treatment
within six
weeks of
histological
diagnosis
=
x 100%
Number of patients with cervical cancer
receiving definitive treatment within six
weeks
of histological diagnosis in a year
Number of patients with cervical cancer with
histological diagnosis in the same period
• Percentage
of patients
with cervical
cancer
completing
CCRT within
eight weeks
=
x 100%
Number of patients with cervical cancer
completing CCRT within eight weeks in a
year
Number of patients with cervical cancer
receiving CCRT in the same period
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed as
clinical audit indicator for quality management:-
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH. These include a Quick Reference and a Training
Module.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
References
1.
Torre L a, Bray F, Siegel RL, et al. Global Cancer Statistics, 2012. 2015;00(00):1–22.
2.
WHO Classification of tumours of the female reproductive organs 20142014.
3.
Omar ZA, Tamin NSI. National Cancer Registry Report 2007. 2011. 42-43 p.
4.
Ward KK, Shah NR, Saenz CC, et al. Changing demographics of cervical cancer in the United
States (1973-2008). Gynecol Oncol; 2012;126(3):330–3.
5.
Berrington de González a, Sweetland S, Green J. Comparison of risk factors for squamous cell
and adenocarcinomas of the cervix: a meta-analysis. Br J Cancer. 2004;90(9):1787–91.
6.
Rajkumar T, Cuzick J, Appleby P, et al. Cervical carcinoma and reproductive factors: Collaborative
reanalysis of individual data on 16,563 women with cervical carcinoma and 33,542 women
without cervical carcinoma from 25 epidemiological studies. Int J Cancer. 2006;119(5):1108–24.
7.
Plummer M, Peto J, Franceschi S. Time since first sexual intercourse and the risk of cervical
cancer. Int J Cancer. 2012;130(11):2638–44.
8.
Parikh S, Brennan P, Boffetta P. Meta-analysis of social inequality and the risk of cervical cancer.
Int J Cancer. 2003;105(5):687–91.
9.
Ikechebelu JI, Onyiaorah I V, Ugboaja JO, et al. Clinicopathological analysis of cervical cancer
seen in a tertiary health facility in Nnewi, south-east Nigeria. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2010;30(3):299–
301.
10. Shapley M, Jordan J, Croft PR. A systematic review of postcoital bleeding and risk of cervical
cancer. Br J Gen Pract. 2006;56(527):453–60.
11. Khattab A F, Ewies A A, Appleby D, et al. The outcome of referral with postcoital bleeding (PCB).
J Obstet Gynaecol. 2005;25(3):279–82.
12. Tehranian A, Rezaii N, Mohit M, et al. Evaluation of women presenting with postcoital bleeding
by cytology and colposcopy. Int J Gynecol Obstet; 2009;105(1):18–20.
13. Sahu B, Latheef R, Aboel Magd S. Prevalence of pathology in women attending colposcopy for
postcoital bleeding with negative cytology. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2007;276(5):471–3.
14. Hirschowitz L, Ganesan R, Sighn N, et al. Standards and datasets for reporting cancers Dataset
for histological reporting of cervical neoplasia (3rd edition). R Coll Pathol. 2011;G071(April
2011):1–26.
15. Takeda N, Sakuragi N, Takeda M, et al. Multivariate analysis of histopathologic prognostic factors
for invasive cervical cancer treated with radical hysterectomy and systematic retroperitoneal
lymphadenectomy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2002;81(12):1144–51.
16. Marchiolé P, Buénerd A, Benchaib M, et al. Clinical significance of lympho vascular space
involvement and lymph node micrometastases in early-stage cervical cancer: A retrospective
case-control surgico-pathological study. Gynecol Oncol. 2005;97(3):727–32.
17. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of cervical cancer. (SIGN Guideline No
99). 2008;(January):77.
18. Martínez A, Mery E, Filleron T, et al. Accuracy of intraoperative pathological examination of SLN
in cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol; 2013;130(3):525–9.
19. Pecorelli S, Zigliani L, Odicino F. Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Gynecol
Obstet; 2009;105(2):107–8.
20. Edge SB, Compton CC. The American Joint Committee on Cancer: the 7th edition of the AJCC
cancer staging manual and the future of TNM. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010;17(6):1471–4.
21. Wiebe E, Denny L, Thomas G. Cancer of the cervix uteri. Int J Gynecol Obstet [Internet].
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics; 2012;119:S100–9.
22. Qin Y, Peng Z, Lou J, et al. Discrepancies between clinical staging and pathological findings of
operable cervical carcinoma with stage IB-IIB: A retrospective analysis of 818 patients: Original
Article. Aust New Zeal J Obstet Gynaecol. 2009;49(5):542–4.
23. Bipat S, Glas AS, Van Der Velden J, et al. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging in staging of uterine cervical carcinoma: A systematic review. Gynecol Oncol. 2003;
91(1):59–66.
24. Shweel M, Abdel-Gawad E, Abdel-Gawad E, et al. Uterine Cervical Malignancy: Diagnostic
Accuracy of MRI with Histopathologic Correlation. J Clin Imaging Sci. 2012;2(1):42.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
25. Bleker SM, Bipat S, Spijkerboer AM, et al. The negative predictive value of clinical examination
with or without anesthesia versus magnetic resonance imaging for parametrial infiltration in
cervical cancer stages IB1 to IIA. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2013;23(1):193–8.
26. Kamimori T, Sakamoto K, Fujiwara K, et al. Parametrial involvement in FIGO stage IB1 cervical
carcinoma diagnostic impact of tumor diameter in preoperative magnetic resonance imaging. Int
J Gynecol Cancer. 2011;21(2):349–54.
27. Epstein E, Testa A, Gaurilcikas A, et al. Early-stage cervical cancer: Tumor delineation by
magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound - A European multicenter trial. Gynecol Oncol;
2013;128(3):449–53.
28. Kang S, Kim SK, Chung DC, et al. Diagnostic value of (18)F-FDG PET for evaluation of
paraaortic nodal metastasis in patients with cervical carcinoma: a metaanalysis. J Nucl Med.
2010;51(3):360–7.
29. Loubeyre P, Navarria I, Undurraga M, et al. Is imaging relevant for treatment choice in early stage
cervical uterine cancer? Surg Oncol; 2012;21(1):e1–6.
30. Patel CN, Nazir SA, Khan Z, et al. 18F-FDG PET/CT of cervical carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol.
2011;196(5):1225–33.
31. Brockbank E, Kokka F, Bryant A, et al. Pre-treatment surgical para-aortic lymph node assessment
in locally advanced cervical cancer ( Review ). 2013;(3).
32. Valduvieco I, Biete A, Rios I, et al. Correlation between clinical findings and magnetic resonance
imaging for the assessment of local response after standard treatment in cervical cancer.
Reports Pract Oncol Radiother J Gt Cancer Cent Poznań Polish Soc Radiat Oncol [Internet].
Wielkopolskie Centrum Onkologii; 2013;18(4):214–9.
33. Lanceley A, Fiander A, McCormack M, et al. Follow-up protocols for women with cervical cancer
after primary treatment. Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2013;11(11):CD008767.
34. Baalbergen A, Veenstra Y, Stalpers LL, et al. Primary surgery versus primary radiation therapy
with or without chemotherapy for early adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2010;(1):CD006248.
35. Plante M. Evolution in Fertility-Preserving Options for Early-Stage Cervical Cancer. Int J Gynecol
Cancer. 2013;23(6):982–9.
36. Muraji M, Sudo T, Nakagawa E, et al. Type II Versus Type III Fertility-Sparing Abdominal Radical
Trachelectomy for Early-Stage Cervical Cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2012;22(3):479–83.
37. Biliatis I, Kucukmetin A, Patel A, et al. Small volume stage 1B1 cervical cancer: Is radical surgery
still necessary? Gynecol Oncol; 2012;126(1):73–7.
38. Han L, Yang XY, Zheng A, et al. Systematic comparison of radical vaginal trachelectomy and
radical hysterectomy in the treatment of early-stage cervical cancer. Int J Gynecol Obstet
[Internet]. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics; 2011;112(2):149–53.
39. Dursun P, LeBlanc E, Nogueira MC. Radical vaginal trachelectomy (Dargent’s operation): A
critical review of the literature. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2007;33(8):933–41.
40. Einstein MH, Park KJ, Sonoda Y, et al. Radical vaginal versus abdominal trachelectomy for
stage IB1 cervical cancer: A comparison of surgical and pathologic outcomes. Gynecol Oncol
[Internet]. Elsevier Inc.; 2009;112(1):73–7.
41. Ziebarth AJ, Smith H, Killian ME, et al. Completed versus aborted radical hysterectomy for nodepositive stage IB cervical cancer in the modern era of chemoradiation therapy. Gynecol Oncol;
2012;126(1):69–72.
42. Garg G, Shah JP LR. Should Radical Hysterectomy Be Aborted on Intraoperative Detection
of Nodal Tumor Metastasis in Early Stage Cervical Cancer? Am Soc Colposc Cerv Pathol.
2010;14(4):3740381.
43. Landoni F, Zanagnolo V, Lovato-Diaz L, et al. Ovarian metastases in early-stage cervical cancer
(IA2-IIA): A multicenter retrospective study of 1965 patients (a cooperative task force study). Int
J Gynecol Cancer. 2007;17(3):623–8.
44. Shimada M, Kigawa J, Nishimura R, et al. Ovarian metastasis in carcinoma of the uterine cervix.
Gynecol Oncol. 2006;101(2):234–7.
45. Yamamoto R, Okamoto K, Yukiharu T, et al. A study of risk factors for ovarian metastases in
stage Ib-IIIb cervical carcinoma and analysis of ovarian function after a transposition. Gynecol
Oncol. 2001;82(2):312–6.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
46. Windbichler GH, Müller-Holzner E, Nicolussi-Leck G, et al. Ovarian preservation in the surgical
treatment of cervical carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999;180(4):963–9.
47. Kucukmetin A, Biliatis I, Naik R, et al. Laparoscopically assisted radical vaginal hysterectomy
versus radical abdominal hysterectomy for the treatment of early cervical cancer ( Review ).
2013;(10).
48. Geetha P, Nair Mk. Laparoscopic, robotic and open method of radical hysterectomy for cervical
cancer: A systematic review. J Minim Access Surg. 2012;8(3):67.
49. Selman TJ, Mann C, Zamora J, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of tests for lymph node status in
primary cervical cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2008;178(7):855–62.
50. Van de Lande J, Torrenga B, Raijmakers PGHM, et al. Sentinel lymph node detection in early
stage uterine cervix carcinoma: a systematic review. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;106(3):604–13.
51. Green J, Kirwan J, Tierney J, et al. Concomitant chemotherapy and radiation therapy for cancer
of the uterine cervix. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;(3):CD002225.
52. Tierney JF, Vale C, Symonds P. Concomitant and Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy for Cervical
Cancer. Clin Oncol. 2008;20(6):401–16.
53. Uno T, Mitsuhashi A, Isobe K, et al. Concurrent daily cisplatin and extended-field radiation
therapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2008;18(1):80–4.
54. Rajasooriyar C, Van Dyk S, Bernshaw D, et al. Patterns of failure and treatment-related toxicity in
advanced cervical cancer patients treated using extended field radiotherapy with curative intent.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;80(2):422–8.
55. Wang X, Liu R, Ma B, et al. High dose rate versus low dose rate intracavity brachytherapy for
locally advanced uterine cervix cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(7):CD007563.
56. Song S, Rudra S, Hasselle MD, et al. The effect of treatment time in locally advanced cervical
cancer in the era of concurrent chemoradiotherapy. Cancer. 2013;119(2):325–31.
57. Keys HM, Bundy BN, Stehman FB, et al. Radiation therapy with and without extrafascial
hysterectomy for bulky stage IB cervical carcinoma: A randomized trial of the Gynecologic
Oncology Group. Gynecol Oncol. 2003;89(3):343–53.
58. Ota T, Takeshima N, Tabata T, et al. Adjuvant hysterectomy for treatment of residual disease in
patients with cervical cancer treated with radiation therapy. Br J Cancer. 2008;99(8):1216–20.
59. Walji N, Chue AL, Yap C, et al. Is There a Role for Adjuvant Hysterectomy after Suboptimal
Concurrent Chemoradiation in Cervical Carcinoma? Clin Oncol; 2010;22(2):140–6.
60. Dueñas-Gonzalez A, Coronel J, Cetina L. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of gemcitabine
hydrochloride for the treatment of cervical cancer. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2011
Dec;7(12):1601-12
61. Rogers L, Siu SSN, Luesley D, et al. Radiotherapy and chemoradiation after surgery for early
cervical cancer. Cochrane database Syst Rev [Internet]. 2012;5(5):CD007583.
62. Rosa DD, Medeiros LRF, Edelweiss MI, et al. Europe PMC Funders Group Adjuvant platinumbased chemotherapy for early stage cervical cancer. 2014;
63. Bundy B, Zaino R, Major F. Prospective Surgical-Pathological Study of Disease-Free Interval in
Patients with Stage I6 Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Cervix : A Gynecologic Oncology Group
Study. 1990;357:352–7.
64. Lukka H, Hirte H, Fyles A, et al. Concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy plus radiotherapy for
cervical cancer - A meta-analysis. Clin Oncol. 2002;14(3):203–12.
65. Rydzewska L, Tierney J, Vale CL, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus surgery versus surgery
for cervical cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(1):CD007406.
66. Kim HS, Sardi JE, Katsumata N, et al. Efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with
FIGO stage IB1 to IIA cervical cancer: An international collaborative meta-Analysis. Eur J Surg
Oncol; 2013;39(2):115–24.
67. Ye Q, Yuan HX, Chen HL. Responsiveness of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before surgery
predicts favorable prognosis for cervical cancer patients: A meta-analysis. J Cancer Res Clin
Oncol. 2013;139(11):1887–98.
68. Morice P, Uzan C, Gouy S, et al. Gynaecological cancers in pregnancy. Lancet;
2012;379(9815):558–69.
69. Hunter MI, Tewari K, Monk BJ. Cervical neoplasia in pregnancy. Part 2: current treatment of
invasive disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2008;199(1):10–8.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
70. Morice P, Narducci F, Mathevet P, et al. French recommendations on the management of
invasive cervical cancer during pregnancy. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2009;19(9):1638–41.
71. Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Chrysikos D, et al. Platinum derivatives during pregnancy in cervical
cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2013;121(2 Pt 1):337–43.
72. Hellström AC, Sigurjonson T, Pettersson F. Carcinoma of the cervical stump. The radiumhemmet
series 1959-1987. Treatment and prognosis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2001;80(2):152–7.
73. Chen L, Xia T, Yang Z, et al. Comprehensive treatment and prognostic factors in patients with
carcinoma of the cervical stump. Clin Oncol Cancer Res. 2009;6(6):426–9.
74. Park JY, Kim DY, Kim JH, et al. Management of occult invasive cervical cancer found after simple
hysterectomy. Ann Oncol. 2009;21(5):994–1000.
75. Smith KB, Amdur RJ, Yeung AR, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy for cervix cancer incidentally
discovered after a simple hysterectomy for either benign conditions or noninvasive pathology.
Am J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun;33(3):229-32
76. Leath CA., Straughn JM, Bhoola SM, et al. The role of radical parametrectomy in the treatment
of occult cervical carcinoma after extrafascial hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;92(1):215–9.
77. Gardner GJ, Reidy-Lagunes D, Gehrig PA. Neuroendocrine tumors of the gynecologic tract: A
Society of Gynecologic Oncology (SGO) clinical document. Gynecol Oncol; 2011;122(1):190–8.
78. McCusker ME, Coté TR, Clegg LX, et al. Endocrine tumors of the uterine cervix: Incidence,
demographics, and survival with comparison to squamous cell carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol.
2003;88(3):333–9.
79. Zivanovic O, Leitao MM, Park KJ, et al. Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix:
Analysis of outcome, recurrence pattern and the impact of platinum-based combination
chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol; 2009;112(3):590–3.
80. Kasamatsu T, Sasajima Y, Onda T, et al. Surgical treatment for neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
uterine cervix. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2007;99(3):225–8.
81. Wang KL, Chang TC, Jung SM, et al. Primary treatment and prognostic factors of small cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma of the uterine cervix: A Taiwanese Gynecologic Oncology Group
study. Eur J Cancer; 2012;48(10):1484–94.
82. Elit L, Fyles AW, Devries MC, et al. Follow-up for women after treatment for cervical cancer: A
systematic review. Gynecol Oncol; 2009;114(3):528–35.
83. Sartori E, Pasinetti B, Carrara L, et al. Pattern of failure and value of follow-up procedures in
endometrial and cervical cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;107(1 SUPPL.).
84. Kew FM, Roberts AP, Cruickshank DJ. The role of routine follow-up after gynecological
malignancy. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2005 May-Jun;15(3):413-9
85. Bodurka-Bevers D, Morris M, Eifel PJ, et al. Posttherapy surveillance of women with cervical
cancer: an outcomes analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2000;78(2):187–93.
86. Morice P, Deyrolle C, Rey A, et al. Value of routine follow-up procedures for patients with stage
I/II cervical cancer treated with combined surgery-radiation therapy. Ann Oncol. 2004;15(2):218–
23.
87. Ibeanu O, Modesitt SC, Ducie J, et al. Hormone replacement therapy in gynecologic cancer
survivors: Why not? Gynecol Oncol; 2011;122(2):447–54.
88. Forner DM, Lampe B. Exenteration as a primary treatment for locally advanced cervical cancer:
Long-term results and prognostic factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol; 2011;205(2):148.e1–148.e6.
89. Benn T, Brooks RA., Zhang Q, et al. Pelvic exenteration in gynecologic oncology: A single
institution study over 20 years. Gynecol Oncol; 2011;122(1):14–8.
90. De Wilt JHW, van Leeuwen DHJ, Logmans A, et al. Pelvic exenteration for primary and recurrent
gynaecological malignancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2007;134(2):243–8.
91. Marnitz S, Köhler C, Müller M, et al. Indications for primary and secondary exenterations in
patients with cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;103(3):1023–30.
92. Schmidt A, Imesch P, Fink D, Egger H. Gynecologic Oncology Indications and long-term clinical
outcomes in 282 patients with pelvic exenteration for advanced or recurrent cervical cancer.
Gynecol Oncol; 2012;125(3):604–9.
93. Berek JS, Howe C, Lagasse LD, et al. Pelvic exenteration for recurrent gynecologic malignancy:
Survival and morbidity analysis of the 45-year experience at UCLA. Gynecol Oncol.
2005;99(1):153–9.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
94. Maggioni A, Roviglione G, Landoni F, et al. Pelvic exenteration: Ten-year experience at the
European Institute of Oncology in Milan. Gynecol Oncol. 2009;114(1):64–8.
95. Ungar L, Palfalvi L, Novak Z. Primary pelvic exenteration in cervical cancer patients. Gynecol
Oncol; 2008;111(2 SUPPL.):S9–12.
96. Scatchard K, Forrest JL, Flubacher M, Cornes P, Williams C. Chemotherapy for metastatic and
recurrent cervical cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Oct 17;10:CD006469
97. Hirte HW, Strychowsky JE, Oliver T, et al. Chemotherapy for recurrent, metastatic, or persistent
cervical cancer: a systematic review. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2007;17(6):1194–204.
98. Lee YS, Kim YS, Kim JH, et al. Feasibility and outcome of concurrent chemoradiotherapy for
recurrent cervical carcinoma after initial surgery. Tumori. 2010;96(4):553–9.
99. Haasbeek CJA, Uitterhoeve ALJ, van der Velden J, et al. Long-term results of salvage
radiotherapy for the treatment of recurrent cervical carcinoma after prior surgery. Radiother
Oncol. 2008;89(2):197–204.
100. Denton AS, Clarke NW, Maher EJ. Non-surgical interventions for late radiation cystitis in
patients who have received radical radiotherapy to the pelvis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2002;(3):CD001773.
101. Covens A. Differences in morbitidy of radical hysterectomy between gynecological oncologists.pdf.
102. MA Zullo, N Manci RA et al. Vesical dysfunctions after radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer:
a critical review. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2003;48(3):287.
103. S Fujii. Anatomic identification of nerve-sparing radical hysterectomy: a step-by-step procedure.
Gynecol Oncol. 2008;111(2 Suppl):S33.
104. Hanks G, Cherny NI, Christakis NA E. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine (4 Ed.). 2009.
105. Network NCC. NCNN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines). 2015.
106. Mx of Cancer pain malaysia.pdf.
107. Booth S, Bruera E TT. Palliative Care Consultation in Gynaeoncology. 2004.
108. Agar M, Broadbent A, Chye R. The management of malignant psoas syndrome: Case reports
and literature review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2004;28(3):282–93.
109. Adderley U, Smith R. Topical agents and dressings for fungating wounds. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2007;(2).
110. Da Costa Santos CM, de Mattos Pimenta CA, Nobre MRC. A Systematic Review of Topical
Treatments to Control the Odor of Malignant Fungating Wounds. J Pain Symptom Manage.
2010;39(6):1065–76.
111. Biewenga P, Mutsaerts MAQ, Stalpers LJ, et al. Can we predict vesicovaginal or rectovaginal
fistula formation in patients with stage IVA cervical cancer? Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010;20(3):471–5.
112. Moore KN, Gold MA., McMeekin DS, et al. Vesicovaginal fistula formation in patients with Stage
IVA cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;106(3):498–501.
113. Scotté F, Rey JB, Launay-Vacher V. Thrombosis, cancer and renal insufficiency: Low molecular
weight heparin at the crossroads. Support Care Cancer. 2012;20(12):3033–42.
114. Ea A, Sr V, Gunukula S, et al. Anticoagulation for the initial treatment of venous thromboembolism
in patients with cancer ( Review ). 2013;(1).
115. Ea A, Labedi N, Barba M, et al. Anticoagulation for the long-term treatment of venous
thromboembolism in patients with cancer ( Review ). 2013;(1).
116. Bhutia S, Wong PF. Once versus twice daily low molecular weight heparin for the initial treatment
of venous thromboembolism. Cochrane database Syst Rev [Internet]. 2013;7(7):CD003074.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23857562
117. Ministry of Health M. Prevention and Treatment of Venous Thromboembolism. 2013.
118. Othieno R, Abu Affan M, Okpo E. Home versus in-patient treatment for deep vein thrombosis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;(3):CD003076.
119. Young T, Tang H, Hughes R. Vena caval filters for the prevention of pulmonary embolism
( Review ). 2010;(2).
120. Van Lonkhuijzen L, Thomas G. Palliative radiotherapy for cervical carcinoma, a systematic
review. Radiother Oncol [Internet]. Elsevier Ireland Ltd; 2011;98(3):287–91.
121. Beesley V, Janda M, Eakin E, et al. Lymphedema after gynecological cancer treatment:
Prevalence, correlates, and supportive care needs. Cancer. 2007;109(12):2607–14.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
122. Framework L. Best practice for the management of lymphoedema International consensus.
London: MEP Ltd. 2006. 3–52 p.
123. Cma B, Nj P, Seers K, Ps M. Benzo-pyrones for reducing and controlling lymphoedema of the
limbs ( Review ). 2009;(1).
124. Badger C, Preston N, Seers K, et al. Physical therapies for reducing and controlling lymphoedema
of the limbs. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(4):CD003141.
125. Dienstmann R, da Silva Pinto C, Pereira MT, et al. Palliative Percutaneous Nephrostomy in
Recurrent Cervical Cancer: A Retrospective Analysis of 50 Consecutive Cases. J Pain Symptom
Manage. 2008;36(2):185–90.
126. Yan Song, Xiang Fei, and Yongsheng Song. Percutaneous Nephrostomy Versus Indwelling
Ureteral Stent in the Management of Gynecological Malignancies. Int J Gynecol Cancer.
2012;22(4):697.
127. Watari H, Hosaka M, Wakui Y et al. A prospective study on the efficacy of octreotide in the
management of malignant bowel obstruction in gynecologic cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer.
2012;22(4):692.
128. DJ Feuer KB. Corticosteroids for the resolution of malignant bowel obstruction in advanced
gynaecological and gastrointestinal cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;2.
129. Mirensky T, Schuster K, UA Ali et al. Outcomes of small bowel obstruction in patients with
previous gynecologic malignancies. Am J Surg. 2012;203(4):472.
130. Cherny N, Fallon M, Kaasa S, Al E. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 2015. 1123 p.
131. NICE Quality Standard 13. End of Life care for adults. 2011;(October). Available from: http://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/QS13/chapter/introduction-and-overview
132. Steele R, Fitch MI. Supportive care needs of women with gynecologic cancer. Cancer Nurs.
2008;31(4):284–91.
133. Vistad I, Fosså SD, Kristensen GB, Dahl a. a. Chronic fatigue and its correlates in longterm survivors of cervical cancer treated with radiotherapy. BJOG An Int J Obstet Gynaecol.
2007;114(9):1150–8.
134. Tangjitgamol S, Manusirivithaya S, Leelahakorn S, Thawaramara T, Lapcharoen O. Sexual
dysfunction in Thai women with early-stage cervical cancer after radical hysterectomy.
2007;(6):1104–12.
135. Scott JL, Kayser K. A review of couple-based interventions for enhancing women’s sexual
adjustment and body image after cancer. Cancer J. 2009;15(1):48–56.
136. Hersch J, Juraskova I, Price M, Mullan B. Psychosocial interventions and quality of
life in gynaecological cancer patients: a systematic review. Psychooncology [Internet].
2008;810(December 2008):795–810. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Citation&list_uids=19090556
137. Pinar G, Okdem S, Buyukgonenc L, Ayhan A. The Relationship Between Social Support and the
Level of Anxiety, Depression, and Quality of Life of Turkish Women With Gynecologic Cancer.
2012;35(3):229–35.
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination, search was limit to English, human and last 10 years:-
1.
Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/
2.
(uterine cervical adj1 (cancer$ or neoplasm$ or carcinoma or
tumo?r$ or malignanc$)).tw.
3.
(uterine cervix adj1 (cancer$ or neoplasm$ or carcinoma or
tumo?r$ or malignanc$)).tw.
4.
1 or 2 or 3
5.
Recurrence/
6.
recurr*.tw.
7.
recrudescen*.tw.
8.
relaps*.tw.
9.
5 or 6 or 7 or 8
10. 4 and 9
11. Antineoplastic Agents/
12. ((drug* or agent*) adj1 anticancer).tw.
13. (chemotherapeutic anticancer adj1 (agent* or drug*)).tw.
14. (cancer chemotherapy adj1 (drug* or agent*)).tw.
15. chemotherapy drugs cancer.tw.
16. chemotherapy agent cancer.tw.
17. chemotherapy agents cancer.tw.
18. chemotherapy drug cancer.tw.
19. (antitumo?r adj1 (drug* or agent*)).tw.
20. antineoplastic*.tw.
21. (antineoplastic adj1 (agent* or drug*)).tw.
22. 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21
23. 10 and 22
24. limit 23 to (english and humans and last 10 years)
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. Epidemiology/Risk factors/Clinical presentation
1.1 What is the epidemiology of cervical cancer?
1.2 What are the risk factors of cervical cancer?
1.3 What are clinical presentations of cervical cancer?
2. Referral
2.1 When should the patients with cervical cancer be referred to
gynae-oncology/oncology team?
3. Diagnosis and Staging
3.1 What are the important histopathological parameters in the
diagnosis of cervical cancer?
3.2 What is the role of frozen section assessment in cervical
cancer?
3.3 Is clinical staging effective in the assessment of cervical
cancer?
3.4 What is the role of imaging in the assessment of cervical
cancer?
4. Treatment
4.1 Are the following modalities effective and safe in the primary
treatment of cervical cancer?
• Surgery
• Definitive Chemoradiotherapy/Radiotherapy
4.2 What are the effective and safe adjuvant therapies in cervical
cancer?
• Surgery
• Chemotherapy
• Chemoradiotherapy/Radiotheraphy
• Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy
4.3 What are the effective and safe management of cervical
cancer in the following special circumstances?
• Pregnancy
• Tumour arising from cervical stump
• Cervical cancer diagnosed after hysterectomy for benign
gynaecological disorder
• Neuroendocrine cancers
4.4 What are follow-up plans for patients with cervical cancer?
4.5 What are the effective and safe modalities for diagnosis,
assessment and treatment of recurrent cervical cancer?
• Surgery
• Chemotherapy
• Salvage radiotherapy/Chemoradiotherapy
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
4.6 What are the effective and safe management of complications
following treatment of cervical cancer?
4.7 What are the effective and safe palliative care following
treatment of cervical cancer?
4.8 What are the effective psychosexual care and social support
for patients and carers?
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
WHO histological classification of tumours of the uterine cervix
Epithelial tumours
Squamous tumours and precursors
Squamous cell carcinoma, not otherwise specified
8070/3
Keratinizing
8071/3
Non-keratinizing
8072/3
Basaloid
8083/3
Verrucous
8051/3
Warty
8051/3
Papillary
8052/3
Lymphoepithelioma-like
8082/3
Squamotransitional
8120/3
Early invasive (microinvasive) squamous cell carcinoma
8076/3
Squamous intraepithelial neoplasia
Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 3 /
8077/2
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ
8070/2
Benign squamous cell lesions
Condyloma acuminatum
Squamous papilloma
8052/0
Fibroepithelial polyp
Glandular tumours and precursors
Adenocarcinoma
8140/3
Mucinous adenocarcinoma
8480/3
Endocervical
8482/3
Intestinal
8144/3
Signet-ring cell
8490/3
Minimal deviation
8480/3
Villoglandular
8262/3
Endometrioid adenocarcinoma
8380/3
Clear cell adenocarcinoma
8310/3
Serous adenocarcinoma
8441/3
Mesonephric adenocarcinoma
9110/3
Early invasive adenocarcinoma
8140/3
Adenocarcinoma in situ
8140/2
Glandular dysplasia
Benign glandular lesions
Müllerian papilloma
Endocervical polyp
Other epithelial tumours
Adenosquamous carcinoma
8560/3
Glassy cell carcinoma variant
8015/3
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
8200/3
Adenoid basal carcinoma
8098/3
Neuroendocrine tumours
Carcinoid
8240/3
Atypical carcinoid
8249/3
Small cell carcinoma
8041/3
Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
8013/3
Undifferentiated carcinoma
8020/3
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Mesenchymal tumours and tumour-like conditions
Leiomyosarcoma
8890/3
Endometrioid stromal sarcoma, low grade
8931/3
Undifferentiated endocervical sarcoma
8805/3
Sarcoma botryoides
8910/3
Alveolar soft part sarcoma
9581/3
Angiosarcoma
9120/3
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour
9540/3
Leiomyoma
8890/0
Genital rhabdomyoma
8905/0
Postoperative spindle cell nodule
Mixed epithelial and mesenchymal tumours
Carcinosarcoma (malignant müllerian mixed tumour;
metaplastic carcinoma)
8980/3
Adenosarcoma
8933/3
Wilms tumour
8960/3
Adenofibroma
9013/0
Adenomyoma
8932/0
Melanocytic tumours
Malignant melanoma
8720/3
Blue naevus
8780/0
Miscellaneous tumours
Tumours of germ cell type
Yolk sac tumour
9071/3
Dermoid cyst
9084/0
Mature cystic teratoma
9080/0
Lymphoid and haematopoetic tumours
Malignant lymphoma (specify type)
Leukaemia (specify type)
Secondary tumours
1.
Morphology code of the International Classification of Diseases for
Oncology (ICD-O) {921} and the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine
(http://snomed.org). Behaviour is coded /0 for benign tumours, /2 for in situ
carcinomas and grade 3 intraepithelial neoplasia, /3 for malignant tumours,
and /1 for borderline or uncertain behaviour.
2.
Intraepithelial neoplasia does not have a generic code in ICD-O. ICD-O
codes are only available for lesions categorized as squamous intraepithelial
neoplasia grade 3 (e.g. cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3) = 8077/2,
squamous cell carcinoma in situ = 8070/2, glandular ntraepithelial neoplasia
grade 3 = 8148/2 and adenocarcinoma in situ = 8140/2.
Source: Kurman RJ, Carcangiu ML, Herrington CS et al. WHO Classification of Tumours
of Female Reproductive Organs. Fourth Edition. Geneva, WHO. 2014; Chapter 5
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
REPORTING PROFORMA FOR CERVICAL CANCER IN EXCISIONAL
CERVICAL BIOPSIES / HYSTERECTOMY SPECIMENS
MACROSCOPIC
Specimen labelled as:
Orientation markers:
Specimen gross/external appearance:
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
Present
Absent
Normal
Abnormal (specify)
Right ovary dimension
mm
Right fallopian tube
mm
Left ovary dimension:
mm
Left fallopian tube:
mm
Present
Absent
Anterior
Posterior
Right
Left
Circumferential
Vaginal cuff dimension:
____mm (length) x ____mm(width/circumferential) x ____ mm(thickness)
Parametrium included
Paracervix included
Macroscopically visible tumour
Number of visible tumour(s)
Tumour location (position)
Yes
No
Yes
No
SPECIMEN MEASUREMENTS
Length of specimen:
Length of canal:
Ectocervix diameter (3-9 o’clock):
Ectocervix diameter (6-12 o’clock):
UTERINE DIMENSION
Cervix-fundus:
Anterior-posterior:
Distance between cornu:
ADNEXA
Type of procedure/specimen:
LLETZ
CONE Biopsy
Trachelectomy
Simple Hysterectomy
Radical Trachelectomy
Radical Hysterectomy
_________
Appendix 4
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Exophytic
Endophytic
Gross appearance of tumour
Carcinoma subtype
Histological tumour grade
Maximum depth of invasion
Cervical wall thickness
Minimum thickness of uninvolved
cervical stroma
Ulceration
Horizontal measurement
Transverse measurement
Tumour size:
____mm (vertical/length) x _____mm horizontal/width) x ____mm(depth/thickness)
Thickness of cervical wall at
deepest invasion site
Macroscopic involvement of vagina
Macroscopic involvement of
parametrium
Macroscopic involvement of
paracervix
Lymph nodes
mm
MICROSCOPIC
Tumour
Multiple tumours
: Present
Absent
Histological tumour type
: Squamous carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Neuroendocrine carcinoma
Other (Specify):
Well / Grade 1
Moderate / Grade 2
Poor / Grade 3
Not assessable / Not applicable
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
Present
Absent
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
EXTENT
Lymphovascular invasion
Parametrium
Paracervix
Vagina cuff
Associated AIS : Absent
Present
(If present, describe extention)
Associated CIN : Absent
Present
(If present, describe grade and
extention)
Associated SMILE : Absent
Present
(If present, describe extention)
Present
Absent
Involved
Not Involved
If involved: Right Left
(distance from excision margin:_____ mm)
Involved
Not Involved
If involved: Right Left
(distance from excision margin:_____ mm)
Involved
Not Involved
(distance from excision margin:_____ mm)
Not Applicable
No Yes
(Please specify)
Involvement of other organs
MARGIN STATUS
Invasive tumour
Endocervical margin
Involved
Not Involved
(specify distance:_____ mm)
Ectocervical margin
Involved
Not Involved
(specify distance:_____ mm)
Radial margin
Involved
Not Involved
(specify distance:_____ mm)
Margin status of AIS
Involved
Not Involved
(specify distance:_____ mm)
Margin status of CIN
Involved
Not Involved
(specify distance:_____ mm)
Margin status of SMILE
Involved
Not Involved
(specify distance:_____ mm)
NON-INVASIVE COMPONENT
ANCILLARY TEST
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
Revised FIGO Cervical Cancer Staging 2009
Cancer of the cervix uteria
Stage
Description
I
The carcinoma is strictly confined to the cervix (extension to the
uterus corpus should be disregarded).
IA
• Invasive cancer identified only microscopically (all gross lesion
even with superficial invasion are Stage IB cancers).
• Invasion is limited to measured stromal invasion with a maximum
depth of 5 mmb and no wider than 7 mm.
• IA1 : Measured invasion of stroma ≤ 3 mm in depth and ≤7 mm
width
• IA2 : Measured invasion of stroma >3 mm and <5 mm in depth
and ≤7 mm width
IB
Clinical lesions confined to the cervix, or preclinical lesions greater
than stage IA
• IB1 : Clinical lesions no greater than 4 cm in size
• IB2 : Clinical lesions >4 cm in size
II
The carcinoma extends beyond the uterus, but has not extended
onto the pelvic wall or to the lower third of vagina.
IIA
Involvement up to the upper 2/3. No obvious parametrial involvement
• IIA1 : Clinically visible lesion ≤4 cm
• IIA2 : Clinically visible lesion >4 cm
IIB
Obvious parametrial involvement but not onto the pelvic sidewall
III
The carcinoma has extended onto the pelvic sidewall. On rectal
examination, there is no cancer-free space between the tumor and
pelvic sidewall. The tumor involves the lower third of the vagina.
All cases of hydroneprosis or non-functioning kidney should be
included unless they are known to be due to other causes.
IIIA
Involvement of the lower vagina but no extension onto the pelvic
sidewall
IIIB
Extension onto the pelvic sidewall, or hydronephrosis/nonfunctioning kidney
IV
The carcinoma has extended beyond the true pelvis or has clinically
involved the mucosa of the bladder and/or the rectum.
IVA
Spread to adjacent pelvic organs
IVB
Spread to distant organs
a Adapted from FIGO Committee on Gynecology Oncology (2)
b The depth of invasion should not be more than 5mm taken from the base of epithelium, either
surface or glandular, from which it originates. Vascular space invasion should not alter the staging.
Source: Pecorelli S; Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the vulva, cervix, and endometrium.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009 May;105(2):103-4. Erratum in: Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2010
Feb;108(2):176
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
Modified Delgado’s Prognostic Risk Scoring System
Relative risk of recurrence after radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer
Variable
Relative risk
Depth of tumor penetration (mm)
Superficial
3
1.0
4
3.0
5
7.2
6
14
7
21
8
26
10
21
Middle
5
20
6
22
7
23
8
25
10
28
12
32
14
36
Deep
7
28
8
30
10
34
12
37
14
41
16
45
18
49
19
54
Clinical tumor size (cm)
Occult tumor
1.0
1
1.6
2
1.9
3
2.4
4
2.9
6
4.4
8
6.6
Capillary/lymphatic space involvement
No
1.0
Yes
1.7
The GOG score is calculated by multiplying the relative-risk for depth X tumour size x capillary/
lymphatic space involvement
Source: Greater Metropolitan Clinical Task force. Gynaecological Cancer Guidelines 2009.
Sydney: NSW Department of Health; 2009
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS
Grade
ECOG
0
Fully active, able to carry on all pre-disease performance
without restriction
1
Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory
and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature,
such as light house work and office work
2
• Ambulatory and capable of all self-care but unable to
carry out any work activities
• Up and about more than 50% of waking hours•
3
Capable of only limited self-care, confined to bed or chair
more than 50% of waking hours
4
• Completely disabled
• Cannot carry on any self-care
• Totally confined to bed or chair
5
Dead
Source: Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol. 1982 Dec;5(6):649-55
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
Systemic Therapy Cancer Protocol
CERVICAL CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY
Concurrent chemo-radiotherapy
Source: Ministry of Health & Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia. Systemic Therapy of Cancer
2nd Edition. Putrajaya: MoH & MoHE; 2008
1 hour
1
Drugs
Route
Days
Cycle length (days) = 21
Anti-emetic = 4
Dose (mg/m2)
IV
30 - 40
Infusion
Time
Cisplatin
N.B. In practice, 50 mg total dose per week of cisplatin could be used
Single agent cisplatin
1 hour
1
Drugs
Route
Days
Cycle length (days) = 21
Anti-emetic = 4
Dose (mg/m2)
IV
50
Infusion
Time
Cisplatin
*Carboplatin can be used if the patient is unable to tolerate cisplatin
Single agent cisplatin
Palliative chemotheraphy
Drugs
Route
Days
Cycle length (days) = 21
Anti-emetic = 4
Dose (mg/m2)
Infusion
Time
Cisplatin-5FU
24 hour
1 - 5
IV
750 - 1000
5Fluorouracil
1 hour
1
IV
50 - 75
Cisplatin
Drugs
Route
Days
Cycle length (days) = 21
Anti-emetic = 4
Dose (mg/m2)
Infusion
Time
Cisplatin-MTX
Bolus
1 - 5
IV
100
Methotrexate
1 hour
1
IV
50
Cisplatin
Drugs
Route
Days
Cycle length (days) = 21
Anti-emetic = 4
Dose (mg/m2)
Infusion
Time
Paclitaxel-cisplatin
Bolus
1 - 5
IV
75
Cisplatin
1 hour
1
IV
175
Paclitaxel
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 9
Pain Management and Palliative Care Service Providers
PAIN CLINICS
Hospital
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kelantan
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah, Selangor
Pusat Perubatan Univeristi Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
PALLIATIVE CARE UNITS
Hospital
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Hospital Bukit Mertajam, Kedah
Hospital Duchness of Kent, Sabah
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Hospital Queen Elizabeth, Sabah
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kelantan
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah, Terengganu
Hospital Tawau, Sabah
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan, Pahang
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar, Negeri Sembilan
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Tel No.
603-61203233
606-2822344
607-3565000
605-2533333
609-7452000
603-33757000
603-79494422
603-91455555
609-7663000
Tel No.
603-61203233
604-5383333
6089-212111
606-2707653
604-2293333
6088-206258
605-5222245
609-7485533
607-2231666
604-7303333
609-6233333
6089-773533
609-5133333
606-7623333
6082-208069
603-79494422
603-91455555
Tel No.
http://www.hselayang.moh.gov.my
http://www.hmelaka.moh.gov.my
http://www.hsi.moh.gov.my
http://www.hipoh.moh.gov.my
http://www.hrpz2.moh.gov.my
http://www.htar.moh.gov.my
http://www.ummc.edu.my
http://www.ppukm.ukm.my
http://www.hselayang.moh.gov.my
URL
http://www.hselayang.moh.gov.my
http://www.hospbm.moh.gov.my
http://www.hdok.moh.gov.my
http://www.hmelaka.moh.gov.my
http://www.hpp.moh.gov.my
http://www.qeh.moh.gov.my
http://www.hipoh.moh.gov.my
http://www.hrpz2.moh.gov.my
http://www.hsajb.moh.gov.my
http://www.hsbas.moh.gov.my
http://www.hsnzkt.moh.gov.my
http://www.htwu.moh.gov.my
http://www.htaa.moh.gov.my
http://www.htjs.moh.gov.my
http://www.hus.moh.gov.my
http://www.ummc.edu.my
http://www.ppukm.ukm.my
Source: Ministry of Health. Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya; MoH: 2010
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Malaysian Hospice Directory
PERSATUAN HOSPICE ARK
No. 2, 2A, 2B Jalan Sutera Merah 3
Taman Sutera, 81200, Johor Bahru, Johor
Tel: 07-556 0878
Contact Person: Ms Alice
Email: hospice_ark@hotmail.com
PERSATUAN HOSPIS KEDAH
d/a Pej Kesihatan Kota Setar, Lebuhraya
Darul Aman
Jalan Bakar Bata, 05100 Alor Setar, Kedah
Tel: 04-771 3487
Fax: 04-771 0116
E-mail: sriwahyu2006@yahoo.com.my
hospiskedah.blogspot.com
HOSPICE MALACCA
621-F, Jalan Delima 12, Tmn Bkt Melaka,
Bukit Beruang, 75450 Melaka
Tel : 012-6235 115
Fax: 06-2321 479
Contact Person: S/N Chong Fei Gin
E-mail: drrajagopal@hotmail.com
www.hospismelaka.org
PERSATUAN HOSPIS PAHANG
A4614 Lorong Alor Akar 19
25250 Kuantan, Pahang
Tel / Fax: 09-5670 743
Email: hospispahang@gmail.com
NCSM PENANG
Rumah Hospis Pulau Pinang
250A, Jalan Air Itam, 10460 Penang
Tel: 04-228 4140
Fax: 04-226 4676
Contact Person: Nor Asikin Abd Kadir
E-mail: ncsmpg@gmail.com
www.ncsmpenang.org
PURE LOTUS HOSPICE OF COMPASSION
73, Jalan Utama, 10460 Penang
Tel / Fax: 04-229 5481
Email: lyanshih@gmail.com
purelotushospice.org
PERAK PALLIATIVE CARE SOCIETY
54, Jalan Sultan Ahmad Shah,
31400 Ipoh, Perak
Tel/Fax: 05-546 4732
Contact Person: Ms Leong Lai Peng
E-mail: admin@ppcs.org.my
www.ppcs.org.my
PALLIATIVE CARE ASSOC. OF JOHOR BAHRU
44, Jalan Tun Abdul Razak, Susur 1
80000 Johor Bahru
Tel: 07-222 9188/222 8858 Fax: 07-222 4858
Contact Person: Ms Nancy Yee
Email: nancyyee.pcajb@gmail.com
www.pcajb.com
PERSATUAN HOSPIS NEGERI KELANTAN
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II,
15586 Kota Bharu, Kelantan
Tel: 09-745 2000
Fax: 09-747 5418
E-mail: drimisairi@klt.moh.gov.my
PERTUBUHAN HOSPICE NEGERI SEMBILAN
No. 41, Off Jalan Rasah
70300 Seremban, Negeri Sembilan
Tel: 06-762 1216
Fax: 06-762 1216
Contact Person : Ms Kala
E-mail: hospicens2012@yahoo.com
pertubuhanhospicenegerisembilan.com
PERSATUAN HOSPIS TERENGGANU
Klinik Bedah Pakar, Kompleks Rawatan Harian,
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah, 20400 KT,
Terengganu
Tel /Fax: 09-6212121 ext 2058
Email: drnona31765@gmail.com
PENANG HOSPICE SOCIETY
c/o Rumah Hospis Pulau Pinang
250A Jalan Air Itam, 10460 Penang
Tel: 04-228 4140 Fax: 04-2264676
Contact Person : Ms Chitra Alagan
E-mail: penanghospicesociety@gmail.com
www.penanghospice.org.my
CHARIS HOSPICE
15, Cangkat Minden, Jalan 12, 11700 Penang
Tel: 011-1246 6757, 04-6587668 Fax: 04-6587669
Email: charishospice@gmail.com
www.charishospice.com
TAIPING PALLIATIVE SOCIETY
48, Jalan Lim Sam Kip,
34000 Taiping, Perak
Tel/Fax: 05-807 2457
Contact Person: Ms Veronica Liew
E-mail: veraliew@hotmail.com
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
HOME CARE HOSPICE PROGRAMME,
SABAH
c/o Sabah Cancer Society
No.15, Lorong Tupai 3, Teck Guan Villa,
Jalan Penampang, 88300 Kota Kinabalu,
Sabah
Tel: 088-222 315
Fax: 088-210 377
E-mail: sabahcancersociety@yahoo.com
www.sabah.org.my/scss/cancer
PERSATUAN HOSPIS TAWAU
TB 14748 Mile 3.5, Jalan James Power,
Off Jalan Kuhara, 91008 Tawau, Sabah
Tel: 089-711 515
Fax: 089-711 514
Contact Person: Mr Victor Raja
E-mai: hospistwu@gmail.com,vicraja@gmail.com
PERSATUAN HOSPICE ST. FRANCIS
XAVIER
St. Francis Xavier’s Mission,
Peti Surat 92, 89007 Keningau, Sabah
Tel/ Fax : 087-339 114
E-mail: liewlucy@hotmail.com
Contact Person : Shelly
SARAWAK HOSPICE SOCIETY
c/o Radiotherapy Unit,
Sarawak General Hospital, 93586 Kuching,
Sarawak
Tel: 082-276 575 Fax: 082- 414 443
E-mail: tangtiengswee@gmail.com
www.sarawakhospicesociety.org
HOSPICE KLANG
82 Jalan Sri Sarawak 4, Tmn Sri Andalas,
41200 Klang, Selangor
Tel: 03-3324 2125
Fax: 03-3324 3125
Contact Person: Ms Tan Guat Hong
E-mail: hpsklang@gmail.com
www.hospiceklang.org
KASIH HOSPICE CARE SOCIETY
No 7, Jalan 14/29 aka Jalan Dato Abdul Aziz,
46100 Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Tel: 03-7960 7424
E-mail: admin@kasihfoundation.org
www.kasihfoundation.org Fax: 03-7956 6442
PALLIATIVE CARE ASSOCIATION OF
KOTA KINABALU, SABAH
PWD 7396 & 7397 Taman Rose,
Off Jln Penampang,
88300 Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
Tel: 088-231 505 Fax: 088- 231 506
Contact Person: Ms Grace Chong
E-mail: pcakk@yahoo.com
www.sabah.org.my/pcakks
THE HOSPICE ASSOCIATION OF SANDAKAN
P.P.M No 324, Elopura
90000 Sandakan, Sabah
Tel: 089-632 219 Fax: 089-632 269
Contact Person: Ms Michelle Chong
E-mail: hcs98@hospicesdk.com
KUCHING HOSPICE CANCER CARE
287, Lot2643 Central Park Commercial Centre,
Jalan Rock, 93250 Kuching, Sarawak
Tel: 082-337 689 Fax: 082- 488 444
E-mail: cancercare.kuching@gmail.com
Contact Person: Ms Molly
MIRI PALLIATIVE CARE HOME PROGRAMME
Daycare centre, Hospital Miri,
Jalan Cahaya, 98000 Miri, Sarawak
Tel: 085-420033 Fax: 085-416514
Contact Person: Dr. Frances Wilkinson
ASSUNTA PALLIATIVE CARE CENTRE
Assunta Hospital, No. 83 Jalan Templer
46990 Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Tel / Fax: 03-7954 3389
Email: aspacc.assuntahospital@gmail.com
www.aspacc.org
HOSPIS MALAYSIA
2 Jalan 4/96, off Jalan Sekuci, Tmn Sri Bahtera,
Jalan Cheras, 56100 Kuala Lumpur
Tel : 03-9133 3936
Fax : 03-9133 3941
Email: info@hospismalaysia.org
www.hospismalaysia.org
Source: Malaysian Hospice Council (available at http://www.malaysianhospicecouncil.org)
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 10
International Society of Lymphology (ISL) Lymphoedema Staging
Stage
A subclinical state where swelling is not
evident despite impaired lymph transport.
This stage may exist for months or years
before oedema becomes evident
This represents early onset of the condition
where there is accumulation of tissue fluids
that subsides with limb elevation. The
oedema may be pitting at this stage
Limb elevation alone rarely reduces the
swelling and pitting is manifest
There may or may not be pitting as tissue
fibrosis is more evident
The tissue is hard (fibrotic) and pitting is
absent. Skin changes as such thickening,
hyperpigmentation, increased skin folds, fat
deposits and warty overgrowth develop
ISL Stage 0
ISL Stage I
ISL Stage II
ISL late Stage II
ISL Stage III
Source: Lymphoedema Framework. Best Practice for the Management of Lymphodema.
International Consensus. London: MEP Ltd; 2006
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 11
Distress Thermometer Screening Tool
Source: Reproduced with permission from The NCCN 1.2010 Distress Management Clinical
Practice Guidelines in Oncology. ©National Comprehensive Cancer Network, 2010.
Available at: http://www.nccn.org.
SCREENING TOOLS FOR MEASURING DISTRESS
Instructions: First please circle the number (0-10) that best
describes how much distress you have been experiencing in
the past week including today.
Extreme distress
No distress
Second, please indicate if any of the following has been a
problem for you in the past week including today. Be sure to
check YES or NO for each.
YES NO Practical Problems
Child care
Housing
Transportation
Work/school
Insurance/financial
YES NO Physical Problems
Appearance
Bathing/dressing
Changes in urination
Constipation
Breathing
Diarrhea
Eating
Feeling Swollen
Fevers
Fatigue
Getting around
Indigestion
Mouth sores
Nausea
Memory/concentration
Nose dry/congested
Pain
Skin dry/itchy
Sleep
Sexual
Tingling in hands/feet
Family Problems
Dealing with children
Dealing with partner
Ability to have children
Emotional Problems
Depression
Fears
Nervousness
Spiritual/religious
concerns
Sadness
Worry
Loss of interest in
usual activities
Other Problems:
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
Appendix 12
Medication List
•
To monitor FBC and serum electrolytes prior to every cycle of chemotherapy.
Source:
1.
Lacy CF, Armstrong, Goldman MP et al. editors. Drug Information Handbook 2012-2013 w/International Trade Names Index , 21st Edition. Ohio: Lexi-Comp; 2012
2.
Ministry of Health & Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia. Systemic Therapy of Cancer 2nd Edition. Putrajaya: MoH & MoHE; 2008
Gemcitabine
• Fever
• Nausea,vomiting
• Myelosuppression
• Increased hepatic
transaminases
• Monitor liver function
Topotecan
• Myelosupression
• Nausea, vomiting
• Monitor for interstitial lung disease
5-Fluorouracil
• Diarrhoea
• Monitor for hand-foot syndrome
Mitomycin-C
• Myelosuppression
• Observe for extravasation (vesicant)
• Monitor for haemolytic-uremic syndrome
Cisplatin
Chemotherapy Drug Common side effects
Comments
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Nausea, vomiting
• Myelosuppression
• Nephrotoxicity
• Ototoxicity
• Adequate hydration and urinary output at least 24 hours after administration
• Obtain baseline renal function, then monitor renal function (SCr, CrCl) at every cycle. Observe for cumulative renal toxicity.
• Recommend to perform baseline audiography and prior to each subsequent dose
• Observe for anaphylactic-like reactions during infusion
• Monitor renal function (SCr, CrCl)
• Observe for anaphylactic-like reactions during infusion
Carboplatin
• Electrolyte imbalance
(hyponatremia,
hypomagnesemia,
hypocalcaemia,
hypokalaemia)
• Nausea, vomiting
• Myelosupression
• Monitor renal function (SCr, CrCl)
• Observe for anaphylactic-like reactions during infusion
Paclitaxel
• Alopecia
• Nausea, vomiting
• Myelosuppression
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Arthalgia/myalgia
• Monitor for hypersensitivity reaction during infusion
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AC
adenocarcinoma
AGC-H
Atypical glandular cells - hyperplasia
AGC-US
Atypical glandular cells of undetermined significance
ASCUS
Atypical Squamous Cells of Undetermined Significance
CCRT
concurrent chemoradiotherapy
CI
confidence interval
CIN
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
cm
centimeter
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CT
computed tomography
DVT
deep vein thrombosis
DFS
disease free survival
DG
Development Group
ECOG
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
EUA
examination under anaesthesia
EBRT
external beam radiotherapy
FDG-PET
Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
FIGO
The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
Gy
Gray
HPV
Human Papilloma Virus
HR
hazard risk
HRT
hormone replacement therapy
HSIL
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
HTA
health technology asessment
INR
International Normalised Ratio
ICBT
intracavitary brachytherapy
LLETZ
large loop excision of transformation zone
LACC
locally advanced cervical cancer
LSIL
low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
LMWH
low molecular weight heparin
LNmM
lymph node micrometastasis
LVSI
lymph vascular space involvement
MoH
Ministry of Health
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MBO
malignant bowel obstruction
NPV
negative predictive value
NAC
neoadjuvant chemotherapy
NEC
neuroendocrine cancers
OR
odds ratio
OS
overall survival
PAN
para-aortic lymph nodes
PN
percutaneous nephrostomy
PET
positron emission tomography
PET-CT
positron emission tomography-computed tomography
PLND
pelvic lymph nodes dissection
PPV
positive predictive value
PCB
postcoital bleeding
PFS
progression-free survival
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of development group of these guidelines would like to express
their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:-
• Ms. Zalina Azman, Nursing Sister, Pejabat Kesihatan Putrajaya
• Dr. Hanin Farhana Kamaruzzaman, MaHTAS Putrajaya
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms
or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon request
from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Cervical Cancer (Second
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health
Malaysia.
QOL
quality of life
RC
Review Committee
RAT
radical abdominal trachelectomy
RAH
radical abdominal hysterectomy
RH
radical hysterectomy
RP
radical parametrectomy
RVT
radical vaginal trachelectomy
RT
radiotherapy
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trials
RR
relative risk
SIGN
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
SSRIs
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor(s)
SN
sentinel nodes
SCC
squamous cell carcinoma
TOP
termination of pregnancy
TNM
tumor-node-metastasis
TVS
transvaginal ultrasound
UFH
unfractionated heparin
VCF
vena caval filter
VTE
venous thromboembolism
vs
versus
WHO
World Health Organization
Management of Cervical Cancer (Second Edition)