CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF HEART
FAILURE 2019
4° Edition
PUBLISHED BY:
National Heart Association of Malaysia
D-13A-06, Menara SUEZCAP 1, KL Gateway
No.2 Jalan Kerinchi, Gerbang Kerinchi Lestari
59200 Kuala Lumpur
eISBN 978-967-11794-4-4
COPYRIGHT
The owners of this publication are the National Heart Association of Malaysia
(NHAM) and the Academy of Medicine Malaysia. The content in this document may
be produced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a
copyright acknowledgement to the owners is included and the content is not
changed in any form or method, not sold and not used to promote or endorse any
product or service. In addition, the content is not to be used in any inappropriate or
misleading context.
© 2019 National Heart Association of Malaysia. All right reserved.
This clinical practice guidelines (CPG) is meant to be a guide for clinical practice,
based on the best available evidence at the time of development. Adherence to
these guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case.
Every healthcare provider is responsible for the management of his/her patient
based on the clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
This CPG was issued in 2019 and will be reviewed in 5 years or sooner if new
evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
c/o Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
4th Floor,Block E1, Parcel E
62590, Putrajaya.
Electronic version available on the following website:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadamed.org.my
This is an update to the Clinical Practice Guidelines on Heart Failure (published
2000, 2007 and 2014). It supersedes the previous CPGs on Heart Failure (2000,
2007, 2014).
STATEMENT OF INTENT
PERIOD OF VALIDITY
MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH
It gives me great pleasure to write a message for another
Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) on the Management of
Heart Failure (HF), which is now in its fourth edition. The first
CPG in HF was published in 2000 with revisions in 2007 and
2014.
Cardiovascular disease is an important cause of morbidity
and mortality in Malaysia. HF, the end stage of most diseases
of the heart, is a common medical problem encountered in
clinical practice and is an important cause of hospital
admissions and readmissions. It is also an important cause of
hospital expenditure.
Since the last CPG in 2014 the treatment modalities for the
management of HF has expanded extensively. There have
been many significant developments in the use of drugs and
devices.
These
guideline-changing
data
have
been
incorporated into this CPG, taking into account our local
health resources.
A CPG is only successful if it is accepted and implemented.
I encourage all healthcare providers involved in the
management of HF in children and adults to adopt these
recommendations in your practice.
Finally, I would like to congratulate the Chairman and
members of the Expert Committee for developing such a
comprehensive CPG. Thanks to you, as well as the External
Reviewers, for your time and effort.
Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah
Director-General of Health Malaysia
MEMBERS OF THE EXPERT PANEL
CHAIRPERSON:
Dr. Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Consultant Cardiologist,
Subang Jaya Medical Centre
MEMBERS (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Azmee Mohd Ghazi
Consultant Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Cham Yee Ling
Consultant Cardiologist,
Sarawak Heart Centre
Dr. David Chew Soon Ping
Consultant Cardiologist,
Cardiac Vascular Sentral, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Effarezan Abdul Rahman
Consultant Cardiologist,
KPJ Damansara Specialist Hospital
Dr. Haifa Abdul Latiff
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Izwan Effendy Ismail
Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Puchong
Dr. Liew Houng Bang
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Queen Elizabeth II
Dr. Ma Soot Keng
Consultant Cardiologist and Electrophysiologist,
Loh Guan Lye Specialist Centre
Dr. Mohd Nizam Mat Bah
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist,
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Dr. Mohd Rahal Yusoff
Consultant Cardiologist & Specialist in Internal Medicine,
Columbia Asia Hospital Klang
Ms. Nirmala Jagan
Clinical Pharmacist,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. K. Sree Raman
Consultant Physician
Chief Executive Officer,
NSCMH Medical Centre, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Sunita Bavanandan
Consultant Nephrologist,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Vengketeswara Rao Seetharaman
Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Kalumpang, Selangor
Dr. Wan Azman Wan Ahmad
Consultant Cardiologist,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Dr. Anwar Irawan Ruhani
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan
Dr. Aizai Aizai Azan Abdul Rahim
Consultant Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Gary Lee Chin Keong
Consultant Cardiologist and Electrophysiologist,
Hospital Serdang
Dr. Geeta Kandavello
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Hizlinda Tohid
Family Medicine Specialist,
University Kebangsaan Malaysia
Dr. Letchumanan Ramanathan
Consultant Physician,
Hospital Ipoh
Dr. Lee Chuey Yan
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Dr. Martin Wong Ngie Leong
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist,
Sarawak Heart Centre
Dr. Noel Thomas Ross
Consultant Physician,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ong Loke Meng
Consultant Nephrologist,
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Dr. Ong Mei Lin
Consultant Cardiologist,
Gleneagles Penang
Dr. Rozita Zakaria
Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Putrajaya Presint 18
Dr. Sahimi Mohamed
Head of Clinical Section,
Pharmacy Department
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan
Dr. Saravanan Krishinan
Consultant Cardiologist and Electrophysiologist,
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah
Dr. Wong Kai Fatt
General Practitioner,
Klinik Tan, 96, Jalan Ipoh, Kuala Lumpur
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
(in alphabetical Order)
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in
Malaysia. Heart Failure (HF), the end stage of most diseases of the heart, is a
common medical problem encountered in general practice and is an important
cause of hospital admissions and readmissions. It is also an important cause of
hospital expenditure. As the population ages, the prevalence of HF is expected to
increase.
The 1st Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) in HF was published in 2000 with
revisions in 2007 and 2014. Since then, there have been many new developments
in this field. Thus the publication of this 4th edition is timely. This CPG proposes a
structured multidisciplinary strategy for the seamless care of patients with HF
between hospital and community care.
This CPG was drawn up by a committee appointed by the National Heart Association
of Malaysia and Ministry of Health. It consists of a multidisciplinary team of cardiologists,
nephrologists, family medicine specialists, general physicians and pharmacists from
the government, private sectors and the public Universities. The external reviewers
were also made up of a multidisciplinary team. Members of the public - patients and
carers - however, were not included.
Objectives:
The objectives of this CPG are to:
 Update the current management of HF based on recent evidence with respect to:
 Prevention
 Diagnosis
 Treatment – pharmacotherapy, device and surgical therapy
 Rehabilitation
 End of life and palliative care
 Recognise and manage HF in special populations:
 Adult congenital heart disease
 Geriatric population
 Pregnant women
 Develop a structured multidisciplinary strategy for the management of patients
with HF both in the primary and secondary care setting.
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
Process
The last CPG published in 2014 was used as a base. In addition to the previous
clinical questions that needed to be updated, the Expert Panel formulated new
questions that needed to be addressed. These clinical questions were then divided
into sections and each member was assigned one or more topics.
A review of current medical literature on HF from 1st October 2013 (the date of the
last CPG) till 31st August 2018 was performed. Literature search was carried out
using the following electronic databases - PubMed and Cochrane Database of
Systemic Reviews.The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either
singly or in combination:
“Heart Failure”, “Congestive Cardiac Failure”, “Acute Heart Failure, “Chronic Heart
Failure” “Right Heart Failure”, “Left Heart Failure” [MeSH], “Heart Failure Reduced
Left Ventricular Function”, Heart Failure Preserved Left Ventricular Function”
[MeSH], Acute decompensated heart failure, tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy,
heart failure mid-range, refractory heart failure, terminal heart failure, end stage
heart failure, cardio-oncology.
The search was filtered to clinical trials and reviews, involving humans and
published in the English language. The relevant articles were carefully selected from
this huge list. In addition, the reference lists of all relevant articles retrieved were
searched to identify further studies. Experts in the field were also contacted to obtain
further information. International guidelines on HF - the American Heart Association
/ American College of Cardiology and European Society of Cardiology - were also
studied. All literature retrieved were appraised by members of the Expert Panel and
all statements and recommendations made were collectively agreed by the group.
The grading of evidence and the level of recommendation used in this CPG was
adapted from the American College of Cardiology / American Heart Association and
the European Society of Cardiology (Table 1, Page 12).
After much discussion, the draft was then drawn up and submitted to the Technical
Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines, Ministry of Health Malaysia and
key health personnel in the major hospitals of the Ministry of Health and the private
sector for review and feedback.
Clinical Questions Addressed:
There were several topics and subtopics that were formulated addressing the
diagnosis and management of HF.
For diagnosis: In a person presenting with shortness of breath:
 What features in the history and clinical examination would make one suspect
this patient is having a HF?
 What diagnostic tests help confirm the clinical suspicion of HF with reasonable
sensitivity and specificity?
 ECG
 Chest X-ray
 Natriuretic peptides
 Echocardiogram
For therapy, the topics and subtopics were formulated using the PICO method as
follows:
P: Population - Persons with confirmed HF and:
 Reduced left ventricular (LV) function (LVEF < 40%) - Heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction (HFrEF) and:
 Congested (Volume overload)
 Hypotensive (Cold)
 Combination of congestion and hypotension
 Coronary artery disease (CAD)
 Atrial fibrillation
 Older persons
 Persons with diabetes
 Women
 Chronic kidney disease
- Not on renal replacement therapy
- On renal replacement therapy
 Preserved LV function (LVEF > 50%) Heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction (HFpEF)
 Mid range LV function (LVEF: 40-50%) Heart failure with mid-range LVEF
(HFmrEF)
I: Intervention:
 Non-pharmacological therapy
 Pharmacological therapy:
 Diuretics
 Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACE-I)
 Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARB)
 β-blockers
 Mineralocorticoid Antagonists (MRA)
 Statins
 Etc
 Surgery :
 Valve surgery
 Coronary artery bypass surgery
 Device therapy
 Cardiac resynchronisation therapy
 Catheter ablation
 Pacemaker therapy
C: Comparison:
 Non-pharmacological therapy vs no non-pharmacological therapy
 Diuretics vs no diuretics
 ACE-I vs no ACE-I
 Etc
O: Outcome:
 Improvement in symptoms
 Reduce hospital readmissions for HF
 Reduction in Major Cardiovascular Disease Event Rate (myocardial infarction
(MI), stroke, cardiovascular (CV) death)
 Reduction in all-cause mortality
Type of Question - Involves:
 Therapy drug therapy, surgery, device therapy
 Harm -
 Worsening of symptoms and readmission rate
 Increase in cardiovascular event rate (MI, HF, CV death)
 Increase in bleeding risk and stroke rate
 Adverse effects due to pharmacotherapy
 Prognosis - reduction in MI, HF, CV death and improvement in all-cause mortality
Type of Study
 Systematic review and meta-analysis
 Randomised controlled studies
 Cohort studies
Thus, there were numerous clinical questions formulated.
Example of some of these Clinical Questions:
 In a person with HFrEF and congested (volume overload) will the use of diuretics
lead to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate
and/or all-cause mortality?
 In a person with HFrEF and not congested (volume overload) will the use of
diuretics lead to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac
event rate and/or all-cause mortality?
 In a person with HFrEF and congested (volume overload) will the use of ACE-I
lead to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate
and/or all-cause mortality?
 In a person with HFrEF and CAD, will coronary artery bypass surgery lead to
an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate and/or
all-cause mortality?
 In a person with HFpEF and congested (volume overload) will the use of ACE-I
lead to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate
and/or all-cause mortality?
Target Group:
This guideline is directed at all healthcare providers involved in the management of
HF in children and adults.
Target Population:
It is developed to treat all individuals with and at risk of HF.
Period of Validity of the Guidelines:
These guidelines need to be revised at least every 5 years to keep abreast with
recent developments and knowledge that is being learnt.
Applicability of the Guidelines and Resource Implications:
This guideline was developed taking into account our local health resources. Blood
investigations, chest radiographs, ECGs and echocardiograms are common in
almost all public health facilities. The drugs used to treat HF - diuretics, ACE-I,
β-blockers have been approved for use in Malaysia and available in public hospitals
as generics.
This guideline aims to educate health care professionals on strategies to optimise
existing resources in the timely management of patients with HF.
Facilitators and Barriers:
The main barrier for successful implementation of this CPG is the lack of knowledge
of healthcare providers in the:
 Diagnosis of HF.
 Management of HF - initial treatment and long term follow-up.
 Optimisation of therapy and when to refer to tertiary centres.
Implementation of the Guidelines:
The implementation of the recommendations of a CPG is part of good clinical
governance. To ensure successful implementation of this CPG we suggest:
 Increasing public awareness of CVD and HF in general and educating them on
the importance of seeking early medical attention.
 Continuous medical education and training of healthcare providers on the
importance of appropriate management of patients with HF. This can be done
by road shows, electronic media, and in-house training sessions.
Clinical audit by individual hospitals and units to ensure compliance using the
suggested performance measures in Section 12, Page 115 and Appendix VI, pg 121.
Dr. Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Chairperson
Table 1: GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Adapted from the American College of Cardiology Foundation / American Heart Association
and The European Society of Cardiology
(Available at: http://assets.cardiosource.com/Methodology_Manual_for_ACC_AHA_Writing-_Committees and at http://www.escardio.org/guidelines-surveys/escguidelines/about/Pages/rules-writing.aspx).
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
I
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement
that a given procedure/therapy is beneficial, useful and/or effective.
II
Conditions for which there is conflicting evidence and/or divergence of
opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of a procedure/therapy.
II-a : Weight of evidence/opinion is in favor of its usefulness/efficacy.
II-b : Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion.
III
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that
a procedure/therapy is not useful/effective and in some cases may be
harmful.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
A
Data derived from multiple randomised clinical trials or meta analyses.
B
Data derived from a single randomised clinical trial or large
non-randomised studies.
C
Only consensus of opinions of experts, case studies or standard of
Care.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pages
Statement of Intent
1
Message from the Director General of Health
2
Members of the Expert Panel
3
External Reviewers
5
Rationale and Process of Guideline Development
6
Grades of Recommendations and Levels of Evidence
12
Table of Contents
13
Glossary
15
What’s New in the Guidelines?
18
PART 1: Management of Heart Failure in Adults
Summary
20
Algorithm and Flow Charts
30
1. INTRODUCTION
33
2. DEFINITION
34
3. CLASSIFICATION
34
4. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
35
5. AETIOLOGY
37
6. DIAGNOSIS
39
7. PREVENTION
44
8. MANAGEMENT
48
8.1 Acute Heart Failure
48
8.2 Chronic Heart Failure due to Reduced LVEF < 40%
62
8.2.1 Non-Pharmacological Measures
62
8.2.2 Pharmacological Management
66
8.2.3 Device Therapy in Heart Failure
78
8.2.4 Surgery for Heart Failure
81
8.3 Asymptomatic Left Ventricular Dysfunction
82
8.4 Heart Failure with Preserved Left Ventricular Systolic Function
8.5 Special Groups
87
8.5.1 Diabetes and Heart Failure
87
8.5.2 Heart Failure in Pregnancy
90
8.5.3 Heart Failure in Adult Congenital Heart Disease
94
8.5.4 Arrhythmia-Induced Heart Failure
98
8.5.5 Cardio-oncology and Heart Failure
100
8.5.6 Heart Failure and Kidney Dysfunction
103
8.6 Advanced Heart Failure/Refractory Heart Failure
107
8.6.1 Heart Transplant
107
8.6.2 Mechanical Circulatory Support
108
8.7 Palliative and End of Life Care
109
9. ORGANISATION OF CARE
110
9.1 Level of Care and Shared Management
110
9.2 Monitoring and Follow-Up
112
9.3 Cardiology Referral
112
10. OTHER THERAPIES FOR HEART FAILURE
113
11. FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
114
12. PERFORMANCE MEASURES
115
APPENDIX
116
REFERENCES
122
Part 2: Management of Heart Failure in Paediatrics
13. HEART FAILURE IN THE PAEDIATRIC POPULATION
145
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
158
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
158
SOURCES OF FUNDING
Abbreviation
Description
ACE-I
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
ACHD
Adult Congenital Heart Disease
AF
Atrial Fibrillation
AHF
Acute Heart Failure
ARB
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers
ARNI
Angiotensin-Receptor Blocker- Neprilysin Inhibitor
ASD
Atrial Septal Defects
ASLVSD
Asymptomatic Lv Systolic Dysfunction
AV
Atrial Ventricular
BNP
Brain Natriuretic Peptide
CABG
Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery
CAD
Coronary Artery Disease
CKD
Chronic Kidney Disease
CKMB
Creatine Kinase-Muscle/Brain Band
CMRI
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging
CV
Cardiovascular
CVD
Cardiovascular Disease
CPAP
Continous Positive Airway Pressure
CPG
Clinical Practice Guideline
CRS
Cardiorenal Syndrome
CRT
Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy
CSA
Central Sleep Apnoea
DBP
Diastolic Blood Pressure
DOAC
Direct Oral Anticoagulants
DPP-4i
Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 Inhibitors
GLOSSARY
Abbreviation
Description
DVT
Deep Vein Thrombosis
ECG
Electrocardiogram
EF
Ejection Fractions
eGFR
Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate
GGT
Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase
GLP-1
Glucagon Like Peptide-1
HF
Heart Failure
HFC
Heart Failure Clinic
HFNC
High Flow Nasal Cannula
HfmrEF
Heart Failure With Mid-Range LVEF
HfrEF
Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction
HfpEF
Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction
HRQoL
Health Related Quality Of Life
IABP
Intra-Aortic Balloon Counterpulsation
ICD
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator
JVP
Jugular Venous Pulse
LBBB
Left Bundle Branch Block
LV
Left Ventricular
LVAD
Left Ventricular Assist Device
LVEF
Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction
LVH
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
MI
Myocardial Infarction
MRA
Mineralocortocoid Receptor Antagonist
NP
Natriuretic Peptide
NSAIDs
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
Abbreviation
Description
NTproBNP
N-Terminal Pro BNP
NYHA
New York Heart Association
OMT
Optimal Medical Treatment
OSA
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea
PCI
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
PND
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Dyspnoea
PP
Pulse Pressure
PS
Pulmonary Stenosis
PSG
Polysomnography
RAS
Renin Angiotensin System
RCT
Randomise Control Trial
RV
Right Ventricular
SBP
Systolic Blood Pressure
SCD
Sudden Cardiac Death
SDB
Sleep Disordered Breathing
SGLT2i
Sodium-Glucose Cotransport-2 Inhibitors
VAD
Ventricular Assist Device
VF
Ventricular Fibrillation
VSD
Ventricular Septal Defect
VT
Ventricular Tachycardia
3rd Ed CPG
4th Ed CPG
Heart Failure (Old)
Heart Failure (New)
Acute Heart
Acute Cardiogenic
Concept of classification according to
Failure
Pulmonary Oedema
clinical presentation:
 Warm and wet - adequate perfusion but
congested (lungs and/or periphery)
 Cold and dry - hypoperfusion and
dehydrated/not congested
 Cold and wet - hypoperfusion and
congested (lungs and/or periphery)
 Warm and dry - adequate perfusion
and dehydrated/not congested.
These patients have either mild HF
or are in the compensated stage of HF.
Oxygen Therapy
-
High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) seems
more effective than conventional oxygen
therapy and non-inferior to non-invasive
positive pressure ventilation in most
studies. (IIa, B)
Pharmacotherapy
-
ARNI should be considered as a
of HFrEF
replacement to ACE-I/ARB in patients
with HFrEF who remain symptomatic to
decrease CV death, HF hospitalisations,
and symptoms. (I,B)
Surgical
No mention of
In patients with moderate to severe MR
Management of
mitraclip
and who are not surgical candidates, the
HFrEF
use of mitralclip has shown mixed
results. (IIb,B)
8.5.1. Diabetes and Heart Failure
8.5.3. Heart Failure in Adult Congenital
Heart Disease
8.5.4. Arrhythymia induced Heart Failure
8.5.5. Cardio-oncology and Heart Failure
8.5.6. Heart Failure and Kidney
Dysfunction
9.
Organisation of Care
14.
Heart Failure in the Paediatric
population
WHAT’S NEW IN THE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF HEART
FAILURE 2019
PART 1
Management of Heart Failure in Adults
Key Message 1:
 Heart Failure (HF) is an important cause of hospitalisation accounting for about
6%-10% of all acute medical admissions and an important cause of hospital
readmissions in Malaysia.
 HF costs was estimated to account for approximately 1.8% of total health
expenditure.
Key message 2: Definition and Classfication
 HF is a clinical syndrome due to any structural or physiological abnormality of
the heart resulting in its inability to meet the metabolic demands of the body or
its ability to do so only at higher than normal filling pressures.
 HF can also be classified according to the clinical presentation into:
 Acute heart failure (Acute HF)
 Chronic heart failure (Chronic HF).
 In the setting of Left Ventricular (LV) myocardial dysfunction, left ventricular
ejection fraction (LVEF) may be:
 Reduced (LVEF ≤ 40%) - Heart failure with reduced ejection function (HFrEF).
 Preserved (LVEF ≥ 50%) - Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
 Mid-range (LVEF 41%-49%) - Heart failure with the LVEF being in the mid
range (HFmrEF).
Key message 3: Diagnosis
 The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported by objective clinical evidence
of cardiac dysfunction. (Flow Chart I, Page 28)
 Exercise capacity in a patient with heart disease is assessed by the New York
Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification.
 Relevant investigations help to confirm the diagnosis and determine the type of
HF and the aetiology.
Key message 4: Prevention
 Prevention and early intervention wherever appropriate, should be the primary
objective of management.
SUMMARY
Key message 5: Acute Heart Failure (AHF)
 AHF may present as:
 Pulmonary and/or peripheral oedema (“wet” - volume overload)
 Low output state - shock (“dry” - usually due to pump failure)
 Combination of pulmonary oedema and a low output state
 The principles of management are:
 Rapid recognition of the condition.
 Identification and stabilisation of life threatening haemodynamics.
 Maintaining oxygenation and perfusion of the vital organs.
 Relieving clinical symptoms and signs.
 Identification and treatment of the underlying cause and precipitating/
aggravating factors.
 After initial clinical assessment, management should be instituted as in Flow
Chart II, Page 29.
 For grading of recommendations and levels of evidence, see Table 2, Page 30.
Key message 6: Heart Failure with Reduced Left Ventricular Function (HFrEF)
 Non-pharmacological measures - These include:
 Education of the patient and family about the disease, treatment options and
prognosis.
 Encouraging lifestyle measures such as:
 Regular exercise
 Avoid adding salt and flavouring sauces such as soya sauce, tomato ketchup
and chilli sauce while cooking or at the table.
 Fluid intake should be individualised. - A general recommendation is 1-1.5
litres per day in patients with normal renal function.
 Smoking cessation and avoiding alcohol.
 Advice regarding sexual activities and pregnancy.
 Pharmacological management:
 After initial clinical assessment, management should be instituted as in Flow
Chart III, Page 31.
 For grading of recommendations and levels of evidence, see Table 3, Page 33.
 Medications that have been shown to improve survival in HFrEF include:
 Angiotensin converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACE-I)/ Angiotensin II Receptor
Blockers (ARB) if ACE-I intolerant
 Angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI)
 β-blockers
 Mineralcorticoid receptor antagonist (MRA)
 Device therapy:
 Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT) can be considered in patients with
all of the following criteria:
 Sinus rhythm
 LVEF ≤ 35%
 Left Bundle Branch Block (LBBB)
 QRS duration > 150ms
 An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is indicated for secondary
prevention in:
 Patients resuscitated from sudden cardian death (SCD) due to ventricular
fibrillation or haemodynamically unstable sustained ventricular tachycardia.
 Prior MI and LVEF ≤ 40% with non-sustained VT AND inducible sustained VT
or VF during an an electrophysiology (EP) study.
 Patients with chronic HF and LVEF ≤ 35% who experience syncope of
unclear origin.
 Surgery For HF
 Coronary revascularisation (by either coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) or
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)) should be considered in patients
with HF and suitable coronary anatomy.
Key message 7: Asymptomatic LV Dysfunction
 Identify patients who are at high risk of developing LV dysfunction and treat the
underlying disease appropriately.
 ACE-I and β-blockers (post MI) have been shown to slow down the onset of
symptoms and reduce cardiac morbidity.
Key message 8:Heart Failure with Preserved LV Function (HFpEF)
 HFpEF is a common cause of HF in the elderly.
 Hypertension is an important cause and should be treated according to guidelines.
 Management remains empiric since trial data are limited.
 Treat volume overload with diuretics and manage comorbidities.
Key message 9: HFrEF in Special Groups
 Diabetes
 Persons with diabetes are managed in the same manner as persons without
diabetes.
 When managing diabetes in patients with HF:
 The sodium-glucose cotransport-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) have been shown
to reduce CV mortality and HF hospitalisations.
 Saxagliptin, a dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors (DPP-4i) and thiazolidinediones
are best avoided because of a trend towards harm.
 Sulphonylureas, biguanides like metformin and alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
like acarbose are generally safe.
 Pregnancy
 The management of HF in pregnancy is more difficult than in the non-pregnant
state and should be managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of physicians,
obstetricians and paediatricians.
 Patients with LVEF < 30% and those in NYHA Class III and IV should be
strongly advised not to get pregnant. They should be refered to the pre-pregnancy
clinic for advise on the modes of contraception. If pregnant, termination should
be considered.
 HF that develops during pregnancy can be managed with the judicious use
of diuretics, digoxin, nitrates, β-blockers and/or hydralazine.
 Arrhythmias
 Arrhythmia-induced HF (also known as Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy)
is a reversible cause of HF.
 Successful treatment of the arrhythmia by drug therapy or catheter ablation
can result in normalisation of LV function.
 Cardio-oncology
 Chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy is not common; clinical HF occurs in 1-5%.
 Close collaboration between the oncologist and the cardiologist is important.
 Patients undergoing chemotherapy should have a careful clinical evaluation
and assessment and treatment of CV risk factors.
 Chronic Kidney Disease
 Cardiac and kidney disease frequently co-exist and this increases the complexity
and costs of care, and may interact to worsen prognosis.
 Management includes the use of intravenous diuretics, careful use of Renin
Angiotensin System (RAS) blockers, β-blockers and occasionally ultrafiltration
and haemodialysis.
Key message 10: Advanced Heart Failure
Patients with advanced HF should be referred to assess whether they may be
potential candidates for mechanical circulatory support (e.g. Left Ventricular Assist
Device - LVAD) and consideration for heart transplant.
Patients with refractory symptoms despite guideline-directed medical therapy,
should be considered for palliative and end of life care.
Key message 11: Organisation of Care
Heart Failure clinics will serve as an intermediary between in-patient hospital care
and community primary care.
Key Recommendations
Key Recommendation # 3:
 The underlying disease and the precipitating cause(s), if present, need
to be identified so that disease-specific treatment can be initiated early.
Key Recommendation # 4:
 The primary objective of management should be prevention of HF and early
intervention, wherever appropriate.
Key Recommendation # 1:
 In making a diagnosis of Heart failure, a detailed history and a thorough
physical examination are important.
 The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported by objective clinical
evidence of cardiac dysfunction. (Flow Chart I, Page 28)
 The exercise capacity in a patient with heart disease should be assessed
by the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification.
(Table 6, Page 40)
Key Recommendation # 2:
 To confirm the diagnosis and determine the type of HF and the aetiology,
the following should be performed:
 Basic investigations such as ECG, Chest Radiography, blood and urine
tests.
 An echocardiogram to help determine the type of HF (HFrEF, HFmrEF
or HFpEF) and identify structural cardiac defects.
Key Recommendation # 5:
 In Acute HF, it is important to:
 Rapidly recognise the condition.
 Identify and stabilise haemodynamics.
 Maintain oxygenation and perfusion of the vital organs.
 Relieve clinical symptoms and signs.
 Identify and treat the underlying cause and precipitating/aggravating
factors.
 After initial clinical assessment, management should be instituted as in
Flow Chart II, Page 29.
Key Recommendation # 6:
 In Chronic HF, non-pharmacological measures play an important role and
it is important to :
 Educate patient and family about the disease, treatment options and
prognosis.
 Encourage lifestyle measures.
 Individualise fluid intake - A general recommendation is 1-1.5 litres per
day in patients with normal renal function.
 Provide advice regarding sexual activities and pregnancy.
Key Recommendation # 7:
Management of chronic HF due to HFrEF is as in Flow Chart III, Page 31.
 Pharmacological Agents that should be administered are those that have
been shown to improve survival in HFrEF and these include:
 ACE-I/ARB if ACE-I intolerant
 ARNI
 β-blockers
 MRA
 The doses of these medications should be slowly up-titrated to the
maximal tolerated doses. (Tables 10-13, Pages 68, 70-72)
Key Recommendation # 8:
In patients with HFrEF, Device therapy should be considered in patients who
fulfil the eligibility criteria, who otherwise have good clinical function and
prognosis (life expectancy of more than 1 year) to improve their survival.
 CRT can be considered in patients with all of the following criteria:
 Sinus rhythm
 LVEF ≤ 35%
 LBBB
 QRS duration > 150ms
 An ICD is indicated for secondary prevention in:
 Patients resuscitated from SCD due to ventricular fibrillation or
haemodynamically unstable sustained ventricular tachycardia.
 Patients with chronic HF and LVEF ≤ 35% who experience syncope of
unclear origin.
 Prior MI and LVEF ≤ 40% with non-sustained VT AND inducible
sustained VT or VF during an EP study.
Key Recommendation # 9:
 In patients with HFrEF, coronary revascularisation (by either CABG or PCI)
should be considered in patients with HF and suitable coronary anatomy.
Key Recommendation # 10:
 In managing patients with HFpEF:
 Hypertension is an important cause and should be treated according to
guidelines.
 Treat volume overload with diuretics
 Manage comorbidities.
Flow Chart I: Algorithm for the Diagnosis of Heart Failure or LV Dysfunction
* Section 6, Page 39
Tests Normal but
clinical suspicion is high
Echocardiography
TREAT ACCORDINGLY
Tests Abnormal
Tests Abnormal
Tests Normal
Tests Normal and
clinical suspicion is low
Suspected Heart Failure because
of symptoms and/or signs
Determine:
- Underlying cause
- Precipitating
cause
- Type of LV
dysfunction
(HFrEF, HFpEF,
HmrEF)
*Additional
diagnostic tests
(where indicated)
e.g.
- Coronary
angiography
(CT or invasive
as indicated)
- Nuclear imaging
- Cardiac MRI
Heart Failure or LV
dysfunction is
unlikely. Consider
other diagnosis
e.g
- Coronary Artery
Disease (angina
equivalent)
- Obesity
- Pulmonary
disease
ECG
Chest Radiograph
Natriuretic Peptides (where available)
ACUTE HEART FAILURE
Oxygen if p02 < 95%
IV Diuretics
Inotropes
• Noradrenaline 1st
• Dopamine (next)
Inotropes
• Noradrenaline 1st
• Dopamine (next)
IV diuretics+/-
Vasodilators
Inotropes
• Noradrenaline 1st
• Dopamine (next)
Cautious
Fuid Challenge
Blood Pressure
SBP > 100mmHG
Improved
SBP > 100mmHG
Blood Pressure
Cold, Wet
Congested
Perfusion Inadequate
Cold, Dry
Not Congested
Perfusion Inadequate
Assess For Congestion And Perfusion
Flow Chart II: Management of Acute Heart Failure
*Hypoperfusion: cold peripheries, capillary refill time more than 2 seconds, diaphoresis, oliguria, dizziness,
confusion, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension.
**Congestion: peripheral oedema, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, lung crepitations, jugular
venous dilatation, hepatojugular reflux, congested hepatomegaly, gut congestion, ascites.
From onset, evaluate to identify correctable/reversible lesions-arrhythmias, hypertension, myocardial
ischaemia/infarction, valvular heart disease.
- Diuretics, Continuous Infusion
+ Combination With Thiazides
- Nitrates
- Low Dose Dopamine
- Dobutamine
- Correct Hypoxia And Acidosis
- Consider Invasive Ventilation
- Refer To Tertiary Centres
Continue oral
medications
(Flow Chart III, Page 31)
Continue Oral
Medications
(Flow Chart III, Page 31)
Warm, Wet
Congested
Perfusion Adequate
SBP > 100mmHG
SBP < 100mmHG
SBP < 100mmHG
Not Improved
Not Improved
SBP < 100mmHG
SBP < 100mmHG
Not Improved
Not Improved
SBP > 100mmHG
SBP > 100mmHG
SBP < 100mmHG
Warm, Dry
Not Congested
Perfusion Adequate
Improved
.
Table 2: Grading of Recommendations in the Management of Acute HF
Intervention
Grades of
Levels of
Comments
Recommendation
Evidence
INITIAL MANAGEMENT CONSISTS OF:
Oxygen
I
C
Maintain the oxygen
saturation above 95%
Diuretics
I
B
Indicated for fluid retention
Nitrates
I
B
Contraindicated if SBP
< 100mmHg. Use with
caution in valvular stenosis.
Morphine
IIb
B
Indicated in patients who
are dyspnoeic and restless
NOT RESPONSIVE TO INITIAL TREATMENT AND SBP > 100mmHg
Diuretics
IIa
B
Continuous infusion;
combination with nitrates,
dopamine, dobutamine or
thiazide
Dopamine
IIb
B
To improve renal perfusion
(<2-3ug/kg/min)
and promote diuresis
Dobutamine
IIb
B
Indicated for peripheral
hypoperfusion +/- pulmonary
congestion
NOT RESPONSIVE TO INITIAL TREATMENT AND SBP < 100mmHg
Noradrenaline
IIa
B
Indicated to increase the BP
Dopamine
IIb
B
Indicated to increase the BP
(> 5ug/kg/min)
IABP
IIa
B
Indicated as a bridge till
myocardial recovery or
heart transplant
Ventricular
IIa
B
Indicated as a bridge till
Assist Device
myocardial recovery or
(VAD)
heart transplant
Flow Chart III: Optimising Drug Therapy In Chronic HFrEF
See :
• Table 3, Page 25 for grading of recommendations
and level of evidence
• Section 8.2.2 for drug details and tables 10-13
for dosages.
Signs and symptoms of
Heart failure (LVEF < 40%)
In stepwise manner, initiate:
• ACE-I (or ARB if ACE-I intolerant)
• β-blockers
Consider:
• Switching ACE-I/ARB to ARNI
Add:
• Ivabradine (if sinus rhythm & HR
> 70bpm) and/or
• Digoxin
See Flow Chart II (Acute HF -
Page 29) -Treat with IV - parenteral
medications
(Consider referral to tertiary cardiac
centres)
• Loop diuretics + thiazides
• Short term parenteral positive
inotropes
• Consider if suitable:
 ICD
 CRT
 IABP
 VAD
 Cardiac transplant
In stepwise manner, initiate:
• Diuretics if volume overload/congestion is present
(including MRA)
• ACE-I (or ARB if ACE-I intolerant) or ARNI
• β-blockers if no signs of volume overload/congestion
• MRA
Continue with:
• Diuretics: low maintenance dose
• ACE-I/ARB or ARNI: titrate to max tolerated dose
• β-blocker: titrate to max tolerated
• MRA
Continue with:
• Diuretics
• ACE-I / ARB - Consider switch to ARNI if not on
• MRA (if not already on)
• β-blockers
• Ivabradine
• Digoxin
Clinical Improvement
Clinical Improvement
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Table 3: Grading of Recommendations in the Management of Chronic HFrEF
Intervention
Grades of
Levels of
Comments
Recommendation
Evidence
INDICATED FOR FLUID RETENTION IN NYHA II - IV
Diuretics
I
B
Not shown to improve survival.
INDICATED IN ALL PATIENTS
ACE-I
I
A
Improves survival and delays progression in
all classes of HF.
ARB
I
A
In ACE-I intolerant patients.
β-blockers
I
A
Improves survival and delays progression in
all classes of HF.
IN ADDITION TO THE ABOVE, THE FOLLOWING ARE INDICATED IN SELECTED PATIENTS
Mineralocorticoid
I
A
Improves survival and reduces hospitalisations
receptor antagonists
in moderate to severe HF and in post MI
(Spironolactone,
patients with mild HF.
Eplerenone)
ARB
I
B
In patients post MI and LVEF < 40%, Valsartan
(in place of ACE-I)
shown to be comparable to captopril.
ARNI
I
B
In patients with HFrEF who remain symptomatic
(in place of
to decrease CV death, HF hospitalisations,
ACE-I/ARB)
and symptoms.
Digoxin
I
B
In patients with HF and AF.
IIa
B
No effect on survival. Reduces hospitalisations
when added to optimal medical therapy.
Ivabradine
IIa
B
Reduces hospitalisations when added to optimal
medical therapy in patients in sinus rhythm and
heart rate > 70bpm.
I
A
Improves survival in patients with resuscitated
cardiac arrest, VF or sustained VT.
ICD
I
A
Improves survival in patients > 40 days post MI,
(implantable
LVEF < 30%, with non-sustained VT AND inducible
cardioverter
sustained VT or VF during an EP study and on
defibrillator)
optimal medical treatment, and in NYHA II or III.
I
B
Improves survival in patients with prior MI and
> 40 days post MI and 3 months after
revascularisation, LVEF ≤ 35% and NYHA class II - III.
I
B
Improves survival in patients (no prior MI), LVEF
< 35%, on optimal medical treatment, and in
NYHA II or III.
CRT
Improves survival in patients having all of the
(cardiac
following): sinus rhythm, LVEF ≤ 35%, LBBB and
resynchronisation
QRS duration on resting 12-lead ECG:
therapy)
I
A
• > 150ms
IIa
B
• > 120-149 msec
Heart failure (HF) is a clinical syndrome and represents the end stage of most heart
diseases. The prevalence of HF varies between 3 - 20 per 1000 population, although
in persons over the age of 65 years, it could be as high as 100 per 1000 population.1
In nearly all regions of the world HF is both common and increasing, affecting
between 1 - 2% of the population.2,3
The main causes of HF amongst adult Malaysians were ischaemic heart disease
(68%), valvular/rheumatic heart disease (29%) and non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy
(28%).4 Vascular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and
dyslipidaemia were common in Asian HF patients, particularly so in Malaysia (75%,
67%, and 52%, respectively).4 In-patient mortality was 6%, with a 30-day readmission
rate of 30%.4
HF is an important cause of hospitalisation accounting for about 6% - 10% of all
acute medical admissions in Malaysia.5,6
It is also an important cause of hospital re-admissions.7,8 About 25% of patients with
HF are readmitted within 30 days for acute decompensation.7,8 The prognosis for HF
remains poor. The 1-year mortality rate varies between 5% to 52% depending on the
severity and the presence of co-morbidity.9,10 With a 5-year mortality at 48%, HF is
deadlier than many cancers, for example, colorectal cancer (35.5%), non Hodgkin’s
lymphoma (29.6%), and breast cancer (10%).9-11
The overall global economic cost of HF in 2012 was estimated at $USD108 billion
(MYR 439 billion) per annum.12 The economic impact includes both direct and
indirect costs.12,13 Globally, direct costs accounted for ~ 60% ($USD 65 billion -
MYR 264 billion) and indirect costs accounted for ~ 40% ($USD43 billion - MYR 175
billion) of the overall spent.12 With an aging, rapidly expanding and industrialising
population this value will continue to rise.
For Malaysia, the estimated overall HF costs was $USD 194 million (MYR 785
million), of which the direct and indirect costs were $USD 12 million (MYR 48.7
million) and $USD 182 million (MYR 740 million).12 This is approximately 1.8% of
total health expenditure, with 3.6% GDP spent on health. In general, in most low and
medium economies like Malaysia, the indirect costs of HF in terms of premature
mortality, morbidity, lost earning potential and unpaid care costs outweigh the direct
costs. HF poses a major health and economic burden and an important goal in
management is to prevent readmissions, thus reducing both direct and indirect
costs.12
1. INTRODUCTION
This guideline provides evidence-based recommendations to help health care
providers in the management of their patients with HF. Beyond the Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG), clinical management needs to be individualised to take into
account patient’s overall health goals, values, perspectives and preferences.
Sound clinical judgment plays an important role in formulating appropriate
patient-centred care plans.
HF is a clinical syndrome due to any structural or physiological abnormality of the
heart resulting in its inability to meet the metabolic demands of the body or its ability
to do so only at higher than normal filling pressures. This may be accompanied by
signs and symptoms of systemic hypoperfusion and/or volume overload. Patients
may have typical symptoms (e.g. breathlessness, ankle swelling and fatigue) and
signs (e.g. elevated jugular venous pressure, ankle oedema, pulmonary crackles,
and displaced apex beat). Occasionally, some patients may present without
signs or symptoms of volume overload.
HF may be the result of any disorder of the endocardium, myocardium,
pericardium or great vessels although commonly, it is due to myocardial
dysfunction. It may involve only the left and/or right ventricle (RV).
HF may be classified in many ways. A commonly used classification is by left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). (Table 4, Page 36) This has been shown to have
prognostic significance.14-16 Furthermore, aetiology, demographic characteristics and
response to therapies differ in the different classes.14,15
2. DEFINITION
3. CLASSIFICATION
Key messages 1:
 HF is an important cause of hospitalisation accounting for about 6% - 10%
of all acute medical admissions and an important cause of hospital
readmissions in Malaysia.
 HF costs was estimated to account for approximately 1.8% of total health
expenditure.
For practical purposes, HF can also be classified according to the clinical
presentation into:
 Acute heart failure (Acute HF) - defined as the rapid onset of symptoms and signs
of HF due to an acute deterioration of cardiac function in the presence or
absence of previous cardiac disease.
 Chronic heart failure (Chronic HF) - this is a chronic state when patients have
stable symptoms. In these patients, an acute precipitating or aggravating
factor(s) may cause acute cardiac decompensation.
The main pathophysiology of HF is due to a decrease in cardiac output. This will
result in the following compensatory mechanisms:
 A higher ventricular end diastolic pressure - This is a compensatory mechanism
to increase stroke volume by the Frank Starling mechanism.
 Neurohormonal activation of the:
 Sympathetic nervous system
 Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
 Vasopressin
This neurohormonal activation is aimed at increasing stroke volume and cardiac
output by:
 An increase in heart rate and ventricular contraction
 Vasoconstriction of arterial resistance vessels to maintain blood pressure
 Venous constriction to increase venous preload
 Salt and water retention to increase preload
In general, these neurohormonal responses are compensatory mechanisms.
However they can also aggravate HF by increasing ventricular afterload and
increasing preload to the point where pulmonary and/or systemic congestion and
oedema occur.
In the setting of LV myocardial dysfunction, LVEF may be:
 Reduced (LVEF ≤ 40%) - Heart failure with reduced ejection function (HFrEF).
 Preserved (LVEF ≥ 50%) - Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF).
 Mid-range (LVEF 41%-49%) - Heart Failure with the LVEF being in the mid range
(HFmrEF).
4. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
4.1 HFrEF
In HFrEF, cardiac output is reduced due to depressed myocardial contractility,
irrespective of the aetiology. This leads to a cascade of pathophysiological changes
as outlined above. There are effective medical and device therapies that have been
shown to have survival benefit in HFrEF.
4.2 HFpEF
About 50% of patients presenting with HF have normal systolic function with
predominantly diastolic dysfunction.7,17,18 Diastolic dysfunction leads to impaired
left ventricular (LV) filling due to decreased relaxation (during early diastole)
and/or reduced compliance (early to late diastole) leading to elevated filling
pressures. These haemodynamic changes are accompanied by predominantly
signs of pulmonary and/or venous congestion and occasionally systemic
hypoperfusion as well. There is limited data available on therapies that improve
survival in HFpEF unlike those with HFrEF.
4.3 HFmrEF
Patients with HFmrEF have a clinical profile that are closer to those of patients with
HFpEF than those of HFrEF. This category of patients is poorly studied and their
response to therapies is unknown. Data seems to indicate that they have all cause
readmission risk that are higher than HFpEF. In addition, the 1-year mortality rate
appeared comparable to HFrEF and HFpEF after risk adjustments.15
Table 4: Classification Of Heart Failure According To LVEF
Ejection Fraction Terminology
LVEF
Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction (HFrEF)
≤ 40%
Heart Failure with mid-range LVEF (HFmrEF)
41% - 49%
Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction (HFpEF)
≥ 50%
HF is not a complete diagnosis. It is important to identify the underlying disease
and the precipitating cause(s), if present, so that disease-specific treatment can
be initiated early.
The common underlying causes of HF in adults are:
 Coronary artery disease (CAD)
 Hypertension
 Dilated cardiomyopathy-idiopathic, familial
 Valvular heart disease
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy
Other causes of HF include:
 Congenital heart disease
 Cor pulmonale
 Pericardial disease: constrictive pericarditis, cardiac tamponade
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 Viral myocarditis
 Acute rheumatic fever
5. AETIOLOGY
Key messages 2:
 HF is a clinical syndrome due to any structural or physiological abnormality
of the heart resulting in its inability to meet the metabolic demands of the
body or its ability to do so only at higher than normal filling pressures.
 HF can also be classified according to the clinical presentation into:
 Acute heart failure (Acute HF)
 Chronic heart failure (Chronic HF)
 In the setting of LV myocardial dysfunction, LVEF may be:
 Reduced (LVEF ≤ 40%) - Heart failure with reduced ejection function
(HFrEF).
 Preserved (LVEF ≥ 50%) - Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
(HFpEF)
 Mid-range (LVEF 41% - 49%) - Heart Failure with the LVEF being in the
mid range (HFmrEF)
 Toxic: Alcohol, cardiotoxic chemotherapy e.g. doxorubicin, trastuzumab
(Herceptin), cyclophosphamide.
 Endocrine and metabolic disorders: thyroid disease, acromegaly,
phaechromocytoma.
 Collagen vascular disease: systemic lupus erythematosis, polymyositis,
polyarteritis nodosa.
 Tachycardia induced cardiomyopathy eg uncontrolled atrial fibrillation.
 Infiltrative cardiac disease e.g. amyloid, hyper-eosinophilic syndrome.
 Miscellaneous.
 High output HF e.g. severe anaemia, large A-V shunts/malformations.
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy.
 Stress (Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy.
Patients with Chronic HF may occasionally develop acute decompensation. Factors
that can contribute to this Acute HF are listed in Table 5, Page 39.
The more important causes that need to be recognised and treated appropriately
are:
 Acute myocardial infarction/myocardial ischaemia.
 Arrhythmias (e.g. atrial fibrillation).
 Hypertensive emergencies.
 Infections (e.g. pneumonia).
 Non-compliance to medications.
 Excessive fluid and salt intake.
 Anaemia.
 Development of renal impairment.
 Adverse effects of drug therapy (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
HF is a clinical diagnosis based on a detailed history and physical examination.
6.1. Symptoms and signs
The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported by objective evidence of cardiac
dysfunction. Breathlessness with orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
(PND), reduced exercise tolerance and ankle swelling are the characteristic
symptoms of HF.
Table 5: Factors Contributing to Decompensation in a Patient with Stable HF
Patient Factors
 Non-compliance to medications
 Dietary indiscretion especially salt and fluid intake
 Inappropriate medications e.g. NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors
 Alcohol consumption
Cardiac Causes
 Superimposed myocardial ischaemia or infarction
(often asymptomatic)
 Hypertensive emergencies
 Arrhythmias
 Pulmonary embolism
 Secondary mitral or tricuspid regurgitation
Systemic Conditions
 Superimposed infections
 Anaemia
 Thyroid disease
 Electrolyte disturbances
 Worsening renal disease
Others
 Urinary retention
 Severe emotional or physical stress
6. DIAGNOSIS
Signs which are more specific for HF are an elevated jugular venous pulse (JVP),
and a third heart sound. These signs are associated with adverse outcomes.19 A
fourth heart sound is due to atrial contraction and is more frequent in patients with
HFpEF. It is absent in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF).
These signs may be accompanied by a laterally displaced apical impulse and a
cardiac murmur. Other supportive signs include peripheral oedema, tachycardia,
narrow pulse pressure, pulmonary crepitations, hepatomegaly and ascites. These
clinical findings may be transient and resolve completely following initial therapy.
However, these signs are difficult to detect and are not always easily reproducible in
the elderly, the obese and in patients with chronic lung disease. Occasionally
symptoms and signs of volume overload may be absent and the patient may present
with fatigue only.
In patients presenting with dysnoea, acute LV failure can sometimes mimic an acute
exacerbation of bronchial asthma. Thus, a proper history and clinical examination is
essential.
Exercise capacity in a patient with heart disease is assessed by the New York Heart
Association (NYHA) functional classification. (Table 6, Page 40)
Table 6: New York Heart Association Functional Classification for Patients
with Heart Disease
CLASS
DESCRIPTION
1 Year Mortality
CLASS I
No limitation. Ordinary physical activity does
5 - 10%
not cause undue fatigue, dyspnoea or
palpitation.
CLASS II
Slight limitation of physical activity. Such
10 - 15%
patients are comfortable at rest. Ordinary
physical activity results in fatigue, palpitation,
dyspnoea or angina.
CLASS III
Marked limitation of physical activity. Although
15 - 20%
patients are comfortable at rest, less than
ordinary activity will lead to symptoms.
CLASS IV
Inability to carry on any physical activity
20 - 50%
without discomfort. Symptoms of heart failure
are present at rest.
Once the diagnosis of HF has been made, it is important to establish the aetiology of
the syndrome. (Section 5, Page 37)
The diagnosis of HFrEF requires these conditions to be satisfied:
 Symptoms and signs typical of HF.
 Objective evidence of reduced LVEF.
In the diagnosis of HFpEF the requirements are:
 Symptoms and signs typical of HF.
 Objective evidence of a normal, non-dilated LV and/or evidence of diastolic
dysfunction.Relevant structural heart disease (LV hypertrophy/LA enlargement).
Key Recommendation # 1:
 In making a diagnosis of Heart failure, a detailed history and a thorough
physical examination are important.
 The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported by objective clinical
evidence of cardiac dysfunction. (Flow Chart I, Page 28)
 The exercise capacity in a patient with heart disease should be assessed
by the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification.
(Table 6, Page 40)
6.2 Investigations
continue to next page...
BASIC INVESTIGATIONS
12 lead ECG
- To assess heart rate, rhythm, QRS morphology, QRS
duration, QRS voltage, evidence of ischaemia, LV
hypertrophy and arrhythmias.
Chest radiograph
- To look for pulmonary congestion, cardiomegaly and
presence of underlying lung pathology.
- Patients with HFpEF may have a normal cardiac size.
Blood tests
FBC, renal function, liver function, serum glucose, lipid
profile
Urinalysis
To look for proteinuria, glycosuria.
OTHER IMPORTANT INVESTIGATIONS
Echocardiography
This will allow assessment of:
 LV chamber size, volume and systolic function
 LV wall thickness, evidence of scarring and wall motion
abnormalities
 Diastolic function of the heart
 Valvular structure and function
 Congenital cardiac abnormalities
 LV mechanical dyssynchrony
 Pulmonary hypertension.
It is the most useful and widely available test to establish
the diagnosis in patients suspected of HF.
Natriuretic Peptides
BNP and NTproBNP are a family of hormones secreted
(NP):
by the ventricles in response to wall stress.
 Brain natriuretic
They are useful in the following situations:
peptide (BNP) or
 In the emergency setting:
 N-terminal pro
 NP are useful as a ‘rule out’ test for patients presenting
BNP (NTproBNP)
with acute dyspnoea. A level of < 100pg/ml for BNP
and < 300pg/ml for NTproBNP makes the diagnosis
of acute HF unlikely.20-23 These levels are affected
by renal function and gender.24-26 (See Table 7, Page 44
for the optimal cut off values of NP to exclude or
diagnose HF in patients with dyspnoea)
 A high level supports the diagnosis of acute HF and
very high levels correlate with the severity of HF and
adverse outcomes.20-23
 In the community:
 They are a useful “rule out” test in the diagnosis of
HF in patients presenting with dyspnoea.27
 Changes in the levels of BNP and NTproBNP predict
risk of hospital admissions for HF.28
 The results of studies on the use of NP to guide therapy
in HF are conflicting.29-32
NP levels are affected by:
 Atrial fibrillation (AF)33,34 - levels are increased even in
the absence of HF.
 Age20,35 - Levels of NP increase with age
 Renal function24-26
 Obesity36,37 - Levels are reduced in obesity
 Certain medications such as Angiotensin - Receptor
Blocker - Neprilysin Inhibitor (ARNI) may interfere with
the intepretation of BNP levels.
A raised NP level may be due to other causes besides HF.
(Appendix I, Page 116)
ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS WHEN INDICATED:
Blood tests
 Serum cardiac biomarkers: to look for myocardial
necrosis-troponins, creatine kinase-muscle/brain band
(CKMB).
 Thyroid function tests.
Other less common tests that may be considered include:
 Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)
 Viral studies
 Iron studies.
Tests for myocardial  Treadmill exercise test
ischaemia and/or
 Stress echocardiography (exercise or pharmacological)
viability
 Radionuclide studies
 Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (Cardiac MRI)
Invasive tests
 Coronary angiography
 Cardiac catheterisation
 Endomyocardial biopsy
Others
 Holter electrocardiography, loop recorders
 Pulmonary function test
Table 7: Optimal Cut Points for Diagnosis or Exclusion of Heart Failure among
Patients with Dyspnoea.20-23
BNP (ng/L)
NTproBNP (ng/L)
Heart failure rule out
< 100
< 300
Heart failure possible
> 400
Age < 50 y: > 450
Age 50 - 75: > 900
Age > 75: > 1800
Key Recommendation # 2:
 To confirm the diagnosis and determine the type of HF and the aetiology,
the following should be performed:
 Basic investigations such as ECG, Chest Radiography, blood and
urine tests .
 An echocardiogram to help determine the type of HF (HFrEF ,HFmrEF
or HFpEF) and identify structural cardiac defects.
Key Recommendation # 3:
 The underlying disease and the precipitating cause(s), if present,
need to be identified so that disease-specific treatment can be initiated
early.
Prevention of HF should always be the primary objective of management. It should
focus on individuals:
 At high risk of developing cardiac disease.
 With cardiac disease but who still have normal myocardial function.
 Who have impaired myocardial function but who do not as yet have signs or
symptoms of HF.
7. PREVENTION
7.1 Individuals who are at high risk of developing HF/CAD but who do not as
yet have structural heart disease.
These include individuals with:
 Multiple risk factors for developing CAD or who already have evidence of
atherosclerotic disease in other vascular beds (e.g. cerebral, peripheral vascular
disease)
 Hypertension - Increased systolic blood pressure (SBP) and pulse pressure (PP)
are associated with the risk of HF in a continuous and graded manner.38-40
Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) demonstrates a U-shaped association with HF
risk.38-40
 Diabetes - This is a risk factor for the development of HF independent of coexisting
hypertension or CAD.41-43 (Section 8.5.1, pg 87)
 Obesity and metabolic syndrome - Data from the Framingham Heart Study
showed that each unit increase in body mass index was associated with a 5%
increase in the risk of HF in men and 7% in women.44
 Smoking - This leads to HF by direct effects on the myocardium and indirectly
by causing or aggravating comorbidities that can cause HF.45, 46
 Familial hyperlipidaemia
 Family history of cardiomyopathy
 Thyroid disorders - Both hyper and hypothyroidism.47 In patients with symptomatic
HF and LVEF < 35%, abnormal thyroid function was associated with a significant
increase in mortality.48
 Renal disease
 Cardiotoxins - excessive alcohol consumption, chemotherapeutic agents,
illicit drug use such as cocaine, amphetamine, antidepressants.
 Sleep-disordered breathing (both central and obstructive sleep apnoea).49, 50
 Connective tissue diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, SLE.
 Chronic pulmonary disease with pulmonary hypertension.
In these individuals the following measures should be taken:
 Treating hypertension to target levels - This has been shown to reduce
the incidence of HF by as much as 50%.51 Treating isolated systolic
hypertension in the elderly reduced risk of HF events by 49% and even in
those over the age of 80 years, treating hypertension reduced new onset
HF by 64%.51-55 Aggressive lowering of the target SBP from ≤ 140 to ≤ 120
resulted in a 37% risk reduction of acute HF events in adults > 75 years.56, 57
 Diabetes - Optimise glycaemic control. Poor glycaemic control has been
shown to increase the risk of HF.41-43 (See Section 8.5.1, Page 87)
I,A
IIa,B
I,B
I,B
I,B
I,B
I,C
I,A
IIb,B
IIb,B
IIa,B
IIb,C
 Healthy lifestyles - A normal body weight, absence of smoking, regular
exercise, and consumption of fruits and vegetables were individually and
jointly associated with a lower lifetime risk of HF.58
 Smoking cessation - Current smokers have a higher risk of HF compared
to non-smokers and ex-smokers.59,60 Quitting smoking appears to have a
substantial and early effect (within two years) on decreasing morbidity
and mortality in patients with left ventricular dysfunction, which is at least
as large as proven drug treatments recommended in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction.60
 Regular exercise - A minimum physical activity of at least 150 minutes
per week of moderate intensity activity has been recommended to prevent
ischaemic heart disease.61
 Maintain ideal body weight61
 Curbing alcohol consumption - Chronic long-term abuse of alcohol can
lead to alcoholic cardiomyopathy.
 Treating lipids to goal in all individuals with established cardiovascular (CV)
disease to reduce mortality. Statins have been shown to reduce the incidence
of HF by approximately 20% among patients with hypercholesterolemia
and CAD.51 Even low risk individuals benefit from statin therapy although
the use of pharmacotherapy for primary prevention should be individualised.62-64
 n-3 fatty acids -
 Studies on the prevention of HF by n-3 fatty acids have been mixed.65,66
A study in patients with multiple CV risk factors or atherosclerotic
vascular disease who had no previous MI, showed that n-3 fatty acids
did not reduce CV mortality and morbidity.67
 On the other hand, consumption of fish more than once per month
was associated with a lower HF risk.67
 Identifying and monitoring at risk individuals prior to administration of
cardiotoxic chemotherapy. The use of β-blockers/ACE-I/ARB’s have
been shown to prevent cardiotoxic cardiomyopathy.68,69 (See Section
8.5.5 Cardio-oncology, Page 100)
 Screening of first-degree relatives of patients with known heritable
cardiomyopathy.
 Detecting and treating thyroid disease early to prevent thyroid heart
disease.
 Obstructive sleep apnoea is associated with an increase in the risk of
HF.49,50 However, to date, the use of servo-ventilation and/or Continous
Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) for central and /or obstructive sleep
apnoea (OSA) has not been shown to prevent HF.70-72
7.2. Individuals with cardiac disease but who still have normal cardiac
function. Strategies include:
 Timely triage and appropriate treatment of patients with acute coronary
syndromes.73-75
 Patients with CAD should be treated appropriately with antiplatelet
agents,76-79 β- blockers,80,81 ACE-I82 and statins.83,84 Coronary revascularisation
should be offered as indicated. ACE-I reduce the incidence of HF
incidence 37% among patients with reduced LV systolic function and by
23% among patients with CAD and normal LV systolic function.51
 Patients with hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) should
have their blood pressure control optimised. (< 140/< 90mmHG ) Regression
of LVH has been shown to be associated with a lower incidence of new
onset HF.85
 Patients with significant valve disease (moderate and above) should
bevfassessed for progression and timely intervention as indicated.86
 Patients with arrhythmias, when indicated, should be referred for evaluation
and treatment.87
 Patients with congenital heart disease should have their cardiac lesions
corrected and appropriate follow-up should be available looking for
progression and sequelae.
In addition to the measures stated above, the following medical therapy have
been shown to help prevent HF:
 ACE-I - have been shown to reduce the incidence of HF by 23% in individuals
with CAD and normal LV systolic function.88 It has also been shown to
reduce new onset HF in patients with atherosclerotic vascular disease,89
diabetes and hypertension with associated CV risk factors.90,91
IIa,C
IIb,B
I,A
I,A
I,B
IIa,C
IIa,C
I,C
I,A
 ARB - are non-inferior to ACE-I and should be considered in ACE-I intolerant
patients.92
 β-blockers - in patients post myocardial infarction (MI).93,94
 Statins in patients with CAD.62-64
 Sodium-glucose cotransport-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) in patients with
diabetes.95-98
7.3. Individuals with myocardial dysfunction but who do not as yet
have signs and symptoms of HF
(Asymptomatic Left Ventricular Dysfunction).
Measures include:
 Treat the underlying cause wherever possible.
 Prevent progression to symptomatic HF by guideline directed therapy.
8.1. ACUTE HEART FAILURE
Acute heart failure (AHF) is a clinical syndrome of new or worsening signs
and symptoms of HF. It can be manifested as a first occurrence (de novo) or
more commonly, as a result of deterioration of a previously diagnosed stable
patient with HF.
AHF may present as:
 Pulmonary and/or peripheral oedema (“wet” - volume overload).
 Low output state - shock (“dry” - usually due to pump failure).
 Combination of pulmonary oedema and a low output state.
IIa,A
IIa,B
I,A
IIa,A
I,C
Key Recommendation # 4:
 The primary objective of management should be prevention of HF
and early intervention, wherever appropriate.
8. MANAGEMENT
The onset and severity of symptoms can vary depending on the nature of the
underlying disease and the rate at which the syndrome develops. The
spectrum of clinical findings may range from worsening of peripheral oedema
to life threatening pulmonary oedema or cardiogenic shock. It often requires
urgent evaluation and treatment, which typically leads to hospitalisation.
Assessment and management must be made promptly and simultaneously.
The principles of management are:
 Rapid recognition of the condition.
 Identification and stabilisation of life threatening haemodynamics.
 Maintaining oxygenation and perfusion of the vital organs.
 Relieving clinical symptoms and signs.
 Identification and treatment of the underlying cause and precipitating/
aggravating factors.
8.1.1 Classification of AHF
There are a number of ways to classify patients with AHF. These classifications
allow physicians to systematically assess the risk, prognosis and treatment
approach.
 According to aetiology and precipitating causes (Table 5, Page 39). The
more important causes are:
 Myocardial infarction/Ischaemia
 Arrhythmias – commonly rapid AF
 Acute valvular dysfunction e.g. acute mitral regurgitation from chordal
rupture
 Severe and uncontrolled hypertension
 Infection e.g. pneumonia
 Non-compliance to treatment especially oral diuretics
 Fluid overload
 According to clinical presentation (Table 8, Page 50)
 Warm and wet - adequate perfusion but congested** (lungs and/or
periphery)
 Cold and dry - hypoperfusion* and dehydrated/not congested**
 Cold and wet - hypoperfusion* and congested** (lungs and/or periphery)
 Warm and dry - adequate perfusion and dehydrated/not congested.**
These patients have either mild HF or are in the compensated stage
of HF.
*Hypoperfusion: cold peripheries, capillary refill time more than 2 seconds,
diaphoresis, oliguria, dizziness, confusion, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension.
**Congestion: peripheral oedema, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnoea, lung crepitations, jugular venous dilatation, hepatojugular reflux,
congested hepatomegaly, gut congestion, ascites
Table 8: Classification of AHF according to Clinical Presentation and a
Guide to Management
Warm/Wet
Perfusion: Adequate
Fluid status: Congested
Management:
 Diuretics - Yes
 Vasodilators - Yes
 Inotropes - No
Warm/Dry
Perfusion: Adequate
Fluid status: Not congested
Management:
 Diuretics - No
 Vasodilators - No
 Inotropes - No
Cold/Wet
Perfusion: Poor
Fluid status: Congested
Management:
 Diuretics - Yes
 Vasodilators -
Cautious depending on BP
 Inotropes - Yes
Cold/Dry
Perfusion: Poor
Fluid status: Not congested
Management:
 Diuretics - No
 Vasodilators -
Cautious depending on BP
 Inotropes - Yes
Consider fluid challenge
cautiously
The aim is to obtain optimal perfusion and fluid status (warm/dry).
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,B
8.1.2. Investigations
Essential Investigations in AHF include (See Section 6.2, Page 42)
 Electrocardiogram (ECG)
 Chest radiograph
 Blood investigations: haemoglobin, serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine,
cardiac biomarkers (troponin, CKMB, Natriuretic Peptides - BNP or
NTproBNP)
 Blood gases may be considered
 Echocardiography
8.1.3. Decision for hospitalisation and care-setting
Initial care in the critical care unit (ICU/CCU) should be considered for
high-risk patients with features such as:
 Haemodynamic instability
 Arrhythmias
 Hypoperfused state-cold peripheries, capillary refill time more than 2 seconds,
diaphoresis, oliguria, dizziness, confusion, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension
 Need for invasive ventilatory support
 Oxygen saturation (SpO2) < 90% despite supplemental oxygen.
The remaining patients with AHF can be managed in a high-dependency unit
or normal ward depending on the clinical circumstances. However clinical
deterioration may occur and hence, frequent re-assessments are necessary.
Step-down care from the ICU/CCU is dictated by clinical improvement.
Similarly, should the patient not improve, he should be considered to be
transferred to a tertiary hospital with a Cardiology Unit.
8.1.4. Management (Flow Chart II, Page 29; Table 2, Page 30 & Table 9,
Page 57)
The management of patients with AHF is largely based on clinical judgement
and experience rather than on randomised controlled trials. Most clinical trials
have been small and of low quality.
8.1.4.1 Oxygen
 Measurement of oxygenation by pulse oximetry (SpO2) is recommended.
 Supplemental oxygen therapy is recommended when the SpO2 < 95% or
PaO2 < 60mmHg. It should be titrated to achieve SpO2 > 95%.99-101
III,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
I,C
I,B
 Routine use in non-hypoxic patients is not recommended as it can cause
deleterious effects such as vasoconstriction and a reduction in cardiac
output.102-104
 High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) seems more effective than conventional
oxygen therapy and non-inferior to non-invasive positive pressure ventilation
in most studies.105,106 It is also better tolerated.
 Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIV) such as CPAP and
BiPAP should be considered early in patients with respiratory distress
(respiratory rate > 25 breaths/min, SpO2 < 90%) despite high-flow oxygen
administration.107-111 There are no significant differences in clinical
outcomes when comparing CPAP with BiPAP and the choice will depend
on the equiment that is available.111-113
 NIV reduces respiratory distress and may decrease the need for
intubation although data regarding mortality are less conclusive.110,111
 Intubation may be considered in patients with respiratory failure, who
cannot be managed non-invasively, show signs of exhaustion and
respiratory muscle fatigue.
 Some helpful indicators of respiratory failure include:
 Hypoxaemia (PaO2 < 60mmHg),
 Hypercapnia (PaCO2 > 50mmHg), and
 Acidosis (pH < 7.35)
8.1.4.2 Diuretics
 Diuretics is the cornerstone therapy in patients who are fluid overloaded (wet).
 Intravenous (i.v.) frusemide 40 - 100mg is the diuretic of choice.114 The
dose should be individualised depending on the severity of the clinical
condition. Patients who have already been on diuretics or have chronic
renal disease, may require a higher dose.
 Further doses can be adjusted according to response, blood pressure,
and renal function.
I,B
I,C
IIa,B
IIb,C
III,C
IIa,C
 Target 0.5 - 1kg decrease in body weight/day when the patient is volume
overloaded. Less than 0.5kg of weight loss/day may indicate inadequate
diuretic dose or diuretic resistance.
 To date, there has been no difference between continuous infusion or
bolus dosing of frusemide for all-cause mortality, length of hospital stay
and electrolyte disturbance, but continuous infusion was superior to bolus
administration with regard to diuretic effect, safety profile and reduction in
brain natriuretic peptide.115-118
8.1.4.3. Vasodilators
 Vasodilators can confer symptomatic relief and an improvement in
haemodynamics but there is, however, a lack of data to draw any firm
conclusions concerning their effects on CV outcome data.119,120
 Nitrates :
 Nitrates are the most widely studied vasodilator.119-124
 They are most useful if there is concomitant myocardial ischaemia,
severe hypertension or aortic or mitral regurgitation.
 They should be considered if the BP is adequate (SBP > 100mmHg).
 It should be administered preferably intravenously for ease of titration.
 Patients should be closely monitored for hypotension. This commonly
occurs with concomitant diuretic therapy.
 The combination of i.v. nitrate and low dose frusemide was shown in
a small study to be more efficacious than high dose diuretic treatment
alone.123
 Extreme caution should be exercised in patients with aortic and mitral
stenosis.
 Nitrates are contraindicated in severe valvular stenosis.
 Nitroprusside:
 This is most useful in AHF due to hypertensive emergencies and
acute valvular regurgitation.
IIa,B
IIb,B
IIb,B
IIb,B
IIb,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
 Sodium nitroprusside would be useful in patients not responsive to
nitrates.125
 Patients should be closely monitored for hypotension preferably using
an intra-arterial line.
8.1.4.5 Inotropes (Table 9, Page 57)
 Inotropes are not routinely administered in patients with an adequate
BP.126,127
 They are indicated in the presence of persistent signs of hypoperfusion
(hypotension and low cardiac output  cold patients) despite an adequate
filling status.
 Dopamine infusion:
 Low dose at < 2 - 3mcg/kg/min to improve renal flow and promote
diuresis.128
 The combination of low dose dopamine and low dose frusemide
was as effective as high-dose furosemide but associated with less
worsening of renal function.118,128 There was however, no difference
in the CV outcomes.118
 Dobutamine infusion:
 Started at 2 - 5mcg/kg/minute and titrated by 1 - 2mcg/kg/minute
increments at 30 minute intervals until the desired clinical and
haemodynamic response is attained.
 Dobutamine improved cardiac output but did not reduce pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure or hospital stay. It was associated with
significant ventricular tachyarrhythmias.127,129,130
 Noradrenaline infusion:
 It was as efficacious as dopamine in terms of 28 day mortality but
safer especially in the subset of patients with cardiogenic shock.131,132
 The combination of noradrenaline-dobutamine appeared to be
associated with more favorable haemodynamics and a safer
strategy than adrenaline alone.133
8.1.4.6 Morphine
 i.v. 1 - 3mg bolus (repeated if necessary, up to a maximum of 10mg). It
reduces pulmonary venous congestion although its effect on venodilation
has actually been shown to be minimal.134
IIb,B
IIb,B
 May reduce anxiety and dyspnoea however due to paucity of data, routine
use cannot be recommended.135,136
 Dose-dependent side effects include nausea, hypotension, bradycardia
and respiratory depression.
 Consider co-administrating intravenous antiemetics (metoclopramide
10mg or prochlorperazine 12.5mg).
8.1.5 Response to therapy
Response should be assessed continuously using the following parameters:
 Symptoms and signs
 Vital signs
 Oxygen saturation
 Heart rate
 Blood pressure
 Respiratory rate
 Urine output
 Body weight
 Investigations
 Renal function tests
 Serum potassium, sodium and magnesium
 Invasive haemodynamic monitoring may be considered in patients
who despite pharmacological treatment present refractory symptoms
(particularly with hypotension and hypoperfusion). This includes:
 Arterial pressure line
 Central venous pressure line and pulmonary artery catheter. This
would allow a more accurate assessment of the fluid status of the
patient and allow better titration of medications. However use of
pulmonary artery catheters did not confer additional benefit beyond
clinical assessment on CV outcomes.137-139
An adequate response would be reflected by all of the following:
 An improvement in the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms,
 Warm peripheries,
 Decrease in his heart rate,
 An improvement in his oxygen saturation and
 An improvement in the urine output.
Generally, a SBP > 90mmHg would be considered adequate if the patient has
all of the following:
 Feels well,
 Has good tissue perfusion as shown by the absence of giddiness, warm skin
and
 Stable renal function with good urine flow.
If the blood pressure is low at initial presentation (SBP < 100mmHg) or
drops during treatment :
Suggest (see Table 9, Page 57)
 Noradrenaline infusion131,132 - initial inotrope and if BP is still low, add:
 Dopamine infusion131
 Avoid vasodilators (nitrates, nitroprusside) and morphine until the blood
pressure has stabilised.
 Over diuresis or hypovolaemia - correct accordingly. In Right Ventricular (RV)
infarction, the hypotension may respond to volume loading.
Other measures
 Intubation and mechanical ventilation
 Correction of acidosis
 Invasive haemodynamic monitoring
 Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation (IABP):
 Would be useful in patients who are not responding optimally to
medical therapy as a bridge to definitive treatment. IABP would be
particularly useful in patients with intractable myocardial ischaemia or
acute mitral regurgitation.140,141
 In acute MI complicated by cardiogenic shock, IABP has been found
to be effective in patients undergoing reperfusion by fibrinolytic therapy.
In those undergoing primary PCI, IABP has not been shown to reduce
mortality.142-144
 IABP is contraindicated in patients with aortic regurgitation or aortic
dissection.
IIa,B
IIb,B
I,C
I,C
I,C
IIa,C
IIb,C
IIa,B
III,C
IIa,B
Table 9: Drugs Commonly Used in Acute HF
Route of
Dosages
Admin
Diuretics
Frusemide
IV
40-100mg
Initial dose:
New onset AHF and frusemidenaive: 20-40mg
Known HF and on oral frusemide:
40-80mg
Infusion
5-20mg/hour (better than
intermittent very high bolus doses)
Vasodilators
Nitroglycerin
Infusion
5-200mcg/min
Isosorbide dinitrate
Infusion
1-10mg/hr
Nitroprusside
Infusion
0.1-5mcg/kg/min
Inotropes
Noradrenaline
Infusion
0.02-1mcg/kg/min till desired
blood pressure is attained
Dopamine
Infusion
< 2-3mcg/kg/min - renal arterial
vasodilation
2-5mcg/kg/min - inotropic doses
5-15mcg/kg/min - peripheral
vasoconstriction
Dobutamine
Infusion
2-20mcg/kg/min
Adrenaline
Infusion
0.05-0.5μg/kg/min
 Ventricular Assist Devices (VAD) - would be useful as a bridge in
patients for whom recovery from AHF is expected or for whom heart
transplant is an option.145-147
There are other agents such as tolvapton, levosimendan and nesiritide which
have shown symptomatic improvement in AHF but have been associated
with either neutral or an increase in adverse events.148-151
8.1.6 Conversion to oral therapy and discharge
Following adequate response to intravenous therapy, the patient should be
converted to optimal oral medications. (See Flow Chart III, Page 31)
 Diuretics114,152
 Oral diuretics may be commenced following resolution of symptoms
of congestion and the patient achieving his “dry weight”.
 The initial dose of oral diuretics required is generally higher than the
intravenous dose since the oral version of frusemide has approximately
50% bioavailability compared with the i.v. preparation.153
 The dose at discharge needs to be individualised.
 ACE-I/ARB9,10,154,155
 Oral Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) blockers may be commenced
at admission if the inital BP is adequate (systolic BP > 120mmHg).
 In all other cases, it is best to defer for at least 24 hours till the BP is
stable.
 If the patient is already on a RAS blocker, it is advisable to stop it for
at least 24 hours if the BP is low. It can be recommenced at a lower
dose once the BP is stable. If the BP is adequate (systolic BP >
120mmHg), it can be continued at the same dose.
 The dose should be uptitrated depending on the BP and renal function.
 β-blockers156-161
 It is advisable to commence oral β-blockers if the BP is adequate and
the patient is no longer congested i.e. his lungs are clear and there is
no more oedema.
 If already on a β-blocker, this can be continued depending on the
patient’s symptoms and haemodynamics.
 MRA162-164
 These can be commenced at admission. Renal function and potassium
levels need to be monitored.
 ARNI
 At present, there is inadequate data to recommend it as first line in AHF.
 There is data from one study at present, that suggests in-hospital
initiation of this drug in patients with AHF in lieu of ACE-I is safe.
The patient should be observed for at least 24 hours for the stability of
symptoms, weight and haemodynamics prior to discharge. The follow-up
plans must be tailored according to the availability of facilities and expertise
to manage the patient on outpatient basis. (See Section 9 Organisation of
Care, Page 110)
I,B
I,A
I,A
I,A
IIa,B
8.1.7 Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis
HF patients especially if they are bed-bound for protracted periods are at risk
for DVT. Prophylactic measures include:
 TED stockings
 Direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC)
 Unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin.
8.1.8 Special situations
 Myocardial Ischaemia / Infarction:
 Reversible myocardial ischaemia causing AHF needs early recognition,
rapid stabilisation and referral for urgent coronary angiography.
 In acute MI, reperfusion therapy by fibrinolytic or primary Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention (PCI) may significantly improve or prevent AHF.
 Long term management strategy should include adequate coronary
revascularisation, antiplatelet therapy, ACE-I and/or ARB, β-blockers
and statins.
 Hypertensive Emergency:
 Typically presenting as “flash pulmonary oedema” with hypertensive crisis.
 Systolic LV function tends to be normal.
 The blood pressure needs to be reduced relatively quickly.
 This is best achieved with parenteral drugs such as intravenous
nitrates or nitroprusside.
 No attempt should be made to restore “normal” values of BP as this may
cause deterioration of organ perfusion.
 Look for secondary causes of hypertension such as renal artery
stenosis and phaeochromocytoma.
 Valvular Heart Disease:
 AHF can be caused by valvular conditions such as acute mitral or
aortic valve incompetence or stenosis, bacterial endocarditis, aortic
dissection and prosthetic valve thrombosis.
 Vasodilator therapy would be beneficial in acute valvular regurgitation,
but is contraindicated in severe valvular stenosis.
 Early access to echocardiography is crucial for the diagnosis and
management.
 Percutaneous intervention such as mitral valve commissurotomy can
be life saving in patients with severe mitral stenosis.
IIa,C
 Arrhythmias:
 Unstable tachy - or bradyarrhythmias need to be identified and treated
appropriately e.g. electrical or pharmacological cardioversion or
temporary pacemaker.
 Renal Failure:
 AHF and renal failure can co-exist and either may give rise to the other.
 Renal failure influences the response to drug therapy.165 In these patients
with refractory fluid retention, continuous ultrafiltration may be considered.
(See Section 8.5.6, Page 103)
8.1.8 Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock carries a very high mortality rate. The In hospital mortality
was > 70% decades ago but recently improved at 27-51% with current
therapy and management.166,167
Features include:
 SBP < 90mmHg not improved with fluid administration.
 Signs of hypoperfusion - cold extremities, altered mental status,
restlessness.
 Reduced urine output (< 20cc/hour).
 Cardiac index* of < 1.8 L/min/m2 without support or 2.2 L/min/m2 with
support.
 PCWP >=15mmHg
 Serum Lactate > 2.0 mmol/L.
*cardiac index = cardiac output/body surface area
It is important to establish the aetiology and institute appropriate resuscitative
therapy immediately. An ECG should be obtained and continuous monitoring
begun. Venous access should be secured, preferably via central venous
cannulation (subclavian or internal jugular).
Wherever possible, these patients should be transferred to a tertiary centre
with PCI capable facilities.
Important considerations are:
 Ventricular Function:
 Echocardiography would allow rapid determination of LV function and
mechanical causes (e.g. acute valve regurgitation, acute septal rupture,
cardiac tamponade) of cardiogenic shock.
 In the presence of preserved LV systolic function, other causes of shock
such as sepsis and intravascular volume depletion should be considered.
 Intra Vascular Volume Status:
 An absolute or relative reduction in LV filling pressures may be present.
 This may be due to excessive diuretic or vasodilator therapy, concomitant
gastro-intestinal bleed or RV infarction.
 In the absence of signs of LV failure, fluid challenge with normal saline
should be administered. Judicious administration of fluids (usual
recommended volume: 100-200 mls) tapered to clinical response and
signs of fluid overload.
 Invasive haemodynamic monitoring would be useful to guide fluid therapy.
 Arrhythmias:
 Should be identified and appropriate treatment such as cardioversion
or pacing instituted.
 Resistant arrhythmias would require antiarrhythymic drug therapy or
radiofrequency ablation.
In the presence of cardiogenic shock or near shock (hypoperfusion with
adequate blood pressure) treatment would include the following:
 Inotropic support: Noradrenaline and/or dopamine. If blood pressure is
adequate in the setting of near shock, dobutamine may be used.
 Mechanical device support: IABP or LVAD.142-147
Key messages:
 AHF may present as:
 Pulmonary and/or peripheral oedema (“wet”- volume overload).
 Low output state - shock (“dry”- usually due to pump failure).
 Combination of pulmonary oedema and a low output state.
Key Recommendation # 5:
 In Acute HF, it is important to:
 Rapidly recognise the condition.
 Identify and stabilise haemodynamics.
 Maintain oxygenation and perfusion of the vital organs.
 Relieve clinical symptoms and signs.
 Identify and treat the underlying cause and precipitating/
aggravating factors.
 After initial clinical assessment, management should be instituted
as in Flow Chart II, Page 29.
8.2 CHRONIC HEART FAILURE DUE TO HFrEF
Goals of management of HF include:
 Reducing symptoms, improving functional capacity and quality of life.
 Preventing hospitalisations and unplanned hospital visits.
 Improving patient survival.
8.2.1 NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MEASURES
8.2.1.1 Education
HF patients and their family members should be educated on the definition,
causes, signs, symptoms and the progressive nature of the disease. They
should:
 Be educated on self care management.
 Recognise the changes in their signs and symptoms - a sudden weight
gain - more than 2kg in 3 days is a sign of worsening HF.
 Know when to contact their healthcare provider.
 Understand the indication, dosing, side effects and drug interaction of
each medication they are prescribed.
 Be warned about self-medication and potential drug interactions.
 Adhere to treatment and be informed of the potential complications
resulting from non-adherence to prescribed medication.
 Provide prognostic information to enable patients to make realistic decisions
and plans. This is important in patients with severe HF. Chronic HF is a
highly lethal disease, more lethal than several common malignancies.
In advanced HF, treatment options must be discussed tactfully and realistically
with the patient and family.
8.2.1.2 Exercise training
Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses support exercise training as
an integral part of the non-pharmacological treatment of HF.168-172
Exercise training:
 Is safe in patients with chronic stable HF.168-173
 In patients with HFrEF, is associated with a trend towards reduction in
all-cause mortality.168
 In patients with HFpEF, the clinical data is sparse. Small trials show that
exercise training leads to an improvement in exercise capacity and quality
of life.174-176
I,B
I,B
IIa,B
IIa,C
Exercise-based rehabilitation:
 Reduced the risk of hospital admissions.168,171,173
 Improved health related quality of life.(HRQoL)168,169,171
 Enhanced exercise capacity.169,172
Regular aerobic exercises are encouraged in NYHA I – III patients. These
include:
 Walking, treadmill, stationary bicycle as well as swimming with a target
goal of 5 days per week, 30 minutes per session.
Moderate intensity aerobic interval may be incorporated for selected patients.
For more details, refer to the 2017 Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on
Primary and Secondary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease,1st Ed.
8.2.1.3 Diet and nutrition
It has been widely accepted that sodium intake has to be restricted in patients
with HF especially in those with symptoms. However, clinical evidence to
support this has been sparse and conflicting.177-182 Excessive salt and fluid
restriction can lead to intravascular depletion resulting in activation of the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and sympathetic systems leading to deleterious
tachycardia.183
The current recommendation is to avoid adding salt and flavouring sauces
such as soya sauce, tomato ketchup and chilli sauce while cooking or at the
table. Refer to Appendix II, Page 117 on salt content of common Malaysian
food.
A good balanced diet plays an an important role to prevent energy depletion
which can lead to cardiac cachexia and malnutrition.
8.2.1.4 Fluid restriction
The current evidence on fluid restriction is mixed.182-185 As with salt, excessive
fluid restriction can also lead to worse outcomes.182-185 This may also be due
to reverse causality - sicker patients tend to take less salt and water.
Fluid intake should be individualised. A general recommendation is
1-1.5 litres per day in patients with normal renal function.
IIa,B
8.2.1.5
Lifestyle measures
These include:
 Weight monitoring - Patients should be encouraged to monitor their own
weight. In obese patients, weight loss should be emphasised.
 Alcohol - This should be avoided in patients with HF as it can lead to acute
decompensation.186 Patients with alcoholic cardiomyopathy must abstain
from alcohol.
 Smoking should be stopped.60
8.2.1.6 Sexual activity, pregnancy and contraception
Physiological and psychological changes in patients with HF often result in
sexual dysfunction.187 These patients, in turn, often report a lower Health-related
quality of life (HRQoL).188 This problem is further compounded by their unmet
need for information on sexual activities from their health care providers.187,189
It is imperative that enquiries on sexual activities or dysfunction be addressed
to provide a holistic approach to patient care.190 The physician must take over
the initial approach since patients are often embarrassed to initiate the topic.
Some helpful tools to initiate the conversation include:
 PLISSIT (permission, limited information, specific suggestion and intensive
therapy).191
 Needs of Sexual Counselling Scale for Chronic Heart Failure (NSCS-CHF)187
 Sexual Adjustment Scale (SAS).187
Patients should be taught:
 To pay attention to their symptoms of HF.
 The potential dangers and how to manage them when they occur during
sexual activities.
 To defer sexual activities if in NYHA III-IV.
 Not to resume until his/her heart condition stabilises.
 To modify sexual practices to accommodate impaired effort tolerance.
HF patients need to be told that certain cardiac medications have important
side effects and drug interactions :
 Nitrates may dangerously interact with drugs for erectile dysfunction -
phosphodiesterase-5-inhibitors (Viagra, Cialis, Levitra).
 β-blockers, may contribute towards worsening erectile dysfunction but it
is important that HF patients remain compliant to them.
I,C
I,C
IIa,B
Patients with LVEF < 30% and those with NYHA III and IV should be advised
against pregnancy because of high maternal mortality.192,193 If pregnant,
termination of pregnancy should be considered.193
When pregnancy is contraindicated, then appropriate contraceptive advice
becomes paramount to the safety of the patient by preventing unwanted
pregnancy. The World Health Organization Medical Eligibility criteria
(WHO-MEC) for contraceptive use offers guidance in women with specific
medical conditions.194
Contraceptive counselling should begin early. In the absence of randomised
controlled studies, the choice of contraceptive method is almost always
based on expert opinion of the attending cardiologists, obstretician and
the patient’s choice. In most cases, the ease of use and efficacy of the
progestogen-only long-acting reversible contraceptive methods make them a
good method for patients with CVD.193,195 (Appendix III and IV, Pages 118 and 119)
8.2.1.7 Sleep disorders
Causes of sleep disturbances in HF include pulmonary congestion, nocturnal
diuresis due to diuretics and anxiety. Up to 53% of adults with HF have been
shown to have either central sleep apnoea (CSA) or OSA.196-198 OSA or CSA
or combination of both, is commonly known as sleep disordered breathing
(SDB).
OSA may occur in normal population or in HF patients, while CSA, which may
present as Cheyne-Stokes respiration, is more uniquely associated with
HF.199 Independent predictors of SDB include older age, male gender,
obesity, low ejection fraction and the presence of AF.196,197 Polysomnography
(PSG) is the gold standard in diagnosing OSA and CSA. However, a screening
using overnight pulse oximetry is useful to preselect a patient for PSG.
Not only does SDB affect HRQoL, it leads to harmful effects on cardiac
function, arrthymias and poorer prognosis due to the repetitive hypoxaemia,
hypercapnia and swings in blood pressure and intrathoracic pressure.
OSA patients are encouraged to lose weight.
CPAP improves daytime sleepiness for OSA patients.196 In HF patients with
OSA, CPAP have been shown to improve HRQoL, LVEF function and HF
symptoms.196 However, none of the evidence so far can suggest improvement
in terms of cardiovascular or all-cause mortality.196
I,C
Key Recommendation # 6:
 In Chronic HF, non-pharmacological measures play an important
role and it is important to :
 Educate patient and family about the disease, treatment options
and prognosis.
 Encourage lifestyle measures.
 Individualise fluid intake - A general recommendation is 1-1.5
litres per day in patients with normal renal function.
 Provide advice regarding sexual activities and pregnancy.
Treatment of CSA in HF patients remains uncertain.194 To date, trials using a
CPAP or adaptive servo-ventilation in patients with HF have not been shown
to be beneficial.70-72,200
As CSA tends to worsen when HF worsens, optimising medical therapy
remains the main strategy in CSA.
8.2.1.8 Psychosocial support
During the course of HF, psychological problems tend to occur that may be
due to change in lifestyle, medication therapy, implanted device and other
procedures. Social support reduces stress and helps in maintaining a healthy
lifestyle and compliance to treatment. Absence of social support has been
associated with higher hospitalisation.201-203
Thus, it is important that family members and carers are included during
counselling sessions. Depressive symptoms may affect adherence and
should prompt referral to specialist for psychological support.
8.2.2 PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT
Drug therapy is the mainstay of management of Chronic HF as outlined in
Flow Chart III, Page 31. For grading of recommendations and levels of
evidence, see Table 3, Page 33.
The majority of patients with HFrEF, regardless of symptom severity, require
lifelong optimal medical treatment (OMT) which would include an ACE-I,
β-blocker and a Mineralocortocoid Receptor Antagonist (MRA), unless
contraindicated. An ARB shall be given to those who are intolerant to ACE-I.
Drugs should be initiated at a low dose and uptitrated to the target doses, or
I,B
III,C
at least up to maximum tolerated doses. Drugs with less proven survival
benefits (e.g. diuretics) should be re-evaluated for reduction in dosage when
OMT is not well tolerated due to a low BP. Alternatively, administering drugs
at different timing may be considered for those with symptomatic hypotension.
Wherever possible, OMT should be continued during an acute illness. If
discontinued, they should be restarted as soon as the condition has
stablised.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in
patients with HF.204
A) Diuretics (Table 10, Page 68)
Diuretics are indicated in all patients with HF in whom there are signs and
symptoms of fluid retention.152
The dose of diuretic used is variable and dependent on individual requirements.
In the presence of severe congestive HF and in the acute decompensated
stage, oral diuretic therapy may be ineffective. Intravenous therapy may be
preferred.
Adequate doses of diuretic should be used. However, these patients should
be monitored closely as overdiuresis can cause intravascular volume
depletion leading to hypotension and deterioration of renal function.
Hypokalaemia is a common problem with diuretic use and oral potassium
supplementation is usually necessary.
Patient should be educated on ‘dry weight’ management and advised to
record their daily weight. If there is a consistent increase in weight of more
than 2kg in 3 days, patients should be educated to self-adjust their diuretic
(frusemide) dose together with restriction of their fluid intake until their “dry
weight” is regained. However, if the weight increase is associated with
worsening symptoms or fails to respond to these measures, the patient
should seek medical help immediately.
The diuretic of choice in patients with fluid overload is a loop diuretic i.e.
frusemide. The goal is a reduction of body weight of about 1kg/day.
Thiazide diuretics may be preferred in patients with hypertensive HF and mild
fluid retention. For most patients however, a loop diuretic is often required.
IIb,B
I,A
Responsiveness to loop diuretics diminishes as HF progresses. Uptitration of
loop diuretics may be a preferred strategy if diuresis is inadequate.
Alternatively, bumetanide, a second generation loop diuretic, may be used
because of its more predictable absorption.
Combination of thiazides and loop diuretics may also be used as these drugs
work synergistically to improve diuresis.205-207 However, this combination has
been associated with hypokalaemia, hyponatremia, worsening renal function
and increased mortality.207,208
Metolazone is a once-daily oral thiazide diuretic. It is given in combination
with a loop diuretic in patients with severe HF and refractory oedema.207,209 At
present, there is inadequate data to show that it is superior to the other
thiazides in this setting.207,210 It may also be used in patients with refractory
oedema and advanced renal failure.211-213
When combination therapy is used, there can be a marked diuresis.207
Careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte balance and BP, is essential.
Table 10: Diuretics Used In Heart Failure
B) Inhibitors of the Renin Angiotensin Syste - Angiotensin Converting
Enzyme Inhibitors (ACE-I) and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARB)
(Table 11, Page 70)
ACE-I improve survival and quality of life in all classes of HF.9,10,154,155,214
Hence, this first line drug should be given to all HFrEF patients. There are no
differences among available ACE-Is in their effects on symptoms or survival.154
Route of
Usual Daily
Administration
Dose
LOOP DIURETICS
Frusemide
IV / Oral
20-80mg
Bumetanide
IV / Oral
0.5-2mg
THIAZIDES
Hydrochlorothiazide
Oral
12.5-50mg
Metolazone
Oral
2.5-10mg
MINERALOCORTICOID
ANTAGONISTS
Spironolactone
Oral
12.5-50mg
Eplerenone
Oral
25-50mg
I,A
IIa,B
IIa,B
III,A
ARBs are also indicated in HFrEF in ACE-I intolerant patients.215-217
ARBs are also indicated in HFrEF. There is no difference between ACE-I and
ARBs in terms of CV outcomes such as mortality and HF hospitalisation.218
ARBs are however better tolerated because of their better side effect
profile.219
In patients post MI with impaired LV function, the ARB, Valsartan, was found
to be as effective as captopril.220
In the initiation of ACE-I/ARB, the following should be considered:
 Patients with underlying low SBP (< 100mgHg) and/or elevated serum
creatinine (> 250μmol/L) should be initiated with a low-dose of ACE-I/ARB
cautiously.
 Avoid excessive diuresis before treatment. If patients are on large doses
of diuretics, the BP and renal function should be monitored.
 Start with a low dose. Patients should not remain on the initial low dose
indefinitely. The dose should be increased gradually to the target dose
(Table 11, Page 70) or the maximum tolerated dose.
 Orthostatic hypotension should be avoided.
 Renal profile should be checked periodically. Serum creatinine or estimated
Glomerular Filtrate Rate (eGFR) may increase up to 30% from baseline
at 7-14 days, after introduction of either an ACE-I or an ARB. Dose
adjustments is not required if the increase stabilises at ≤ 30%. The renal
function should however be monitored periodically on a regular basis.
There is no significant difference in rates of hypotension, hyperkalaemia, or
renal dysfunction between ACE-Is and ARBs.
ACE-I intolerance denotes the presence of a bothersome cough (most
common, incidence:10-20%) or the experience of angioedema (uncommon,
incidence <1%) with ACE-I therapy. Patients with this condition may be
switched to an ARB, although, some may still develop angioedema.222
Routine combined use of both ACE-I and an ARB should be avoided, as this
combination causes more adverse effects (hypotension, hyperkalaemia, and
renal dysfunction).220,223
I,A
Table 11: Recommended Doses of ACE-I and ARBs used in HF
C) β-Blockers (Table 12, Page 71)
Large clinical trials have shown that β-blockers reduce morbidity and mortality
in patients with NYHA Class II-IV, of both ischaemic and non-ischaemic
aetiology, on top of standard therapy.156-161,240-226
However, objective improvement in cardiac function might not be apparent for
6-12 months after β-blocker initiation.
Patients with AHF should be clinically stabilised and preferably no longer in
overt HF (i.e. lungs are clear), before β-blocker initiation. Those in NYHA
III-IV require close monitoring.
Patients who decompensate and are admitted in AHF should be maintained
on the same dose of β-blockers unless the clinical condition (hypotension or
significant bradycardia) warrants a temporary reduction in the dose. After the
patient has been stabilised, an attempt should be made to uptitrate to the
target or maximum tolerated dose of β-blockers.
The dose of the β-blocker may be doubled gradually every 2-4 weeks. The
dose of diuretics may need to be adjusted at β-blocker initiation or uptitration
as patients may experience transient fluid retention.
Drug
Initial Daily Dose(s)
Target Dose(s)
ACE-I
Captopril
6.25mg BD
50mg TDS
Enalapril
2.5mg OD
10-20mg BD
Lisinopril
2.5-5mg OD
20-40mg OD
Perindopril
2mg OD
8-16mg OD
Ramipril
2.5mg OD
10mg OD
ARBs
Candesartan
4-8mg OD
32mg OD
Losartan
25-50mg OD
50-150mg OD
Valsartan
40mg OD
160mg BD
I,A
Contraindications include:
 Bronchial asthma
 In the presence of atrioventricular (AV) block (e.g. second or third degree
heart block without a pacemaker)
 Symptomatic bradycardia or hypotension
 A requirement for β agonist therapy or positive inotropic support.
Initiating therapy with a β-blocker first is non-inferior to the standard approach
of starting with an ACE-I.159 The benefits seen with both these drugs are
additive.
Table 12: Recommended Doses of β-Blockers used in HF*
* Only the above mentioned β-blockers have been shown to improve CV outcomes.
** Currently only metoprolol tartrate is available in Malaysia.
*** One study showed reduction in composite endpoint of death or CV hospitalisation with no reduction
in mortality.226
D) Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists (MRA) (Table 10, Page 68)
The addition of spironolactone to ACE-I, loop diuretics and digoxin in patients
with severe HF reduces mortality and rehospitalisation.162 Similarly,
eplerenone, another MRA, when added to β-blockers and ACE-I in patients
with mild HF, has been shown to reduce both morbidity and mortality.163,164
Care should be exercised in patients with renal impairment, especially during
an acute dehydrating illness. Serum creatinine and potassium should be
monitored regularly especially in high-risk groups. This includes those with:
 Diabetes
 Pre-existing renal impairment and/or
 Older age
Potassium supplements may need to be reduced or discontinued. If despite
these measures, hyperkalaemia persists, then the dose of MRA should be
Drug
Initial Daily Dose(s)
Target Dose(s)
Bisoprolol
1.25mg OD
10mg OD
Carvedilol
3.125mg BD
25mg BD
(50mg, if > 85kg)
Metoprolol Succinate
CR/XL**
12.5-25mg OD
200mg OD
Nebivolol***
1.25mg OD
10mg OD
I,B
reduced or stopped.
Spironolactone can cause breast enlargement and discomfort in men; this is
infrequent with eplerenone.
Table 13: Other Drugs Recommended for HF Management and their
Dose Regime
*(PO) Hydralazine-nitrate combination is not available.
#Consider lower doses and once daily dose in patients with low BP.
E) Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor (ARNI) (Table 13, Page 72)
ARNI is a combination of an ARB (valsartan) and an inhibitor of neprilysin
(sacubitril), an enzyme that degrades natriuretic peptides-bradykinin,
adrenomedullin, and other vasoactive peptides.
In a large study comparing the first approved ARNI (valsartan/sacubitril)
versus enalapril in symptomatic patients with HFrEF on an adequate dose of
either ACE-I or ARB, ARNI reduced the primary composite endpoint of CV
death or HF hospitalisation by a significant 20%.227 Patients with a serum
potassium > 5.2mmol/L, an eGFR < 30ml/min, and symptomatic hypotension
with a systolic BP of < 100mmHg were excluded from the trial.227
The use of an ARNI is associated with hypotension and a low incidence of
angioedema. To facilitate initiation and titration, the approved ARNI is available
in 3 doses (50mg, 100mg, 200mg).
ARNI should be considered as a replacement to ACE-I/ARB in patients with
HFrEF who remain symptomatic to decrease CV death, HF hospitalisations,
and symptoms. The benefit of this ARNI over an ACE-I, was consistent
Drug
Initial Daily Dose(s)
Max Dose(s)
ARNI
Sacubitril/valsartan
50-100mg BID#
100-200mg BID
If Channel Inhibitor
Ivabradine
(2.5-) 5mg BID
7.5mg BID
Others
Isosorbide dinitrate*
20mg TDS
40mg TDS
Digoxin
0.0625-0.125mg
0.25mg daily
IIa,B
regardless of background therapy and irrespective of previous coronary
revascularisation or β-blocker dose.228
ARNI should not be administered:
 Concomitantly with ACE-I or within 36 hours of the last dose of an
ACE-I.229,230
 To patients with a history of angioedema.
The tolerability of ARNI and its side effect profile is similar to that of ACE-I or
ARB. Laboratory monitoring is also similar. The long term safety of this group
of drugs is, however, still not established.231-233
When initiating an ARNI:
 Initial dosing and rate of titration is dependent on the pre-existing
treatment and associated comorbidities. It should, preferably, be
individualised.
 When switching between an ACE-I and an ARNI, a washout period of at
least 36 hours is required to decrease the risk of angioedema. No
washout period is required for conversion between an ARB and an ARNI.
The drug should be uptitrated to the target dose shown to improve important
HF outcomes.
In patients taking ARNI, NTproBNP is a more reliable biomarker than BNP.
BNP levels may be spuriously elevated as the drug prevents its breakdown.
F) Ivabradine (Table 13, Page 72)
Ivabradine selectively inhibits the If current in the sinoatrial node, providing
heart rate reduction. It has no effect on the ventricular rate in AF.
Ivabradine resulted in a reduction in hospitalisation, improvement in LV
function and quality of life without an effect on mortality in patients who
are:234,235
 On optimal medical therapy with diuretics, ACE-I, MRA and β-blockers, and
 Still symptomatic (NYHA class II-III), and
 Having a LVEF ≤ 35%, and
 Having a resting heart rate of ≥ 70 beats /min.
Every effort should be made to achieve target or maximally tolerated doses
of β-blockers before initiation of ivabradine. It would be useful in patients who
have contraindications to β-blockers or not able to tolerate higher doses of
IIa,B
IIa,B
β-blockers due to its side effect. Ivabradine has no effect on BP or myocardial
contractility. It can, however, cause symptomatic bradycardia and visual
disturbances.
G) Digoxin
The use of digoxin in HF in the contemporary era remains controversial. It
has no proven survival benefits but it relieves symptoms and reduces
hospitalisations.236-238 It has a narrow therapeutic range and thus close
monitoring of renal function and serum electrolytes (particularly potassium
and magnesium levels) is required, prior to initiation of digoxin and periodically
during use.
Digoxin may be added to OMT and diuretics for patients with HFrEF and in
sinus rhythm, who continue to have moderate to severe symptoms.236-238
In patients with AF, combination of digoxin and β-blockers is superior to either
agent alone.239,240
Hence, digoxin may be considered in patients with HF and AF in the following
situations:
 Rate control is inadequate on β-blockers alone.
 β-blockers are contraindicated.
 Rapid control of the ventricular rate with parenteral drugs is required.
No loading dose is required for the management of chronic HF. Lower doses
of digoxin and lower levels of serum digoxin (0.5-0.8ng/ml or 0.65 to 1nmol/L)
are efficacious and appear adequate in most patients with compensated
HF.241-243 The maintenance dose of digoxin may range between 0.0625mg to
0.25mg daily, which may be lower in elderly patients, women and those with
renal impairment.
Regular monitoring of digoxin levels is not required other than to assess for
toxicity. The levels should not be used to guide dose adjustment in chronic
therapy. Digoxin levels may be elevated in the presence of worsening renal
function, electrolyte imbalance (hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, or
hypocalcaemia) or interacting drugs (e.g. amiodarone), which may lead to
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias particularly in the presence of hypokalaemia.
IIa,C
III,A
I,A
I,C
H) Nitrates
HF symptoms such as orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea,
exercise-induced dyspnoea, or angina may be relieved with the use of
nitrates alone, in the form of tablets, sprays, or transdermal patches.
Nitrates are mainly used in AHF. In chronic HF, the trials on nitrates have
been in combination with hydralazine.244,245 This combination has been shown
to improve survival in the African-American population with HF. 244,245
Continuous (i.e. around the clock) use should generally be avoided to prevent
nitrate tolerance and pseudotolerance.246
I) Antiplatelet and Anticoagulation Therapy
There is no role for routine antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy in patients
with HFrEF.247-251
HF patients with the following risk factors for thromboembolism should be
given an appropriate anticoagulant, unless contraindicated:
 AF - This is a common problem among patients with HF. All patients with
AF should be given an anticoagulant, unless contraindicated.252-257
 Intracardiac thrombus (except for organised mural thrombus).
J) Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy
Arrhythmias are common in HF. The more common ones are:
 Atrial fibrillation
 Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
 Bradyarrhythmias
J.1 Atrial fibrillation (AF)
New-onset AF in a patient with established HF is associated with a poor
prognosis irrespective of the LVEF.258-260 On the other hand, patients who
developed AF first, followed by HF usually have a more benign course.259
Persistent ventricular rates > 150bpm may cause an arrhythmia induced HF
that resolves with rate and/or rhythm control. (See Section 8.5.4, Page 98)
I,A
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,A
IIa,B
Patients with AF can be managed by either rate control or rhythm
control.261-264
 Rate control
 The optimal resting ventricular rate in patients with AF and HF is unknown,
but probably between 75-90/min.265-267 Excessive rate control, which
may be associated with an increase in pauses, carries a risk.266
 The optimal ventricular rate during exercise is also uncertain, but may
be <110/min during light exercise.264,267,268
This can be achieved by using either:
 β-blockers239,240, 268-270 and/or
 Digoxin268
β-blockers are preferred over digoxin as it provides better rate control during
exercise and improves morbidity and mortality in patients with HF although
the latter effect is attenuated in patients with AF.266,271
Rate control is better when digoxin and β-blockers are used in combination
rather than with each drug individually.239,240
In patients with marked congestion who cannot tolerate β-blockers, suggest:
 Oral or intravenous (i.v.) digoxin
 Oral or i.v. amiodarone272,273
 Rhythm control
This is indicated in patients intolerant of AF even after rate control. It can be
achieved either by pharmacological cardioversion with amiodarone or by
elective electrical cardioversion after a period of anticoagulation.268
Sinus rhythm can be maintained by using:268
 Amiodarone or
 Radiofrequency ablation274
I,A
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,C
I,C
I,A
J.2 Ventricular Arrhythmias
The exact prevalence of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in patients with HF in
the contemporary era is not known. It varies depending on the aetiology of
the HF and the LVEF.275 Patients with HF and reduced LVEF (< 30 or 35%)
(HFrEF) account for < 20% of all SCDs.276
SCD is most often due to either sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or
ventricular fibrillation (VF) although sometimes it may be due to a
bradyarrhythmia or electromechanical dissociation.277,278 Occasionally rapid
supraventricular tachycardias may deteriorate to malignant ventricular
tachyarrhythmias.278
The following medications have been shown to reduce the incidence of SCD:
 β-blockers: These agents were shown to reduce SCD in the clinical
trials done on patients post MI as well as in the HF trials.279-281
 MRA: have been shown to reduce the incidence of SCD.162,163,282
 ACE-I: Analysis of trials done following MI showed that ACE-I reduced
SCD.283-286
 ARNI: this reduced both sudden cardiac deaths and deaths from
worsening HF.287
 Statins: have a modest beneficial effect on SCD.288
In addition to the above, in patients with ventricular tachyarrhythmias, the
following are important:
 Identify contributing factors such as electrolyte disturbances, ischaemia
and drugs.
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).289-293 (Section 8.2.3.2, Page 79)
 Antiarrhythymic drug therapy with amiodarone can be considered as
adjunctive therapy in patients with ICD to reduce the number of shocks
and in patients who are not candidates for ICD.294
 Radiofrequency ablation may be considered in the event of VT storms.
I,C
III,A
Patients with significant bradyarrhythmias, trifascicular blocks and high-degree
Atrio-ventricular (AV) blocks should be considered for pacemaker therapy.295
Prior to implanting a conventional pacemaker, the need for an ICD or Cardiac
Resynchronisation Therapy (CRT) device should be considered.
K) Calcium Channel Blockers (CCBs)
Routine use of CCBs is not recommended in patients with HFrEF as they do
not confer any morbidity or mortality benefit but worsen HF outcomes.296-301
Diltiazem, verapamil and nifedipine should be avoided.
However, amlodipine and felodipine may be considered for other indications
such as persistent hypertension despite use of OMT.300,302
8.2.3 DEVICE THERAPY IN HEART FAILURE
8.2.3.1 Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy (CRT)
Patients who remain symptomatic (NYHA class II-III) despite OMT should be
considered for CRT.
CRT has been shown to improve symptoms, hospitalisations and mortality,
though up to 30% of patients may be non-responders.303-307
Patients with all of the following criteria can be considered for CRT:304,305,308-312
 Sinus rhythm
 LVEF ≤ 35%
 Left Bundle Branch Block (LBBB)
Key Recommendation # 7:
 Management of chronic HF due to HFrEF is as in Flow Chart III,
Page 31.
 Pharmacological Agents that should be administered are those
that have been shown to improve survival in HFrEF and these
include:
 ACE-I/ARB if ACE-I intolerant
 ARNI
 β-blockers
 MRA
 The doses of these medications should be slowly up-titrated to
the maximal tolerated doses. (Tables 10-13,Pages 68,70-72)
IIa,B
I,A
I,A
I,A
IIa,B
 QRS duration on resting 12-lead ECG:
 ≥ 129-149ms
 ≥ 150ms
Mechanical ventricular dyssynchrony is no longer a criteria in selecting
patients for CRT.313,314
Patients with AF are less likely to respond to CRT. They may be considered
for CRT together with atrio-ventricular node ablation to improve biventricular
pacing.315-317
Regular monitoring of these patients is mandatory after device implantation
to adjust medical therapies and reprogram the device as necessary.
8.2.3.2 Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD)
SCD in patients with HF is often due to VF or VT. This risk can be reduced
with the implantation of an ICD.
An ICD can be implanted as secondary prevention in patients with previous
sudden cardiac arrest or documented sustained ventricular arrhythmias.289-293
It should be considered in patients who fulfil the eligibility criteria, who
otherwise have good clinical function and prognosis (life expectancy of more
than 1 year) to improve their survival.
Secondary prevention:
The following should be considered for implantation of ICD:289-293
 Patients resuscitated from SCD due to ventricular fibrillation or
haemodynamically unstable sustained ventricular tachycardia. These
cardiac arrest survivors have a high risk of recurrent events and implantation
of an ICD has been shown to reduce mortality.
 Patients with chronic HF and LVEF ≤ 35% who experience syncope of
unclear origin have a high risk of subsequent SCD.
 Prior MI and LVEF ≤ 40% with non-sustained VT AND inducible sustained
VT or VF during an electrophysiological (EP) study.318,319
Primary prevention (prophylactic ICD implantation)
Prophylactic ICD implantation to reduce the risk of SCD may be considered
in patients with:
 Prior MI and at least 40 days after an MI and 3 months after revascularisation
by PCI or CABG and:
 LVEF ≤ 30% with no HF symptoms (NYHA class I).320
 LVEF ≤ 35% with mild to moderate HF symptoms (NYHA class II-III).321
 Non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy LVEF ≤ 35% and:
 Mild to moderate HF symptoms (NYHA class II–III).322-324
 No HF symptoms (NYHA class I).322-324
The decision regarding the balance of potential risks and benefits of ICD
implantation for an individual patient remains complex.
IIa,B
I,B
IIa,B
I,B
Key Recommendation # 8:
In patients with HFrEF, Device therapy should be considered in
patients who fulfil the eligibility criteria, who otherwise have good
clinical function and prognosis (life expectancy of more than 1 year) to
improve their survival.
 CRT can be considered in patients with all of the following criteria:
 Sinus rhythm
 LVEF ≤ 35%
 LBBB
 QRS duration > 150ms
 An ICD is indicated for secondary prevention in:
 Patients resuscitated from SCD due to ventricular fibrillation or
haemodynamically unstable sustained ventricular tachycardia.
 Patients with chronic HF and LVEF ≤ 35% who experience
syncope of unclear origin.
 Prior MI and LVEF ≤ 40% with non-sustained VT AND inducible
sustained VT or VF during an EP study.
8.2.4 SURGERY FOR HEART FAILURE
Patients with HF should undergo surgery if the pathology causing the HF is
amenable to surgical treatment. However the decision to subject a patient to
surgery should take into account the functional status, prognosis and comorbid
conditions of the patient.
Surgical procedures include the following:
A) Revascularisation Procedures
Patients with CAD and HF may benefit from revascularisation by either PCI
or CABG, particularly if they have angina and anatomy that is suitable for
revascularisation (left main stem or triple vessel disease). The benefit of
revascularisation is likely to be more in patients with more severe left
ventricular dysfunction, severe CAD with angina, viable myocardium and
reversible ischaemia.
The STICH extension trial found a lower risk of total mortality in the CABG
group compared to medical therapy in patients with severe HF (LVEF < 35%)
and significant CAD, after a median follow-up of 9.8 years.325 There was also
a significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular (CV) death and the
combined outcome of all cause death and CV hospitalisations in the CABG
group. There was an early risk of mortality following CABG, but benefits of
CABG was seen after 2 years, and this benefit in favour of CABG was seen
whether viability or angina was present or absent.
Coronary revascularisation (by either CABG or PCI) should be considered in
patients with HF and suitable coronary anatomy.325
B) Valve Surgery
Patients with HF and severe mitral regurgitation, non-ischaemic in origin,
may have symptomatic improvement after mitral valve surgery. If the LVEF
< 30%, mitral valve repair is preferred as mitral valve replacement is associated
with poorer outcomes.326
Patients with LV systolic dysfunction undergoing surgical coronary
revascularisation who also have severe mitral regurgitation secondary to
ventricular dilatation may be considered for concomitant mitral valve repair or
replacement.327,328
IIa,B
In patients with moderate to severe MR and who are not surgical candidates,
the use of mitralclip has shown mixed results.329,330
C) LV Reduction Surgery
LV aneurysmectomy may be considered in patients with a large discrete LV
aneurysm who develop HF, angina pectoris, thromboembolism, and
tachyarrhythmias due to the aneurysm.331
Patients with HF undergoing surgical coronary revascularisation, who have
areas of LV dyskinesia or akinesia do not benefit from concomitant LV
reduction surgery.332
D) LV Assist Devices
Left ventricular assist devices have been used to:
 Bridge patients with HF to heart transplant.
 Support patients with acute severe myocarditis with a view to recovery.
 Provide long term haemodynamic support in eligible patients
(destination therapy).333-335
Patients awaiting heart transplant who have become refractory to medical
therapy and require inotropic support should be considered for a mechanical
support device as a bridge to transplant.
8.3 ASYMPTOMATIC LEFT VENTRICULAR DYSFUNCTION
The prevalence of Asymptomatic LV Systolic Dysfunction (ASLVSD) varies
with the diagnostic LVEF criteria that is used as a cutoff as well as the population
studied. About 0.9-2.1% in the general population have asymptomatic LVEF
< 40%.336,337
Patients with ASLVD (LVEF < 40%) carry substantially higher risk for subsequent
morbidity and mortality than the general population. The rate of progression
to symptomatic HF was estimated to be 9.7% per year and the risk of death
Key Recommendation # 9:
 In patients with HFrEF, coronary revascularisation (by either CABG
or PCI) should be considered in patients with HF and suitable
coronary anatomy.
III,B
IIb,B
or HF hospitalisation was 8%.9,338 Outcomes are worse if effective therapy is
initiated after patients develop overt HF.339
Asymptomatic moderate to severe LV diastolic dysfunction is also common
(5.6%) and associated with an adverse prognosis.340 There is a higher risk of
progression to HF and death when asymptomatic diastolic dysfunction is
present, particularly in patients with diabetes and CAD.340
Screening may be done by:341
 Resting ECG - not very specific or sensitive
 Echocardiography - this is the most specific test
 Natiuretic Peptides (NP) level - may be used to identify individuals who
may need an echocardiogram.
These screening tests are more cost effective and of greater value when
used to screen high risk individuals.341-343 These include patients with:
 CAD especially if there is a history of ACS
 Hypertension that has been long standing or poorly controlled
 Diabetes mellitus associated with complications
 Peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular disease
 Excessive alcohol intake
 Metabolic syndrome344
 Family history of cardiomyopathy
The goals of treatment in these patients are to:
 Slow down the progression of the disease
 Prevent the development of symptoms of HF
 Improve survival
Wherever possible, the underlying disease should be treated appropriately to
prevent the development of HF.
Drug therapy. This includes:
 ACE-I: Long term treatment with an ACE-I has been shown to delay the
onset of symptoms of HF and decrease the combined risk of death and
hospitalisation.9,338,345,346
 ARB: There has been no study of the use of ARB in patients with asymptomatic
left ventricular dysfunction. The ARB, Valsartan, may be an alternative in
post MI patients who cannot tolerate an ACE-I.220
 β-blockers: In post MI patients and in those with CAD, β-blockers are
recommended. They may be considered in all patients with LVEF < 40%.157,347
 MRA: In post MI patients with diabetes and reduced EF, eplerenone was
beneficial.348,349 Eplerenone also reduced the risk of an increase in
natriuretic levels post STEMI.350
I,A
I,A
IIa,B
IIa,C
 Diuretics and digoxin: There is no role for these agents in this group of
asymptomatic patients.
 Calcium channel blockers: The use of calcium channel blockers with
negative inotropic effects is not recommended in asymptomatic post MI
patients with LVEF < 40%.351
8.4 HEART FAILURE WITH PRESERVED LEFT VENTRICULAR SYSTOLIC
FUNCTION
The prevalence of HF with preserved LV systolic function (HFpEF) varies
between 40-71% depending on the LVEF criteria used as cut off.18,352 HFpEF
constitutes more than half of HF in older adults and the prevalence is increasing
over time.18,352 Commonly, these patients are older women who have
hypertension.
8.4.1 Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HFpEF is challenging as symptoms and signs can be attributable
to other co-existing conditions and LVEF is normal. Other co-morbidities that
can contribute to dyspnoea in these patients include chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and obesity.
Criteria that is used to diagnose HFpEF include:353,354
 Clinical signs or symptoms of HF such as exertional dyspnoea, orthopnoea,
atrial gallop sounds, and pulmonary rales combined with a suggestive
chest X-ray and a favourable response to diuretics.
 Biochemistry - Elevated NP.
 Echocardiographic criteria;
 Preserved or normal LVEF (> 50% or more within 72 hours of the
event) and LV end diastolic volume index (LVEDVI) < 97ml/m2.
 Left ventricular hypertrophy (increased LV wall thickness or LV mass
index > 115g/m2 for men and > 95g/m2 for women) or left atrial
enlargement (LA volume index > 34ml/m2).
 Diastolic dysfunction if E/e′ ≥ 13 and the mean e’ septal and lateral
wall < 9cm/s or tricuspid valve regurgitation velocity > 2.8m/s.
Key message 7:
 Identify patients who are at high risk of developing LV dysfunction
and treat the underlying disease appropriately.
 ACE-I and β-blockers (post MI) have been shown to slow down the
onset of symptoms and reduce cardiac morbidity.
III,C
III,B
I,A
I,A
I,C
I,C
 Invasive haemodynamic criteria:
 Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure > 15mmhg or LV end diastolic
pressure of > 16mmHg indicates elevated LV filling pressures.
8.4.2 Aetiology and Associated Comorbidities
Diastolic dysfunction may be due to myocardial or pericardial disease. (See
Table 14, Page 87).
Hypertension remains the most prevalent comorbidity of HFpEF, with a
prevalence of 60% to 89% from large controlled trials, epidemiological
studies, and HF registries.355
Other comorbidities include overweight or obesity, diabetes mellitus, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, obstructive sleep apnoea, anaemia, CAD
and chronic kidney disease.18,352,356
The presence of diabetes, a lower systolic BP, haemoglobin and eGFR were
associated with a poorer outcome.356
AF is common in HFpEF and increases risk of adverse outcomes.357
8.4.3 Management
The management of these patients remains empiric, since trial data are
limited. Compared with HFrEF patients, hospitalisations and deaths in
patients with HFpEF are more likely to be non-cardiovascular.
The important aim of therapy is to alleviate symptoms, improve well-being
and reduce hospitalisations. Screening for comorbidities and appropriate
interventions of these comorbidities is important. It includes:
 Identifying and treating the underlying cause(s) appropriately.
 Hypertension should be treated to target goals.55,358 Improved BP
control has been shown to reduce hospitalisation for HF.358
 CAD is common in patients with HFpEF and this should be treated
appropriately.
 Tachyarrhythmias should be treated and sinus rhythm restored whenever
possible. If the patient remains in persistent AF, β-blockers or calcium
channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem) alone or in combination are the
usual first line agents used for rate control.
 Patients with paroxysmal or persistent AF should be anticoagulated to
reduce the risk of thromboembolic events.359,360
I,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,C
I,C
Pharmacological options include:
 Diuretics: These are necessary to control pulmonary congestion and
peripheral oedema but should be used cautiously so as not to lower
preload excessively and thereby reduce stroke volume and cardiac
output.
 β-blockers: This could be given to lower heart rate and increase the
diastolic filling period. At present, however, there is no good demonstration
that β-blockers is beneficial in the treatment of HFpEF.226,361
 Non-dihydropyridine Calcium Channel Blockers (verapamil and
diltiazem): These may be used to lower the heart rate and has been
shown to be beneficial.362 Verapamil has been shown to improve
functional capacity in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.363
 ARB trials have shown mixed results. One large trial showed a
reduction in hospitalisation while another large trial was neutral.364,365
 ACE-I may improve relaxation and cardiac distensibility directly and
may have long term effects via their antihypertensive action and
regression of hypertrophy and fibrosis. One small study showed an
almost significant trend toward reduction in the primary end point of
combined all-cause mortality and unexpected hospitalisations for HF
while another trial was neutral.366,367
 MRA: A large study with spironolactone showed no difference in the
combined primary end point of cardiovascular death, aborted cardiac
arrest, or HF hospitalisation, though there was a reduction in HF
hospitalisation endpoint alone.368 Hyperkalaemia was more common
in those on MRA and close monitoring of potassium and renal function
is recommended for those treated with MRA.
 Exercise training: This is safe and improves exercise capacity and quality
of life.169 Combined endurance/resistance training appears safe for patients
with HFpEF and improves exercise capacity (as reflected by an increase
in peak oxygen consumption), physical functioning score and diastolic
function.369 It should consist of dynamic isotonic and not static exercise
(e.g. walking or cycling).
 The use of an implantable pulmonary artery pressure monitoring system can
guide augmentation of diuretic therapy and reduce HF hospitalisations.370
Key Recommendation # 10:
 In managing patients with HFpEF:
 Hypertension is an important cause and should be treated
according to guidelines.
 Treat volume overload with diuretics
 Manage comorbidities.
Table 14: Causes of Diastolic Dysfunction
Adapted from van Kraaij DJ, van Pol PE, et al. Diagnosing diastolic heart failure. Eur J Heart Failure
2002;4:419-30.
8.5 SPECIAL GROUPS
8.5.1 DIABETES AND HEART FAILURE
Heart failure and diabetes often co-exist in as many as 35-45% of cases
irrespective of whether it is HFrEF or HFpEF.371 The presence of diabetes
increases both morbidity and mortality in these HF patients.371-374 This is
particularly so in patients with HFpEF who have co-existing microvascular
complications.375
Patients with HF were shown to be at an increased risk of developing
diabetes during a 3 year follow-up.376,377 The mechanisms for this are not
clear and may be the result of drug therapy (diuretics), reduced physical
activity or from increased catecholamine and sympathetic activity.
Conversely, men and women with diabetes have 2 x and 4 x respectively,
MYOCARDIAL DISORDERS
Myocardial diseases
 Infiltrative
 Sarcoidosis
 Fatty infiltration
Non-infiltrative
 Ischaemic cardiomyopathy
 Idiopathic cardiomyopathy
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Endomyocardial diseases
 Endomyocardial fibrosis
 Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Storage disease
 Haemochromatosis
 Glycogen storage disease
PERICARDIAL DISORDERS
Pericardial constriction
 Constrictive pericarditis
 Effusive constrictive pericarditis
Pericardial effusions
 Pericardial effusion with cardiac
compression
 Glycogen storage disease
I,A
increased risk of HF as compared to those without diabetes.378 Associations
have also been reported between absolute blood glucose levels, glycaemic
control, and HF.41,43,368,379,380 The risk for hospitalisations for HF was increased
by almost 45% over a 5.7 year period despite having five risk factor variables
within the target range ie glycated haemoglobin level, low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol level, blood pressure, absence of albuminuria and smoking.381
HF is one of the earliest, most common and the most serious cardiovascular
complication of diabetes.382 Once HF develops, the clinical course is marked
by frequent hospitalisations and eventually death.383-385 Most sudden deaths
are due to LV dysfunction rather than a new ischaemic event. Advanced age,
duration of the disease, insulin use, the presence of CAD and an elevated
serum creatinine are all independent risk factors for the development of HF.386
Diabetes can lead to HF due to:
 Coronary atherosclerosis
 Co-existing hypertension
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy - this can present as either systolic or diastolic
LV dysfunction in an otherwise healthy diabetic person in the absence
of clinically significant coronary, valvular or hypertensive disease.387
The link between diabetes and HF has been postulated to be multifactorial. In
these patients advanced glycation end products, formed by a non-enzymatic
reaction between protein and sugar residues, are increased and correlate
inversely with left ventricular ejection fraction, the severity of the disease and
its prognosis.388,389 In addition, other proposed mechanisms include abnormal
cardiac handling of free fatty acids, decreased myocardial levels of adiponectin, presence of cardiotoxic inflammatory cytokines and hyperinsulinaemia by
itself.390
8.5.1.1 Diagnosis of HF in diabetes
Diabetics with HF present in a similar manner as non-diabetics. In diabetics
though, dyspnoea may also be a symptom of ischaemia and CAD.
The investigative work up is also similar to non-diabetics.
8.5.1.2 Treatment of HF in patients with diabetes
Conventional therapies for HFrEF are equally effective in both diabetics and
non-diabetics. These include:
 Inhibitors of the renin angiotensin system – ACE-I/ARB.214
I,A
I,A
I,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
I,A
IIa, B
III,B
IIa,C
IIa,C
III,A
 β-blockers - diabetics with HF had a reduction in morbidity and mortality
that was as great as, if not greater than non-diabetics.214,391
 MRA - spironolactone and eplerenone. In the EPHESUS trial, eplerenone
was shown to reduce mortality in patients with diabetes and mild HF,
post MI163
 Sacubitril/valsartan (ARNI)227
 Ivabradine234,235
In patients with HFpEF,
 Spironolactone was shown to reduce morbidity and mortality in obese
diabetic patients.368
 Sacubitril/valsartan and empagliflozin are being assessed in ongoing
trials in HF patients with and without diabetes.
8.5.1.3 Treatment of diabetes in patients with HF
The optimal target HbA1c levels in these patients is still unknown. A large
meta-analysis showed that intensive glucose lowering is not associated with
any significant reduction in CV risk.392 Conversely there was a 47% increase
in the risk of HF.392 Tight control of diabetes especially with the occurrence of
hypoglycaemia is associated with increased mortality.392-395
In considering pharmacotherapy of diabetes in patients with HF:
 The sodium-glucose cotransport-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) have been
shown to reduce the risk of HF and in addition, in patients with HF at
baseline, it also reduces CV mortality and HF hospitalisations.95-98
 Glucagon like Peptide -1 ( GLP-1) agonists should be used with caution
in patients with HF although recent large CV outcome trials have not
demonstrated an increase in HF hospitalizations.396,397
 Saxagliptin, a dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors (DPP-4i), was shown
to be associated with an increase in hospitalisation for HF.398
 This increased risk of HF was however, not seen with the other agents
of the same class.399
 Thiazolidinediones are associated with an increase in the incidence of
HF and should be avoided in those in NYHA Functional class III & IV.400,401
 Sulphonylureas are generally safe in HF patients although caution
must be exercised with the short acting formulations which may cause
hypoglycaemia.
 Biguanides like metformin and alpha-glucosidase inhibitors like
acarbose are generally safe in patients with HF.
Key message 9:
 Persons with diabetes and, in general, managed in the same manner
as persons without diabetes.
 When managing diabetes in patients with HF:
 The sodium-glucose cotransport-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) have
been shown to reduce CV mortality and HF hospitalisations.
 Saxagliptin and thiazolidinediones are best avoided because
of a trend towards harm.
 Sulphonylureas, biguanides like metformin and alpha-glucosi
dase inhibitors like acarbose are generally safe.
8.5.2 HEART FAILURE IN PREGNANCY
About 0.5-4% of pregnant women have cardiac disease.402,403 In our National
Obstetrics Registry, CVD occurred in about 0.45 and 0.55% of cases in 2013
and 2014 respectively.193
HF may develop in pregnancy:193
 For the first time in a patient with pre-existing heart disease (congenital
and/or valvular) due to decompensation from the stress.
 May occur in a patient who had HF previously and still has a depressed
myocardial function. (LVEF < 40%).
 In a patient with a previously unrecognised genetic cardiomyopathy or a
latent cardiac viral infection which has been unmasked or activated by
the stress of pregnancy.404-407
 In a patient with a previously normal heart due to:408-410
 Hypertensive complications of pregnancy i.e. gestational hypertension
and the more severe forms preeclampsia, the HELLP syndrome
(H: haemolysis, EL: elevated liver enzymes, LP: low platelet count).
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy.
Normal haemodynamic changes that occur in pregnancy are:
 Cardiac output increases by 30-50% during normal pregnancy.
 Cardiac output increases to 80% above baseline during labour and delivery.
 Haemodynamic changes return to baseline 2-4 weeks after vaginal delivery
and up to 6 weeks after Caesarean delivery.
In women with heart disease, these changes may have a deleterious effect
on their cardiovascular system and precipitate HF. The periods of greatest
risk for cardiac events during pregnancy are early third trimester, at delivery
and in the immediate post partum period.
8.5.2.1 Diagnosis
Most forms of cardiac disease can be detected by physical examination, ECG
and echocardiography.
8.5.2.2. Management
The management of HF in pregnancy is more difficult than in the non-pregnant
state and should be managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of
physicians, obstetricians and paediatricians.193,402,411
In the management of HF in pregnancy, the following issues need to be
considered:193,402
 Gestational age at presentation.
 Clinical presentation, either as Acute HF or Chronic HF.
 Response to medical therapy.
 Potential maternal and foetal risks.
 Review and replace all fetotoxic drugs
 Timing and mode of delivery.
Predictors of maternal cardiac complications are as in Table 15, Page 91.
Table 15: Predictors of Maternal Risk for Cardiac Complication
Predictors of cardiac complication in the mother:193,402,407,408
 Cyanosis (oxygen saturation< 90%)
 Repaired or unrepaired cyanotic heart disease
 History of HF before pregnancy
 Prior cardiac event (HF, transient ischaemic attack, stroke, arrhythmia)
 Prior arrhythmia (symptomatic sustained tachyarrhythmia or
bradyarrhythmia requiring treatment)
 NYHA class > II
 Valvular stenosis (aortic or mitral valve area < 1.5cm2) and LV
outflow tract obstruction (peak gradient > 30mmHg)
 Reduced systemic ventricular dysfunction (LVEF < 40%)
 Mechanical valve
 High risk aortopathy
 Reduced subpulmonary ventricular function (TAPSE <16 mm)
 Pulmonary arterial hypertension
 Systemic and pulmonary atrio-ventricular valve regurgitation
(moderate to severe)
 Natriuretic peptide levels (NT-proBNP >128pg/mL at 20 weeks
predictive of event later in pregnancy)
 Cardiac medication before pregnancy
 Maternal history of smoking
 No prior cardiac intervention
I,C
I,B
I,C
IIa,C
IIa,C
IIa,C
III,C
IIa,C
III,C
III,C
A. Preconception counselling
Patients with LVEF < 30% and those in NYHA Class III and IV should be
strongly advised not to get pregnant.193,412 Preconception counselling should
be for all women in the childbearing age with known or suspected heart
disease. If pregnant, termination should be considered.
Management during pregnancy involves:
 Non-pharmacological measures
The management of patients with mild symptoms consists mainly of
non-pharmacological measures such as:193
 limiting strenuous exercise.
 adequate rest - maintaining a low salt diet.
 treating anaemia and infections early.
 frequent antenatal examinations.
 Pharmacological measures
The following drugs may be used in the pregnant patient with HF:193
 Diuretics are the first line therapy in patients who are fluid overloaded.
 Nitrates and/or hydralazine are used for preload and afterload reduction.
 β-blockers can be used cautiously.
 Digoxin is safe in pregnancy and during breast feeding.
 ACE-I, ARB and ARNI are contraindicated in pregnancy.
 ACE-I (enalapril and captopril) can be used in the post partum period.
 Ivabradine should not be used in pregnancy.
 Spironolactone is best avoided (FDA Category C) in pregnancy and
during breast feeding.
 Other treatment considerations in the pregnant patient.
 Patients with AF who are haemodynamically unstable should be
promptly electrically cardioverted. This is safe in pregnancy.
 Anticoagulation is indicated in the presence of AF, dilated left atrium
or mechanical prosthetic heart valve.
I,C
 Patients with valvular lesions who remain symptomatic despite optimal
medical treatment may be considered for percutaneous valve
intervention or surgery.
 Commonly recommended antihypertensive drugs include methyldopa,
labetalol, calcium channel blockers and hydralazine.413-417
 In patients with peripartum cardiomyopathy and severe AHF,
bromocriptine may be considered.402
B. Antenatal care
The principles of management of HF in pregnancy are similar to that in the
non-pregnant state. If the patient is in decompensated HF requiring
inotropes, she should be transferred to a cardiac centre.402
C. Labour and delivery
Timing and mode of delivery should be carefully planned by the multidisciplinary
team. In the majority of patients, vaginal delivery with epidural anaesthesia
is the preferred mode of delivery.
 Caesarean section is indicated:193
 For obstetric reasons.
 In patients on warfarin or who have discontinued their warfarin for < 2
weeks and who now are in imminent labour.
 In patients with severe pulmonary hypertension.
 It is beneficial to shorten the second stage of labour by forceps or vacuum
assisted delivery.193
 Left lateral decubitus position is preferred to attenuate the haemodynamic
effects in the supine position.
 A slow i.v infusion of oxytocin immediately after birth, (2 U of oxytocin
given over 10 min followed by 12 mU/min for 4 h) reduces the risk of
post partum haemorrhage and has a minimal impact on cardiovascular
parameters.418
 Routine antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended in patients with valvular
heart disease undergoing uncomplicated vaginal delivery or Caesarean
section.
D. Post partum care
After delivery, careful monitoring of haemodynamic status should be done for
at least 24 hours, or longer in high risk patients. In patients with severe
cardiac lesions, haemodynamics may be abnormal up to 10 days after delivery.193
These patients should be evaluated post partum to assess the need for
corrective surgery.
The risk of recurrence of HF in subsequent pregnancies should also be made
known to the patient.
Follow-up visit at 6 weeks post partum should be attended by the
multidisciplinary team, a full cardiac assessment should be done, and appropriate
contraception should be advised.
8.5.3 HEART FAILURE IN ADULT CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE (ACHD)
Adult congenital heart disease (ACHD) includes patients who are born with
congenital heart disease (CHD) and survived to adulthood (age 18 years and
above). These include those:
 Diagnosed during childhood and did not require intervention.
 Diagnosed and treated during childhood either surgically or transcatheterly.
A significant proportion of this group of patients have residual haemodynamic
lesions predisposing them to develop complications later during adult life.
Eg: most of the repaired cyanotic heart lesions, palliated single ventricle.
 Diagnosed in adulthood either incidentally or when presenting with
complications. eg. atrial septal defects (ASD), congenitally corrected
transposition of the great arteries (CCTGA) and Ebstein’s anomaly of the
tricuspid valve.
8.5.3.1 Prevalence
Advances in diagnosis, medical and surgical management, interventional
techniques and perioperative care have resulted in an improvement in the
survival of children with CHD into adult life. The population of ACHD is thus
increasing rapidly.419
Key message 9:
The management of HF in pregnancy is more difficult than in the
non-pregnant state and should be managed by a multidisciplinary
team consisting of physicians, obstetricians and paediatricians.
 Patients with LVEF < 30% and those in NYHA Class III and IV should
be strongly advised not to get pregnant. If pregnant, termination
should be considered.
 HF that develops during pregnancy can be managed with the judicious
use of diuretics, digoxin, nitrates, β-blockers and/or hydralazine.
The overall mortality rate of these patients is about 8% with the mean age of
death occurring at 37 years.420 The main causes of death were sudden
cardiac death, HF due to systemic ventricular failure or tachyarrhythmias or a
combination of both.420-422
8.5.3.2 Pathophysiology of heart failure
The underlying pathophysiology of HF in ACHD is multifactorial and complex
and is highly dependent on the underlying anatomy, haemodynamic severity,
timing and type of intervention, myocardial protection during surgery,
presence of residual haemodynamic lesions and acquired comorbidities. In
general, HF in ACHD may be due to:423
 Hemodynamic significant lesions- these need surgical/catheter interventions
 Myocardial failure - the mainstay of management is drug therapy and
correction of the underlying causes eg CAD.
 Arrhythmias - management is a combination of drug therapy, CRT and or ICD
 Undetermined or a combination of factors
8.5.3.3 Diagnosis
It is important to determine the cause of the HF. It may be due to:
 An undiagnosed cardiac defect.
 A worsening residual lesion.
 Arrhythmias.
 A compounding extra cardiac pathology such as thyroid dysfunction or
severe anaemia.
Knowing the baseline cardiac lesion and the history of previous surgeries
and/or catheter interventions is absolutely important in the management of
these patients. Due to chronic adaptation to abnormal haemodynamic state
since childhood, many ACHD patients with HF may not report any symptoms
or reduced exercise tolerance. Traditional echocardiographic parameters to
assess ventricular function (volume, ejection fraction) are not applicable in
many situations such as systemic RV or single ventricle. Longitudinal
monitoring of individual patients is of paramount importance.
Investigations are similar to those mentioned in Section 6, Page 39.
 ECG - baseline abnormalities are common and a change in ECG morphology
should trigger further investigation. New tachyarrhythmia is a common
triggering factor for HF in ACHD patients
 Chest Xray - cardiomegaly, pulmonary congestion, pleural effusion, size
of pulmonary arteries, concomittant lung pathology
Table 16: Common etiology and treatment of heart failure in ACHD
Etiology
Common examples
Treatment
Systemic left
Structural
Surgical or catheter intervention
ventricular failure
Volume loading lesions
whenever
e.g. aortic regurgitation,
mitral regurgitation and VSD
Pressure loading lesions
e.g. subvalvular, valvular and
supravalvular aortic stenosis
and coarctation of aorta
Myocardial disease,
Standard heart failure therapy
cardiomyopathy from any
(refer to Table 3, Page 32;
Flow Chart III, Page 31)
Systemic right
ccTGA, DTGA post Mustard
Consider tricuspid valve repair
ventricular failure
or Senning atrial switch procedure
CRT
Standard heart failure therapy
(refer to Table 3, Page 32;
Flow Chart III, Page 31)
Systolic
Structural
Consider surgical correction
dysfunction of the
RV volume overload:
e.g. Repair or replace the
subpulmonic RV
(i) chronic pulmonary insufficiency
dysfunction valve, relief of RV
after TOF repair
outflow tract obstruction, ASD
(ii) Ebstein’s anomaly of tricuspid
(if still operable)
valve with TR
Symptomatic treatment for HF
(iiI) Shunt e.g. ASD, TAPVD
Chronic RV pressure overload
e.g. pulmonary stenosis, conduit
stenosis), DORV post TOF with
residual RVOTO, Branch PA stenosis
Myocardial dysfunction
HF therapy: diuretics, MRA
e.g. ischemia,
and ACE
cardiomyopathies due to any
etiology
PAH/Eisenmengers syndrome
PAH targeted therapy424
Standard heart failure therapy
(refer to Table 3, Page 32;
Flow Chart III, Page 31)
Fontan failure
Functioning single ventricular
Surgical or catheter
hearts e.g. DILV, Tricuspid
intervention of residual
atresia, unbalance AVSD
structural lesion
Fontan failure
Standard heart failure therapy
(refer to Table 3, Page 32;
Flow Chart III, Page 31)
Arrhythmia
Atrial flutter/fibrillation Ventricular
Standard antiarrhythmic therapy
arrhythmias Common lesions: ASD,
RFA
Ebstien's, Fontan, Post TOF
CRT
correction
Pacemaker, ICD implantation
Acquired ischemic
(i) Cardiovascular risk factors
Treatment of risk factors CABG
heart disease
(ii) Congenital coronary artery
or PCI
abnormalities or acquired
(extrinsic compression,
coronary artery kinking)
iii) Anaemia
Look for underlying cause
iv) Thyroid disease
and treatment
*Diuretics should be used with caution
 Echocardiography - establish underlying anatomical diagnosis, identify
residual or new lesions and sequelae, assess ventricular function
 Cardiac MRI - the new “gold standard” for comphrehensive assessment
of anatomy, haemodynamic, ventricular function and detection of myocardial
fibrosis
 Cardiac CT - assessment of stents, conduit, coronary artery and collateral
arteries
 Cardiac catheterisation - invasive quantification of shunts, measurements
of pressure gradients across stenotic lesions, assessment of severity of
pulmonary hypertension and vasoreactivity to help determine surgical
operability. Lesions which are amenable to transcatheter interventions
can be treated at the same time.
 Natriuretic peptides - the level correlates with the severity of haemodynamic
lesions in many ACHD
 Cardiopulmonary exercise test - valuable tool with prognostic implications
8.5.3.4. Management
The aim of management is to:
 Reduce morbidity and mortality.
 Improve quality of life and functional capacity.
 Reduce hospitalisations.
All patients with ACHD and HF are best managed at a tertiary cardiac centre
by a multidisciplinary team with ACHD expertise.425
Management includes:
 Surgical or catheter-based interventions is indicated where amenable.426
 Pharmacological therapy is less well studied in CHD. Selection of choice
of pharmacological agents should be based on understanding of the
underlying pathophysiology of HF. (Table 16, Page 96).423,427-429
 Systolic failure of systemic LV - diuretics, ACE-Is, ARB, β-blockers
and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists should be used in both
symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.
 Systolic failure systemic RV - evidence is lacking but the above standard
HF agents may be used in symptomatic patients.
 Systolic failure of subpulmonic RV - diuretics are the mainstay treatment
for symptomatic patients. If RV failure is secondary to pulmonary
arterial hypertension (eg. Eisenmenger syndrome), PAH-targeted
therapy such as phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (PDE5i), endothelin
receptor antagonists or prostacycline analog should be used (see
Malaysian CPG on Management of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension, 2011)
 Systolic failure of single ventricle - treatment is challenging and options
are limited. Diuretics may be used to reduce congestive symptoms
but high doses may reduce preload and effective cardiac output. In
patients with raised pulmonary vascular resistance, PDE5i may improve
Fontan haemodynamics.
 Tachyarrhythymia is a frequent precipitating factor of HF in ACHD and
should be treated aggressively with either pharmacological therapy,
catheter ablation or with devices such as cardiac implantable electronic
devices (CIEDs).430,431
 Thromboembolism using anticoagulants (warfarin or Direct Oral Antico
agulants - DOAC).
 Iron deficiency is not uncommon in ACHD patients, especially in patients
with cyanotic lesions. Iron replacement improves functional capacity and
reduces number of HF hospitalisations.
 Routine phlebotomy is no longer recommended for cyanotic patients with
secondary erythrocytosis as it increases the risk of stroke and mortality. It
is only indicated in symptomatic hyperviscosity syndromes.
 Individualised exercise rehabilitation.432
 Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis (See Malaysian CPG
for Prevention, Diagnosis and Management of Infective Endocarditis,1st
Edition 2017).
 Contraception and pregnancy (See Malaysian CPG on Heart Disease in
Pregnancy, 2nd Edition 2016 and Sections 8.2.1.6, Page 64 and 8.5.2 ,
Page 90)
8.5.4 ARRHYTHMIA-INDUCED HEART FAILURE
Arrhythmia-induced HF (also known as Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy)
is a reversible cause of HF characterised by LV dysfunction resulting from an
increased ventricular rate. The degree of dysfunction correlates with the
duration as well as rate of the tachyarrhythmia.
Recognition of this entity is important clinically, as treatment of the underlying
arrhythmia can result in either partial or complete recovery of LV function
which, in turn, would result in an improvement in morbidity and mortality.433,434
Arrhythmia suppression should be considered as part of the holistic evaluation
in treating patients with HF although the underlying mechanisms are not fully
understood.
IIb,C
IIb,B
8.5.4.1 Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Any supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with a rapid ventricular response
may induce HF. Commonly encountered SVTs in clinical practice include:435
 Incessant atrial tachycardia (AT),
 Very frequent episodes of atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia
(AVNRT), and
 Atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT).
Successful treatment, usually via electrophysiological study and radiofrequency
ablation, could potentially restore LV function.
8.5.4.2 Atrial Fibrillation
AF is the commonest cardiac arrhythmia encountered in clinical practice.436
AF with a rapid ventricular response may induce HF.436,437
Rate control or rhythm control with antiarrhythmic drug is the first line therapy.
See Section 8.2.2-J1, Pages 75 and 76.
8.5.4.3 Ventricular Arrhythmias
Ventricular arrhythmias, including frequent premature ventricular complexes
(PVC) or VT, may also induce HF. Maintenance of sinus rhythm or control of
ventricular rate is critical in treating patients with HF.434
Curative or suppressive therapies with either radiofrequency ablation or
antiarrhythmic drugs (AAD) may be considered in patients with PVC burden:
 10% over 24 hours (high)
 20% over 24 hours438 (very high)
Radiofrequency ablation is preferred, since most antiarrhythmic drugs are
contraindicated in the presence of HF.
8.5.4.4 Ventricular Pacing
Ventricular pacing at high rates may cause HF. Additionally, right ventricular
pacing (more evidently at the apical position) may exacerbate HF symptoms,
increase hospitalisation for HF and increase mortality.439,440
In patients with HF who have bradyarrhythmias and where pacing is indicated,
biventricular pacing (CRT) is the pacing mode of choice.441
8.5.5 CARDIO-ONCOLOGY AND HEART FAILURE
Heart disease and cancer are often linked due to:
 Common risk factors (e.g. increasing age and cigarette smoking)
 Treatment strategies
 Chemotherapy drugs has been associated with HF, arrhythmias,
vasculitis and thromboembolic disease.
 Radiotherapy of the mediastinum and left chest can lead to CAD,
myopericardial fibrosis and valvular dysfunction.
Dyspnoea in cancer patients could be due to:
 Fluid overload.
 Cardiomyopathy due to chemotherapeutic agents, stress (Takotsubo), or
underlying CAD.
 The primary cancer causing anaemia, lung and pericardial involvement.
Chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy is not common, clinical HF occurs in
1-5% and an asymptomatic decrease in LV function in the range of 5% to
20%.442 Prognosis in the patients who develop HF is poor.443
The anthracycline class of chemotherapeutic agents remain the major cause
of chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy.444,445 In the current era, newer
agents have also been implicated in a reversible form of cardiomyopathy.446
Chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy as defined by the Cardiac Review and
Evaluation Committee is the presence of at least one or more of the following:447
1. Cardiomyopathy characterised by a decrease in Ejection Fraction (EF)
globally or due to regional changes in interventricular septum contraction.
2. Symptoms of HF.
3. Signs associated with HF including but not limited to S3 gallop, tachycardia,
or both.
4. Decline in initial EF of at least 5% to < 55% with signs and symptoms of
HF or asymptomatic decrease in EF of at least 10% to < 55%.
Key message 9:
 Arrhythmia-induced heart failure (also known as tachycardia-
induced cardiomyopathy) is a reversible cause of HF.
 Successful treatment of the arrhythmia by drug therapy or catheter
ablation can result in normalisation of LV function.
Chemotherapy drugs that have been associated with HF include (Appendix
V, Page120):
 Doxorubicin
 5% at a cumulative dose of 400mg/m2 (the higher the cumulative dose,
the greater the risk of HF.445
 Even at lower doses of 180 to 240mg/m2, subclinical events can
occur in up to 30% of patients about 13 years post treatment.448
 These suggest that there is no ‘safe’ dose for doxorubicin.
 Cyclophosphamide especially in high doses and ifosfomide.449,450
 Newer agents such as monoclonal antibodies (trastuzumab and pertuzumab),
small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib, sunitinib, sorafenib)
and the proteasome inhibitor (bortezomib).
 Trastuzumab especially when administered together with anthracyclines
and cyclophosphamide, has been associated with an increased incidence
of HF of 27% compared to 1.7% to 4.1% when anthracycline was not part
of the therapeutic regimen.451-453 Symptoms are usually mild to moderate
and improve following medical management and termination of drug
administration. Improvement is usually seen in about 4-6 weeks after
withdrawal of the agent.454-456 After symptomatic improvement,
reinstitution of treatment is usually possible.454-456
 Vascular endothelial growth factor signaling pathway (VSP) inhibitors
(bevacizumab) can cause hypertension. Bevacizumab also blocks
receptors that are involved in the compensatory response to stress in
the cardiomyocytes and when the heart is unable to compensate for
the hypertension, it could lead to HF.457,458 Maintaining good blood pressure
control can prevent HF associated with this agent. Heart failure due to
VSP inhibitors is usually reversible with cessation of the agent.459
One must consider both the efficacy and the toxicity in choosing chemotherapeutic
agents. Many of the newer targeted agents cause a reversible form of HF and
symptoms usually resolve after the initiation of anti-failure medications.454-456,459,460
Risk factors for anthracycline toxicity include: 461-465
 The total cumulative dose
 Intravenous bolus administration versus infusion
 Higher single doses
 History of prior irradiation
 Use of concomitant agents known to have cardiotoxicity
 Female gender
 Underlying CV disease
 Age (young and elderly)
An increase in cardiac biomarkers such as troponins during and
after administration is an indication of toxicity.
8.5.5.1 Management
 Patients undergoing chemotherapy should have a careful clinical evaluation
and assessment and treatment of CV risk factors.464,465
 Blood pressure control is important in all patients especially in those
being considered for VSP inhibitors.
 All patients with potential cardiotoxic chemotherapy should have an
echocardiogram prior to treatment. An important parameter is the LVEF
determined using the biplane method of discs (Simpson’s method) or
three-dimensional echocardiography where available. Newer techniques
to detect and quantitate regional and global myocardial dysfunction
(strain assessment with global longitudinal strain) can be used to detect
pre-clinical and subtle changes in function.466-469
 Biomarkers such as troponin and natriuretic peptides can help identify
patients at higher risk.462,463,470,471
Close collaboration between the oncologist and the cardiologist is important.
For the oncologists, the strategy (prior to commencement) includes:465
 Identifying high risk patients (pre-existing heart disease, presence of
CV risk factors, age - young and old, female gender, use of high dose
anthracycline regimens).
 High risk patients should:
 Have a pre-treatment cardiac function evaluation. If the LVEF is < 50%,
refer to the cardiologist.
 Be considered for non-cardiotoxic alternatives.
 Have their therapy protocols adjusted where necessary (e.g. reduction
in doses, continuous infusions rather than bolus injections, liposomal
doxorubicin, dexrazoxane etc).
For the cardiologists/general physicians, the strategy includes:
 Treating CV risk factors.
 Assessing, repeating (if necessary) imaging studies. (e.g. using high
quality LVEF measurement, strain evaluation etc).
 Assessing cardiac biomarkers (troponin and/or NP).
 Considering cardio-protection prior to/or during treatment using β-blockers,
MRA and/or ACE-I/ARB if:69,465,472-474
 EF < 50%,
 EF drops by > 10%
 Abnormal global longitudinal strain (GLS) (> 15% drop).
I,C
I,C
IIa,B
I,C
I,C
I,C
Key message 9:
 Chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy is not common; clinical
HF occurs in 1-5%.
 Close collaboration between the oncologist and the cardiologist is
important.
 Patients undergoing chemotherapy should have a careful clinical
evaluation, assessment and treatment of CV risk factors.
 Monitoring LVEF during therapy is important with repeat echocardiography
at 3-monthly intervals and/or according to symptoms. If cardioprotective
medications are given, monitoring may be necessary at closer intervals of
time depending on the clinical condition of the patient e.g. 1-monthly interval.
 Withholding cardiotoxic therapy only as a last resort. (for anthracycline
LVEF < 45%, for anti-HER2 therapy LVEF < 40%).
 Monitoring even after completion of therapy:
 Obtain post therapy LVEF.
 Repeat echocardiography in 6 months or 1 year. Most cases of
treatment-associated cardiac dysfunction develop within the first year
after completion of therapy.475,476
 If EF remains abnormal, follow guidelines for management of HF.465
8.5.6 HEART FAILURE AND KIDNEY DYSFUNCTION
8.5.6.1 Epidemiology, definitions and classifications
Cardiac and pre-existing kidney disease at admission frequently co-exist,
varying from 45.4% in patients with chronic HF to > 60% in those with
AHF.477,478
In addition, during treatment of AHF, a significant proportion of patients will
develop varying degrees of worsening renal function (WRF).
The definition of WRF is:479
 An increase in serum creatinine by ≥ 26.5μmol/ L (0.3mg/dl) and/or
 A ≥ 25% increase in serum creatinine or a ≥ 20% drop in eGFR.
The rise in serum creatinine usually occurs in the first three to five days of
hospitalisation.
The incidence of WRF is estimated to be between 19 and 45%.165 This large
observed range is due to variations in the definitions of WRF, the observed
time-at-risk and the study population.165
Risk factors for WRF during admission for HF include:480
 A prior history of HF or diabetes,
 An admission serum creatinine of > 133μmol/L, or
 Systolic blood pressure > 160mmHg.
WRF may fulfill criteria for type 1 or type 2 cardiorenal syndrome (CRS). The
term “cardiorenal syndrome” refers to disorders of the heart and kidneys
whereby acute or chronic dysfunction in one organ may induce acute or
chronic dysfunction of the other.165
This syndrome has been classified by the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative
working group into 5 subtypes as shown in Table 17, Page 105.165 Many
patients however, may belong to more than one subtype and may move
between subtypes during the course of their disease.165
8.5.6.2. Pathogenesis of CRS
Multiple mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of CRS. These include:
 Increased renal venous pressure - venous congestion is probably the
most important factor.481
 RV dysfunction.
 Reduced renal perfusion with reduced cardiac output.
 Neurohumoral adaptations (e.g. activation of the sympathetic nervous
system and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, increases in
vasopressin and endothelin-1).
8.5.6.3 Clinical significance /Impact of kidney dysfunction in HF
The combination of cardiac and kidney disease increases the complexity and
costs of care, and may interact to worsen prognosis.
A. Pharmacologic considerations
 Safety:
 Dosing of renally-excreted cardiac drugs need adjustment in the
presence of renal impairment (e.g. digoxin, insulin, low molecular
weight heparin).
 Patients with HF are at increased risk of contrast-induced acute kidney
injury.
 Efficacy:
 Impaired renal function will affect drug choices and dosing. If eGFR <
30mls/min/1.73m2, most thiazide diuretics are no longer effective and
loop diuretics are preferred. Higher doses of loop diuretics may be
required with increasing renal impairment.
B. Prognostic implications
 Preexisting CKD is a bad prognostic indicator in patients with HF - the
more severe the CKD, the worse the mortality.482,483
 In patients with HF, WRF may not always indicate a poor outcome.484 The
prognostic value of WRF is mainly determined by:
 The presence of persistent congestion
 Baseline renal function and magnitude of renal changes
 Duration - persistent WRF is usually associated with hemodynamic
derangements and poor prognosis as compared with transient WRF
as a result of agressive decongestive therapy.485-487
Table 17: Classification of Cardiorenal Syndrome (CRS)
Cardiorenal (CRS) Subtypes
Description
CRS Type 1 (acute CRS)
Rapid worsening of cardiac function
leading to acute kidney injury e.g. MI
with cardiogenic shock.
CRS Type 2 (chronic CRS)
Chronic abnormalities in cardiac
function leading to progressive
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) e.g.
chronic HFrEF or HFpEF.
CRS Type 3
Worsening of renal function leading
(acute renocardiac
to acute cardiac dysfunction e.g. in
syndrome)
Acute Kidney Injury.
CRS Type 4
Primary chronic kidney disease
(chronic renocardiac
contributing to decreased cardiac
syndrome)
function and an increased risk of CV
events e.g. CKD leading to LVH, CAD.
CRS Type 5
Presence of comorbid cardiac and
(secondary CRS)
renal dysfunction due to either acute
or chronic systemic disease e.g.
diabetes, sepsis, amyloidosis.
Adapted from Ronco C, McCullough P, Anker SD, et al. Cardio-renal syndromes: report from the
consensus conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative. Eur Heart J 2010;31:703–11.
8.5.6.4. Management
 A multi-disciplinary approach is recommended. Early referral to a
nephrologist is advisable.
 Exclude potentially reversible causes for increasing renal dysfunction
such as hyper - or hypovolaemia, concomitant medications such as
aminoglycosides and NSAIDs, ACE-I or ARB and renal artery stenosis.
 Closely monitor electrolytes and kidney function, especially during acute
illnesses, dehydration and when increasing doses of cardiac drugs
including diuretics. The baseline renal function will determine how frequently
this should be done.
 The recommended range for serum potassium is 4-5.5mmol/L.488
 Wherever possible, avoid nephrotoxins, e.g. contrast media for angiography
 Intravenous diuretics
 Loop diuretics are the first choice.
 Continuous infusion may not have greater benefits compared with
bolus dosing.115-118,489
 Start initially with 2-2.5 times the usual oral dose.
 Combination therapy (loop diuretic and thiazide/thiazide-like diuretic/
mineralocorticoid) may be required to enhance diuresis.205-207 However,
care is required to avoid electrolyte disturbances, hypovolaemia and
worsening renal dysfunction.
 Careful use of Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) blockers
 HF patients with stable, chronic mild-moderate renal insufficiency
(eGFR > 30mls/min/1.73m2) should receive standard therapy with an
ACE-I/ ARB and an MRA.490
 A serum creatinine rise or GFR decrease by up to 30% from baseline
may be acceptable before it becomes necessary to consider stopping
or decreasing doses.221
 In patients with advanced renal failure, the decision to start or stop
RAS blockers should be individualised.490
 Consider withholding RAS blockers during aggressive diuresis in
patients at high risk for WRF.
 RAS blockers (and β-blockers) can be used in patients with HF who
are on chronic dialysis therapy.
 Ultrafiltration
 This involves the removal of plasma water across a semi-permeable
membrane in response to a transmembrane pressure gradient.
 It may be considered for congestive symptoms refractory to diuresis,
but should be used in consultation with a nephrologist.491
 Evidence for its efficacy in fluid removal is mixed at present.491
I,C
I,C
I,A
IIa,B
IIa,B
I,B
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
IIa,B
 Haemodialysis
 Criteria for possible need to initiate renal replacement therapy include:
 Oliguria unresponsive to fluid resuscitation.
 Severe hyperkalaemia (serum potassium > 6.5mmol/L).
 Severe acidaemia (pH < 7.2).
 Serum urea > 25mmol/L.
 Serum creatinine > 300μmol/L.
8.6 ADVANCED HEART FAILURE/REFRACTORY HEART FAILURE
These are patients with severe symptoms of HF despite maximal medical
therapy. Hospital admission is necessary for stabilisation. Meticulous control
of fluid balance is important. Aggravating causes of HF as listed in Table 5,
Page 39 should be identified and treated.
These patients may need specialised treatment in CCU or ICU. The following
may be required:
 Intravenous infusion of frusemide. These patients may require combination
loop diuretics and thiazides.
 Intravenous infusion of inotropes - low dose dobutamine (5mcg/kg/min) or
milrinone. These improve symptoms but no survival benefit has been
demonstrated.126,492
 Ultrafiltration in patients who are fluid overloaded.493 In most patients,
however, the relief is temporary.
The prognosis of these patients is poor. They should be referred to assess
whether they may be potential candidates for mechanical circulatory support
(e.g. LVAD) and consideration for heart transplant.
8.6.1 HEART TRANSPLANT
Heart transplantation is a well-established treatment of refractory end stage
HF. This definitive therapy for HF however is limited by the lack of donor
organs.494,495
Key message 9:
 Cardiac and kidney disease frequently co-exist and this increases
the complexity and costs of care, and may interact to worsen prognosis.
 Management includes the use of intravenous diuretics, careful use
of Renin Angiotensin System blockers, β-blockers and occasionally
ultrafiltration and haemodialysis.
All patients with severe symptomatic HF despite optimal medical therapy and
no other alternative therapy option should be considered for heart transplant.
They need to be referred to a HF specialist cardiac hospital for further evaluation.
Assessment for heart transplant is done by a multispeciality, multidisciplinary
team and appropriate work up will be performed for eligibility.
Eligibility criteria to be considered for heart transplant include:
 Poor LVEF (< 25%).
 Recurrent HF hospitalisations.
 Major limitation of the patient’s daily activities.
 Poor effort tolerance i.e. peak VO2 (maximal oxygen consumption or
peak oxygen uptake) less than 10ml/kg/min (or < 50% predicted). VO2
max is the maximum rate of oxygen consumption measured during
incremental exercise ie exercise of increasing intensity and is widely
used as an indicator of cardiorespiratory fitness.
 Intravenous inotropic dependence for symptomatic relief or to maintain
end organ function.
 Motivated, psychologically stable and compliant to therapy.
Contraindications to heart transplant
 Active infection.
 Severe peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular disease.
 Malignancy within 5 years.
 Diabetes mellitus with widespread microvascular complications.
 Systemic disease with multi-organ dysfunction.
 Irreversible chronic kidney, liver or lung disease.
 Pharmacologically irreversible pulmonary hypertension.
 Other medical or psychosocial issues that would impact survival.
8.6.2 MECHANICAL CIRCULATORY SUPPORT
The use of mechanical circulatory support (e.g. LVAD), should be considered
for patients with potentially reversible or treatable conditions or as a bridge to
heart transplant in suitable candidates.
LVAD may also be used as destination therapy in candidates who are not
suitable for transplant. Patients have improvement in their symptoms when
compared to optimal medical therapy.496,497 However, the rate of rehospitalisations
due to complications of bleeding, thrombosis and infections are high.496-498
Many patients also go into major depression. Thus, extensive discussion with
the patient and family is necessary prior to LVAD implantation.
Key message 10:
 Patients with Advanced Heart Failure should be referred to assess
whether they may be potential candidates for mechanical circulatory
support (e.g. LVAD) and consideration for heart transplant.
8.7 PALLIATIVE AND END OF LIFE CARE
Despite recent advances in therapy, for some patients, HF remains a
progressive disease and carries a poor prognosis. Patients with refractory
symptoms despite guideline-directed medical therapy, should be considered
for palliative and end of life care if they have the following characteristics:499
 Progressive functional decline (mental and physical) and dependence in
most activities of daily living.
 Severe HF symptoms with poor quality of life despite optimal pharmacological
and non-pharmacological therapies.
 Frequent hospital admissions or serious episodes of decompensation
despite optimal therapies.
 Heart transplantation and mechanical circulatory support ruled out.
 Cardiac cachexia.
 Clinically judged to be near end of life.
The aim of palliative care in HF is to prevent and relieve suffering and to
promote the best quality of life for patients and their families.500
Despite the complexities of end-of-life issues in HF patients, there is minimal
evidence-based guidance on the care of this population.501 The key components
of end-of-life care are:
1. Advanced care plan with directives and informed decisions on:
 Use or withdrawal of treatment including advanced therapies such
as V inotropes, ICD and mechanical circulatory support.
 When it would be appropriate to switch off devices such as ICD or
CRT.
 Resuscitation status.
 Preferred location of death (i.e. at home or hospital).
2. Symptom management
Goals of care at this stage should shift from extending life to controlling
symptoms and maximising quality of life. Common symptoms include:
 Dyspnoea
 Fatigue
 Pain
 Urinary retention
 Constipation
 Cachexia
 Depression
Medications that may be useful include analgesics, antiemetics, anxiolytics,
opioids, laxatives, and diuretics, etc.
3. Psychosocial support
The impact of HF on quality of life for the patient and family is complex and
extends beyond physical symptoms.502
Emotional, spiritual and social support should be provided to alleviate patient
anxiety about dying, and to guide patient towards a peaceful journey at the end
of life.
9.1 LEVEL OF CARE AND SHARED MANAGEMENT
The care of patients with HF should ideally take place in a multidisciplinary system,
allowing for shared care between the hospital (secondary or tertiary settings) and
community (primary setting). A multidisciplinary approach encompasses patient
education, cardiac rehabilitation, psychosocial support and palliative care, and has
been proven to reduce HF hospitalisations and mortality in discharged patients.503-505
The multidisciplinary team usually consists of cardiologists and or general
physicians, HF nurses, pharmacists, dieticians, physiotherapists, primary care
providers, social workers as well as geriatricians, psychologists, occupational
therapists and when necessary, palliative care specialists. Care can be done in two
different settings:
 In the patient’s own home - home-based interventions are associated with
significantly lower healthcare costs, reduced hospital readmissions and an
improvement in the patient’s quality of life.506 This may however, not be feasible
in our local setting.
 Specialist outpatient clinic - the Heart Failure Clinic (HFC).
HFCs can either be:
 Nurse-directed - these are run by nurses with special training in HF.
 Physician-directed - run by general physicians and/or cardiologists.
HFCs can be established in the tertiary hospitals or in the primary care setting. The
minimum human resource requirements are a:
 Cardiologist or general physician with an interest in cardiology and HF,
 Dedicated nurse and
 Medical technologist for blood taking, doing echocardiography and 6 minutes
walk tests.
9. ORGANISATION OF CARE
In bigger clinic settings, the involvement of physiotherapists to encourage physical
activity, pharmacists and counsellors for end of life care would be advisable.
These clinics will be the intermediary between in-patient hospital care and community
primary care. Patients who can be seen in these clinics include those:507
 Recently discharged after an admission for decompensated HF (a waiting
time of 7-12 days post discharge has to be the maximum wait-time).
 Who are in the early decompensation phase and need treatment modification.
 Who are stable but need uptitration of HF medications.
 With ICD or CRTs.
 With comorbidities, such as renal dysfunction, diabetes and COPD.
 With advanced HF who may benefit from:
 Heart transplant
 Left Ventricular Assist Device (LVAD)
 Palliative care.
The objectives of these HF clinics may vary based on local settings. These
include:507,508
 Optimisation of medical therapy particularly the uptitration of β-blockers, ACE-I
and MRA.
 Education of the patient and caregiver on the nature of the disease and its
progression.
 Promotion of self-care such as :
 Compliance to medical therapy and fluid restriction.
 Regular weighing and adjusting diuretic doses according to symptoms and
body weight.
Patient with optimised HF medications/treatment plans can be discharged to the
community with appropriate care plans to primary care. Close partnership between
these HF clinics and primary care helps to reduce unnecessary admissions to
hospital.
In 2018, the Heart Failure Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic (MTAC) was
introduced. These clinics are conducted by pharmacists in collaboration with doctors
and other healthcare providers to improve HF management. The objectives of the
Heart Failure MTAC are:509
 Enhance patient’s adherence to HF pharmacotherapy and non-pharmacological
interventions.
 To reduce unscheduled emergency department visits or hospitalisations of HF
patient due to acute decompensation.
 To provide consultative service to doctors on evidence-based HF pharmacotherapy
and related issues.
 To collaborate with doctors and other health care professionals in HF management
program.
9.2 MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
Patients with HF require regular follow-up and monitoring. Serial evaluations serve
to assess a patient’s status, response to therapy, development of complications and
disease progression. Key components of assessment include:
 Functional capacity - NYHA functional class or 6-minute walk test
 Fluid status and body weight
 Blood pressure, heart rate and rhythm
 Examination of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems
 Cognitive status and nutritional status
 Review of pharmacotherapy - uptitration, compliance and side effects
 Serum urea, electrolytes, creatinine and eGFR as necessary
 Diet and sodium intake
 Consumption of alcohol or illicit drugs
 Smoking history.
The frequency of follow-up will depend on the patient’s clinical stability and need for
pharmacotherapy optimisation. A patient with a recent episode of decompensation
or clinical instability, for instance, should ideally be seen again soon, usually within 2
weeks. Ultimately, the intensity and type of follow-up would be determined by the
local organisation of care and resources.
Routine serial echocardiogram is not recommended. However, if there has been a
recent change in clinical status or if the patient has received treatment that might
significantly change certain echocardiographic parameters, a follow-up echocardiogram
is reasonable to assess the LVEF and structural remodeling.
Serial brain natriuretic peptide measurements to guide and tailor HF therapy cannot
be broadly recommended at the present time due to a lack of consistent evidence.29-32
9.3 CARDIOLOGY REFERRAL
HF patients with stable symptoms may be managed at the primary care level.
Referral to the cardiologist should be considered in the following situations:
 De novo HF for a comprehensive workup to confirm the diagnosis and determine
the aetiology, and to devise a management plan.
 Episodes of acute decompensation.
 Worsening HF symptoms despite appropriate therapy.
 HF complicated with symptomatic hypotension or excessive bradycardia, limiting
uptitration of pharmacotherapy.
10. OTHER THERAPIES FOR HEART FAILURE
 Symptomatic stable CAD and/or acute coronary syndrome for consideration of
revascularisation (PCI or CABG).
 Resuscitated cardiac arrest.
 Documented or suspected significant arrhythmias e.g. AF, VT.
 Significant valvular disease not previously assessed or worsening valvular
dysfunction.
 Pre-conception assessment and counselling of women with significant structural
heart disease and a past history of HF or LV dysfunction.
 Complex congenital cardiac lesions and/or Eisenmenger’s syndrome.
Despite taking conventional HF therapy, patients may seek alternative therapy and
healing approaches that are not considered as allopathic medicine. The National
Centre for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) defines complementary
and alternative medicine (CAM) as a group of diverse medical and healthcare
interventions, practices, products or disciplines that are not generally considered
part of conventional medicine.
10.1 Enhanced External Counter Pulsation (EECP)
There is inadequate evidence of clinical effectiveness of EECP in HF.510-513 There is
concern that it could precipitate or exacerbate HF.
10.2 Stem cell therapy
A global position paper on cardiovascular regenerative medicine stated that
cell-based therapy in HF patients is neither positive nor consistent.514
10.3 Omega 3 fatty acids
In patients with HFrEF, it may be considered as an adjunctive therapy based on a
single randomised controlled trial (RCT) which showed a small benefit in CV death
and/or hospitalisations.515,516
Key message 11:
 Heart Failure clinics will serve as an intermediary between in-patient
hospital care and community primary care.
10.4 Coenzyme Q10
There is no convincing evidence to support or refute the use of coenzyme Q10 for
patients with HF.517
10.5 Tai Chi
Tai Chi may improve 6 min walk test distance, quality of life and LVEF in patients with
HF.518,519 Its effect on hard CV outcomes such as rehospitalisation, MI and mortality
is not known.
10.6 Yoga
A meta-analysis in 2014 that includes two RCTs concluded that yoga improved peak
VO2 (exercise capacity) and quality of life in chronic HF patients.520 There is an
ongoing RCT to look at the effect of yoga in HFpEF patients.521
The focus of future development for HF in Malaysia should be towards service
enhancement working to meet the World Heart Federation mandate of a 25%
reduction in premature non-communicable disease mortality by 2025.
Finding the balance between costs and quality remains a global challenge, and the
understanding of the disease in our healthcare context is imperative to making sure
we move forward regarding service delivery, human resource allocation, medical
expense costs and patient outcomes. To achieve this, the following need to be
undertaken:
 Epidemiological studies to understand the disease profile in the country.
 Establishment and expansion of HFCs leading to more patient-centred HF care.
 Expanding service delivery, human resource allocation, medical expense cost
and patient outcomes.
 Education of healthcare personnel.
Efforts should be directed to the knowledge and understanding of the epidemiology
of HF in our country, its phenotype, presentation, current adherence to guideline-directed
therapy and outcomes. Regular cluster sampling cohorts or a nationwide registry
should be considered. Understanding the limitations of service delivery albeit
geography or human resources and making plans for better service delivery systems
are important.
11. FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
Development of HFCs, can lead to a more patient-centric HF care. (See Section 9,
Pages 110-113)
Modules for HF care need to be initiated in order to train and educate general
internal medicine physicians. A core-curriculum for education needs to be formed to
ensure adequate training has been disseminated to HFC personnel.
Incentives regarding HF guidelines compliance should be implemented and HF
innovative practice should be encouraged with awards for best clinical practice and
innovation be made available.
This streamline approach to HF care with engagement of connected groups hopefully
will help in better overall patient care and experience.
Performance measures should be used with the goal of improving quality of care for HF.518,519
Process performance measures focus on the aspects of care that are delivered to a patient,
while outcome measures focus on the end-points such as mortality or hospitalisation.
Process performance indicators for in-patients with HF includes:522-524
 % of patients who had documentation of NYHA Functional Class.
 % of patients who had LVEF measurement.
 % of patients with current or prior LVEF < 40% and without contraindications
discharged with ACE-I/ARB.
 % of patients with current or prior LVEF < 40% and without contraindications
discharged on β-blockers.
 % of patients with current or prior LVEF < 40% and without contraindications
discharged on MRA.
 % of patients with chronic or paroxysmal AF/atrial flutter without contraindications
on anticoagulant therapy at discharge.
 % of patients given a post discharge appointment.
The accepted performance measure should be more than 60%.
Outcome measures indicators include:
 In-hospital mortality
 30-day readmission for HF
Refer to Appendix VI, Page 121 for calculation of these measures.
12. PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Appendix I: Causes of Elevated Natriuretic Peptide Levels*
*Adapted from
• Yancy WC, Jessup M, Bozkut B, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA
Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure. A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America.
Circulation 2017;136:e137-61.
• Goei D, Schouten O, Boersma E, et al. Influence of renal function on the usefulness of N-terminal
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide as a prognostic cardiac risk marker in patients undergoing noncardiac
vascular surgery. Am J Cardiol 2008;101:122-6.
• Tagore R, Ling LH, Yang H, Daw HY, Chan YH, Sethi SK. Natriuretic peptides in chronic kidney disease.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008;3:1644-51.
Cardiac
 HF, including RV syndromes
 Acute coronary syndromes
 Heart muscle disease, including LVH
 Valvular heart disease
 Pericardial disease
 Atrial fibrillation
 Myocarditis
 Cardiac surgery
 Cardioversion
 Toxic-metabolic myocardial insults, including cancer chemotherapy
Non-cardiac
 Advancing age (Table 7, Page 44) for optimal cut off values according
to age)
 Anaemia
 Renal failure:
 NTproBNP lost its prognostic value in patients with GFR
< 30ml/min/1.73 m2.
 BNP levels are relatively independent of GFR.
 Right ventricular overload from:
 Pulmonary causes: obstructive sleep apnoea, severe pneumonia
 Pulmonary hypertension whatever the cause
 Critical illness
 Bacterial sepsis
 Severe burns
 Liver cirrhosis
Appendix II: Salt Content of Common Malaysian Foods
CONTENT OF SODIUM IN FOODS
Low Content
Moderate
High Content
Content
Fruit
Meat
Flavouring Agents
Sauces: Soya Tomato,
Vegetables
Fish
Chili Barbeque
Pure Oil
Egg
Tauchioh
Natural Fats
Milk
Extract
Vegetable(Marmite)
Sugar
Meat (Bovril)
Plain Flour
Enhancers
Monosodium Glutamate
Rice
Flavouring cubes
Most Cereals
Rising Agents
Bicarbonate of Soda
Legumes
Baking Powder
Nuts
Dressing
Salad Cream
Mayonnaise
Processed Food
Tinned or Canned Food
 Salted Crisps
 Salted Nuts
 Cheese
 Packed Soup
 Raising Agents
Preserved Food
Salted Fish/Eggs Cured
Meat Preserved Sausages
Vegetables/Fruits Belacan
Medication
Effervescent Salts
Bicarbonate Powder
Appendix III: Risk of Combined Contraceptive Pills for the Different Cardiac Conditions
WHOMEC Risk Classification for the Use of Combined Hormonal Contraceptives*
MEC CLASS
WHOMEC 1
WHOMEC 2
WHOMEC 3
WHOMEC 4
Category
Condition with no
Condition where the
Condition where the
Conditions where
of Use
restriction for the use
advantages of the
risks of the method
the method represents
Cardiac
of contraceptive
method generally
usually outweigh the
an unacceptable
Conditions
method
outweigh the risks
advantages and to
health risk
consider all alternatives first
Always usable
Broadly usable
Caution in use
Do not use
Physiological murmurs
Most arrhythmias
Atrial fibrillation or
Atrial fibrillation or
in absence of heart
otherthan atrial
flutter on warfarin
flutter if not
disease
fibrillation and flutter
anticoagulated
Mitral valve prolapse
Uncomplicated mild
Bi-leaflet mechanical
Pulmonary hypertension
with or trivial mitral
native mitral and
valve in mitral or aortic
or pulmonary vascular
regurgitation
aortic valve disease
position taking warfarin
disease (e.g.
Eisenmenger syndrome)
Bicuspid aortic valve
Tissue prosthetic valve
ASD with left to right
Dilated left atrium
with normal function
lacking any of the
shunt that may reverse
> 4 cm
features noted in
with physiological stress
WHOMEC 3 and
(e.g. Valsalva
WHOMEC 4
manoeuvre)
Mild pulmonary stenosis
Surgically corrected
Marfan syndrome with
Fontan heart on
congenital heart disease aortic dilatation
warfarin
lacking any features
unoperated
noted in WHOMEC 3
and WHOMEC 4
Cardiac
Repaired coarctation
Small left to right shunt
Past thrombotic event
Cyanotic heart disease
Conditions
with no hypertension
not reversible with
on Warfarin
or aneurysm
physiological
manoeuvres (e.g. small
VSD, small PDA)
Simple congenital
Pulmonary arteriovenous
lesions successfully
malformation
repaired in childhood
and with no sequelae
Past thromboembolic
e.g.
event (venous and
 Ostium secundum
Uncomplicated Marfan
arterial) not on warfarin
atrial septal defect
syndrome
 VSD
Poor left ventricle
 PDA
function of any cause
 Total anomalous
(e.g. dilated
pulmonary venous
cardiomyopathy)
drainage
Ejection fraction < 30%
Hypertrophic
Coronary artery disease
cardiomyopathy lacking
any of the features
noted in WHOMEC 3
and WHOMEC 4
Past cardiomyopathy
Coronary arteritis (e.g
fully recovered including
Kawasaki’s disease
peripartum cardiomyopathy
with coronary involvement
*World Health Organization. Medical Eligibility Criteria (MEC) for Contraceptive use. (5thed) 2015. Available at: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
publication/family_planning/Ex-SummMec-5/en/
Adapted From: Thorne S et al. Pregnancy and contraception in heart disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Fam Plann Reprod Health
Care. 2006; 32:75-81
Appendix IV: Safety of Progesterone Only Contraceptive Methods in Women
with Cardiac Disease
Progesterone Only
Cardiac Condition
WHOMEC# Class
Contraceptive Method
Progesterone only pilla
All cardiac conditions
1
 Noriday®
(should not normally be
 Cerazette®b
advised where pregnancy
poses a high or
unacceptable risk -
WHOMEC Class 3 and
4 conditions)
All cardiac patients who
1
are not on warfarin
All cardiac patients on
3
warfarinc
Implants e.g.
(Nexplanon® previously
All cardiac patients
1
known as Implanon®)
Cardiac patients generally
1
even if taking warfarind
Structural heart diseasee
2
Prosthetic heart valvesd,e
3
Previous endocarditise
3
Pulmonary hypertension,
4(3)
Fontan circulation or other
condition in which vagal
reaction at insertion would
be poorly tolerated
Emergency contraception
All cardiac disease
1
Intra-Uterine System e.g.
Mirena®
Depo Provera
#WHOMEC: World Heart Organization Medical Eligibility Criteria (see Appendix III, Page 118)
aAlthough safe, the standard progestogen-only pill is less effective than all the other progestogen-only methods.
bEfficacy reduced by Bosentan
cRisk of haematoma at injection site
dThe INR may be altered after initiation of any progesterone hormone therapy. It needs to be monitored.
e Risk of Infective Endocarditis
From: Thorne S, MacGregor A, Nelson-Piercy C. Pregnancy and contraception in heart disease and pulmonary
arterial hypertension. J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care 2006;32:75-81.
Chemotherapy Agents
Management
Anthracyclines
 Monitor LVEF, strain assessment with global
Doxorubicin
longitudinal strain,
Epirubicin
 Measure troponins
Idarubicin
 Consider use of dexrazoxane, continuous
infusion, liposomal preparations, β-blockers,
ACE-I
Alkylating agents
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Antimetabolites
Decitabine
Clofarabine
Antimicrotubule agents
Docetaxel
Monoclonal antibodybased tyrosine kinase
inhibitors
Trastuzumab
Bevacizumab
Avoid concomitant use with anthracyclines
Adostratuzumab emtacine
Pertuzumab
Small molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitors
Pazopanib
Sorafenib
Treat hypertension aggressively
Sunitinib
Lapatinib
Proteasome inhibitor
Carfilzomib
Bortezomib
Appendix V: Anticancer Agents Associated with Heart Failure / LV Dysfunction)
APPENDIX VI: Calculation of Performance and Outcome Measures
% of patients who
=
Number of patients who had documentation of
X 100
had documentation
NYHA Functional Class
of NYHA Functional
Number of HF patients who were seen during
Class
thattime period
% of patients who had
=
Number of patients who had LVEF measurement
X 100
LVEF measurement
Number of HF patients who were seen during
that time period
% of patients discharged
=
Number of patients who were on ACE-I /
X 100
with ACE-I / ARB
ARB at discharge
Number of HF patients who were discharged
during this time period who had no
contraindications to ACE-I/ARB
% of patients discharged
=
Number of patients who were on β-blockers at
X 100
on β-blockers
discharge
Number of HF patients who were discharged
during that time period who had no
contraindications to β-blockers
% of patients discharged
=
Number of patients who
X 100
on MRA
were on MRA at discharge
Number of HF patients who were discharged
during that time period who had no
contraindications to MRA
% of patients with chronic
=
Number of patients who had AF/Atrial
X 100
or paroxysmal AF/Atrial
Flutter who were on OAC at discharge
Flutter on anticoagulant
Number of HF patients who had AF/Atrial
therapy(OAC) at discharge.
Flutter during that time period who had no
contraindications to OAC at discharge
% of patients given a post
=
Number of patients who were given a post
X 100
discharge appointment
discharge appointment
Number of HF patients who were seen during
that time period
REFERENCES
1.
Davis RC, Hobbs FDR, Lip GYH. ABC of heart failure. History and epidemiology. BMJ 2000;320:39-42.
2.
Mendez GF, Cowie MR. The epidemiological features of heart failure in developing countries: a review of
the literature. Int J Cardio 2001;80(2-3):213-9.
3.
McMurray JJ, Stewart S. Epidemiology, aetiology, and prognosis of heart failure. Heart 2000;83(5):596-602.
4.
Reyes EB, Ha JW, Firdaus I, et al. Heart failure across Asia: Same healthcare burden but differences in
organization of care. Int J Card 2016: 223:163-7.
5.
Chong AY, Rajaratnam R, Hussein NR, Lip GY. Heart failure in a multiethnic population in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. Eur J Heart Fail 2003; 5(4):569-74.
6.
Teh BT, Lim MN, Robiah A, et al. Heart failure hospitalisation in Malaysia. J of Cardiac Failure 1999:3 (suppl 1):64.
7.
Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al on behalf of the American Heart Association Statistics Committee
and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. AHA statistical update. Heart disease and stroke statistics - 2013
update. A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2013;127:e6-245.
8.
Jencks SF, Williams MV,Coleman EA. Rehospitalizations among patients in the medicare fee‐for‐service
program. N Engl J Med 2009; 360:1418-28.
9.
The SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril on mortality and the development of heart failure in asymptomatic
patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions. New Engl J Med 1992;372:685-91.
10.
The CONSENSUS Trial study group. Effects of enalapril on mortality in severe congestive heart failure:
results of the Cooperative North Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study (CONSENSUS). N Engl J Med
1987;316:1429-35.
11.
National Cancer Institute. Cancer stat fact sheets. Available at http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts. (Accessed
16 November 2018).
12.
Cook C, Cole G, Asaria P, Jabbour R, Francis DP .The annual global economic burden of heart failure. Int
J Card 2014:171(3):368-76.
13.
Berry C, Murdoch DR, McMurray JJ. Economics of chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2001;3(3):283-91.
14.
Sweitzer NK, Lopatin M, Yancy CW, Mills RM, Stevenson LW. Comparison of clinical features and
outcomes of patients hospitalized with heart failure and normal ejection fraction (> or =55%) versus those
with mildly reduced (40% to 55%) and moderately to severely reduced (< 40%) fractions. Am J Cardiol
2008:101:1151-6.
15.
Cheng RK, Cox M, Neely ML, et al. Outcomes in patients with heart failure with preserved, borderline, and
reduced ejection fraction in the Medicare population. Am Heart J 2014:168:721-30.
16.
Wangs RJ, Evans JC, Benjamin EJ, et al. Natural history of asymptomatic left ventricular systolic dysfunction
in the community. Circulation 2003;108: 977-82.
17.
Redfield MM, Jacobsen SJ, Burnett JC Jr, Mahoney DW, Bailey KR, Rodeheffer RJ. Burden of systolic and
diastolic ventricular dysfunction in the community: appreciating the scope of the heart failure epidemic.
JAMA 2003;289(2):194.
18.
Steinberg BA, Zhao X, Heidenreich PA, et al. Trends in patients hospitalized with heart failure and
preserved left ventricular ejection fraction: prevalence, therapies, and outcomes. Circulation 2012;126:65-75.
19.
Drazner MH, Rame JE, Dries DL. Third heart sound and elevated jugular venous pressure as markers of
the subsequent development of heart failure in patients with asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction. Am
J Med 2003;114:431-7.
20.
Maisel AS, Krishnaswamy P, Nowak RM, et al for Breathing Not Properly Multinational Study Investigators.
Rapid measurement of B-type natriuretic peptide in the emergency diagnosis of heart failure. N Engl J Med
2002;347(3):161-7.
21.
Maisel AS, McCord J, Nowak RM, et al. Bedside B-type natriuretic peptide in the emergency diagnosis of
heart failure with reduced or preserved ejection fraction. Results from the Breathing Not Properly
Multinational Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41(11):2010-7.
22.
Januzzi JL, van Kimmenade R, Lainchbury J, et al. NT-proBNP testing for diagnosis and short-term prognosis
in acute destabilized heart failure: an international pooled analysis of 1256 patients: the International
Collaborative of NT-proBNP Study. Eur Heart J 2006;27(3):330-7.
23.
Nielsen LS, Svanegaard J, Klitgaard NA, Egeblad H. N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide for
discriminating between cardiac and non-cardiac dyspnoe. Eur J Heart Failure 2004;6:63-70.
24.
Chenevier-Gobeaux C, Claessens YE, Voyer S, et al. Influence of renal function on N-terminal pro-brain
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) in patients admitted for dyspnoea in the Emergency Department:
comparison with brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). Clin Chim Acta 2005;361(1–2):167-75.
25.
Srisawasdi P, Vanavanan S, Charoenpanichkit C, Kroll MH. The effect of renal dysfunction on BNP,
NT-proBNP, and their ratio. Am J Clin Path 2010:133:1:14-23.
26.
Takase H, Dohi Y. Kidney function crucially affects B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), N-terminal proBNP
and their relationship. Eur J Clin Invest 2014;44(3):303-8.
27.
Hobbs FD, Davis RC, Roalfe AK, Hare R, Davies MK, Kenkre JE. Reliability of N-terminal pro-brain
natriuretic peptide assay in diagnosis of heart failure: cohort study in representative and high risk community
populations. Br Med J 2002; 324(7352):1498.
28.
Savarese G, Musella F, D’Amore C, et al. Changes of natriuretic peptides predict hospital admissions in
patients with chronic heart failure. A meta-analysis. JACC Heart Failure 2014:2(2):148-58.
29.
Porapakkham P, Porapakkham P, Zimmet H, Billah B, Krum H. B-type natriuretic peptide-guided heart
failure therapy: A meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2010;170:507-14.
30.
Stienen S, Salah K, Moons AH, et al. NT-proBNP (N-Terminal pro-B-Type Natriuretic Peptide)-guided
therapy in acute decompensated Heart Failure. PRIMA II Randomized Controlled Trial. Circulation
2017;137:1671-83.
31.
Pufulete M, Maishman R, Dabner L, et al. B-type natriuretic peptide-guided therapy for heart failure (HF):
a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data (IPD) and aggregate data. Systematic
Reviews 2018:7:112.
32.
Felker GM, Anstrom KJ, Adams KF, et al for the GUIDE-IT Trial. Effect of natriuretic peptide-guided
therapy on hospitalization or cardiovascular mortality in high-risk patients with heart failure and reduced
ejection fraction. A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017;318(8):713-20.
33.
WoldKnudsen C, Omland T,Clopton P, Westheim A, Wu AHB. Impact of atrial fibrillation on the diagnostic
performance of B-type natriuretic peptide concentration in dyspneic patients: An analysis from the
Breathing Not Properly Multinational Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2005;46:838-44.
34.
Richards M, Di Somma S, Mueller C, et al. Atrial fibrillation impairs the diagnostic performance of cardiac
natriuretic peptides in dyspneic patients. Results from the BACH Study (Biomarkers in ACute Heart
Failure). JACC Heart Failure 2013;1:192-9.
35.
Keyzer JM, Hoffmann JJ, Ringoir L, Nabbe KC, Widdershoven JW, Pop VJ. Age- and gender-specific brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP) reference ranges in primary care. Clin Chem Lab Med 2014;52(9):1341-6.
36.
Daniels LB, Clopton P, Bhalla V. How obesity affects the cut-points for B-type natriuretic peptide in the
diagnosis of acute heart failure. Results from the Breathing Not Properly Multinational Study. Am Heart J
2006;151:999-1005.
37.
Krauser DG, Lloyd-Jones DM, Chae CU, et al. Effect of body mass index on natriuretic peptide levels in
patients with acute congestive heart failure: a ProBNP Investigation of Dyspnea in the Emergency
Department (PRIDE) substudy. Am Heart J 2005;149(4):744-50.
38.
Schocken DD, Benjamin EJ, Fonarow GC, et al. Prevention of heart failure. A Scientific Statement from
the American Heart Association Councils on Epidemiology and Prevention, Clinical Cardiology, Cardiovascular
Nursing, and High Blood Pressure Research; Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary
Working Group; and Functional Genomics and Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Group.
Circulation 2008;117:2544-65.
39.
Haider AW, Larson MG, Franklin SS, Levy D. Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and pulse
pressure as predictors of risk for congestive heart failure in the Framingham Heart Study. Ann Intern Med
2003;138:10-16.
40.
Moser M, Hebert PR. Prevention of disease progression, left ventricular hypertrophy and congestive heart
failure in hypertension treatment trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 1996;27:1214-8.
41.
Nichols GA, Gullion CM, Koro CE, Ephross SA, Brown JB. The incidence of congestive heart failure in type
2 diabetes: an update. Diabetes Care 2004;27(8):1879-84.
42.
Bertoni AG, Tsai A, Kasper EK, Brancati FL. Diabetes and idiopathic cardiomyopathy: a nationwide
case-control study. Diabetes Care 2003;26(10):2791-5.
43.
Iribarren C, Karter AJ, Go AS, Ferrara A, Liu JY, Sidney S, Selby JV. Glycemic control and heart failure
among adult patients with diabetes. Circulation 2001;103:2668-73.
44.
Hubert HB, Feinleib M, McNamara PM, Castelli WP. Obesity as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular
disease: a 26-year follow-up of participants in the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation 1983;67:968-77.
45.
Moliterno DJ, Willard JE, Lange RA, et al. Coronary-artery vasoconstriction induced by cocaine, cigarette
smoking, or both. N Engl J Med 1994;330(7):454-9.
46.
Morrow JD, Frei B, Longmire AW, et al. Increase in circulating products of lipid peroxidation (F2-isoprostanes)
in smokers. Smoking as a cause of oxidative damage. N Engl J Med 1995;332(18):1198-203.
47.
Schmidt-Ott UM, Ascheim DD. Thyroid hormone and heart failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep 2006;3(3):114-9.
48.
Mitchell JE, Hellkamp AS, Mark DB, et al. Thyroid function in heart failure and impact on mortality. JACC
Heart Fail 2013;1(1):48-55.
49.
Javaheri S. Sleep-related breathing disorders in heart failure. In: Doulgas L, Mann F, editors. A companion
to braunwald's heart disease. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2010. pp. 471-87.
50.
Herrscher TE, Akre H, Overland B, Sandvik L, Westheim AS. High prevalence of sleep apnea in heart
failure outpatients: even in patients with preserved systolic function. J Card Fail 2011;17:420-5.
51.
Baker DW. Prevention of heart failure. J Card Fail 2002;8:333-46.
52.
Dahlöf B, Lindholm LH, Hansson L, et al. Morbidity and mortality in the Swedish trial in old patients with
hypertension (STOPHypertension). Lancet 1991;338:1281-5.
53.
Kostis JB, Davis BR, Cutler J, et al. Prevention of heart failure by antihypertensive drug treatment in older
persons with isolated systolic hypertension: SHEP Cooperative Research Group. JAMA 1997;278:212-16.
54.
Staessen JA, Fagard R, Thijs L, et al. Randomised double-blind comparison of placebo and active
treatment for older patients with isolated systolic hypertension. The Systolic Hypertension in Europe
(Syst-Eur) Trial Investigators. Lancet 1997;350: 757-64.
55.
Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al for the HYVET Study Group. Treatment of hypertension in patients
80 years of age or older. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1887-98.
56.
Upadhya B, Rocco M, Lewis CE, et al; SPRINT Research Group. Effect of intensive blood pressure
treatment on heart failure events in the Systolic Blood Pressure Reduction Intervention Trial. Circ Heart
Fail 2017;10(4). pii: e003613.
57.
Williamson JD, Supiano MA, Applegate WB, et al. Intensive vs standard blood pressure control and
cardiovascular disease outcomes in adults aged > 75 years. A randomized trial. JAMA 2016;315:2673-82.
58.
Djouss´e L, Driver JA, Gaziano JM. Relation between modifiable lifestyle factors and lifetime risk of heart
failure. Physicians Health Study 1. JAMA 2009;302:4:394-400.
59.
Wilhelmsen L, Rosengren A, Erikkson H, Lappas G. Heart failure in the general population of men –
morbidity, risk factors and prognosis. J Int Med 2001;249;253-61.
60.
Suskin N, Sheth T, Negassa A, Yusuf S. Relationship of current and past smoking to mortality and
morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;37:1677-82.
61.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Prevention of Cardiovascular
Disease. 1st Ed, 2018. Available at www.acadmed.org
62.
Taylor F, Ward K, Moore TH, et al. Statins for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2011;19;(1):CD004816.
63.
The Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaboraters. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with statin
therapy in people at low risk of vascular disease: meta-analysis of individual data from 27 randomised
trials. Lancet 2012:380;(9841):581-90.
64.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Dyslipidemia. 5th
Ed [Internet], 2017. Available at www.acadmed.org
65.
Saravanan P, Davidson NC, Schmidt EB, Calder PC. Cardiovascular effects of marine omega-3 fatty
acids. Lancet 2010;376(9740):540-50.
66.
Wilk JB, Tsai MY, Hanson NQ, Gaziano JM, Djoussé L. Plasma and dietary omega-3 fatty acids, fish
intake, and heart failure risk in the Physicians' Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96(4):882-8.
67.
Roncaglioni MC, Tombesi M, Avanzini F, et al for the Risk and Prevention Study Collaborative Group. n-3
fatty acids in patients with multiple cardiovascular risk factors. N Engl J Med 2013;368(19):1800-8.
68.
Saidi A, Alharethi R. Management of chemotherapy induced cardiomyopathy. Curr Cardiol Rev
2011;7(4):245-9.
69.
Bosch X, Rovira M, Sitges M, et al. Enalapril and carvedilol for preventing chemotherapy-induced left
ventricular systolic dysfunction in patients with malignant hemopathies: the OVERCOME trial (preventiOn
of left Ventricular dysfunction with Enalapril and caRvedilol in patients submitted to intensive ChemOtherapy
for the treatment of Malignant hEmopathies). J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61(23):2355-62.
70.
Bradley TD, Logan AG, Kimoff RJ, et al; CANPAP Investigators. Continuous positive airway pressure for
central sleep apnea and heart failure. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2025-33.
71.
McEvoy RD, Antic NA, Heeley E, et al; SAVE Investigators and Coordinators. CPAP for prevention of
cardiovascular events in obstructive sleep apnea. N Engl J Med 2016;375:919-31.
72.
Cowie MR, Woehrle H, Wegscheider K, et al. Adaptive servo-ventilation for central sleep apnea in systolic
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2015;373:1095-105.
73.
De Luca G, Suryapranata H, Zijlstra F, et al. Symptom-onset-to-balloon time and mortality in patients with
acute myocardial infarction treated by primary angioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42(6):991-7.
74.
Nallamothu BK, Bates ER. Percutaneous coronary intervention versus fibrinolytic therapy in acute
myocardial infarction: is timing (almost) everything? Am J Cardiol 2003;92(7):824-6.
75.
Keeley EC, Boura JA, Grines CL. Primary angioplasty versus intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acute
myocardial infarction: a quantitative review of 23 randomised trials. Lancet 2003;361(9351):13-20.
76.
Sabatine MS, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al for the CLARITY-TIMI 28 Investigators. Addition of clopidogrel
to aspirin and fibrinolytic therapy for myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med
2005;352:1179-89.
77.
COMMIT collaborative group. Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin in 45852 patients with acute myocardial
infarction: randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2005;366: 1607-21.
78.
Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med 2007;357(20):2001-15.
79.
Steg PG, James S, Harrington RA, et al. Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with ST-elevation acute
coronary syndromes intended for reperfusion with primary percutaneous coronary intervention: A Platelet
Inhibition and Patient Outcomes (PLATO) trial subgroup analysis. Circulation 2010;122(21):2131-41.
80.
Gottlieb SS, McCarter RJ, Vogel RA, et al. Effect of beta-blockade on mortality among high risk and low
risk patients after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1998; 339:489-97.
81.
Yusuf S, Peto R, Lewis J, et al. Beta blockade during and after myocardial infarction: An overview of the
andomized trials. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1985;27:335-43.
82.
ACE–Inhibitor MI Collaborative group. Evidence for early beneficial effect of ACE inhibitors started within
the first day in patients with AMI: Results of systematic overview among 100000 patients. Circulation
1996;94:1-90.
83.
Fonarow GC, Wright S, Spencer FA, et al. Effect of statin use within the first 24 hours of admission for AMI
on early morbidity and mortality. Am J Cardiol 2005;96:611-6.
84.
Cannon CP, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Comparison of intensive and moderate lipid lowering with
statins after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1562-4.
85.
Larstorp AC, Okin PM, Devereux RB, et al. Regression of ECG-LVH is associated with lower risk of
new-onset heart failure and mortality in patients with isolated systolic hypertension; The LIFE study. Am J
Hypertens 2012;25(10):1101-9.
86.
Baumgartner H, Falk V, Bax JJ, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2017 ESC/EACTS Guidelines for
the Management of Valvular Heart Disease. Eur Heart J 2017;38(36):2739-91.
87.
Umana E, Solares CA, Alpert MA. Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy. Am J Med 2003;114(1):51-5.
88.
Fox KM. Efficacy of perindopril in reduction of cardiovascular events among patients with stable coronary
artery disease: randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial (the EUROPA study).
Lancet 2003;362:782-8.
89.
Braunwald E, Domanski MJ, Fowler SE, et al. PEACE Trial Investigators. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme
inhibition in stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2058–68.
90.
Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and
microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE
substudy. Lancet 2000;355:253-9.
91.
Lindholm LH, Ibsen H, Dahlof B, et al for the LIFE study group. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in
patients with diabetes in the Losartan Intervention For Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a
randomised trial against atenolol. Lancet 2002;359:1004-10.
92.
The On-Target Investigators. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events. N
Engl J Med 2008;358:1547-59.
93.
Gheorghiade M, Goldstein S. β-Blockers in the post-myocardial infarction patient. Circulation 2002;106:394-8.
94.
Ebert GA, Colivicchi F, Caracciolo MM, Riccio C. Additive beneficial effects of beta blockers in the
prevention of symptomatic heart failure. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 2009;72(1):18-22.
95.
Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. SE, EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliflozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117-28.
96.
Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. for the CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliflozin and
cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644-57.
97.
Mahaffey KW, Neal B, Perkovic V, et al for and on behalf of the CANVAS Program Collaborative Group.
Canagliflozin for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular events. Results from the CANVAS
Program (Canagliflozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study). Circulation 2017;137:323-34.
98.
Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al for the DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators.. Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;380(4):347-57.
99.
Stub D, Smith K, Bernard S, et al for the AVOID Investigators. Air versus oxygen in ST-segment- elevation
myocardial infarction. Circulation 2015;131:2143-50.
100. Cabello JB, Burls A, Emparanza JI, Bayliss SE, Quinn T. Oxygen therapy for acute myocardial infarction
(Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;12:CD007160.
101. Hofmann R, James SK, Jernberg T, et al for the DETO2X–SWEDEHEART Investigators. Oxygen therapy
in suspected acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2017;377:1240-9.
102. Park JH, Balmain S, Berry C, Morton JJ, McMurray JJ. Potentially detrimental cardiovascular effects of
oxygen in patients with chronic left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Heart 2010;96(7):533-8.
103. Shuvy M, Atar D, Steg PG, Halvorsen S, Jolly S, Yusuf S, Lotan C. Oxygen therapy in acute coronary
syndrome: are the benefits worth the risk? Eur Heart J 2013:34: 1630-5.
104. Sjöberg F, Singer M. The medical use of oxygen: a time for critical reappraisal. J Intern Med 2013;274(6):505-28.
105. Helviz Y, Einav S. A systematic review of the high-flow nasal cannula for adult patients. Crit Care 2018;22:71.
106. Ni YN, Luo J, Yu H, et al. Can high-flow nasal cannula reduce the rate of endotracheal intubation in adult
patients with acute respiratory failure compared with conventional oxygen therapy and noninvasive
positive pressure ventilation? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2017;151:764-75.
107. Masip J, Betbese AJ, Paex J, et al. Noninvasive pressure support ventilation versus conventional oxygen
therapy in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema: a randomized trial. Lancet 2000;356:2126-32.
108. Mehta S, Jay GD, Wollard RH, et al. Randomized, prospective trial of bilevel versus continuous positive
airway pressure in acute pulmonary edema. Crit Care Med 1997;25:620-8.
109. Pang D, Keenan SP, Cook DJ, Sibbald WJ. The effect of positive pressure airway support on mortality and
the need for intubation in cardiogenic pulmonary edema: a systemic review. Chest 1998;114:1185-92.
110. Gray A, Goodacre S, Newby DE, Masson M, Sampson F, Nicholl J for the 3CPO Trialists. Noninvasive
ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. N Engl J Med 2008;359:142-51.
111. Masip J, Roque M, Sanchz B, Fernandez R, Subirana M, Exposito JA. Non invasive ventilation in acute
cardiogenic pulmonary edema: systemic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2005;294(24):3124-30.
112. Ho KM, Wong K. A comparison of continuous and bi-level positive airway pressure non-invasive ventilation
in patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema: a meta-analysis. Crit Care 2006;10:R49.
113. Li H, Hu C, Xia J, et al. A comparison of bilevel and continuous positive airway pressure noninvasive
ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Am J Emerg Med 2013;31:1322-7.
114. Brater DC. Diuretic therapy. N Engl J Med 1998; 339:387-95.
115. Ng KT, Yap JLL. Continuous infusion vs. intermittent bolus injection of furosemide in acute decompensated
heart failure: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Anaesthesia
2018;73(2):238-47.
116. Salvador DR, Rey NR, Ramos GC, Punzalan FE. Continuous infusion versus bolus injection of loop
diuretics in congestive heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;(1):CD003178.
117. Ng KT, Velayit A, Khoo DKY, Mohd Ismail A, Mansor M. Continuous infusion versus intermittent bolus
injection of furosemide in critically ill patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth 2018;32(5):2303-10.
118. Triposkiadis FK, Butler J, Karayannis G, et al. Efficacy and safety of high dose versus low dose furosemide
with or without dopamine infusion: the Dopamine in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure II (DAD-HF II)
trial. Int J Cardiol 2014;172(1):115-21.
119. Publication Committee for the VMAC Investigators (Vasodilatation in the Management of Acute CHF).
Intravenous nesiritide vs nitroglycerin for treatment of decompensated congestive heart failure: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;287(12):1531-40.
120. Wakai A, McCabe A, Kidney R, et al. Nitrates for acute heart failure syndromes. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2013;(8):CD005151.
121. Bertini G, Giglioli C, Biggeri A, et al. Intravenous nitrates in the prehospital management of acute
pulmonary edema. Ann Emerg Med 1997;30(4):493-9.
122. Hoffman JR, Reynold S. Comparison of nitroglycerin, morphine and frusemide in treatment of presumed
pre-hospital pulmonary edema. Chest 1987;92:586-93.
123. Cotter G, Metzkor E, Kaluski E, et al. Randomised trial of high dose isosorbide dinitrate plus low dose
furosemide versus high dose furosemide plus low dose isosorbide dinitrate in severe pulmonary oedema.
Lancet 1998;351:389-93.
124. Sharon A, Shpirer I, Kaluski E, et al. High-dose intravenous isosorbide-dinitrate is safer and better than
Bi-PAP ventilation combined with conventional treatment for severe pulmonary edema. J Am Coll Cardiol
2000:36(3):832-7.
125. Guiha NH, Cohn JN, Mikulic E, et al. Treatment of refractory heart failure with infusion of nitroprusside. N
Engl J Med 1974;291:587-92.
126. Cuffe MS, Califf RM, Adams KF, Jr, et al. Short-term intravenous milrinone for acute exacerbation of
chronic heart failure: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;287:1541-7.
127. Tacon CL, McCaffrey J, Delaney A. Dobutamine for patients with severe heart failure – a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Intensive Care Med 2012;38(3):359-67.
128. Giamouzis G, Butler J, Starling RC, et al. Impact of dopamine infusion on renal function in hospitalized
heart failure patients: results of the Dopamine in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (DAD-HF) Trial. J
Card Fail 2010;16(12):922-30.
129. Capomolla S, Pozzoli M, Opasich C, et al. Dobutamine and nitroprusside infusion in patients with severe
congestive heart failure: hemodynamic improvement by discordant effects on mitral regurgitation, left atrial
function, and ventricular function. Am Heart J 1997;134:1089-98.
130. Burger AJ, Horton DP, LeJemtel T, et al. Effect of nesiritide (B-type natriuretic peptide) and dobutamine on
ventricular arrhythmias in the treatment of patients with acutely decompensated congestive heart failure:
the PRECEDENT study. Am Heart J 2002;144:1102-8.
131. De Backer D, Biston P, Devriendt J, et al for the SOAP II Investigators. Comparison of dopamine and
norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. N Engl J Med 2010; 362:779-89.
132. Rui Q, Jiang Y, Chen M, Zhang N, Yang H, Zhou Y. Dopamine versus norepinephrine in the treatment of
cardiogenic shock. A PRISMA-compliant meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2017; 96(43):e8402.
133. Levy B, Perez P, Perny J, Thivilier C, Gerard A. Comparison of norepinephrine-dobutamine to epinephrine
for hemodynamics, lactate metabolism, and organ function variables in cardiogenic shock. A prospective,
randomized pilot study. Crit Care Med 2011;39(3):450-5.
134. Vismara LA, Leaman DM, Zelis R. The effect of morphine on venous tone in patients with acute pulmonary
edema. Circulation 1976;54:335-7.
135. Sosnowski MA. Review article: Lack of effect of opiates on the treatment of acute cardiogenic pulmonary
edema. Emerg Med Australasia 2008;20:384-90.
136. Peacock WF, Hollander JE, Diercks DB, Lopatin M, Fonarow G, Emerman CL. Morphine and outcomes in
acute decompensated heart failure: an ADHERE analysis. Emerg Med J 2008;25(4):205-9.
137. Binanay C, Califf RM, Hasselblad V, et al; ESCAPE Investigators and ESCAPE Study Coordinators.
Evaluation study of congestive heart failure and pulmonary artery catheterization effectiveness: the
ESCAPE trial. JAMA 2005;294(13):1625-33.
138. Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al. Impact of the pulmonary artery catheter in critically ill
patients: meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2005;294(13):1664-70.
139. Harvey S, Stevens K, Harrison D, et al. An evaluation of the clinical and cost-effectiveness of pulmonary
artery catheters in patient management in intensive care: a systematic review and a randomised controlled
trial. Health Technol Assess 2006;10(29):iii-iv, ix–xi, 1-133.
140. Thompson CR, Buller CE, Sleeper LA, et al. Cardiogenic shock due to acute severe mitral regurgitation
complicating acute myocardial infarction: a report from the SHOCK Trial Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol
2000;36(3s1):1104-9.
141. Stone GW, Ohman EM, Miller MF, et al. Contemporary utilization and outcomes of intra-aortic balloon
counterpulsation in acute myocardial infarctionThe benchmark registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41(11):1940-5.
142. Romeo F, Acconcia MC, Sergi D, et al. The outcome of intra-aortic balloon pump support in acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock according to the type of revascularization: a
comprehensive meta-analysis. Am Heart J 2013;165(5):679-92.
143. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, et al. Intraaortic balloon support for myocardial infarction with
cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med 2012;367(14):1287-96.
144. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann F-J, et al. Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in acute myocardial
infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock (IABP-SHOCK II): final 12 month results of a randomised,open-label
trial. Lancet 2013;382:1638-45.
145. Thiele H, Sick P, Boudriot E, et al. Randomized comparison of intra-aortic balloon support with a
percutaneous left ventricular assist device in patients with revascularized acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock. Eur Heart J 2005;26:1276-83.
146. Seyfarth M, Sibbing D, Bauer I, et al. A randomized clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a
percutaneous left ventricular assist device versus intra-aortic balloon pumping for treatment of cardiogenic
shock caused by myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:1584-8.
147. Greenberg B, Czerska B, Delgado RM, et al. Effects of continuous aortic flow augmentation in patients
with exacerbation of heart failure inadequately responsive to medical therapy: results of the Multicenter
Trial of the Orqis Medical Cancion System for the Enhanced Treatment of Heart Failure Unresponsive to
Medical Therapy (MOMENTUM). Circulation 2008;118:1241-9.
148. Gheorghiade M, Konstam MA, Burnett JC Jr, et al; Efficacy of Vasopressin Antagonism in Heart Failure
Outcome Study With Tolvaptan (EVEREST) Investigators. Short-term clinical effects of tolvaptan, an oral
vasopressin antagonist, in patients hospitalized for heart failure: the EVEREST Clinical Status Trials.
JAMA 2007;297:1332-43.
149. Konstam MA, Gheorghiade M, Burnett JC Jr, et al; Efficacy of Vasopressin Antagonism in Heart Failure
Outcome Study With Tolvaptan (EVEREST) Investigators. Effects of oral tolvaptan in patients hospitalized
for worsening heart failure: the EVEREST Outcome Trial. JAMA 2007;297:1319-31.
150. Packer M, Colucci W, Fisher L, et al. Effect of levosimendan on the short-term clinical course of patients
with acutely decompensated heart failure. JCHF 2013;1(2):103-11.
151. O'Connor CM, Starling RC, Hernandez AF, et al. Effect of nesiritide in patients with acute decompensated
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2011;365:32-43.
152. Hampton JR. Results of clinical trials with diuretics in heart failure. Br Heart J 1994; 72:(suppl):68-72.
153. Hammarlund MM, Paalzow LK, Odlind B. Pharmacokinetics of furosemide in man after intravenous and
oral administration. Application of moment analysis. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1984;26(2):197-207.
154. Garg R, Yusuf S. Overview of randomized trials of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors on mortality
and morbidity in patients with heart failure. Collaborative Group on ACE Inhibitor Trials. JAMA 1995;273:1450-6.
155. Flather MD, Yusuf S, Kober L, et al. Long-term ACE-inhibitor therapy in patients with heart failure or
left-ventricular dysfunction: a systematic overview of data from individual patients. ACE-Inhibitor Myocardial
Infarction Collaborative Group. Lancet 2000;355:1575-81.
156. Packer M, Coats ASS, Fowler MB, et al. Effect of carvediolol on survival in severe chronic heart failure. N
Engl J Med 2001;344:1651-8.
157. The CAPRICORN Investigators. Effect of carvedilol on outcomes after myocardial infarction in patients
with left ventricular dysfunction: the CAPRICORN randomized trial. Lancet 2001;357:1385-90.
158. Australia-New Zealand Heart failure Research Collaborative Group. Randomised, placebo-controlled trial
of carvedilol in patients with congestive heart failure due to ischemic heart disease. Lancet 1997;349:375-80.
159. Willenheimer R, van Veldhuisen DJ, Silke B, et al. Effect on survival and hospitalization of initiating
treatment for chronic heart failure with bisoprolol followed by enalapril, as compared with the opposite
sequence. Results of the Randomized Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study (CIBIS) III. Circulation
2005;112:2426-35.
160. MERIT-HF Study Group. Effect of metoprolol CR/XL in chronic heart failure: Metoprolol CR/XL randomized
Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF). Lancet 1999;353:2001-7.
161. Poole-Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Cleland JG, et al. Comparison of carvedilol and metoprolol on clinical
outcomes in patients with CHF in the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol European Trail (COMET): randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2003;362:7-13.
162. Pitt B, Zannad F, Remme WJ, et al. for the Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study Investigators. The
effect of spironolactone on morbidity and mortality in patients with severe heart failure. N Engl J Med
1999;341:709-17.
163. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, et al. Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone blocker, in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1309-21.
164. Zannad F, McMurray JJV, Krum H, et al for the EMPHASIS-HF Study Group. Eplerenone in patients with
systolic heart failure and mild symptoms. N Engl J Med 2011;364:11-21.
165. Ronco C, McCullough P, Anker SD, et al for the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) consensus group.
Cardio-renal syndromes: report from the consensus conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative. Eur
Heart J 2010;31(6):703-11.
166. Goldberg RJ, Spencer FA, Gore JM, Lessard D, Yarzebski J. Thirty-year trends (1975 to 2005) in the
magnitude of, management of, and hospital death rates associated with cardiogenic shock in patients with
acute myocardial infarction: a population-based perspective. Circulation 2009;119(9):1211-9.
167. Babaev A, Frederick PD, Pasta DJ, et al. Trends in management and outcomes of patients with acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. JAMA 2005;294(4):448-54.
168. Taylor RS, Sagar VA, Davies EJ, et al. Exercise-based rehabilitation for heart failure. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2014:CD003331.
169. Taylor RS, Davies EJ, Dalal HM, et al. Effects of exercise training for heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative studies. Int J Cardiol 2012;162:6-13.
170. Smart N, Marwick TH. Exercise training for patients with heart failure: a systematic review of factors that
improve mortality and morbidity. Am J Med 2004;116:693-706.
171. Davies EJ, Moxham T, Rees K, et al. Exercise training for systolic heart failure: Cochrane systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur J Heart Fail 2010;12:706-15.
172. Ismail H, McFarlane JR, Nojoumian AH, Dieberg G, Smart NA. Clinical outcomes and cardiovascular
responses to different exercise training intensities in patients with heart failure: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. JACC Heart Fail 2013;1:514-22.
173. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, et al. Efficacy and safety of exercise training in patients with chronic
heart failure: HF-ACTION randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2009;301:1439-50.
174. Edelmann F, Gelbrich G, Dungen HD, et al. Exercise training improves exercise capacity and diastolic
function in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: results of the Ex-DHF (Exercise
training in Diastolic Heart Failure) pilot study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;58:1780-91.
175. Kitzman DW, Brubaker PH, Herrington DM, et al. Effect of endurance exercise training on endothelial
function and arterial stiffness in older patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: a
randomized, controlled, single-blind trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:584-92.
176. Nolte K, Herrmann-Lingen C, Wachter R, et al. Effects of exercise training on different quality of life
dimensions in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: the Ex-DHF-P trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol
2015;22:582-93.
177. Arcand J, Ivanov J, Sasson A, et al. A high-sodium diet is associated with acute decompensated heart
failure in ambulatory heart failure patients: a prospective follow-up study. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:332-7.
178. Colin-Ramirez E, McAlister FA, Zheng Y, et al. The long-term effects of dietary sodium restriction on
clinical outcomes in patients with heart failure. The SODIUM-HF (Study of Dietary Intervention Under 100
mmol in Heart Failure): a pilot study. Am Heart J 2015;169:274-81.e1.
179. Doukky R, Avery E, Mangla A, et al. Impact of dietary sodium restriction on heart failure outcomes. JACC
Heart Fail 2016;4:24-35.
180. Aliti GB, Rabelo ER, Clausell N, et al. Aggressive fluid and sodium restriction in acute decompensated
heart failure: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:1058-64.
181. Gupta D, Georgiopoulou VV, Kalogeropoulos AP, et al. Dietary sodium intake in heart failure. Circulation
2012;126:479-85.
182. Philipson H, Ekman I, Forslund HB, Swedberg K,Schaufelberger M. Salt and fluid restriction is effective in
patients with chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2013;15(11):1304-10.
183. Alvelos M, Ferreira A, Bettencourt P, et al. The effect of dietary sodium restriction on neurohumoral activity
and renal dopaminergic response in patients with heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2004;6:593-9
184. Holst M, Stromberg A, Lindholm M, Willenheimer R. Liberal versus restricted fluid prescription in stabilised
patients with chronic heart failure: result of a randomised cross-over study of the effects on health related
quality of life, physical capacity, thirst and morbidity. Scand Cardiovasc J 2008;42:316-22.
185. Travers B, O’Loughlin C, Murphy NF, et al. Fluid restriction in the management of decompensated heart
failure: no impact on time to clinical stability. J Card Fail 2007;13:128-32.
186. Laonigro I, Correale M, Di Biase M, Altomare E. Alcohol abuse and heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2009;11:453-62.
187. Van Driel AG, De Hosson MJ, Gamel C. Sexuality of patients with chronic heart failure and their spouses
and the need for information regarding sexuality. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2014;13(3):227-34.
188. Hoekstra T, Jaarsma T, Sanderman R, et al. Perceived sexual difficulties and associated factors in patients
with heart failure. Am Heart J 2012;163(2):246-51.
189. Jaarsma T, Stromberg A, Fridlund B, et al. Sexual counselling of cardiac patients: Nurses' perception of
practice, responsibility and confidence. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2010;9:24-9.
190. Steinke E, Jaarsma T. Sexual counseling and cardiovascular disease – Practical approaches. Asian J
Androl 2015;17:32-9.
191. Jaarsma T, Steinke E, Gianotten W. Sexual problems in cardiac patients. How to assess, when to refer. J
Cardiovasc Nurs 2010;25(2):159-64.
192. Oakley CM, Child A, Lung B, et al. Expert consensus document on management of cardiovascular
diseases during pregnancy. The Task Force on the Management of Cardivascular Diseases during
Pregnancy of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 2003:24;761-81.
193. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Heart Disease in Pregnancy, 2nd Ed, 2016.
Available at www.acadmed.com.my
194. World Health Organization. Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use: A WHO family planning
cornerstone (4th ed). Geneva; 2010. Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK138639/pdf/
Bookshelf_NBK138639.pdf (Accessed 6 April 2019).
195. Roos-Hesselink JW, Cornette J, Sliwa K, Pieper PG, Veldtman GR, Johnson MR. Contraception and
cardiovascular disease. Eur Heart J 2015;36(27):1728-34.
196. Pearse SG, Cowie MR. Sleep disordered breathing in heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:353-61.
197. Artz M, Woehrle H, Oldenburg O, et al; SchlaHF Investigators. Prevalence and predictors of sleep
disordered breathing in patients with stable chronic heart failure. JACC: Heart Failure 2016;4(2):116-25.
198. Naughton MT, Kee K. Sleep apnea in heart failure. To treat or not to treat? Respirology 2017:22:217-29.
199. Constanzo MR, Khayat R, Ponikowski P, et al. Mechanisms and clinical consequences of untreated
central sleep apnea in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;65(1):72-84.
200. Lyons OD, Floras JS, Logan AG, et al. Design of the effect of adaptive servo-ventilation on survival and
cardiovascular hospital admissions in patients with heart failure and sleep apnea: the ADVENT-HF trial.
Eur J Heart Fail 2017:19;579-87.
201. Gallager R, Luttik ML, Jaarsma T. Social support and self-care in heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs
2011;26(6):439-45.
202. Luttik ML, Jaarsma T, Moser D, et al. The importance and impact of social support on outcomes in patients
with heart failure: An overview of the literature. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2005;20:162-9.
203. Struthers AD, Anderson G, Donnan PT, et al. Social deprivation increases cardiac hospitalizations in
chronic heart failure independent of disease severity and diuretic non-adherence. Heart 2000;83:12-6.
204. Huerta C, Varas-Lorenzo C, Castellsague J, Garcia Rodriguez LA. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
and risk of first hospital admission for heart failure in the general population. Heart 2006;92:1610-5
205. Dormans TP, Gerlag PG, Russel FG, et al. Combination diuretic therapy in severe congestive cardiac
failure. Drugs 1998;55:165-72.
206. Kissling KT, Pickworth KK. Comparison of the effects of combination diuretic therapy with oral
hydrochlorothiazide or intravenous chlorothiazide in patients receiving intravenous furosemide therapy for
the treatment of heart failure. Pharmacotherapy 2014;34(8):882-7.
207. Jentzer JC, DeWald TA, Hernandez AF. Combination of loop diuretics with thiazide-type diuretics in heart
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56:1527-34.
208. Brisco‐Bacik MA, Ter Maaten JM, Houser SR, et al. Outcomes associated with a strategy of adjuvant
metolazone or high‐dose loop diuretics in acute decompensated heart failure: a propensity analysis. JAHA
2018;7:e009149.
209. Rosenberg J, Gustafsson F, Galatius S, Hildebrandt PR. Combination therapy with metolazone and loop
diuretics in outpatients with refractory heart failure: an observational study and review of the literature.
Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 2005;19(4):30-6.
210. Moranville MP, Choi S, Hogg J, Anderson AS, Rich JD. Comparison of metolazone versus chlorothiazide
in acute decompensated heart failure with diuretic resistance. Cardiovasc Ther 2015;33(2):42-9.
211. Dargie HJ, Allison ME, Kennedy AC, Gray MJ. High dosage metolazone in chronic renal failure. Br Med J
1972;4(5834):196.
212. Wollam GL, Tarazi RC, Bravo EL, Dustan HP. Diuretic potency of combined hydrochlorothiazide and
furosemide therapy in patients with azotemia. Am J Med 1982;72(6):929.
213. Fliser D, Schröter M, Neubeck M, Ritz E. Coadministration of thiazides increases the efficacy of loop
diuretics even in patients with advanced renal failure. Kidney Int 1994;46(2):482.
214. Shekelle PG, Rich MW, Morton SC, et al. Efficacy of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and
beta-blockers in the management of left ventricular systolic dysfunction according to race, gender, and
diabetic status: a meta-analysis of major clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:1529-38.
215. Granger CB, McMurray JJ, Yusuf S, et al. Effects of candesartan in patients with chronic heart failure and
reduced left-ventricular systolic function intolerant to angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors: the
CHARM-Alternative trial. Lancet 2003;362(9386):772-776.
216. Maggioni AP, Anand I, Gottlieb SO, et al. Effects of valsartan on morbidity and mortality in patients with
heart failure not receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;40:1414-21.
217. Yusuf S, Teo K, Anderson C, et al. Effects of the angiotensin-receptor blocker telmisartan on cardiovascular
events in high-risk patients intolerant to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2008;372(9644):1174-1183.
218. Caldeira D, David C, Sampaio C. Tolerability of angiotensin-receptor blockers in patients with intolerance
to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Cardiovasc
Drugs 2012;12(4):263-77.
219. Lee VC, Rhew DC, Dylan M, et al. Meta-analysis: angiotensin-receptor blockers in chronic heart failure
and high-risk acute myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med 2004;141:693-704.
220. Pfeffer MA, McMurray JJ, Velazquez EJ, et al for the Valsartan in Acute Myocardial Infarction Trial
Investigators. Valsartan, captopril or both in myocardial infarction complicated by heart failure,
left-ventricular dysfunction or both. N Engl J Med 2003; 349:1893-906.
221. Bakris GL, Weir MR. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor associated elevations in serum creatinine.
Is this a cause for concern? Arch Intern Med 2000;160:685-93.
222. Haymore BR, Yoon J, Mikita CP, et al. Risk of angioedema with angiotensin receptor blockers in patients
with prior angioedema associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a meta-analysis. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2008;101(5):495-499.
223. Yusuf S; Teo KK; Pogue J; Dyal L; Copland I; Schumacher H; Dagenais G; Sleight P; Anderson C.
Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events. N Engl J Med 2008; 358(15):1547-59.
224. The RESOLVD Investigators. Effects of metoprolol CR in patients with ischemic and dilated
cardiomyopathy. Circulation 2000;101:378-84.
225. Foody JM, Farrell MH, Krumholz HM. Beta-blocker therapy in heart failure: scientific review. JAMA 2002;287:883-9.
226. Van Veldhuisen DJ, Cohen-Solal A, Bohm M, et al. Beta-blockade with nebivolol in elderly heart failure
patients with impaired and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction: data from SENIORS (Study of
Effects of Nebivolol Intervention on Outcomes and Rehospitalization in Seniors With Heart Failure). J Am
Coll Cardiol 2009;53:2150-8.
227. McMurray JJ, Packer M, Desai AS, et al; PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees. Angiotensin-ne
prilysin inhibition versus enalapril in heart failure. N Engl J Med 2014;371:993-1004.
228. Okumura N, Jhund PS, Gong I, et al on behalf of the PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees.
Effects of sacubitril/valsartan in the PARADIGM-HF Trial (Prospective Comparison of ARNI with ACEI to
Determine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart Failure) according to background therapy.
Circ Heart Fail 2016;9:e003212.
229. Packer M, Califf RM, Konstam MA, et al. Comparison of omapatrilat and enalapril in patients with chronic
heart failure: the Omapatrilat Versus Enalapril Randomized Trial of Utility in Reducing Events (OVERTURE).
Circulation 2002;106:920-6.
230. Kostis JB, Packer M, Black HR, et al. Omapatrilat and enalapril in patients with hypertension: the
Omapatrilat Cardiovascular Treatment vs. Enalapril (OCTAVE) trial. Am J Hypertens 2004;17:103-11.
231. Vodovar N, Paquet C, Mebazaa A, Launay J-M, Hugon J, Cohen-Solal A. Neprilysin, cardiovascular, and
Alzheimer’s diseases: the therapeutic split? Eur Heart J 2015;36:902-5.
232. Yasojima K, McGeer EG, McGeer PL. Relationship between beta amyloid peptide generating molecules
and neprilysin in Alzheimer disease and normal brain. Brain Res 2001;919:115-21.
233. Langenickel TH, Tsubouchi C, Ayalasomayajula S, et al. The effect of LCZ696 (sacubitril/valsartan) on
amyloid-β concentrations in cerebrospinal ﬂuid in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2016;81(5):878-90.
234. Swedberg K, Komajda M, Böhm M, et al. Ivabradine and outcomes in chronic heart failure (SHIFT): a
randomised placebo-controlled study. Lancet 2010;376:875-85.
235. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, et al. Ivabradine for patients with stable coronary artery disease and left-ventricular
systolic dysfunction (BEAUTIFUL): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2008;372:807.
236. Uretsky BF, Young JB, Shahidi FE, et al. Randomized study assessing the effect of digoxin withdrawal in
patients with mild to moderate congestive heart failure: results of the PROVED trial: PROVED Investigative
Group. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993;22:955-62.
237. Packer MR, Gheorghiade M, Young JB, et al on behalf of the RADIANCE Study: Withdrawal of digoxin
from patients with chronic heart failure treated with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. N Engl J
Med 1993;329:1-7.
238. The Digitalis Investigation Group. The effect of digoxin on mortality and morbidity in patients with heart
failure. N Engl J Med 1997;336:525-33.
239. Khand AU, Rankin AC, Martin W, et al. Digoxin or carvedilol for the treatment of atrial fibrillation in patients
with heart failure? (Abstract). Heart 2000; 83:30.
240. Farshi R, Kistner D, Sarma JS, Longmate JA, Singh BN. Ventricular rate control in chronic atrial fibrillation
during daily activity and programmed exercise: a crossover open-label study of five drug regimens. J Am
Coll Cardiol 1999;33(2):304-10.
241. Rathore SS, Curtis JP, Weng Y, et al. Association of serum digoxin concentration and outcomes in patients
with heart failure. JAMA 2003;289:871-8.
242. Adams KF Jr, Patterson JH, Gattis WA, et al. Relationship of serum digoxin concentration to mortality and
morbidity in women in the Digitalis Investigation Group Trial: a retrospective analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol
2005;46:497-504.
243. Lopes R, Rordorf R, De Ferrari G, et al. Digoxin and mortality in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2018;71:1063-74.
244. Cohn JN, Archibald DG, Ziesche S, et al. Effect of vasodilator therapy on mortality in chronic congestive
heart failure: results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1547-52.
245. Taylor AL, Ziesche S, Yancy C, et al; African-American Heart Failure Trial Investigators. Combination of
isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine in blacks with heart failure. N Engl J Med 2004;351(20):2049-57.
246. Thadani U. Challenges with nitrate therapy and nitrate tolerance: prevalence, prevention, and clinical
relevance. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs 2014;14:287-301.
247. Madelaire C, Gislason G, Kristensen SL, et al. Low-dose aspirin in heart failure not complicated by atrial
fibrillation: a nationwide propensity-matched study. JACC Heart Fail 2018;6(2):156-67.
248. Cokkinos DV, Haralabopoulos GC, Kostis JB, Toutouzas PK, HELAS Investigators. Efficacy of antithrombotic
therapy in chronic heart failure: the HELAS Study. Eur J Heart Fail 2006;8(4):428-32.
249. Cleland JG, Findlay I, Jafri S, et al. The Warfarin/Aspirin Study in Heart failure (WASH): a randomized trial
comparing antithrombotic strategies for patients with heart failure. Am Heart J 2004;148(1):157.
250. Lip GY, Shantsila E. Anticoagulation versus placebo for heart failure in sinus rhythm. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2014;3:CD003336.
251. Zannad F, Anker SD, Byra WM, et al; COMMANDER HF Investigators. Rivaroxaban in patients with heart
failure, sinus rhythm, and coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2018;379(14):1332.
252. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients
with Atrial Fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation 2014;130:e199.
253. Steffel J, Verhamme P, Potpara TS, et al. The 2018 European Heart Rhythm Association Practical Guide
on the Use of Non-Vitamin K Antagonist Oral Anticoagulants in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Eur Heart J
2018:39:1330-93.
254. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Aguilar MI. Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy to prevent stroke in patients who
have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med 2007;146(12):857-67.
255. Dentali F, Riva N, Crowther M, Turpie AG, Lip GY, Ageno W. Efficacy and safety of the novel oral anticoagulants
in atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. Circulation 2012;126(20):2381-91.
256. Adam SS, McDuffie JR, Ortel TL, Williams JW Jr. Comparative effectiveness of warfarin and new oral
anticoagulants for the management of atrial fibrillation and venous thromboembolism: a systematic review.
Ann Intern Med 2012;157(11):796-807.
257. Ntaios G, Papavasileiou V, Diener HC, Makaritsis K, Michel P. Nonvitamin-K-antagonist oral anticoagulants
in patients with atrial fibrillation and previous stroke or transient ischemic attack: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Stroke 2012;43(12):3298-304.
258. Swedberg K, Olsson LG, Charlesworth A, et al. Prognostic relevance of atrial fibrillation in patients with
chronic heart failure on long-term treatment with beta-blockers: results from COMET. Eur Heart J
2005;26:1303-8.
259. Smit MD, Moes ML, Maass AH, et al. The importance of whether atrial fibrillation or heart failure develops
first. Eur J Heart Fail 2012;14:1030-40.
260. Olsson LG, Swedberg K, Ducharme A, et al. Atrial fibrillation and risk of clinical events in chronic heart
failure with and without left ventricular systolic dysfunction: results from the Candesartan in Heart
Failure-Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity (CHARM) program. J Am Coll Cardiol
2006:47:1997-2004.
261. Roy D, Talajic M, Nattel S, et al. Rhythm control versus rate control for atrial fibrillation and heart failure. N
Engl J Med 2008;358:2667-77.
262. Hagens VE, Crijns HJGM, Van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Rate control versus rhythm control for patients with
persistent atrial fibrillation with mild to moderate heart failure: results from the RAte Control versus
Electrical cardioversion (RACE) study. Am Heart J 2005;149:1106-11.
263. Van Gelder IC, Hagens VE, Bosker HA, et al. A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients
with recurrent persistent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1834-40.
264. Van Gelder IC, Wyse DG, Chandler ML, et al; RACE and AFFIRM Investigators. Does intensity of
rate-control influence outcome in atrial fibrillation? An analysis of pooled data from the RACE and AFFIRM
studies. Europace 2006;8:935-42.
265. Li SJ, Sartipy U, Lund LH, et al. Prognostic significance of resting heart rate and use of b-blockers in atrial
fibrillation and sinus rhythm in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: findings from the
Swedish Heart Failure Registry. Circ Heart Fail 2015;8:871-9.
266. Mareev Y, Cleland JGF. Should b-blockers be used in patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation? Clin
Ther 2015;37:2215-24.
267. Van Gelder IC, Groenveld HF, Crijns HJ, et al. Lenient versus strict rate control in patients with atrial
fibrillation. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1363-73.
268. Kirchhof K, Benussi S, Kotecha D, et al. 2016 ESC Guidelines for the Management of Atrial Fibrillation
developed in collaboration with EACTS. Eur Heart J 2016:37(38): 2893-962.
269. Khand AU, Rankin AC, Kaye GC, et al. Systematic review of the management of atrial fibrillation in patients
with heart failure. Eur Heart J 2000; 21:614-32.
270. Olshansky B, Rosenfeld CE, Warner AL, et al. The Atrial Fibrillation Follow Up Investigation of Rhythm
Management (AFFIRM) Study; approach to control rate in atrial fibrillation. J Am Col Cardiol 2004;43:1201-8.
271. Kotecha D, Holmes J, Krum H, et al for the Beta-Blockers in Heart Failure Collaborative Group. Efficacy of
β blockers in patients with heart failure plus atrial fibrillation: an individual-patient data meta-analysis.
Lancet 2014;384:2235-43.
272. Hofmann R, Steinwender C, Kammler J, Kypta A, Leisch F. Effects of a high dose intravenous bolus
amiodarone in patients with atrial fibrillation and a rapid ventricular rate. Int J Cardiol 2006;110:27-32.
273. Hofmann R, Wimmer G, Leisch F. Intravenous amiodarone bolus immediately controls heart rate in
patients with atrial fibrillation accompanied by severe congestive heart failure. Heart 2000;84:635.
274. Marrouche NF, Brachmann J, Andresen D, et al. for the CASTLE-AF Investigators. Catheter ablation for
atrial fibrillation with heart failure. N Engl J Med 2018; 378:417-27.
275. Hayashi M, Shimizu W, Albert CM, The spectrum of epidemiology underlying sudden cardiac death. Circ
Res 2015;116:1887-906.
276. Wellens HJJ, Schwartz PJ, Lindemans FW, et al. Risk stratification for sudden cardiac death: current
status and challenges for the future. Eur Heart J 2014: 35(25):1642-51.
277. Luu M, Stevenson WG, Stevenson LW, et al. Diverse mechanisms of unexpected cardiac arrest in
advanced heart failure. Circulation 1989; 80:1675-80.
278. Wang Y, Scheinman MM, Chien WW, et al. Patients with supraventricular tachycardia presenting with
aborted sudden death. Incidence, mechanism and long-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol 1991;18:1711-19.
279. Nutall SL, Toescu V, Kendall MJ. Beta blockers have a key role in reducing morbidity and mortality after
infarction. BMJ 2000;320:581.
280. The CIBIS II Investigators. The Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study II (CIBIS-II): a randomised trial.
Lancet 1999;353(9146):90-13.
281. Al-Gobari M, El Khatib C, Pillon F, Gueyffier F. β-Blockers for the prevention of sudden cardiac death in
heart failure patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2013;13:52.
282. Bapoje SR, Bahia A, Hokanson JE, et al. Effects of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists on the risk of
sudden cardiac death in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Circ Heart Fail 2013;6:166-173.
283. Domanski MJ, Exner DV, Borkowf CB, Geller NL, Rosenberg Y, Pfeffer MA. Effect of angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibition on sudden cardiac death in patients following acute myocardial infarction: a
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999;33:598-604.
284. Solomon SD, Wang D, Finn P, et al. Effect of candesartan on cause-specific mortality in heart failure
patients: the Candesartan in Heart failure Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM)
program. Circulation 2004;110:2180-3.
285. Teo KK, Mitchell LB, Pogue J, Bosch J, Dagenais G, Yusuf S on behalf of the HOPE Investigators. Effect
of ramipril in reducing sudden deaths and nonfatal cardiac arrests in high-risk individuals without heart
failure or left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation 2004;110:1413-7.
286. Naccarella F, Naccarelli GV, Maranga SS, et al. Do ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists reduce
total mortality and arrhythmic mortality? A critical review of controlled clinical trials. Curr Opin Cardiol
2002;17:6-18.
287. Desai AS, McMurray JJ, Packer M, et al. Effect of the angiotensin-receptor-neprilysin inhibitor LCZ696
compared with enalapril on mode of death in heart failure patients. Eur Heart J 2015;36:1990-7.
288. Kazem Rahimi K, Majoni W, Merhi A, Emberson J. Effect of statins on ventricular tachyarrhythmia, cardiac
arrest, and sudden cardiac death: a meta-analysis of published and unpublished evidence from
randomized trials. Eur Heart J 2012;33(13):1571-81.
289. Wever EF, Hauer RN, van Capelle FL, et al. Randomized study of implantable defibrillator as first-choice
therapy versus conventional strategy in postinfarct sudden death survivors. Circulation 1995;91:2195-203.
290. Siebels J, Kuck KH. Implantable cardioverter defibrillator compared with antiarrhythmic drug treatment in
cardiac arrest survivors (the Cardiac Arrest Study Hamburg). Am Heart J 1994;127:1139-44.
291. The Antiarrhythmics vs Implantable Defibrillator (AVID) Investigators. A comparison of antiarrhythmic drug
therapy with implantable defibrillators in patients resuscitated from near fatal ventricular arrhythmias. N
Engl J Med 1997;337:1576-83.
292. Connolly SJ, Hallstrom AP, Cappato R, et al. Meta-analysis of the implantable cardioverter defibrillator
secondary prevention trials. AVID, CASH and CIDS Studies. Antiarrhythmics vs Implantable Defibrillator
Study. Cardiac Arrest Study Hamburg. Canadian Implantable Defibrillator Study. Eur Heart J 2000;21(24):2071-8.
293. Kuck KH, Cappato R, Siebels J, Ruppel R. Randomized comparison of antiarrhythmic drug therapy with
implantable defibrillators in patients resuscitated from cardiac arrest: the Cardiac Arrest Study Hamburg
(CASH). Circulation 2000;102:748-54.
294. Steinberg JS, Martins J, Sadanandan S, et al; AVID Investigators. Antiarrhythmic drug use in the implantable
defibrillator arm of the Antiarrhythmics Versus Implantable Defibrillators (AVID) Study. Am Heart J 2001;142(3):520.
295. Vardas PE, Auricchio A, Blanc JJ, et al. Guidelines for cardiac pacing and cardiac resynchronization
therapy: The Task Force for Cardiac Pacing and Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy of the European
Society of Cardiology. Developed in Collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm Association. Eur Heart
J 2007;28 (18):2256-95.
296. Elkayam U, Amin J, Mehra A, et al. A prospective, randomized, double-blind, crossover study to compare
the efficacy and safety of chronic nifedipine therapy with that of isosorbide dinitrate and their combination
in the treatment of chronic congestive heart failure. Circulation 1990;82:1954-61.
297. Littler WA, Sheridan DJ. Placebo controlled trial of felodipine in patients with mild to moderate heart failure.
UK Study Group. Br Heart J 1995;73:428-33.
298. Goldstein RE, Boccuzzi SJ, Cruess D, Nattel S. Diltiazem increases late-onset congestive heart failure in
postinfarction patients with early reduction in ejection fraction. The Adverse Experience Committee; and
the Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Research Group. Circulation 1991;83:52-60.
299. [No authors listed]. Effect of verapamil on mortality and major events after acute myocardial infarction (the
Danish Verapamil Infarction Trial II-DAVIT II). Am J Cardiol 1990;66:779-85.
300. Packer M, O’Connor CM, Ghali JK, et al. Effect of amlodipine on morbidity and mortality in severe chronic
heart failure. Prospective Randomized Amlodipine Survival Evaluation Study Group. N Engl J Med
1996;335:1107-14.
301. Packer M, Carson P, Elkayam U, et al. Effect of amlodipine on the survival of patients with severe chronic
heart failure due to a nonischemic cardiomyopathy: results of the PRAISE-2 study (Prospective
Randomized Amlodipine Survival Evaluation 2). JACC Heart Fail 2013;1:308-14.
302. Cohn JN, Ziesche S, Smith R et al. Effect of the calcium antagonist felodipine as supplementary vasodilator
therapy in patients with chronic heart failure treated with enalapril. Circulation 1997;96:856-63.
303. Abraham WT, Fisher WG, Smith AL, et al. Cardiac resynchronization in chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med
2002;346:1845-53.
304. Bristow MR, Saxon LA, Boehmer J, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy with or without an implantable
defibrillator in advanced chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2140-50.
305. Cleland JG, Daubert JC, Erdmann E, et al. The effect of cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and
mortality in heart failure. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1539-49.
306. Jarcho JA. Biventricular pacing. N Engl J Med 2006;355:288-94.
307. Patwala AY, Wright DJ. Device based treatment of heart failure. Postgrad Med J 2005;81:286-91.
308. Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DS, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy for the prevention of heart-failure
events. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1329-38.
309. Abraham WT, Young JB, Leon AR, et al. Effects of cardiac resynchronization on disease progression in
patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction, an indication for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator,
and mildly symptomatic chronic heart failure. Circulation 2004;110:2864-8.
310. Linde C, Abraham WT, Gold MR, St John Sutton M, Ghio S, Daubert C. Randomized trial of cardiac
resynchronization in mildly symptomatic heart failure patients and in asymptomatic patients with left
ventricular dysfunction and previous heart failure symptoms. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:1834-43.
311. Tang A, Wells G, Talajic M, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy for mild-to-moderate heart failure. N
Engl J Med 2010;363:2385-95.
312. Ruschitzka F, Abraham WT, Singh JP, et al for the EchoCRT Study Group. Cardiac-resynchronization
therapy in heart failure with a narrow QRS complex. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1395-405.
313. Beshai JF, Grimm RA, Nagueh SF, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy in heart failure with narrow
QRS complexes. N Engl J Med 2007;357(24):2461-71.
314. Donahue T, Niazi I, Leon A, et al. One year follow-up of CRT in narrow QRS patients with mechanical
dyssynchronie. Circulation 2008:118:949.
315. Gasparini M, Auricchio A, Metra M, et al. Long-term survival in patients undergoing cardiac resynchronization
therapy: the importance of performing atrio-ventricular junction ablation in patients with permanent atrial
fibrillation. Eur Heart J 2008;29:1644-52.
316. Khadjooi K, Foley PW, Chalil S, et al. Long-term effects of cardiac resynchronisation therapy in patients
with atrial fibrillation. Heart 2008;94:879-83.
317. Brignole M, Pokushalov E, Pentimalli F, et al; APAF-CRT Investigators. A randomized controlled trial of
atrioventricular junction ablation and cardiac resynchronization therapy in patients with permanent atrial
fibrillation and narrow QRS. Eur Heart J 2018:39:3999-4008.
318. Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DS, et al for the Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial (MADIT)
Investigators. Improved survival with an implanted defibrillator in patients with coronary disease at high
risk for ventricular arrhythmia. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1933-40.
319. Buxton AE, Lee KL, Fisher JD, et al. A randomized study of the prevention of sudden death in patients with
coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 1999; 341:1882-90.
320. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al. Prophylactic implantation of a defibrillator in patients with myocardial
infarction and reduced ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2002; 346:877-83.
321. Bardy GH, Lee KL, Mark DB, et al. Amiodarone or an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for congestive
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2005;352:225-37.
322. Lars Køber, Thune JJ, Nielsen JC, et al for the DANISH Investigators. Defibrillator implantation in patients
with nonischemic systolic heart failure. N Engl J Med 2016;375:1221-30.
323. Kadish A, Dyer A, Daubert JP, et al for the Defibrillators in Non-Ischemic Cardiomyopathy Treatment
Evaluation (DEFINITE) Investigators. Prophylactic defibrillator implantation in patients with nonischemic
dilated cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2151-8.
324. Desai AS, Fang JC, Maisel WH, Baughman KL. Implantable deﬁbrillators for the prevention of mortality in
patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA
2004;292:2874-9.
325. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al for the STICHES Investigators. Coronary artery bypass surgery in
patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 2016;374:1511-20.
326. Otto CM. Timing of surgery in mitral regurgitation. Heart 2003;89(1):100-5.
327. Fattouch K, Guccione F, Sampognaro R, et al. Efficacy of adding mitral valve restrictive annuloplasty to
coronary artery bypass grafting in patients with moderate ischemic mitral valve regurgitation: a
randomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2009;138:278-85.
328. Chan KMJ, Punjabi PP, Flather M, et al for the RIME Investigators. Coronary artery bypass surgery with or
without mitral valve annuloplasty in moderate functional ischemic mitral regurgitation. Final results of the
Randomized Ischemic Mitral Evaluation (RIME) Trial. Circulation 2012;126:2502-10.
329. Stone GW, Lindenfeld J, Abraham WT, et al for the COAPT Investigators. Transcatheter mitral-valve repair
in patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med 2018 379:2307-18.
330. Obadia J-F, Messika-Zeitoun D, Leurent G, et al for the MITRA-FR Investigators. Percutaneous repair or
medical treatment for secondary mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2297-306.
331. Castelvecchio S, Menicanti L, Di Donato M. Surgical ventricular restoration to reverse left ventricular
remodeling. Curr Cardiol Rev 2010;6:15-23.
332. Jones RH, Velazquez EJ, Michler RE, Sopko G, Oh JK, O'Connor CM, et al for the STICH Hypothesis 2
Investigators. Coronary bypass surgery with or without surgical ventricular reconstruction. N Engl J Med
2009;360:1705-17.
333. Stewart GC, Givertz MM. Mechanical circulatory support for advanced heart failure. Patients and technology
in evolution. Circulation 2012;125:1304-15.
334. Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ et al. Long term mechanical left ventricular assistance for end stage
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1435-43.
335. Health Quality Ontario. Left ventricular assist devices: an evidence-based analysis. Ont Health Technol
Assess Ser 2004;4(3):1-69.
336. Davies M, Hobbs F, Davis R, et al. Burden of systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction in the community:
appreciating the scope of the heart failure epidemic. Lancet 2001;358(9280):439
337. Redfield MM, Jacobsen SJ, Burnett JC Jr, Mahoney DW, Bailey KR, Rodeheffer RJ. Prevalence of
left-ventricular systolic dysfunction and heart failure in the Echocardiographic Heart of England Screening
study: a population based study. Lancet 2001;358(9280):439-44.
338. Jong P, Yusuf S, Rousseau MF, et al. Effect on enalapril on 12-year survival and life expectancy In patients
with left ventricular systolic dysfunction: a follow-up study. Lancet 2003;361:1843-8.
339. The SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril on survival in patients with reduced left ventricular ejection
fractions and congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med 1991;325(5):293-302.
340. Wan S, Vogel MW, Chen HH. Pre-clinical diastolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:407-16.
341. Galasko GI, Barnes SC, Collinson P, Lahiri A, Senior R. What is the most cost-effective strategy to screen
for left ventricular systolic dysfunction: natriuretic peptides, the electrocardiogram, hand-held echocardiography,
traditional echocardiography, or their combination? Eur Heart J 2006;27(2):193.
342. Nielsen OW, McDonagh TA, Robb SD, Dargie HJ. Retrospective analysis of the cost-effectiveness of
using plasma brain natriuretic peptide in screening for left ventricular systolic dysfunction in the general
population. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41(1):113.
343. Ledwidge M, Gallagher J, Conlon C, et al. Natriuretic peptide-based screening and collaborative care for
heart failure: the STOP-HF randomized trial. JAMA 2013 310(1):66-74.
344. Carrubba S, Todaro MC, Zito C, et al. Asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction and metabolic syndrome:
Results from an Italian Multicenter Study. J Cardiovasc Echo 2013;23:96-101.
345. Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moyé LA, et al. Effect of captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. Results of the survival and ventricular enlargement trial.
The SAVE Investigators. N Engl J Med 1992;327(10):669.
346. Køber L, Torp-Pedersen C, Carlsen JE, et al. A clinical trial of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor
trandolapril in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. Trandolapril Cardiac
Evaluation (TRACE) Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995;333(25):1670.
347. Vantrimpont P, Rouleau JL, Wunetal for the SAVE Investigators. Additive beneficial effects of β-blockers to
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in the Survuival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) study. J
Am Coll Cardiol 1997;29:229-36.
348. O'Keefe JH, Abuissa H, Pitt B. Eplerenone improves prognosis in postmyocardial infarction diabetic
patients with heart failure: results from EPHESUS. Diabetes Obes Metab 2008;10(6):492-7.
349. Chen MD, Dong SS, Cai NY, et al. Efficacy and safety of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists for
patients with heart failure and diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc
Disord 2016;16:28.
350. Montalescot G, Pitt B, Lopez de Sa E, et al. Early eplerenone treatment in patients with acute ST-elevation
myocardial infarction without heart failure: The Randomized Double-Blind Reminder Study. Eur Heart J
2014;35:2295-302.
351. The Multicenter Diltiazem Post infarction Trial Research Group. The effect of diltiazem on mortality and
reinfarction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1988;319:385-92.
352. Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2006;355:251-9.
353. Paulus WJ, Tscho¨pe C, Sanderson JE, et al. How to diagnose diastolic heart failure: a consensus
statement on the diagnosis of heart failure with normal left ventricular ejection fraction by the Heart Failure
and Echocardiography Associations of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 2007:28(20):2539-50.
354. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a
report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/ American heart association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62(16):e147-239.
355. Bhuiyan T, Maurer MS. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: persistent diagnosis, therapeutic
enigma. Curr Cardiovasc Risk Rep 2011;5:440-9.
356. Maréchaux S, Six-Carpentier MM, Bouabdallaoui N, et al. Prognostic importance of comorbidities in heart
failure with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. Heart Vessels 2011;26(3):313-20.
357. Sartipy U, Dahstrom U, Fu M, et al. Atrial fibrillation in heart failure with preserved, mid range and reduced
ejection fraction. JACC Heart Failure 2017;5:567-74.
358. Piller LB, Baraniuk S, Simpson LM, et al. Long-term follow-up of participants with heart failure in the
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). Circulation
2011;124:1811-8.
359. Cairns JA, Connolly S, McMurtry S, et al. Canadian Cardiovascular Society Atrial Fibrillation Guidelines
2010: Prevention of stroke and systemic thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation and flutter. Can J Cardiol
2011;27:74-90.
360. Camm AJ, Kirchhof P, Lip GY, et al. Guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation: the Task Force
for the Management of Atrial Fibrillation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2
010;31:2369-429.
361. Hernandez AF, Hammill BG, O'Connor CM, et al. Clinical effectiveness of beta-blockers in heart failure:
findings from the OPTIMIZE-HF (Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized
Patients with Heart Failure) Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:184-92.
362. Setar JF, Zaret BL, Schulman DS, et al. Usefulness of verapamil for congestive heart failure associated
with abnormal left ventricular diastolic filling and normal left ventricular systolic performance. Am J Cardiol
1990;66:981-6.
363. Bonow RO, Dilsizian V, Rosing DR, et al. Verapamil-induced improvement in left ventricular diastolic filling
and increased exercise tolerance in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: short and long term
effects. Circulation 1985;72:853-64.
364. Yusuf S, Pfeffer MA , Swedberg K, et al. Effects of candesartan in patients with CHF and preserved
left-ventricular ejection fraction: the CHARM – Preserved Trial. Lancet 2003;362:777-81.
365. Massie BM, Carson PE, McMurray JJ, et al. Irbesartan in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection
fraction. N Engl J Med 2008;359:2456-67.
366. Yip GW, Wang M, Wang T, et al. The Hong Kong Diastolic Heart Failure Study: a randomised controlled
trial of diuretics, irbesartan and ramipril on quality of life, exercise capacity, left ventricular global and
regional function in heart failure with a normal ejection fraction. Heart 2008;94(5):573-80.
367. Cleland JG, Tendera M, Adamus J, Freemantle N, Polonski L, Taylor J, PEP-CHF Investigators. The
Perindopril in Elderly People with Chronic Heart Failure (PEP-CHF) study. Eur Heart J 2006;27(19):2338-45.
368. Pitt B, Pfeffer MA, Assmann SF, et al. TOPCAT Investigators. Spironolactone for heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1383-92.
369. Fukuta H, Goto T, Wakami K, et al. Effects of drug and exercise intervention on functional capacity and
quality of life in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2016;23:78-85.
370. Adamson PB, Abraham WT, Bourge RC, et al. Wireless pulmonary artery pressure monitoring guides
management to reduce decompensation in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail
2014;7:935-44.
371. Packer M. Heart failure: the most important, preventable, and treatable cardiovascular complication of
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2018;41:11-13.
372. Stratton IM, Adler AI, Neil HA, et al. Association of glycaemia with macrovascular and microvascular
complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 35): prospective observational study. BMJ 2000;321:405-12.
373. Metra M, Zacà V, Parati G, et al. Cardiovascular and noncardiovascular comorbidities in patients with
chronic heart failure. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 2011;12:76-84.
374. MacDonald MR, Petrie MC, Varyani F, et al. Impact of diabetes on outcomes in patients with low and
preserved ejection fraction heart failure: an analysis of the Candesartan in Heart failure: Assessment of
Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM) programme. Eur Heart J 2008;29:1377-85.
375. Sandesara PB, O’Neal WT, Kelli HM, et al. The prognostic significance of diabetes and microvascular
complications in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Diabetes Care 2018;41:150-15.
376. Amato L, Paolisso G, Cacciatore F, et al. Congestive heart failure predicts the development of non-insu
lin-dependent diabetes mellitus in the elderly. The Osservatorio Geriatrico Regione Campania Group.
Diabetes Metab 1997;23:213-8.
377. Andersson C, Norgaard ML, Hansen PR, et al. Heart failure severity, as determined by loop diuretic
dosages, predicts the risk of developing diabetes after myocardial infarction: a nationwide cohort study.
Eur J Heart Fail 2010;12:1333-8.
378. Kannel WB, Hjortland M, Castelli WP. Role of diabetes in congestive heart failure: the Framingham study,
Am J Cardiol 1974;34:29-34.
379. Matsushita K, Blecker S, Pazin-Filho A, et al. The association of hemoglobin a1c with incident heart failure
among people without diabetes: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Diabetes 2010;59:2020-6.
380. He J, Ogden LG, Bazzano LA, et al. Risk factors for congestive heart failure in US men and women:
NHANES I epidemiologic follow-up study, Arch Intern Med 2001;161:996-1002.
381. Rawshani A, Rawshani A, Franzén S, et al. Risk factors, mortality, and cardiovascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2018; 379:633-44.
382. McMurray JJ, Gerstein HC, Holman RR, Pfeffer MA. Heart failure: a cardiovascular outcome in diabetes
that can no longer be ignored. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:843-51.
383. Krumholz HM, Chen YT, Wang Y, et al. Predictors of readmission among elderly survivors of admission
with heart failure. Am Heart J 2000;139:72-7.
384. Shindler DM, Kostis JB, Yusuf S, et al. Diabetes mellitus, a predictor of morbidity and mortality in the
Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD) Trials and Registry, Am J Cardiol 1996;77:1017-20.
385. Kishimoto I, Makino H, Ohata Y, et al. Hemoglobin A1c predicts heart failure hospitalization independent
of baseline cardiac function or B-type natriuretic peptide level, Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2014;104(2):257-65.
386. Wang Y, Negishi T, Negishi K, Marwick TH. Prediction of heart failure in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus - a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2015;108:55-66.
387. Rutter MK, Parise H, Benjamin EJ, et al. Impact of glucose intolerance and insulin resistance on cardiac
structure and function: sex-related differences in the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation 2003;107:448-54.
388. Hartog JW, Voors AA, Schalkwijk CG, et al. Clinical and prognostic value of advanced glycation end-products
in chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J 2007;28:2879-85.
389. Simm A, Wagner J, Gursinsky T, et al. Advanced glycation endproducts: a biomarker for age as an outcome
predictor after cardiac surgery? Exp Gerontol 2007;42:668-75.
390. Tousoulis D, Oikonomou E, Siasos G, Stefanadis C. Diabetes mellitus and heart failure. Eur Cardiol 2014;9(1):37-42.
391. Haas SJ, Vos T, Gilbert RE, Krum H. Are beta blockers as efficacious in patients with diabetes mellitus as
in patients without diabetes mellitus who have chronic heart failure? A meta-analysis of large scale clinical
trials. Am Heart J 2003;146:84853.
392. Boussageon R, Bejan-Angoulvant T, Saadatian-Elahi M, et al. Effect of intensive glucose lowering
treatment on all cause mortality, cardiovascular death, and microvascular events in type 2 diabetes:
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2011;343:d4169.
393. Elder DH, Singh JS, Levin D, et al. Mean HbA1c and mortality in diabetic individuals with heart failure: a
population cohort study. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:94-102.
394. ACCORD Study Group, Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Genuth S, et al. Long-term effects of intensive glucose
lowering on cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med 2011;364:818-28.
395. Ukena C, Dobre D, Mahfoud F, et al. Hypo- and hyperglycemia predict outcome in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction after acute myocardial infarction: data from EPHESUS. J Card Fail 2012;18:439-45.
396. Jorsal A, Kistorp C, Holmager P, et al. Effect of liraglutide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 analogue, on left
ventricular function in stable chronic heart failure patients with and without diabetes (LIVE) - a multicentre,
double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19(1):69-77.
397. Scheen AJ. GLP-1 receptor agonists and heart failure in diabetes. Diabetes Metab. 2017 Apr;43 Suppl
1:2S13-2S19
398. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, et al. SAVOR-TIMI 53 Steering Committee and Investigators.
Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1317-26.
399. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, et al. TECOS Study Group. Effect of sitagliptin on cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:232-42.
400. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, et al; RECORD Study Group. Rosiglitazone evaluated for
cardiovascular outcomes - an interim analysis. N Engl J Med 2007;357:28-38.
401. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, et al; RECORD Study Team. Rosiglitazone evaluated for
cardiovascular outcomes in oral agent combination therapy for type 2 diabetes (RECORD): a multicentre,
randomised, open-label trial. Lancet 2009;373:2125-35.
402. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the management of
cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy. The Task Force for the Management of Cardiovascular
Diseases during Pregnancy of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2018:39:3165-241.
403. Weiss BM, Hess OM. Pulmonary vascular disease and pregnancy; current controversies, management
strategies and perspective. Eur Heart J 2000;21:104-15.
404. van Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, Posafalvi A, van den Berg MP, et al. Titin gene mutations are common in
families with both peripartum cardiomyopathy and dilated cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 2014;35:2165-73.
405. van Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, van Tintelen JP, van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Peripartum cardiomyopathy as a
part of familial dilated cardiomyopathy. Circulation 2010;121:2169-75.
406. van Tintelen JP, Pieper PG, van Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, van den Berg MP. Pregnancy, cardiomyopathies
and genetics. Cardiovasc Res 2014;101:571-8.
407. Silversides CK, Grewal J, Mason J, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in women with heart disease. The
CARPREG II Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:2419-30.
408. Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Sliwa K. Pathophysiology and epidemiology of peripartum cardiomyopathy. Nat Rev
Cardiol 2014;11:364-70.
409. Sliwa K, Fett J, Elkayam U. Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Lancet 2006;368:687-93.
410. Sliwa K, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Petrie MC, et al. Current state of knowledge on aetiology, diagnosis, management,
and therapy of peripartum cardiomyopathy: A Position Statement from the Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Peripartum Cardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail
2010;12:767-78.
411. Wan Ahmad WA, Khanom M, Yaakob ZH. Heart failure in pregnancy: an overview. Int J Clin Pract 2011;65(8):848-51.
412. Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, et al. Prospective multicenter study of pregnancy outcomes in women with
heart disease. Circulation 2001;104(5):515-21.
413. Ministry of Health Malaysia (Division of Family Health Division). Training Manual on Hypertensives
Disorders in Pregnancy, 2014.
414. New York State Department of Health. Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. Guideline Summary, May 2013.
415. [No authors listed]. Nifedipine versus expectant management in mild to moderate hypertension in
pregnancy. Gruppo di Studio ipertensione in Gravidanza. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:718-22.
416. Magee LA, Schick B, Donnenfeld AE, et al. The safety of calcium channel blockers in human pregnancy:
a prospective multicenter cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:3:823-8.
417. Weber-Schoendorfer C, Hannemann D, Meister R, et al. The safety of calcium channel blockers during
pregnancy: a prospective, multicenter, observational study. Reprod Toxicol 2008;26(1):24-30.
418. Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Swan L, Uebing A, Gatzoulis MA, Johnson MR. The management of the third stage
of labour in women with heart disease. Heart 2017;103;945-51.
419. Khairy P, Ionescu-Ittu R, MacKie AS, Abrahamowicz M, Pilote L, Marelli AJ. Changing mortality in
congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56(14):1149-57.
420. Oechslin EN, Harrison DA, Connelly MS, Webb GD, Siu SC. Mode of death in adults with congenital heart
disease. Am J of Cardiol 2000;86(10):1111-6.
421. Verheugt CL, Uiterwaal CSPM, van der Velde ET, et al. Mortality in adult congenital heart disease. Eur
Heart J 2010; 31(10):1220-9.
422. Diller GP, Kempny A, Alonso-Gonzalez R, et al. Survival prospects and circumstances of death in
contemporary adult congenital heart disease patients under follow-up at a large tertiary centre. Circulation
2015;132(22):2118-25.
423. Sabanayagam A, Cavus O, Williams J, Bradley E. Management of heart failure in adult congenital heart
disease. Heart Failure Clin 2018;14:569-77.
424. Galiè N, Humbert M, Vachiery JL, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2015 ESC/ERS guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension: The Joint Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment
of Pulmonary Hypertension of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Respiratory
Society (ERS): Endorsed by: Association for European Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology (AEPC),
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Eur Heart J 2016;37(1):67-119.
425. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults with
congenital heart disease. A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2019;139:e698-e800.
426. Oster M, Bhatt AB, Zaragoza-Macias E, Dendukuri N, Marelli A. Interventional therapy versus medical
therapy for secundum atrial septal defect: A systematic review (Part 2). for the 2018 AHA/ACC guideline
for the management of adults with congenital heart disease: A report of the American College of Cardiology
/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2019;73(12):1579-95.
427. Brida M, Diller GP, Nashat H, et al. Pharmacological therapy in adult congenital heart disease: growing,
yet limited evidence. Eur Heart J 2018;0:1-10.
428. Zaragoza-Macias E, Zaidi AN, Dendukuri N, Marelli A. Medical therapy for systemic right ventricles: a
systematic review (Part 1) for the 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults with congenital
heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2019;139:e801-13.
429. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults with
congenital heart disease. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiolo 2019;73(12):e81-192.
430. Egbe AC, Connolly HM, Khan AR, et al. Outcomes in adult Fontan patients with atrial tachyarrhythmias.
Am Heart J 2017;186:12-20.
431. Khairy P, Van Hare GF, Balaji S, et al. PACES/HRS expert consensus statement on the recognition and
management of arrhythmias in adult congenital heart disease: developed in partnership between the
Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society (PACES) and the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS).
Endorsed by the governing bodies of PACES, HRS, the American College of Cardiology (ACC), the
American Heart Association (AHA), the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), the Canadian Heart
Rhythm Society (CHRS), and the International Society for Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ISACHD). Can
J Cardiol 2014;30(10):e1-63.
432. Budts W, Börjesson M, Chessa M, et al. Physical activity in adolescents and adults with congenital heart
defects: individualized exercise prescription. Eur Heart J 2013;34:3669-74.
433. Latchamsetty R, Yokokawa M, Morady F, et al. Multicenter outcomes for catheter ablation of idiopathic
premature ventricular complexes. JACC Clin Electrophysiol 2015;3:116-23.
434. Yokokawa M, Good E, Crawford T, et al. Recovery from left ventricular dysfunction after ablation of
frequent premature ventricular complexes. Heart Rhythm 2013;10(2):172-5.
435. Khasnis A. Jongnarangsin K, Abela G, Veerareddy S, Reddy V, Thakur R. Tachycardia-induced cardiomy
opathy: a review of literature. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2005: 28:710-21.
436. Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, et al. ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 Guidelines for the Management of Patients
with Atrial Fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines
(Writing Committee to Revise the 2001 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation):
developed in collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm Association and the Heart Rhythm Society.
Circulation 2006;114:e257-354.
437. Lubitz SA, Benjamin EJ, Ellinor PT. Atrial fibrillation in congestive heart failure. Heart Fail Clin 2010;6(2):187-200.
438. Baman TS, Lange DC, Ilg KJ, et al. Relationship between burden of premature ventricular complexes and
left ventricular function. Heart Rhythm 2010;7(7) :865-9.
439. Wilkoff BL, Cook JR, Epstein AE, et al; Dual Chamber and VVI Implantable Defibrillator Trial Investigators.
Dual-chamber pacing or ventricular backup pacing in patients with an implantable defibrillator: the Dual
Chamber and VVI Implantable Defibrillator (DAVID) Trial. JAMA 2002:288:3115-23.
440. Wilkoff BL, Kudenchuk PJ, Buxton AE, et al; DAVID II Investigators. The DAVID (Dual Chamber and VVI
Implantable Defibrillator) II trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009:53:872-80.
441. Curtis AB, Worley SJ, Chung ES, Li P, Christman SA, St John Sutton M. Improvement in Clinical Outcomes
With Biventricular Versus Right Ventricular Pacing: The BLOCK HF Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2016;67(18):2148-57.
442. Shakir DK, Rasul KI. Chemotherapy induced cardiomyopathy: pathogenesis, monitoring and management.
J Clin Med Res 2009;1(1):8-12.
443. Albini A, Pennesi G, Donatelli F, Cammarota R, De Flora S, Noonan DM. Cardiotoxicity of anticancer drugs:
the need for cardio-oncology and cardio-oncological prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 2010;102(1):14-25.
444. Tan C, Tasaka H, Yu KP, Murphy ML, Karnofsky DA. Daunomycin, an antitumor antibiotics in the treatment
of neoplastic disease. Clinical evaluation and special reference to childhood leukemia. Cancer 1967;20:333-53.
445. Swain SM, Whaley FS, Ewer MS. Congestive heart failure in patients treated with doxorubicin: a
retrospective analysis of three trials. Cancer 2003;97:2869-79.
446. Seidman A, Hudis C, Pierri MK, et al. Cardiac dysfunction in the trastuzumab clinical trials experience. J
Clin Oncol 2002;20:1215-21.
447. Felker GM, Thompson RE, Hare JM, et al. Underlying causes and long term survival in patients with
initially unexplained cardiomyopathy. NEJM 2000;342:1077-84.
448. Vandercruys E, Mondelaers V, De Wold D, Benoit Y, Suys B. Late cardiotoxicity after low dose of anthracyclines
therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia in childhood. J Cancer Surviv 2012;6:95-101.
449. Gottdiener JS, Appelbaum FR, Ferrans VJ, Deisseroth A, Ziegler J. Cardiotoxicity associated with high
dose cyclophosphamide therapy. Arch Intern Med 1981;141:758-63.
450. Quezado ZM, Wilson WH, Cunnion RE, et al. High dose ifosfamide is associated with severe reversible
cardiac dysfunction. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:31-6.
451. Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Use of chemotherapy plus monoclonal antibody against
HER2 or metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER2. NEJM 2001;344:783-92.
452. Bird BR, Swain SM. Cardiac toxicity in breast cancer survivors: a review of potential cardiac problems. Clin
Cancer Res 2008:14:14-24.
453. Hudis CA. Trastuzumab-mechanism of action and use in clinical practice. NEJM 2007;357:39-51.
454. Keefe DL. Trastuzumab-associated cardiotoxicity. Cancer 2002;95:1592-600.
455. Perez EA, Rodeheffer R. Clinical cardiac tolerability of trastuzumab. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:322-9.
456. Ewer MS, Vooletich MT, Durand JB, et al. Reversibility of trastuzumab-repated cardiotoxicity: new insights
based on clinical course and response to medical treatment. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:7820-6.
457. Chintalgattu V, Ai D, Langley RR, et al. Cardiomyocyte PDGFR-beta signaling is an essential component
of the mouse cardiac response to load induced stress. J Clin Invest 2010;120:472-84.
458. Chen MH, Kerkela R, Force T. Mechanism of cardiac dysfunction associated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor
cancer therapeutics. Circ 2008;118:84-95.
459. Uraizee I, Cheng S, Moleshi J. Reversible cardiomyopathy associated with sunitinib and sorefanib. NEJM
2011;365:1649-50.
460. Grandin EW, Ky B, Cornell RF, Carver J, Lenihan DJ. Patterns of cardiac toxicity associated with
irreversible proteasome inhibition in the treatment of multiple myeloma. J Card Fail 2015;21:138-44.
461. Braveman AC, Antin JH, Plappert MT, Plappert MT, Cook EF, Lee RT. Cyclophosphamide cardiotoxicity in
bone marrow transplantation: a prospective evaluation of new dosing regimens. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1215-23.
462. Cardinale D, Sandri MT, Colombo A, et al. Prognostic value of Trop I in cardiac risk stratification of cancer
patients undergoing high dose chemotherapy. Circ 2004;109:2749-54.
463. Cardinale D, Sandri MT, Martinoni A, et al. Myocardial injury revealed by plasma troponin I in breast cancer
treated with high dose chemotherapy. Ann Oncol 2002;13:710-5.
464. Plana JC, Galderisi M, Barac A, et al. Expert consensus for multimodality imaging evaluation of adult
patients during and after cancer therapy: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography and the
European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2014;27(9):911-39.
465. Armenian SH, Laccheti C, Barac A, et al. Prevention and monitoring of cardiac dysfunction in survivors of
adult cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Clin Oncol
2017;35:893-911.
466. Thavendiranathan P, Grant AD, Negishi T, Plana JC, Popović ZB, Marwick TH. Reproducibility of echocardiography
techniques for sequential assessment of left ventricular ejection fraction and volumes: application to
patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61(1):77-84.
467. Sawaya H, Sebag IA, Plana JC, et al. Assessment of echocardiography and biomarkers for extended
prediction of cardiotoxicity in patients treated with anthracyclines, taxanes and trastuzumab. Circ
Cardiovasc Imaging 2012;5(5):596-603.
468. Negishi K, Negishi T, Hare JL, Haluska BA, Plana JC, Marwick TH. Independent and incremental value of
deformation indices for prediction of trastuzumab-induced cardiotoxicity. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2013;
26(5):493-8.
469. Thavendiranathan P, Poulin F, Lim KD , Plana JC, Woo A, Marwick TH. Use of myocardial strain imaging
by echocardiography for the early detection of cardiotoxicity in patients during and after cancer chemotherapy:
a systemic review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63(25 Pt A):2751-68.
470. Braunwald E. Biomarkers in heart failure. NEJM 2008;358:2148-59.
471. Ky B, French B, Levy WC, et al. Multiple biomarkers for risk prediction in chronic heart failure. Circ Heart
Fail 2012;5(2):183-90.
472. Cardinale D, Colombo A, Sandri MT, et al. Prevention of high-dose chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity
in high-risk patients by angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition. Circulation 2006;114(23):2474-81.
473. Gulati G, Heck SL, Ree AH, et al: Prevention of cardiac dysfunction during adjuvant breast cancer therapy
(PRADA): A 2 × 2 factorial, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial of candesartan and
metoprolol. Eur Heart J 2016:37:1671-80.
474. Boekhout AH, Gietema JA, Milojkovic Kerklaan B, et al: Angiotensin II-receptor inhibition with candesartan
to prevent trastuzumab-related cardiotoxic effects in patients with early breast cancer: A randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Oncol 2016: 2:1030-7.
475. Cardinale D, Colombo A, Bacchiani G, et al: Early detection of anthracycline cardiotoxicity and improvement
with heart failure therapy. Circulation 2015:131:1981-8.
476. Goldhar HA, Yan AT, Ko DT, et al: The temporal risk of heart failure associated with adjuvant trastuzumab
in breast cancer patients: A population study. J Natl Cancer Inst 2015:08(1).pii:djv301.
477. Tromp J, Tay WT, Ouwerkerk W, et al for ASIAN-HF authors. Correction: Multimorbidity in patients with
heart failure from 11 Asian regions: a prospective cohort study using the ASIAN-HF registry. PloS Med
2018;15(5):e1002583.
478. Heywood JT, Fonarow GC, Costanzo MR, et al. High prevalence of renal dysfunction and its impact on
outcome in 118,465 patients hospitalized with acute decompensated heart failure: a report from the
ADHERE database. J Card Fail 2007;13:422-30.
479. Ponikowski P, Voors AA, Anke SD, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group 2016. ESC Guidelines for the
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and
Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) developed
with the special contribution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC. Eur J Heart Fail
2016;18(8):891-975.
480. Forman DE, Butler J, Wang Y, et al. Incidence, predictors at admission, and impact of worsening renal
function among patients hospitalized with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004:43(1):61-7.
481. Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, et al. Importance of venous congestion for worsening of renal
function in advanced decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:589-96.
482. Smith GL, Lichtman JH, Bracken MB, et al. Renal impairment and outcomes in heart failure: systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47(10):1987–96.
483. Nunez J, Garcıa S, Nunez E, et al. Early serum creatinine changes and outcomes in patients admitted for
acute heart failure: the cardio-renal syndrome revisited. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care 2017;6(5):430-40.
484. Testani JM, Kimmel SE, Dries DL, Coca SG. Prognostic importance of early worsening renal function
following initiation of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor therapy in patients with cardiac dysfunction.
Circ Heart Fail 2011;4(6):68591.
485. Metra M, Davison B, Bettari L, et al. Is worsening renal function an ominous prognostic sign in patients with
acute heart failure? The role of congestion and its interaction with renal function. Circ Heart Fail 2012;5:54-62.
486. Greene SJ, Gheorghiade M, Vaduganathan M, et al. Hemoconcentration, renal function, and
post-discharge outcomes among patients hospitalized for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction:
insights from the EVEREST trial. Eur J Heart Fail 2013;15:1401-11.
487. Testani JM, Chen J, McCauley BD, Kimmel SE, Shannon RP. Potential effects of aggressive decongestion
during the treatment of decompensated heart failure on renal function and survival. Circulation 2010;122:265-72.
488. Ezekowitz JA, O’Meara E, McDonald AM, et al. 2017 Comprehensive Update of the Canadian Cardiovascular
Society Guidelines for the Management of Heart Failure. Can J Cardiol 2017;33:1342–433.
489. Felker GM, Lee KL, Bull DA, et al. Diuretic strategies in patients with acute decompensated heart failure.
N Engl J Med 2011;364:797-805.
490. Bhandari S, Ives N, Brettell EA, et al. Multicentre randomized controlled trial of angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker withdrawal in advanced renal disease: the STOP-ACEi trial.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2016;31(2):255-61.
491. Constanzo MR, Ronco C, Abraham WT, et al. Extracorporeal ultrafiltration for fluid overload in heart failure:
current status and prospects for further research. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;69(19):2428-45.
492. Applefeld MM, Newman KA, Sutton FJ, et al. Outpatient dobutamine and dopamine infusions in the
management of chronic heart failure. Clinical experience in 21 patients. Am Heart J 1987;114:589-95.
493. Bart BA, Goldsmith SR, Lee KL, et al for the Heart Failure Clinical Research Network. Ultrafiltration in
decompensated heart failure with cardiorenal syndrome. N Engl J Med 2012;367:2296-304.
494. Stehlik J, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, et al. The Registry of the International Society for Heart and
Lung Transplantation: Twenty-eighth Adult Heart Transplant Report - 2012. J Heart Lung Transpl
2012;31:10:1052-64.
495. Kilic A, Weiss ES, George TJ, et al. What predicts long-term survival after heart transplantation? An
analysis of 9,400 ten-year survivors. Ann Thorac Surg 2012;93:3:699-704.
496. Estep JD, Starling RC, Horstmanshof DA, et al; ROADMAP Study Investigators. Risk assessment and
comparative effectiveness of left ventricular assist device and medical management in ambulatory heart
failure patients: Results from the ROADMAP study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:1747-61.
497. Pagani FD, Milano CA, Tatooles AJ, et al. HeartWare HVAD for the treatment of patients with advanced
heart failure ineligible for cardiac transplantation: results of the ENDURANCE destination therapy trial. J
Heart Lung Transplant 2015;34:S9.
498. Health Quality Ontario. Left ventricular assist devices for destination therapy: a health technology
assessment. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser 2016;16(3):1-60.
499. Ponikowski P, Voors AA, Anker SD, et al. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and
Chronic Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). 2016 ESC Guidelines for the
Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure. Eur Heart J 2016;37:2129-200.
500. Jaarsma T, Beattie JM, Ryder M, et al for the Advanced Heart Failure Study Group of the HFA of the ESC.
Palliative care in heart failure: a position statement from the palliative care workshop of the Heart Failure
Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail 2009;11:433-43.
501. Whellan DJ, Goodlin SJ, Dickinson MG, et al for Quality of Care Committee, Heart Failure Society of
America. End-of-life care in patients with heart failure. J Card Fail 2013;20:121-34.
502. Gillilan R, Puchalski C. Spiritual issues in heart failure. In: Supportive Care in Heart Failure, Beattie J,
Goodlin S (Eds), Oxford University Press, Oxford 2008. p.299.
503. McAlister FA, Stewart S, Ferrua S, McMurray JJ. Multidisciplinary strategies for the management of heart
failure patients at high risk for admission: a systematic review of randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol
2004;44:810-19.
504. Feltner C, Jones CD, Cené CW, et al. Transitional care interventions to prevent readmissions for persons
with heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2014;160:774-84.
505. Hauptman PJ, Rich MW, Heidenreich PA, et al; Heart Failure Society of America. The Heart Failure Clinic:
a consensus statement of the Heart Failure Society of America. J Card Fail 2008;14:801-15.
506. Stewart S, Carrington MJ, Marwick TH, et al. The WHICH trial: Impact of home versus clinic-based
management of chronic heart failure. JACC 2012;60(14):1239-48.
507. Gustafsson F, J. Arnold MO. Heart failure clinics and outpatient management: review of the evidence and
call for quality assurance. Eur Heart J 2004;25:1596-1604.
508. The Health Foundation. Kim Sutherland. Bridging the quality gap: Heart failure. London. March 2010.
509. Ministry of Health Malaysia (Pharmacy Practice and Development Division). Protocol Medication Therapy
Adherence Clinic (MTAC): Heart Failure 2018, 1st Ed.
510. Soran O. A new treatment modality in heart failure enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP). Cardiol
Rev 2004;12:15-20.
511. Tecson KM, Silver MA, Brune SD, et al. Impact of EECP on heart failure rehospitalization in patients with
ischemic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 2016;117:901-5.
512. Lawson WE, Kennard ED, Holubkov R, et al; IEPR investigators. Benefit and safety of enhanced external
counterpulsation in treating coronary artery disease patients with a history of congestive heart failure.
Cardiology 2001;96:78-84.
513. McKenna C, McDaid C, Suekarran S, et al. Enhanced external counterpulsation for treatment of stable
angina and heart failure: a systemic review and economic analysis. Health Tech Assessment
2009;13(24):iii-iv, ix-xi, 1-90.
514. Fernandez-Aviles F, Sanz-Ruiz R, Climent AM, et al for TACTICS (Transnational Alliance for Regenerative
Therapies in Cardiovascular Syndromes) Writing Group; Authors/Task Force Members. Chairpersons;
Basic Research Subcommittee; Translational Research Subcommittee; Challenges of Cardiovascular
Regenerative Medicine Subcommittee; Tissue Engineering Subcommittee; Delivery, Navigation, Tracking
and Assessment Subcommittee; Clinical Trials Subcommittee; Regulatory and funding strategies
subcommittee; Delivery, Navigation, Tracking and Assessment Subcommittee. Global position paper on
cardiovascular regenerative medicine. Eur Heart J 2017;38:2532-46.
515. Tavazzi L, Maggioni AP, Marchioli R, et al; Gissi-HF Investigators. Effect of n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
in patients with chronic heart failure (the GISSI-HF Trial): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet 2008;372:1223-30.
516. Siscovick DS, Barringer TA, Fretts AM, et al. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (fish oil) supplementation
and the prevention of cardiovascular disease. A Science Advisory From the American Heart Association.
Circulation 2017;135:(15):e867-84.
517. Madmani ME, Yusuf Solaiman A, Tamr Agha K, et al. Coenzyme Q10 for heart failure. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2014;6:CD008684.
518. Ren X, Li Y, Yang X, et al. The effects of Tai Chi training in patients with heart failure: a systemic review
and meta-analysis. Front Physiol 2017;8:989.
519. Gu Q, Wu SJ, Zheng Y, et al. Tai Chi exercise for patients with chronic heart failure. Am J Phys Med
Rehabil 2017;96(10):706-16.
520. Gomes-Neto M, Sousa Rodrigues-Jr E, Monteiro Silva-Jr W, Carvalho VO. Effects of yoga in patients with
chronic heart failure: a meta-analysis. Arq Bras Cardiol 2014; 103(5):433-9.
521. Lopes CP, Danzmann LC, Moraes RS, et al. Yoga and breathing technique training in patients with heart
failure and preserved ejection fraction: study protocol for a randomized clinical trial. Trials 2018;19:405.
522. Fonarow GC, Albert NM, Curtis AB, et al. Improving evidence-based care for heart failure in outpatient
cardiology practices: primary results of the Registry to Improve the Use of Evidence-Based Heart Failure
Therapies in the Outpatient Setting (IMPROVE HF). Circulation 2010;122:585-96.
523. Bonow RO, Ganiats TG, Beam CT, et al. ACCF/AHA/AMA-PCPI 2011 performance measures for adults
with heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association
Task Force on Performance Measures and the American Medical Association-Physician Consortium for
Performance Improvement. Circulation 2012;125:2382-401.
524. Patel J, Sandhu A, Parizo J, Moayedi Y, Fonarow GC, Heidenreich PA. Validity of performance and
outcome. Measures for heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2018;11:e005035.
PART 2
Management of Heart Failure in Paediatrics
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pages
Glossary
145
13.1
Introduction
146
13.2
Definition
146
13.3
Aetiology
146
13.4
Clinical Presentation
147
13.5
Diagnosis
147
13.6
Management
148
13.7
Prognosis
151
Tables 18-24
152
References
158
Abbreviation
Description
DACE-I
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
ALCAPA
Anomalous left coronary artery to pulmonary artery
AP window
Aortopulmonary window
AS
Aortic stenosis
AVSD
Atrioventricular septal defect
CHD
Congenital heart disease
CXR
Chest X-ray
CoA
Coarctation of aorta
ECG
Electrocardiogram
HF
Heart Failure
HLHS
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
PBF
Pulmonary blood flow
PDA
Patent ductus arteriosus
PHF
Paediatric heart failure
PS
Pulmonary stenosis
TGA
Transposition great arteries
VSD
Ventricular septal defect
13. HEART FAILURE IN THE PAEDIATRIC POPULATION
GLOSSARY
13.1 Introduction
Paediatric heart failure (PHF) is a complex syndrome with heterogeneous
aetiology and presentation.1 It is an uncommon condition with a reported
incidence of 0.87 to 7.4 per 100,000 population.2 It, however, causes
significant morbidity and mortality.
Unlike adults with HF, PHF is commonly due to congenital heart disease
(CHD) or cardiomyopathies. However, the general principles of management
are similar to those in adults, except that there is a lack of randomised clinical
trials and international guidelines for PHF.3
13.2 Definition
There are various definitions of PHF.1,4,5 PHF can be defined as
 “The failure of the heart to supply blood to either systemic or pulmonary
circulation at an appropriate rate of flow, or to receive venous return at an
appropriate filling pressure, resulting in adverse effects on the heart, the
circulation, and the patient”4 or
 “A clinical and pathophysiologic syndrome that results from ventricular
dysfunction, volume or pressure overload, alone or in combination that
leads to characteristic signs and symptoms, and is associated with
circulatory, neurohormonal and molecular abnormalities”.5
13.3 Aetiology
In children, cardiac failure is most often due to CHDs and cardiomyopathies.6
(Table 18, Page 152).
Common etiologies are:
 At birth - foetal cardiomyopathies, foetal arrhythmias or non-cardiac conditions
(i.e., perinatal asphyxia, sepsis, hypoglycaemia, and hypocalcaemia).
 Within the first week of life - duct dependent systemic circulation, i.e.
closure or restriction of ductus arteriosus leading to a severe reduction of
end-organ perfusion in patients with critical aortic stenosis (AS), aortic
coarctation (CoA), and hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS).
 Within the first year of life - left to right shunts (i.e. large ventricular septal
defect (VSD), patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), atrioventricular septal
defect (AVSD), aortopulmonary window (AP window), or cyanotic CHD with
non-protective pulmonary blood flow (i.e. transposition great arteries with
VSD, truncus arteriosus). In both these conditions, pulmonary blood flow
(PBF) progressively increases with the fall of pulmonary vascular resistance.
 Children and adolescence (1-18 years of age) - more often due to
rheumatic carditis, myocarditis or cardiomyopathies other than congenital
heart disease.
13.4 Clinical Presentation
The clinical presentation of HF varies with age. It may present at birth
(because of foetal disease) or can develop at any stage of childhood. Table
19, Page 153 summarises the clinical presentation of paediatric HF according
to the different age groups.
The clinical presentation of HF in neonates and infants are non-specific, and
cardiac murmurs may be absent or very soft. Absence of femoral pulse or
presence of radio-femoral delay may suggest coarctation of aorta.
Hence, it is very important to exclude underlying cardiac disease in younger
infants with feeding difficulties, respiratory distress, and growth failure.
Furthermore, features of HF in adults such as ankle oedema are rarely seen
in infants and children.
The severity of HF is staged based on modified Ross classification as shown
in Table 20, Page 153. Briefly, class 1 is absence of symptoms and class 4 is
severe symptoms of HF.
Acute heart failure in children may present with hypotension or tachycardia
with narrow pulse pressure, cool extremities, and irritable or decreased
consciousness. It is usually seen in cardiomyopathies, myocarditis, and left
ventricular outflow tract obstructions such as critical/severe aortic stenosis or
coarctation of aorta.
13.5 Diagnosis
PHF is a clinical diagnosis, and any child presenting with symptoms and
signs of HF needs assessment to establish the diagnosis and haemodynamic
status.7 The initial steps of management are non-invasive investigations to
look for the aetiology and assess the severity of HF.
These include blood investigations, electrocardiogram (ECG), chest
radiograph, echocardiogram. Occasionally, other investigations such as
cardiac catheterisation, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or CT
scan may be necessary.
13.5.1 Essential investigations (Tables 21 and 22, Pages 154 and 155)
Initial therapy to reduce pulmonary congestion or to improve perfusion should
not be delayed while waiting for the results of the investigations.
Chest X-ray (CXR)
CXR is indicated as the first-line investigation in all children with suspected
HF.
Features to look for are:
 Size of the heart (small, normal or, large) -
 In the neonate and small infant, the thymic shadow may be confused
as cardiomegaly. In these cases, a lateral CXR may be helpful.
 The incidental finding of cardiomegaly in asymptomatic infants would
warrant further investigations with an echocardiogram.
 Contours of the heart
 Pulmonary vascularity (increase, normal, and decrease)
 Signs of fluid overload such as cardiomegaly, septal lines (or Kerley B
lines), and pleural effusions.
ECG
 The ECG is always abnormal in children with HF. However, the findings
are generally non-specific - e.g. sinus tachycardia and left ventricular
hypertrophy.
 ECG may be diagnostic in HF secondary to tachy - or bradyarrhythmias
(e.g. supraventricular tachycardia, atrial ectopic tachycardia, heart block).
 A continuous ECG monitoring (Holter) is indicated in any patient presenting
with unexplained dilated cardiomyopathy for possible tachycardia-induced
cardiomyopathy.
2D-echocardiogram
This will provide information on:
 Structural cardiac defects (volume or pressure overload),
 Chamber sizes (dilated left atrium and ventricle in left to right shunt), and
 Cardiac function (a poor cardiac function with dilated left ventricle in
myocarditis or dilated cardiomyopathies.
13.6 Management
The therapeutic approach should be tailored to the clinical status at presentation
and the underlying cause of HF. (Table 23, Page 156).
Treatment goals are:
 Treat the underlying problem, i.e., corrective surgery/intervention in a
child with significant left-right lesions,
I,C
I,C
 Minimise morbidity and mortality, and
 Improve functional status and quality of life.
Children with decompensated HF are preferably managed in an intensive
care unit for stabilisation.
General principles of management include:
 Oxygen therapy in acute HF.
 Correcting acidosis, hypoglycaemia, and anaemia.
 Correcting electrolyte disturbances.
 Treating respiratory infections.
 Nasogastric tube feeding in children with poor weight gain.
 Treating gastroesophageal reflux.
 Adequate nutritional intake.
 Fluids should be carefully administered - symptoms may be related to
fluid overload, under perfusion or both. Therefore, the goal of therapy is
to return the patient to a euvolemic state with good perfusion.
 Anaemia should be treated cautiously. If indicated, blood transfusion
should be given in small volumes (5-10ml/kg) to avoid worsening
symptoms.
Following stabilisation, efforts should be made to identify and treat the underlying
cause. All treatable structural heart defects should have corrective surgery
and/or interventional therapy as early as possible.
In cases of HF due to cardiomyopathy or myocarditis, long-term medical
therapy is necessary.
Common medications include: (Table 24, Page 157)
 Loop diuretics - frusemide
 Indicated in the treatment of HF due to volume overload.
 In decompensated HF, a slow intravenous infusion of frusemide
would avoid worsening the hypotension as compared to intermittent
bolus injections.8
 The addition of spironolactone (potassium sparing) avoids the need
for potassium supplements. It has the additional beneficial effect of
attenuating the development of aldosterone-induced myocardial
fibrosis and catecholamine release.9
 In euvolemic patients, diuretics should be used judiciously.
I,C
 Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I)
 Captopril is commonly used in infants.4,6
 In those more than 2 years of age, enalapril can also be used.4,6
 Close monitoring of renal function is required to avoid renal impairment
particularly in the neonate and small infant.
 β-blockers
 Indicated in the treatment of HF with moderate to severe systolic left
ventricular dysfunction.
 In dilated cardiomyopathy, carvedilol shall be started together with
diuretics and ACE-I.10,11 Start a low dose and gradually titrate up to
the targeted dose.
 Phosphodiesterase type III inhibitor (Milrinone)12,13
 Milrinone is indicated for the prevention of low cardiac output
syndrome (poor perfusion, decreased urine output, cool extremities)
after cardiac surgery.12,13
 It is also indicated in decompensated HF with a low cardiac output
syndrome.4,13
 It is to be used cautiously in the presence of hypotension.
 Digoxin
 Indicated in symptomatic patients with left and/or right ventricular
systolic dysfunction but is rarely used at present.
 It has a narrow therapeutic index, hence needs close monitoring for toxicity.
 Inotropes
 Dopamine and dobutamine have been shown to be effective inotropes
and vasopressors in neonates, infants, and children with circulatory
failure.
 However, these inotropes may also cause tachycardia and other
tachyarrhythmias and should be used cautiously.
 Corticosteroid and intravenous immunoglobulin in myocarditis
 In children with acute HF due to suspected myocarditis, routine use of
corticosteroid and intravenous immunoglobulin is not indicated due to
lack of benefit.4
IIb,C
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
13.7 Prognosis
The outcome of infants and children with HF depends largely on the aetiology.
When due to structural congenital defects, surgery and/or interventional
treatment can be curative. In some patients, however, it may only be
palliative with some improvement in clinical symptoms.
Table 18: Causes of Paediatric Heart Failure
Type
Mechanisms
Example
Congenital
Left to right shunt
Large VSD, PDA, AVSD, AP
heart disease
(volume overload)
window, and coronary fistula
Outflow tract obstruction
Severe or critical PS, AS or CoA
(pressure overload)
Inflow obstruction
Cor triatriatum
Pulmonary vein stenosis
Mitral stenosis
Complex CHD with
TGA with large VSD
non-protected pulmonary
Univentricular heart with no PS
flow
Truncus Arteriosus
Anomalous pulmonary
TAPVD
venous drainage
Severe valvular regurgitation
Severe Ebstein anomaly, common
AV valve regurgitation
Coronary insufficiency
ALCAPA
(decreased O2 supply to
cardiomyocyte)
Acquired heart
Severe valvular regurgitation
Rheumatic carditis Infective endocarditis
disease
Cardiomyopathies
Systolic dysfunction
Dilated cardiomyopathies:
(low cardiac output)
 Familial
 Metabolic disease
 Post myocarditis
 Neuromuscular Disease
 Drug induce (Anthracycline)
Pressure overload
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
Decrease preload
 Infant of diabetic mother
 Noonan syndrome
 Pompe disease
Diastolic dysfunction
Restrictive cardiomyopathies
(elevatedpulmonary
 Familial RCM
capillary pressure)
Arrhythmias
Low cardiac output
Supraventricular tachycardia
Complete heart block
Infection
Myocardial dysfunction
Severe sepsis
Miscellaneous
High output
Severe anaemia
Systemic arteriovenous malformation
Thyrotoxicosis
Myocardial ischaemia
Kawasaki disease
Fluid Overload
Acute glomerulonephritis
ALCAPA, anomalous left coronary artery to pulmonary artery; AP, aortopulmonary; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; AS, aortic
stenosis; CHD, congenital heart disease; CoA, coarctation of aorta; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary stenosis; RCM,
restrictive cardiomyopathy; TAPVD, total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage; TGA, transposition great arteries; VSD,
ventricular septal defect.
Table 19: Clinical Presentation of Paediatric Heart Failure
Table 20: Modified Ross Classification for Paediatric Heart Failure1
Age group
Clinical presentation
Infants and young children
Difficulty in feeding (interrupted feeding,
prolonged feeding time)
Tachypnoea
Diaphoresis
Pallor
Rarely with ascites, facial oedema, ankle
swelling
Children and adolescence
Shortness of breath
Dyspnoea
Decrease effort tolerance
Abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting
Rarely ankle oedema, ascites, chest pain,
and palpitation
Class
Age groups
Symptoms
I
All
Asymptomatic
II
Infant†
Mild tachypnoea or diaphoresis during feeding
No growth failure or failure to thrive
Older children‡
Dyspnoea on moderate exertion
III
Infants
Marked tachypnoea or diaphoresis during feeding
Growth failure or failure to thrive
Older children
Dyspnoea on mild or minimal exertion
IV
All
Tachypnoea, diaphoresis or respiratory
distress at rest
†Infants refer to age 0-1 year.
‡Older children refer to age 1-10 years
1Ross RD, Daniels SR, Schwartz DC, Hannon DW, Shukla R, Kaplan S. Plasma norepinephrine levels in
infants and children with congestive heart failure. Am J Cardiol 1987;59:911-4.
Table 21: The ECG, CXR, and 2d-Echocardiography and Possible Cardiac
Diagnosis in Paediatric Heart Failure
4.1 ECG findings
Interpretation
LVH
Left to right shunt
RAD, RVH
Right sided lesion
T inversion and Q waves in inferolateral leads
ALCAPA
Bilateral atrial enlargement (bifid p and peak p)
RCM
Supraventricular tachycardia
Tachycardia-induced dilated cardiomyopathy
4.2 CXR findings
Interpretation
Left ventricular and atrial enlargement and
Left to right shunt
pulmonary artery dilation
Right atrial and ventricular enlargement,
Right-sided lesion
pulmonary artery dilation
Left ventricular enlargement, Rib notching
Bigger children with CoA
“Snowman” sign
Supracardiac TAPVD
Small heart with increase pulmonary
Obstructed TAPVD
vascular marking
4.3 2d-echocardiography findings
Interpretation
Dilated LA and LV with a normal function
Left to right shunt
LVH +/- LV dysfunction
Left sided obstructive lesion
RVH +/- LV dysfunction
Right-sided obstructive lesion
Dilated LV with LV dysfunction
DCM, ALCAPA
Global IVS thickening
HOCM
Biatrial enlargement
RCM
Dilated RA and RV
Neonatal CoA
TAPVD
Pulmonary hypertension
ASD (rarely cause symptomatic heart failure
in infancy)
LCAPA, anomalous left coronary artery to pulmonary artery; AS, aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect;
CoA, coarctation of aorta; CXR, Chest X-ray; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; ECG, electrocardiogram;
HOCM, hypertrophy obstructive cardiomyopathy; IVS, interventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV, left
ventricle; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; PS, pulmonary stenosis; RA, right atrium; RAD, right axis
deviation; RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy; RV, right ventricular; RVH, right ventricular hypertrophy;
TAPVD, total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage.
Table 22: Other Tests for Heart Failure in Children
Test
Indication and findings
FBC
Low haemoglobin (anaemia) may cause or aggravate HF.
Electrolyte
Prolong use of diuretic may cause low potassium or chloride.
Renal profile
Renal impairment may result from medication used for treatment
of HF (diuretic or ACE inhibitor) particularly in neonate and small
infant.
Liver function test
In acute HF, raised liver enzyme is commonly noted due to liver
congestion particularly in infant and children with right-sided
volume and pressure overload.
Natriuretic peptides
BNP or NT-proBNP levels are useful in distinguishing HF from
respiratory or other non-cardiac disease.
Lactate
Useful in patients with acute decompensated HF, helps guide
management.
Arterial blood gases
In acute stage for oxygen (hypoxia) and metabolic acidosis.
Thyroid function test
If clinically indicated to exclude thyrotoxicosis.
Cardiac troponins
Useful in HF i.e. increase troponin T in acute myocarditis and
increase troponin I in dilated cardiomyopathy.
Metabolic and genetic testing
Indicated in children with unexplained cardiomyopathy.
Should be based on clinical presentation and a discussion with
genetic and/or metabolic specialist.
Viral studies
Indicated in infant and children with suspected acute myocarditis.
Viral studies includes enterovirus, adenovirus, parvovirus,
hepatitis C, and the herpes group viruses (EBV, CMV, HSV,
HHV6/7, VZV) from blood, stool, and/or nasopharyngeal
samples as appropriate.
Endomyocardial biopsy
Useful in suspected acute myocarditis, but the yield is low.
Not advisable in non-stable patients and infant less than 10kg.
Cardia MRI/CT scan
Shall be guided by echocardiogram.
Useful in diagnosis of primary CMs and myocarditis, complex
CHD or rare extracardiac malformation i.e. vascular ring and
sling, pulmonary sequestration, abdominal CoA.
Cardiac catheterisation
Shall be guided by echocardiogram.
Indicated for complex CHD.
Assessment of pulmonary pressure and haemodynamic.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; CHD, congenital heart disease;
CMV, cytomegalovirus; CoA, coarctation of aorta; CT, computerised tomography; EBV, Ebsteins Barr virus;
FBC, full blood count; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HF, heart failure; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide; VZV, varicella zoster virus
Table 23: Summary of Principles of Management of Paediatric Heart Failure
by Aetiology/Pathophysiology
Type of heart failure
Suggested treatment and medication†
Comments
Volume overload
Frusemide, spironolactone, and/or ACE-I.
Corrective surgery or intervention
Corrective surgery or intervention.
should be considered early in an
infant with poor weight gain and
recurrent chest infection.
Pressure overload††
Supportive care in the acute stage.
Inotropes shall be used cautiously,
Urgent corrective surgery or intervention to
may worsen HF.
release the obstruction.
Avoid ACE-I in CoA.
Single ventricle/
Surgical repair
Unnecessary use of O2
complex CHD with
Frusemide, spironolactone, and/or ACE-I
supplement, may worsen HF.
no pulmonary stenosis
ALCAPA††
Supportive care in the acute stage.
May mimic left-sided obstructive lesion
Frusemide, spironolactone, and ACE-I
In the acute stage:
Corrective surgery
 May need a slow infusion of
frusemide and inotrope.
 Add each medication in a stepwise
manner.
Dilated cardiomyopathy††
Frusemide, spironolactone, and ACE-I,
In the acute stage:
β-blocker
 May need a slow infusion of
frusemide and inotrope.
 Add each medication in a stepwise
manner.
 β-blocker after stabilisation.
Hypertrophic
β-blocker
In the acute stage:
cardiomyopathy
Surgical resection
 Inotropes shall be used cautiously,
may worsen HF.
Restrictive
Diuretic, β-blocker and ACE-I
 To administer medications cautiously.
cardiomyopathies
Associated with poor prognosis.
Tachyarrhythmias
Antiarrhythmias to control SVT.
In the acute stage:
β-blocker
 Inotropes shall be used cautiously,
may worsen arrhythmias.
Complete heart block
Temporary pacing or intravenous
Permanent pacing
isoprenaline in the acute stage.
Acute myocarditis††
Supportive care in the acute stage.
In the acute stage:
Frusemide, spironolactone, and ACE-I
May need a slow infusion of frusemide
and inotrope
Add each medication in a
stepwise manner
Rheumatic carditis
Steroids in severe carditis.
As steroids are being weaned off,
Frusemide, spironolactone, and ACE-I
aspirin is added.
Early valve repair in severe valvular
regurgitation.
Infective endocarditis
Supportive care in the acute stage
Early valve repair in severe .
Appropriate antibiotic
valvular regurgitation
Frusemide, spironolactone, and ACE-I
† No. of medication used is depending on clinical response
†† Commonly associated with ventricular dysfunction
ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ALCAPA, anomalous left coronary artery to pulmonary artery; CHD,
congenital heart disease; CoA, coarctation of aorta; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.
Table 24: Common Drugs Used in Paediatric Heart Failure
Medication
Standard dose†
Indication and comments
Diuretics
Frusemide
Oral 0.5-1mg/kg 6-24H
A slow intravenous infusion may
be required in children with
Infusion 0.1-1mg/kg/hr.
impaired or depressed cardiac
function.
Spironolactone*
Oral
Potassium sparring, used in
0-10kg: 6.25mg 12H
combination with frusemide.
11-20kg: 12.5mg 12H
21-40kg: 25mg 12H
> 40kg: 25mg 8H
ACE-I
Captopril
Oral 0.1mg/kg 8H up to
Introduce slowly and monitor
max 2mg/kg 8H
renal function.
Monitor for hypotension.
Enalapril
Oral 0.1 mg/kg daily up
Only for children more than
to max 0.5mg/kg 12H
2 years of age.
β-blocker
Propranolol
Oral 0.2-0.5mg/kg 68H
SVT, HOCM
up to max 1.5mg/kg 6-8H
Metoprolol
Oral 1-2mg/kg 6-12H
SVT, HOCM, DCM
Carvedilol
Oral 0.1mg/kg 12H, up to
Stable DCM in addition of
max 0.5-0.8mg/kg 12H
diuretics and ACE-I
Increase gradually, 0.1mg/kg
every 1-2 week to max dose.
Milrinone
Infusion 75mcg/kg over
For low cardiac output syndrome.
1 hour, then
0.5-0.75mcg/kg/min
Digoxin
3-5mcg/kg 12H
Rarely used except in
tachyarrhythmia and ventricular
dysfunction.
Monitor the digoxin level.
ACE-I, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors; HOCM, hypertrophy cardiomyopathy; SVT,
supraventricular tachycardia.
†Adapted from Drug Doses Frank Shann 17th edition
REFERENCES
1.
Hsu DT, Pearson GD. Heart failure in children part I: History, etiology, and pathophysiology. Circ Hear Fail
2009;2(1):63-70.
2.
Shaddy RE, George AT, Jaecklin T, et al. Systematic literature review on the incidence and prevalence of
heart failure in children and adolescents. Pediatr Cardiol 2018:39:415-36.
3.
Colan SD. Review of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Practice Guidelines for
Management of Heart Failure in Children. Cardiol Young 2015;25(S2):154-9.
4.
Kantor PF, Lougheed J, Dancea A, et al. Presentation, diagnosis, and medical management of heart failure
in children: Canadian Cardiovascular Society Guidelines. Can J Cardiol 2013;29(12):1535-52.
5.
Kirk R, Dipchand AI, Rosenthal DN, et al. The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation
Guidelines for the Management of Pediatric Heart Failure: Executive summary. J Heart Lung Transplant
2014;33(9):888-909.
6.
Das BB. Current state of pediatric heart failure. Children 2018;5(7): pii: E88
7.
Masarone D, Valente F, Rubino M, et al. Pediatric Heart Failure: A Practical Guide to Diagnosis and
Management. Pediatrics & Neonatology 2017;58:303-12.
8.
Stough WG, O'Connor CM, Gheorghiade M. Overview of current noninodilator therapies for acute heart
failure syndromes. Am J Cardiol 2005;96(6A):41G-6G.
9.
Feingold B, Mahle WT, Auerbach S, et al. Management of cardiac involvement associated with neuromuscular
diseases: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2017;136(13):e200-31.
10. Huang M, Zhang X, Chen S, et al. The effect of carvedilol treatment on chronic heart failure in pediatric
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy: A prospective, randomized-controlled study. Pediatr Cardiol
2013;34(3):680-5.
11. Shaddy RE, Boucek MM, Hsu DT, et al. Carvedilol for children and adolescents with heart failure: A
randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc 2007;298(10):1171-9.
12. Hoffman TM, Wemovsky G, Atz AM, et al. Efficacy and safety of milrinone in preventing low cardiac output
syndrome in infants and children after corrective surgery for congenital heart disease. Circulation
2003;107(7):996-1002.
13. Bishara T, Seto WTW, Trope A, Parshuram CS. Use of milrinone in critically ill children. Can J Hosp Pharm
2010;63(6):420-8.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The committee would like to thank the following for all their assistance:
 MAHTaS Unit, Division of Ministry of Health.
 Panel of experts who reviewed the draft.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
This CPG was made possible by an educational grant from Novartis Corporation
(Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. and National Heart Association of Malaysia. Views and interests
of the funding body have not influenced the final recommendations.