Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or
endorse any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or
misleading context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-29-5
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform:
MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2015 and subject to be reviewed in
minimum four (4) years time or in the advent of any significant change
in management of patient. When it is due for updating, the Chairman
of the CPG or National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed
about it. A discussion will be done on the need for a revision including
the scope of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed
and the latest systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be
employed.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1.
DENGUE VIRUS AND SEROTYPE TRENDS IN MALAYSIA
2.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
3.
3.1 Spectrum of Dengue Infection
3.2 Clinical Course of Dengue Infection
3.3 Pathophysiology of Plasma Leakage in Severe Dengue Infection
3.4 WHO Dengue Classification
3.5 Diagnostic Challenges
DISEASE NOTIFICATION
4.
INVESTIGATIONS
5.
5.1 Disease Monitoring Tests
5.2 Diagnostic Tests
INVESTIGATION OF POST MORTEM CASE
6.
MANAGEMENT OF DENGUE INFECTION
7.
7.1 Outpatient Management
7.2 Patient Triaging at Emergency and Outpatient Department
7.3 Criteria for Hospital Referral / Admission
7.4 Disease Monitoring
7.5 Fluid Management
ALGORITHM A : Fluid Management in Compensated Shock
ALGORITHM B : Fluid Management in Decompensated Shock
ALGORITHM C : Fluid Management in Decompensated Shock
(With Presence of Bleeding & Leaking/ Other
Causes of Shock)
7.6 Management of Complications in Dengue Infection
7.7 Intensive Care Management of Dengue Infection
DENGUE INFECTION IN PREGNANCY
8.
DISCHARGE CRITERIA
9.
1
2
3
3
3
5
7
8
8
9
9
9
12
13
13
16
16
18
21
26
27
28
30
37
40
42
Levels of Evidence & Formulation of Recommendation
Guidelines Development and Objectives
Guidelines Development Group
Review Committee
External Reviewers
i
ii
v
vi
vii
No. Title Page
43
43
43
44
46
56
57
58
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
68
68
No. Title Page
PREVENTION OF DENGUE TRANSMISSION IN HOSPITALS
10.
VACCINATION
11.
FOOD AND SUPPLEMENTS
12.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
13.
REFERENCES
14.
Appendix 1 Search Strategy
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
Appendix 3 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of
DF and DHF (1997)
Appendix 4 Methods of Sample Collection
Appendix 5 Type of Tests for Dengue Diagnosis and
Recommended Use
Appendix 6 Type of Dengue Tests Recommended Based
On Clinical History
Appendix 7 Outpatient Dengue Monitoring Record
Appendix 8 Dengue Assessment Checklist
Appendix 9 Home Care Advice Leaflet for Dengue Patients
Appendix 10 Inpatient Dengue Monitoring Chart
List of Abbreviations
Acknowledgement
Disclosure Statement
Source of Funding
Level
Study design
I
Evidence obtained from at least one properly
randomised controlled trial
II-1
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials
without randomisation
II-2
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or casecontrol analytic studies, preferably from more
than one centre or research group
II-3
Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or
without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled
experiments could also be regarded as this type of
evidence
III
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical
experience; descriptive studies and case reports; or
reports of expert committees
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is in the process of incorporating Grading
Recommendations,
Assessment,
Development
and
Evaluation
(GRADE) in its work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence
and its effect size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG
Development Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall
balances of the following aspects are considered in determining the
strength of the recommendations:-
Overall quality of evidence
•
Balance of benefits vs harms
•
Values and preferences
•
Resource implications
•
Equity, feasibility and acceptability
•
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH).
There was also active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review
Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N); Medline via Ovid,
Pubmed and Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) (refer
to Appendix 1 for Search Strategy). The inclusion criteria are all
literature on dengue infection regardless of study design. The search
was limited to literature published in the last five years, on humans and
in English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts
in the field were also contacted to identify relevant studies. In certain
situations, pivotal papers beyond the scope of search were used in the
CPG. All searches were conducted from 26 May 2015 to 24 July 2015.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
The previous edition of CPG (2010) was used as the basis in updating
these present guidelines. Reference was also made to other guidelines
on dengue infection in adults as well as handbooks from WHO such as
Dengue Guidelines for Diagnosis, Treatment, Prevention and Control
(2009) and Handbook for Clinical Management of Dengue (2012).
A total of 18 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. (Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions)
The DG members met 7 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. The literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion were resolved consensually. The CPG was
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
The literature used in these guidelines was graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and
CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on
the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual on
Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice
Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.gov.my/
index.php/pages/view/117).
OBJECTIVES
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
To provide evidence-based guidance in the management of dengue
infection in adult patients.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
To improve recognition and diagnosis of dengue cases and provide
•
appropriate care to the patients.
To improve on early and accurate notification of dengue cases for
•
prompt public health intervention.
To identify severe dengue and carry out more focused close
•
monitoring and prompt appropriate management.
To provide guidance on appropriate and timely fluid management
•
and the use of blood and blood products.
To create awareness on early detection of dengue infection with
•
complications.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Adult patients with dengue fever and severe dengue.
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management of
dengue infection in adults particularly healthcare professionals in
primary and secondary/tertiary care namely:-
Physicians and specialists from related disciplines
a.
Family Health Specialists
b.
Medical officers and general practitioners
c.
Allied health professionals
d.
Pharmacists
e.
Students (medical postgraduates and undergraduates, and allied
f.
health students)
Patients and carers
g.
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings inclusive of private
healthcare facilities.
Dr. Ahmad Tajuddin Mohamad Nor
Consultant Emergency Medicine Specialist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Dr. Rose Nani Mudin
Head of Vector - Borne Diseases
Disease Control Division, MoH
Dr. Anilawati Mat Jelani
Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Dr. Saiful Safuan Md. Sani
Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Chow Ting Soo
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Datin Dr. Salbiah Hj. Nawi
Consultant Pathologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Faisal Salikin
Consultant Emergency Medicine Specialist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Salmah Idris
Consultant Pathologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Dr. Faridah Mohd. Amin
Head of Epidemiology Division
National Public Health Laboratory Sg. Buloh
Dato’ Dr. Santha Kumari
Senior Consultant Physician
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah, Klang
Dr. Hanin Farhana Kamaruzaman
Principal Assistant Director, CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section, MoH
Dr. Shahanizan Mohd. Zain
Principal Assistant Director
Medical Development Division, MoH
Dr. Haniza Omar
Consultant Hepatologist
Hospital Selayang
Dr. Shanthi Ratnam
Consultant Intensivist & Physician
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Dr. Intan Iliana Iliassa
Transfusion Medicine Specialist
Hospital Serdang
Dr. Shari Mohd. Nor
Consultant Obstaetric & Gynaecology
Sabah Women & Children Hospital, Likas
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Ghazali
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Section, MoH
Dato’ Dr. K. Sree Raman
Senior Consultant Physician
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar, Seremban
Dr. Kan Fong Kee
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Dr. Suresh Kumar Chidambaram
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Sugai Buloh
Dr. Nahla Irtiza Ismail
Intensivist & Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Melaka
Dr. Siti Zulfa Zulkifli
Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nor Azilah Abu Bakar @ Mansor
Assistant Director
Medical Development Division, MoH
Dr. Tai Li Ling
Senior Consultant Intensivist & Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nor Hafizah Ahmad
Transfusion Medicine Specialist
National Blood Bank
Mrs. Yu Kie a/p Chem
Science Officer (Microbiology)
National Public Health Laboratory Sg. Buloh
Dr. Norhayati Shaharudin
Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Melaka
Dr. Zailiza Suli
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Disease Control Division, MoH
Dr. Ravindran Thayan
Research Officer, Virology Unit
Institute for Medical Research
CHAIRPERSON
Dato’ Dr. Mahiran Mustafa
Senior Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Members (alphabetical order)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guideline was reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
CHAIRPERSON
Datuk Dr. Jeyaindran Tan Sri Sinnadurai
Deputy Director General (Medical)
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Members (alphabetical order)
Datuk Dr. Christopher Lee Kwok Chong
Senior Consultant Infectious Disease
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Dato’ Dr. Faraizah Dato’ Abdul Karim
Deputy Director
National Blood Bank
Dr. J. Ravichandran Jeganathan
Senior Consultant Obstetric & Gynaecology
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section, MoH
Dr. Sabariah Faizah Jamaluddin
Senior Consultant Emergency & Trauma
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Datin Dr. Sivasakthi Velayuthapillai
Senior Consultant Anaesthesiology
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:-
Dr. Hari Dass
Private General Practitioner
Klinik Seremban
Dr. Jameela Sathar
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Ampang
Dr. Petrick Periyasamy
Lecturer and Infectious Disease Physician
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre
Dr. Tan Lian Huat
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Sunway Medical Centre
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1.
Dengue is one of the most important arthropod-borne viral diseases in
terms of public health problem with high morbidity and mortality. It affects
tropical and subtropical regions around the world, predominantly in urban
areas.
The global increase of dengue incidence is also experienced by Malaysia.
Since the year 2000, the dengue incidence in Malaysia continues to
increase from 32 cases per 100,000 population to 361 cases per 100,000
population in 2014 (Figure 1). The dengue incidence rate is higher in the
age group of 15 and above. Most of the dengue cases reported were from
urban areas (70%–80%) where factors such as high density population and
rapid development favour dengue transmission.
With regards to case fatality rate, the national target is less than 0.2%. The
case fatality rate has been reduced from 0.6% in year 2000 to 0.2% in year
2014 (Figure 1). Most of the dengue death has been observed to be higher
in the age group of 15 years and above (Figure 2) and the highest has
been observed in 2004.
Figure 1: Dengue Incidence Rate and Case Fatality Rate, Malaysia 2000-2014
Figure 2: Dengue Case Fatality Rate (CFR) By Age Group In Malaysia, 2004-2014
DENGUE VIRUS AND SEROTYPE TRENDS IN MALAYSIA
2.
Dengue infection is caused by dengue virus which is a mosquito-borne
flavivirus. It is transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus. There
are four distinct serotypes, DENV-1,2,3 and 4. Each episode of infection
induces a life-long protective immunity to the homologous serotype but
confers only partial and transient protection against other serotypes.
Secondary infection is a major risk factor for severe dengue due to
antibody-dependent enhancement. Other important contributing factors are
viral virulence, host genetic background, T-cell activation, viral load and
auto-antibodies.
In Malaysia, all four serotypes can be isolated at any one time. However,
a particular dengue virus serotype can predominate for at least two years
before it is replaced by another serotype (Figure 3). In year 2013-2014,
the predominant serotype had switched twice from DENV-2 to DENV-1 in
February and June 2014 (Figure 4).
Figure 3: Dengue Serotypes in Malaysia (1990-2014)
Figure 4: Dengue Serotypes in Year 2013, 2014 and 2015 (Jan-June)
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
3.
3.1 SPECTRUM OF DENGUE INFECTION
The incubation period for dengue infection is 4-7 days (range 3-14).1 It
may be asymptomatic or may result in a spectrum of illness ranging from
undifferentiated mild febrile illness to severe disease, with or without
plasma leakage and organ impairment. Symptomatic dengue infection
is a systemic and dynamic disease with clinical, haematological and
serological profiles changing from day to day. These changes accelerate
within hours or even minutes during the critical phase, particularly in those
with plasma leakage (refer to subchapter 3.3).
Understanding the systemic and dynamic nature of dengue disease as well
as its pathophysiological changes during each phase of the disease will
produce a rational approach in the management of dengue infection.
3.2 CLINICAL COURSE OF DENGUE INFECTION
After the incubation period, the illness begins abruptly and will be followed
by three phases: febrile, critical and recovery phase (refer to Figure 5).2,3
i. Febrile Phase
Patients develop high grade fever suddenly and usually last 2-7 days. It
is often accompanied by facial flushing, rash, generalised body ache,
vomiting and headache. 2,3 Some patients may have sore throat, injected
pharynx and conjunctival injection.
Mild haemorrhagic manifestations like petechiae and mucosal membrane
bleeding may be seen during the illness.4,5 Per vaginal bleeding may occur
in females but rarely massive. Gastrointestinal bleeding is not uncommon.5,6
The findings of tender liver are warning signs of dengue infection.
The earliest abnormality in the full blood count is a progressive decrease
in total white cell count followed by platelet reduction. This should alert the
physician to a high index of suspicion of dengue infection. This disease
should be notified as early as possible for preventive measures.
ii. Critical Phase
The critical phase often occurs after third day of fever (may occur earlier)
or around defervescence indicated by a rapid drop in temperature. This
coincides with an increase in capillary permeability in some patients. In
other viral infections, the patient’s condition improves as the temperature
subsides, but the contrary happens in severe dengue infection wherein the
patient may deteriorate and manifest third space plasma leakage or organ
dysfunction.2,3,7,8
The critical phase lasts about 24-48 hours (refer to Figure 5). Varying
circulatory disturbances (refer to Table 1) can develop. In less severe
cases, these changes are minimal and transient. Many of these patients
either recover spontaneously or after a short period of fluid or electrolyte
therapy. In more severe forms of plasma leakage, the patients may
develop compensated or decompensated shock (Table 1). Abdominal pain,
persistent vomiting and/or diarrhoea, restlessness, altered conscious level,
clinical fluid accumulation, mucosal bleed or tender liver are the clinical
warning signs of dengue infection with high possibility of complications.8-10
Organ dysfunctions such as hepatitis, encephalitis and myocarditis usually
but not exclusively occur during this phase.
It is important to note that thrombocytopaenia and haemoconcentration are
usually detectable in this phase. The haematocrit (HCT) level correlates
well with plasma volume loss and disease severity. However, interpretation
of HCT may be difficult when there are confounding factors such as
haemorrhage, excessive fluid replacement or in haemodilutional state.
Leucopaenia with relative lymphocytosis, clotting abnormalities, elevation
of transaminases [typically the level of aspartate aminotransaminase
(AST) is higher than the level of alanine aminotransaminase (ALT)],
hypoproteinaemia and hypoalbuminaemia are usually observed.2-4
iii. Recovery/Reabsorption Phase
After 24-48 hours of critical phase, usually plasma leakage stops followed
by reabsorption of extravascular fluid. Patient’s general well being improves,
appetite returns, gastrointestinal symptoms improve, haemodynamic status
stabilises and diuresis ensues. Some patient may have a classical rash of
“isles of white in the sea of red” with generalised pruritus.2 It is important to
note that during this phase, HCT level stabilises and drops further due to
haemodilution following reabsorption of extravascular fluid. The recovery of
platelet count is typically preceded by recovery of white cell count (WCC).
In some instances, organ dysfunctions may worsen (hepatitis, encephalitis
and intracranial bleed) as the patient enters reabsorption phase.
Figure 5 : Clinical Course of DHF 11-13
3.3 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PLASMA LEAKAGE IN SEVERE
DENGUE INFECTION
The primary pathophysiological abnormality seen in dengue infection is
an acute increase in vascular permeability that leads to leakage of plasma
into the extravascular compartment, resulting in haemoconcentration and
hypovolaemia or shock.2,3,14 Hypovolaemia leads to reflex tachycardia and
generalised vasoconstriction due to increased sympathetic output.15,16
Clinical manifestations of vasoconstriction in various systems are as follows:
Skin - coolness, pallor and delayed capillary refill time
•
Cardiovascular system - raised diastolic blood pressure and a
•
narrowing of pulse pressure
Renal system - reducing urine output
•
Gastrointestinal system - persistent vomiting, persistent diarrhoea and
•
abdominal pain
Central nervous system – lethargy, restlessness, apprehension,
•
reduced level of consciousness
Respiratory system – tachypnoea (respiratory rate >20/min)
•
Inadequate perfusion of the tissue leads to increased anaerobic glycolysis
and lactic acidosis. If the hypovolaemia is not corrected promptly, the
patient will progress to a refractory shock state. By then, the tissue
perfusion would not respond to vasopressor drugs, even if the blood
pressure and intravascular volume were to be restored and cardiac output
would remain depressed. The resultant lactic acidosis further depresses
the myocardium and worsens the hypotension.16
The common late complications of prolonged shock are massive bleeding,
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) and multi-organ failure
which are often fatal. The pathophysiology of organ dysfunction will be
described in subchapter 7.6.
The following Table 1 is the summary of the continuum of various
pathophysiological changes in a patient who progresses from normal
circulatory state to hypovolaemic shock.
The critical phase often occurs after third day of fever (may occur
•
earlier) or around defervescence with a rapid drop in temperature.
Clinical deterioration often occurs during the critical phase with
•
plasma leakage or organ dysfunction.
Evidence of plasma leakage includes raised HCT, haemodynamic
•
instability,
fluid
accumulation
in
extravascular
space
or
hypoproteinaemia.
Abdominal pain, persistent vomiting and/or diarrhoea, restlessness,
•
altered conscious level, clinical fluid accumulation, tender liver or
mucosal bleed are the clinical warning signs of dengue infection with
high possibility of rapid progression to severe dengue.
Table 1: A continuum of pathophysiological changes from normal circulation to
compensated and decompensated/hypotensive shock
The pathogenetic mechanism responsible for the increased vascular
permeability in severe dengue infection is not known. Post-mortem findings
revealed perivascular oedema and loss of integrity of endothelial junctions
with endothelial dysfunction.17,18 Abnormal immune response involving the
production of cytokines or chemokines, activation of T-lymphocytes and
disturbances of haemostatic system are the major changes seen in severe
dengue infection. Mediators including C3a, C5a, tumour necrosis factor-α,
interleukin 2, 6 and 10, interferon-α and histamine are elevated.15,19
Secondary infection with a heterotypic dengue virus is associated with
increased risk of developing severe dengue infection. It is believed to be
due to the antibody-dependent enhancement phenomenon.20-22 The subneutralising concentration of the cross-reacting antibody from the previous
infection may opsonise the virus and enhance its uptake and replication in
the macrophage or mononuclear cells. The level of T-cell activation is also
enhanced. Profound T-cell activation with cell death during acute dengue
infection may suppress or delay viral elimination, leading to the higher
viral loads and increased immunopathology found in patients with severe
dengue infection.15,19
Normal Circulation
Compensated Shock
Decompensated /
Hypotensive Shock
Clear consciousness
•
Brisk capillary refill
•
time (<2 sec)
Warm and pink
•
peripheries
Good volume
•
peripheral pulses
Normal heart rate
•
for age
Normal blood
•
pressure for age
Normal pulse
•
pressure for age
Normal respiratory
•
rate for age
Normal urine output
•
Clear consciousness
•
- shock can be
missed if you do not
touch the patient
Prolonged capillary
•
refill time (>2 sec)
Cool extremities
•
Weak & thready
•
peripheral pulses
Tachycardia
•
Normal systlic
•
pressure with raised
diastolic pressure
Postural hypotension
•
Narrowing pulse
•
pressure
Tachypnoea
•
Reduced urine output
•
Intense thirst
•
Change of mental
•
state - restless,
combative or lethargy
Mottled skin, very
•
prolonged capillary
refill time
Cold, clammy
•
extremities
Feeble or absent
•
peripheral pulses
Severe tachycardia
•
with bradycardia in
late shock
Hypotension /
•
unrecordable BP
Narrowed pulse
•
pressure (<20 mmHg)
Metabolic acidosis/
•
hyperpnoea /
Kussmaul’s breathing
Oliguria or anuria
•
Adapted : Ganong WF. Cardiovascular homeostasis in health and disease. In: Review
of Medical Physiology. 22nd Edition. London: McGraw-Hill; 2005:p.630-46.
3.4 WHO DENGUE CLASSIFICATION
Based on 1997 WHO dengue classification scheme (refer to Appendix 3),
the key differentiating feature between DF and DHF is the presence of plasma
leakage in DHF. However, in the early febrile phase of dengue infection, the
symptoms can overlap and one cannot differentiate DF and DHF.
3.4.1 Limitations of 1997 WHO classification 23, level I
It has been observed that the 1997 WHO classification scheme has several
limitations.
Dengue with shock without fulfilling all the four criteria for DHF
i.
Severe organ impairment without shock
ii.
The 1997 classification scheme does not address the entire spectrum
iii.
of the disease.
3.4.2 WHO Classification 2009
This classification addresses the levels of severity of dengue infection which
is more practical to be used in the management decision of the patient
(Figure 6).
Figure 6: 2009 WHO Dengue Classification and Level of Severity 24
Adapted: World Health Organization. Dengue Guidelines for Diagnosis, Treatment,
Prevention and Control - New Edition 2009. WHO: Geneva; 2009
3.5 DIAGNOSTIC CHALLENGES
Clinical features of dengue infection are rather non-specific and mimic
many other diseases, therefore can be easily misinterpreted. A high index
of suspicion and appropriate history taking, particularly with regards to a
recent stay in dengue hotspots or clusters of fever in neighbourhood, are
useful for early and accurate diagnosis of dengue infection.
In addition, a dengue patient may have a co-infection with another
pathogen. Diseases that may mimic dengue infection includes other viral
illnesses. Organ dysfunction can occur in other diseases apart from dengue
infection and should be investigated.
4. DISEASE NOTIFICATION
All suspected dengue cases from private and public health facilities must
be notified by telephone/fax/e-notification to the nearest health office within
24 hours of diagnosis, followed by written notification using the standard
notification format. Failure to notify is liable to be compounded under the
Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases Act, 1988 (Act 342).25
Any delay in notification will increase the risk of dengue transmission in
the locality of the residence. It is also important to update the notification if
there is a change in severity of dengue infection or when there is dengue
death.
Notified cases will be followed up by the health authorities for the
verification of case definition and preventive measures. Since 2014,
the Ministry of Health Malaysia has set up new criteria for dengue cases
registration, whereby all registered dengue cases must be confirmed by
laboratory investigations.
All dengue deaths need to be notified as soon as possible by the treating
doctor in the hospital to the district health office and/or State Health
Director and must be investigated by District Health Officer or Epidemiology
Officer.26
Dengue mortality audit should be conducted within seven days after
the dengue death has occurred at hospital level followed by state level,
chaired by Hospital Director and State Health Director respectively. The
complete dengue death report should be sent to Communicable Diseases
Division, Ministry of Health within one week via State Vector Officer. The
implementation of dengue case management and death should comply to
the Director General of Health Malaysia Circular No.15/2010 dated 24 May
2010.26
5. INVESTIGATIONS
5.1 DISEASE MONITORING TESTS
White cell count (WCC) and Platelet count:
i.
In the early febrile phase WCC and platelet count are usually normal
but will decrease rapidly as the disease progresses.4, level III The
decrease in WCC is accompanied by platelet reduction.
There is no correlation between disease severity and platelet count
2,level III;25,level III and it is not predictive of bleeding.28,level I;29,level II-2;30-32,level III In
recovery phase, the WCC normalises followed by platelet.
Haematocrit (HCT):
ii.
A rising HCT is a marker of plasma leakage in dengue infection. The median
values of normal HCT level among Malaysian populations are: 33,level II-2
male
•
< 60 years – 46%
male > 60 years – 42%
•
female (all age groups) – 40%
•
Other important blood tests in disease monitoring are Liver Function Test
(LFT), Renal profile (RP), coagulation profile, lactate and blood gases
(Table 6). Special tests such as Troponin and Creatine Kinase (CK) should
be discussed with the Specialists/Registrars before performing.
Recommendation 1
Baseline haematocrit (HCT) and white cell count should be established
•
during the first visit in all patients with suspected dengue infection.
Serial full blood count and HCT must be monitored as dengue infection
•
progresses.
5.2 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Diagnostic tests include point of care testing such as dengue NS1 antigen
test and rapid combo tests (NS1 antigen and dengue IgM/IgG antibodies).
Other laboratory tests include NS1 antigen test, dengue antibody detection
tests including IgM and IgG ELISA, dengue genome detection assay (real
time RT-PCR) and dengue viral isolation assay. Specifications for an ideal
dengue test include the ability to differentiate between dengue and other
diseases with similar clinical presentation, to detect during the acute stage
of infection, provides rapid results, inexpensive and easy to use. However,
the interpretation of diagnostic results should be done with the clinical
context.
5.2.1Rapid Combo Test (RCT)
Rapid combo tests are assays that can detect the presence of virus as well
as antibodies simultaneously.34-35,level II-2 Generally RCT tests can be read
within 15-20 minutes. However, it is important that the tests have to be
read according to the manufacturer’s recommendation in the product insert.
Reading too late gives false results.
Interpretation of the results is through the presence or absence of bands
for dengue NS1 antigen and dengue IgM and IgG antibodies.34-35,level II-2
These tests have a longer detection window as they can detect both the
virus and antibodies, thus reducing the possibility of false negative results.
Hence these tests are useful during the early phase of onset when there is
viraemia as well as at a later stage when antibodies against dengue begin
to rise. Suitable samples that can be used for testing include whole blood,
serum and plasma. The sensitivity is 93.9% and specificity is 92%.36,level II-2
5.2.2 Dengue Antigen and Serology Tests by ELISA
Both antigen and serological tests are more commonly used to diagnose
dengue infections. The tests include antigen detection (NS1) or antibody
detection. Usually different patterns of antibody response are seen in primary
dengue infection as compared to secondary dengue infection. 37,level II-2
i. Non-Structural Protein-1 (NS1 Antigen)
NS1 antigen is a highly conserved glycoprotein that seems to be essential
for virus viability. Secretion of the NS1 protein is a hallmark of flavivirus
infecting mammalian cells and can be found in dengue infection as well as
in yellow fever and West Nile virus infection. False positive results have
been reported in chronic diseases and haematological malignancies.38,level III
The detection rate is much better in acute sera of primary infection
(75%-97%) when compared to the acute sera of secondary infection
(60%-70%).39-41,level III The sensitivity of NS1 antigen detection drops from
day 4-5 of illness onwards and usually becomes undetectable in the
convalescence phase.40-42,level III
The presence of NS1 detection after day five may predict severe dengue.44,level II-2
ii. Dengue IgM test
The IgM capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is the
most widely used serological test. The antibody titre is significantly higher
in primary infections compared to secondary infections. Once the IgM is
detectable, it rises quickly and peaks at about two weeks after the onset of
symptoms, and it wanes to undetectable levels by 90 days.
In primary dengue infection, anti-dengue IgM can be detected after five
days of illness in approximately 80% of the cases.37,level II-2 Almost 93%-99%
of cases will have detectable IgM from day 6 through day 10. In the event
of a negative IgM result, a repeat serum should be collected after five days.
However, in secondary dengue infections, IgM was detected in among
78% of patients after day seven.45,level II-2 IgM appears earlier or at the same
time frame but usually at lower titres compared to primary dengue. This
is possibly due to appearance of high levels of anti-dengue IgG before
or sometimes simultaneously with the IgM response. Thus, 28% of all
secondary dengue infections were undiagnosed when only IgM was the
only assay performed. 46-48,level III
iii. Dengue IgG test
In primary and secondary dengue infection, dengue IgG was detected in
100% of patients after day seven of onset of fever. Therefore, a repeat
dengue IgG is recommended if dengue IgM is still negative after day seven
with the negative IgG in the initial test sample. 45,level II-2; 47, level III
iv. Differentiation between primary and secondary dengue infection
Detection of significant elevation of IgG antibodies to dengue virus by
ELISA is very useful for identification of secondary dengue infections.
49-50,level II-2 There are commercially available ELISA kits which can be used
to differentiate between primary and secondary dengue infections as the
kits have incorporated in-house threshold levels of IgG. For example,
Panbio has incorporated a cut off of more than 22 Panbio Units which is
equivalent to HAI level of 1:2560, and thus indicative of secondary dengue
infections.51
Note: False positive dengue serology
Serological tests for dengue have been shown to cross-react with:
other flavivirus – Japanese Encephalitis
•
48,level III; 52, level III
non-flavivirus – malaria, leptospirosis, toxoplasmosis, syphilis
•
53-54, level III
connective tissue diseases – rheumatoid arthritis
•
55, level III
5.2.3 Dengue Viral RNA Detection (Real time RT-PCR)
Dengue viral RNA detection is a molecular method that utilises reagents
that will target specific genome of the virus to enable amplification and
detection of the target. The method is useful only during the viraemic stage
of the disease and can detect the viral RNA target up to five days after
onset of the symptoms. 56-57,level II-2 The test is useful for determination of
circulating dengue serotypes in the country.
Limitations of RT-PCR are:
This test is only available in a few centres with facilities and trained
personnel (e.g.IMR, National Public Health Laboratory, State Public
Health Laboratories and University Malaya Medical Centre).
The test is expensive.
The
specimen
requires
special
storage
temperatures
and
short
transportation time between collection and extraction (refer to Appendix 4).
5.2.4 Virus Isolation
Dengue virus isolation is carried out in Institute for Medical Research (IMR),
National Public Health Laboratory and University Malaya Medical Centre
for research, surveillance and genotyping purposes.
Please refer to Appendix 4 on details of sample collection for diagnostic tests.
As clinical diagnosis of dengue lacks specificity, a definitive diagnosis of
dengue infections requires laboratory confirmation. There are many targets
for laboratory confirmation of dengue which have been listed in Appendix 5
with information on sensitivity and specificity of each target and when to do
after the onset of symptoms.
a)
b)
c)
Appendix 6 summarises the type of tests recommended for patients
presented with clinical history and their interpretation. This serves as
laboratory guidelines for the clinicians who are managing dengue patients.
Recommendation 3
A repeat dengue serology should be obtained at the time of dengue
•
death.
Suitable specimens for viral isolation and/or real time reverse
•
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and/or nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen detection should be done for
confirmation of dengue infection.
Dengue IgM is usually positive after day 5-7 of illness. Therefore a
•
negative IgM taken before day 5-7 of illness does not exclude dengue
infection.
Caution: Massive blood transfusion may affect the test results mentioned above.
6. INVESTIGATION OF POST MORTEM CASE
Suitable samples for virus isolation and PCR can be obtained from most of
the organs however, the best tissue sample for investigation is
the liver.58-59,level III If patient had encephalitis, CSF should also be included
as samples for investigation. The liver should be placed in sterile containers
and moistened with viral transport media or sterile normal saline. CSF
should be submitted in sterile bijou bottle. Both should be refrigerated if
there is delay in transportation. Specimen for viral investigation should be
transported in ice to IMR and National Public Health Laboratory.
Recommendation 2
Dengue rapid combo test or non-structural protein 1 antigen (NS1 Ag)
•
should be taken as soon as dengue infection is suspected.
If dengue IgM is negative before day seven, a repeat sample must be
•
taken in recovery phase.
If dengue IgM is still negative after day seven, dengue IgG should be
•
done for diagnostic confirmation of secondary dengue infection.
7. MANAGEMENT OF DENGUE INFECTION
7.1 OUTPATIENT MANAGEMENT
The management of dengue infection is symptomatic and supportive. An
approach to outpatient evaluation is as suggested in Table 2.
Management issues vary according to the three phases of the clinical
course (refer to section 7.4). It is crucial to recognise plasma leakage, early
shock and severe organ dysfunction. This can be achieved by frequent
clinical and laboratory monitoring during the early febrile phase of dengue
infection.
Dengue patients who are managed in the outpatient setting should be
provided with an outpatient dengue monitoring record (refer to Appendix 7)
to ensure that relevant informations are available for continuity of care by
health care providers.
Primary care providers with no immediate haematocrit facilities and/or
•
point of care tests should refer patient to the nearest health facility for
further management.
Point of care tests (RCT or NS1 antigen) should be done when dengue
•
infection is suspected.
Table 2: Approach to Outpatient Evaluation of Dengue Infection 1-3
It is important to evaluate every patient for the following:
Overall assessment
1. History
Date of onset of fever/ illness
•
Oral intake
•
Assess for warning signs – Refer to Table 3
•
Change in mental state/seizure/dizziness
•
Urine output (frequency, volume and time of last voiding)
•
Other important relevant histories:
•
Family or neighbourhood history of dengue
--
Jungle trekking and swimming in waterfall (consider leptospirosis,
--
typhus, malaria)
Travelling
--
Recent unprotected sexual or intravenous drug user (consider acute
--
HIV seroconversion illness)
Co-morbidities (consider sepsis particularly in patients with diabetes
--
mellitus)
2. Physical examination
i. Assess mental state and GCS score
ii. Assess hydration status
iii. Assess haemodynamic status
Skin colour (C), capillary refill time (normal <2 seconds) (C), cold/ warm
--
extremities (T), pulse volume (V) and rate (R) - CCTVR
Blood pressure and pulse pressure
--
iv. Look out for tachypnoea/acidotic breathing/pleural effusion
v. Check for abdominal tenderness/hepatomegaly/ascites
vi. Examine for bleeding manifestation
3. Investigation
i. FBC and HCT
ii. Point of care test for dengue (RCT or NS1 antigen)
Diagnosis, disease staging and severity assessment
Based on evaluations in history, physical examination ± FBC, HCT and point of care
test, the clinicians should be able to determine:
1. Likelihood of dengue infection
2. The phase of dengue infection (febrile/critical/recovery)
3. Severity of the illness
Plan of management
1. Dengue assessment checklist must be filled by the attending doctor (Appendix 8)
2. Notify the district health office (refer to Chapter 4 on disease notification) followed
by disease notification form
3. If admission is indicated (refer to admission criteria)
Stabilise the patient at primary care before transfer (refer to intravenous fluid
•
regime)
Communicate with the receiving hospital/Emergency Department before
•
transfer
4. If admission is not indicated (refer to Table 4)
Daily follow up is necessary especially from day 3 of illness onwards until the
•
patient is afebrile for at least 24-48 hours without antipyretics.
Provide the patient with Outpatient Dengue Monitoring Record (
•
Appendix 7)
and Home Care Advice Leaflet for Dengue Patients (Appendix 9)
Table 3: Warning Signs
Any abdominal pain/tenderness
•
Persistent vomiting (
•
>3 times over 24 hours)
Persistent diarrhoea (
•
>3 times over 24 hours)
Third space fluid accumulation (such as ascites, pleural and
•
pericardial effusion)
Spontaneous bleeding tendency
•
Lethargy/restlessness/confusion
•
Tender liver
•
Raised HCT with rapid drop in platelet:
•
o HCT male <60 years – 46%
o HCT male >60 years – 42%
o HCT female (all age groups) – 40%
*median values of normal HCT in Malaysian population33,level II-2.
Adapted : World Health Organization. Dengue Guidelines for Diagnosis, Treatment,
Prevention and Control - New Edition 2009. WHO: Geneva; 2009
Table 4 : Clinical and Laboratory Criteria for Patients Who Can Be Treated at Home60-62
Able to tolerate orally well, good urine output and no history of
1.
bleeding
Absence of warning signs (refer to Table 3)
2.
Physical examination:
3.
Haemodynamically stable
•
No tachypnoea or acidotic breathing
•
No tender liver or abdominal tenderness
•
No bleeding manifestation
•
No sign of third space fluid accumulation
•
No alterations in mental state
•
Investigation:
4.
Stable serial HCT
•
No other criteria for admission (i.e. co-morbidities, pregnancy, social
5.
factors)
7.2 PATIENT TRIAGING AT EMERGENCY AND OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENT
The purpose of triaging patients is to determine whether they require
urgent attention. This is to avoid critically ill patients being missed upon
arrival.60,level III; 63-64,level III
Triage Checklist at Registration Counter:
1. History of fever
2. Abdominal Pain
3. Vomiting
4. Dizziness/ fainting
5. Bleeding
Vital parameters to be taken:
Mental state, blood pressure, CCTVR and respiratory rate
7.3 CRITERIA FOR HOSPITAL REFERRAL / ADMISSION
7.3.1 Referral from Primary Care Providers to Hospital
The decision for referral and admission must not be based on a single
clinical parameter but should depend on the Total Assessment of the
patient.
Referral from primary care providers to hospital
1. Symptoms:
Warning signs (refer to Table 3)
•
Bleeding manifestations
•
Inability to tolerate oral fluids
•
Reduced urine output
•
Seizure
•
2. Signs:
Dehydration
•
Shock (refer to Table 1)
•
Bleeding
•
Any organ failure
•
3. Special situations:
Patients with co-morbidity e.g. Diabetes, Hypertension, Ischaemic
•
Heart Disease, Coagulopathy, Morbid Obesity, Renal failure,
Chronic Liver disease, COPD
Elderly more than 65 years old
•
Patients who are on anti-platelet and/or anticoagulants
•
Pregnancy
•
Social factors that limit follow-up e.g. living far from health facility,
•
no transport, patient living alone, etc.
4. Laboratory criteria: Rising HCT accompanied by reducing platelet count
7.3.2 Referral from Hospitals Without Specialist To Hospitals
With Specialists
Nearest physician should be consulted for all cases of severe dengue,
those who are pregnant and patients with comorbidities.
Prerequisites for transfer
All efforts must be taken to optimise the patient’s condition before and
1.
during transfer.
The Emergency Department, ICU and Medical Department of the
2.
receiving hospital must be informed prior to transfer.
Adequate and essential information must be sent together with the
3.
patient that includes fluid chart, monitoring chart and investigation
results.
7.3.3 Intervention in Emergency Department
Proactive ongoing clinical reassessment of airway, breathing and circulatory
status must be done.
7.3.4 Laboratory tests in the Emergency Department
These tests must be done immediately in cases of suspected dengue
infection :
FBC and HCT
•
Point of care testing e.g. Rapid combo test (RCT) or NS1 antigen
•
In suspected severe dengue, the following investigations should be done:
Blood gases and serum lactate
•
LFT/AST and RP
•
Creatine kinase (CK) to detect myocarditis and rhabdomyolysis
•
GXM
•
7.3.5 Imaging Investigations in the Emergency Department
for Patients Requiring Admission
Chest x-ray and ultrasound (where available) are required in patients
suspected to have vascular leakage. However, it should not delay
admission.
Ultrasonography may be performed by trained personal to look for evidence of:
Third space fluid loss such as the presence of pleural effusion,
i.
pericardial effusion, gallbladder wall oedema and intraperitoneal
fluid collection.
Collapsibility of the inferior vena cava (IVC) as an indirect indicator
ii.
of adequacy of the intravascular fluid compartment & response to
intravenous fluids.
Recommendation 4
Dengue assessment checklist should be filled by the attending doctor
•
for all patients with suspected dengue infection (refer to Appendix 8).
All dengue patients requiring admission should be
•
immediately
started on an appropriate fluid therapy [oral or intravenous (IV)].
o
When indicated, IV fluid therapy should be initiated and adjusted
accordingly.
In monitoring of dengue patients, the following must be done and
•
documented:
o
serial monitoring of vital signs
o
strict monitoring of ongoing fluid losses and hourly fluid
input/output charting
Dengue patients with deteriorating vital signs must be uptriaged
•
accordingly.
7.4 DISEASE MONITORING
7.4.1 Principles of Disease Monitoring
During critical phase, monitoring of patients need to be intensified
i.
and frequent adjustments in the fluid regime may be required.
Recognition of onset of reabsorption phase is also important
ii.
because intravenous fluid regime needs to be progressively
reduced/discontinued at this stage.
7.4.2 Inpatient Disease Monitoring
Immediately after admission every patient with suspected dengue infection
should be reviewed thoroughly using the dengue assessment checklist
by the attending doctor (Appendix 8). The plan of management and
monitoring should be based on the phase and severity of the disease.
The clinical findings must also be documented in the Inpatient Dengue
Monitoring Chart (Appendix 10).
Table 5 and 6 summarise the issues, parameters and frequency of
monitoring according to the different phases of the illness.
Table 5: Issues of Monitoring According to Different Phases of Dengue Illness
Phases of
illness
Issues
Febrile
Differentiation of dengue illness from other febrile
--
illnesses.
Critical
Plasma leakage occurs as patient progresses to late
--
febrile phase or as temperature begins to defervesce
(T <38.0 °C).
Clinical deterioration occurs during this phase due to
--
plasma leakage.
Plasma leakage results in haemoconcentration and
--
hypovolaemia/ shock.
Excessive plasma leakage due, in part, to intravenous
--
fluid therapy may cause respiratory distress.
Bleeding can be precipitated by prolonged shock and
--
shock can be perpetuated by bleeding.
Organ dysfunction may occur.
--
May mimic acute abdomen from other causes.
--
May be confused with septic shock or other forms of
--
shock.
Reabsorption
Cessation of plasma leakage.
--
Reabsorption of fluid from extravascular compartment.
--
Haemodilution occurs following fluid reabsorption.
--
Fluid overload and pulmonary oedema if intravenous
--
fluid therapy is continued.
Frequency of monitoring
Parameters for
monitoring
Febrile phase
Critical phase
Reabsorption
phase
Frequency of monitoring
Parameters for
monitoring
Febrile phase
Critical phase
Reabsorption
phase
Table 6 : Parameters and Frequency of Monitoring According to Different Phases
of Dengue Illness
General well being
Appetite / oral intake
Warning signs
Daily or more
frequently towards late
febrile phase
At least twice a day
and more frequently as
indicated
Daily or more
frequently as indicated
Haemodynamic
status
• CCTVR
• BP
• Pulse pressure
Respiratory status
• RR
• SpO2
Neurological Status
• conscious level
• restlessness
• seizures
4-6 hourly depending
on clinical status
2-4 hourly depending
on clinical status
In shock
Every 15-30 minutes till
stable then 1-2 hourly
4-6 hourly
Urine output
4 hourly
2-4 hourly
In shock : Hourly
4-6 hourly
FBC
Daily or more
frequently as indicated
4-12 hourly depending
on clinical status
In shock
Repeated before and
after each fluid
resuscitation and as
indicated
Daily
BUSE/Creatinine
LFT + AST
RBS
Creatine Kinase
As clinically indicated
At least daily or more
frequently as indicated
In shock
Crucial to monitor ABG
and lactate closely
As clinically
indicated
ABG, lactate
Coagulation profile
CRP
Troponin or CKMB
Fibrinogen, LDH,
ferritin,
triglyceride
ECG
Echocardiogram
Ultrasound
As clinically indicated
As clinically indicated
As clinically indicated
Clinical Parameters
Laboratory Parameters and Imaging
All investigations done at ED must be reviewed immediately upon ward admission
Adapted : World Health Organization. Dengue Guidelines for Diagnosis, Treatment,
Prevention and Control - New Edition 2009. WHO: Geneva; 2009
7.5 FLUID MANAGEMENT
7.5.1 Non-Shock Patients (DF with Warning Signs)
Common pitfalls in fluid therapy:
Treating patients with unnecessary fluid boluses based on raised
•
HCT or warning signs as the sole parameter without considering other
clinical parameters.
Excessive and prolonged fixed fluid regime in stable patients.
•
Infrequent monitoring and adjustment of infusion rate.
•
Continuation of intravenous fluid during the recovery phase.
•
Excessive fluid therapy in patients with co-morbidities (such as heart
•
disease and renal disease).
In non shock dengue patients, increased oral fluid intake may be sufficient
in those who are haemodynamically stable and not vomiting. Inappropriate
intravenous fluid therapy had been shown to prolong hospitalisation with
a tendency to develop more fluid accumulation.65,level II-3 However IV fluid
(0.9% saline is recommended) is indicated in patients with increasing HCT
with evidence of ongoing plasma leakage, despite increased oral intake.
IV fluid therapy should also be considered in patients who are vomiting,
severe diarrhoea and not tolerating orally.60,level III; 66,level III
The normal maintenance requirement for IV fluid therapy in such patients
could be calculated based on the formula in Table 7. Frequent adjustment
of maintenance fluid regime is needed during the critical phase. In dengue
patients without co-morbidities who can tolerate orally, adequate oral fluid
intake of two to three litres daily should be encouraged (often 1.2-1.5 times
the normal maintenance will be required during the critical phase). Patients
may be able to take oral fluids after a few hours of IV therapy. If the fluid
infusion rate exceeds more than the maintenance requirement, the infusion
rate should be reviewed within 2-4 hours.
In patients with persistent warning signs with increasing or persistently high
HCT, the graded fluid bolus may be initiated with caution (refer to Table 8).
Frequent monitoring of clinical and laboratory parameters must be carried
out every 2-4 hours until patients improve. Aim for urine output of 0.5-1.0
ml/kg/hr.
A rising HCT indicates on-going plasma leakage and will require an
increase in the IV fluid infusion rate. If patients deteriorate and progress to
shock, refer to the section on fluid resuscitation in DSS (subchapter 7.5.2).
Reduce or consider discontinuation of IV fluid therapy when patients begin
to show signs of recovery (usually after 24-48 hours of defervescence, or
the HCT drops in a stable patient).
Table 7 : Calculations for maintenance of intravenous fluid infusion
Non-obese patients
1.2 to 1.5 ml/kg/hour
•
National Clinical Guideline Centre (UK). Intravenous Fluid
Therapy: Intravenous Fluid Therapy in Adults in Hospital
[Internet]. London: Royal College of Physicians (UK); 2013 Dec.
Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK247761/
Adapted :
Adapted :
Obese patients (BMI >27.5 kg/m2)*
Maintenance fluid can be calculated based on adjusted body weight
Adjusted bodyweight (ABW) can be calculated using the
•
formula.
o ABW = IBW + 0.4 (actual weight - IBW)**
o Ideal bodyweight (IBW) can be estimated based on the
following formula. 72, level III
Female: 45.5 kg + 0.91(height in cm -152)
Male: 50.0 kg + 0.91(height in cm -152)
Malaysian Society for the Study of Obesity. Clinical Practice
Guidelines: Management of Obesity. Ministry of Health,
Malaysia;2004
GlobalRPH 2015, calculator adjusted body weight
(available at http://www.globalrph.com/ibw_calc.htm)
*
* *
Table 8 : Graded Fluid Bolus Regime
Obtain a baseline HCT before fluid therapy.
•
Give crystalloids solution (such as 0.9% saline).
•
Start with 5 ml/kg/hour for 1–2 hours, then reduce to 3 ml/kg/hr for 2–4
•
hours, and then reduce to 2 ml/kg/hr or less according to the clinical
response.
If the clinical parameters are worsening and HCT is rising, increase the
•
rate of infusion.
Reassess the clinical status, repeat the HCT and review fluid infusion
•
rates accordingly.
Fluid intake and urine output must be reviewed and
adjusted according to clinical response. Use of volumetric
pumps is encouraged, especially in patients requiring close
fluid monitoring.
CAUTION :
Recommendation 5
In dengue patients without co-morbidities who can tolerate orally,
•
adequate oral fluid intake of two to three litres daily should be
encouraged. These patients may not require intravenous (IV) fluid
therapy.
IV fluid should be instituted in dengue patients with:
•
o vomiting, unable to tolerate oral fluids or severe diarrhoea
o increasing haematocrit (with other signs of ongoing plasma
leakage) despite increased oral intake
In patients with persistent warning signs with increasing or persistently
•
high HCT, the graded fluid bolus may be initiated with caution.
Crystalloids solution should be the fluid of choice for non-shock dengue
•
patients.
7.5.2 Dengue Shock Syndrome (DSS)
Dengue shock syndrome is a medical emergency. Recognition of shock
in its early stage (compensated shock) and prompt fluid resuscitation will
give a good clinical outcome.67,level I Refer to Table 1 for details. However,
failure to recognise the phase of compensated shock will ultimately lead
to decompensated (hypotensive) shock with a more complicated disease
course and organ failures.
Pulse pressure of <20 mmHg and systolic pressure <90 mmHg are late
signs of shock in adults.
All patients with dengue shock should be managed in high dependency
or intensive care units. Fluid resuscitation must be initiated promptly
and should not be delayed while waiting for admission to ICU or high
dependency unit. Following initial resuscitation there maybe recurrent
episodes of shock because capillary leakage can continue for 24-48 hours.
IV fluid therapy is the mainstay of treatment for dengue shock. To date,
only four randomised controlled trials studying different types of fluid
regime in DSS in children aged from 5-15 years are available.67-70,level I Our
recommendations are extrapolated from these studies. From these studies
of colloids versus crystalloids, there is no clear advantage of using any of
the colloids over crystalloids in terms of the overall outcome and mortality.
67-69, level I; 71,level I However colloid may be preferable as the fluid of choice in
patients with intractable shock in the initial resuscitation.
Colloids seem to restore the cardiac index and reduce the level of HCT
faster than crystalloids in patients with intractable shock.68-69,level I The choice
of colloids in these studies included gelatin solution and hydroxyethyl starch
(HES) solution. In the recent meta-analysis, HES in non-dengue critically ill
patients with sepsis was associated with an increase in the rate of renal
replacement therapy and coagulation abnormalities.72,level I
Colloid should be used mainly for resuscitation. Prolonged use of colloid as
sole maintenance fluid should be avoided. HES solution is contraindicated
in patients with severe hepatic dysfunction, fluid overload (e.g. pulmonary
oedema and congestive cardiac failure), renal failure and patients receiving
dialysis.
Albumin as resuscitation fluid in DSS has not been studied, however from
extensive use in critically ill patients, 4%-5% albumin is comparable to
crystalloid and may be better in subgroup of septic patients.70,level I;72,level I
Hypertonic sodium lactate in DSS has shown positive results in only one
study.73,level I However, there is lack of clear evidence to support the use of
this solution and furthermore, the product is not available in this country.
7.5.3 Principles for Fluid Resuscitation
The volume of initial and subsequent fluid resuscitation depends on the
degree of shock and can vary from 10-20 ml/kg adjusted body weight.
The volume and rate of fluid replacement should be carefully titrated to the
clinical response to maintain an effective circulation while avoiding an overreplacement.
Adequate and effective fluid resuscitation will leads to improvement in the
following parameters in Table 9.
Table 9 : Fluid Responsiveness Parameters
A. Clinical response parameters
Improvement of general well being/mental state
Warm peripheries
Capillary refill time <2sec
BP stable
Improving pulse pressure
Reducing tachycardia
Improving urine output
Less tachypnoea
B. Laboratory parameters
Appropriate decrease in HCT
Improvement in metabolic acidosis and lactate clearance
C. Imaging parameters (recommended but not mandatory)
Improvement of IVC collapsibility index (spontaneous breathing patient)
IVC expiratory diameter – IVC inspiratory diameter
IVC expiratory diameter
X
100
=
Caval index (%)
* Caval index close to 100% is indicative of almost complete collapse, therefore
volume depletion and 0% suggests minimal collapse i.e. likely volume overload.
>40% collapse will be fluid responsive.72
Adapted : Goldflam K, Saul T and Lewiss R. Focus on: inferior vena cava
ultrasound. ACEP News 6. 2011. pp 24-25. (available at : http://www.acep.org/
Content.aspx?id=80791)
CAUTION : IVC assessment should be performed by trained personnel and not
to be interpreted in isolation.
7.5.3 Non-responders to Initial Resuscitation (Refer to Algorithm A and B)
If the first two cycles of fluid resuscitation (about 40 ml/kg) fails to establish a
stable haemodynamic state and HCT remains high, further bolus of colloids
should be considered for the third cycle.1;60,level III (refer to Algorithm A and
Algorithm B)
If the repeat HCT drops after two cycles of fluid resuscitation and the patient
remains in shock, one should suspect significant bleed (often occult) for which
blood ± blood products transfusion needs to be instituted promptly. (refer to
Algorithm A and Algorithm B)
Other possible causes of persistent shock include: (refer to Algorithm C)
sepsis
•
cardiogenic shock (due to myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, RV/LV
•
dysfunction, pericardial effusion or cardiac ischaemia),
cytokine storm (a vasodilated state due to release of inflammatory
•
mediators)
liver failure with lactic acidosis.
•
Fluid therapy has to be judiciously controlled to avoid fluid overload which could
result in massive pleural effusion, pulmonary oedema or ascites.69,level I
HCT
HCT or high
IV = intravenous ; HCT = haematocrit
= increased ; = decreased
1GXM: emergency cross-match
IV crystalloid 5-7 ml/kg/hr for
•
1-2 hours, then:
reduce to 3-5 ml/kg/hr
for 2-4 hours; then
reduce to 2-3 ml/kg/hr
for 2-4 hours
If
patient
continues
to
•
improve, fluid can be further
reduced.
Monitor HCT 4-6 hourly.
•
If the patient is not stable,
•
act
according
to
HCT
levels:
if
HCT
increases,
consider
bolus
fluid
administration
or
increase
fluid
administration
if
HCT
decreases,
consider
transfusion
with
packed
red
cells
and/or
blood
components
Consider to stop IV fluid at
•
48 hours of plasma leakage/
defervescence.
ALGORITHM A - FLUID MANAGEMENT IN COMPENSATED SHOCK
COMPENSATED SHOCK
(systolic pressure maintained but has signs of reduced perfusion)
Fluid resuscitation with isotonic crystalloid 5-10 ml/kg/hr for 1 hour
•
Obtain FBC, HCT, RP, LFT, RBS, PT/APTT, CK, Lactate/HCO
•
3, GXM1 before fluid
resuscitation.
* Reassess the patient’s clinical condition, vital signs, pulse volume, capillary refill
time, urine output and temperature of extremities.
** Colloid is preferable if the patient has already received previous bolus of crystalloid
IMPROVEMENT*
IMPROVEMENT*
YES
YES
NO
NO
If patient improves, reduce to
•
7-10 ml/kg/hr for 1-2 hours
Then reduce further
•
Check HCT
Consider significant
occult/overt bleed
Initiate transfusion with
packed red cells and/or
blood components
Administer 2nd bolus
of fluid (colloid) **
10-20 ml/kg/hr for 1 hour
HCT or
HCT
IV = intravenous ; HCT = haematocrit
= increased ; = decreased
1GXM: emergency cross-match
Crystalloid/colloid 10ml/
•
kg/hr for 1 hour, then
continue with:
IV
crystalloid
5-7 ml/kg/hr for
1-2 hours; then
reduce to 3-5
ml/kg/hr for 2-4
hours; then
reduce to 2-3
ml/kg/hr for 2-4
hours
If patient continues to
•
improve, fluid can be
further reduced.
Monitor HCT 4 hourly
•
or more frequent as
indicated.
If the patient is not
•
stable, act according
to HCT levels:
if HCT increases,
c o n s i d e r
bolus
fluid
administration
or increase fluid
administration;
if
HCT
d e c r e a s e s ,
c o n s i d e r
transfusion with
packed red cells
Consider
to
stop
•
IV fluid at 48 hours
of
plasma
leakage/
defervescence.
IMPROVEMENT*
IMPROVEMENT*
IMPROVEMENT*
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
Review HCT
Repeat 2nd HCT
HCT or high
HCT
Repeat
3rd HCT
Consider
significant
occult/overt
bleed
Initiate transfusion
with packed red
cells and /or blood
components
Administer 2nd
bolus of fluid
(colloid)^
10-20 ml/kg
over ½ to 1 hour
REFER TO
ALGORITHM C
HCT unchanged
Administer 3rd bolus of
fluid (colloid) 10-20 ml/kg
over 1 hour
ALGORITHM B - FLUID MANAGEMENT IN DECOMPENSATED SHOCK
DECOMPENSATED SHOCK
Fluid resuscitation with 20 ml/kg colloid / crystalloid within 15 - 30 minutes
•
Obtain HCT/FBC, RP, LFT, RBS, PT/APTT, CK, Lactate/HCO
•
3, GXM1 before fluid
resuscitation.
* Reassess the patient’s clinical condition, vital signs, pulse volume, capillary refill time
and temperature of extremities.
^ Colloid is preferable if the patient has already received previous bolus of crystalloid.
ALGORITHM C - FLUID MANAGEMENT IN DECOMPENSATED SHOCK
(WITH PRESENCE OF BLEEDING & LEAKING OR OTHER CAUSES OF SHOCK)
HAEMATOCRIT REMAIN UNCHANGED AFTER
FIRST FLUID RESUSCITATION
Consider other causes of shock
Bleeding and leaking at
same time
All the above types of shocks need to be supported by echocardiography and noninvasive cardiac output monitoring and treatments tailor to each patient.
HCT = haematocrit ; MAP = mean arterial pressure ; CO = cardiac output;
OGDS = oesophagogastroduodenoscopy USG = ultrasonography
Septic shock
Cardiac dysfunction
Severe metabolic
acidosis with
hyperlactataemia (liver
+ multiorgan failure)
Cytokine storm
Look for source of bleeding
(eg. OGDS)
Evidence of leaking (USG,
chest X-ray)
Check for coagulopathy
Transfuse packed red cells
and blood components
Vasodilated state
Noradrenaline
titrated to MAP
65 mmHg
Vasopressor
+
Supportive care
+
Continuous renal replacement
therapy (CRRT)
Low CO :
Inotrope
(eg. dobutamine/
adrenaline)
High CO :
Vasodilated shock with
myocardial dysfunction
Inotropes + vasopressor
(eg. noradrenaline +
dobutamine /adrenaline)
Noradrenaline
and fluids
Check for disease
markers of
haemophagocytic
syndrome
7.5.4 Metabolic acidosis
Patient could be in shock even with normal blood pressure as the
leakage happens slowly over hours and body compensates well by
peripheral vasoconstriction to maintain the mean arterial pressure. Thus,
compensated metabolic acidosis is an early sign of shock due to leakage
or bleeding. Lactic acidosis due to tissue hypoxia and hypoperfusion is the
most common cause of metabolic acidosis in dengue shock.
Monitoring of blood lactate levels is commonly carried out in patients
with severe dengue. A lactate level of <2 mmol/L in a critically ill patient
generally implies that the patient has adequate tissue perfusion, although
higher levels are not necessarily the result of tissue hypoxia.
Correction of shock and adequate fluid replacement will correct the
metabolic acidosis. If metabolic acidosis remains uncorrected by this
strategy, one should suspect severe bleeding, liver failure, acute kidney
injury, sepsis, cardiac dysfunction, drugs (e.g. beta2 agonists, metformin)
and hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis.
Hyperchloraemia, caused by the administration of large volumes of 0.9%
sodium chloride solution (chloride concentration of 154 mmol/L), may cause
metabolic acidosis with normal lactate levels and present as a normal
anion gap metabolic acidosis. If serum chloride levels increase, change the
fluid to balanced solution such as sterofundin or Hartmann’s.73, level III This
improves chloride-related acidosis.
Sodium bicarbonate for metabolic acidosis caused by tissue hypoxia is not
recommended for pH >7.10. Bicarbonate therapy is associated with sodium
and fluid overload, an increase in lactate and pCO2 and a decrease in
serum ionised calcium.
A delay in lactate clearance or persistent lactate elevation is associated
with poor outcome. Persistent lactic acidosis contributes to myocardial
depression, arrhythmias, vasodilatation, increase in respiratory muscle
workload, reduced oxygen delivery, decreased ATP production and multiorgan failure.
A likely more useful parameter for guiding therapy is lactate clearance.
Lactate clearance is calculated as follows:76
lactate initial - lactate subsequent
lactate initial
X 100%
A 20% clearance in two hours improves survival.
7.5.5 Arterial blood gases
Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis is frequently done (2-4 hourly) in patients
with shock mainly for detection of worsening acidosis by looking at base
excess, bicarbonate, CO2 and lactate.
Mixed respiratory alkalosis with metabolic acidosis (CO2 lower than
expected) commonly seen in liver failure, dengue encephalitis and sepsis.
This is seen in patients with pleural effusion and moderate ascites as they
are tachypnoeic.
Hypoxaemia is a guide to warn us of fluid overload, pleural effusion and
interstitial oedema.
7.5.6 Electrolyte and acid-base imbalances
All patients with severe dengue should be monitored for electrolytes
imbalances such as hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia. Presence of
hyponatraemia is a common observation in severe dengue and a marker
of disease severity. 77-78,level III
Other electrolytes that need to be monitored are :-
serum calcium
•
serum phosphate
•
serum magnesium
•
Recommendation 6
Crystalloids solution is be the preferred choice in Dengue Shock
•
Syndrome (DSS).
Patients with DSS who do not respond to initial crystalloid resuscitation
•
should receive colloids as the second fluid bolus.
In DSS with persistent shock, other causes of shock should be
•
aggressively looked for and treated accordingly.
7.6 MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS IN DENGUE INFECTION
7.6.1 MANAGEMENT OF BLEEDING / HAEMOSTASIS
i. Haemostatic Abnormalities in Dengue Infection
The haemostatic changes that occur in dengue infection is a result of
endothelial activation.79,level II-3;80-81,level III This leads to thrombocytopaenia and
coagulation activation which are an intrinsic part of the disease.79,level II-3;8081,level III
Thrombocytopaenia and coagulation abnormalities do not reliably predict
bleeding in dengue infection.82,level I;83,level II-2;84,level III
Markers
of
endothelial
activation
such
as
elevated
levels
of
thrombomodulin, tissue factor and Von Willebrand factor are more often
seen in severe dengue.85-86,level II-2 Increased levels of these proteins may
promote microvascular thrombosis and end-organ damage.87,level III
ii. How to Recognise Significant Occult Bleeding?
Bleeding is considered significant when it results in haemodynamic
instability. Bleeding from the gums or per vagina, epistaxis and petechiae
are common but will usually cease spontaneously and are often not
significant.88,level II-3 Significant bleeding or disseminated intravascular
coagulation usually occurs following prolonged shock and acidosis.89,level III
Suspect significant occult bleeding in the following situations:
HCT not as high as expected for the degree of shock to be explained
•
by plasma leakage alone.89, level III
A drop in HCT without clinical improvement despite adequate fluid
•
replacement (40-60 ml/kg).89, level III; 61
Severe metabolic acidosis and end-organ dysfunction despite adequate
•
fluid replacement.89,level III
iii. Management of Bleeding in Dengue Infection
Transfusion of blood and blood components in dengue is indicated when
there is evidence of significant bleeding.89,level III Recently published studies
done in critically ill patients and patients undergoing cardiac surgery have
not shown any difference in clinical outcomes and lactate recovery when
transfused with shorter-term storage packed cells (7-10 days) compared to
longer-term storage packed cells (21-28 days) ).90-92,level I
Transfusion of blood in patients with significant bleeding
Transfuse blood (5–10ml/kg of packed red cells) and observe the
•
clinical response. Consider blood components if required.
Consider repeating the blood transfusion if there is further blood loss
•
or no appropriate rise in HCT after blood transfusion.
No significant difference in clinical outcomes and lactate recovery
•
when transfused with shorter-term storage packed cells compared with
longer-term storage packed cells.
Recommendation 7
Dengue patients with mild bleeding do not require blood transfusion.
•
Transfusion with packed cells and/or blood component should be
•
administered in dengue patients with significant bleeding.
iv. Management of Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Gastrointestinal bleeding is one of the most common haemorrhagic
manifestations in dengue infection and it is often associated with high
mortality.88,level II-3 The common causes are haemorrhagic (and/or erosive)
gastritis, peptic ulcer and oesophageal ulcer.93,level II-2; 94, level III
Fluid therapy, transfusion of packed cells and blood products, and
administration of proton pump inhibitor are fundamental in the management
of gastrointestinal haemorrhage in dengue infection.95,level II-2 Endoscopy
is indicated if these patients have persistent bleeding despite optimum
medical therapy.96-98,level III
Endoscopic therapy is also recommended in patients with history of
peptic ulcers with recent haemorrhage including active arterial bleeding,
nonbleeding visible vessels, nonbleeding adherent clots or persistent
oozing. However, endoscopic injection therapy is not recommended in
dengue infection with gastrointestinal haemorrhage.93,level II-2
v. Prophylactic Transfusions in Dengue Infection
Prophylactic transfusion with platelets and fresh frozen plasma do not
produce sustained changes in the coagulation status and platelet count in
patients with severe dengue infection.99-100, level III
Prophylactic transfusion of packed cells and/or blood components is
only indicated when invasive procedure or an operation is decided.
The transfusion of platelet is recommended within one hour and FFP
within 30 minutes prior to the procedure. Inappropriate transfusion of
blood components increases the risk of pulmonary oedema, respiratory
depression and transfusion-transmitted infection.99,level III
There is no role for routine prophylactic transfusion with platelets and
•
plasma in dengue infection.
Prophylactic transfusion of packed cells and/or blood components is
•
only indicated when invasive procedure or an operation is decided.
vi. Adjunctive Therapy in Dengue Infection
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of recombinant activated
factor VII in dengue patients with significant bleeding.101,level I;102,level III The
coagulation system is activated in dengue and infusion of activated factor
concentrates may increase the risk of thrombosis.103,level III
7.6.2 MANAGEMENT OF HEPATITIS IN DENGUE INFECTION
i. Clinical Features and Biochemical Profiles
Clinical features suggesting dengue-related hepatic involvement includes
abdominal pain (18%-63%), nausea and vomiting (49%-58%), anorexia,
hepatomegaly and elevated transaminases.104-106,level II-2;107,level III In a singlecentered study done in Malaysia, 5.2% of acute liver failure was attributed to
dengue infection.108,level II-2;109,level III
Raised AST has been seen in 63%-97% of patients while raised ALT levels in
45%-96%. More than 10-fold rise has been seen in 3%-15% cases.106,level II-2;110,level III
In a majority of studies elevation of AST is more than ALT during the first week of
infection, with a tendency to decrease to normal levels within three weeks.104-106,level II-2
ii. Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of liver involvement during dengue infection is poorly
understood. The potential mechanism of liver injury include direct effects of
the virus, immunology injury due to dysregulated immune response to the
virus, ishaemic injury due to hypotensive episodes and hepatotoxic effect
of medications such as acetaminophen or herbal remedies.105,level II-2; 109,level III
Hepatocyte injury including necrotic changes commonly involve midzonal
area followed by centrilobular area.105,level II-2
iii. Management and Use of N-Acetylcysteine (NAC)
Dengue hepatitis is usually a self-limiting disease. The management of
acute liver failure (as defined by coagulopathy, usually INR >1.5 and any
degree of mental alteration in a patient without preexisting cirrhosis) includes
appropriate fluid management, monitoring of haemodynamic and metabolic
parameters.111 Avoidance of other potential hepatotoxic drugs is crucial.
There are case studies on use of NAC in acute liver failure secondary to
dengue infection.109,level III;112-115,level III However up to now, there is insufficient
evidence to support the use of NAC in the management of dengue-
associated hepatitis.
The regime for IV N-Acetylcysteine for treatment of acute liver failure
in dengue infection remains controversial, but have been suggested as
follows:
100 mg/kg/day as infusion for five days.
•
112,level III
150 mg/kg infusion over 15-60 minutes, followed by 12.5 mg/kg/hour
•
for four hours and then 6.25 mg/kg/hour.116,level III
Liver transplantation is not feasible because of haemodynamic instability,
bleeding manifestation and other organ dysfunction caused by dengue
infection itself; and thus, may not be a viable treatment option. Artificial and
bioartifical liver support systems have not conclusively been shown to be
beneficial for dengue-related acute liver failure.
7.6.3 MANAGEMENT OF CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS IN DENGUE INFECTION
Cardiac dysfunction is increasingly recognised as a component of shock
in dengue infection and manifest as arrhythmias, functional myocardial
impairment and myocarditis.117-118,level II-2;119,level III Functional myocardial
impairment can be caused by subclinical myocarditis, myocardial oedema
or circulating myocardial depressant factors.120,level III Possible mechanisms
include regional vulnerability to coronary hypoperfusion, cytokine storm, direct
myocardial inflammation and altered calcium homeostasis.
Cardiac complications of dengue should be suspected in those with fluid
refractory shock or haemodynamic compromise disproportionate to capillary
leakage/HCT increase (refer to Algorithm C). In such patients, it is
recommended to do ECG, cardiac biomarkers and echocardiography.
i. Investigations :
Cardiac biomarkers
•
Cardiac biomarkers (CK/CKMB or Troponin) have limited
--
sensitivity and could be normal. 120,level III
ECG
•
ECG alterations reported in dengue infection are often transient.
--
ECG changes might be the only sign of cardiac involvement
with normal biomarker levels and echocardiograms.121,level II-2
Common ECG changes reported are :
o Sinus bradycardia
o Atrioventricular block
o Atrial fibrillation
o T-wave and ST-segment abnormalities
ii. Echocardiography
The available data on role of echocardiography in assessing cardiac function
of dengue infected patients is limited.118,level II-2;122-123,level III There is evidence of
significantly low ejection fraction during the critical stage of severe dengue
infection.123,level III;124,level II-2;125,level III
Measurement of ejection fraction is difficult to interpret as it is influenced by
changes in preload and afterload. In severe dengue infection, there may be
evidence of systolic and diastolic dysfunction with possible segmental wall
abnormalities of the septum as well as right ventricular wall.118,level II-2;124,level II-2
Echocardiography is indicated in refractory shock despite adequate fluid
resuscitation and suspected myocardial dysfunction.
iii. Treatment:
Management of dengue infection in such patients should primarily be focused
on cautious fluid resuscitation, aiming to give just sufficient IV fluid therapy to
maintain adequate tissue perfusion.
There has been no evidence to support the use of antiviral and
immunomodulatory treatments such as beta interferon, corticosteroids and IV
immunoglobulins for dengue myocarditis.120,level III
Recommendation 8
Echocardiography is indicated in refractory shock despite adequate
•
fluid resuscitation and in suspected myocardial dysfunction in dengue
infection.
Adequate fluid resuscitation should be ensured before myocardial
•
dysfunction can be diagnosed in dengue infection.
7.6.4 MANAGEMENT OF NEUROLOGICAL COMPLICATIONS
IN DENGUE INFECTION
The proportion of hospitalised dengue patients in Southeast Asia developing
neurological complications ranges between 0.5% and 5.4%.127,level II-2;128-129,level III
Dengue infection results in a wide spectrum of neurological complications
such as encephalopathy, encephalitis, intracranial bleed, meningitis and
meningoencephalitis.129,level
III;130-131,level
II-2
Immune-mediated
syndromes
that include myelitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), and
Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), myositis and various neuro-opthalmic
complications have been reported.129,level III
i. Dengue Encephalopathy
This is the most commonly reported neurological complication in dengue
infection. Encephalopathy in dengue infection may be the result of prolonged
shock, hypoxia, cerebral oedema, acute liver failure, acute renal failure,
hyponatraemia and cerebral haemorrhage.
ii. Dengue Encephalitis
Dengue encephalitis is the next commonly reported neurological complication
especially in secondary dengue infection. It classically presents with fever,
headache, seizures, altered consciousness and focal neurological signs
after 5-7 days of onset of fever.131-133,level II-2 The most common abnormality
on neuroimaging is cerebral oedema. MRI is the imaging modality of choice.
However, the MRI can be normal.127,level II-2
If possible, lumbar puncture should be done. The CSF should be analysed
for dengue virus-specific IgM antibodies, NS1 antigen, dengue virus RNA,
depending on available laboratory facilities. CSF analysis can be normal or
they can reveal pleocytosis and high protein.133,level II-2;134,level III In general, the
sensitivity of serological techniques and RT-PCR is was low.134,level III
The treatment modality for management of dengue encephalitis is supportive.
Symptoms suggestive of raised intracranial pressure (ICP) which include
headache, vomiting and reduced consciousness should be looked for.
Standard interventions for the management of raised ICP should then be
instituted. The outcome of dengue encephalitis is variable with many studies
showing good recovery.133,level II-2;135,level II-2
iii. Acute Transverse Myelitis
Acute transverse myelitis in dengue infection can occur within the first week
of illness due to direct virus invasion or 1-2 weeks later as an immunemediated phenomenon.
iv. Muscle Involvement
Extent of muscle involvement in dengue infection can vary from transient
myalgia, rhabdomyolysis, quadriparesis to respiratory muscle weakness. In
most cases, spontaneous recovery happens within 1-2 weeks.
v. Ocular Manifestations
Ocular manifestations of dengue infection include maculopathy, retinal
oedema, retinal haemorrhages, optic neuropathy and vitritis.129,level III
Adjuvant Treatment
Corticosteroids
•
The effectiveness of corticosteroids in neurological complications of
dengue remains to be proven. However, IV methylprednisolone have been
recommended in dengue myelitis and ADEM. 129,level III
Immunoglobulin
•
High doses of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) might be useful to treat
post-dengue Guillain-Barré syndrome.129,level III
Plasmapheresis
•
No evidence to show the effectiveness of plasmapheresis in management
of neurological complications in dengue infection.
Recommendation 9
In dengue patients with altered sensorium, the common causes for
•
encephalopathy must be ruled out.
In dengue patients with suspected encephalitis, symptoms and signs
•
suggestive of raised intracranial pressure should be looked for and
treated accordingly.
7.6.5 MANAGEMENT OF RENAL COMPLICATIONS IN DENGUE INFECTION
Dengue infection has been associated with a variety of renal disorders.
Transient proteinuria and haematuria have been reported.136-137,level III and
usually normalise within 3-4 weeks of illness.
Acute renal failure (ARF) occasionally complicates severe dengue
infection. It is usually due to acute tubular necrosis as a result of
hypotension, haemolysis, disseminated intravascular coagulation138,level II-2
and rhabdomyolysis.139,level III ARF in such setting carries a high mortality
rate.138, level II-2;140,level II-2
Treatment of ARF in dengue infection follows standard management. It
involves volume optimisation, treatment of electrolyte abnormalities and
dialysis if indicated (eg. severe metabolic acidosis, hyperkalaemia, fluid
overload etc). Peritoneal dialysis is not recommended as there is a high
risk of bleeding.
7.6.6 MANAGEMENT OF HAEMOPHAGOCYTIC SYNDROME
IN DENGUE INFECTION
Haemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) is a potentially fatal syndrome of
pathologic extreme immune activation leading to cytokine storm. There is
increased IL-2, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8, interferon γ generated by uncontrolled
activation of histiocytes and T-cells.141-143,level III The clinical course is
generally severe and may mimic sepsis. It commonly presents with an
unexplained persistent fever or resurgence of high grade fever after an
initial defervescence. Other presentations are hepatosplenomegaly, rash,
bleeding, CNS manifestations and jaundice (refer to Table 10).144,level III
Laboratory findings of HPS present in forms of bicytopaenia or
pancytopaenia, coagulopathy, hypertriglyceridaemia, hypofibrinogenaemia,
hyperferritinaemia, transaminitis, hyperbilirubinaemia, hypoalbuminaemia
and hyponatraemia.140,level III;143;145,level III Dengue-associated HPS had been
increasingly reported.145-160,level III
Currently, there are three well-accepted diagnostic classifications for
haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH): Diagnostic criteria for HLH
used in HLH-2004 trial;144,level III Proposed HLH diagnostic criteria, 2009142
and HScore 2014.161,level II-2 Former two were not validated in adults while the
latter was validated for macrophage activation syndrome in adults.
The lack of validated HPS classification system for dengue should
not discourage clinicians to attempt diagnosing HPS. Since HPS is a
progressive systemic disease, the lack of adequate criteria at one juncture
does not exclude the diagnosis.
Haemophagocytosis demonstrated in bone marrow biopsy is the hallmark
of the diagnosis but it is non-specific. It has been reported from day 5 till
day 32 after the onset of illness.The absence of haemophagocytic activities
in marrow in the early phase does not exclude the diagnosis.
Serum ferritin of >10,000 is not pathognomonic of HPS in adults162,level III
although it is highly sensitive and specific in paediatric population.163,level III The
level does not correlate with severity but the trend is important as it relates
with disease activity. Often, there is a sudden exponential rise of ALT, AST
and LDH which could occur in less than 12 hours.
The mainstay of management is mainly supportive.147-148,level III;153,level III;160,level III Milder
forms of HPS can recover spontaneously. For severe HPS, specific therapy with
IV methylprednisolone or dexamethasone (with or without IVIg) may sometimes
be helpful if started early and promptly.148-149,level III;153-154,level III;159,level III Steroids should
be tapered off rapidly as patients improve clinically and biochemically. High dose
steroid should be avoided when suspected bacterial sepsis and in the presence
of active gastrointestinal bleeding.
Table 10 : Manifestations of Haemophagocytic Syndrome
Significant immune activation
Abnormal immunopathology
Fever
•
Splenomegaly/hepatomegaly
•
Elevated ferritin (>300ng/mL)
•
Elevated sCD25
•
Elevated sCD163
•
Cytopaenias
•
Decreased fibrinogen or
•
increased triglycerides
Haemophagocytosis
•
Hepatitis
•
CNS involvement
•
Adapted : Henter JI, Horne A, Aricó M, et al. HLH-2004: Diagnostic
and therapeutic guidelines for haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007 Feb;48(2):124-31
1.
Acute respiratory distress with the following clinical signs:
RR >30/min
--
Dyspnoea
--
Use of accessory muscles
--
Agitation, confusion
--
2.
High levels of supplemental oxygen (O2 concentration >50% to maintain oxygen
saturation >90%)
3.
Risk of respiratory compromise with large volume resuscitation e.g. congestive
heart failure, chronic kidney disease, etc.
4.
Massive haemoptysis
5.
Potential need for non-invasive/invasive ventilation
1.
Haemodynamic instability due to hypovolaemia, haemorrhage, myocarditis or
other causes
2.
Complex cardiac dysrhythmias requiring close monitoring/intervention
3.
Underlying cardiac disease with risk of cardiorespiratory compromise e.g. unstable
ischaemic heart disease, fixed cardiac output states, etc.
1.
Seizures
2.
CNS depression
1.
Acute gastrointestinal bleeding with hypotension, continuous bleeding
2.
Severe acute hepatitis
1.
Severe coagulopathy
2.
Significant bleeding
1.
Acute kidney injury
2.
Acute rhabdomyolysis with renal insufficiency
7.7 INTENSIVE CARE MANAGEMENT OF DENGUE INFECTION
Management of severe dengue in the intensive care unit (ICU) follows the
general principles of a critically ill patient. Indications for intensive care
referral can be categorised into organ systems as in Table 11.
Table 11 : Indications for Intensive Care Referral
7.7.1 Respiratory Support:
The main objectives of respiratory support are to:
support pulmonary gas exchange based on alveolar ventilation and
1.
arterial oxygenation
reduce the metabolic cost of breathing by unloading the ventilatory
2.
muscles
Respiratory
Cardiovascular
Neurologic
Gastrointestinal
Haematologic
Renal
Patients who are alert, cooperative and haemodynamically stable
with or without mild metabolic acidosis may benefit from non-invasive
ventilation.164,level I
Intubation and ventilation in patients with severe dengue are not without
risks. Initiation of positive pressure ventilation will further decrease the
cardiac output by reducing venous return. In patients with pleural effusion
and ascites, haemodynamics will be further compromised when higher
airway pressure is applied to achieve adequate ventilation and oxygenation.
Care must be taken to avoid trauma to the airway during intubation, which
may cause bleeding.
In patients with metabolic acidosis, respiratory support should be
considered despite preservation of relatively normal arterial blood pH.
When the actual PaCO2 is higher than the expected to compensate for the
acidosis, consider intubation and mechanical ventilation.
Formula to calculate expected PaCO2 = 1.5 (Actual [HCO3] mmol/L ) + 8 (+ 2 mmHg)
When a patient with metabolic acidosis is on invasive mechanical
ventilation, set the ventilator settings so that the PaCO2 remains low, at
the expected PaCO2 level. Failure to do so may cause further deterioration
as the acidosis markedly worsens, resulting in depression of myocardial
contractility, hypotension and arrhythmias.
7.7.2 Haemodynamic Support
Fluid resuscitation is crucial and should be initiated early as per guidelines
in the section on fluid management. The causes of persistent shock and
treatment in severe dengue are outlined in Algorithm C.
The role of inotropic and vasopressor agents in dengue shock has not
been investigated in clinical trials. Vasopressors may be able to maintain
the blood pressure but do not improve tissue perfusion if the intravascular
volume has not been restored.
The use of inotropic and vasopressor agents should be limited to the
following clinical situations (refer to Algorithm C):
As
a
temporary
measure
to
prevent
life-threatening
hypotension while aggressive fluid resuscitation is being carried
out or during induction for intubation.165-168,level I
Cardiogenic shock
In the case of cardiac dysfunction, it is appropriate to use inotropic
agents such as dobutamine or adrenaline in combination with a
vasopressor.169,level I
Concomitant septic shock
Noradrenaline is preferred to other vasopressors as first-line
therapy.165,level I
Indications for mechanical ventilation in severe dengue include:
persistent shock
•
acute respiratory failure secondary to massive pleural effusion
•
+
ascites, fluid overload
severe metabolic acidosis
•
airway protection
•
1.
2.
3.
7.7.3 Renal Replacement Therapy
Renal replacement therapy may be indicated in severe dengue with acute
kidney injury (refer to chapter on Management of Renal Complications in
Dengue Infection).
7.7.4 Guide on Safety and Risk of Invasive Procedures
i. Central Venous Catheter (CVC) Insertion
In any condition that requires fluid resuscitation, rapid and large volume of
fluids can be infused via a large bore peripheral venous catheter. A well-
sited proximal peripheral venous catheter is sufficient if it is expected that
vasopressor is required for only short duration (1-2 hours).170
The commonly available CVCs are long and multi-lumens with relatively
smaller individual lumen. The need for CVC arise when there is:
inadequate peripheral venous access
•
171,level III
patient requires an infusion of vasopressor for prolonged period
•
171, level III
Apart from the above indications, CVC should not be inserted solely for
monitoring of CVP. CVP is not reliable to predict left ventricular filling volume
or to predict haemodynamic response to fluid challenge.172,level I;173,level II-2 Thus,
CVP should not be used to guide fluid management in dengue.
In general, it is a relative contraindication to insert a CVC in patients with
thrombocytopaenia or coagulation abnormalities. Overall, the risk of
bleeding following CVC insertion in these patients is low.174-175,level II-2; 176,level III
A subclavian approach should be avoided as the subclavian artery and vein
is not accessible to direct compression.176,level III The use of real-time USG
is recommended for CVC insertion if it is available and there is expertise.
177,level I;178, level II-2
Routine prophylactic transfusion of platelets and FFP in severe
thrombocytopaenia prior to insertion of CVC should not be done as there is
no clear evidence to support this practice.179-180;181,level III If platelets are to be
transfused, a CVC should be done within 4 hours following transfusion for
a maximum effect.182,level II-2 The most recent recommendation by American
Association of Blood Banks suggested for transfusion as low as 20,000
prior to CVC insertion.179
ii. Arterial Catheter Insertion
Intra-arterial cannulation is useful as it enables continuous arterial pressure
monitoring and repeated arterial blood gas sampling. Overall, the rate
of bleeding complication is low (0.53%-1.58%), lowest in the radial site
compared to the femoral.183, level I
iii. Gastric Tube
If a gastric tube is required, the nasogastric route should be avoided in
patients with bleeding disorder. Consider orogastric tube as this is less
traumatic.184,level III
iv. Pleural Tap and Chest Drain
Intercostal drainage of pleural effusions should be avoided as it can lead to
severe haemorrhage and sudden circulatory collapse.185,level III
Recommendation 10
Non-invasive ventilation may be beneficial in dengue patients who
•
are alert, cooperative and haemodynamically stable with or without
mild metabolic acidosis.
Caution should be exercised during intubation as sedatives and
•
mechanical ventilation may worsen haemodynamic instability in
dengue patients.
Intravenous fluid therapy is the mainstay of treatment in
•
decompensated dengue shock syndrome (DSS), however inotrope
and vasopressors may be used as a temporary measure.
In DSS:
•
o
central venous pressure should not be used to guide
fluid therapy
o
subclavian vein cannulation should be avoided
o
real-time ultrasonography is recommended for central
venous cannulation if it is available and there is expertise
8. DENGUE INFECTION IN PREGNANCY
An early diagnosis of dengue infection in pregnancy is usually difficult due
to the various physiological changes of pregnancy, which are:186
elevation of HCT in dengue is masked by haemodilution due to
•
increase in plasma volume especially in the second and third
trimester. Serial HCT measurement is crucial for disease monitoring in
pregnancy
the detection of third space fluid accumulation is difficult due to the
•
presence of gravid uterus
baseline blood pressure is often lower and pulse pressure wider
•
baseline heart rate may be higher
•
elevated liver enzymes
•
low haemoglobin and platelets
•
mild metabolic acidosis and low P
•
aCO2 of 32 mmHg (in third trimester)
i. Pregnancy Outcomes in Pregnant Women with Dengue Infection
Significant bleeding due to thrombocytopaenia is not common. However,
both mother and the newborn with dengue infection may be at an increased
risk for haemorrhage in the presence of DSS. The higher percentage of
severe dengue infection occurred among pregnant women compared to
non-pregnant women (OR: 3.38; 95% CI: 2.10–5.42, p=0.0001).187,level II-3
Significant number of pregnant women with dengue infection may present
with DSS and mortality rate is about three times higher in this group.187-189,
level II-3 A rare complication with pre-eclampsia, eclampsia or dengue
encephalopathy have been reported.189,level II-3
A very close monitoring of the vital signs, early signs of shock and bleeding
should be sought. Appropriate fluid therapy, and when indicated blood
and blood product transfusion, should be instituted.188,level II-3 A referral to
intensivist and obstetrician should be done early in this group of patients to
optimise care.
ii. Maternal Complications in Pregnant Women with Dengue Infection
Pregnant women with dengue who progress to spontaneous vaginal
delivery do not have additional risk of adverse outcomes. Maternal
complications commonly happen when dengue infection occur during first
and third trimester. First trimester infection is associated with abortion and
third trimester infection is commonly complicated with preterm birth.190,level
III Infection occur during labour can be associated with worse maternal
outcomes contributed by massive bleeding due to surgical interventions
such as caesarean section and operative vaginal delivery. Acute dengue
infection during this stage will increase the risk of foetal distress and higher
chance of surgical interventions.189,level II-3 ;191,level III
iii. Foetal Outcome in Pregnant Women with Dengue Infection
DEN virus can be vertically transmitted to the foetus in utero or to the infant at
parturition from infected symptomatic pregnant women.187,level II-3 Mothers who
are asymptomatic have very low risk of transmission to the foetus.192,level II-3
Clinical monitoring and laboratory investigations should be carried out for up
to one week of life in the neonates.193,level II-3 Positive serology tests for dengue
IgM, NS1 antigen or real-time RT-PCR to dengue in neonates confirm the
vertical transmission.193,level II-3
Dengue infection during pregnancy may be associated with various
complications, including preterm delivery (4.0%-17.9%), foetal death (8.9%-
13.6%), low birth weight (4.0%-24.3%) and more frequent miscarriage
(RR=3.3).188-189,level II-3;193-194,level II-3;195,level III No long term foetal abnormalities
noted among infants with vertical transmission.193,level II-3
iv. Mode and Timing of Delivery
Dengue infection is not an indication for elective delivery. Majority of patients
can be allowed to progress to spontaneous vaginal delivery.191,level III However,
if premature labour occurs during the acute infection, it is advisable to delay
the delivery until the acute infection resolves. The use of tocolytic drugs
such as nifedipine and atosiban may be indicated. Close foetal monitoring
is required in this group of patients to detect foetal distress and decision
for delivery can be made by the obstetrician. All pregnant mothers with
dengue should be co-managed in hospitals by physician, anaesthetist and
obstetrician.190,level III Deliveries in these patients should be conducted by
obstetrician or senior medical officer (in hospital without specialist). Group
and cross match (GXM) must be done for all dengue patients in labour.
Blood and blood products transfusion is to be given only when indicated.
Instrumental delivery should be avoided where possible and if indicated,
the procedures should be done by an obstetrician.190,level III When the
decision for instrumental delivery or operative delivery is made, the blood
and blood products must be made available.190,level III Active management
of third stage of labour in preventing postpartum haemorrhage is required
by the use of IV uterotonic agent (avoid intramuscular injection). Platelets
transfusion is only recommended when patients have manifestation of
bleeding, decided for caeserean section or instrumental delivery.190,level III In
this patient, platelets transfusion should be targeted to achieve minimum of
50,000/ml to ensure maternal safety.190, level III
v. Breastfeeding
Transmission of dengue virus through breastfeeding is inconclusive. There
is a case report of significant dengue viral load detected in breastmilk
during the acute viraemic phase.196,level III Hence, it is advisable to delay
breastfeeding during the acute viraemic phase.
HCT value in pregnant women is usually lower compared to normal
•
adults due to physiological haemodilution.
Dengue infection in pregnancy has a higher risk of developing
•
severe dengue and mortality.
Dengue infection in pregnancy has a higher adverse foetal
•
outcome.
Routine platelet transfusion is not indicated unless there is
•
presence of bleeding manifestation or patient is planned for
operative or instrumental delivery.
Intramuscular injection must be avoided in pregnant patients with
•
thrombocytopaenia.
Recommendation 11
All pregnant mothers with dengue infection should be managed in
•
hospitals by a multidisciplinary team (physician, anaesthetist and
obstetrician).
Intrapartum management in pregnant dengue patients are:
•
o
spontaneous vaginal delivery is the preferred mode of delivery
o
group and cross match must be done. Blood and blood
products transfusion to be given only when indicated
o
blood and blood products should be transfused as indicated
when instrumental or operative delivery is decided
Serology tests (Dengue IgM and non-structural protein 1 [NS1]
•
antigen) or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction should
be performed in neonates when congenital dengue infection is
suspected.
9. DISCHARGE CRITERIA
The following should be taken into consideration before discharging a
dengue patient:60,level III; 61
improved general well-being
•
afebrile for 24-48 hours
•
rising white cell count followed by platelet count
•
stable haematocrit
•
resolution/recovery of organ dysfunction
•
11. VACCINATION
There are published and ongoing trials on the efficacy of dengue vaccine
among the paediatric population. 202-204, level I
12. FOOD AND SUPPLEMENTS
Food and supplements such as Carica papaya leave juice/extract, cactus
extract, crab or padi frog soup, bitter gourd soup, porcupine bezoar stone,
Tawa-tawa and Pegaga leaves and commercial isotonic drink have not
been proven scientifically with robust evidence in preventing complications,
expediting the recovery or curing dengue infection. It is important to note
that the main problem that needs to be dealt with in dengue infection is
the plasma leakage and/or immune activation issues, not only about the
low platelet count. Manipulation of platelet count alone does not alter the
clinical course of the disease as it is just a surrogate marker of disease
progression or evolution. Plasma leakage and organ dysfunction should be
the main focus of management.
10. PREVENTION OF DENGUE TRANSMISSION IN HOSPITALS
Patients are viraemic and hence potentially infectious during the febrile
phase.197-198,level III There are no scientific studies that address the efficacy of
mosquito repellents or mosquito netting in reducing dengue transmission
in hospitalised patients. However, several community studies had shown
that the use of mosquito netting/screening was efficacious in preventing
transmission of dengue in the community.199,level I; 200, level III
Generally, repellent products with higher concentrations of DEET (N,Ndiethylm-toluamide) have longer repellence times.201,level III
Case fatality rate of
dengue infection
National target < 0.2%
=
No. of death of dengue infection
No. of dengue infection
Case fatality rate for
severe dengue
=
No. of death in severe dengue
Total no. of severe dengue
i.
ii.
X 100%
X 100%
13. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of dengue infection in adults
at all healthcare levels in Malaysia by using an evidence-based CPG. This
aims to prevent mortality and long-term morbidity.
13.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:-
wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies
i.
and softcopies)
regular dengue update for healthcare providers
ii.
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG are:-
inadequate understanding of dengue infection and management
i.
among patients/carers and healthcare providers
insufficient resources especially trained personnel, diagnostic kits and
ii.
infrastructure
variation in treatment practice and preferences
iii.
13.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:-
ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
i.
initiate training (with adequate funding) of healthcare providers
ii.
ensuring information is up-to-date
ensure availability of highly specialised diagnostic tools and trained
iii.
manpower in dengue management including multidisciplinary team at
different levels of healthcare
ensure widespread distribution of updated patient education materials
iv.
Implementation strategies such as Quick Reference and Training Module
will be developed following the approval of the CPG by MoH.
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed as
clinical audit indicator for quality management:-
REFERENCES
World Health Organization. Dengue Guidelines for Diagnosis, Treatment, Prevention
1.
and Control - New Edition 2009. WHO: Geneva; 2009
Nimmannitya S. Clinical spectrum and management of dengue haemorrhagic fever.
2.
Southeast Asian J Trop Med Pub Hlth. 1987; 18(3):392-7.
Gubler DJ. Dengue and Dengue Haemorrhagic Fever. Clin Microbio Review. 1998;
3.
11(3):480-96.
Kalayanarooj S, Vaughn DW, Nimmannitya S, et al. Early clinical and laboratory
4.
indicators of acute dengue illness. J Infect Dis. 1997 Aug; 176(2):313-21.
Balmaseda A, Hammond SN, Perez MA, et al. Short report: assessment of the World
5.
Health Organization scheme for classification of dengue severity in Nicaragua. Am J
Trop Med Hyg. 2005 Dec; 73(6):1059-62.
Hammond SN, Balmaseda A, Perez L, et al. Differences in dengue severity in infants,
6.
children, and adults in a 3-year hospital-based study in Nicaragua. Am J Trop Med
Hyg. 2005; 73:1063-170.
Guzman MG, Alvarez M, Rodrı´guez R, et al. Fatal dengue hemorrhagic fever in
7.
Cuba, 1997. Int J Infect Dis 1999; 3:130–5.
Rigau-Perez JG, Laufer MK. Dengue-related deaths in Puerto Rico, 1992-1996:
8.
diagnosis and clinical warning signs. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 May 1;42(9):1241-6.
Ong A, Sandar M, Chen MI, Sin LY. Fatal dengue haemorrhagic fever in adults during
9.
a dengue epidemic in Singapore. International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2007
May;11(3):263-7.
Wichmann O, Hongsiriwon S, Bowonwatanuwong C, et al. Risk factors and clinical
10.
features associated with severe dengue infection in adults and children during the
2001 epidemic in Chonburi, Thailand. Trop Med Int Health. 2004 Sep;9(9):1022-9.
Simmons CP, et al. Current concepts: Dengue. N Engl J Med. 2012 Apr;366:1423-32.
11.
Tricou V, Minh NN, Farrar J, et al. Kinetics of viremia and NS1 antigenemia are
12.
shaped by immune status and virus serotype in adults with dengue. PLoS Negl Trop
Dis. 2011 Sep;5(9):e1309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001309.
Duyen HT, Ngoc TV, Ha do T, et al. Kinetics of plasma viremia and soluble
13.
nonstructural protein 1 concentrations in dengue: differential effects according to
serotype and immune status. J Infect Dis. 2011 May 1;203(9):1292-300. doi: 10.1093/
infdis/jir014.
Cohen SN, Halstead SB. Shock associated with dengue infection. I. Clinical and
14.
physiologic manifestations of dengue hemorrhagic fever in Thailand, 1964. J Pediat
1966; 68:448-56.
Pongpanich B. Pathogenetic mechanism in dengue hemorrhagic fever: Report of an
15.
international collaborative study. Bull World Hlth. 1973; 48:117.
Ganong WF. Cardiovascular homeostasis in health and disease. In: Review of
16.
Medical Physiology. 22nd Edition. London: McGraw-Hill; 2005:p.630-46.
Bhamarapravati N, Tuchinda P, Boonyapaknavik V. Pathology of Thailand
17.
haemorrhagic fever: a study of 100 autopsy cases. Anna Trop Med Parasitol.
1967;61:500-10.
Sahaphong S, Riengrojpitak S, Bhamarapravati N, et.al. Electron microscopic study
18.
of the vascular endothelial cell in dengue haemorrhagic fever. Southeast Asian J Trop
Med Public Health 1980;11:194.
Chuansumrit A, Tangnararatchakit K. Pathophysiology and management of dengue
19.
hemorrhagic fever. Transfusion Alternatives In Transfusion Medicine. 2006;8 (Suppl
1):3-11.
Halstead SB. Observations related to pathogenesis of dengue hemorrhagic fever. VI.
20.
Hypotheses and discussion. Yale J Biol Med. 1970 Apr;42(5):350-62.
Sangkawibha N, Rojanasuphot, S, Ahandriks, et al. Risk factors in dengue shock
21.
syndrome: a prospective epidemiologic study in Rayong, Thailand. I. The 1980
outbreak. Am. J. Epidemiol. 1984;120:653-669.
Guzman MG, Kouri G, Bravo J, et al. Enhanced severity of secondary dengue-2
22.
infections: death rates in 1981 and 1997 Cuban outbreaks. Rev Panam Salud
Publica, 2002 Apr;11:223-7.
Badyopadhyay S, Lum LCS, Kroeger A. Classifying dengue: a review of the difficulties
23.
in using the WHO case classification for dengue haemorrhagic fever. Tropical
Medicine and International Health. 2006; 11(8):1238-55.
World Health Organization, & UNICEF. Handbook for clinical management of dengue.
24.
2012.
Prevention and Control of Infectious Disease Act 1988 (Act 342). Kuala Lumpur:
25.
Percetakan National Malaysia Berhad, 2001.
Surat Pekeliling Ketua Pengarah Kesihatan Malaysia Bil 15/2010. Pelaksanaan
26.
Pengurusan Kes dan Kematian Denggi.
Malavige GN, Velathanthiri VG, Wijewickrama ES, et al. Patterns of disease among
27.
adults hospitalized with dengue infections. QJM. 2006 May;99(5):299-305.
Mairuhu AT, Mac Gillavry MR, Setiati TE. Is clinical outcome of dengue-virus infections
28.
influenced by coagulation and fibrinolysis? A critical review of the evidence. Lancet.
Jan 2003;3:33-41.
Krishnamurti C, Kalayanarooj S, Cutting MA, et al. Mechanisms of hemorrhage in
29.
dengue without circulatory collapse. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2001 Dec;65(6):840-7.
Lum LC, Goh AY, Chan PW, et al. Risk factors for hemorrhage in severe dengue
30.
infections. J. Pediatr 2002 May;140:629-31.
Chuansumrit A, Philmothares V, Tardtong P, et al. Transfusion requirements in
31.
patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health.
2000;3:10-14
Chaudhary R, Khetan D, Sinha S, et al. Transfusion support to dengue patients in
32.
a hospital-based blood transfusion service in north India. Transfusion and Apheresis
Science. 2006 Dec; 35:239-44.
Ambayya A, Su AT, Osman NH, et al. Haematological reference intervals in a
33.
multiethnic population. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e91968. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0091968. eCollection 2014.
Tontulawat
P,
Pongsiri
P,
Thongmee
C,
et
al.
Evaluation
of
rapid
34.
immunochromatographic NS1 test, anti-dengue IgM test, semi-nested PCR and IgM
ELISA for detection of dengue virus. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2011
May;42(3):570-8.
Wang SM, Sekaran SD. Early diagnosis of Dengue infection using a commercial
35.
Dengue Duo rapid test kit for the detection of NS1, IGM, and IGG. Am J Trop Med
Hyg. 2010 Sep;83(3):690-5. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2010.10-0117.
Gan VC, Tan LK, Lye DC, et al. Diagnosing dengue at the point-of-care: utility of a
36.
rapid combined diagnostic kit in Singapore. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 19;9(3):e90037. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0090037.
Peeling RW, Artsob H, Pelegrino JL, et al. Evaluation of diagnostic tests: dengue. Nat
37.
Rev Microbiol. 2010 Dec;8(12 Suppl):S30-8.
Chung SJ, Krishnan PU, Leo YS. Two cases of false-positive dengue non-structural
38.
protein 1 (NS1) antigen in patients with hematological malignancies and a review of
the literature on the use of NS1 for the detection of Dengue infection. Am J Trop Med
Hyg. 2015 Feb;92(2):367-9. doi:10.4269/ajtmh.14-0247.
Kumarasamy V, Wahab AH, Chua SK, et al. Evaluation of a commercial dengue NS1
39.
antigen-capture ELISA for laboratory diagnosis of acute dengue virus infection. J Virol
Methods. 2007 Mar;140(1-2):75-9.
Lapphra K, Sangcharaswichai A, Chokephaibulkit K, et al. Evaluation of an NS1
40.
antigen detection for diagnosis of acute dengue infection in patients with acute
febrile illness. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2008 Apr;60(4):387-91. doi:10.1016/j.
diagmicrobio.2007.11.010.
Blacksell SD, Mammen MP Jr, Thongpaseuth S, et al. Evaluation of the Panbio
41.
dengue virus nonstructural 1 antigen detection and immunoglobulin M antibody
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for the diagnosis of acute dengue infections in
Laos. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2008 Jan;60(1):43-9.
Sekaran SD, Lan EC, Mahesawarappa KB, et al. Evaluation of dengue NS1 capture
42.
ELISA assay for the rapid detection of dengue. Journal of Infections In Developing
Countries. 2007;1(2):182-8.
Dussart P, Labeau B, Lagathu G, et al. Evaluation of an enzyme immunoassay for
43.
detection of dengue virus NS1 antigen in human serum. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2006
Nov;13(11):1185-9.
Paranavitane SA, Gomes L, Kamaladasa A, et al. Dengue NS1 antigen as a marker
44.
of severe clinical disease. BMC Infect Dis. 2014 Oct 31;14:570. doi: 10.1186/s12879014-0570-8.
Schilling S, Ludolfs D, Van An L, et al. Laboratory diagnosis of primary and secondary
45.
dengue infection. J Clin Virol. 2004 Nov;31(3):179-84.
Gubler DJ. Dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1998
46.
Jul;11(3):480-96. Review.
Chanama S, Anantapreecha S, A-nuegoonpipat A, et al. Analysis of specific
47.
IgM responses in secondary dengue virus infections: levels and positive rates in
comparison with primary infections. J Clin Virol. 2004 Nov;31(3):185-9.
Wichmann O, Stark K, Shu PY, et al. Clinical features and pitfalls in the laboratory
48.
diagnosis of dengue in travellers. BMC Infect Dis. 2006 Jul 21;6:120.
Hawkes RA, Boughton CR, Naim HM, et al. Arbovirus infections of humans in New
49.
South Wales. Seroepidemiology of the flavivirus group of togaviruses. Med J Aust.
1985 Dec 9-23;143(12-13):555-61.
Chen WJ, Hwang KP, Fang AH. Detection of IgM antibodies from cerebrospinal fluid
50.
and sera of dengue fever patients. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1991
Dec;22(4):659-63.
Panbio Dengue IgG Capture ELISA Product Insert Cat No 01PE10 August 2008.
51.
Standard Diagnostics Republic of Korea.
Cuzzubbo AJ, Vaughn DW, Nisalak A, et al. Comparison of PanBio dengue duo
52.
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and MRL dengue fever virus
immunoglobulin M capture ELISA for diagnosis of dengue virus infections in
Southeast Asia. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 1999 Sep;6(5):705-12
Wu SJ, Paxton H, Hanson B, et al. Comparison of two rapid diagnostic assays for
53.
detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies to dengue virus. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol.
2000 Jan;7(1):106-10.
Kit Lam S, Lan Ew C, Mitchell JL, et al. Evaluation of a capture screening enzyme54.
linked immunosorbent assay for combined determination of immunoglobulin M and
G antibodies produced during Dengue infection. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2000
Sep;7(5):850-2.
Berlioz-Arthaud A. Evaluation of reagents for the serological diagnosis of Dengue
55.
EPINET II Workshop. Institut Pasteir de Nouvelle Caledonie. March 2002.
Grobusch MP, Niedrig M, Göbels K, et al. Evaluation of the use of RT-PCR for the
56.
early diagnosis of dengue fever. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2006 Apr;12(4):395-7
Seah CLK et al. A comparative, prospective study of serological, virus isolation
57.
and PCR amplification techniques for the laboratory diagnosis of dengue infection.
Serodiagnosis and immunotherapy in infectious disease. 1995;7.2:55-58.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever: diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control. 2nd
58.
ed. Geneva: World Health Organization: 1997. Available at: http://w3.who.int/csr/
resources/publications/ dengue/024-33.pdf.
Ramos C, Sánchez G, Pando RH, et al. Dengue virus in the brain of a fatal case of
59.
hemorrhagic dengue fever. J Neurovirol. 1998 Aug;4(4):465-8.
Kalayanarooj S, Nimmannitya S. Guidelines for DHF Case Management for Workshop
60.
on Case Management of Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever, WHO Collaborating Centre for
Case Management of Dengue/DHF/DSS June 10 – 15, 2002.
Subcommittee of Technical Experts on Clinical Management of DF/ DHF. Guidelines
61.
on Clinical Management of Dengue/Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever, Sri Lanka. 2005.
Available at http://www.epid.gov.lk/pdf/Guidelines
MOH, Singapore. Guidelines on Clinical Management of Dengue Fever/Dengue
62.
Haemorrhagic Fever 2005.
Carlos CC, Oishi K, Cinco, et al. Comparison of Clinical Features and Hematologic
63.
CDC. Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions: preventing transmission of infectious agents in healthcare
settings 2007. Administrative responsibilities. Atlanta (GA): Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC);2007 June.
Harnod D, Chang H, Wang TL. Dengue Fever versus Bioterrorism. Ann Disaster Med.
64.
2002;1 Suppl 1:S 44-58.
Lee IK, Lee WH, Yang KD, et al. Comparison of the effects of oral hydration and
65.
intravenous fluid replacement in adult patients with non-shock dengue hemorrhagic
fever in Taiwan. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Aug;104(8):541-5. doi: 10.1016/j.
trstmh.2010.05.003.
WHO Regional Publication SEARO, 29, 1999.
66.
Dung NM, Day NP, Tam DT, et al. Fluid replacement in dengue shock syndrome: a
67.
randomized, double-blind comparison of four intravenous-fluid regimens. Clin Infect
Dis. 1999 Oct; 29:787-94.
Ngo NT, Cao XT, Kneen R, et al. Acute management of dengue shock syndrome: a
68.
randomized double-blind comparison of 4 intravenous fluid regiments in the first hour.
Clin Infect Dis. 2001; 32:(2) 204-13.
Wills BA, Nguyen MD, Ha TL, et al. Comparison of three fluid solutions for
69.
resuscitation in dengue shock syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2005 Sep 1; 353(9):877- 89.
Akech S, Ledermann H, Maitland K. Choice of fluids for resuscitation in children with
70.
severe infection and shock: systematic review. BMJ. 2010 Sep 2;341:c4416. doi:
10.1136/bmj.c4416.
Perel P, Roberts I, Ker K. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in
71.
critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Feb 28;2:CD000567. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD000567.pub6.
Haase N, Perner A, Hennings LI, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.38-0.45 versus
72.
crystalloid or albumin in patients with sepsis: systematic review with meta-analysis
and trial sequential analysis. BMJ. 2013 Feb 15;346:f839. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f839.
Somasetia DH, Setiati TE, Sjahrodji AM, et al. Early resuscitation of dengue shock
73.
syndrome in children with hyperosmolar sodium-lactate: a randomized single-blind
clinical trial of efficacy and safety. Crit Care. 2014 Sep 5;18(5):466. doi: 10.1186/
s13054-014-0466-4.
Muller L, Bobbia X, Toumi M, et al. Respiratory variations of inferior vena cava
74.
diameter to predict fluid responsiveness in spontaneously breathing patients with
acute circulatory failure: need for a cautious use. Crit Care. 2012 Oct 8;16(5):R188.
doi: 10.1186/cc11672.
Skellett S, Mayer A, Durward A, et al. Chasing the base deficit: hyperchloraemic
75.
acidosis following 0.9% saline fluid resuscitation. Archives of Disease in Childhood.
2000 Dec;83(6):514-6.
Jansen TC, van Bommel J, Schoonderbeek FJ, et al; LACTATE study group. Early
76.
lactate-guided therapy in intensive care unit patients: a multicenter, open-label,
randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Sep 15;182(6):752-61.
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200912-1918OC.
Lumpaopong A, Kaewplang P, Watanaveeradej V, et al. Electrolyte disturbances and
77.
abnormal urine analysis in children with dengue infection. Southeast Asian J Trop
Med Public Health. 2010 Jan;41(1):72-6.
Mekmullica J, Suwanphatra A, Thienpaitoon H, et al. Serum and urine sodium levels
78.
in dengue patients. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2005 Jan;36(1):197-9.
Sosothikul D, Seksarn P, Pongsewalak S. Activation of endothelial cells, coagulation
79.
and fibrinolysis in children with dengue virus infection.Thromb Haemost, 2007.
Apr;97;627-34
Avila-Aguero ML, Avila-Aguero CR, Um SL, et al. Systemic host inflammatory and
80.
coagulation response in the Dengue virus primo-infection. Cytokine. 2004 Sep 21;27:
173-9.
Tanomsri S, Suchitra N. Haematology in dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever.
81.
Bailliere’s Clinical Haematology 2000;13:261-76.
Mairuhu AT, Mac Gillavry MR, Setiati TE. Is clinical outcome of dengue-virus infections
82.
influenced by coagulation and fibrinolysis? A critical review of the evidence. Lancet.
Jan 2003;3:33-41.
Krishnamurti C, Kalayanarooj S, Cutting MA, et al. Mechanisms of hemorrhage in
83.
dengue without circulatory collapse. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2001 Dec;65(6):840-7.
Chaudhary R, Khetan D, Sinha S, et al. Transfusion support to dengue patients in
84.
a hospital-based blood transfusion service in north India. Transfusion and Apheresis
Science. 2006 Dec; 35:239-44.
Wills BA, Oragui EE, Stephens AC, et al. Coagulation abnormalities in dengue
85.
hemorrhagic fever: serial investigations in 167 Vietnamese children with Dengue
Shock Syndrome. Clin Infect Dis. 2002 Aug; 35(3): 277-85.
Perret C, Chanthavanich P, Pengsaa K, et al. Dengue infection during pregnancy and
86.
transplacental antibody transfer in Thai mothers. Journal of Infection. 2005;51:287-93.
Esmon CT. The impact of the inflammatory response on coagulation. Thrombosis
87.
Research. 2004;114(5-6):321-7.
Fariz-Safhan MN, Tee HP, Abu Dzarr GA, et al. Bleeding outcome during a dengue
88.
outbreak in 2005 in the East-coast region of Peninsular Malaysia: a prospective study.
Trop Biomed. 2014 Jun;31(2):270-80.
Lum LC, Goh AY, Chan PW, et al. Risk factors for hemorrhage in severe dengue
89.
infections. J. Pediatr 2002 May;140:629-31.
Lacroix J, Hébert PC, Fergusson DA, et al; ABLE Investigators; Canadian Critical
90.
Care Trials Group. Age of transfused blood in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med. 2015
Apr 9;372(15):1410-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1500704.
Steiner ME, Ness PM, Assmann SF, et al. Effects of red-cell storage duration on
91.
patients undergoing cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2015 Apr 9;372(15):1419-29. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa1414219.
Dhabangi A, Mworozi E, Lubega IR, et al. The effect of blood storage age on
92.
treatment of lactic acidosis by transfusion in children with severe malarial anaemia:
a pilot, randomized, controlled trial. Malar J. 2013 Feb 6;12:55. doi: 10.1186/14752875-12-55.
Chiu YC, Wu KL, Kuo CH, et al. Endoscopic findings and management of
93.
dengue patients with upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2005
Aug;73(2):441-4.
Sari EF, Syam AF, Leonard Nainggolan. Cause of Upper Gastrointestinal Tract
94.
Bleeding in Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever Patient. Indones J Gastro, Hepato Dig.
2008;9:30-4.
Chuansumrit A, Phimolthares V, Tardtong P, et al. Transfusion requirements in
95.
patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health.
2000 Mar;31(1):10-4.
Hsu WH, Wu IC. Watermelon stomach in dengue hemorrhagic fever. Endoscopy.
96.
2013;45 Suppl 2.
Boo YL, Chin PW, Hoo FK, et al. Duodenal hematoma: An unusual presentation of
97.
dengue fever. RMJ. 2015; 40(2): 248-250. - level III
Lee CY, Tsai HC, Lee SS, et al. Dengue hemorrhagic fever presenting with
98.
hemorrhagic pancreatitis and an intramural hematoma of the duodenal wall: a case
report and review of the literature. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2013
May;44(3):400-8. - level III
Lum LC, Abdel-Latif Mel-A, Goh AY, et al. Preventive Transfusion in DSS- is it
99.
necessary? J Pediatr. 2003 Nov;143(5):682-4.
Chairulfatah, A, Setiabudi, D., Agoes, et al. Thrombocytopenia and platelet
100.
transfusions in dengue haemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome. Dengue
Bulletin, 2003;27
Chuansumrit A, Wangruangsatid S, Lektrakul Y, et al. Dengue Study Group. Control
101.
of bleeding in children with DHF using recombinant activated FVII: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 16(8): 549-55.
86 Chuansumrit A, Tangnararatchakit K, Lektakul Y, et al. The use of recombinant
102.
activated FVII for controlling life-threatening bleeding in DSS. Blood Coagul
Fibrinolysis. 2004 Jun;15:335-42.
United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation (UKHCDO) Guidelines on
103.
the selection and use of therapeutic products to treat hemophilia and other hereditary
bleeding disorders. Hemophilia. 2003;9:1-23.
Parkash O, Almas A, Jafri SM, et al. Severity of acute hepatitis and its outcome in
104.
patients with dengue fever in a tertiary care hospital Karachi, Pakistan (South Asia).
BMC Gastroenterol. 2010 May 7;10:43.
Trung DT, Thao le TT, Hien TT, et al. Liver involvement associated with dengue
105.
infection in adults in Vietnam. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Oct;83(4):774-80.
Tristão-Sá R, Kubelka CF, Zandonade E, et al. Clinical and hepatic evaluation in adult
106.
dengue patients: a prospective two-month cohort study. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop.
2012 Dec;45(6):675-81.
Samanta J, Sharma V. Dengue and its effects on liver. World J Clin Cases. 2015 Feb
107.
16;3(2):125-31. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v3.i2.125
Ahmad S, Dhar M, Srivastava S, et al. Dengue hepatitis sans dysfunction: experience
108.
of a single tertiary referral centre in the north Indian state of Uttarakhand. Trop Doct.
2013 Apr;43(2):62-5. doi: 10.1177/0049475513483281.
Tan SS, Bujang MA. The clinical features and outcomes of acute liver failure
109.
associated with dengue infection in adults: a case series. Braz J Infect Dis. 2013 MarApr;17(2):164-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bjid.2012.09.007
Thomas L, Brouste Y, Najioullah F, et al. Predictors of severe manifestations in
110.
a cohort of adult dengue patients. J Clin Virol. 2010 Jun;48(2):96-9. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcv.2010.03.008.
Lee WM, Stravitz RT, Larson AM. Introduction to the revised American Association for
111.
the Study of Liver Diseases Position Paper on acute liver failure 2011. Hepatology.
2012;55(3):965-967.
Habaragamuwa BW, Dissanayaka P. N-acetylcystein in dengue associated severe
112.
hepatitis. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2014 Mar;18(3):181-2. doi: 10.4103/09725229.128712.
Senanayake MP, Jayamanne MD, Kankananarachchi I. N-acetylcysteine in children
113.
with acute liver failure complicating dengue viral infection. Ceylon Med J. 2013
Jun;58(2):80-2. doi: 10.4038/cmj.v58i2.5684.
Abeysekera RA, Illangasekera U, Jayalath T,et al. Successful use of intravenous
114.
N-acetylcysteine in dengue haemorrhagic fever with acute liver failure. Ceylon Med
J. 2012 Dec;57(4):166-7. doi: 10.4038/cmj.v57i4.5085.
Giri S, Agarwal MP, Sharma V, et al. Acute hepatic failure due to dengue: A case
115.
report. Cases J. 2008 Oct 2;1(1):204. doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-1-204.
Stravitz RT, Kramer AH, Davern T, et al; Acute Liver Failure Study Group. Intensive
116.
care of patients with acute liver failure: recommendations of the U.S. Acute Liver
Failure Study Group. Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov;35(11):2498-508.
Miranda CH, Borges Mde C, Matsuno AK, et al. Evaluation of cardiac involvement during
117.
dengue viral infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Sep;57(6):812-9. doi: 10.1093/cid/cit403.
Yacoub S, Griffiths A, Chau TT, et al. Cardiac function in Vietnamese patients with
118.
different dengue severity grades. Crit Care Med. 2012 Feb;40(2):477-83. doi:
10.1097/CCM. 0b013e318232d966.
Lee CH, Teo C, Low AF. Fulminant dengue myocarditis masquerading as acute
119.
myocardial infarction. Int J Cardiol. 2009 Aug 21;136(3):e69-71. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2008.05.023.
Yacoub S, Wertheim H, Simmons CP, et al. Cardiovascular manifestations of the
120.
emerging dengue pandemic. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2014 Jun;11(6):335-45. doi: 10.1038/
nrcardio.2014.40.
Kularatne SA, Pathirage MM, Kumarasiri PV, et al. Cardiac complications of a dengue
121.
fever outbreak in Sri Lanka, 2005. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2007 Aug;101(8):804-8.
Khongphatthanayothin A, Lertsapcharoen P, Supachokchaiwattana P, et al. Myocardial
122.
depression in dengue hemorrhagic fever: prevalence and clinical description. Pediatr
Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov;8(6):524-9.
Khongphatthanayothin A, Suesaowalak M, Muangmingsook S, et al. Hemodynamic
123.
profiles of patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever during toxic stage: an
echocardiographic study. Intensive Care Med. 2003 Apr;29(4):570-4.
Sengupta SP, Nugurwar A, Jaju R, et al. Left ventricular myocardial performance
124.
in patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever and thrombocytopenia as assessed by
two-dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography. Indian Heart J. 2013 MayJun;65(3):276-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ihj.2013.04.017.
Wali JP, Biswas A, Chandra S, et al. Cardiac involvement in Dengue Haemorrhagic
125.
Fever. Int J Cardiol. 1998 Mar 13;64(1):31-6.
Charron C, Caille V, Jardin F, et al. Echocardiographic measurement of fluid
126.
responsiveness. Current opinion in critical care. 2006 Jun;12(3):249-54.
Cam BV, Fonsmark L, Hue NB, et al. Prospective case control study of
127.
encephalopathy in children with dengue hemorrhagic fever. Am J Trop Med Hyg Dec
2001 Dec;65(6):848–51.
Hendarto SK, Hadinegoro SR. Dengue encephalopathy. Acta Paediatr Jpn 1992
128.
Jun;34(3):350–7.
Carod-Artal FJ, Wichmann O, Farrar J, et al. Neurological complications of dengue
129.
virus infection. Lancet Neurol. 2013 Sep;12(9):906-19.
Araújo FM, Araújo MS, Nogueira RM, et al. Central nervous system involvement in
130.
dengue: a study in fatal cases from a dengue endemic area. Neurology. 2012 Mar
6;78(10):736-42
Soares CN, Cabral-Castro MJ, Peralta JM, et al. Review of the etiologies of viral
131.
meningitis and encephalitis in a dengue endemic region. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Apr
15;303(1-2):75-9.
Jackson ST, Mullings A, Bennett F, et al. Dengue infection in patients presenting
132.
with neurological manifestations in a dengue endemic population. West Indian Med J.
2008 Sep;57(4):373-6.
Rao SM, Pradeep M, Dnyaneshwar M, et al. Dengue Encephalitis - Clinical spectrum
133.
and outcome. Intern Med Inside. 2013;1:8.
Soares CN, Faria LC, Peralta JM, et al. Dengue infection: neurological manifestations
134.
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Nov 1;249(1):19–24
Sahu R, Verma R, Jain A, et al. A Neurologic complications in dengue virus infection:
135.
a prospective cohort study. Neurology. 2014 Oct 28;83(18):1601-9.
Vasanwala FF, Puvanendran R, Ng JM, et al. Two cases of self-limiting nephropathies
136.
secondary to dengue haemorrhagic fever. Singapore Med J. 2009 Jul;50(7):e253-5.
Abeysekera RA, Illangasekera U, Jayalath, T, et al. A Case of Mixed Nephrotic-Range
137.
Proteinuria–Microscopic Hematuria After Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever. Infectious Diseases
in Clinical Practice. 2013;21(6):386-388.
Lee IK, Liu JW, Yang KD. Clinical characteristics, risk factors, and outcomes in adults
138.
experiencing dengue hemorrhagic fever complicated with acute renal failure. Am J Trop
Med Hyg. 2009 Apr;80(4):651-5
Repizo LP, Malheiros DM, Yu L, et al. Biopsy proven acute tubular necrosis due to
139.
rhabdomyolysis in a dengue fever patient: a case report and review of literature. Rev Inst
Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2014 Jan-Feb;56(1):85-8.
Khalil MA, Tan J, Khalil MAet al. Predictors of hospital stay and mortality in dengue virus
140.
infection-experience from Aga Khan University Hospital Pakistan. BMC Res Notes. 2014
Jul 27;7:473. doi:10.1186/1756-0500-7-473.
Schram AM and Berliner N. How I treat hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis in the adult
141.
patient. Blood. 2015;125(19):2908-14.
Filipovich, AH. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) and related disorders. A
142.
SH
Education Program Book. Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center;2009.p127-131.
Weitzman S. Approach to hemophagocytic syndromes.
143.
ASH Education Program Book.
Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children University Avenue
Toronto;2011.p178-183.
Henter JI, Horne A, Aricó M, et al. HLH-2004: Diagnostic and therapeutic guidelines for
144.
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007 Feb;48(2):124-31.
Rajagopala S, Singh N, Agarwal R, et al. Severe hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis in
145.
adults-experience from an intensive care unit from North India. Indian J Crit Care Med.
2012 Oct;16(4):198-203. doi: 10.4103/0972-5229.106501.
Pal P, Giri PP, Ramanan AV. Dengue associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: a
146.
case series. Indian Pediatr. 2014 Jun;51(6):496-7.
Jain D, Singh T. Dengue virus related hemophagocytosis: a rare case report. Hematology.
147.
2008 Oct;13(5):286-8. doi: 10.1179/102453308X316095.
Srichaikul T, Punyagupta S, Kanchanapoom T, et al. Hemophagocytic syndrome in
148.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever with severe multiorgan complications. J Med Assoc Thai. 2008
Jan;91(1):104-9.
Sorakhunpipitkul L, Punyagupta S, Srichaikul T, et al. Thai adult dengue hemorrhagic fever
149.
during 2008–2010: seven cases presented with severe multiorgan failure and successfully
treated with high dose of corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulin G. J Infect Dis
Antimicrob Agents. 2011; 28(2):99-103.
Rajagopala S, Singh N. Diagnosing and treating hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
150.
in the tropics: systematic review from the Indian subcontinent. Acta Med Acad.
2012;41(2):161-74. doi: 10.5644/ama2006-124.49.
Mitra S, Bhattacharyya R. Hemophagocytic syndrome in severe dengue Fever: a rare
151.
presentation. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2014 Sep;30(Suppl 1):97-100. doi:
10.1007/s12288-013-0273-0.
Morel Z, Ramírez A. Autoimmune response in children with dengue. Case reports.
152.
Reumatol Clin. 2014 Jul-Aug;10(4):257-9. doi: 10.1016/j.reuma.2013.07.005.
Tan LH, Lum LC, Omar SF, Kan FK. Hemophagocytosis in dengue: comprehensive report
153.
of six cases. J Clin Virol. 2012 Sep;55(1):79-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2012.06.005.
Asli RA, Abdullah MA, Telisinghe PU, et al. Haemophagocytic lympohistiocytosis: a rare
154.
manifestation of dengue fever. Brunei Int Med J. 2013;9(5):334-337.
Vijayalakshmi AM, Ganesh VR. Hemophagocytic syndrome associated with dengue
155.
hemorrhagic fever. Indian Pediatr. 2009 Jun;46(6):545.
Ray S, Kundu S, Saha M, Chakrabarti P. Hemophagocytic syndrome in classic
156.
dengue Fever. J Glob Infect Dis. 2011 Oct;3(4):399-401. doi: 10.4103/0974777X.91068.
Rathore R, Daniyal SM, Iqbal A, et al. Hemophagocytic Syndrome–A Rare
157.
Complication of Dengue Fever. Annals of King Edward Medical University.
2013;18(1).
Kapdi M, Shah I. Dengue and haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Scand J Infect
158.
Dis. 2012 Sep;44(9):708-9. doi: 10.3109/00365548.2011.652667.
Ribeiro E, Kassab S, Pistone T, et al. Primary dengue fever associated with
159.
hemophagocytic syndrome: a report of three imported cases, Bordeaux, France.
Intern Med. 2014;53(8):899-902.
Kobayashi K, Hikone M, Sakamoto N, et al. Dengue-associated hemophagocytic
160.
syndrome in a Japanese traveler: a case report. J Travel Med. 2015 JanFeb;22(1):64-6. doi: 10.1111/jtm.12158.
Fardet L, Galicier L, Lambotte O, et al. Development and validation of the HScore, a
161.
score for the diagnosis of reactive hemophagocytic syndrome. Arthritis Rheumatol.
2014 Sep;66(9):2613-20. doi: 10.1002/art.38690.
Schram AM, Campigotto F, Mullally A, et al. Marked hyperferritinemia does not predict
162.
for HLH in the adult population. Blood. 2015 Mar 5;125(10):1548-52. doi: 10.1182/
blood-2014-10-602607.
Allen CE, Yu X, Kozinetz CA, et al. Highly elevated ferritin levels and the diagnosis of
163.
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Jun;50(6):1227-35
Cam BV, Tuan DT, Fonsmark L, et al. Randomized Comparison of Oxygen Mask
164.
Treatment vs. Nasal Continuous Positive Airway Pressure in Dengue Shock
Syndrome with Acute Respiratory Failure. J Trop Pediatr. 2002;48:335–339.
Annane D, Vignon P, Renault A, et al. Norepinephrine plus dobutamine versus
165.
epinephrine alone for management of septic shock: a randomised trial. Lancet
2007;370: 676–84.
De Backer D, Biston P, Devriendt J, et al. Comparison of Dopamine and
166.
Norepinephrine in the Treatment of Shock. N Engl J Med 2010; 362:779-789.
Havel C, Arrich J, Losert H, et al. Vasopressors for hypotensive shock (Review).
167.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 5.
Myburgh JA, Higgins, A, Jovanovska A, et. al. A comparison of epinephrine and
168.
norepinephrine in critically ill patieints Intensive Care Medicine 2008;34:2226-2234.
Levy B , Perez P, Perny J et al. Comparison of norepinephrine-dobutamine to
169.
epinephrine for hemodynamics, lactate metabolism, and organ function variables
in cardiogenic shock. A prospective, randomized pilot study. Crit Care Med 2011
Mar;39(3):450-5.
Djogovic D, MacDonald S, Wensel A, et al. Vasopressor and Inotrope Use in
170.
Canadian Emergency Departments: Evidence Based Consensus Guidelines. CJEM.
2015 Feb;17 Suppl 1:1-16. doi: 10.1017/cem.2014.77.
Taylor Robert W & Palagiri AC. Central Venous Catheterization: Concise Definitive
171.
Review. Critical Care Medicine. 2007; 35(5):1390-96.
Marik PE, Cavallazzi R. Does the central venous pressure predict fluid
172.
responsiveness? An updated meta-analysis and a plea for some common sense. Crit
Care Med. 2013 Jul;41(7):1774-81. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31828a25fd.
Kumar A, Anel R, Bunnell E, et al. Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure and central
173.
venous pressure fail to predict ventricular filling volume, cardiac performance, or the
response to volume infusion in normal subjects. Crit Care Med. 2004 Mar;32(3):691-9.
Mumtaz H, Williams V, Hauer-Jensen M, et al. Central venous catheter placement in
174.
patients with disorders of hemostasis. Am J Surg. 2000 Dec;180(6):503-5; discussion 506.
Kander T, Frigyesi A, Kjeldsen-Kragh J, et al. Bleeding complications after central line
175.
insertions: relevance of pre-procedure coagulation tests and institutional transfusion
policy. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2013 May;57(5):573-9. doi: 10.1111/aas.12075
Doerfler ME, Kaufman B, Goldenberg AS. Central venous catheter placement
176.
inpatients with disorders of hemostasis. Chest. 1996 Jul;110(1):185-8.
Calvert N, Hind D, McWilliams RG, et al. The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
177.
of ultrasound locating devices for central venous access: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2003;7(12):1-84.
Tercan F, Ozkan U, Oguzkurt L. US-guided placement of central vein catheters in
178.
patients with disorders of hemostasis. Eur J Radiol. 2008 Feb;65(2):253-6.
Kaufman RM, Djulbegovic B, Gernsheimer T, et al; AABB. Platelet transfusion: a
179.
clinical practice guideline from the AABB. Ann Intern Med. 2015 Feb 3;162(3):205-13.
doi: 10.7326/M14-1589.
Patel IJ, Davidson JC, Nikolic B, et al; Standards of Practice Committee, with
180.
Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiological Society of Europe (CIRSE)
Endorsement. Consensus guidelines for periprocedural management of coagulation
status and hemostasis risk in percutaneous image-guided interventions. J Vasc Interv
Radiol. 2012 Jun;23(6):727-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jvir.2012.02.012.
Blumberg N, Heal JM, Phillips GL. Platelet transfusions: trigger, dose, benefits, and
181.
risks. F1000 Med Rep. 2010 Jan 27;2:5. doi: 10.3410/M2-5.
Kander T, Tanaka KA, Norström E, et al. The effect and duration of prophylactic
182.
platelet transfusions before insertion of a central venous catheter in patients with
bone marrow failure evaluated with point-of-care methods and flow cytometry. Anesth
Analg. 2014 Oct;119(4):882-90. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000000259.
Scheer B, Perel A, Pfeiffer UJ. Clinical review: complications and risk factors of
183.
peripheral arterial catheters used for haemodynamic monitoring in anaesthesia and
intensive care medicine. Crit Care. 2002 Jun;6(3):199-204.
Metheny NA, Meert KL, Clouse RE. Complications related to feeding tube placement.
184.
Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2007 Mar;23(2):178-82.
Soni A, Chugh K, Sachdev A, Gupta D. Management of dengue fever in ICU. Indian J
185.
Pediatr. 2001 Nov;68(11):1051-5.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Dengue Infection in Adults (Revised 2nd
186.
Edition). Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2010.
Machado CR, Machado ES, Denis Rohloff R, et al. Is Pregnancy Associated with
187.
Severe Dengue? A Review of Data from the Rio de Janeiro Surveillance Information
System. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013;7(5):5–8.
Adam I, Jumaa AM, Elbashir HM, et al. Maternal and perinatal outcomes of dengue in
188.
PortSudan, Eastern Sudan. Virol J. 2010;7:153.
Pouliot SH, Xiong X, Harville E, et al. Maternal dengue and pregnancy outcomes: a
189.
systematic review. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2010;65(2):107–18.
Chitra TV, Panicker S. Maternal and fetal outcome of dengue fever in pregnancy. J
190.
Vector Borne Dis. 2011;48(4):210–3.
Kariyawasam S, Senanayake H. Dengue infections during pregnancy: Case series
191.
from a tertiary care hospital in Sri Lanka. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2010;4(11):767–75.
Mohamed Ismail NA, Wan Abd Rahim WER, Salleh SA, et al. Seropositivity of
192.
Dengue Antibodies during Pregnancy. Sci World J. Hindawi Publishing Corporation;
2014;2014:1–4.
Phongsamart W, Yoksan S, Vanaprapa N, et al. Dengue virus infection in late
193.
pregnancy and transmission to the infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2008;27(6):500–4.
Friedman EE, Dallah F, Harville EW, et al. Symptomatic Dengue Infection during
194.
Pregnancy and Infant Outcomes: A Retrospective Cohort Study. PLoS Negl Trop Dis.
2014;8(10):e3226.
Singla N, Arora S, Goel P, et al. Dengue in pregnancy: an under–reported illness,
195.
with special reference to other existing co–infections. Asian Pac J Trop Med. Hainan
Medical College; 2015;8(3):206–8.
Barthel A, Gourinat AC, Cazorla C, et al. Breast milk as a possible route of vertical
196.
transmission of dengue virus? Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Aug;57(3):415-7. doi: 10.1093/
cid/cit227.
Brown JL, Wilkinson R, Davidson RN, et al. Rapid diagnosis and determination of
197.
duration of viraemia in dengue fever using a reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1996 Mar-Apr;90(2):140-3.
Murgue B, Roche C, Chungue E, et al. Prospective study of the duration and
198.
magnitude of viraemia in children hospitalised during the 1996-1997 dengue-2
outbreak in French Polynesia. J Med Virol. 2000 Apr;60(4):432-8.
Ko YC, Chen MJ, Yeh SM. The predisposing and protective factors against dengue
199.
virus transmission by mosquito vector. Am J Epidemiol. 1992 Jul 15;136(2):214-20.
Igarashi A. Impact of dengue virus infection and its control. FEMS Immunol Med
200.
Microbiol. 1997 Aug;18(4):291-300.
Chou JT, Rossignol PA, Ayres JW. Evaluation of commercial insect repellents
201.
on human skin against Aedes aegypti (Diptera: Culicidae). Journal of Medical
Entomology. 1997. 34(6): 624-30.
Villar L, Dayan GH, Arredondo-García JL, et al; CYD15 Study Group. Efficacy of a
202.
tetravalent dengue vaccine in children in Latin America. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan
8;372(2):113-23. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411037.
Capeding MR, Tran NH, Hadinegoro SR, et al; CYD14 Study Group. Clinical efficacy
203.
and safety of a novel tetravalent dengue vaccine in healthy children in Asia: a
phase 3, randomised, observer-masked, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2014 Oct
11;384(9951):1358-65. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61060-6.
Hadinegoro SR, Arredondo-García JL, Capeding MR, et al; CYD-TDV Dengue
204.
Vaccine Working Group. Efficacy and Long-Term Safety of a Dengue Vaccine in
Regions of Endemic Disease. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jul 27.
APPENDIX 1
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly
or in combination. Search was limited to English, human and last five
years. These are some of the examples of search strategy used for the
clinical questions. The details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SEARCH STRATEGY
Emergency management
1 dengue/
2 severe dengue/
3 dengue*.tw.
4 (dengue adj1 fever).tw.
5 ((breakbone or break-bone or
break bone) adj1 fever).tw.
6 (classical adj1 dengue*).tw.
7 classical dengue fever*.tw.
8 (severe adj1 dengue*).tw.
9 hemorrhagic dengue*.tw.
10 (dengue adj1 hemorrhagic
fever).tw.
11 dengue shock syndrome.tw.
12 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7
or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
13 EMERGENCY SERVICE,
HOSPITAL/
14 ((Emergency or unit*
emergency) adj1 (room* or ward*
or unit* or outpatient unit* or
department*)).tw.
15 “accident and emergency
department”.tw.
16 ((hospital emergenc*
or emergenc* hospital) adj1
service*).tw.
17 (hospital adj1 (emergenc*
service* or services emergenc*)).tw.
18 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17
19 Clinical laboratory
techniques/
20 ((Clinical laboratory or
laboratory) adj1 (technique* or
diagnos* or technique* clinical)).tw.
21 ((Laboratory or diagnos*)
adj test*).tw.
22 “diagnos* and laboratory
examinations”.tw.
23 19 or 20 or 21 or 22
24 12 and 18 and 23
Diagnostic test (1)
15 IMMUNOGLOBULIN M/
16 Immunoglobulin M.tw.
17 IMMUNOGLOBULIN G/
18 7s gamma globulin.tw.
19 gamma globulin 7s.tw.
20 igg2b.tw.
21 igg2a.tw.
22 immunoglobulin g.tw.
23 polyglobin.tw.
24 igg1.tw.
25 igg2.tw.
26 igg3.tw.
27 igg4.tw.
28 igg.tw.
29 igg t.tw.
30 Primary infection.tw.
31 Secondary infection/
32 Secondary infection.tw.
33 COINFECTION/
34 (infection* adj1 mixed).tw.
35 (infection* adj1 secondary).tw.
36 co*infection*.tw.
37 (infection* adj1
polymicrobial).tw.
Fluid management
1 dengue/
2 severe dengue/
3 dengue*.tw.
4 (dengue adj1 fever).tw.
5 ((breakbone or break-bone or
break bone) adj1 fever).tw.
6 (classical adj1 dengue*).tw.
7 classical dengue fever*.tw.
8 (severe adj1 dengue*).tw.
9 hemorrhagic dengue*.tw.
10 (dengue adj1 hemorrhagic
fever).tw.
11 dengue shock syndrome.tw.
12 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7
or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
13 Rehydration*.tw.
14 Fluid adj1 (therap* or
management or replacement or
resuscitation or administration).tw.
15 Starch-based intravenous
fluid.tw.
16 (Starch* or derivatives
or starch derivatives) adj1
(hydroxyethyl* or hydroxyethyl
starch).tw.
17 Colloid*.tw.
18 Hydrocolloid*.tw.
19 Gelatine.tw.
20 Gelafusal.tw.
21 gel?fusine.tw.
22 Dextrans/
23 Dextran*.tw.
24 Isotonic Solutions/
25 Isotonic adj1 solutions.tw.
26 Saline Solution, Hypertonic/
27 solution* adj1 (hypertonic
saline or saline hypertonic).tw.
28 sodium chloride solution*
hypertonic.tw.
29 Ringer’s lactate.tw.
30 Albumins/
31 Albumins.tw.
32 Prealbumin.tw.
Diagnostic test (2)
1 Rapid combo test.tw.
2 Duo test.tw.
3 ANTIBODIES, VIRAL/
4 (viral adj1 antibodies).tw.
5 REAGENT KITS,
DIAGNOSTIC/
6 in vitro diagnostic medical
device*.tw.
7 (diagnostic adj1 test kit*).tw
8 (reagent adj1 kit* diagnostic).tw.
9 diagnostic reagent kit*.tw.
10 in vitro diagnostic device*.tw.
11 non-structural protein 1/
12 Non-structural protein 1.tw.
13 VIRAL NONSTRUCTURAL
PROTEINS/
14 ((nonstructural or nonstructural) adj1 protein* viral).tw.
15 (protein* adj1 viral ns).tw.
Complications
1 dengue/
2 severe dengue/
3 dengue*.tw.
4 (dengue adj1 fever).tw.
5 ((breakbone or break-bone or
break bone) adj1 fever).tw.
6 (classical adj1 dengue*).tw.
7 classical dengue fever*.tw.
8 (severe adj1 dengue*).tw.
9 hemorrhagic dengue*.tw.
10 (dengue adj1 hemorrhagic
fever).tw.
11 dengue shock syndrome.tw.
12 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7
or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
13 Cardiac complication*.tw.
14 Heart complication*.tw.
15 h?emophagocytic syndrome
adj (infection associated or
infection-associated).tw.
16 infection-associated
h?emophagocytic syndrome.tw.
17 h?emophagocytic syndrome*.tw.
18 h?emophagocytic adj1
lymphohistiocytos?s.tw.
19 reactive adj1
(h?emophagocytic syndrome).tw.
20 lymphohistiocytos?s
hemophagocytic.tw.
21 rhabdomyolys?s.tw.
22 Hepatitis/
23 Hepatitis.tw.
24 Hepatitides.tw.
25 Encephalopathy.tw.
26 Encephalitis/
27 encephalitis.tw.
28 (brain adj1 inflammation*).tw.
29 (infectious adj1 encephaliti*).tw.
30 Meningitis/
31 Meningitis.tw.
32 Meningitides.tw.
33 Renal impairment.tw.
34 Renal Insufficiency/
35 (insufficienc* adj1 (renal or
kidney)).tw.
36 (failure* adj1 (kidney or
renal)).tw.
37 Acute Kidney Injury/
38 (acute adj1 (kidney failure*
or renal failure* or renal injur* or
kidney injur*)).tw.
39 (acute adj1 (kidney
insufficienc* or renal
insufficienc*)).tw.
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
What is the current epidemiological data and notification system for
1.
dengue?
What are the serotyping patterns of dengue infection in Malaysia?
2.
What are the clinical criteria or classification used to diagnose dengue
3.
infection?
What are the effective tools/investigations in diagnosis of dengue?
4.
What are the effective investigations in diagnosing dengue?
5.
What are the effective/safe management of patients with dengue
6.
infection at primary care or outpatient department?
What are the effective/safe risk stratification and management of
7.
patient that can be treated at home?
What are the effective/safe management of patients with dengue
8.
infection in emergency department/during triaging?
What are the effective/safe management of patients with dengue
9.
infection before transferring from ED to the ward?
What are the effective/safe management of patients with dengue
10.
infection who requires hospitalisation?
What are the effective/safe tools and management for inpatient
11.
disease monitoring?
What are the effective/safe fluid management in patients with dengue
12.
infection?
What are the complications of dengue infection and the effective/safe
13.
management of these complications?
What are the criteria for intensive care referral of dengue infection?
14.
What are the effective/safe intensive care management for dengue
15.
infection?
What are the effective/safe management of dengue infection in
16.
pregnancy?
What are the discharge criteria for patients with dengue infection?
17.
What are the effective/safe preventive measures for dengue
18.
transmission in hospital?
APPENDIX 3
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION CLASSIFICATION OF DF AND DHF (1997)
CASE DEFINITION FOR DENGUE FEVER
Given the variability in the clinical illness associated with dengue infection,
it is not appropriate to adopt a detailed clinical definition of dengue fever.
Rather, the need for laboratory confirmation is emphasised.
The following classifications are proposed:
Probable – an acute febrile illness with two or more of the following
•
manifestations:
headache
--
retro-orbital pain
--
myalgia
--
arthralgia
--
rash
--
haemorrhagic manifestations
--
leucopenia
--
AND
Supportive serology(a reciprocal haemagglutination-inhibition antibody
--
titre ≥ 1280, a comparable IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) titre or a positive IgM antibody test on a late acute or
convalescent-phase serum specimen)
OR
Occurrence at the same location and time as other confirmed cases of
--
dengue fever
Confirmed – a case confirmed by laboratory criteria (see below)
•
Reportable – any probable or confirmed case should be reported
•
Laboratory criteria for confirmation of dengue fever are
Isolation of the dengue virus from serum or autopsy samples: or
•
Demonstration of a fourfold or greater change in reciprocal IgG or
•
IgM antibody titres to one or more dengue virus antigens in paired
serum samples; or
Demonstration of dengue virus antigen in autopsy tissue, serum
•
or cerebrospinal fluid samples by immune histochemistry, immune
fluorescence or ELISA;
OR
Detection of dengue virus genomic sequences in autopsy tissue
•
serum or cerebrospinal fluid samples by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR).
APPENDIX 3
CASE DEFINITION FOR DENGUE HAEMORRHAGIC FEVER
The following must ALL be present :
Fever, or history of acute fever, lasting 2–7 days, occasionally
•
biphasic.
Haemorrhagic tendencies, evidenced by at least one of the following:
•
a positive tourniquet test
--
petechiae, ecchymoses or purpura
--
bleeding from the mucosa, gastrointestinal tract, injection sites or
--
other locations
haematemesis or melaena
--
Thrombocytopenia (100,000 cells per mm3 or less).
•
Evidence of plasma leakage due to increased vascular permeability,
•
manifested by at least one of the following:
a rise in the HCT equal to or greater than 20% above average for
--
age, sex and population;
a drop in the HCT following volume-replacement treatment equal
--
to or greater than 20% or baseline;
signs of plasma leakage such as pleural effusion, ascites and
--
hypoproteinaemia
CASE DEFINITION FOR DENGUE SHOCK SYNDROME
All of the above four criteria for DHF must be present, plus evidence of
circulatory failure manifested by:
Rapid and weak pulse, and
•
Narrow pulse pressure [<20mmHg (2.7 kPa)]
•
OR manifested by:
Hypotension for age, and
•
Cold, clammy skin and restlessness
•
Grade l : Fever accompanied by non-specific constitutional
symptoms; the only haemorrhagic manifestation is a positive
tourniquet test and / or easy bruising.
Grade ll : Spontaneous bleeding, in addition to the manifestations of
Grade l patients, usually in the form of skin or other
haemorrhages.
*Grade lll : Circulatory Failure manifested by a rapid, weak pulse and
narrowing of pulse pressure or hypotension with the presence
of cold, clammy skin and restlessness.
*Grade lV : Profound shock with undetectable blood pressure or pulse.
Note : * i. Grades III and IV are classified as Dengue Shock Syndrome
ii. The WHO Classification has been reviewed and revised.
APPENDIX 4
METHODS OF SAMPLE COLLECTION
1. Rapid Combo Test (bed side test)
Draw 1 ml of blood into a plain tube without anti-coagulants
i.
Set-up the rapid combo test device on suitable surface area
ii.
Proceed to perform the test according to the procedure, using whole blood
iii.
Read the results within the stipulated time and discard the device and
iv.
other clinical waste in biohazard bag
2. Dengue Serology (ELISA)
Draw 3-5 ml of blood into a plain tube without anti-coagulants
i.
Clot at ambient temperature
ii.
Dispatch to the laboratory within 4 hours of collection for serum separation
iii.
by centrifugation
Note : Haemolysed or icteric or lipaemic specimens invalidate certain test. If
such specimens are received, the samples will be rejected to assure results are
of clinical value.
3. Viral Genome Detection (PCR)
a) Blood
Collect 3-5 ml of blood into plain tube
i.
Send directly to virology laboratory within 2 hours of sampling. If this is
ii.
delayed, centrifuge and aliquot serum into sterile tube. Keep the sample in
a freezer at -70ºC and put in ice when sending to Virology laboratory the
next day
b) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Collect a minimum of 0.5 ml (5 drops) of CSF into sterile bijou bottle
i.
Pack in ice for transport
ii.
Send directly to Virology laboratory within 2 hours after being taken
iii.
Send together with serum sample
iv.
c) Post-mortem tissue sample
Tissue specimens should be placed in a sterile container containing either
viral transport media (VTM) or normal saline (NS) and sent immediately to the
laboratory which can perform dengue real time RT-PCR.
4. Viral Isolation
a) Blood
Draw 3-5 ml of blood into a plain tube without anti-coagulants
i.
b) CSF
Collect at least 1 ml of CSF specimen in a sterile plain screw-capped
i.
container (universal or bijou bottle).Do not add in VTM or freeze
Pack the specimen individually in biohazard plastic bag and keep in 4ºCor
ii.
in cold box with ice
Send to the laboratory within 24 hours after collection
iii.
c) Tissue or post mortem tissue
Put the tissue in sterile container containing VTM or normal saline and
i.
screw-capped tight.
Packed the specimen individually in biohazard plastic bag and keep in 4ºC
ii.
or in cold box with ice.
Send to the laboratory within 24 hours after collection
iii.
Inform the laboratory processing the samples that the case was fatal
•
Obtain a blood sample to attempt virus isolation and serology
•
Obtain tissue samples for separate tests of virus isolation and
•
immunohistochemistry
TYPE OF TESTS FOR DENGUE DIAGNOSIS
Type of test
Technique
When To Test
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
1. Antibody
Detection
IgM Detection
IgG Detection
Rapid IgM
Detection
(Strips)
4 days after onset of
symptoms and up to 3
months in primary dengue.
3 days after onset of
symptoms and sometimes
hindered by large scale
IgG
production
in
secondary dengue
10 days after onset of
symptom
in
primary
dengue and 3 days after
onset of symptoms in
secondary dengue
5 days after onset of
symptoms and up to 2
months
61.5-100
46.3-99.0
20.5-97.7
52.0-100
80.0-100
76.6-90.6
2.Antigen/
Antibody
Combined
Detection
NS1 and IgM
Combo Kit
As this is a combo test,
useful in early stage of
infection (day 3 onwards)
and up to sero conversion
period (up to 2 weeks)
89.9-92.9
75.0 – 100
NS1 and IgM/
IgG Combo kit
As this is a combo test,
useful in early stage of
infection (day 3 onwards)
and up to sero conversion
period (up to 2 weeks
onwards). In the event
of both NS1 and IgM are
non reactive and IgG is
reactive, case can be
interpreted as secondary
dengue.
93.0
100
3. Viral
Detection
Virus Isolation
(cell culture)
Virus Isolation
(mosquitoes)
Viral RNA
RT-PCR
(Conventional)
Viral RNA
RT-PCR (Real
Time)
Viral Antigen
(NS1)
1-5 days of onset of
symptoms
in
Primary
Dengue and 1-4 days
after onset of symptoms in
secondary dengue
- same as above-
- same as above-
- same as above1-7 days of onset of
symptoms
in
Primary
Dengue and 1-5 days
after onset of symptoms in
secondary dengue
40.5
71.5-84.2
48.4-100
58.9-100
54.2-93.4
100
100
100
100
92.5-100
APPENDIX 5
APPENDIX 6
TYPE OF DENGUE TESTS RECOMMENDED BASED ON CLINICAL HISTORY
Clinical
History
Test
Result
Interpretation
History of
fever less
than 5
days
Dengue NS1 Ag
or RCT
Positive
Negative
Acute dengue infection.
Dengue infection still cannot rule out.
Suggest to send second sample for
Dengue IgM after day 5 of fever
History of
fever more
than 5
days
Dengue IgM
Positive
Indeterminate
Negative
Presence of detectable IgM antibody.
Suggestive of recent dengue infection
Advice to repeat the test.
The result does not rule out dengue
infection. Advice to send repeat sample
for dengue IgM after day 7 of fever or ask
for Dengue IgG test.
History of
fever more
than 5
days and
Dengue
IgM and /or
NS1 was
negative
Dengue IgG
Positive
Indeterminate
Negative
Elevated IgG levels are seen in acute or
past infections.
A titre of equal or more than 1:2560 is
consistent with acute secondary infection.
Advice to repeat the test if clinically
indicated.
No detectable elevated IgG antibody. The
absence of elevated IgG is presumptive
evidence that the patient does not have
secondary dengue infection.
APPENDIX 7
OUTPATIENT DENGUE MONITORING RECORD
APPENDIX 8
DENGUE ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST
APPENDIX 9
HOME CARE ADVICE LEAFLET FOR DENGUE PATIENTS
WHAT SHOULD BE DONE?
Adequate bed rest
•
Adequate fluid intake (more than 8 glasses or 2 litres for an average
•
person).
Milk, fruit juice (caution with diabetes patient) and isotonic
--
electrolyte solution (ORS) and barley water.
Plain water alone is not sufficient and may cause electrolyte
--
imbalance.
Take paracetamol (not more than 4 gram per day).
•
Tepid sponging.
•
If possible, use mosquito repellent or rest under a mosquito net even
•
during day time to prevent mosquito bites.
Look for mosquito breeding places in and around the home and
•
eliminate them.
WHAT SHOULD BE AVOIDED?
Do not take non steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAIDS) eg. aspirin /
•
mefenamic acid (ponstan) or steroids. If you are already taking these
medications, please consult your doctor.
Antibiotics are not required
•
Do not take injection
•
Do not do massage / cupping / quasa
•
HOME CARE ADVICE FOR DENGUE PATIENTS
Front View
Back View
THE DANGER SIGNS OF DENGUE INFECTION
(IF ANY OF THESE ARE OBSERVED, PLEASE GO IMMEDIATELY TO
THE NEAREST HOSPITAL / EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT)
Bleeding
1.
for example :
Red spots or patches on the skin
•
Bleeding from nose or gums
•
Vomiting blood
•
Black coloured stools
•
Heavy menstruation / vaginal bleeding
•
Frequent vomiting and/or diarrhoea
2.
Abdominal pain / tenderness / diarrhoea
3.
Drowsiness or irritability
4.
Pale, cold or clammy skin
5.
Difficulty in breathing
6.
Adapted : CPG Management of Dengue Infection in Adults (Revised 2nd
Edition), 2010
APPENDIX 10
INPATIENT DENGUE MONITORING CHART
ABG
Arterial blood gases
ALT
Alanine transaminase
AST
Aspartate aminotransferase
BP
Blood pressure
BUSEC
Blood urea serum electrolyte creatinine
CCTVR
Skin colour, cold/warm extremities, capillary filling time <2 secs, pulse volume and rate
CK
Creatine kinase
CNS
Central nervous system
CRT
Capillary refill time
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
CVC
Central venous catheter
CVP
Central venous pressure
DBP
Diastolic blood pressure
DENV
Dengue virus
DF
Dengue fever
DHF
Dengue haemorrhagic fever
DIC
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
DSS
Dengue shock syndrome
ECG
Electrocardiogram
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
FBC
Full blood count
FFP
Fresh frozen plasma
GCS
Glasgow Coma Scale
GSH
Group, screen and hold
GXM
Group cross match
HCT
Hematocrit
HCO3
Bicarbonate
HI
Haemagglutination inhibition
HPS
Haemophagocytic syndrome
ICU
Intensive care unit
IgG
Immunoglobulin G
IgM
Immunoglobulin M
IMR
Institute of Medical Research
IV
Intravenous
IVC
Inferior vena cava
IVIg
Intravenous immunoglobulin
LDH
Lactate dehydrogenase
LFT
Liver function test
NAC
N-Acetylcysteine
NS1
Non-structural protein 1
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
PP
Pulse pressure
PR
Pulse rate
RBS
Random blood sugar
RCT
Rapid combo test
RP
Renal profile
RR
Respiratory rate
RT-PCR
Reverse transcriptase Polymerase chain reaction
SBP
Systolic blood pressure
USG
Ultrasonography
WCC
White cell count
WHO
Word Health Organization
WS
Warning signs
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:-
Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
•
Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
•
feedback
Information specialists for searching and retrieving the evidence:-
•
Dr. Nur Farhana Mohamad
--
Dr. Shahril Effendi Shuib
--
Dr. Syaharatul Patimah Kamarudin
--
Mr. Lee Sit Wai
--
Matron Loong Ah Moi
--
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof, Head of CPG Unit, MaHTAS for
•
providing guidance and support
All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
•
of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure forms. None
held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details
are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Dengue Infection in Adults
(Third Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health
Malaysia.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT