CLINICAL PRACTICE GUID!
MANAGEMENT OF
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-28-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.neuro.org.my
Also available as a mobile app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2015 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2019) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence & Formulation of Recommendation
i
Guidelines Development and Objectives
ii
Guidelines Development Group
v
Review Committee
vi
External Reviewers
vii
Algorithm 1. Care Pathway for Referral and
viii
Management of MS
Algorithm 2. Disease Modifying Therapies for
ix
Multiple Sclerosis
Algorithm 3. Treatment of Relapsing-Remitting
x
Multiple Sclerosis
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1
3.
RISK FACTORS
3
4.
PATHOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
4
5.
CLINICAL FEATURES
5
6.
CLINICALLY ISOLATED SYNDROME,
7
OPTIC NEURITIS AND TRANSVERSE MYELITIS
7.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
13
8.
NATURAL HISTORY
20
9.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
22
10. INVESTIGATIONS
24
11.
MONITORING DISEASE ACTIVITY AND RISK
27
OF PROGRESSION
12.
REFERRAL
32
13.
TREATMENT
33
13.1 Treatment of Acute Attacks and Relapses
33
13.2 Disease Modifying Treatment
35
13.3 Treatment of MS-related Symptoms
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
No.
Title
Page
14.
NEUROPSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS
72
15.
SPECIAL ISSUES
75
16.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
78
References
79
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
91
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
92
Appendix 3 Differential Diagnosis of Optic Disc Swelling
93
Appendix 4 Treatment of NMO/NMOSD
94
Appendix 5 New NMOSD Diagnostic Criteria for Adult
97
Patients
2013 MS Disease Modifier Phenotypes
Appendix 6 Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale
99
(EDSS) for Neurologic Assessment
Appendix 7 Neuroimaging Features in MS
100
Appendix 8 Bladder Diary
103
Appendix 9 Drug Dosages and Side Effects in MS
104
List of Abbreviations
120
Acknowledgement
122
Disclosure Statement
122
Source of Funding
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
Level
I
II -1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit
of MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
ii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N); Medline via Ovid,
Pubmed and Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) (refer
to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The inclusion criteria
are all literature on multiple sclerosis regardless of study design. The
search was limited to literature published in the last 15 years, humans
and English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts
in the field were also contacted to identify relevant studies. In certain
situations, pivotal papers beyond the scope of search were used in the
CPG. All searches were conducted from 30 January 2013 to 13 August
2014. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical questions at
the end of the CPG development process allowing any relevant papers
published before 28 February 2015 to be included. In view of evolving
issues on it, pivotal papers on diagnostic criterias after February 2015
were accessed. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published
after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to a CPG on multiple sclerosis developed
by the National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions in 2004
and National Clinical Guideline Centre in 2014 [commissioned by
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)]. The CPG
was evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as references.
A total of 23 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. (Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions)
The DG members met 24 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. The literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion were resolved consensually. The CPG was
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
iii
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines was graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
iv
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the following:
a. Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis
b. Management of multiple sclerosis and its complications
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
a. Inclusion Criteria
Adult patients (≥18 years old) with MS
b. Exclusion criteria
•
Patients with other relapsing remitting central nervous system
disorders not fulfilling diagnostic criteria for MS
•
Paediatric groups with demyelinating disorders
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management of MS
particularly healthcare professionals in primary and secondary/tertiary
care namely:-
a. Physicians and specialists from related disciplines
b. Family Medicine Specialists
c. Medical officers and general practitioners
d. Allied health professionals
e. Pharmacists
f.
Students (medical postgraduates and undergraduates, and allied
health students)
g. Patients and carers
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
v
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Shanthi Viswanathan
Consultant Neurologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Akmal Hafizah Zamli
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Sg. Buloh
Dr. Chee Kok Yoon
Consultant Neuropsychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Darisah Lah
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bukit Tunggal
Kuala Terengganu
Dr. Joyce Pauline Joseph
Consultant Neurologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kartikasalwah Abd. Latif
Neuroradiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section,
MoH
Dr. Mohd. Izmi Ahmad @ Ibrahim
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Dr. Mohd. Sufian Adenan
Neurologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norzaini Rose Mohd. Zain
Consultant Neuroradiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ooi Phaik Yee
Neurologist
Hospital Sg. Buloh
Dr. Saiful Safuan Md. Sani
General Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sheela Theivanthiran
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras
Dr. Shelina Oli Mohamed
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Selayang
Dr. Suhailah Abdullah
Lecturer & Consultant Neurologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Associate Professor Dr. Tan Hui Jan
Lecturer & Consultant Neurologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia
En. Thian Soon Yew
Pharmacist
Klinik Kesihatan Sg. Besi, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
vi
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guideline was reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Hj. Md. Hanip Rafia
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Neurologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Baizury Bashah
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Presinct 18, Putrajaya
Professor Dr. Hamid Abd. Rahman
Senior Lecturer & Consultant
Neuropsychiatrist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia
Dato’ Dr. K. Aris Chandran
Senior Consultant Physician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Bainun
Dr. Lee Moon Keen
Consultant Neurologist
Sunway Medical Centre
Associate Professor Dr. Lydia Abd. Latif
Lecturer & Consultant Rehabilitation
Physician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Professor Dr. Norlisah Ramli
Senior Lecturer, Consultant
Neuroradiologist
& Head, University Malaya Research
Imaging Centre
Madam Padma Nayar
President
Multiple Sclerosis Society
Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section,
MoH
Dr. Salmah Bahri
Director
Pharmaceutical Practice & Development
Division, MoH
Professor Datuk Dr. Tan Chong Tin
Senior Lecturer & Consultant
Neurologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Professor Dr. Wan Hazabbah Wan Hitam
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Neuroophthalmologist
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
Dr. Warren Lo Hwa Loon
Consultant Urologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yusniza Mohd. Yusof
Head of Department &
Consultant Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
vii
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Brian M Tress
Edgar Rouse Professor University of Melbourne
Department of Radiology, Royal Melbourne Hospital
Melbourne, Australia
Professor Dr. Dennis Velakoulis
Director, Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital
& Clinical Director, Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre
Melbourne, Australia
Professor Dr. Fary Khan
Director of Rehabilitation, Royal Melbourne Hospital
& Clinical Professor, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Ms. Goh Chia Mein
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Helmut Butzkueven
Department of Medicine at the Royal Melbourne Hospital
University of Melbourne
Australia
Professor Dr. Kazuo Fujihara
Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine
Sendai, Japan
Professor Dato’ Dr. Raymond Azman Ali
Senior Consultant Neurologist, Dean, Medical Faculty
& Director, Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ruziaton Hasim
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Shah Alam Seksyen 7, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Tan Woon Teck Clement
Head & Senior Consultant
Neuro-Ophthalmology Services
National University Hospital Singapore, Singapore
Professor Dr. Thomas Berger
Vice-Director Clinical Dept of Neurology, Chair Clinical PhD Programs at MUI,
National Multiple Sclerosis Coordinator Austrian Society of Neurology,
Head Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Clinic & Research Unit,
Clinical Dept. of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck (MUI), Austria
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
ALGORITHM 1. CARE PATHWAY FOR REFERRAL AND
MANAGEMENT OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS (MS)
Referral to
secondary/tertiary care
Diagnosis
confirmed
Diagnosis not
confirmed
Diagnosis
not MS
MS
management
Continuation
of care
Disease modifying
treatments (DMT)
Management of
MS-related symptoms
Treatment of acute
relapse
Follow-up as
necessary
Manage
accordingly
Patient with suspected
symptoms/signs
of MS at primary care
Diagnostic workup
for MS
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
ALGORITHM 2. DISEASE MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR MS
NA = not applicable
*Refer to text for definitions of active MS, highly active MS and rapidly evolving
or aggressive MS
**Currently not available in Malaysia
***John Cunningham virus (JCV) testing for risk stratification
ix
NA
Methylprednisolone
Plasmapheresis
Level of
therapy
Escalation
Therapy
Initial
Therapy
Relapse
Therapy
Level of
pharmacological
agent
Relapsingremitting
active MS*
Highly active
relapsingremitting MS*
Rapidly evolving/
aggressive
relapsingremitting MS*
Secondary
progressive MS
with relapses
Interferon
beta/
Glatiramer
acetate**/
Teriflunomide/
Dimethylfumarate
Refer to
section on
highly active
relapsing
remitting MS
Fingolimod/
Natalizumab***/
Alemtuzumab
Interferon beta
Mitoxantrone/
Rituximab/
Cyclophosphamide
Mitoxantrone/
Rituximab/
Cyclophosphamide
Mitoxantrone/
Cyclophosphamide
Second-line
Second-line
Third-line
First-line
NA
First-line
Fingolimod/
Natalizumab***/
Alemtuzumab
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
ALGORITHM 3. TREATMENT OF RELAPSING-REMITTING
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS (RRMS)
Treatment-naïve RRMS
Rapidly
evolving/
aggressive
disease*
Treatment
failure
Escalation
therapy
Treatment
failure
Escalation
therapy
Second-line
therapy
Fingolimod/
Natalizumab***/
Alemtuzumab
Third-line
therapy
Mitoxantrone/
Rituximab/
Cyclophosphamide
Consider switching
between
second-line
therapies
Fingolimod/
Natalizumab***/
Alemtuzumab
First-line therapy
Interferon beta/
Glatiramer acetate**/
Teriflunomide/
Dimethylfumarate
Treatment
failure
Escalation
therapy
Lateral switch
for side effects
*In rapidly evolving or aggressive MS,
fingolimod, natalizumab (depending on
JCV stratification)/or alemtuzumab would
be options for first-line therapy.
**Currently not available in Malaysia
***JCV testing for risk stratification
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
1
1. INTRODUCTION
Multiple sclerosis (MS) and other idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating
disorders (IIDDs) especially neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder
(NMOSD) have an increasing importance in terms of diagnosis and
treatment in Malaysia. MS is an inflammatory demyelinating disorder of
the central nervous system (CNS) with heterogeneous presentations.
It can be considered a two phase disease made up of the early
predominantly inflammatory phase wherein relapses are common and
a later more progressive neurodegenerative phase characterised by
axonal loss.
It is important to diagnose MS during the early inflammatory phase.
It is during this phase that disease modifying therapy (DMT) prevents
relapses and may delay the disability and progression of disease.
Initiation of early treatment in MS poses many challenges and with
the recent increase in DMTs, the treatment should be individualised.
As MS patients also experience diverse symptoms and disabilities, a
multidisciplinary approach is ideal.
In Malaysia, the first point of contact for patients with symptoms
suggestive of established MS or high risk for MS is the primary and
secondary healthcare providers. Neurologists have an important role
in confirming the diagnosis, ruling out NMOSD and initiating DMT in
MS. To date, there have not been any local guidelines to aid in the
management of MS. Hence, this CPG on Management of MS is timely,
evidence-based and applicable to the local context at all levels of health
care.
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY
The total number of patients with MS worldwide is estimated to be 2 -
2.5 million. The prevalence is >100 - 200/100,000 in temperate areas
like United States of America, Canada, New Zealand and parts of
Australia. It is <5 per 100,000 in tropical areas or Asia.1, level III
In Asia, the prevalence of MS is reported to be 1 - 2/100,000 in China
and 7.7/100,000 in Japan.2 - 3, level III The prevalence of MS in Malaysia
is estimated to range from 2 to 3/100,000.3 - 4, level III However, the patient
population included in these studies were a mixed group of both MS
and NMOSD. In the 1980s, the prevalence of MS in India was crudely
estimated to be 1/100,000 but a recent study suggested the age
adjusted prevalence had increased to 7.8/100,000.5, level III
Worldwide, MS is commonest among women in their 20s to 40s. It is
commoner among whites and the female to male ratio varies from 2:1
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
2
to 3.8.3, level III A study at the Kuala Lumpur Hospital showed a female to
male ratio of 5:1 for MS. The mean age at onset was 28.6±9.9 years with
a mean duration of illness of 6.4±5.2 years. Malay was the predominant
racial group affected (52.9%), followed by the Indian (26.9%), Chinese
(18.3%), and indigenous groups from East Malaysia (1.9%). Ratios of
MS to NMOSD in different racial groups in Malaysia also differs i.e.
Malays 38:55 (41% NMOSD), Chinese 32:19 (63% NMOSD) and
Indians 7:28 (20% NMOSD).6, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
3
3. RISK FACTORS
The aetiology of MS is multifactorial involving both genetic and
environmental factors. The disease is triggered by an autoimmune
process in susceptible individuals. The risk factors can be categorised
as the following:
a. Genetics
• The risk of MS in offspring of single affected parent is 2% and
higher in those of conjugal pairs with MS (20%).7, level III Maternal
half-siblings of MS patients have twice the risk compared with
paternal half-siblings.1, level III
• First degree relatives have a 10 - 25 times greater risk of
developing MS than the general population.8, level III
• Twin studies have shown genetic susceptibility with concordance
rates of 25 - 30%.1, level III
• The commonest genetic risk factor is Human Leucocyte Antigen
allele DRB1*1501.1, level III
b. Ethnicity
• Caucasians from Scandinavia and Scotland are extremely
susceptible to MS. However, it is rare in the Mongolian race,
Chinese and others.1, level III
c. Sex
• MS is more common in women than men.8, level III
d. Migration and latitude
• Migrants moving from an area where MS is common to an area
where it is less common show a decrease in the rate of MS, while
migrants moving in the opposite direction tend to retain the low
risk of MS as of their country of origin. Studies have shown that
people born in an area with a high risk of MS who then migrated
to an area with a lower risk before the age of 15 assumed the risk
of their new area suggesting the effect of an environmental agent
before puberty.1, level III
• Within regions of temperate climate, MS prevalence generally
increases with latitude.8, level III
e. Environmental factors associated with increased risk of MS are:
• lack of sunlight exposure1, level III and ultraviolet radiation9, level III
• low serum level of 25 Hydroxycholecalciferol10, level II-2
• Epstein-Barr Virus infection11, level II-2
• smoking12, level II-2
• Risk factors for MS are:
 genetics
 ethnicity
 sex
 migration and latitude
 environmental factors
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
4
4. PATHOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
MS is believed to be an autoimmune disease. The pathological hallmark
of MS is the presence of multiple discrete areas of myelin loss within
the CNS with predilection for the optic nerves, spinal cord, brainstem,
cerebellum, juxtacortical,subcortical and periventricular white matter
regions as well as the cortical grey matter. The affected areas are
called plaques or lesions.13, level III
Early MS demyelination is accompanied by inflammation and relative
axonal preservation though axon loss also occurs. The lesions
evolve differently during the early as opposed to the later stage of
the disease. Within each phase, different plaques in different stages
of demyelinating activity are evident. Histologically, inflammation,
myelin breakdown, astrogliosis, olidendrocyte injury, axonal loss and
remyelination are seen.13, level III In progressive MS, increasing axonal
loss, neurodegeneration and failure of remyelination all play an
important role.14, level III
MS is an immune mediated disease. Autoreactive T and B cells are
activated in the periphery and trans-migrate to the blood brain barrier
(BBB) triggering an autoimmune cascade which leads to damage of
the myelin sheath and axons directly within the CNS. This activating
mechanism or antigen(s) has not been characterised to date.15 - 17, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
5
5. CLINICAL FEATURES
MS has a highly variable clinical presentation and course in different
individuals. The majority of patients are young, less than 50 years old
and females.7, level III; 18 - 19, level III The clinical course is characterised
by relapses and disease progression. An attack/relapse/exacerbation
in MS is defined as an acute or subacute patient-reported symptom
or objectively observed signs typical of an acute inflammatory
demyelinating event within the CNS either current or historical of at
least 24 hours in the absence of fever or infection.20, level III This may be
a new event or a worsening of a pre-existing event. Relapses may fully
recover over days or weeks, or lead to persistent residual deficits.
In 85% of MS patients, a relapsing-remitting disease course is seen.
Typical clinical presentations of relapses are optic neuritis (ON; the
initial symptom in 20%), sensory deficits or cerebellar dysfunction.21, level III
Primary progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS) can be seen in 10 - 15% of
patients. It refers to those with at least one year of disease progression
(retrospectively or prospectively determined).20, level III The usual clinical
presentation is as follows:19, level III
• The spinal cord is commonly involved and patients present with
a slowly evolving upper motor neuron syndrome for the legs
(chronic progressive myelopathy).
• Progressive cognitive decline, visual loss, brainstem and cerebellar
ataxic syndromes, bowel, bladder and sexual dysfunction may
occur.
• If accompanied by relapses, it is called progressive relapsing MS
(seen in less than <5% of patients).
• The hallmark of relapsing MS is attacks or exacerbations affecting
different parts of the CNS which are separated in time and space.
Pseudorelapse is defined as an acute worsening of symptoms that
is typically associated with an increase in body temperature due to
infection, exercise or heat exposure.22, level III
Patients may experience the following clinical symptoms and signs
during their disease course:7, level III; 18 - 19, level III; 23 - 25, level III
a. Weakness occurs in 89% of patients:
• with cerebral involvement - monoparesis, hemiparesis or hemiplegia
• with spinal cord involvement - partial myelitis, presenting with
hemiparesis/plegia and paraparesis/plegia, spasticity, stiffness,
painful spasms, sensory symptoms, sphincter involvement
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
6
b. Sensory symptoms:
• numbness, tingling and paraesthesias can be seen in 87% of
patients
• 34% of patients complain of sensory symptoms at initial presentation
• Lhermittes sign (trunk and limb paresthesias elicited by neck
flexion)
c. Fatigue is a common symptom in 83% of patients.
d. Pain, such as paraethesiaes or paroxysmal pains (trigeminal
neuralgia), is seen in 54% of patients
e. Visual disturbances due to optic nerve involvement are seen in 50%
of patients:
• unilateral ON is more common (20%) than bilateral ON at onset
(0.4%)
• painful blurring of vision, visual field (VF) defects and reduced
colour vision
f. Cognitive Impairment
g. Psychiatric symptoms such as depression, anxiety, and psychosis
h. Cortical symptoms - aphasia/dysphasia and epilepsy rarely occur
i. Brainstem and cerebellar disturbances - diplopia, internuclear
ophthalmoplegia, dysarthria, pseudo-bulbar palsy, vertigo, ataxia,
postural or action tremors and others
j. Paroxysmal attacks of motor or brainstem phenomenon - painful
tonic muscle contraction of the limbs, trunk and face
k. Bowel and bladder involvement
l. Other features that can occur include:
• heat intolerance and Uthoffs phenomenon (symptomatic worsening
with increases in body temperature)
• extrapyramidal symptoms
• sexual dysfunction
• headaches
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
7
6. CLINICALLY ISOLATED SYNDROME, OPTIC NEURITIS AND
TRANSVERSE MYELITIS
6.1 Clinically Isolated Syndrome
Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) is the first clinical episode, lasting
≥24 hours in which a patient has symptoms and signs suggestive of an
inflammatory demyelinating disorder of the CNS that is at high risk of
development of MS.26 - 27, level III
In 85% of patients with MS, possible presentations of CIS at onset
include:21 level III; 27, level III
• ON (20 - 25%)
• transverse myelitis (partial) (30 - 50%)
• brainstem or cerebellar disease (25 - 30%)
• rarely cerebral hemisphere syndromes (5%)
However, only 30 - 70% of patients with CIS will convert to clinically
definite multiple sclerosis (CDMS) provided all other potential diagnosis
has been excluded within 2 to 5 years.27, level III
The term CIS is typically applied to:26, level III
• adults (aged 20 - 45 years) with an episode of subacute or acute
onset, which reaches a peak within 2 - 3 weeks and
• the episode should last for at least 24 hours and occur in the absence
of fever or infection, with no clinical features of encephalopathy
CIS is by definition isolated in time (monophasic) and also isolated in
space (monofocal) clinically, with signs indicating a lesion in the optic
nerve, spinal cord, brainstem or cerebellum, or a cerebral hemisphere.
Occasionally, it is multifocal.26, level III
The presentation of CIS affects the disease course and prognosis as
shown in Table 1.27, level III; 28, level II-2
Table 1. Features of CIS affecting prognosis
Good prognosis
Young
Female sex
Good recovery from first attack
ON, isolated sensory symptoms
Long interval to second relapse
No disability after five years
Normal magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) brain/low lesion load
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) negative
for oligoclonal bands (OCBs)
Bad prognosis
Older age at onset
Male sex
Poor recovery from first attack
Efferent systems affected (motor, brainstem, cerebellar etc.)
High relapse rate in the first two to five years
Substantial disability after five years
Abnormal MRI brain with large lesion load, brain
atrophy, ≥2 spinal cord lesions,≥T1 lesions
CSF positive for oligoclonal bands
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
8
Diagnosis of CDMS can be made clinically if CIS patients have another
attack.29, level III However a second attack is not required if McDonald
2010 MRI criteria for dissemination in space (DIS) and dissemination in
time (DIT) is fulfilled at presentation.20, level III
Clinical factors associated with higher risk of conversion to CDMS
are:28, level II-2
• younger age at onset
• female
• non-white ethnicity
• greater number of functional systems affected at onset
• higher Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) at onset
MRI predicts risk for time to conversion of CIS to CDMS as follows:
• With the presence of asymptomatic but typical brain lesions, the
long-term risk is 60 - 80%.26, level III
• If MRI brain is normal apart from the symptomatic lesion, the longterm risk is 20%.26, level III
• Spinal cord lesions on MRI independently predicts a higher risk and
shorter time to CDMS conversion.30, level II-2
• Infratentorial lesions (especially in the brainstem) have higher risk
of conversion to CDMS.31, level II-3
• Risk for developing MS increases from 4% to 23% with the presence of
OCBs in CSF for patients who have normal MRI at presentation.
26, level III In patients with >than 10 lesions on brain MRI and OCB
positivity, the risk of CDMS increases to 64%.32, level II-3
6.2 Optic Neuritis
ON involves primary inflammation of the optic nerve. Although it may
be associated with various systemic autoimmune disorders, acute
demyelinating ON, which is the commonest form, is known to be
associated with MS.33, level III
i. Clinical Presentation
Acute demyelinating ON is a clinical diagnosis. It is more common in
women (67%) and usually presents between 20 to 50 years of age.
Patients with ON of the type seen in CIS or MS may present with the
following clinical features:20, level III; 33 - 34, level III
• eye pain
 present in more than 90% of cases
 worsens on eye movement and resolves within a week
• central visual loss
 usually monocular in MS, rarely bilateral at onset (0.4%) but
more commonly involves both eyes in NMOSD at onset (11 -
20%)35, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
9
 it typically progresses over hours to days; recovery begins
within two to four weeks and visual acuity (VA) recovers to 6/6
or better by one month in 75% of patients with MS
 progression of visual loss beyond two weeks or lack of any
improvement after four weeks should prompt the consideration
of other differential diagnoses and the appropriate investigations
• ocular assessment reveals evidence of optic neuropathy
 reduced VA between 6/6 to “No Perception to Light (NPL)”
 presence of relative afferent pupillary defect
 colour vision loss
 VF loss (classically central scotoma)
 reduced contrast sensitivity (CS)
• funduscopy
 optic disc findings at presentation
- two thirds have normal optic discs (retrobulbar neuritis)
- one third have mild and diffuse optic disc swelling
 optic-nerve head atrophy (disc pallor) which occurs after a few
weeks in spite of VA recovery
• atypical features of ON (if baseline MRI is normal)
 retinal haemorrhages
 markedly swollen optic nerve
 retinal exudates
 absence of pain
 NPL vision at onset
 absence of any visual recovery by 30 days
Refer to Appendix 3 on Differential Diagnosis of Optic Disc Swelling.
ii. Differential Diagnosis of demyelinating ON33 - 34, level III
• Other autoimmune conditions [such as sarcoidosis, systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Sjogren’s syndrome] or infective
conditions (such as syphilis, tuberculosis, viral infections, cat
scratch and Lyme disease)
• Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder
• Compressive optic neuropathy
• Anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy
• Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy
iii. Investigations33 - 34, level III
The following investigations are useful in the assessment of ON
including to rule out the above differential diagnosis (refer to Chapter
on Differential Diagnosis):
• MRI orbit, brain and spine
• OCBs in CSF (investigations based on suspected differential diagnosis)
• Visual Evoked Potentials (VEPs)
 VEPs show prolonged P100 latencies and/reduced amplitudes of
waveforms in 65% patients with ON
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
10
• Optical Coherence Tomography
 Retinal Nerve Fibre Layer Thickness of <70 µm predicts a worse
VA outcome at least three months after ON (p=0.0193).36, level II-2
iv. ON AND CDMS33 - 34, level III
About 15 - 20% of MS patients may first present with ON. Apart from
that, ON can present during the course of MS in 50% of patients.
Neuroimaging of the brain can help to stratify the risk of MS in ON (refer
to yellow box below).
• Among patients with a first episode of ON, 38% will develop MS over
ten years.
• The risk of MS within 10 years after the first episode of ON increases
from 22% to 56% if at least one characteristic demyelinating white
matter lesion is present on baseline MRI brain.
• Over ten years, recurrent ON will develop in 48% of MS patients
compared with 24% of non-MS patients.
Recommendation 1
• All patients with isolated optic neuritis should be referred to an
ophthalmologist/neurologist for further assessment.
6.3 Transverse Myelitis
Transverse myelitis (TM) is a focal inflammatory disorder of the
spinal cord, resulting in motor, sensory and autonomic dysfunction.
Approximately one third of patients with TM have complete recovery or
minimal deficits, one third are left with moderate degree of permanent
disability and another third have severe disability.37, level III
TM can be divided into two subgroups based on the spinal cord
involvement:
i. Acute Complete TM (ACTM)
a. An acute or subacute inflammatory process of the spinal cord
causing a symmetrical and moderate to severe loss of function
distal to that level.38
b. Usually lesions are centrally located, extending >3 vertebral
segments in length, with cord oedema and gadolinium (Gd)-
enhancement in acute lesions.39, level III
ii. Acute Partial TM (APTM)
a. Incomplete or patchy involvement of at least one spinal segment
with mild to moderate weakness, asymmetrical or dissociated
sensory symptoms, and occasionally bladder involvement.38
b. Lesions are usually peripherally located with a predilection for
lateral and posterior areas of the cord, and involvement of <2
spinal cord segments.39, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
11
MS-associated TM is usually a partial myelitis, milder in severity with
sensory predominant symptoms.
The differential diagnoses for TM include inflammatory, infective (bacterial,
viral, parasitic, and fungal), and paraneoplastic conditions.40 level III
Figure 1 shows the differential diagnosis of demyelinating spinal cord
syndrome.
Isolated spinal cord syndrome
Typical for MS
• Evolution over hours to days
• Partial myelitis
• Purely sensory
• Deafferented upper limb
• Lhermitte’s sign
• Partial Brown-Sequard
• Spontaneous remission
Atypical for MS
• Hyperacute onset or insidiously
progressive
• Complete TM
• Sharp sensory level
• Radicular pain
• Areflexia
• Failure to remit
MRI clearly
indicates a non-MS
diagnosis such as
spinal cord
compression
Consider other
diagnoses
Brain and spinal
cord MRI
Normal
Abnormal lesions
consistent with
demyelination
High risk for MS
(60 - 90%)
Review McDonald Criteria
Low risk for MS
(20%)
• Compression such as intervertebral
disc, tumour
• Ischaemia/infarction
• Other inflammatory/Autoimmune
conditions such as Neuromyelitis
Optica Spectrum Disorder (NMOSD),
lupus
• Infection such as syphilis. tuberculosis
• Toxic/nutritional/metabolic
such as B12 deficiency, nitrous oxide
toxicity
• Arteriovenous malformation
• Non-cord “mimicks” such as
Gullain-Barre syndrome, myasthenia
gravis
MRI, CSF neurophysiological,
serologic and other investigations
as appropriate
Figure 1. Differential diagnosis upon presentation with
demyelinating spinal cord syndrome
Source: Miller DH, Weinshenker BG, Filippi M, et al. Differential diagnosis of suspected
multiple sclerosis: a consensus approach. Mult Scler. 2008 Nov;14(9):1157-74
At least 13% of patients with Idiopathic Acute TM will convert to MS.
41, level II-2 The risk factors associated with conversion to MS are:
• types of TM - conversion rate of 10.3% in APTM (95% CI 4.1 to
23.6) as compared with 0 - 2% in ACTM on five years follow-up38
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
12
• MS-like MRI brain abnormalities - conversion rate of approximately
80% in abnormal MRI group as compared with 10% in normal MRI
group by three to five years of disease onset38
• longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions (LESCLs), defined as
extending over at least three vertebral segments - LESCLs are more
likely to have NMO than MS (p=0.0036).38 Spinal cord MRI lesions
in Asian patients with classical MS are similar to that of Caucasians.
42, level III
• anti-Aquaporin 4 antibody (anti-AQP4 Ab) - ACTM with LESCLs
in the presence of anti-AQP4 Ab positivity is highly sensitive and
specific for NMO.38 In the presence of seronegative anti-AQP4
Ab, other differential diagnosis should be carefully excluded in
view of the heterogeneity of this condition.43 - 44, level III
• OCBs in CSF - conversion rate is 33% if OCBs are positive as
compared with only 2% if it is negative. In contrast, the combination
of negative OCB testing and IgG index ≤0.7 yields a very low
likelihood of MS conversion (NPV of 100%).41, level II-2
The red flags based on MRI features which are not supportive of TM
are:39, level III; 45 - 46, level III
• vascular cause
 elongated ‘‘pencil-like’’ lesion in the anterior cord (anterior
spinal artery occlusion)
 triangular lesion in posterior cord (posterior spinal artery
occlusion)
 abnormal flow voids or tortuous vessels on the surface of the
cord (arteriovenous fistulas)
 presence of haemosiderin deposition indicating old bleed
• tumour
 persisting Gd-enhancement months after treatment of an acute
myelitis
 cavitary lesions, leptomeningeal enhancement
 pathological fracture of the vertebral bodies (spinal cord tumour
or metastasis)
• infective cause
 dural or leptomeningeal enhancement
• APTM, MS-like brain MRI abnormalities and OCBs positivity in CSF
are associated with a higher risk of conversion to CDMS.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
13
7. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for MS and its clinically isolated syndromes
can be extensive as demyelination affects any part of the CNS. In the
differential diagnosis, it is important to rule out conditions that may mimick
the presentation of MS.47 - 48, level III
In making the diagnosis, it is necessary to:47 - 51 level III
a. determine whether patient’s age, symptoms and its temporal
evolution are likely/consistent with MS
b. exclude diseases not likely to be MS such as vasculitis, stroke and
others
c. exclude other Idiopathic Inflammatory Demyelinating Diseases
(IIDDs) not fulfilling criteria for MS such as:
• NMO and its spectrum disorders (NMOSD)
• Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
• Isolated ON, TM (not MS or NMO) and recurrent ON such as
chronic relapsing inflammatory optic neuropathy and recurrent
TM (unclassified as MS or NMO)
d. Other rarer IIDDs: acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalopathy and
variants of MS such as Marburg’s disease, Balo’s concentric
sclerosis, tumefactive presentations and others.
• IIDDs is a term which encompasses all demyelinating diseases that
includes:
 MS
 NMOSD
 ADEM
 clinically isolated syndrome suggestive/not suggestive of MS
 recurrent ON and TM (unclassified as MS/NMOSD)
 other rarer IIDDs (refer text above)
Other differential diagnoses for MS include non-IIDDs such as:
• vascular causes: small-vessel ischaemic disease
• connective tissue disorders: SLE, Sjogren’s syndrome, Bechet’s
disease, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and other types of
CNS vasculitis
• granulomatous diseases: sarcoidosis
• neurodegenerative/metabolic diseases: subacute combined
degeneration of the spinal cord, mitochondrial disorders,
leukodystrophies and Susacs syndrome
• others: cerebral lymphomas, migraines, non-specific white
matter MRI lesions
Investigations in the differential diagnosis should be tailored according
to the type of IIDDs suspected and to rule out the underlying possible
causes for the differential diagnosis. Refer to Figure 2 on Steps in MS
Diagnosis.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
14
Figure 2. Steps in MS diagnosis
Source: Miller DH, Weinshenker BG, Filippi M, et al. Differential diagnosis of suspected
multiple sclerosis: a consensus approach. Mult Scler. 2008 Nov;14(9):1157-74
 In the diagnosis of MS, it is important:
1. to rule out other possible mimicks of MS such as inflammatory
and non-inflammatory non-demyelinating diseases of the CNS
2. to rule out other IIDDs especially NMO/NMOSD
Atypical Features for MS (“Identification of Red Flags”)
Certain atypical features are inconsistent with a diagnosis of MS and
recognition is important. Therefore, in the differential diagnosis identify
potential “Red Flags” which are unlikely to suggest MS, based on
demographics, clinical features, laboratory tests and neuroimaging.
47 - 49 level III; 51, level lll
1. The demographic and clinical “Red Flags” include:
• onset in childhood/over 50 years of age (exceptions exist)
• prominent family history
• persistently normal neurological examination
Symptoms consistent with
inflammatory demyelinating disease
(monofocal or multifocal syndromes)
Classify IIDD
(based on demographics,
clinical course,
specific symptoms and
signs, radiology,
laboratory tests)
No MS
(NMO, ADEM,
unclassified)
MS
established
MS not yet
established
Dissemination in
time and space
(Mcdonald criteria)
Historic pathway
for MS
diagnosis
Consistent with
prototypic MS
(include CIS)
Exclude non-demyelinating syndrome
(as appropriate based on demographics,
specific symptoms and signs,
clinical course, radiology, laboratory tests)
Determine diagnosis
non-inflammatory
demyelinating disease
(recognise red flags to suggest specific
diagnosis, or comprehensive
evaluation, if diagnosis is not apparent)
New diagnostic
pathway - enhanced
evaluation of
“no better explanation”
caveat in existing
diagnostic criteria
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
15
• abrupt onset
• presence of atypical clinical features such as
 encephalopathy
 altitudinal VF defects, persistent complete loss of vision
(unilateral/bilateral) with poor recovery after one month
 extrapyramidal symptoms, progressive ataxias or pyramidal
symptoms (myelopathies)
 area post-rema symptoms and hypothalamic disturbances:
intractable hiccough, vomiting, symptomatic narcolepsy
 cortical signs: dementia, seizures, aphasia, cortical blindness
 headaches, meningisimus, loss of hearing
 peripheral nerve symptoms, myopathy and others
 systemic symptoms suggestive of connective tissue diseases
and others
2. The laboratory and other paraclinical “Red Flags” are:
• abnormal connective tissue screens (false positives exist)
• low serum B12 levels, raised ESR
• serum angiotensin converting enzyme positivity, abnormal chest Xray
• positive anti-AQP4 Ab titres
• persistent CSF pleocytosis; white blood cells >50 cells/mm3,
presence of polymorphonuclear cells, proteins >80mg/dl
3. The neuroimaging “Red Flags” are:
• persistently normal MRI (brain and spine) or
• atypical MRI (brain and spine) with
 cortical, lacunar infarcts, haemorrhages, microhaemorrhages
 meningeal enhancement, hydrocephalus
 persistent Gd-enhancement (>3 months)/simultaneous
enhancement of all lesions
 linear medullary and periaqueductal lesions
 chiasmal lesions (acute phase)
 large infiltrative tumour-like cerebral/brainstem lesions
 longitudinally extensive contiguous spinal cord lesions extending
over ≥3 vertebral segments, centrally located in the post-acute
phase
 predominance of lesions at the cortical-subcortical junction
In the differential diagnosis of MS, clinical, demographic, paraclinical
and neuroimaging “Red Flags” should be identified as they may suggest
an alternative diagnosis to MS.
Neuromyelitis Optica
NMO has the following features:43 - 44, level III; 47, level III; 52, level II-2; 53, level III;
54, level II-3; 55 - 57, level III; 58, level II-2
• is an autoimmune humorally mediated inflammatory demyelinating
disorder of the CNS
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
16
• histopathologically, astrocytic damage, demyelination, neuronal
loss and necrosis predominate
• has a different prognosis and response to immunomodulatory
treatment compared with MS [refer to Table 2 on Differences
between MS and NMO and Appendix 4 on Treatment of NMO/
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD)]
• characterised by attacks of ON and longitudinally extensive TM
which are severe, often with incomplete recovery
• relapsing course in 80 - 90%, with 10% being monophasic
• females are predominantly affected
• is associated with an auto-antibody, termed as NMO-IgG or antiAQP4 Ab, against the Aquaporin-4 water channel on astrocytic
end-feet in the CNS; the discovery of this highly specific autoantibody has allowed for the:
 differentiation of MS and other IIDDs from NMO
 identification of limited forms of NMO termed ‘Neuromyelitis
optica spectrum disorders’
It is positive in 60 - 90% of cases of NMO and 50% of cases of
NMOSD, while negative in 10 - 40% of cases (seronegative NMO).
However, recently in 21.1% of patients with NMOSD negative for
anti-AQP4 Ab, a new autoantibody against myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (anti-MOG) has been reported.
Diagnostic criteria for NMO/NMOSD
• In 2006, the diagnostic criteria for NMO was revised with the
incorporation of the anti-AQP4 Ab (refer to Table 2 and Table 3).
It is 99% sensitive (95% CI 97 to 100) and 90% specific (95% CI
90 to 100) for the diagnosis of NMO.44, level III
• In 2007, the criteria were expanded to include limited forms of
NMO termed NMOSD, with the identification of the anti-AQP4 Ab
in other high risk syndromes for NMO (refer to Table 4).43, level III
• In 2015, a revision to the current diagnostic criteria has been
published which awaits validation and universal use.59, level III Refer
to Appendix 5.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
17
Table 2. Differences between MS and NMO
Source:
1. Morrow MJ, Wingerchuk D. Neuromyelitis optica. J Neuroophthalmol.
2012;32(2):154-66
2. Wingerchuk DM, Lennon VA, Lucchinetti CF, et al. The spectrum of neuromyelitis
optica. Lancet Neurol. 2007;6(9):805-815
Table 3. Diagnostic Criteria for NMO
Source: Wingerchuk DM, Lennon VA, Pittock SJ, et al. Revised diagnostic criteria for
neuromyelitis optica. Neurology. 2006;66(10):1485-1489
Features
Clinical onset
course
Secondary
progressive
course
Median age at
onset (years)
Sex (Female:Male)
MRI brain
MRI spinal cord
CSF (white
cells/differential
count)
CSF oligoclonal
bands
NMO-Ig G
Systemicautoimmune
disease
Severity of
relapse
Recovery from
relapses
Vision
MS
85% relapsing-remitting
15% primary progressive
Often
29
3 - 4:1
Periventricular white matter lesions,
subcortical lesions (Barkhof criteria)
1 - 2 segments long, short segment
lesions, peripherally located
<50/mm3, all mononuclear
85%
Negative
Occasional
Usually mild to moderate
Usually fair to good
Usually unilateral, with good recovery of
vision within one month
NMO
80 - 90% relapsing-remitting
10 - 20% monophasic
Extremely Rare
39
9:1
Usually normal or atypical for MS
lesions, non-specific lesions,
brainstem, diencephalon lesions,
hypothalamic, peri-ependymal
periventricular, corpus callosal
lesions
Longitudinally extensive lesions, ≥3
vertebral segments, central in the
post-acute phase
Often >50 cells/mm3, polymorphonuclear and mononuclear cells
Infrequent (10 - 15%)
60 - 90% positive
Occasional
Usually moderate to severe
Usually fair to poor
Unilateral or bilateral with poor
recovery of vision
Absolute (at least 1 attack of each of the following)
ON
TM
Supportive (at least 2 of the following 3)
Brain MRI: Onset brain MRI normal or not meeting the diagnostic criteria for MS
Spinal cord MRI: Contiguous spinal cord lesion extending over ≥3 vertebral segments
NMO-Ig G seropositivity
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
18
Table 4. NMOSD
Source: Wingerchuk DM, Lennon VA, Lucchinetti CF, et al. The spectrum of
neuromyelitis optica. Lancet Neurol. 2007;6(9):805-815
Brain involvement at onset in NMOSD:
• has now been recognised; reported in 43 - 70% of NMOSD patients
at onset and 50 - 85% of patients with NMO
• may be symptomatic or asymptomatic
• MRI brain findings in NMOSD include:60 - 61, level III
 periependymal lesions surrounding the ventricular systems
- diencephalic lesions around the third ventricle and cerebral
aqueduct
- dorsal brainstem adjacent to fourth ventricle (area postrema
and nucleus tractus solitarius)
- corpus callosal lesions (extensive, large edematous)
 hemispheric white matter lesions
 lesions involving the corticospinal tracts (unilateral or bilateral)
 enhancing lesions and non specific white matter lesions
Features of spinal cord lesions in NMO/NMOSD include:6, level III; 62, level II-2
• longitudinally extensive contiguous/linear lesions
• three or more vertebral segments in length
• mostly situated in the cervical/cervicothoracic region
• centrally located in the post-acute phase on axial cord scans
• associated with T1 hypointensity on sagittal scans and cord
atrophy
Refer to Figure 3 on MRI spinal cord findings in NMOSD.
NMOSD
Neuromyelitis optica
Limited forms of NMO
• Idiopathic single or recurrent events of longitudinally extensive myelitis (≥3 vertebral
segment spinal cord lesions seen on MRI spine)
• ON (recurrent or simultaneous bilateral)
Asian optic spinal MS
ON or longitudinally extensive myelitis associated with systemic autoimmune disease
ON or myelitis associated with brain lesions typical of NMO (hypothalamic, corpus callosal,
periventricular or brainstem
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
19
A
B
D
C
A and B. Sagittal T2WI-Longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesion
involving the cervico-thoracic region. C is axial T1WI with Gdenhancement. D is central gray matter lesion on T2WI with Gdenhancement.
Figure 3. Spinal cord MRI lesions characteristic of NMOSD
Acute Demyelinating Encephalomyelitis (ADEM)47, level III; 63, level III
• An acute autoimmune demyelinating disease of CNS
• Triggered by viral infections and immunisations
• Usually a monophasic course
• Characterised by:
 subacute encephalopathy evolving over one week to three
months, disturbance of consciousness and/or behavioural
abnormality
 seizures or coma
 multifocal symptoms and signs: cerebellar or cerebral
 ON or TM
 MRI brain shows symmetrical multifocal or diffuse brain lesions
- supra/infratentorial
- deep grey matter can be involved
- simultaneous enhancement may occur
 spinal cord lesions when present are longitudinally extensive
 CSF pleocytosis, transient rise of CSF IgG/OCBs
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
20
8. NATURAL HISTORY
The overall course of MS can be classified into the following categories:
a. Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS)64, level II-2; 65, level III
• This is defined as acute worsening of neurological function
followed by a variable degree of recovery, with a stable course
between attacks.
• Approximately 85% of patients initially fall into this category.
b. Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis (SPMS)64, level II-2; 65, level III
• It is defined by an initial relapsing-remitting disease course,
followed by gradual progression with or without relapses and
plateaus.
• Estimated median time to secondary progressive onset is 15
years.
• More than 80% of patients develop secondary course after 25
years from onset of RRMS.
c. Primary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis (PPMS)21, level III; 65, level III
• This refers to a gradual, nearly continuous worsening baseline
with minor fluctuations but no distinct relapses.
• It affects 10 to 20% of patients.
d. Progressive Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis (PRMS)21, level III; 65, level III
• This is defined as progressive disease from onset, with subsequent
relapses, with or without full recovery. The periods between
relapses are characterised by continuing disease progression.
• It affects less than 5% of individuals with MS.
The following figure illustrates the four categories of MS mentioned
above:
Figure 4. Categories of MS
Source: Diagnosis, Treatments, and Prognosis in MS: A Nursing Perspective. Available
from: http://www.medscape.org/viewarticle/739432)
Relapsing-Remitting MS
Secondary-Progressive MS
Primary-Progressive MS
Progressive-Relapsing MS
Time
Time
Time
Time
Increasing Disability
Increasing Disability
Increasing Disability
Increasing Disability
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
21
The clinical course in MS can also be defined based on severity as
below:65 - 66, level III
a. Benign MS
• Patient with minimal (EDSS ≤3.0) or no disability 10 to 15 years
after disease onset.
b. Malignant MS
• Rapid and progressive course of illness, leading to significant
disability in multiple neurological systems or death in a relatively
short time after disease onset.
Estimated median time from disease onset to EDSS 3, 6, 8 and 10 are
10, 18, 28 and 63 years respectively. The second attack usually occurs
after a median of two years. The median interval from onset to EDSS 3
is approximately eight years.64, level II-2 Refer to Appendix 6 on Kurtzke
Expanded Disability Status Scale.
The factors associated with a higher conversion rate to SPMS are:64, level II-2
• short first inter-attack interval
• more relapses in the first two years
This emphasises the importance of early initiation of disease modifying
treatment (DMT).
In 2011, the International Advisory Committee on Clinical Trials of
MS re-examined the MS disease phenotypes and revised its clinical
descriptions of relapsing and progressive MS. While retaining core
features above, it included assessment of disease activity based on
clinical relapses, imaging findings and disease progression as the 2013
revisions.The progressive relapsing category was eliminated and it is
now called primary progressive MS with disease activity. CIS is now
included under the spectrum of MS.67, level III Refer to Appendix 5.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
22
9. DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The currently accepted criteria for MS diagnosis are the Mc Donalds
diagnostic criteria. The criteria includes clinical and paraclinical
laboratory investigations. The criteria emphasise the need to demonstrate
DIS and DIT, and to exclude alternative diagnoses. Refer to Appendix
7 for MRI Brain Criteria on DIS and DIT.
These criteria have resulted in an earlier diagnosis of RRMS with
moderate sensitivity and specificity. The current revision of the McDonald
criteria in 2010 also reinforces the importance of excluding other IIDDs
such as NMOSD by doing anti-AQP4 Ab testing with validated assays.
Diagnosis of CDMS requires evidence of ≥2 attacks with objective
clinical evidence of ≥2 lesions on examination. However, objective
clinical evidence of one lesion, corroborated by reasonable historical
evidence of a prior attack may also be used.
If the above definition for CDMS is only partially fulfilled, the diagnosis
can still be made by using McDonald criteria 2010 on MRI for
dissemination in space and time. The current criteria also provides for
the diagnosis of PPMS. Refer to Table 5 and Table 6.
Table 5. The McDonald criteria 2010 for MS diagnosis
If criteria are fulfilled and there is no better explanation for the clinical presentation,
the diagnosis is “MS”. If criteria are not completely met, the diagnosis is “possible
MS”. If another diagnosis arises during the evaluation that better explains the
clinical presentation, the diagnosis is “not MS”.
aFor attack (refer to definition in Chapter on Clinical Features) - Some historical
events characteristic of MS can be accepted but before a definite diagnosis can
be made, at least one attack must be corroborated by findings on neurological
examination, VEPs (in patients with prior visual disturbance) or MRI consistent
with demyelination in the area of the CNS implicated in the historical report of
symptoms.
bReasonable historical evidence for one past attack in the absence of
documented objective neurological findings can include historical events with
symptoms and evolution characteristic for a prior inflammatory demyelinating
event; at least one attack however must be supported by objective findings.
Clinical presentation
≥2 attacksa: objective clinical evidence of ≥2
lesions or objective clinical evidence of 1
lesion with reasonable historical evidence of
a prior attackb
2 attacksa; with objective clinical evidence of
1 lesion
1 attacka; objective clinical evidence of ≥2
lesions
1 attacka; objective clinical evidence of 1
lesion (clinically isolated syndrome)
Additional data needed for MS diagnosis
Nonec
DIS on MRI* or await a further attack
implicating a different CNS site
DIT on MRI* or await a second attack
Need to demonstrate both DIS and DIT on
MRI or await a second attack (showing DIT
and DIS)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
23
cNo additional tests are required but it is desirable that the diagnosis of MS be
made with access to imaging based on this critera. If neuroimaging or other
tests (CSF for OCBs) are negative alternative diagnoses must be considered.
Source: Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple
sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(2):292302
Table 6. McDonald criteria 2010 for diagnosis of PPMS
dGd-enhancing lesions not required, symptomatic brainstem or cord lesions are
excluded.
Source: Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple
sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(2):292302
Table 7 demonstrates the moderate sensitivity and specificity of
McDonald criteria 2010 applied in different populations.
Table 7. Sensitivity and specificity of McDonald criteria 2010
in different populations
Recommendation 2
• The McDonald 2010 criteria should be used in the diagnosis of
multiple sclerosis.
Clinical presentation
Insidious neurological
progression
suggestive of MS
(PPMS)
Additional data needed for MS diagnosis
One year of disease progression (retrospectively or prospectively
determined) plus two or three of the followingd:
• Evidence of DIS in the brain [refer to Chapter on
Investigations (Neuroimaging)]
• Evidence of DIS in the spinal cord based on ≥2 T2 lesions in the
cord
• Positive CSF (isoelectric focusing evidence of OCBs
and/elevated IgG index)
Population (studies)
European68, level II-2
(at two years)
Spanish69, level III
DIS
(at two years)
DIT
(at two years)
Korean (DIS)70, level III
(at two years)
Sensitivity (range)
76.6%
(64.9 - 85.3)
85.71%
(73.33 - 92.90)
52.63%
(37.26 - 67.52)
75.5%
(65.0 - 84.4)
Specificity (range)
60.2%
(53.0 - 67.0)
66.67%
(43.75 - 59.26)
75.00%
(50.50 - 89.82)
60.0%
(48.6 - 69.7)
Accuracy (range)
Not available
66.67%
(43.75 - 83.72)
59.26%
(45.97 - 71.32)
68.1%
(57.2 - 77.3)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
24
10. INVESTIGATIONS
The mainstay of investigations in patients with MS is neuroimaging;
MRI is supported in certain situations by paraclinical tests and other
investigations to rule out potential differential diagnoses (refer to
Section on Differential Diagnoses, tailoring investigations according to
clinical suspicion).
10.1 Neuroimaging
Since 2001, brain MRI has been included in the evaluation of patients
with suspected MS by demonstrating dissemination of disease in
space (DIS) and time (DIT).71, level III It assists in earlier diagnosis of
MS by enabling visualisation of lesions in the brain that are clinically
silent. However, a diagnosis of MS should not be made simply on the
basis of MRI findings without the appropriate clinical history, signs and
symptoms.72, level III
To date, there have been a number of revisions to the McDonald
criteria (refer to Appendix 7. The latest revision of 2010 simplifies the
MRI criteria for easier implementation in both clinical and research
settings.20, level III
a. Dissemination in Space
DIS on MRI is demonstrated by the presence of multiple lesions in
characteristic locations, some of which can be clinically silent.
In the revised McDonald criteria 2010, ≥1 T2-hyperintense lesion in at
least two of the four characteristic locations are required for DIS:
• juxtacortical
• periventricular
• infratentorial
• spinal cord*
*If a subject has a brainstem or spinal cord syndrome, the symptomatic
lesions are excluded from the criteria and do not contribute to lesion
count. Gd-enhancement of lesion is not required for DIS. Refer to
Appendix 7.
Characteristics of spinal cord lesion in MS:
• more common in cervical than thoracic cord
• vertical length of the lesion is less than two vertebral bodies
• asymmetric in axial section (occupies only part of the spinal
cord)71, level III
MRI of the spinal cord can differentiate MS from other neurological
diseases (OND) which encompass various inflammatory disorders
and cerebrovascular diseases. Brain images are abnormal in all MS
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
25
patients and in 65% of OND patients. Abnormal cord images are found
in 92% of MS and 6% of OND patients. The combination of brain and
spinal cord images increases the accuracy of MS diagnosis compared
with brain images alone.30, level II-2; 73, level II-2
b. Dissemination in Time
DIT on MRI can be shown by either one of the two ways based on
McDonald criteria 2010:
• The presence of both Gd-enhancing and non-enhancing lesions
in a single scan provided that these lesions are not due to nonMS pathology.68, level II-2 This single early scan must demonstrate
DIS and can be performed at any time after the onset of CIS.
• The presence of new enhancing lesions or new/enlarging T2
lesions on follow-up scans. In the absence of both Gd-enhancing
and non- enhancing lesions on their initial MRI, serial imaging
showing a new enhancing/new T2 lesion will still be required to
establish DIT.20, level III; 74, level III
Refer to Appendix 7 for images.
Table 8 compares the sensitivity and specificity of the different MRI
diagnostic criteria. The McDonald criteria 2010 have a moderate
sensitivity and specificity for DIS and DIT.20, level III; 74, level III
Table 8. Performance of various MRI diagnostic criteria for
predicting conversion of CIS into CDMS
* The McDonald 2010 criteria incorporates the Swanton neuroimaging criteria
Source: Montalban X, Tintoré M, Swanton J, et al. MRI criteria for MS in patients with
clinically isolated syndromes. Neurology. 2010;74(5):427-434
Recommendation 3
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine utilising the
MRI Diagnostic Criteria* should be used in the diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis.
*Refer to preceding text on DIS and DIT.
10.2 Paraclinical Investigations
OCBs and evoked potentials (EPs) are valuable as supportive tools
in diagnosis and differential diagnosis of MS. These investigations are
helpful in assessing the risk of CIS conversion to CDMS, support the
DIS and DIT
McDonald 2001
McDonald 2005
McDonald 2010
Sensitivity
47.1%
60.0%
71.8%
Specificity
91.1%
87.8%
87.0%
Accuracy
73.1%
76.4%
80.8%
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
26
inflammatory demyelinating nature of the underlying condition, rule out
alternative differential diagnosis and in the diagnosis of PPMS.20, level III
a. Oligoclonal Bands
IgG OCBs represent IgG unique to the CSF and they are indicative
of plasma cell immune response in the CNS.75, level III The finding of
OCBs in CSF but not in the serum and/elevated IgG index supports the
diagnosis of MS.76, level III In Caucasians, OCBs were positive in about
68% of CIS and 84 - 88% of patients with MS.77, level II-2 A hospital-based
study in Malaysia showed positive CSF OCBs in 57.6% of patients with
MS.78, level III
A systematic review of MS showed that CSF OCBs had sensitivities
between 69% and 91% with specificities between 59% and 94% for
the diagnosis of MS. When combined with MRI, the sensitivity and
specificity were further enhanced.79, level II-2
Four percent of CIS patients with normal MRI and negative OCBs
developed CDMS compared with 23% in those with normal MRI but
positive OCBs.32, level II-2
b. Evoked Potentials
EPs tests are studies to measure the electrical activity of the brain
in response to stimulation of specific sensory nerve pathways, thus
detecting the slowing of electrical conduction due to demyelination in
the regions of the CNS which are clinically silent.80, level II-2
In a systematic review of moderate quality diagnostic studies, patients
suspected to have MS with abnormal VEPs were 2.5 - 9 times more
likely to develop CDMS compared with patients with normal VEPs.
VEPs sensitivities ranged from 25% to 83%. Somatosensory EPs were
possibly useful to identify patients at increased risk for developing
CDMS, but there was insufficient evidence to recommend brainstem
auditory EPs.81, level II-2
However, a more recent systematic review showed that the current data
did not justify applying EPs to diagnose MS.79, level II-2
Recommendation 4
• Cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal bands and evoked potentials may be
useful in the diagnostic workup for multiple sclerosis.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
27
11. MONITORING DISEASE ACTIVITY AND RISK OF PROGRESSION
Disease activity and risk of progression in MS can be measured by
looking at:82 - 83, level II-2; 84, level II-3; 85, level I
• clinical relapses
• change in disability over a given time period assessed at two time
points as measured by the EDSS
• neuroimaging (presence of new or enlarging T2-weighted lesions
and Gd-enhancing lesions)
These measures help in assessing whether a patient is truly stable or a
change or escalation in therapy should be considered.
a. Clinical relapses
Natural history studies have shown a modest correlation between the
occurrence of relapses in the first few years (2 - 5 years) of disease
onset and the risk of disability, progression to EDSS 6.0 and onset of
secondary progressive MS. Later in the disease course, the association
between relapses and progression is not as strong.64, level II-2; 86 - 87, level II-2
b. Measuring progression
Progression in MS is the term used to define steady worsening of
symptoms and signs over 6 - 12 months. The date at which progression
starts is assigned retrospectively, once the required 6 - 12 months
duration of continuous neurological worsening is confirmed. Disease
progression in MS can be monitored clinically using the EDSS.
Kurtzke’s Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) is the gold
standard for grading clinical impairment and disability in MS. EDSS is
an ordinal and categorical assessment (refer to Appendix 6). Time to
reach a selected level of EDSS is the best means to measure disease
progression.7, level III; 21, level III Refer to Figure 5 on EDSS.
Figure 5. The Expanded Disability Status Scale
Source: My-MS.org For Information on Multiple Sclerosis (Internet communication, 16
December 2014 at http://www.my-ms.org/ms.htm)
Death
Normal
neurological
function
No disability
with only
minimal signs
Minimal
disability
Moderaties
disability
Relatively
severe
disability
Disability
affects
full daily
activities
Assistance
required
to walk
& work
Essentially
restricted to
wheelchair
Restricted to
bed or
wheelchair
Bedridden
& unable to
communicate
effectively or
eat/shallow
0.0
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
EDSS
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
28
Disease progression is influenced by several factors:
• Sex88, level II 2
 Males have four times risk to reach EDSS 6 compared with
females (HR=4.39, 95% CI 2.13 to 9.03). More recent studies
(outside our search period) had suggested males progressed
faster in their EDSS in relapsing MS. But in primary progressive
MS, the rate of disability accumulation was equal in both
sexes.
• Age of onset21, level III
 Mean age of onset for relapsing MS is younger than progressive
MS (29.6 ± 9.5 years vs 39.3 ± 11.3 years; p<0.001).
 The time to EDSS 4 or EDSS 6 is significantly longer in
relapsing MS compared with progressive MS.
• Symptoms at onset88, level II 2
 Motor and brainstem symptoms at onset are associated with
an 8.1-fold and 13.1-fold increased risk to EDSS 6 respectively
[HR=8.1 (95% CI 1.06 to 61.97) and HR=13.1 (95% CI 1.71 to
100.99) respectively].
Recommendation 5
• Disease progression in multiple sclerosis should be assessed clinically
by using Kurtzke’s Extended Disability Status Scale upon diagnosis and
follow-up.
c. Neuroimaging
In MS, T2-weighted (T2WI) and Gd-enhanced T1-weighted (T1Gd) MRI scans measure plaque burden and breakdown of the BBB
respectively. These sequences are widely used outcome measures
for monitoring disease activity in clinical trials and clinical practice. A
number of studies have shown significant correlation between MRI
activity and risk of conversion to CDMS and modest correlation with risk
of disease progression especially in the early years.89, level II-2; 90, level III
However it cannot be denied that in some patients, clinical-radiological
mismatch exists whereby an increase in MRI disease activity is not
always accompanied by relapses, worsening in clinical presentation or
disability and vice versa.
Brain atrophy is another promising complementary imaging biomarker
of MS. However currently it has limited use in daily clinical practice and
is more of a tool for research purposes or as an outcome measure in
drug trials.
i. T2-lesions
In a study on CIS and CDMS patients, baseline MRI findings for the
whole cohort were predictive for disability of the disease.89, level II-2
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
29
In this whole cohort:89 level II-2
• T2-lesion volume at all time-points (0, 5, 10, 14 and 20 years)
correlated with 20-year EDSS follow-up (rs ranging from 0.48 to 0.67)
• a significant correlation between the change in T2-lesion volume and
concurrent change of EDSS was found in the first 14 years, and this
correlation was strongest in the first five years [rs= 0.69 (95% CI 0.41
to 0.72)]
For those who developed CDMS:89 level II-2
• similar correlations were also demonstrated, where the T2 lesion
volume at all time-points (0, 5, 10, 14 and 20 years) was significantly
correlated with 20 year EDSS (rs ranging from 0.53 to 0.57)
• baseline MRI findings in CIS were predictive of the development of
CDMS
CIS patients with an abnormal MRI scan at presentation were more
likely to convert to CDMS and had shorter median time of conversion
than those with a normal scan at presentation:89, level II-2
• 21% CIS patients with normal baseline MRI converted to CDMS and
median time of conversion was six years
• 82% CIS patients with an abnormal baseline MRI convert to CDMS
and median time of conversion was two years
ii. Gd-enhancing lesions
Contrast enhancement by using a Gd-containing agent increases the
efficacy of MRI and is widely practised for the diagnosis and initial
evaluation of MS.
A meta-analysis on patients with MS showed that although Gdenhancing MRI was a predictor of relapses, it was not a strong one for
cumulative impairment or disability:91, level II-2
• RR for relapse was 1.2 in the first year (p=0.020) and 1.59 in the
second year (p=0.010).
• Neither the initial scan nor monthly scans over six months were
predictive of change in the EDSS in the subsequent 12 months or 24
months.
However more recent longitudinal studies in MS patients treated with
interferons and glatiramer acetate showed that new T2 lesions and
Gd-enhancing lesions was modestly associated with risks of further
relapses and disability progression.82, level II-2; 84, level II-2; 92, level II-2 A
systematic review of MS patients with poor response to interferons
revealed that new Gd-enhancing lesions and ≥2 T2-weighted lesions
increased the risks of further relapses and disability progression.93, level I
• In CIS patients, abnormal baseline MRI is predictive of conversion to
CDMS.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
30
• T2-lesions on MRI brain should be monitored as it:
 is predictive of conversion from CIS to CDMS
 modestly correlates with risk of long-term disability (in the early
years)
 may be used to monitor treatment response, risk of further
relapses and worsening of disability in patients treated with
disease modifying therapies (DMTs)
• Gd-enhancing lesions on MRI brain should be monitored because it:
 is a predictor of risk of further relapses
 may be used to monitor treatment response as it correlates with
risk of further relapses and worsening disability in patients treated
with disease modifying therapies
• Cerebral and cord atrophy
Brain atrophy is a recognised clinical trial outcome measure in
monitoring disease progression and evaluating the impact of new
treatment strategies in MS. Both global and regional brain atrophy
in MS are studied using qualitative or quantitative methods in mainly
research settings. Studies have shown that the rate of brain volume
loss in patients with MS is higher than normal subjects, ranging from
0.5% to 1.3% annually.94, level III
Brain atrophy develops in different structures of the brain (whole
brain, grey matter or white matter) and in all stages of MS including
the earliest stage of the disease ie CIS.89, level III Whole brain atrophy
has a stronger but moderate association with physical disability. It is
a stronger predictor for future disability than T1-hypointense and T2hyperintense volume.95, level III The grey matter volume is the strongest
independent predictor of physical disability and cognitive impairment
as measured by the EDSS and Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test
respectively.96, level III However, brain atrophy assessment in daily clinical
practice has limited value currently due to heterogeneity in trial data,
lack of consensus in both method of measurement and criteria for
assessment. In the future, it may gain more importance.
Spinal cord gray matter atrophy is significantly correlated with MS
disability as measured by EDSS in patients with relapsing and
progressive MS.97, level II-2
Recommendation 6
• Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain should be used in the
monitoring of disease activity in multiple sclerosis.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
31
• Follow-up MRI72, level III; 98, level III
Clinical indications for follow-up MR imaging of the brain are:
• reassessment of disease burden for monitoring of disease
activity and treatment response; a rational approach is baseline
assessment with follow-up annually in patients on treatment to
assess for subclinical disease activity99, level III
• reassessment with MRI may be sooner if there are concerns
about the patient’s clinical activity and disease course99, level III
• after switching DMT i.e. repeat MRI in six months
• assessment for DIT within 6 - 12 months in high risk CIS and 12
- 24 months in low risk CIS
• assessment of risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(PML); every 12 months in patients with JCV negative, every 3 - 6
months in those with JCV positive and in those on natalizumab
≥18 months
• suspicion of a secondary diagnosis
Indications for MRI spine are:
• CIS with or without spinal cord symptoms (TM) especially with
inconclusive MRI brain findings to support the diagnosis of MS
• strong clinical suspicion for MS but with no findings on brain MRI
• to clarify the diagnosis of possible MS in cases of non-specific
white matter lesions on the brain MRI
• PPMS
On follow-up, the radiologist has to provide several measures that are
of value in following lesions in the brain, which include:
• number of new or enlarging T2-hyperintense lesions
• number of Gd-enhancing lesions
• T1-hypointense lesions (‘black holes’)
• Neuroimaging parameters in monitoring MS disease activity are:
 T2-weighted lesions (new or enlarging lesions)
 Gd-enhancing T1-weighted lesions
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
32
12. REFERRAL
Patients with clinical features suggestive of MS and a high index of
suspicion for CIS, in particular ON and TM, require a referral to a
neurologist for further investigations. The diagnosis of MS should not be
made on the grounds of MRI findings alone.100 The urgency of referral
should be guided by the acuteness and severity of clinical presentation.
After the diagnosis of MS is made, the frequency of follow-up depends
on the clinical course of MS, taking into consideration acute relapses,
response to treatment and the need for multidisciplinary intervention.
A comprehensive review of all aspects of care should be done at least
once a year.100
Refer to Algorithm 1 on Care Pathway for Referral and Management
of MS.
Recommendation 7
• Patients with clinical features highly suggestive of multiple sclerosis
should be referred to a neurologist.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
33
13. TREATMENT
The management of MS involves:
• treatment of acute attacks (this includes CIS and relapses in
CDMS)
• prevention of relapses
• symptomatic treatment
The goals of therapy in relapsing-remitting MS are:
• to reduce the incidence and severity of relapses
• to decrease MRI disease activity
• to slow or delay disability progression
With the advent of newer therapies, there has been a paradigm
shift in therapeutic objectives with the concept of “Treat to the target”
and no evidence of disease activity being touted which is defined
as:101 - 103, level III
• no evidence of confirmed relapses
• no evidence of MRI activity (new T2/enlarging T2/Gd-enhancing
lesions)
• no evidence of disease progression
• (more recently) no evidence of annual brain volume loss >0.4%
Currently, it is more of a research metric for efficacy in drug trials and
the ability to achieve this as well as applicability in daily clinical practice
still needs further investigation.
Refer to Appendix 9 for Suggested Drug Dosages and Side Effects
in MS.
13.1 Treatment of Acute Attacks and Relapses
The goal of treating MS relapses is to decrease the duration and
intensity of neurological dysfunction. It is important to identify pseudoexacerbations due to infection (commonly urinary tract infection/
upper respiratory tract infection), stress, fever and heat exposure,
and treat this first. Disabling relapses need treatment. Relapses such
as pure sensory attacks with minimal disability may only need close
observation.104, level III
a. Glucocorticoids
Methylprednisolone is a synthetic corticosteroid used to treat acute
attacks and relapses of MS. It is widely distributed to the tissues and
able to cross the BBB. It dampens the inflammatory cascades, inhibits
the activation and invasion of T cells into the CNS
In a Cochrane systematic review, steroids or adrenocorticotropic
hormone were more efficacious compared to placebo in the treatment
of acute relapse in MS at one week, five weeks and one year followManagement of Multiple Sclerosis
34
up. The doses of intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone ranged between
500 to 1000 mg daily for three to five days. Gastrointestinal symptoms
were more common but non-significantly different in IV high dose
methylprednisolone than placebo.105, level I
In another Cochrane systematic review on acute relapse of CDMS,
oral methylprednisolone was as efficacious as IV methylprednisolone
in terms of improvement of EDSS and MRI Gd-enhancement activity
at four weeks. The doses of methylprednisolone (oral or IV) used was
between 500 to 1000 mg daily for three to five days. Adverse events
rates were comparable in both groups.106, level I The need for oral tapering
after IV methylprednisolone needs to be considered based on severity
and type of relapse though data suggests no additional benefit for it
(the CPG DG feels that this should be at the discretion of the treating
neurologists). However in the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT) for
ON, oral tapering was practiced.107, level I
Recommendation 8
• Intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone should be used in acute attacks of
multiple sclerosis.
 Dose of IV methylprednisolone used is 500 - 1000 mg daily for
3 - 5 days.
Acute ON
In the treatment of acute ON, higher rate in return of vision to normal
was seen with IV corticosteroids compared with placebo. However,
there was no additional benefit in terms of visual outcomes (VA, CS
and VF) at one month, six months and one year follow-up.108, level I
The dose of IV methylprednisolone used in the ONTT was 250 mg
6-hourly for three days followed by oral prednisolone at 1 mg/kg for 11
days with a fast taper.108, level I
In the ONTT, the use of oral corticosteroids alone was associated with
a higher rate of new episodes of ON at two years (RR=1.89, 95% CI
1.09 to 3.27).109, level I
Recommendation 9
• In acute optic neuritis, intravenous methylprednisolone should be given.
b. Plasma Exchange (Plasmapheresis)
Plasma exchange (PE) has been explored as a treatment modality in
acute relapses of MS since 1980s. It is a process where 1.1 to 1.4
plasma volumes are exchanged using either 5% normal serum albumin
or fresh frozen plasma as replacement solutions.110, level II-2; 111, level III;
112, level I A total of five to seven exchanges are performed 14 days after
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
35
completion of high dose IV corticosteroids or earlier (seven days) if
deficits continue to worsen five days after steroids administration.112, level I
This modality of treatment is reserved for patients with poor recovery to
the initial institution of pulsed corticosteroids.110, level II-2; 111, level III; 112, level I
The potential efficacy of PE was based on multiple case series and
small clinical trials involving heterogeneous groups of patients with
IIDD. A randomised clinical trial (RCT) showed moderate to good
improvement in terms of power scores (p=0.027) and EDSS (p=0.032)
after PE in 42% of patients compared with placebo. Improvement was
seen in 36% of patients with pure MS.112, level I
These findings were further supported in a later study where marked
improvements were seen in 50% of patients with paresis and 92% of
patients with ON.110, level II-2 The effects of PE were not sustained beyond
six months.112, level I; 113, level II-1
Male gender (p=0.021), early initiation of treatment (21 to 60 days from
symptoms onset, p=0.009) and preserved or brisk reflexes (p=0.019) were
significant predictors of improvement in function.111, level III Improvements
were seen within three exchanges in 75% of responders.111, level III
Overall, PE was well-tolerated. Common adverse events were anaemia
and hypotension.110, level II-2; 111, level III; 112, level I
Recommendation 10
• Plasma exchange may be considered in the treatment of acute
attacks of idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating disorders including
multiple sclerosis patients who recover poorly after initial intravenous
corticosteroids.
c. Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG)
IVIG is as efficacious as IV methylprednisolone114, level II-1 but there is no
added benefit on adding IVIG to IV methylprednisolone in treating acute
relapses of MS.115, level I These findings are based on moderate quality
of evidence.
13.2 Disease Modifying Treatment
DMTs aim to:
• reduce relapse rates
• delay disability progression
• reduce radiologically active or new brain lesions on MRI
DMT treatment selection should be individualised based on accessibility,
availability, efficacy, tolerability and safety of DMTs, prognostic factors,
co-morbidities and patient’s preference.116, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
36
The following DMTs are currently used for the treatment of RRMS:
*DMTs available currently (as of June 2015) in Malaysia.
a. Interferon beta
Two types of recombinant interferon beta (IFNβ) are currently
available in Malaysia, IFNβ-1a and IFNβ-1b. Both are administered via
subcutaneous (SC) injection and have anti-inflammatory properties. At
present, IM IFNβ-1a is not available yet.
In two Cochrane systematic reviews on patients with RRMS, IFNβ-1a
and IFNβ-1b significantly prevented exacerbations and progression of the
disease compared with placebo at two years.117 - 118, level I MRI endpoints
could not be assessed due to heterogeneity in MRI assessments.
Recently, subcutaneous pegylated IFNβ given twice monthly has
become available with significant reduction on annualised relapse rate
(ARR), disability progression and MRI endpoints compared to placebo
at two years (p<0.001).119, level I
In a Cochrane systematic review on progressive MS, IFNβ was not
efficacious in decreasing disability progression over 24 to 36 months
when compared with placebo.117, level I In another systematic review,
there was limited data on effect of IFNβ treatment on PPMS; however
this may have been due to short follow-up period for assessment of
effects on disease progression.120, level I
A Cochrane systematic review on SPMS showed that IFNβ significantly
reduced the risk of relapses and the total lesion volume on MRI, but
did not prevent 6-months disease progression over three years followup.121, level I In another systematic review, there was no effect of IFNβ
treatment on PPMS.120, level I
The commonest side-effects in the IFNβ treatment are flu like symptoms,
injection site reactions, leukopaenia and elevated liver enzymes.118, level I:
120, level I
Recommendation 11
• Interferon beta should be used as first-line therapy in active relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis.
b. Glatiramer acetate
Glatiramer acetate (GA) has been approved for the immunomodulatory
treatment of RRMS.122, level III GA is not currently available in Malaysia.
Injectables
Interferon beta (1a, 1b)*
Glatiramer acetate
Oral therapies
Teriflunomide
Dimethyl fumarate
Fingolimod*
Intravenous therapies
Natalizumab*
Alemtuzumab
Mitoxantrone*
Rituximab*
Cyclophosphamide*
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
37
In a Cochrane systematic review, GA was more efficacious than placebo
in reducing relapses in RRMS but not disease progression over 1 - 3
years follow-up.123, level I
The recently completed RCT comparing long-acting GA three times a
week to placebo in RRMS showed a 34% reduction in risk of relapses
(p<0.0001) with modest reduction in the cumulative number of Gdenhancing T1 (44.8%) and new or newly enlarging T2 lesions (34.7%)
at months six and 12 follow-up (p<0.0001).124, level I
Most common adverse events were transient and self-limiting such as
ﬂushing, chest tightness, sweating, palpitations and anxiety.123, level I
Recommendation 12
• Glatiramer acetate should be considered for active relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis.
c. Teriflunomide
Teriflunomide is an oral disease modifying agent approved for patients
with relapsing forms of MS. It is the active metabolite of leflunomide
which has both anti-proliferative and anti-inflammatory properties.
Teriflunomide is thought to selectively and reversibly inhibit dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, leading to a reduction in proliferation of
activated T and B lymphocytes thus it has selective immunosuppressant
and immunomodulatory activity.
A Cochrane systematic review demonstrated low quality RCTs on the
use of teriflunomide for relapsing forms of MS. However, patients on
teriflunomide 7 mg and 14 mg alone showed significantly lower ARR at
108 weeks and teriflunomide 14 mg had lower proportions of sustained
disability progression at 12 weeks compared with placebo.125, level I An
RCT comparing teriflunomide 7 mg and 14 mg with placebo showed a
significant reduction in ARR (with both doses) and sustained disability
progression (with the high dose of 14 mg).126, level I Another RCT comparing
IFNβ-1a with teriflunomide 7 and 14 mg failed to show any significant
differences in efficacy though treatment satisfaction was higher with the
oral therapy.127, level I
Short-term teriflunomide, 7 or 14 mg alone or with add-on IFNβ, was
safe in relapsing MS compared with placebo. Most common adverse
events included hair thinning, headache, diarrhoea, fatigue, elevated
alanine aminotransferase levels, influenza and back pain.125, level l
Teriflunomide is teratogenic, categorised as X in the United States
Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) Pregnancy Risk Classification.
Thus, effective contraception is advisable during treatment with it
among women. Men wishing to father a child or women wishing to get
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
38
pregnant or in the event of a pregnancy during teriflunomide therapy,
the medication needs to be actively washed-out with cholestyramine (8
g every 8 hours intravenously for 11 days to achieve non-teratogenic
plasma concentration of <0.02 mg/L).128, level III
Recommendation 13
• Teriflunomide may be considered as first-line therapy in active relapsing
forms of multiple sclerosis.
d. Dimethyl fumarate
Dimethyl fumarate (DMF) is an oral fumaric acid metabolite. It is thought
to have anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties through activation
of the nuclear-related factor 2 transcriptional pathway, thus reducing
oxidative cell stress.
There are good RCTs on the efficacy of DMF 240 mg twice daily in the
treatment of RRMS at two years follow-up:129 - 130, level I
• reduction of ARR by 44 - 53% for twice daily dosing and 48 - 51% for
trice-daily dosing (p<0.001)
• reduction in mean number of new or enlarging hyperintense lesions
on T2-weighted images by 71 - 85% for twice daily dosing and 73 -
74% for thrice daily dosing (p<0.001)
However, reduction of confirmed disability progression (CDP) was seen
with both doses of DMF at 12 weeks in only the former RCT and failed
to be replicated in the subsequent RCT.129 - 130, level I
DMF was safe, with mild to moderate severity of flushing and
gastrointestinal side effects which was highest in the first month of
the treatment.129 - 130, level I However, due to rare lymphopaenia (<2%),
white blood cell counts are recommended one month after treatment
initiation, followed by 3 - 6 monthly monitoring. If a patient develops
permanent lymphopaenia (<500 cell/μL at two consecutive laboratory
controls 3 - 6 months apart), DMF should be stopped. PML was recently
reported in treatment naïve MS patients on DMF with lymphopaenia,
thus vigilance is needed in this matter.131, level III
Recommendation 14
• Dimethyl fumarate may be considered as first-line therapy in active
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
e. Fingolimod
Fingolimod is a new class of oral sphingosine-1-phosphate-receptor
modulators that prevents the migration of potentially auto-reactive
lymphocytes from lymph nodes and reduces its infiltration into the
CNS.132 - 133, level I Due to it’s mode of action, fingolimod is classified as a
selective immunosuppressant.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
39
Two good quality RCTs demonstrated the efficacy of fingolimod on
clinical and neuroimaging outcomes in RRMS. The first RCT, comparing
fingolimod 0.5 mg OD and 1.25 mg OD vs placebo at 24 months,
showed:133, level I
• relative reduction in ARR by 54% and 60% respectively (p<0.001)
• reduction in confirmed disability progression after six months by
37% and 40% respectively (p<0.05)
• significant reduction in mean number of Gd-enhancing lesions,
higher proportion of patients with absence of Gd-enhancing
lesions, free of new or enlarged T2-weighted lesions with
significantly smaller percentage reduction in brain volume at one
and two years
In the second RCT, comparing fingolimod 0.5 mg and 1.25 mg to placebo,
similar results of significant reduction in ARR and number of patients
relapse free at two years as the former trial was noted. In addition, there
was also a significant reduction in new/enlarged T2 and Gd-enhancing
lesions as well as a smaller reduction in mean percentage brain volume
loss with both doses in the latter RCT compared to placebo.132, level I
In another RCT with 12 months follow-up, fingolimod 0.5 mg OD and
1.25 mg OD vs IM IFNβ-1a showed:134, level I
• relative reduction in ARR by 38% and 52% respectively (p<0.001)
• higher proportion of patients relapse free (p<0.001)
• no significant differences in the time to confirmed disability
progression
• higher proportion of patients free of new or enlarged T2-weighted
and Gd-enhancing lesions (p<0.001) and smaller percentage
reduction in brain volume (p<0.001)
Baseline characteristics of patients in all the RCTs were consistent with
active or highly active RRMS and also included a subgroup of rapidly
evolving MS patients who had prior DMT.132 - 134, level I
Fingolimod was associated with clearly reported adverse events.
132 - 134, level I
• Most common adverse events were transient bradycardia (1 -
2%, majority asymptomatic) and atrioventricular block (<1%)
which were noted after the first dose. Therefore, first dose hourly
monitoring of the heart rate with electrocardiogramme recording
at baseline and at the end of six hours is important.
• Other side effects included:
 reversible lymphopaenia (73%), seen within one month after
treatment initiation
 raised ALT (8%)
 macular oedema (0.5%), seen within four months, reversible
upon drug discontinuation
 non-fatal herpes viral infections
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
40
 skin cancers such as basal cell carcinoma (though no causal
relationship had been established)
• Two fatal cases, one of disseminated primary varicella zoster
infection and herpes encephalitis were reported in the fingolimod
1.25 mg treated group in the TRANSFORMS trial. Thus, before
initiating fingolimod, it is important to do varicella-zoster antibody
titres and if negative, vaccination is advisable one month prior to
initiation.
• Two cases of PML have been reported in fingolimod-treated
patients as of 2015, so continued vigilance is necessary.135, level III
• Fingolimod has teratogenic risk, thus female patients have to
perform effective contraception as long as being treated with
fingolimod (and another two months after stopping fingolimod).
Recommendation 15
• Fingolimod should be used for highly active relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis patients who have failed first-line treatment or
rapidly evolving aggressive disease. Close cardiac monitoring (pre-
and post-treatment), varicella-zoster screening and 3 - 6 monthly
laboratory monitoring of white blood cell count and liver enzymes
are advisable.
f. Natalizumab
Natalizumab is a highly specific α4-integrin antagonist that acts at the
level of the BBB.136, level I Due to it’s mode of action, natalizumab is
classified as a selective immunosuppressant.
In a Cochrane systematic review on RRMS patients, natalizumab ±
IFNβ was more efficacious than control (placebo or IFNβ) at two years
in:137, level I
• reducing relapse rates (RR=0.57, 95% CI 0.47 to 0.69)
• reducing disease progression (RR=0.57, 95% CI 0.47 to 0.69)
• reducing Gd-enhancing lesions (RR=0.12, 95 CI 0.09 to 0.17)
Serious allergic reactions occurred only in 1% of cases.136, level I Natalizumab
was well tolerated over two years follow-up. However, PML due
to the re-activation of the JCV was reported in two cases.137, level I
Therefore, factors that influence the selection of patients with RRMS
for natalizumab are:
• prior immunosuppressant therapy
• JCV antibody status and index if available138, level II-2
• patient’s choice and type of disease activity
The Stratify Anti-JCVTM Antibody Test, a two step enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to screen for the presence of JCV
antibodies is used to assess antibody status prior to treatment initiaton
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
41
Duration of natalizumab
0.7 (0.5 - 1.0)
5.3 (4.4 - 6.2)
6.1 (4.8 - 7.8)
0 - 24
25 - 48
49 - 72
1.8 (1.1 - 2.7)
11.2 (8.8 - 14.3)
Insufficient data
Prior immunosuppressive therapy exposure
No
therapy (month)
Yes
and identify the risk of PML. JCV antibody is detected in 54% of MS
patients with seroconversion rates of 2 - 3 % annually. Seropositive
patients can be treated up to two years, then re-stratification for benefit
vs risk of PML on whether to continue or switch therapy is needed.
Anti-JCV index (where available) helps further to define PML risk in
treated patients. Seropositive patients with a JCV antibody index
<1.5 are considered to have a low PML risk and can be continued
with natalizumab [with rigourous clinical follow-up and 3- (if on prior
immunosuppressants and locally feasible) to 6-monthly MRI of the
brain]. Seronegative patients should have 6-monthly anti-JCV antibody
testing and biannual MRI scans.138 - 139, level II-2; 140, level III
Risk stratification for natalizumab use is shown in the table below. The
risk increases with:
• duration of exposure to natalizumab
• prior immunosuppressant use
• JCV seropositivity
Table 9. Stratified PML risk data associated with natalizumab
therapy for JCV seropositive patientsa, b
aRisk estimates are expressed per 1000 treated patients (95% CI) and updated
on September 1, 2013.
bThe risk of PML for JCV seronegative patients is estimated at 0.1 per 1000
patients (95% CI 0.01 to 0.35)
Source: Wingerchuk DM, Carter JL. Multiple sclerosis: current and emerging disease
modifying therapies and treatment strategies. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014
Feb;89(2):225-40
If new neurological symptoms suggestive of PML occur clinically
and are confirmed by CSF studies for JCV DNA and MRI brain, then
natalizumab should be interrupted and plasmapheresis is instituted with
care for occurrence of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome.
Recommendation 16
• Natalizumab should be given to patients with highly active relapsingremitting or rapidly evolving multiple sclerosis.
g. Alemtuzumab
Alemtuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that targets CD52 antigen
on the surface of most immune cells, especially lymphocytes and
monocytes and possibly works by resetting the immune system.141
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
42
Based on three RCTs, IV alemtuzumab 12 mg or 24 mg daily for three to
five days at baseline, 12 and 24 months was more efficacious than IFNβ1a in the treatment of RRMS. It significantly reduced the risk of sustained
accumulation of disability (SAD) and relapse rate at two, three and five
years.142 - 144, level I The ARR for alemtuzumab 12 mg was 0.11 at three
and five years compared with 0.36 and 0.35 for IFNβ-1a at the same time
points.144, level I There was also significant reduction of lesion load and loss
of brain volume on MRI.142, level I; 144, level I
The major safety concern of alemtuzumab is its risk of further autoimmune
diseases, especially thyroid events (common i.e. up to 35% of all
patients), Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura (rare i.e. <1 - 3%) and
immune nephropathies (rare i.e. <1%).142 - 144, level I ITP was associated
with one fatal intracranial hemorrhage.144, level I Given these risks,
monthly laboratory monitoring is required up to 48 months after the
last alemtuzumab dose. Oral prophylaxis with acyclovir 200 mg BD is
recommended prior to treatment and one month after each course to
reduce the risk of Herpes Simplex viral infections.142, level I
Recommendation 17
• Alemtuzumab may be considered in the treatment of highly active
or rapidly evolving/aggressive relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
However, appropriate frequent monitoring is required to detect
potential serious adverse effect.
h. Mitoxantrone
Mitoxantrone is a cytotoxic agent of anthracenedione family. The
postulated mechanism of action is by suppressing B cells, T cells and
macrophages that attack the myelin sheath.
In a Cochrane systematic review on the efficacy of mitoxantrone in MS,
it partially reduced the risk of progression (OR=0.30, 95% CI 0.09 to
0.99) and frequency of relapses (MD= -0.85, 95% CI -1.47 to -0.23)
in worsening RRMS, PRMS and SPMS against placebo in a two-year
follow-up.145, level I
The safety profile of mitoxantrone over five years follow-up is acceptable,
provided that the cumulative dose is respected (<140 mg/m2) and cardiac
function [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) >50%] as well as the
white blood cell counts (>500/mm3) are strictly monitored.146 - 147, level II-2
Severe adverse events reported include LVEF <50% (5% - 5.6%),
acute congestive heart failure (0.1% - 2%), acute leukaemia (0.25%
- 0.6%) and amenorrhoea (5.4% - 51% depending on age group and
cumulative dose).146 - 147, level II-2 Cumulative dose of mitoxantrone >75
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
43
mg/m2 and previous or concomitant use of oral methotrexate are risk
factors for cardiotoxicity.146, level II-2
Recommendation 18
• Mitoxantrone may be offered to worsening relapsing-remitting multiple
sclerosis and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis with relapses
provided cumulative dose, cardiac function and haematological profile
are monitored closely.
i. Rituximab
Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody to CD-20 that depletes B-cells. The
beneficial clinical effects in RRMS are mediated through modulation of
systemic and CNS intrinsic immune responses.
There is modest evidence on the efficacy of rituximab in the treatment
of RRMS. It significantly reduces ARR and total Gd-enhancing T1weighted lesion counts at 24 but not at 48 weeks.148, level I
In a large multicentre RCT on PPMS, rituximab compared to placebo
failed to show significant delay in time to CDP.149, level I
Rituximab is safe for a single course short-term treatment, with mild
to moderate infusion related adverse event. There is no increase in
incidence of any infection, infection-associated serious adverse events
and clinically significant opportunistic infections.148, level I
j. Cyclophosphamide
Cyclophosphamide is an alkylating drug that binds to DNA, interferes
with mitosis and cell replication, thus causing suppression of cellmediated and humoral immunity through its effects on B cells and T
cells.150, level III
In patients with moderate to severe, refractory and aggressive RRMS,
high dose cyclophosphamide given monthly or over four days was
significantly efficacious in terms of reduction in relapses, sustained
disability progression and mean number of Gd-enhancing lesions over
18 and 23 months respectively.151 - 152, level II-3
In a study on aggressive RRMS with treatment failure while on IFNβ-1a,
pulse cyclophosphamide added to IFNβ-1a (IM weekly) was significantly
efficacious in reducing the yearly relapse rates and number of Gdenhancing lesions but not for EDSS at two years.153, level II-3 In rapidly
worsening MS, monthly pulse cyclophosphamide added to IFNβ-1a
for 12 months and then 2-monthly for six months, produced significant
reductions in relapse rates, EDSS and MRI activity at three years.154, level II-3
However, these studies were of small sample size and subject to bias.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
44
Another more recent Cochrane systematic review on cyclophosphamide,
using direct and indirect comparisons, found an unfavourable risk
benefit balance in RRMS and no efficacy in reducing disability in
progressive MS.117, level I
Side effects included alopecia, nausea and vomiting, amenorrhoea, infertility,
major infections, leukopaenia, haemorrhagic cystitis, hypogammaglobulinaemia
and malignancies.117, level I; 151 - 155, level II-3; 156, level I
Recommendation 19
• Cyclophosphamide may be considered in severe refractory and
aggressive relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
• Cyclophosphamide should not be given in progressive multiple
sclerosis as its efficacy is not established.
k. IVIG
IVIG is made up of concentrated antibodies derived from blood plasma.
It is postulated to down-regulate the overactive immune system.
In a recent Cochrane systematic review on IVIG vs placebo, there was
low quality evidence on disability progression and recurrence of relapse
over 24 months in RRMS and progressive MS.117, level I
IVIG was well-tolerated with a <5% risk of drug-related adverse events;
most common were headache, nausea, fever, chills, dizziness, rash
and fatigue.157, level I
l. Glucocorticoids
There is poor evidence for the efficacy of steroids as a DMT in MS.
158 -163, level I
Steroids as add-on therapy to IFNβ-1a is efficacious in reducing relapse
rates when compared with placebo158 - 160, level I or methotrexate161, level I
in active RRMS. There is inadequate data to describe the safety profile
of steroids in MS.162, level I
m. Methotrexate/Mycophenolate Mofetil/Azathioprine/Vitamin D
Currently, there is insufficient evidence on methotrexate, mycophenolate
mofetil, azathioprine and vitamin D as maintenance treatment for the
prevention of relapses and disability progression in MS.117, level I; 161, level I;
164 - 169, level I; 170 level II-3
n. Indications for initiation of DMTs as preventive therapy.
• CIS
There is high quality evidence for early DMT treatment in CIS. However
heterogeneity exists among the trials in terms of type and dosing of
treatment, diagnostic criteria and outcome measures.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
45
In these studies, early treatment with IFNβ or GA was more efficacious
in preventing conversion of CIS to CDMS compared with placebo.
 In a systematic review, OR for conversion with IFNβ was 0.53
(95% CI 0.40 to 0.71) at one year and 0.52 (95% CI 0.38 to 0.70)
at two years.171, level I
 In a RCT comparing SC IFNβ-1a vs placebo, HR for 2-year rates
of conversion was 0.48 (95% CI 0.31 to 0.73) for three times as
week and 0.53 (95% CI 0.35 to 0.79) for once a week dosing.
172, level I
 In another RCT, HR for conversion was 0.55 (95% CI 0.40 to
0.77) for GA at 36 months.173, level I
IFNβ was more efficacious in reducing Gd-enhancing T1 lesions
and new or enlarging hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted images
compared with placebo.171, level I and this was significantly better seen
with high dose SC IFNβ 1a 44 mcg three times a week than once a
week dosing.172, level I Similar results were noted for MRI endpoints with
GA in patients who never converted to CDMS over two years compared
to placebo.173, level I
IFNβ and GA were safe and consistent with the well-established safety
profiles.171 - 173, level I DMTs have clear impact on development of CDMS,
and early treatment is beneficial in eligible patients.
The CPG DG feels it is very important that all other differential diagnosis
for CIS have been ruled out before initiating treatment for CIS at high
risk for MS based on clinical and neuroimaging parameters.
Recommendation 20
• Patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) should be stratified
according to risk for clinically definite multiple sclerosis (CDMS)
based on clinical and neuroimaging parameters.*
• β-interferon may be considered after stratification of risk for CDMS
in CIS patients with careful consideration on the benefit risk ratio of
early treatment and open discussion with the patient.
*Refer to Figure 6 below and Chapter on Clinically Isolated
Syndrome, Optic Neuritis and Transverse Myelitis.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
46
CIS
Stratify according to Clinical/Laboratory features
Multifocal onset vs monofocal
Extent of recovery from first episode
Positive CSF for OCBs
Patient preference
Assess clinical risk
factors (above)
Either monitor clinically by
follow-up MRI or early initiation
of treatment
Stratify according to MRI data
• T2 lesions
• Gd-enhancing lesions
• Presence of black holes
• Cerebral atrophy - ability to quantitate this not
available in Malaysia
Low risk
• No T2/
Gd-enhancing lesion
Intermediate risk
• 1 - 9 T2 lesions
• 0 Gd-enhancing lesion
High risk
• >9 T2 lesions +
• Presence of Gd-enhancing lesion
Clinical or radiological
observation
Recommend to
start treatment
Figure 6. Risk stratification for the management of CIS
Adapted: Yamout B, Alroughani R, Al-Jumah M, et al. Consensus guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of multiple sclerosis. Curr Med Res Opin. 2013
Jun;29(6):611-21
• RRMS
 IFNβ
IFNβ is initiated as first-line treatment for patients with RRMS based on
the following criteria:174, level III
- ≥2 clinically significant relapses in previous two years (active
MS)*
- able to walk ≥10 m**
- not pregnant or attempting conception
- aged >18 years
- no contra-indications
*Active MS is defined as more than two significant relapses in the
previous two years.
**In certain situations, after careful consideration, patients who are able
to walk unaided or aided between 10 and 99 metres (EDSS of 6.0 - 6.5)
may still benefit from IFNβ.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
47
 GA
GA is currently not available in Malaysia and the criteria for initiating
treatment as first-line therapy is similar as for IFNβ
 Teriflunomide and DMF
Evidence from a number of moderate to good quality RCTs on RRMS
have shown, teriflunomide and DMF compared to placebo were
efficacious in reducing the relapse rates and MRI brain activity. High
dose teriflunomide (in two RCTs) and DMF (in one RCT) showed
modest effects on disability progression (refer to preceding sections on
the specific medications).
A recent systematic review using indirect comparisons showed DMF
significantly reduced ARR more than IFNβ, GA and teriflunomide when
compared with placebo175, level I A RCT demonstrated that teriflunomide
failed to show any significant difference in clinical efficacy from IFNβ
though it was associated with better patient tolerability127, level I
In patients with side effects/intolerability to injectables or needle
phobia, teriflunomide and DMF are options. Teriflunomide and DMF
have been studied and are approved by the National Institute of
Clinical Excellence, US FDA and European Medical Agency as firstline therapy in active RRMS.176, level III; 177 - 178, level I; 179 - 180, level III There is
a lack of evidence for the use of teriflunomide and DMF in patients with
suboptimal response to first-line injectable therapy and more data with
head-to-head comparisons is needed in the future.
For rapidly evolving or highly active MS, refer to Section on Treatment
failure.
Recommendation 21
• In active relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis,
 interferon beta and glatiramer acetate* should be used as firstline therapy
 teriflunomide and dimethyl fumarate may be used as first-line
therapy
*GA is not available in Malaysia.
o. Treatment Failure
In a longitudinal observational study on patients with RRMS and CIS, the
probability of failing initial treatment after three years was 30%.181, level II-2
Currently, there is no validated definition for treatment failure.116, level III;
182, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
48
• Treatment failure refers to patients who have failed to respond to a
full and adequate course of treatment with first-line therapies after
an adequate time period of one year.183 - 185, level III
• It may be assessed using the following parameters:
 clinical relapses
 disease progression as assessed by worsening EDSS
 MRI brain activity
Any two of the above three parameters allows identification of
patients with RRMS at significant risk of disease activity in the
subsequent two years.186, level II-3
• However, if patients exhibit high disease activity, treatment failure is
diagnosed earlier.
Therapeutic failure occurs due to the following factors:116, level III
• patient factors - poor compliance and adherence to dose regimen
or monitoring
• drug related factors - side effects
• lack of therapeutic efficacy - in terms of relapses and progression
of disease (increase in EDSS >1 in one year)
• increase in MRI brain activity (number of new T2 lesions and Gdenhancing lesions)
Patients with treatment failure can be divided into the following groups
depending on the severity of disease activity:183 - 185, level III; 187, level III
• non-responders/highly active MS
• rapidly evolving MS
Factors associated with greater risk of active/progressive disease in
MS patients at diagnosis are as below:188, level III
• relapse severity
 ≥1 moderate or severe attack
 steroids/hosptalisation required
 severe effect on activities of daily living (ADL)
 >1 functional system affected
 severe motor/cerebellar/brainstem involvement
• relapse recovery - incomplete
• MRI findings
 ≥2 Gd-enhancing, new T2 lesions or ≥2 T1 hypointense lesions
 ≥2 spinal lesions
• older age, male sex, certain ethnicities e.g. African Americans
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
49
• Active MS refers to patients who have had two or more attacks in the
last two years.
• Highly active MS/non-responders are individuals who have failed to
respond to full and adequate course (one year of treatment) of DMT
and have these features:
 ≥1 relapse in the previous year while on treatment or
 unchanged/increased/ongoing severe relapses compared with
the previous year
and
 ≥9 T2 lesions on brain MRI or
 ≥1 Gd-enhancing lesions on brain MRI
• Rapidly evolving/aggressive MS are those with:
 ≥2 disabling relapses in the last one year and
 ≥1 Gd-enhancing lesions on brain MRI or a significant increase in
T2 lesion load compared to previous recent MRI scan or
 increase in two points in the EDSS in the past 12 months
This can occur prior to or after initiation of first-line therapy.
Source:
1. European Medicines Agency. (Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/)
2. NHS England Clinical Reference Group for Neurosciences. Clinical Commissioning
Policy: Disease Modifying Therapies for Patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
London: NHS England; 2014
3. Río J, Tintoré M, Sastre-Garriga J, et al. Change in the clinical activity of multiple
sclerosis after treatment switch for suboptimal response. Eur J Neurol.
2012;19(6):899-904
After treatment initiation, follow-up and evaluation are as below:183 - 184 level III;
189, level II-2; 190, level III; 191, level II-2
• clinically every three months for the first year and every six
months thereafter
• neurologically by EDSS compared to baseline
• radiologicaly via MRI brain which is usually done at baseline and 6
- 12 months after initiation of therapy with first-line agents or earlier if
clinically indicated. However the frequency of neuroimaging must
be tempered with local availability.
A change in treatment needs to be considered if:184 - 185, level III; 191, level II-2
• relapse frequency has increased/is unchanged
• treatments are considered not acceptable to patients
• a sustained worsening of the neurological status is observed on
at least two consecutive examinations (≥1 point on EDSS) with a
six month interval between them
• an evaluation MRI done during the first 6 - 12 months of therapy
shows ≥1 new Gd-enhancing/and ≥2 new or enlarging T2 lesions
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
50
It is also important to rule out pseudorelapses and non-adherence
before diagnosing treatment failure. In the absence of clinical activity
but in the presence of MRI activity, close clinical monitoring is needed
as increase in relapses or disability scores may indicate a need for
change in therapy.
In addressing treatment failures in MS, the treatment modalities include:
• escalation therapy
• induction therapy
• rescue therapy - escalation to third-line therapy
Refer to Algorithm 3 on Treatment of RRMS.
Escalation therapy (to second-line therapy)
• There is no RCT to support the use of any drug as escalation
therapy in patients with suboptimal response to first-line
therapies.116, level III; 182, level III; 192 - 193, level III
• Escalation therapy refers to the initial sequential use of first-line
drugs with the best risk-benefit ratio and then adopting second-line
drugs with increasing strength but potentially more side effects to
control the more aggressive highly active disease.116, level III; 189, level II-2;
190, level III
• Drugs used in escalation therapy include fingolimod, natalizumab
and alemtuzumab.
Natalizumab
• In a systematic review (using direct and indirect comparisons),
natalizumab was most efficacious in preventing clinical
relapses compared with IFNβ/GA, mitoxantrone and other
immunosuppressants.117, level I
• In a RCT, combination of natazulimab and IM IFNβ-1a was more
efficacious than IM IFNβ-1a alone in clinical and MRI outcomes.
194, level I
• Observational studies on patients with suboptimal response to
IFNβ or GA who were switched to natalizumab showed beneficial
results on clinical and MRI endpoints.189, level II-2; 195 - 197, level II-3
Recently, observational studies from real world datasets using
propensity matched statistics showed switching to natalizumab
compared to interferon/GA in patients relapsing on interferon/
GA was associated with superior outcomes in terms of 65 - 75%
reduction in ARR at year one (p<0.001).197, level III
Fingolimod
• There is no head to head trial to support the efficacy of fingolimod
in patients with therapeutic failure on first-line treatments.
• In a RCT comparing fingolimod to IM IFNβ-1a which included
patients who had prior treatment with IM IFNβ and GA, fingolimod
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
51
0.5 mg significantly reduced ARR, mean number of Gd-enhancing
lesions, number of new or newly enlarged T2 lesions compared with
IFNβ-1a alone.198, level I Subgroup analysis of patients with highly
active disease despite IM IFNβ-1a from the same trial showed
a significant reduction in ARR by 61%.134, level I In another study,
relapse rates were not higher in patients switching from natalizumab
to fingolimod compared to other therapies to fingolimod.199, level III
JCV antibody stratification with the JCV StratifyTM antibody test kit is
important in deciding between natalizumab and fingolimod due to the
risks of PML.116, level III; 182, level III
• If JCV is negative, natazulimab is an option but close monitoring
is needed with 6-monthly or annual MRI and 6-monthly JCV
antibody testing.
• If JCV is positive, fingolimod followed by alemtuzumab in the
event of suboptimal response to fingolimod would be the other
second-line options (refer to text below).
• If seropositive and considering natalizumab, the risk and benefits
of starting or continuing natalizumab need to be discussed
with the patient including more frequent clinical and MRI brain
monitoring. Refer to Chapter on DMT (Natalizumab).
If switching from natazulimab to fingolimod is required, a washout
period of 6 - 8 weeks is sufficient for risk of rebound disease activity.200, level III
For switching from IFNβ to second-line therapy, no washout period is
needed.
Alemtuzumab
Alemtuzumab is more efficacious than IFNβ-1a in reducing relapse
rates and sustained accumulation of disability in patients with refractory
RRMS failing first-line treatment with IFNβ/GA at two and five
years.142 - 143, level I In a study on active RRMS not controlled by IFNβ-1a,
alemtuzumab reduced relapse rates and improved disability scores in
those who continued to relapse.201, level II-3 Alemtuzumab is an option in
active RRMS patients with intolerability/lack of response to fingolimod or
natazulimab.182, level III; 189, level II-2; 190, level III
Moderate quality evidence from systematic reviews, RCTs and
observational studies suggested that fingolimod, natalizumab and
alemtuzumab were efficacious in highly active MS/rapidly evolving
aggressive RRMS.100; 142 - 143, level I; 180, level III; 182, level III; 201, level II-3
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
52
Recommendation 22
• In patients with highly active multiple sclerosis (MS) who experience
treatment failure with first-line therapies, fingolimod, natalizumab or
alemtuzumab may be used*.
• In patients with rapidly evolving aggressive/severe MS, fingolimod,
natalizumab or alemtuzumab may be considered as first-line
treatment*.
*The choice of switching depends on stratification according to John
Cunningham virus (JCV) antibody, cardiac, thyroid and haematological
status
• If JCV antibody is positive prior to initiation or while on natalizumab,
switch to fingolimod may be an option.
• If there is lack of response or intolerability to fingolimod, natalizumab
or alemtuzumab may be used.
• Alemtuzumab is an option in highly active/aggressive RRMS
with issue of lack of response/intolerability to fingolimod or
natazulimab.
Rescue therapy (escalation to third-line therapy)
Rescue therapy refers to the use of drugs with limited evidence for
patients not responding to the approved drugs mentioned above (thirdline therapy).189, level II-2
Mitoxantrone significantly reduces relapse rates, prolongs time to
confirmed disease progression and reduces MRI activity in patients with
worsening or aggressive RRMS and secondary progressive MS.117, level I;
192, level III; 202, level III; 203 - 204, level II-3 However, benefit:risk ratio in terms of
cardiotoxicity (2% heart failure) and treatment-related leukaemia
(0.6%) needs to be considered.205, level III Refer to Chapter on DMT
(Mitoxantrone).
Open label and observational studies showed the efficacy of rituximab
and cyclophosphamide in the treatment of refractory and rapidly
deteriorating MS.151, level II-3; 153 - 154, level II-3; 189, level 2; 206, level II-3; 207, level I
Refer to Chapter on DMT (Rituximab and Cyclophosphamide).
Induction therapy
Induction therapy represents a more aggressive approach in which
powerful immunosuppressants/DMT are used right from the start
to tackle the disease process hard and early, followed by long-term
maintenance treatment with less powerful DMT.190, level III; 191, level II-2;
202, level III Fingolimod and natalizumab are indicated for aggressive MS.
There is limited evidence on mitoxantrone followed by IFNβ in
patients with highly active/aggressive MS. Monthly IV mitoxantrone
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
53
for six months followed by IFNβ is efficacious in terms of clinical and
neuroimaging endpoints in patients with aggressive MS.204, level II-3;
208 level II-2
Induction therapy in aggressive MS with cyclophosphamide or
alemtuzumab is another option. Induction therapy with natalizumab
runs the risk of rebound disease activity.142 - 143, level I; 153 - 154, level II-3; 189, level
II-2; 201, level II-3; 202, level III
p. Treatment for Progressive MS
• Treatment for PPMS
Based on a high quality systematic review, currently there is lack of
evidence on any disease modifying agent or immunosuppressants in
the treatment of PPMS.117, level I
• Treatment for SPMS
 IFNβ-1b shows some benefits in SPMS with relapses. Refer to
Chapter on DMT (IFNβ).121, level I Indications for starting IFNβ-1b
in SPMS are:174, level III
- ≥2 disabling relapses in two years
- able to walk ≥10 m
- minimal increase in disability due to gradual progression over
the past two years
- disease progression by <2 EDSS points over last year
 In a large multicentre RCT, mitoxantrone 12 mg/m2 was efficacious
compared with placebo in significantly reducing clinical
exacerbations, Gd-enhancing lesions and progression of disability
over two years.209, level I
Recommendation 23
• Interferon beta (IFNβ) may be given as first-line therapy in active
secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS) with relapses.
• Mitoxantrone may be given in active SPMS with relapses especially
if failing IFNβ.
13.3 Treatment of MS-related Symptoms
a. Rehabilitation Programmes
• General Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is a ‘problem-solving educational process aimed at
reducing disability and handicap experienced by someone as a result
of disease or injury’.210, level I
Rehabilitation involves multidisciplinary interventions focusing on
reducing symptoms and limitations at the level of activity and participation.
This is done through interventions which include personal and
environmental factors, to achieve the highest possible independence
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
54
and the best quality of life (QoL) of MS patients within the limits of the
disease.210, level I
Rehabilitation settings may include:210, level I
• inpatient settings
• ambulatory/outpatient settings
• home-based settings
• Multidisciplinary Rehabilitation
Multidisciplinary rehabilitation (MDR) in MS is a co-ordinated delivery
of intervention by two or more disciplines (physiotherapy, occupational
therapy, social work, psychology, nursing and others) under medical
supervision (neurologist and rehabilitation physician). It is designed
to be patient-centred, time-based and functionally-oriented using a
biopsychosocial model.210, level I
A Cochrane systematic review showed strong evidence to support
inpatient MDR in producing short-term gains at the levels of activity
(disability) and participation in patients with MS.211, level I
• Physical Therapy
Up to 79% of patients with MS experience loss of mobility. Within 10
years of diagnosis, 38% of the patients will need walking aids and these
increases to 83% after 30 years.212, level III
MS is associated with a reduction in physical activity as a result of
the disease per se and/or a sedentary lifestyle. It leads to increased
incidence of osteoporosis, depression, fatigue, loss of muscle strength
and death from cardiovascular diseases.213, level I
Physical therapy aims at improving motor functions, balance and gait,
and reducing spasticity through passive and active exercises training.
Types of exercise that can be used includes resistance, endurance and
combination training.213 level I
A Cochrane systematic review on MS reported:214, level I
• strong evidence for exercise-based rehabilitation in improving
muscle power, exercise tolerance and mobility-related activities
• moderate evidence for improving mood
Both group exercise therapy215, level I and home-based therapy216, level I
improve some functions compared to no exercise in MS patients.
Robot-driven gait orthosis significantly improves walking endurance
and knee strength compared with conventional walking training in MS
patients with severe walking disabilities (EDSS 6.0 - 7.5).217, level I
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
55
• Occupational therapy
The key components of occupational therapy (OT) in MS are
restoration and maintenance of functional independence, modiﬁcation
of environment and use of adaptive or assistive devices.
MS patients experience limitations in their ability to undertake a variety
of activities needed to live independently referred to as ADL which
include personal, domestic and community ADL.
Patients with MS who experience limitation in ADL should receive a
comprehensive multidisciplinary assessment and, individualised and
goal-directed programme of interventions with the aim of increasing
and maintaining independence wherever possible.218
Mobility Assistive Technology (MAT) is useful to maintain or improve
mobility. These are devices that:219, level II-2
• reduce activity limitations and participation restrictions
• prevent or reduce fatigue by energy conservation
• improve QoL
MAT includes gait aids, orthoses and wheelchairs.
Arm or upper extremity function is important in performing ADL. This
requires motor coordination, dexterity and precise collaboration between
both hands. Treatment can be divided into training and compensatory
approaches. The former aim to maximise arm function while the latter
focuses on correct positioning of the affected upper limb and prevention
of contracture.212, level III
Recommendation 24
• Patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) should be assessed on MSrelated symptoms.
• Multidisciplinary rehabilitation should be offered to MS patients in all
health care settings.
b. Ataxia
Cerebellar ataxia refers to deficits in temporal and spatial coordination
caused by lesions or degeneration in the cerebellum and/or brain stem
in patients with MS.212, level III
A Cochrane Review on treatment of ataxia revealed a lack of RCTs on
ataxia. Physical training programmes may bring some benefit.220, level I
The use of weights for ataxia with specific weighting placement on the
trunk has effects on functional ambulation outcome measures.212, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
56
c. Fatigue
Fatigue is defined as a subjective lack of physical and/or mental energy,
perceived by the individual or caregiver to interfere with usual and desired
activities. It has been reported in 60 - 95% of patients with MS and has a
significant impact on ADL, social life and ability to work. 210, level III; 212, level lII
Treatment of fatigue should be multi-dimensional and tailored to the
medical and functional status of each patient.210, level III; 212, level lII
• Treatment
Rehabilitation interventions should be the initial treatment of choice
for fatigue.221, level I These include energy conservation strategies,
education for patient and family (avoid heat but use air-conditioners/
cooling gel vests) and address lifestyle factors (avoid physical activity
at mid-afternoon).210, level III
Energy conservation management utilises strategies or assistive
technologies to reduce fatigue by pacing, modifying and delegating
activities.222, level I This can be achieved by individually adapting the
structure of private & work life such as having “power-naps”.
In a Cochrane systematic review of five RCTs on amantadine, there
was a small and inconsistent improvement of fatigue in MS. The side
effects were generally mild such as hallucinations, nausea, dizziness,
hyperactivity, anxiety and insomnia observed in 10% to 57% of
patients.223, level I
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of carnitine224, level I
while modafinil is not efficacious in the treatment of fatigue in MS.225, level I
In a recent meta-analysis on non-pharmacological treatment, energy
conservation management based on Packer course was more effective
than no treatment in reducing the impact of fatigue in the short-term.222 level I
However, more evidence is needed on this matter before it can be
recommended.
Recommendation 25
• In multiple sclerosis patients with fatigue:
 energy conservation management should be used
 amantadine may be offered
d. Spasticity and Paralysis
Spasticity
About 60% of patients with MS experience spasticity complications.226, level III
Spasticity is defined as a disordered sensori-motor control, resulting
from an upper motor lesion, presenting as intermittent or sustained
involuntary activation of muscles.227, level III In some instances, spasticity
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
57
may be beneficial by counteracting muscle weakness. However, disabling
spasticity should be treated as it may lead to pain, pressure ulcer,
spasms, reduced mobility, restricted joint range of motion and contractures.
• Clinical Evaluation
In every MS patient, a detailed history should include symptoms of
spasticity such as muscle stiffness/spasms or tightness in or around the
joints. For more severe symptoms, painful spasms may be enquired.
Modified Asworth Scale is a commonly used clinical tool to assess
severity and monitor treatment outcome of spasticity.228, level I
• Treatment
Treatment of spasticity in MS should be individualised with the aim
to achieve reduction of symptoms, improvement of functions and
prevention of complications such as contractures. Elimination of
triggers that may exacerbate spasticity such as urogenital infection,
constipation, pressure ulcer and pain are also important.
Treatment of spasticity in MS involves non-pharmacological,
pharmacological and surgical intervention. In principle, localised
spasticity is amenable to physical therapy, splinting and Botulinum Toxin
(BTX) injection. Conversely, oral drugs and at a later stage intrathecal
intervention may be considered for generalised spasticity.226, level III
i. Non-pharmacological intervention
There is minimal evidence to support non-pharmacological intervention
with or without pharmacological intervention in the management of
spasticity and paralysis in MS.
• Physical therapy
 Daily range of motion exercise performed at least 2 - 3 times/
day is an integral part of spasticity treatment as it may prevent
contractures in MS.229, level III
 Daily stretching and strengthening exercises minimise the risk for
muscle shortening and reduce the risk of progressive weakening
of spastic muscles respectively in MS.230, level III
 Hydrotherapy230, level III and swimming in cold pools231, level III
actively stretch spastic muscles and maintain/build endurance in
MS. Local applications of cold may provide temporary relief of
localised muscles spasm and spasticity.230, level III
 Four sessions of unloaded arm and leg cycling exercise 20
minutes every 2 - 3 days reduces spasticity in MS (p<0.001).232, level II-3
 Treadmill training with partial body weight support, combined with
physiotherapy, reduces spasticity in MS.231, level III
 BTX A followed by daily physiotherapy for 15 days decrease
spasticity at two weeks and 12 weeks compared with BTX A
alone in MS (p<0.01).228, level I
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
58
• Physical modalities
 Functional electrical stimulation causes a significant reduction of
spasticity in MS.231, level III
 Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) applied eight
hours daily for two weeks improves muscle spasm (p=0.038) and
pain (p=0.008) in MS.228, level I; 231, level III
 Daily sessions of repetitive magnetic stimulation for two weeks
improves spasticity in MS (p<0.05).228, level I
• Splints and orthotic device
 Splints and orthotic devices can be used to reduce tone, prevent
contractures and reduce pain in MS. Orthotic device may also
control joint instability and improve ambulation such as ankle foot
orthoses. Serial plaster casting every seven to 10 days may also
be used to gradually improve range of motion and thus correct
mild soft tissue contracture.229, level III
ii. Pharmacological intervention
• Baclofen
 Oral baclofen improves spasticity, passive range of motion,
painful spasms and clonus compared with placebo in MS.226, level III;
229, level III; 233, level I
 Intra-thecal baclofen via an implantable pump may be an option
for MS patients who do not achieve adequate control of their
spasticity or unable to tolerate side effects of oral medication.226, level III;
229, level III
• Tizanidine
 Tizanidine reduces mean total Ashworth score from baseline
after nine weeks of treatment MS (p=0.004).233, level I
 Oral and sublingual tizanidine is more efficacious compared
with placebo in reducing spasticity in MS by Ashworth score
(p=0.002). Sublingual tizanidine given on night significantly
reduces somnolence effect.234, level I
• Benzodiazepines (diazepam and clonazepam)
 Benzodiazepines are efficacious in reducing spasticity from
spinal and cerebral complications of MS. These drugs however
are preferably given at bed time due to drowsiness side effect.
226, level III; 229, level III
• Cannabinoids
 Cannabinoids significantly improves pain, spasms and spasticity
in terms of severity and frequency compared with placebo.228, level I
 Oral cannabinoids are more efficacious in relieving muscle
stiffness after 12 weeks compared with placebo in MS (OR=2.26,
95% CI 1.24 to 4.13).235, level I
• BTX A
o BTX A injection improves spasticity lasting for 1 - 3 months in
MS.233, level I It also induces muscle relaxation and prevents
contractures in affected muscles.226, level III; 229, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
59
iii. Surgical intervention
Orthopedic procedures such as tenotomies, tendon transfers and
tendon lengthening can be considered in the management of focal
spasticity and contractures in MS.229, level III
In extreme refractory cases of spasticity, neurosurgical procedures
such as selective dorsal rhizotomy, myelotomy or cordectomy may be
indicated.229, level III
Paralysis
Patients with MS are commonly affected by weakness and paralysis in
consequence to deconditioning as well as the neurological disease
itself. This often results in impaired mobility and abnormal gait pattern.
Physiotherapy intervention and the use of walking aids can compensate
for weakness, alleviate pain, improve posture, correct gait abnormality
and thus enable people to walk further and more safely. Fampiridine
226, level III and extended-release dalfampridine236, level III have shown
positive results on walking ability in some patients with MS.
Recommendation 26
• In multiple sclerosis (MS) patients with disabling spasticity:
 non-pharmacological interventions may be offered as initial
treatment
 pharmacological intervention may be offered in severe spasticity
refractory to non-pharmacological management
 orthopaedic and neurosurgical procedures may be offered for
extreme spasticity, when conservative management fails
• In MS patients with weakness and paralysis resulting in abnormal
gait pattern, physiotherapy intervention, use of walking aids and
pharmacological treatment may be offered.
e. Visual Problems
MS patients with visual disturbances may benefit from the low-vision
rehabilitation utilising low-vision aids, illumination and training to
maximise participation in independent living. These aids include
magnifiers, prisms, telescopes, electronic devices and large-text reading
material. MS patients with oscillopsia may benefit from Gabapentin.100; 218
Rehabilitation services for the blind assist in personal, domestic and
community ADL.7, level III; 210, level III
f. Swallowing and Speech Difficulties
Swallowing Difficulty
Oropharyngeal dysphagia affects between 30% and 65% of MS patients.
Dysphagia is associated with increased morbidity and mortality due to
complications such as malnutrition and bronchopneumonia.212, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
60
• Treatment
Dysphagia evaluation comprises of bedside swallowing assessment,
formal swallowing evaluation (such as videofluoroscopy or flexible
endoscopy) and in specific situations, oesophageal manometry.212, level III
The aims of treatment for dysphagia are to preserve or to restore
patients with MS to a normal diet, to improve the nutritional status
and to decrease the morbidity and mortality associated with aspiration
pneumonia.212, level III
Evidence of efficacy of dysphagia therapy in MS is limited. This
includes:212, level III
 restorative interventions
- oromotor stimulation and exercise
- head elevation exercise
 compensatory strategies
- postural manoeuvres
- special swallowing techniques such as double swallow,
effortful swallow and Mendelsohn manoeuvre
 adaptive strategies
- diet adaptation and modification of fluid consistency
- positioning of body and head, take up time for eating, breaks,
empty one’s mouth before next bite and regular swallowing of
saliva
Other swallowing therapies:
 pharmacological agents
- BTX A injection is safe and may benefit dysphagic MS patients
associated with upper oesophageal sphincter hyperactivity.237, level II-3
 tube feeding
- Enteral feeding tubes are used when oral intake is insufficient
in MS. If the need is short term, nasogastric tube feeding is
utilised, whereas percutaneousgastrostomy is preferred in
chronic cases.212, level III
Recommendation 27
• Dysphagia therapy maybe offered in multiple sclerosis (MS) with
swallowing difficulty.
• Botulinum toxin A injection may be offered in dysphagic MS patients
with upper oesophageal sphincter hyperactivity.
Speech Difficulty
Slurred speech (dysarthria), including spastic and ataxic components,
occurs in 40% to 50% of MS patients.212, level III It occurs because of
difficulty in controlling the quality of the voice and in articulating words
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
61
due to motor impairment in the muscles controlling speech, insufficient
subglottal pressure and weakened expiratory and/or laryngeal
muscles.238, level II-I
Language disturbance (aphasia) is rare in MS but may occur mostly
in the context of severe cognitive impairment.212, level III or rarely
in the context of a relapse caused by a subcortical MS plaque and
perilesional edema. Cognitive and behavioural impairment, fatigue,
pain and emotional disturbances, and common drugs in MS (such as
benzodiazepines, baclofen and tizanidine) may impair speech.212, level III
• Treatment
The main goals of the intervention are to increase speech intelligibility
and functional communication, depending on the stage of dysarthria.
212, level III
The type of speech therapy interventions used to improve the respiratory
and phonatory functions in MS patients include the intensive Lee
Silverman Voice Treatment. Other interventions are expiratory muscle
strength training, breath control exercises, accent method and breath
pattering, and music therapy.212, level III
A variety of techniques has been used to improve rate, prosody and
articulation with some success, including external pacing devices,
computer training, behavioural instructions and biofeedback.212, level III
Other augmentation methods include using letter or communication
boards and microcomputers with synthetic voice output.212, level III
Recommendation 28
• Speech therapy interventions maybe offered in multiple sclerosis
with speech difficulty.
g. Bladder Dysfunction
About 75% of patients with MS have bladder dysfunction.239, level III
The symptoms may vary according to the severity of the neurological
disability. Symptoms of incontinence are reported to occur in 49%,
urgency and frequency in 32% and hesitancy-retention in 19% of MS
patients with bladder dysfunction.240, level III
Although there is no strong evidence on management of bladder
dysfunction, CPG DG agrees that this issue is crucial and has to be
addressed based on expert opinion when evidence is limited.
• Clinical Evaluation
In every MS patient, a detailed clinical history (especially in those with
clinical or MRI spinal cord involvement) should include symptoms
of bladder dysfunction such as urgency, frequency, incontinence,
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
62
hesitancy, retention and nocturia. The aetiology of bladder dysfunction
(neurogenic or non-neurogenic; detrusor versus sphincter origin or
combination of both) should be determined.
A bladder diary is a useful tool for clinical assessment in symptomatic
patients. Relevant investigations include urine analysis, culture and
sensitivity, and post-void residual volume (PVRV) assessment. In patients
with severe symptoms who are refractory to conservative management,
ultrasound KUB and video-urodynamic studies may be considered.
239 - 241, level III
Refer to Appendix 8 on Bladder Diary.
Recommendation 29
• Bladder diary, urine analysis and culture, and post void residual
volume should be performed in patients with multiple sclerosis and
symptoms of bladder dysfunction.
 Ultrasound kidney-urether-bladder and video-urodynamic studies
may be considered in those with severe refractory symptoms.
• Treatment
Treatment of bladder dysfunction in MS should be individualised with
the aim to achieve adequate urinary continence, prevent medical
complications and tailored to the severity of symptoms and disability,
and results of investigations. Possible causes of clinical exacerbation
such as urinary tract infection should be treated.
Treatment of bladder dysfunction in MS involves:
i. non-pharmacological intervention
ii. pharmacological intervention
iii. neuromodulation
iv. surgical intervention
i. Non-pharmacological intervention
• Behavioural therapy
Fluid management should be individualised according to the bladder
diary. Generally, intake of 1 - 2 litres a day is recommended. Avoidance
of caffeinated drinks may reduce the symptoms of urgency and
frequency. The use of external collection devices such as incontinence
pads or condom catheter may also be offered. Bladder retraining and
pelvic floor muscle exercises (Kegel exercise) can reduce symptoms of
both urge and stress incontinence by improving the strength of pelvic
floor muscles.226, level III; 239 - 240, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
63
• Catheterisation
In MS patients with bladder symptoms and PVRV >100 ml, complete
emptying via clean intermittent self-catheterisation or clean intermittent
catheterisation by caregiver is indicated. This can be done 4 - 6 hourly.
In those with refractory urinary symptoms, indwelling catheterisation
may be considered. Suprapubic catheterisation is preferred over
urethral catheterisation due to risk of severe urethral erosions and
damage.226, level III; 239, level III
Recommendation 30
• In multiple sclerosis patients with bladder dysfunction:
 fluid management, avoidance of caffeinated beverages, timed
voiding and pelvic floor muscles exercises may be offered as
initial management.
 clean intermittent catheterisation 4 - 6 hourly should be advised
in those with high post void residual volume (>100 ml).
 suprapubic catheterisation is preferred in those with severe
refractory urinary symptoms not responding to conservative
management.
ii. Pharmacological intervention
• Anti-cholinergic medications
Anti-cholinergic agents such as oxybutinin, tolterodine tartarate,
propiverine hydrochloride and solifenacin succinate are available
locally.
In a Cochrane systematic review, oral oxybutinin was more efficacious
than oral propantheline in reduction of frequency symptoms with
MD=0.7 (95% CI 0.17 to 1.23). Although there is no significant difference
in the efficacy, oral oxybutinin caused more dry mouth compared with
intravesical atropine [OR=9.0 (95% CI 4 to 22)]. The trials in this review
were of poor quality.242, level I
Side effects of anti-cholinergic agents include drowsiness, constipation
and urinary retention.239 - 240, level III; 243, level III
• Alpha blockers
The use of alpha adrenergic blockers may be of benefit to improve the
flow rate and reduction of PVRV in MS patients with obstructive urinary
symptoms.226, level III; 239, level III
• Desmopressin
A meta-analyses showed that desmopressin either orally or intranasally
administered was efficacious compared with placebo for day frequency
and nocturia in MS. Hyponatraemia was reported in 5% of cases, thus
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
64
this medication need to be prescribed with caution and not be used
more than once in 24 hours.244, level I Locally, desmopressin may be
considered for those with nocturnal diuresis refractory to conservative
measures.
• BTX Type A
In a systematic review which included MS patients, BTX A was
significantly more efficacious than control in decreasing daily urinary
incontinence at week 2 and 24 post-treatment and significantly
improved urodynamic parameters. No significant adverse reaction were
reported.245, level I
Recommendation 31
• In multiple sclerosis, the following medication may be considered:
 anti-cholinergics for frequency and urge incontinence.
 alpha blockers for high post-voiding residual volume and urinary
retention.
 desmopressin for nocturnal diuresis refractory to conservative
measures.
 botulinum toxin type A intravesical injection for urinary incontinence
refractory to conservative measures.
iii. Neuromodulation
Given the likely neurogenic cause of voiding dysfunction in MS,
neuromodulation may potentially alleviate symptoms. Neuromodulation
is defined as the alteration of nerve activity through the delivery of
electrical stimulation or chemical agents to targeted sites of the body.
A minimally invasive neuromodulation technique using Posterior Tibial
Nerve Stimulation is significantly efficacious compared with control
in both clinical symptoms and urodynamic parameters of bladder
dysfunction in MS after 12 weeks.246, level II-3
Sacral neuromodulation with electrical stimulation of the S3-nerve root
can be considered in detrusor overactivity unresponsive to BTX A.226, level III
iv. Surgical intervention
Surgical intervention such as bladder augmentation surgery and
urinary diversion can be offered for patients with intractable urge
incontinence, renal compromise from low compliance or reflux, or those
with irreversible complications of long-term catheterisation.226, level III; 239,
level III; 241, level III
Augmentation ileocystoplasty is efficacious in improving bladder capacity
compared with baseline in MS.247, level II-3
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
65
Clinical Assessment
MS with
bladder dysfunction
• Urine analysis, C&S & PVR
• Ultrasound KUB & Video-urodynamics
• Fluid management
• Kegel Exercise
• Time voiding
• Collection devices such as
condom catheter and
incontinence pads
Behavioural Therapy
- 4 to 6 hourly daily
- ± anti-cholinergics
Intermittent Catheterisation
• Peripheral or sacral
neuromodulation
Neuromodulation
• Minor: SPC
• Major: Augmentation cystoplasty
or urinary diversion
Surgery
• Anti-cholinergics (urinary incontinence)
• Alpha blockers (urinary retention)
• Desmopression (nocturnal diuresis)
Oral Pharmacological Intervention
• Intravesical Botulinum Toxin A
Non-oral Pharmacological Intervention
PVRV
>100 ml
No
Fail
Fail
Yes
Recommendation 32
• Neuromodulation may be considered for the treatment of severe
detrussor overactivity refractory to conservative treatment in multiple
sclerosis (MS).
• Bladder augmentation surgery or urinary diversion may be offered
in the treatment of severe detrussor overactivity refractory to
conservative treatment in MS.
A summary of bladder dysfunction management in MS is shown the
following Figure 7.
Figure 7. Management of Bladder Dysfunction in MS
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
66
h. Bowel Problem
Bowel dysfunction (constipation and faecal incontinence) has been
reported in up to 70% of MS patients.212, level lII This results from autonomic
and rectal dysfunction.210, level III Management of bowel dysfunction in
MS is predominantly based on expert opinion.212, level lII
• Treatment
An effective bowel management programme involves:210, level III; 212, level lII
 a regular schedule:
- completed within 60 minutes from beginning of insertion of
rectal stimulant to bowel evacuation
- timing ideally should be postprandial to induce gastrocolic
reflex
- should be daily or alternate day which is designed to meet
specific requirements of patients and carers
 optimisation of stool consistency
- achieved by adequate oral intake, a high fibre diet and
laxatives
- laxatives may include bulking agents such as fibre supplement
(psyllium seed husks) and stool softener such as liquid paraffin
 facilitation in the movement of bowel contents
- abdominal massage increases the frequency of defecation248, level I
- laxatives including osmotic agents (such as lactulose) and oral
colonic stimulants (such as bisacodyl)
 bowel evacuation
- digital rectal stimulation increases motility in reflex neurogenic
bowel dysfunction
- manual evacuation of faeces involves using a single gloved
and lubricated finger to remove faeces from the rectum
- rectal stimulants [suppositories (such as bisacodyl) and
enemas] are used to stimulate reflex evacuation at the time
chosen for bowel care; enemas are to be avoided except in
faecal impaction due to adverse effects on sacral reflexes
from excessive distention of the rectum7, level III
If the bowel management programme is insufficient, transanal irrigation
can be used by passing water or other liquids via the anus.212, level lII
The Malone Antegrade Continence Enema is a safe and effective
treatment when conservative and transanal irrigation are unsuccessful
or inappropriate. Other treatment options available are electrical
stimulation of the pelvic floor and sacral anterior root stimulation.212, level lII
Surgery (elective colostomy or ileostomy) should only be performed if
all medical and conservative options have failed especially when faecal
incontinence is associated with severe pressure ulcers.212, level lII
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
67
Recommended 33
• Bowel management programme may be offered in multiple sclerosis
patients with bowel dysfunction.
i. Pain
The prevalence of pain (acute and chronic) in MS is 83%.249, level I The
underlying mechanisms of pain in MS are unclear and have been linked
with the differentiation and disinhibition of central and peripheral pain
pathways.210, level III
Pain in MS can be classified into:250, level III
• central neuropathic pain
 most common pain syndromes associated with MS251, level III
 constant burning sensation, usually affecting lower limbs, more
frequently distally than proximally251, level III
 caused by demyelinating lesions in the CNS250, level III
• non-neuropathic pain250, level III
 such as musculoskeletal pain and painful tonic spasms
 due to indirect consequence of the disability associated with MS
• mixed neuropathic and non-neuropathic pain250, level III
 such as headache, painful muscle spasms and spasticity
Pain is co-related with anxiety, depression, and fatigue, and is
aggravated by sleep disturbance and spasticity.250, level III
• Treatment
To date, few clinical trials have examined the pain management in MS.
In a systematic review on this issue:249, level I
 Anticonvulsants
- Gabapentin and pregabalin reduced pain, with adverse events
including mental cloudiness, somnolence and nausea.
- Lamotrigine was efficacious in reducing the worst and least
pain in comparison to placebo. Nausea was the most common
adverse event.
- Levetiracetam was significantly efficacious in reducing pain
when compared with placebo. Common adverse events were
tiredness, dizziness and mental changes.
 Antidepressants
- Nortriptyline was as efficacious as TENS in reducing pain.
Common adverse effects included drowsiness, constipation,
urinary retention and hypotension.
- Duloxetine was efficacious in reducing pain compared with
placebo in central neuropathic pain. Common side effects
included nausea, somnolence and dizziness.
 Cannabinoids
- Dronabinol improved pain when compared with placebo.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
68
- Nabiximols (an oromucosal spray) was significantly efficacious
in reducing central pain but not mixed pain when compared
with placebo.
- Dizziness was most common adverse event. Others included
fatigue, somnolence, vertigo and headaches.
 Dextromethorphan/Quinidine
- Dextromethorphan/quinidine, originally intended for pseudobulbar
affect, improved pain when compared with placebo. Most
common adverse events were non-vertiginous dizziness,
nausea and headache. This drug is currently not available in
Malaysia.
 Opioids
- IV morphine reduced pain when compared with saline placebo.
Most common adverse effects were constipation, sedation,
nausea, dizziness and vomiting.
NICE 2004 recommeds the use of anticonvulsants (such as carbamazepine
or gabapentin) or antidepressants (such as amitriptyline) for the treatment
of neuropathic pain in MS.218
However in a 3-year cohort study, a significantly higher incidence of
adverse effects in patients treated with carbamazepine was noted, with a
high rate of discontinuation at low dosages and episodes of neurological
worsening compared with gabapentin or lamotrigine.252, level II-2
In central pain of MS, opioids have minimal use and seem effective only
at very high doses. Neuropathic pain is poorly responsive to opioids.
On another note, The International Association for the Study of Pain
rates cannabis use in MS pain as second-line treatment due to lack of
long-term safety data.250, level III
• Chronic low back pain
In MS, chronic low back pain:
 is the most common type of somatic nociceptive pain and may be
due to degenerative changes and excessive burden of joints and
muscles from incorrect posture and/or abnormal gait, prolonged
wheelchair use and ill-fitting use of aids251, level III
 pharmacological treatment (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs or opioids) should follow the same strategies as those for
non-MS-related pain251, level III
 high-frequency TENS is more efficacious for pain relief at six
weeks while the low-frequency TENS produces a more sustained
effect at 32 weeks although not statistically significant253, level I
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
69
Recommendation 34
• Anticonvulsants or antidepressants may be offered for central
neuropathic pain in multiple sclerosis.
j. Paroxysmal Symptoms
Paroxysmal manifestations of MS are cluster of brief symptoms that
appear suddenly, frequently and are often stereotyped.7, level III In MS,
paroxysmal symptoms which cause severe discomfort affect 10% of
patients.254, level II-3 Paroxysmal symptoms are likely due to abnormal
transient electric discharges spread throughout demyelinated axons.
255, level II-3
Paroxysmal symptoms include:
• trigeminal neuralgia (TN)
 TN occurs 20 times more common in MS than in the general
population. It is typically unilateral.250, level III
• painful tonic spasms
 Painful tonic spasms is an abrupt abnormal posturing of
extremities. It can be described as cramping, pulling pain,
clawing of a hand or arm, or kicking out of a leg.250 - 251, level III
 It is distinct from pain related to spasticity and is estimated to
occur in11% of the MS population.251, level III
• Lhermitte’s sign
 This is a transient paroxysmal electric shock-like sensation
radiating down the spine to the lower extremities which is
elicited by neck flexion or extension.251, level III
 It is experienced by 40% of patients with MS.250 - 251, level III
• other paroxysmal manifestations of MS are paroxysmal
paraesthesiae, paroxysmal itching, dysarthria, diplopia, akinesia
and ataxia.7, level III
• Treatment
Despite of lack in RCTs, carbamazepine is being used in the treatment
of paroxysmal symptoms in MS.7, level III; 210, level III
Gabapentin reduces or completely resolves paroxysmal symptoms
(TN and PTS) with mild side effects within three months of therapy and
sustains for subsequent months (p=0.005).255, level II-3
Pregabalin reduces paroxysmal painful phenomena (p<0.05) with welltolerated side effects.254, level II-3
Recommendation 35
• Carbamazepine, gabapentin or pregabalin may be used in multiple
sclerosis with paroxysmal symptoms.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
70
k. Sexual Dysfunction
Sexual dysfunction in MS due to neurogenic lesions is common during
the disease course and affects approximately 70% of patients (refer
to Table 10). Underlying psychological dysfunction and side effects of
medication may also play a role.240, level III
Table 10. Common symptoms of sexual dysfunction in MS
• Clinical Evaluation
Sexual dysfunction in MS is commonly diagnosed on clinical basis
alone. If needed, serum testosterone level can be helpful to exclude
hormonal deficiency in men.240, level III; 256, level III
• Treatment
 Counseling is offered to address psychosocial relationship
concerns.240, level III; 256, level III
 Relevant interventions offered to patients with recognised specific
symptom.
- For female patients:240, level III; 256, level III
 oral or topical estrogens for vaginal dryness due to decreased
lubrication
 methyl-testosterone to increase libido
 vibratory stimuli to improve arousal
 variation in sexual positioning to reduce fatigue
- For male patients:
 sildenafil citrate improves ability to achieve and maintain
erection thus enhancing vaginal penetration and completion
of intercourse (RR=2.72, 95% CI 1.40 to 5.28). Significant side
effects include visual disturbance, rhinitis, flushing, dyspepsia and
headache.164, level I
 other interventions include:226, level III; 240, level III; 256, level III
- stimulation therapy - alternative erogenous zones, erotic
visual, audio aids and olfactory stimulation
- local injectable therapy - intra-urethral or intra-cavernosal
prostaglandin E1
- physical intervention such as physical therapy - vacuum
pump with constriction bands or manual/vibratory stimulation
- surgical intervention - inflatable, rigid or semi-rigid penile
prostheses
Men
Decreased libido
Difficulty in achieving or maintaining erection
Delayed ejaculation or loss of ejaculatory
function
Impaired genital sensation
Women
Decreased libido
Orgasmic dysfunction
Decreased vaginal lubrication
Decreased vaginal sensation
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
71
Recommendation 36
• Sexual dysfunction in multiple sclerosis (MS) should be enquired
and addressed. Management strategies may be offered to provide
symptomatic relief and improve the quality of life of MS patients.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
72
14. NEUROPSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS
a. Epidemiology
Neuropsychiatric manifestations are very common in MS in all subtypes
and stages. The prevalence rates of cognitive impairment in MS ranges
from 43 to 70%. MS negatively affects various aspects of cognitive
functioning including attention, information processing abilities, new
learning and memory functioning.257, level I Cognitive impairment is
detected as early as in CIS (20 - 30%) progressing over time, and most
frequent and severe in SPMS.258, level III
Among individuals with MS, relative to the general population, lifetime
prevalence rates are elevated for major depressive disorder (36 - 54%
vs 16.2%), bipolar disorder (13% vs 1 - 4.5%) and psychotic disorders
(2 - 3% vs 1.8%).259
b. Treatment
•
Cognitive Problem
A Cochrane systematic review reported a low level of evidence for the
positive effects of neuropsychological rehabilitation in MS. Cognitive
training improved memory span (SMD=0.54, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.88) and
working memory (SMD=0.33, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.57).260, level I
Another systematic review found some beneﬁts for attention training,
executive functions, learning performance and memory although the
evidence was limited due to methodological problems of the included
studies.257, level I
• Cognitive training may be beneficial in the rehabilitation of multiple
sclerosis patients with cognitive impairment.
• Memory Problem
In a Cochrane systematic review, donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine
and ginko biloba were not efficacious when compared with placebo
in the treatment of memory problem in MS. Nevertheless, no serious
adverse events were attributed to the above treatments.261, level I In a
recent Cochrane meta-analysis of cholinesterase inhibitors in MS with
cognitive impairment, donepezil and rivastigmine were not efficacious
when compared with placebo in objective cognitive improvement
and activities of daily living in short and medium terms treatment,
but showed significant improvement in the clinicians’ impression of
cognitive change (OR=1.96, 95% CI CI 1.06 to 3.62).262, level I
• There is no evidence to support any specific pharmacological
intervention in memory problem in MS.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
73
•
Depression
In a Cochrane systematic review, desipramine and paroxetine showed
a trend towards efficacy in depression in MS at short term compared
with placebo, however it was not statistically significant. Desipramine
reduced Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) score at least by
50% at five weeks, and paroxetine reduced HAM-D score at least by
50% at 12 weeks.263, level I Fluvoxamine improves depression based on
Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale scores in RRMS with
major depression disorder.264, level II-3
In another Cochrane systematic review on psychological interventions
in MS patients, there was some evidence that cognitive behavioural
therapy (CBT) might improve depression and help in adjustment
and coping with MS.265, level I Telephone-administered-CBT provides
significantly greater quality of life benefits compared with telephoneadministered supportive emotion focused therapy by improving
depression and positive affect.266, level I Stress management also
significantly improves depressive symptoms in MS compared with
control group (ES=0.53, p=0.02).267, level I A recent systemic review on
mindfulness-based intervention in MS showed significant improvement
in depression post-intervention (ES=0.65, p<0.001) and six months
later (ES=0.36, p<0.05).268, level I
In the absence of strong evidence that depression in MS is different
from depression in general psychiatry, the CPG on Management of
Major Depressive Disorder should be used in managing this group of
patients.269
Recommendation 37
• Antidepressants, cognitive behavioural therapy, mindfulness-based
intervention or stress management may be offered in multiple
sclerosis with depression.
• Bipolar disorder and pseudobulbar affect
Dextromethorphan/quinidine (DM/Q) is efficacious compared with
placebo in treatment of pseudobulbar affect (pathological laughing
and crying) in MS based on Center for Neurologic Study-Lability Scale
scores (p=0.0001) at all clinic visits (days 15, 29, 57 and 85). This
treatment is well-tolerated.270, level I
In the absence of strong evidence that bipolar disorder in MS is different
from bipolar disorder in general psychiatry, the CPG on Management
of Bipolar Disorder in Adults should be used in managing this group of
patients.271
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
74
Recommendation 38
• Dextromethorphan/quinidine may be considered in the treatment of
multiple sclerosis with pseudobulbar affect.
•
Psychosis
Based on two systematic reviews, there was insufficient evidence to
determine the efficacious treatment of psychosis in MS.226, level III; 259
Therefore the management of these patients should follow the
management of psychosis in general psychiatry.226, level III
Recommendation 39
• Psychosis in multiple sclerosis should be managed as in general
psychiatry.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
75
15. SPECIAL ISSUES
15.1 Pregnancy-related Issues
MS is most common among women during their child-bearing age
and this poses extra challenges for women, their families and health
providers. However, MS is not a hereditary disorder.272, level III
• Conception
MS appears to have no physiological effect on fertility although sexual
dysfunction affecting individuals with MS may impact conception.
273 - 274, level III
• Pregnancy Management
It is unusual for MS to present or relapse during pregnancy. A metaanalysis found that the relapse rate decreased during pregnancy in
relation to the preceding year but increased in the first three months
after delivery (p<0.0001).275, level II-2 A large cohort study showed that
during the first three months postpartum, the relapse rate rebounded to
70% above the pre-pregnancy state and reduced to the pre-pregnancy
rate thereafter.276, level II-2 This risk of postpartum relapse is higher in
those who have high relapse and disability in pre-pregnancy and
relapse during pregnancy period than those without.272, level III; 276, level II-2
Prenatal care of MS patients is similar to that of non-MS patients but
some may have aggravation of pre-existing urinary or bowel dysfunction.
They may be prone to urinary tract infection and possibly pyelonephritis
if untreated.274, level III
• MS Therapies in Pregnancy
There is lack of evidence on the safety of steroids in pregnant MS
patients.272, level III Based on a few case-control studies, steroids were
associated with an increased risk of cleft lips and palate when used in
the first trimester of pregnancy.277 - 278, level II-2 Therefore the risk:benefit
ratio needs to be weighed carefully before giving steroids for acute
relapses that occur during pregnancy especially during the first
trimester. Alternatives such as IVIG may also be considered.279, level III
Currently there is no evidence to suggest that DMT is not teratogenic or
safe in pregnancy. No uniform guidelines exist to direct the stopping of
a DMT before trying to become pregnant. Pregnancy counselling and
planned withdrawal of DMT is usually discussed with women with MS in
advance. The risks of teratogenicity and pregnancy losses are usually
balanced with an open discussion on the time frame of DMT withdrawal
and when the patient should start to try conceiving. For DMT like IFNβ,
GA and DMF one month is sufficient for withdrawal of therapy prior to
try conceiving and two months for fingolimod. Although three months
have been recommended for natalizumab, it may be that one month is
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
76
sufficient. Teriflunomide should always be washed out prior to planned
conception.272, level III In the event of unexpected pregnancy, treatment
interruption is advisable and patient is closely followed up. Refer to
Appendix 9.
Symptomatic therapies should be evaluated for potential teratogenic
risks and thus minimised in pregnant MS patients. Only those absolutely
necessary are used at the minimum effective dose. Alternative nonpharmacological strategies are encouraged.
• Pregnancy Outcome
A recent meta-analysis showed that there was a relatively higher
prevalence of abortions, caesarean sections, prematurity and low
birth-weight babies among women with MS. However, these rates did
not reach levels that would signify great concern.275, level II-2 Therefore
patients can be advised that MS has no negative impact on pregnancy
and its outcomes.
• Post-partum Issues
i. Delivery Issues
MS has no impact on the mode of delivery and the choice of anaesthesia
in pregnancy.272, level III
ii. Breastfeeding
DMT is not advisable during lactation. Two meta-analyses showed that
breastfeeding significantly prevented postpartum relapses although the
findings were limited by heterogeneity, methodological issues and small
studies.280 - 281, level II-2
iii. Restart Therapy
DMT can be started immediately postpartum as long as the patient is
not breast-feeding.272, level III
• Contraception
There is no evidence that oestrogen at doses contained in the combined
oral contraceptive pill (OCP) has an adverse effect on MS. Some drugs
used in treating MS symptoms such as carbamazepine may decrease
the effectiveness of OCP. MS patients with decreased mobility should be
warned about the risk of thrombosis with OCPs. Therefore, alternative
methods of birth control should be discussed.273 - 274, level III
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
77
Recommendation 40
• Pre-pregnancy counselling should be given to women with multiple
sclerosis (MS) in the childbearing age.
• Steroids should be avoided in the first trimester of pregnancy of MS
patients; however the benefit and risk need to be carefully assessed.
Methylprednisolone may be offered to MS patients with acute
relapse in second and third trimesters.
• Disease Modifying Therapy should not be used in MS patients who
are pregnant or breast-feeding.
15.2 Anaesthesia
Currently, there is lack of evidence on the effect of anaesthesia in MS
patients. Therefore, general principles on the use of anaesthesia should
be applied pre-, intra- and post-operatively. DMT used in MS needs to
be reviewed during pre-operative anaesthetic consultation. There is no
evidence to suggest one route (spinal, epidural or general anaesthesia)
or any particular agent of anaesthesia is preferable or may lead to MS
exacerbation.282, level III
15.3 Immunisation
Tetanus 283, level II-2 and Hepatitis B vaccines 284, level II-2 do not increase
risk of developing MS. Hepatitis B, influenza, tetanus and diphtheriatetanus/diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccines do not increase the risk
of relapse of MS.285, level II-2 No evidence is available for other vaccines.
Caution needs to be exercised in patients on fingolimod, natalizumab
and mitoxantrone when considering the use of live attenuated vaccines.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
78
16. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of MS at all healthcare
levels in Malaysia by using an evidence-based CPG. This aims to
prevent long-term morbidity and mortality.
16.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
i. wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies
and softcopies)
ii. regular MS update for healthcare providers
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG are:
i. poor understanding/limited knowledge of MS issues among patients/
carers and healthcare providers
ii. insufficient resources in the management of MS particularly in the
expertise (doctors and allied health) and diagnostic tools
iii. variation in treatment practice and preferences
iv. lack of active involvement of government and non-governmental
organisations
v. lack of co-ordinated referral and follow-up system
16.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
i. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare providers
ii. initiate training (with adequate funding) of healthcare providers
ensuring information is up-to-date
iii. ensure availability of highly specialised diagnostic tools and trained
manpower in MS management including multidisciplinary team at
different levels of healthcare
iv. ensure availability of drugs to treat MS
v. ensure widespread distribution of updated patient education materials
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed as
clinical audit indicator for quality management:-
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH. They are such as a Quick Reference and a Training
Module.
Percentage of
RRMS patients
prescribed with
IFNβ as firstline treatment
Total number of RRMS patients
in the same period
Number of RRMS patients presecribed with
IFNβ as first-line treatment in a period
=
x 100%
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
79
References
1.
Milo R, Kahana E. Multiple sclerosis: geoepidemiology, genetics and the environment.
Autoimmun Rev. 2010;9(5):A387-394.
2.
Cheng Q, Cheng XJ, Jiang GX. Multiple sclerosis in China-history and future. Mult Scler.
2009;15(6):655-660.
3.
Chong HT, Tan CT. A review of multiple sclerosis with Asian perspective. Med J Malaysia.
2008;63(5):356-361.
4.
Tan CT. Multiple sclerosis in Malaysia. Arch Neurol. 1988;45(6):624-627.
5.
Pandit L, Kundapur R. Prevalence and patterns of demyelinating central nervous system
disorders in urban Mangalore, South India. Mult Scler. 2014;20(12):1651-1653.
6.
Viswanathan S, Rose N, Masita A, et al. Multiple sclerosis in Malaysia: demographics, clinical
features, and neuroimaging characteristics Mult Scler Int. 2013:614716.
7.
Compston A, Confavreux C, Lassmann H, et al. McAlpine’s Multiple Sclerosis Fourth Edition.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc.; 2006.
8.
Ramagopalan SV, Dobson R, Meier UC, et al. Multiple sclerosis: risk factors, prodromes, and
potential causal pathways. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(7):727-739.
9.
Sloka S, Silva C, Pryse-Phillips W, et al. A quantitative analysis of suspected environmental
causes of MS. Can J Neurol Sci. 2011;38(1):98-105.
10.
Salzer J, Hallmans G, Nyström M, et al. Vitamin D as a protective factor in multiple sclerosis.
Neurology. 2012;79(21):2140-2145.
11.
Thacker EL, Mirzaei F, Ascherio A. Infectious mononucleosis and risk for multiple sclerosis: a
meta-analysis. Ann Neurol. 2006;59(3):499-503.
12.
Hawkes CH. Smoking is a risk factor for multiple sclerosis: a metanalysis. Mult Scler.
2007;13(5):610-615.
13.
Popescu BF, Pirko I, Lucchinetti CF. Pathology of multiple sclerosis: where do we stand?
Continuum (Minneap Minn) 2013;19(4 Multiple Sclerosis):901-921.
14.
Wegner C. Recent insights into the pathology of multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica. Clin
Neurol Neurosurg. 2013;115 Suppl 1:S38-41.
15.
Comabella M, Khoury SJ. Immunopathogenesis of multiple sclerosis. Clin Immunol.
2012;142(1):2-8.
16.
Wu GF, Alvarez E. The immunopathophysiology of multiple sclerosis. Neurol Clin. 2011;29(2):257278.
17.
Sospedra M, Martin R. Immunology of multiple sclerosis. Annu Rev Immunol. 2005;23:683-747.
18.
Aminoff MJ, Boller F, Swaab DF. Foreword. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;126(vii).
19.
Noseworthy JH, Lucchinetti C, Rodriguez M, et al. Multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med.
2000;343(13):938-952.
20.
Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010
revisions to the McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(2):292-302.
21.
Confavreux C, Vukusic S. Natural history of multiple sclerosis: a unifying concept. Brain.
2006;129(Pt 3):606-616.
22.
Thrower BW. Relapse management in multiple sclerosis. Neurologist. 2009;15(1):1-5.
23.
Burman J, Raininko R, Fagius J. Bilateral and recurrent optic neuritis in multiple sclerosis. Acta
Neurol Scand. 2011;123(3):207-210.
24.
Birmbaum G. Making the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Adv Neurol. 2006;98:111-124.
25.
Compston A, Coles A. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 2002;359(9313):1221-1231. Erratum in: Lancet
2002 Aug 1224;1360(9333):1648.
26.
Miller DH, Chard DT, Ciccarelli O. Clinically isolated syndromes. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11(2):157169.
27.
Miller D, Barkhof F, Montalban X, et al. Clinically isolated syndromes suggestive of multiple
sclerosis, part I: natural history, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and prognosis. Lancet Neurol.
2005;4(5):281-288.
28.
Mowry EM, Pesic M, Grimes B, et al. Clinical predictors of early second event in patients with
clinically isolated syndrome. J Neurol. 2009;256(7):1061-1066.
29.
Poser CM, Paty DW, Scheinberg L, et al. New diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: guidelines
for research protocols. Ann Neurol. 1983;13(3):227-231.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
80
30.
Sombekke MH, Wattjes MP, Balk LJ, et al. Spinal cord lesions in patients with clinically isolated
syndrome: a powerful tool in diagnosis and prognosis. Neurology. 2013;80(1):69-75.
31.
Tintore M, Rovira A, Arrambide G, et al. Brainstem lesions in clinically isolated syndromes;.
Neurology. 2010;75(21):1933-1938.
32.
Tintoré M, Rovira A, Río J, et al. Do oligoclonal bands add information to MRI in first attacks of
multiple sclerosis? Neurology. 2008;70(13 Pt 2):1079-1083.
33.
Balcer LJ. Clinical practice. Optic neuritis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(12):1273-1280.
34.
Frohman EM, Frohman TC, Zee DS, et al. The neuro-ophthalmology of multiple sclerosis. Lancet
Neurol. 2005;4(2):111-121.
35.
Morrow MJ, Wingerchuk D. Neuromyelitis optica. J Neuroophthalmol. 2012;32(2):154-166.
36.
Costello F, Coupland S, Hodge W, et al. Quantifying axonal loss after optic neuritis with optical
coherence tomography. Ann Neurol. 2006;59(6):963-969.
37.
Transverse Myelitis Consortium Working Group. Proposed diagnostic criteria and nosology of
acute transverse myelitis. Neurology. 2002;59(4):499-505.
38.
Scott TF, Frohman EM, De Seze J, et al. Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee
of American Academy of Neurology. Evidence-based guideline: clinical evaluation and treatment
of transverse myelitis: report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2011;77(24):2128-2134.
39.
Jacob A, Weinshenker BG. An approach to the diagnosis of acute transverse myelitis. Semin
Neurol. 2008;28(1):105-120.
40.
West TW. Transverse myelitis-a review of the presentation, diagnosis, and initial management.
Discov Med. 2013;16(88):167-177.
41.
Cobo Calvo A, Mañé Martínez MA, Alentorn-Palau A, et al. Idiopathic acute transverse myelitis:
outcome and conversion to multiple sclerosis in a large series. BMC Neurol. 2013;13:135.
42.
HT Chong, N Ramli, KH Lee, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of Asians with multiple sclerosis
was similar to that of the West. Neurology Asia. 2004;9:47-53.
43.
Wingerchuk DM, Lennon VA, Lucchinetti CF, et al. The spectrum of neuromyelitis optica. Lancet
Neurol. 2007;6(9):805-815.
44.
Wingerchuk DM, Lennon VA, Pittock SJ, et al. Revised diagnostic criteria for neuromyelitis
optica. Neurology. 2006;66(10):1485-1489.
45.
Choi KH, Lee KS, Chung SO, et al. Idiopathic transverse myelitis: MR characteristics. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol. 1996;17(6):1151-1160.
46.
Schiff D, O’Neill BP. Intramedullary spinal cord metastases: clinical features and treatment
outcome. Neurology. 1996;47(4):906-912.
47.
Miller DH, Weinshenker BG, Filippi M, et al. Differential diagnosis of suspected multiple sclerosis:
a consensus approach. Mult Scler. 2008;14(9):1157-1174.
48.
Rolak LA, Fleming JO. The Differential Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis. The Neurologist.
2007;13(2):57-72.
49.
Katz Sand IB, FD L. Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Continuum
(Minneap Minn). 2013;19(4 Multiple Sclerosis):922-943.
50.
Cañellas AR, Gols AR, Izquierdo JR, et al. Idiopathic inflammatory-demyelinating diseases of the
central nervous system. Neuroradiology. 2007;49(5):393-409.
51.
Scolding N. The differential diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2001;71 Suppl 2:ii9-15.
52.
Sato DK, Callegaro D, Lana-Peixoto MA, et al. Distinction between MOG antibody-positive and
AQP4 antibody-positive NMO spectrum disorders. Neurology. 2014;82(6):474-481.
53.
Trebst C, Jarius S, Berthele A, et al. Update on the diagnosis and treatment of neuromyelitis
optica: recommendations of the Neuromyelitis Optica Study Group (NEMOS). J Neurol.
2014;261(1):1-16.
54.
Kitley J, Woodhall M, Waters P, et al. Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies in adults
with a neuromyelitis optica phenotype. Neurology. 2012;79(12):1273-1277.
55.
Jarius S, Wildemann B. Aquaporin-4 antibodies (NMO-IgG) as a serological marker of
neuromyelitis optica: a critical review of the literature. Brain Pathol. 2013;23(6):661-683.
56.
Fujihara K. Neuromyelitis optica and astrocytic damage in its pathogenesis. J Neurol Sci.
2011;306(1-2):183-187.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
81
57.
Takahashi T, Fujihara K, Nakashima I, et al. Anti-aquaporin-4 antibody is involved in the
pathogenesis of NMO: a study on antibody titre. Brain. 2007;130(Pt 5):1235-1243.
58.
Lennon VA, Kryzer TJ, Pittock SJ, et al. IgG marker of optic-spinal multiple sclerosis binds to the
aquaporin-4 water channel. J Exp Med. 2005;202(4):473-477.
59.
Wingerchuk DM, Banwell B, Bennett JL, et al. International consensus diagnostic criteria for
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. Neurology. 2015;85(2):177-189.
60.
Kim HJ, Paul F, Lana-Peixoto MA, et al. MRI characteristics of neuromyelitis optica spectrum
disorder: An international update. Neurology. 2015;84(11):1165-1173.
61.
Pittock SJ, Lennon VA, Krecke K, et al. Brain abnormalities in neuromyelitis optica. Arch Neurol.
2006;63(3):390-396.
62.
Cassinotto C, Deramond H, Olindo S, et al. MRI of the spinal cord in neuromyelitis optica and
recurrent longitudinal extensive myelitis. J Neuroradiol. 2009;36(4):199-205.
63.
Krupp LB, Banwell B, Tenembaum S, et al. Consensus definitions proposed for pediatric multiple
sclerosis and related disorders. Neurology. 2007;68(16 Suppl 2):S7-12.
64.
Scalfari A, Neuhaus A, Degenhardt A, et al. The natural history of multiple sclerosis: a
geographically based study 10: relapses and long-term disability. Brain. 2010;133(Pt 7):19141929.
65.
Lublin FD, Reingold SC. Defining the clinical course of multiple sclerosis: results of an
international survey. National Multiple Sclerosis Society (USA) Advisory Committee on Clinical
Trials of New Agents in Multiple Sclerosis. Neurology. 1996;46(4):907-911.
66.
Glad S, Nyland H, KM M. Benign multiple sclerosis. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 2006;183:55-57.
67.
Lublin FD, Reingold SC, Cohen JA, et al. Defining the clinical course of multiple sclerosis: the
2013 revisions. Neurology. 2014;83(3):278-286.
68.
Rovira A, Swanton J, Tintoré M, et al. A single, early magnetic resonance imaging study in the
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol. 2009;66(5):587-592.
69.
Gómez-Moreno M, Díaz-Sánchez M, Ramos-González A. Application of the 2010 McDonald
criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis in a Spanish cohort of patients with clinically
isolated syndromes. Mult Scler. 2012;18(1):39-44.
70.
Huh SY, Kim SH, Kim W, et al. Evaluation of McDonald MRI criteria for dissemination in space in
Korean patients with clinically isolated syndromes. Mult Scler. 2014;20(4):492-495.
71.
McDonald WI, Compston A, Edan G, et al. Recommended diagnostic criteria for multiple
sclerosis: guidelines from the International Panel on the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Ann
Neurol. 2001;50(1):121-127.
72.
Simon JH, Li D, Traboulsee A, et al. Standardized MR imaging protocol for multiple sclerosis:
Consortium of MS Centers consensus guidelines. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2006;27(2):455-461.
73.
Bot JC, Barkhof F, Lycklama à Nijeholt G, et al. Differentiation of multiple sclerosis from other
inflammatory disorders and cerebrovascular disease: value of spinal MR imaging. Radiology.
2002;223(1):46-56.
74.
Montalban X, Tintoré M, Swanton J, et al. MRI criteria for MS in patients with clinically isolated
syndromes. Neurology. 2010;74(5):427-434.
75.
Freedman MS, Thompson EJ, Deisenhammer F, et al. Recommended standard of cerebrospinal
fluid analysis in the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: a consensus statement. Arch Neurol.
2005;62(6):865-870.
76.
Fortini AS, Sanders EL, Weinshenker BG, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal bands in the
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Isoelectric focusing with IgG immunoblotting compared with
high-resolution agarose gel electrophoresis and cerebrospinal fluid IgG index. Am J Clin Pathol.
2003;120(5):672-675.
77.
Dobson R, Ramagopalan S, Davis A, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal bands in multiple
sclerosis and clinically isolated syndromes: a meta-analysis of prevalence, prognosis and effect
of latitude. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84(8):909-914.
78.
Viswanathan S, Arip M, Mustafa N, et al. The frequency of anti-aquaporin-4 Ig g antibody in
neuromyelitis optica and its spectrum disorders at a single tertiary referral center in malaysia.
Mult Scler Int. 2014;2014:568254.
79.
Schäffler N, Köpke S, Winkler L, et al. Accuracy of diagnostic tests in multiple sclerosis-a
systematic review. Acta Neurol Scand. 2011;124(3):151-164.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
82
80.
Matthews WB, Wattam-Bell JR, Pountney E. Evoked potentials in the diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis: a follow up study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1982;45(4):303-307.
81.
Gronseth GS, Ashman EJ. Practice parameter: the usefulness of evoked potentials in identifying
clinically silent lesions in patients with suspected multiple sclerosis (an evidence-based review):
Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2000;54(9):1720-1725.
82.
Prosperini L, Mancinelli CR, De Giglio L, et al. Interferon beta failure predicted by EMA criteria or
isolated MRI activity in multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2014;20(5):566-576.
83.
Sormani MP, Arnold DL, De Stefano N. Treatment effect on brain atrophy correlates with
treatment effect on disability in multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 2014;75(1):43-49.
84.
Río J, Rovira A, Tintoré M, et al. Evaluating the response to glatiramer acetate in relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients. Mult Scler. 2014;20(12):1602-1608.
85.
Sormani MP, Bruzzi P. MRI lesions as a surrogate for relapses in multiple sclerosis: a metaanalysis of randomised trials. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12(7):669-676.
86.
Tremlett H, Yousefi M, Devonshire V, et al. Impact of multiple sclerosis relapses on progression
diminishes with time. Neurology. 2009;73(20):1616-1623.
87.
Weinshenker BG, Bass B, Rice GP, et al. The natural history of multiple sclerosis: a geographically
based study. 2. Predictive value of the early clinical course. Brain. 1989;112 (Pt 6):1419-1428.
88.
Damasceno A, Von Glehn F, Brandão CO, et al. Prognostic indicators for long-term disability in
multiple sclerosis patients. J Neurol Sci. 2013;324(1-2):29-33.
89.
Fisniku LK, Brex PA, Altmann DR, et al. Disability and T2 MRI lesions: a 20-year follow-up of
patients with relapse onset of multiple sclerosis. Brain. 2008;131(Pt 3):808-817.
90.
Barkhof F. The clinico-radiological paradox in multiple sclerosis revisited. Curr Opin Neurol ;.
2002;15(3):239-245.
91.
Kappos L, Moeri D, Radue EW, et al. Predictive value of gadolinium-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging for relapse rate and changes in disability or impairment in multiple sclerosis:
a meta-analysis. Gadolinium MRI Meta-analysis Group. Lancet. 1999;353(9157):964-969.
92.
Bermel RA, You X, Foulds P, et al. Predictors of long-term outcome in multiple sclerosis patients
treated with interferon β. Ann Neurol. 2013;73(1):95-103.
93.
Dobson R, Rudick RA, Turner B, et al. Assessing treatment response to interferon-β: is there a
role for MRI? Neurology. 2014;82(3):248-254.
94.
Giorgio A, Battaglini M, Smith SM, et al. Brain atrophy assessment in multiple sclerosis:
importance and limitations. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2008;18(4):675-686.
95.
Bermel RA, Bakshi R. The measurement and clinical relevance of brain atrophy in multiple
sclerosis. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5(2):158-170.
96.
Roosendaal SD, Bendfeldt K, Vrenken H, et al. Grey matter volume in a large cohort of MS
patients: relation to MRI parameters and disability. Mult Scler. 2011;17(9):1098-1106.
97.
Schlaeger R, Papinutto N, Panara V, et al. Spinal cord gray matter atrophy correlates with
multiple sclerosis disability. Ann Neurol. 2014;76(4):568-580.
98.
2015 Revised CMSC MRI Protocol and Guidelines: Available from: http://c.ymcdn.com/
sites/www.mscare.org/resource/collection/9C5F19B9-3489-48B0-A54B-623A1ECEE07B/
MRIprotocol2015.pdf.
99.
Lövblad KO, Anzalone N, Dörfler A, et al. MR imaging in multiple sclerosis: review and
recommendations for current practice. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2010;31(6):983-989.
100. National Clinical Guideline Centre. Multiple sclerosis, management of multiple sclerosis in
primary and secondary care. London: NCGC; 2014.
101. Bevan CJ, Cree BA. Disease activity free status: a new end point for a new era in multiple
sclerosis clinical research? JAMA Neurol. 2014;71(3):269-270.
102. Giovannoni G, Cook S, Rammohan K, et al. Sustained disease-activity-free status in patients
with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis treated with cladribine tablets in the CLARITY study: a
post-hoc and subgroup analysis. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10(4):329-337.
103. Havrdova E, Galetta S, Hutchinson M, et al. Effect of natalizumab on clinical and radiological
disease activity in multiple sclerosis: a retrospective analysis of the Natalizumab Safety and
Efficacy in Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (AFFIRM) study. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8(3):254260.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
83
104. Berkovich R. Treatment of acute relapses in multiple sclerosis. Neurotherapeutics. 2013;10(1):97105.
105. Filippini G, Brusaferri F, Sibley WA, et al. Corticosteroids or ACTH for acute exacerbations in
multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(4):CD001331.
106. Burton JM, O’Connor PW, Hohol M, et al. Oral versus intravenous steroids for treatment of
relapses in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;12:CD006921.
107. Perumal JS, Caon C, S H, et al. Oral prednisone taper following intravenous steroids fails to
improve disability or recovery from relapses in multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neurol. 2008;15(7):677680.
108. Gal RL, Vedula SS, Beck R. Corticosteroids for treating optic neuritis. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2012;4:CD001430.
109. Beck RW, Cleary PA, Trobe JD, et al. The effect of corticosteroids for acute optic neuritis on the
subsequent development of multiple sclerosis. The Optic Neuritis Study Group. N Engl J Med.
1993;329(24):1764-1769.
110. Trebst C, Reising A, Kielstein JT, et al. Plasma exchange therapy in steroid-unresponsive
relapses in patients with multiple sclerosis. Blood Purif. 2009;28(2):108-115.
111. Keegan M, Pineda AA, McClelland RL, et al. Plasma exchange for severe attacks of CNS
demyelination: predictors of response. Neurology. 2002;58(1):143-146.
112. Weinshenker BG, O’Brien PC, Petterson TM, et al. A randomized trial of plasma exchange in
acute central nervous system inflammatory demyelinating disease. Ann Neurol. 1999;46(6):878886.
113. Keegan M, König F, McClelland R, et al. Relation between humoral pathological changes in
multiple sclerosis and response to therapeutic plasma exchange. Lancet. 2005;366(9485):579582.
114. Elovaara I, Kuusisto H, Wu X, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulins are a therapeutic option in the
treatment of multiple sclerosis relapse. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2011;34(2):84-89.
115. Sorensen PS, Haas J, Sellebjerg F, et al. IV immunoglobulins as add-on treatment to
methylprednisolone for acute relapses in MS. Neurology. 2004;63(11):2028-2033.
116. Wingerchuk DM, Carter JL. Multiple sclerosis: current and emerging disease-modifying therapies
and treatment strategies. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89(2):225-240.
117. Filippini G, Del Giovane C, Vacchi L, et al. Immunomodulators and immunosuppressants for
multiple sclerosis: a network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2013,
Issue 6 Art No: CD008933.
118. Rice GPA, IncorvaiaB, Munari LM, et al. Interferon in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2001, Issue 4 Art No: CD002002.
119. Calabresi PA, Kieseier BC, Arnold DL, et al. Pegylated interferon β-1a for relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis (ADVANCE): a randomised, phase 3, double-blind study. Lancet Neurol.
2014;13(7):657-665.
120. Rojas JI, Romano M, Ciapponi A, et al. Interferon Beta for Primary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 1 Art No: CD006643.
121. La Mantia L, Vacchi L, Di Pietrantonj C, et al. Interferon beta for secondary progressive multiple
sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 1 Art No: CD005181.
122. Ziemssen T, Schrempf W. Glatiramer acetate: mechanisms of action in multiple sclerosis. Int Rev
Neurobiol. 2007;79:537-570.
123. La Mantia L, Munari LM, Lovati R. Glatiramer acetate for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 5 Art No: CD004678.
124. Khan O, Rieckmann P, Boyko A, et al. Three times weekly glatiramer acetate in relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 2013;73(6):705-713.
125. He D, Xu Z, Dong S, et al. Teriflunomide for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2012, Issue 12 Art No: CD009882.
126. Confavreux C, O’Connor P, Comi G, et al. Oral teriflunomide for patients with relapsing multiple
sclerosis (TOWER): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Neurol. 2014;13(3):247-256.
127. Vermersch P, Czlonkowska A, Grimaldi LM, et al. Teriflunomide versus subcutaneous interferon
beta-1a in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis: a randomised, controlled phase 3 trial. Mult
Scler. 2014;20(6):705-716.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
84
128. Medication Guide AUBAGIO (teriflunomide) tablets Available from: http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/drugs/drugsafety/ucm322204.pdf.
129. Fox RJ, Miller DH, Phillips JT, et al. Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 or glatiramer
in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(12):1087-1097. Erratum in: N Engl J Med. 2012
Oct 1025;1367(1017):1673.
130. Gold R, Kappos L, Arnold DL, et al. Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 for relapsing
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(12):1098-1107. Erratum in: N Engl J Med. 2012 Dec
1013;1367(1024):2362.
131. FDA Drug Safety Podcast: FDA warns about case of rare brain infection PML with MS
drug Tecfidera (dimethyl fumarate). Available from: http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/
drugsafetypodcasts/ucm424874.htm).
132. Calabresi PA, Radue EW, Goodin D, et al. Safety and Efficacy of Fingolimod in patients with
relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (FREEDOMS II): a double blind, randomized, placebocontrolled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Neurol 2014;13: 545-556.
133. Kappos L, Radue EW, O’Connor P, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of oral fingolimod in relapsing
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(5):387-401.
134. Cohen JA, Barkhof F, Comi G, et al. Fingolimod versus intramuscular interferon in patient
subgroups from TRANSFORMS. J Neurol. 2013;260(8):2023-2032.
135. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA warns about cases of rare brain infection with MS
drug Gilenya (fingolimod) in two patients with no prior exposure to immunosuppressant drugs.
Available from: http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm456919.htm).
136. Polman CH, O’Connor PW, Havrdova E, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
natalizumab for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(9):899-910.
137. Pucci E, Giuliani G, Solari A, et al. Natalizumab for relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 10 Art No: CD00762.
138. Plavina T, Subramanyam M, Bloomgren G, et al. Anti-JC virus antibody levels in serum or plasma
further define risk of natalizumab-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Ann
Neurol. 2014;76(6):802-812.
139. Bloomgren G, Richman S, Hotermans C, et al. Risk of natalizumab-associated progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(20):1870-1880.
140. Sørensen PS, Bertolotto A, Edan G, et al. Risk stratification for progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy in patients treated with natalizumab. Mult Scler. 2012;18(2):143-152.
141. Fernandez O. Alemtuzumab in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. J Inflamm Res. 2014;7:19-27.
142. Coles AJ, Fox E, Vladic A, et al. Alemtuzumab more effective than interferon β-1a at 5-year followup of CAMMS223 clinical trial. Neurology. 2012;78(14):1069-1078.
143. Coles AJ, Twyman CL, Arnold DL, et al. Alemtuzumab for patients with relapsing multiple
sclerosis after disease-modifying therapy: a randomised controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2012;380(9856):1829-1839.
144. CAMMS223 Trial Investigators, Coles AJ, Compston DA, et al. Alemtuzumab vs. interferon beta1a in early multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(17):1786-1801.
145. Martinelli Boneschi F, Vacchi L, Rovaris M, et al. Mitoxantrone for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 5 Art No: CD002127.
146. Rivera VM, Jeffery DR, Weinstock-Guttman B, et al. Results from the 5-year, phase IV RENEW
(Registry to Evaluate Novantrone Effects in Worsening Multiple Sclerosis) study. BMC Neurol.
2013;13(1):80.
147. Le Page E, Leray E, Edan G, et al. Long-term safety profile of mitoxantrone in a French cohort of
802 multiple sclerosis patients: a 5-year prospective study. Mult Scler. 2011;17(7):867-875.
148. He D, Zhou H, Han W, et al. Rituximab for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 12 Art No: CD009130.
149. Hawker K, O’Connor P, Freedman MS, et al. Rituximab in patients with primary progressive
multiple sclerosis: results of a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled multicenter trial. Ann
Neurol. 2009;66(4):460-471.
150. Boster A, Edan G, Frohman E, et al. Intense immunosuppression in patients with rapidly
worsening multiple sclerosis: treatment guidelines for the clinician. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7(2):173183.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
85
151. Krishnan C, Kaplin AI, Brodsky RA, et al. Reduction of disease activity and disability with
high-dose cyclophosphamide in patients with aggressive multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol.
2008;65(8):1044-1051.
152. Khan OA, Zvartau-Hind M, Caon C, et al. Effect of monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide in
rapidly deteriorating multiple sclerosis patients resistant to conventional therapy. Mult Scler.
2001;7(3):185-188.
153. Reggio E, Nicoletti A, Fiorilla T, et al. The combination of cyclophosphamide plus interferon beta
as rescue therapy could be used to treat relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis patients - twentyfour months follow-up. J Neurol. 2005;252(10):1255-1261.
154. Patti F, Reggio E, Palermo F, et al. Stabilization of rapidly worsening multiple sclerosis for 36
months in patients treated with interferon beta plus cyclophosphamide followed by interferon
beta. J Neurol. 2004;251(12):1502-1506.
155. Portaccio E, Zipoli V, Siracusa G, et al. Safety and tolerability of cyclophosphamide ‘pulses’ in
multiple sclerosis: a prospective study in a clinical cohort. Mult Scler. 2003;9(5):446-450.
156. La Mantia L, Milanese C, Mascoli N, et al. Cyclophosphamide for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 1 Art No: CD002819.
157. Gray O, McDonnell GV, Forbes RB. Intravenous immunoglobulins for multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(4):CD002936.
158. Kalincik T, Horakova D, Dolezal O, et al. Interferon, azathioprine and corticosteroids in multiple
sclerosis: 6-year follow-up of the ASA cohort. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2012;114(7):940-946.
159. Ravnborg M, Sørensen PS, Andersson M, et al. Methylprednisolone in combination with
interferon beta-1a for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MECOMBIN study): a multicentre,
double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(7):672-680.
160. Sorensen PS, Mellgren SI, Svenningsson A, et al. NORdic trial of oral Methylprednisolone as
add-on therapy to Interferon beta-1a for treatment of relapsing-remitting Multiple Sclerosis
(NORMIMS study): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8(6):519-529.
161. Cohen JA, Imrey PB, Calabresi PA, et al. Results of the Avonex Combination Trial (ACT) in
relapsing-remitting MS. Neurology. 2009;72(6):535-541.
162. Ciccone A, Beretta S, Brusaferri F, et al. Corticosteroids for the long-term treatment in multiple
sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 Jan 23;(1):CD006264.
163. Brusaferri F, Candelise L. Steroids for multiple sclerosis and optic neuritis: a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled clinical trials. J Neurol. 2000;247(6):435-442.
164. Xiao Y, Huang J, Luo H, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 Feb 7;2:CD010242.
165. Massacesi L, Tramacere I, Amoroso S, et al. Azathioprine versus beta interferons for
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a multicentre randomized non-inferiority trial. PLoS One.
2014;9(11):e113371.
166. Kampman MT, Steffensen LH, Mellgren SI, et al. Effect of vitamin D3 supplementation on relapses,
disease progression, and measures of function in persons with multiple sclerosis: exploratory
outcomes from a double-blind randomised controlled trial. Mult Scler. 2012;18(8):1144-1151.
167. Soilu-Hänninen M, Aivo J, Lindström BM, et al. A randomised, double blind, placebo controlled
trial with vitamin D3 as an add on treatment to interferon β-1b in patients with multiple sclerosis.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83(5):565-567.
168. Jagannath VA, Fedorowicz Z, Asokan GV, et al. Vitamin D for the management of multiple
sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 12 Art No: CD008422.
169. Casetta I, Iuliano G, Filippini G. Azathioprine for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 4 Art No: CD003982.
170. Calabresi PA, Wilterdink JL, Rogg JM, et al. An open-label trial of combination therapy with
interferon beta-1a and oral methotrexate in MS. Neurology. 2002;58(2):314-317.
171. Clerico M, Faggiano F, Palace J, et al. Recombinant interferon beta or glatiramer acetate for
delaying conversion of the first demyelinating event to multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 2 Art No: CD005278.
172. Comi G, De Stefano N, Freedman MS, et al. Comparison of two dosing frequencies of
subcutaneous interferon beta-1a in patients with a first clinical demyelinating event suggestive
of multiple sclerosis (REFLEX): a phase 3 randomised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol.
2012;11(1):33-41.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
86
173. Comi G, Martinelli V, Rodegher M, et al. Effect of glatiramer acetate on conversion to clinically
definite multiple sclerosis in patients with clinically isolated syndrome (PreCISe study): a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;374(9700):1503-1511.
174. NHS England Clinical Reference Group for Neurosciences. Clinical Commissioning Policy:
Disease Modifying Therapies for Patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). London: NHS England;
2014.
175. Hutchinson M, Fox RJ, Havrdova E, et al. Efficacy and safety of BG-12 (dimethyl fumarate) and
other disease-modifying therapies for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a
systematic review and mixed treatment comparison. Curr Med Res Opin. 2014;30(4):613-627.
176. Limmroth V. Treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: current and future algorithms.
Eur Neurol. 2014;72 Suppl 1:35-38.
177. National Institute of Health and Care Exellence. Teriflunomide for treating relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis. London: NICE; 2014.
178. National Institute of Health and Care Exellence. Dimethyl fumarate for treating relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis. London: NICE; 2014.
179. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Available from: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/default.htm.
180. European Medicines Agency: Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/.
181. Gauthier SA, Glanz BI, Mandel M, et al. Incidence and factors associated with treatment failure
in the CLIMB multiple sclerosis cohort study. J Neurol Sci. 2009;284(1-2):116-119.
182. Sorensen PS. New management algorithms in multiple sclerosis. Curr Opin Neurol.
2014;27(3):246-259.
183. Freedman MS. Treatment options for patients with multiple sclerosis who have a suboptimal
response to interferon-β therapy. Eur J Neurol. 2014;21(3):377-387, e318-320.
184. Río J, Comabella M, Montalban X. Multiple sclerosis: current treatment algorithms. Curr Opin
Neurol. 2011;24(3):230-237.
185. European Medicines Agency. Gilenya EU summary of product characteristics: Available from:
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/
human/002202/WC500104528.pdf.
186. Río J, Castilló J, Rovira A, et al. Measures in the first year of therapy predict the response to
interferon beta in MS. Mult Scler. 2009;15(7):848-853.
187. Edan G, Morrissey S, Le Page E. Rationale for the use of mitoxantrone in multiple sclerosis. J
Neurol Sci. 2004;223(1):35-39.
188. Freedman MS, Selchen D, Arnold DL, et al. Treatment optimization in MS: Canadian MS Working
Group updated recommendations. Can J Neurol Sci. 2013;40(3):307-323.
189. Río J, Tintoré M, Sastre-Garriga J, et al. Change in the clinical activity of multiple sclerosis after
treatment switch for suboptimal response. Eur J Neurol. 2012;19(6):899-904.
190. Rieckmann P, Traboulsee A, Devonshire V, et al. Escalating immunotherapy of multiple sclerosis.
Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2008;1(3):181-192.
191. Río J, Nos C, Tintoré M, et al. Assessment of different treatment failure criteria in a cohort of
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis patients treated with interferon beta: implications for clinical
trials. Ann Neurol. 2002;52(4):400-406.
192. Hartung HP, Montalban X, Sorensen PS, et al. Principles of a new treatment algorithm in multiple
sclerosis. Expert Rev Neurother. 2011;11(3):351-362.
193. Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Consensus Group (MSTCG), Wiendl H, Toyka KV, et al. Basic
and escalating immunomodulatory treatments in multiple sclerosis: current therapeutic
recommendations. J Neurol. 2008;255(10):1449-1463.
194. Rudick RA, Stuart WH, Calabresi PA, et al. Natalizumab plus interferon beta-1a for relapsing
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(9):911-923.
195. Butzkueven H, Kappos L, Pellegrini F, et al. Efficacy and safety of natalizumab in multiple
sclerosis: interim observational programme results. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2014;85(11):1190-1197.
196. Prosperini L, Borriello G, Fubelli F, et al. Natalizumab treatment in multiple sclerosis: the
experience of S. Andrea MS Centre in Rome. Neurol Sci. 2011;31 Suppl 3:303-307.
197. Spelman T, Kalinicik T, Zhang A, et al. Comparative efficacy of switching to natalizumab in active
multiple sclerosis. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2015;2(4):373-387.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
87
198. Cohen JA, Barkhof F, Comi G, et al. Oral fingolimod or intramuscular interferon for relapsing
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(5):402-415.
199. Jokubaitis VG, Li V KT, Izquierdo G, et al. Fingolimod after natalizumab and the risk of short-term
relapse. Neurology. 2014;82(14):1204-1211.
200. Cohen M, Maillart E, Tourbah A, et al. Switching from natalizumab to fingolimod in multiple
sclerosis: a French prospective study. JAMA Neurol. 2014;71(4):436-441.
201. Fox EJ, Sullivan HC, Gazda SK, et al. A single-arm, open-label study of alemtuzumab in
treatment-refractory patients with multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neurol. 2012;19(2):307-311.
202. Edan G, Le Page E. Induction therapy for patients with multiple sclerosis: why? When? How?
CNS Drugs. 2013;27(6):403-409.
203. Le Page E, Edan G. Long-term experience with induction treatment regimens in multiple
sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 2009;277 Suppl 1:S46-49.
204. Le Page E, Leray E, Taurin G, et al. Mitoxantrone as induction treatment in aggressive relapsing
remitting multiple sclerosis: treatment response factors in a 5 year follow-up observational study
of 100 consecutive patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79(1):52-56.
205. Marriott JJ, Miyasaki JM, Gronseth G, et al. Evidence Report: The efficacy and safety of
mitoxantrone (Novantrone) in the treatment of multiple sclerosis: Report of the Therapeutics
and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology.
2010;74(18):1463-1470.
206. Naismith RT, Piccio L, Lyons JA, et al. Rituximab add-on therapy for breakthrough relapsing
multiple sclerosis: a 52-week phase II trial. Neurology. 2010;74(23):1860-1867.
207. Hauser SL, Waubant E, Arnold DL, et al. B-cell depletion with rituximab in relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(7):676-688.
208. Edan G, Comi G, Le Page E, et al. Mitoxantrone prior to interferon beta-1b in aggressive relapsing
multiple sclerosis: a 3-year randomised trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011;82(12):13441350.
209. Hartung HP, Gonsette R, König N, et al. Mitoxantrone in progressive multiple sclerosis: a
placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomised, multicentre trial. Lancet. 2002;360(9350):20182025.
210. Khan F, Amatya B, Turner-Stokes L. Symptomatic therapy and rehabilitation in primary
progressive multiple sclerosis. Neurol Res Int. 2011:740505.
211. Khan F, Turner-Stokes L, Ng L, et al. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation for adults with multiple
sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD006036.
212. European Multiple Sclerosis Platform (EMSP). Recommendations on Rehabilitation Services for
Persons with Multiple Sclerosis in Europe. Brussels EMSP; 2012.
213. Dalgas U, Stenager E, Ingemann-Hansen T. Multiple sclerosis and physical exercise:
recommendations for the application of resistance-, endurance- and combined training. Mult
Scler. 2008 14(1):35-53.
214. Rietberg MB, Brooks D, Uitdehaag BMJ, et al. Exercise therapy for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD003980.
215. Tarakci E, Yeldan I, Huseyinsinoglu BE, et al. Group exercise training for balance, functional
status, spasticity, fatigue and quality of life in multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial.
Clin Rehabil. 2013;27(9):813-822.
216. Miller L, Paul L, Mattison P, et al. Evaluation of a home-based physiotherapy programme for
those with moderate to severe multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled pilot study. Clin
Rehabil. 2011;25(8):720-730.
217. Beer S, Aschbacher B, Manoglou D, et al. Robot-assisted gait training in multiple sclerosis: a pilot
randomized trial. Mult Scler. 2008;14(2):231-236.
218. The National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Multiple Sclerosis. London: RCP;
2004.
219. Souza A, Kelleher A, Cooper R, et al. Multiple sclerosis and mobility-related assistive technology:
systematic review of literature. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2010;47(3):213-223.
220. Mills RJ, Yap L, Young CA. Treatment for ataxia in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database for
Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD005029.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
88
221. Asano M, Finlayson ML. Meta-analysis of three different types of fatigue management
interventions for people with multiple sclerosis: exercise, education, and medication. Mult Scler
Int. 2014;2014:798285.
222. Blikman LJ, Huisstede BM, Kooijmans H, et al. Effectiveness of energy conservation treatment
in reducing fatigue in multiple sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil. 2013;94(7):1360-1376.
223. Pucci E, Brañas Tato P, D’Amico R, et al. Amantadine for fatigue in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD002818.
224. Tejani AM, Wasdell M, Spiwak R, et al. Carnitine for fatigue in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 5. Art. No.: CD007280.
225. Möller F, Poettgen J, Broemel F, et al. HAGIL (Hamburg Vigil Study): a randomized placebocontrolled double-blind study with modafinil for treatment of fatigue in patients with multiple
sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2011;17(8):1002-1009.
226. Thompson AJ, Toosy AT, Ciccarelli O. Pharmacological management of symptoms in multiple
sclerosis: current approaches and future directions. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(12):1182-1199.
227. Pandyan AD, Gregoric M, Barnes MP, et al. Spasticity: clinical perceptions, neurological realities
and meaningful measurement. Disabil Rehabil. 2005;27(1-2):2-6.
228. Amatya B, Khan F, La Mantia L, et al. Non pharmacological interventions for spasticity in multiple
sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Feb 28; 2:CD009974.
229. Gelber DA, Jozefczyk PB. The management of spasticity in multiple sclerosis. Int J MS Care.
1999;1(1):35-49.
230. Haselkorn JK, Balsdon Richer C, Fry Welch D, et al. Overview of spasticity management in
multiple sclerosis. Evidence-based management strategies for spasticity treatment in multiple
sclerosis. J Spinal Cord Med. 2005;28(2):167-199.
231. de Sa JC, Airas L, Bartholome E, et al. Symptomatic therapy in multiple sclerosis: a review for a
multimodal approach in clinical practice. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2011;4(3):139-168.
232. Sosnoff JJ, Motl RW. Effect of acute unloaded arm versus leg cycling exercise on the soleus
H-reflex in adults with multiple sclerosis. Neurosci Lett. 2010;479(3):307-301.
233. Shakespeare DT, Boggild M, Young C. Anti-spasticity agents for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD001332.
234. Vakhapova V, Auriel E, Karni A. Nightly sublingual tizanidine HCl in multiple sclerosis: clinical
efficacy and safety. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2010;33(3):151-154.
235. Zajicek JP, Hobart JC, Slade A, et al. Multiple sclerosis and extract of cannabis: results of the
MUSEC trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83(11):1125-1132.
236. Blight AR. Treatment of walking impairment in multiple sclerosis with dalfampridine. Ther Adv
Neurol Disord. 2011;4(2):99-109.
237. Restivo DA, Marchese-Ragona R, Patti F, et al. Botulinum toxin improves dysphagia associated
with multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neurol. 2011;18(3):486-490.
238. Chiara T, Martin D, Sapienza C. Expiratory muscle strength training: speech production
outcomes in patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2007;21(3):239-249.
239. Fowler CJ, Panicker JN, Drake M, et al. A UK consensus on the management of the bladder in
multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009;80(5):470-477.
240. Fernández O. Mechanisms and current treatments of urogenital dysfunction in multiple sclerosis.
J Neurol. 2002;249(1):1-8.
241. Stoffel JT. Contemporary management of the neurogenic bladder for multiple sclerosis patients
Urol Clin North Am. 2010;37(4):547-557.
242. Nicholas RS, Friede T, Hollis S, et al. Anticholinergics for urinary symptoms in multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004193.
243. Markowitz C. Symptomatic therapy of multiple sclerosis. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2010;16(5
Multiple Sclerosis):90-104.
244. Bosma R, Wynia K, Havlíková E, et al. Efficacy of desmopressin in patients with multiple sclerosis
suffering from bladder dysfunction: a meta-analysis. Acta Neurol Scand. 2005;112(1):1-5.
245. MacDonald R, Monga M, Fink HA, et al. Neurotoxin treatments for urinary incontinence in
subjects with spinal cord injury or multiple sclerosis: a systematic review of effectiveness and
adverse effects. J Spinal Cord Med. 2008;31(2):157-165.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
89
246. Kabay S, Kabay SC, Yucel M, et al. The clinical and urodynamic results of a 3-month percutaneous
posterior tibial nerve stimulation treatment in patients with multiple sclerosis-related neurogenic
bladder dysfunction. Neurourol Urodyn. 2009;28(8):964-968.
247. Zachoval R, Pitha J, Medova E, et al. Augmentation cystoplasty in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Urol Int. 2003;70(1):21-26; discussion 26.
248. McClurg D, Hagen S, Hawkins S, et al. Abdominal massage for the alleviation of constipation
symptoms in people with multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled feasibility study. Mult Scler.
2011;17(2):223-233.
249. Jawahar R, Oh U, Yang S, et al. A systematic review of pharmacological pain management in
multiple sclerosis. Drugs. 2013;73(15):1711-1722.
250. Maloni H. Pain in Multiple Sclerosis. Clinical Bulletin Information for Health Professionals:
Available from: http://www.nationalmssociety.org/NationalMSSociety/.
251. Solaro C, Messmer Uccelli M. Pharmacological management of pain in patients with multiple
sclerosis. Drugs. 2010;70(10):1245-1254.
252. Solaro C, Brichetto G, Battaglia MA, et al. Antiepileptic medications in multiple sclerosis: adverse
effects in a three-year follow-up study. Neurol Sci. 2005;25(6):307-310.
253. Warke K, Al-Smadi J, Baxter D, et al. Efficacy of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(tens) for chronic low-back pain in a multiple sclerosis population: a randomized, placebocontrolled clinical trial. Clin J Pain. 2006;22(9):812-819.
254. Solaro C, Boehmker M, Tanganelli P. Pregabalin for treating paroxysmal painful symptoms in
multiple sclerosis: a pilot study. J Neurol. 2009;256(10):1773-1774.
255. Solaro C, Lunardi GL, Capello E, et al. An open-label trial of gabapentin treatment of paroxysmal
symptoms in multiple sclerosis patients. Neurology. 1998;51(2):609-611.
256. Pentyala S, Jalali S, Park J, et al. Urologic Problems in Multiple Sclerosis. The Open Andrology
Journal. 2010;2:37-41.
257. O’Brien AR, Chiaravalloti N, Goverover Y, et al. Evidenced-based cognitive rehabilitation for
persons with multiple sclerosis: a review of the literature. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89(4):761769.
258. Amato MP, Langdon D, Montalban X, et al. Treatment of cognitive impairment in multiple
sclerosis: position paper. J Neurol. 2013;260(6):1452-1468.
259. Minden SL, Feinstein A, Kalb RC, et al. Evidence-based guideline: assessment and management
of psychiatric disorders in individuals with MS: report of the Guideline Development Subcommittee
of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2014;82(2):174-181.
260. Rosti-Otajärvi EM, Hämäläinen PI. Neuropsychological rehabilitation for multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of SystematicReviews 2014, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD009131. .
261. He D, Zhang Y, Dong S, et al. Pharmacological treatment for memory disorder in multiple
sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD008876.
262. Li Y, Hai S, Zhou Y, et al. Cholinesterase inhibitors for rarer dementias associated with
neurological conditions. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 3. Art. No.:
CD009444.
263. Koch MW, Glazenborg A, Uyttenboogaart M, et al. Pharmacologic treatment of depression
in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 2. Art. No.:
CD007295.
264. Benedetti F, Campori E, Colombo C, et al. Fluvoxamine treatment of major depression associated
with multiple sclerosis. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2004;16(3):364-366.
265. Thomas PW, Thomas S, Hillier C, et al. Psychological interventions for multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004431.
266. Cosio D, Jin L, Siddique J, et al. The effect of telephone-administered cognitive-behavioral
therapy on quality of life among patients with multiple sclerosis. Ann Behav Med. 2011;41(2):227234.
267. Artemiadis AK, Vervainioti AA, Alexopoulos EC, et al. Stress management and multiple sclerosis:
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2012;27(4):406-416.
268. Simpson R, Booth J, Lawrence M, et al. Mindfulness based interventions in multiple sclerosis-a
systematic review. BMC Neurol. 2014;14:15.
269. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Major Depressive Disorder. Putrajaya: MoH; 2007.
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
90
270. Panitch HS, Thisted RA, Smith RA, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of dextromethorphan/
quinidine for pseudobulbar affect in multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 2006;59(5):780-787.
271. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Bipolar Disorder in Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2014.
272. Coyle PK. Multiple sclerosis in pregnancy. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2014 Feb;20(1 Neurology
of Pregnancy):42-59.
273. Lee M, O’Brien P. Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2008;79(12):1308-1311.
274. Dwosh E, Guimond C, Sadovnick AD. Reproductive counselling for MS: a rationale. Int MS J.
2003;10(2):52-59.
275. Finkelsztejn A, Brooks JB, Paschoal FM Jr, et al. What can we really tell women with multiple
sclerosis regarding pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. BJOG.
2011;118(7):790-797.
276. Vukusic S, Hutchinson M, Hours M, et al. Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis (the PRIMS study):
clinical predictors of post-partum relapse. Brain. 2004 Jun;127(Pt 6):1353-60. Erratum in: Brain.
2004 Aug;127(Pt 8):1912.
277. Carmichael SL, Shaw GM. Maternal corticosteroid use and risk of selected congenital anomalies.
Am J Med Genet. 1999;86(3):242-244.
278. Rodríguez-Pinilla E, Martínez-Frías ML. Corticosteroids during pregnancy and oral clefts: a casecontrol study. 1998. Teratology;58(1):2-5.
279. Achiron A, Kishner I, Dolev M, et al. Effect of intravenous immunoglobulin treatment on pregnancy
and postpartum-related relapses in multiple sclerosis. J Neurol. 2004;251(9):1133-1137.
280. Pakpoor J, Disanto G, Lacey MV, et al. Breastfeeding and multiple sclerosis relapses: a metaanalysis. J Neurol. 2012;259(10):2246-2248.
281. Langer-Gould A, Huang SM, Gupta R, et al. Exclusive breastfeeding and the risk of postpartum
relapses in women with multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol. 2009;66(8):958-963.
282. Dorotta IR, Schubert A. Multiple sclerosis and anesthetic implications. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol.
2002;15(3):365-370.
283. Hernán MA, Alonso A, Hernández-Díaz S. Tetanus vaccination and risk of multiple sclerosis: a
systematic review. Neurology. 2006;67(2):212-215.
284. Martínez-Sernández V, Figueiras A. Central nervous system demyelinating diseases and
recombinant hepatitis B vaccination: a critical systematic review of scientific production. J Neurol.
2013;260(8):1951-1959.
285. Rutschmann OT, McCrory DC, DB; M, et al. Immunization and MS: a summary of published
evidence and recommendations. Neurology. 2002;59(12):1837-1843.
286. Araki M, Matsuoka T, Miyamoto K, et al. Efficacy of the anti-IL-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab in
neuromyelitis optica: a pilot study. Neurology. 2014;82(15):1302-1306.
287. Pittock SJ, Lennon VA, McKeon A, et al. Eculizumab in AQP4-IgG-positive relapsing neuromyelitis
optica spectrum disorders: an open-label pilot study. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12(6):554-562.
288. Sellner J, Boggild M, Clanet M, et al. EFNS guidelines on diagnosis and management of
neuromyelitis optica. Eur J Neurol. 2010;17(8):1019-1032.
289. Jacob A, McKeon A, Nakashima I, et al. Current concept of neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and NMO
spectrum disorders. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84(8):922-930.
290. Shimizu J, Hatanaka Y, Hasegawa M, et al. IFNβ-1b may severely exacerbate Japanese opticspinal MS in neuromyelitis optica spectrum. Neurology. 2010 Oct 19;75(16):1423-7
291. Min JH, Kim BJ, Lee KH. Development of extensive brain lesions following fingolimod (FTY720)
treatment in a patient with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder. Mult Scler. 2012 Jan;18(1):113-5
292. Kleiter I, Hellwig K, Berthele A, et al. Failure of natalizumab to prevent relapses in neuromyelitis
optica. Arch Neurol. 2012 Feb;69(2):239-45
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
91
Appendix 1
Example of Search Strategy
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination, search was limit to English, human and 1998 to current:-
1.
Multiple Sclerosis/
2.
(multiple adj1 sclerosis).tw.
3.
1 or 2
4.
Recurrence/
5.
recurrence*.tw.
6.
relapse*.tw.
7.
4 or 5 or 6
8.
acute.tw.
9.
7 and 8
10. 3 and 9
11. Methylprednisolone/
12. Methylprednisolone.tw.
13. Methylprednisolone acetate.tw.
14. 11 or 12 or 13
15. Prednisolone/
16. Prednisolone.tw.
17. 15 or 16
18. Plasma Exchange/
19. (plasma adj1 exchange*).tw.
20. 18 or 19
21. Plasmapheresis/
22. plasmapheres#s.tw.
23. 21 or 22
24. Immunoglobulin/
25. immunoglobulin*.tw.
26. (immune adj1 globulin*).tw.
27. 24 or 25 or 26
28. 10 and 14 or 17
29. limit 28
30. 10 and 20 or 23
31. limit 30
32. 10 and 27
33. limit 32
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
92
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
1. What is the epidemiology of MS?
2.
What are the risk factors for MS?
3.
What is CIS, acute relapse in MS and in MS?
4.
What is the natural history/progression of MS?
5.
What are the clinical features of MS?
6.
What is optic neuritis and transverse myelitis?
7.
In the diagnosis of MS, what is the sensitivity/specificity of:
- Mcdonald criteria - oligoclonal bands/evoked potentials
8.
What are the differential diagnoses of MS?
9.
What is the sensitivity/specificity of anti-aquaporin 4 in diagnosing
NMO?
10. What is the effectiveness of MRI brain and spine in:
- diagnosing MS - predicting conversion of CIS to CDMS
11. How is disease progression in MS monitored?
12. In acute relapse of MS, are the following medication effective and safe:
- high dose IV steroids
- high dose IV steroids compared with oral steroids
- plasma exchange
- IVIG
13. In MS, are the following medications effective and safe as DMT:
- interferons beta
- fingolimod
- rituximab
- methotrexate
- glatiramer
- natazulimab
- cyclophosphamide
- mycophenolate mofetil
acetate
- teriflunomide
- alemtuzumab
- IVIG
- azathioprine
- dimethyl fumarate
- mitoxantrone
- steroids
- vitamin D
14. What are the indications for starting DMT in MS?
15. What is the effectiveness and safety of DMT in CIS?
16. What are effective and safe therapies for treatment failure in MS?
17. What is the effective and safe treatment for progressive MS?
18. In MS, what is the effective and safe treatment for the following
MS-related symptoms:
- rehabilitation
- visual problems
- pain
programmes
- ataxia
- swallowing and speech
- paroxysmal
difficulties
symptoms
- fatigue
- bladder ysfunction
- sexual
dysfunction
- spasticity and paralysis - bowel problem
19. Is rehabilitation programmes effective and safe in MS?
20. What is the epidemiology and treatment for cognitive impairment/
memory problem/depression/bipolar disorder/psychosis in MS?
21. Does MS or its treatment affect pregnancy/breastfeeding in women?
22. Is anaesthesia/immunisation safe in MS?
23. When should patients with suspected MS/relapsed MS be referred
and followed-up?
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
93
Appendix 3
Differential Diagnosis of Optic Disc Swelling
Adapted: Agarwal PC, Gupta S, Thakur A, et al. Optic disc oedema: a diagnostic dilemma. BMJ Case Rep. 2011 Oct 4;2011
. pii: bcr0720114473
Diagnosis
Visual
Acuity
ON
Papilloedema
Anterior
Ischaemic
Optic
Neuropathy
Markedly
decreased
Normal or
mild blurring of
vision
Markedly
decreased
Colour
Vision
Red-green
defect
Normal
Red-green
defect
Visual
Field
Defect
Central or
centrocaecal
scotoma
Normal or
enlarged
blind spots
Altitudinal
defects
Normal or
slightly
dilated
Loss
of venous
pulsation;
dilated and
tortous
Focal
dilated
vessels
Optic Disc
Appearance
Retinal
Veins
Usually
unilateral
Bilateral
Usually
unilateral
Symmetry
Picture
Hyperaemic,
blurred
margins
Hyperaemic,
swollen,
blurred
margins
Peripapillary
retinal folds
Segmental
disc oedema
with pallor
Peripappilary
Retinal
Haemorrhages
+/-
++
+
RAPD
+
-
+
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
94
Appendix 4
Treatment of NMO/NMOSD53, level III; 286 - 287, level II-3; 288; 289, level III
1. Treatment of acute relapses
2. Prevention of relapses
3. Management of symptoms and rehabilitation (similar to symptomatic
management in MS)
Treatment of acute relapse
• IV methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 5 days followed by 1 mg/kg body
weight for a month, and then gradual tailing off over 6 - 12 months.
• Refractory relapses benefit from early plasmapheresis usually
initiated in the second week (after high dose steroids) if no recovery
is seen and deficits are severe. Five to seven exchanges over a
2-week period has been tried.
Prevention of relapses
In NMOSD, prevention of relapses is usually achieved by
immunosuppressants, though there is limited high quality evidence
for this. Table below shows the common immunosuppressants used
in achieving stabilisation of disease by relapse prevention in NMOSD.
After a relapse, steroids are given at 1 mg/kg/day from up to 1 - 3
months, then slowly tapered over 6 - 12 months. However, some
patients need a low dose of maintenance steroids between 10 - 20 mg
to maintain remission.
Disease modifying therapies such as interferons, fingolimod and
natalizumab should not be used in patients with NMOSD as it has been
shown to produce an exacerbation of the disease.290 - 292, level IIII
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
95
Drug Name
Regimen
Monitoring/Side effects
Therapy
Azathioprine
or
MMF
Prednisolone
(± immunosuppressants
azathioprine/MMF)
Rituximab
Methotrexate
Cyclophosphamide*
Mitoxantrone*
2 - 3 mg/kg/day oral
1 - 3 g/day oral
1 mg/kg/day 1 - 3 months,
tapered over 6 - 12 months,
then switched off OR
maintenance of 10 - 30
mg/day daily and taper after
one year
1) IV 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4
weeks
OR
2) 1000 mg infused twice,
with 2 week interval in
between
3) Repeated every 6 months
7.5 - 17.5 mg weekly
7 - 25 mg/kg every month for
6 months (especially with
SLE/SS)
IV 12 mg/m2 monthly for 6
months, followed by 12
mg/m2 every 3 months for 9
months
Thiopurine methyltransferase activity, mean
corpuscular volume
monthly, LFT for first 6
months then twice yearly,
maintain absolute
neutrophil counts >1000
cells/µL
(switch to rituximab/MMF if
side effects not tolerable or
treatment failure)
Monthly LFT for first 6
months then twice yearly,
target absolute lymphocyte
count 1 - 1.5 K/µL
(switch to rituximab if
treatment failure)
Refer to drug table below
Each pair can be given
every 6 months without
monitoring of CD 19 counts
or by following CD 19
counts and redosing when
it exceeds 1%. Monthly CD
19 counts starting
immediately post-infusion.
Early relapses do not mean
failure of treatment.
(switch to azathioprine/MMF
if treatment failure)
Check for liver toxicity
every 3 months
Folate supplementation
Refer to drug table below.
Refer to drug table below
(*switch to azathioprine/MMF
/rituximab if treatment
failure) or go to third-line
therapies
First-line
therapy
With or
without
Second-line
therapy
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
96
Tocilizumab
Eculizumab
Combination therapy*
IV 4 mg/kg once every 4
weeks
• 600 mg weekly for
first 4 weeks, followed by
• 900 mg for fifth dose
1 week later, then
• 900 mg every 2 weeks
thereafter
*Combination therapy refers
to rituximab and
methotrexate/IVIG or
induction with mitoxantrone
followed by azathioprine or
MMF or intermittent PE with
immunosuppressants
Neutropaenia, risk of
infections e.g. herpes,
raised liver enzymes
Monitor for meningococcal
meningitis (meningococcal
vaccination 2 weeks before
first dose), paroxysmal
nocturnal haemoglobinuria
and allergic reactions
-
Third-line
therapy
Drug Name
Regimen
Monitoring/Side effects
Therapy
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
97
Criteria for NMOSD
with AQP4-IgG
positive
Diagnostic criteria
for NMOSD without
AQP4-Ig G or
NMOSD with
unknown AQP4-IgG
status
Core clinical
characteristics
Additional MRI
requirements for
NMOSD without
AQP4-IgG and
NMOSD with
unknown AQP4-IgG
status
1. At least one core clinical characteristic
2. Positive test for AQP4-Ig G using best available detection
method (cell based assay strongly recommended)
3. Exclusion of alternative diagnoses
1. At least two core clinical characteristics occurring as a result of
one or more clinical attacks and meeting all the following
requirements:
-
at least one core clinical characteristic must be ON, acute
myelitis with LETM or area postrema syndrome
-
dissemination in space (≥2 different core clinical
characteristics)
-
fulfilment of additional MRI requirements as applicable
2. Negative tests for AQP4-IgG using best available detection
method or testing unavailable
3. Exclusion of alternative diagnoses
1. ON
2. Acute myelitis
3. Area postrema syndrome: episode of otherwise unexplained
hiccups/nausea and vomiting
4. Acute brainstem syndrome
5. Symptomatic narcolepsy or acute diencephalic clinical
syndrome with NMOSD-typical diencephalic lesions
6. Symptomatic cerebral syndrome with NMOSD-typical brain
lesions.
1. Acute optic neuritis:requires brain MRI showing:
-
normal findings or only non specific white matter lesions
-
OR optic nerve MRI with T2-hyperintense lesion or
T1-weighted Gd-enhancing lesion extending >½ optic nerve
length or involving the optic chiasm
2. Acute myelitis: requires associated intramedullary MRI lesion
extending over ≥3 contigous segments (LETM) or ≥ 3 contigous
segments of focal spinal cord atrophy in patients with history
compatible with acute myelitis
3. Area
postrema
syndrome-requires
dorsal
medulla/area
postrema lesions
4. Acute brainstem syndrome: requires associated periependymal
brainstem lesions
Appendix 5
New NMOSD Diagnostic Criteria for Adult Patients
Wingerchuk DM, Banwell B, Bennett JL, et al. International consensus diagnostic
criteria for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders.Neurology. 2015;85(2):177-189
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
98
2013 MS disease modifier phenotypes:
CIS and RRMS
CIS
RRMS
2013 MS Disease modifier phenotypes:
Progressive Disease
Primary Progressive: Progressive accumulation
of disability from onset
Progressive
Disease
Secondary Progressive
Progressive accumulation of disability after initial
relapsing course
Not Active
Active*, **
Not Active
Active*
Active with
progression***
Active without
progression
Not active with
progression
Not active without
progression
(STABLE
DISEASE)
*
**
2013 MS Disease Modifier Phenotypes
Activity is determined by clinical relapses and/or MRI activity
(contrast-enhancing lesions; new or enlarging T2 lesions assessed
at least annually); if assessments are not available the activity is
“indeterminate”.
CIS if clinically active and fulfils current MS diagnostic criteria
becomes RRMS.
*** Progression measured by clinical evaluation, assessed at least
annually. If assessements are not available, activity and progression
“indeterminate”.
Source: Lublin FD, Reingold SC, Cohen JA, et al. Defining the clinical course of
multiple sclerosis: the 2013 revisions. Neurology. 2014 Jul 15;83(3):278-86
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
99
Description
Normal neurological exam [all grade 0 to Functional system (FS)]
No disability, minimal signs in one FS (i.e. grade 1)
No disability, minimal signs in one FS (more than one FS grade 1)
Minimal disability in one FS (one FS grade 2, other 0 or 1)
Minimal disability in two FS (two FS grade 2, others 0 to 1)
Moderate disability in one FS (one FS grade 3, others 0 to 1) or mild disability in three or four FS
(three or four FS grade 2, others 0 or 1) though fully ambulatory
Fully ambulatory but with moderate disability in one FS (one grade 3) and one or two FS grade 2;
or two FS grade 3; or five FS grade 2 (others 0 to 1)
Fully ambulatory without aid, self-sufficient, up and about some 12 hours a day despite relatively
severe disability consisting of one FS grade 4 (others 0 or 1) or combinations of lesser grades
exceeding limits of previous steps, able to walk without aid or rest some 500 metres
Fully ambulatory without aid, up and about much of the day, able to work a full day, may otherwise
have some limitation of full activity or require minimal assistance: characterised by relatively
severe disability usually consisting of one FS grade 4 (others 0 or 1) or combinations of lesser
grades exceeding limits of previous steps, able to walk without aid or rest 300 metres
Ambulatory without aid or rest for about 200 metres; disability severe enough to impair full daily
activities (e.g. to work a full day without special provisions). (Usual FS equivalents are one grade
5 alone, others 0 or 1; or combinations of lesser grades usually exceeding specifications for step
4.0.)
Ambulatory without aid or rest for about 100 meters; disability severe enough to preclude full daily
activities (Usual FS equivalents are one grade 5 alone, others 0 or 1; or combinations of lesser
grades usually exceeding specifications for step 4.0.)
Intermittent or unilateral constant (cane, crutch, braces) required to walk about 100 metres with or
without resting. (Usual FS equivalents are combinations with more than two FS grade 3+.)
Constant bilateral assistance (canes, crutches, braces) required to walk about 20 metres without
resting. (Usual FS equivalents are combinations with more than two FS grade 3+.)
Unable to walk beyond approximately five metres even with aid, essentially restricted to
wheelchair; wheels self in standard wheelchair and transfers alone; up and about in wheelchair
some 12 hours a day. (Usual FS equivalents are combinations with more than one FS grade 4+;
very rarely pyramidal grade 5 alone.)
Unable to take more than a few steps; restricted to wheelchair, may need aid in transfer; wheels
self but cannot carry on in standard wheelchair a full day; may require motorised wheelchair.
(Usual FS equivalents are combinations with more than one FS grade 4+.)
Essentially restricted to bed or chair or perambulated in wheelchair, but may be out of bed itself
much of the day; retains many self-care functions; generally has effective use of arms. (Usual FS
equivalents are combinations generally grade 4+ in several systems.)
Essentially restricted to bed much of day; has some effective use of arm(s); retains some self-care
functions. (Usual FS equivalents are combinations generally 4+.)
Helpless bed patient can communicate and eat. (Usual FS equivalents are combinations
generally 4+.)
Totally helpless bed patient; unable to communicate effectively or eat or swallow. (Usual FS
equivalents are combinations almost all grade 4+.)
Death due to MS
Scale
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
Appendix 6
Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)
for Neurologic Assessment
Note 1: EDSS steps 1.0 to 4.5 refer to patients who are fully ambulatory and the
precise step number is defined by the Functional System score(s). EDSS steps 5.0 to
9.5 are defined by the impairment to ambulation and usual equivalents in Functional
Systems scores are provided.
Note 2: EDSS should not change by 1.0 step unless there is a change in the same
direction of at least one step in at least one FS. (For Functional System score, please
look at source reference below)
Source: Kurtzke JF. Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: an expanded
disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology. 1983 Nov;33(11):1444-52
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
100
Appendix 7
Neuroimaging Features in MS
a. DIS
Types of Focal Lesions based on Location in the BrainJoost et al., 2002, level II-2
Axial T2 (A) and Axial FLAIR (B) images showing multiple periventricular
lesions which are touching the ventricular borders
Axial T2 (A) and axial FLAIR (B) images: Arrows pointing to juxtacortical
lesions.
A
B
Location
Definition
Juxtacortical
Lesion touches or extends into the grey matter of the cortex
Periventricular
Lesion is adjacent to ventricles or is less than 1 cm from them
as measured from the centre of the lesion
Infratentorial
(self explanatory)
Deep white matter
Lesions that do not fulfil one of the previous criteria
A
B
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
101
Sagittal T2 (A) image demostrates lesion within the spinal cord (arrow).
The same lesion as seen on the axial T2 (B) image, occupying only part
of the spinal cord.
Axial T2 image shows (A) an infratentorial right midbrain lesion (arrow)
and (B) a left middle cerebellar peduncle lesion.
b. DIT
Axial FLAIR (A) images show the presence of four lesions (two on the
right and two on the left side). On axial Gd-enhanced T1 (B) image only
two lesions show enhancement (arrowheads) whereas the other two do
not. This presence of enhancing, as well as non-enhancing lesions in a
single MRI indicates dissemination in time.
#
B
A
B
A
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
102
Diagnostic Algorithm of Patients with Typical CIS
This algorithm only applies to patients with typical CIS, aged 14 to 50 years and after
having performed a complete diagnostic work up.
PV=periventricular; JC=juxtacortical; PF=posterior fossa
Source: Montalban X, Tintoré M, Swanton J, et al. MRI criteria for MS in patients with
clinically isolated syndromes. Neurology. 2010 Feb 2;74(5):427-34
MRI Criteria for Dissemination in Space and Time for MS
DIS/DIT
DIS (on either
baseline or
follow-up MRI)
DIT
McDonald 2005
3 or more of :
≥ 9 T2 lesions or ≥1 Gd-enhancing
lesions
≥ 3 PV lesions JC
≥ 1 JC lesions PF
≥ 1 PF lesions or spinal cord lesion
Any number of cord lesions can be
included in the total lesion count
1) ≥ 1 Gd-enhancing lesion at least 3
months after the CIS onset (if not
related to CIS)
2) A new T2 lesion with reference to
a baseline scan obtained at least
30 days after CIS onset
McDonald 2010
≥1 lesion in each of ≥2 characteristics
location:
PV
JC
PF
Spinal cord
All lesions in symptomatic regions
excluded in BS and SC syndromes
1) Simultaneous presence of
asymptomatic Gd-enhancing and
nonenhancing lesions at any time
2) A new T2 and/or Gd-enhancing
lesion on follow-up MRI irrespectiv
of timing of baseline scan
Abbreviation: BS = brainstem; DIS = dissemination in space; DIT = dissemination in Time;
Gd= gadolinium; JC= juxtacortical; PF= posterior fossa; PV= periventricular; SC= spinal cord
MRI at any time with
DIS but not DIT
MRI at any time with
DIS & DIT
New MRI:
DIS and DIT
New MRI:
DIT
MS
MRI at any time
without DIS
DIS
≥1 asymptomatic lesion
in each of ≥2 characteristic locations:
PV, JC , PF, spinal cord
DIT
i. Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic Gdenhancing
and non-enhancing lesion(s) any time
ii. A new T2 and/or Gd-enhancing lesion on followup
MRI irrespective of timing of baseline scan
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
103
Appendix 8
Bladder Diary
Name:…………………………………………………...
Registration No:……………………………….
Mode of bladder management:...............................................................
Bladder medications:..............................................................................
Date
Time
(am/pm)
Fluid intake
(mls)
Voided
volume(mls)
Leaking
(mls)
Comment
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
104
Appendix 9
Drug Dosages and Side Effects in MS
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Drug
Indication
IV methylprednisolone
Pregnancy category:C
Oral
methylprednisolone
Pregnancy category:C
Oral prednisolone
Pregnancy category:C
Acute relapse
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
ON
500 mg od for 5 days
0.5 - 1 mg/kg/day
Oral taper as per
ONTT
500 - 1000 mg od for
3 - 5 days
(15 - 30 mg/kg)
Transient leucocytosis,
oedema, hypertension,
infections,
gastrointestinal (GI)
effects, muscle
weakness, hirsutism, acne,
hyperpigmentation,
arthralgia, osteoporosis
Serious infections
Administration of live
virus vaccines.
Precautions and Monitoring
Tuberculosis
Hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Liver failure
Renal failure
Diabetes mellitus
Osteoporosis
Glaucoma
Severe affective disorders
Epilepsy
Peptic ulcer disease
Thyroid disease
History of steroid myopathy
Drug
Indication
IV Alemtuzumab
Pregnancy category:C
Active RRMS
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Infusion-related reactions,
idiopathic
thrombocytopaenia,
thyroid disorder, increase
risk of herpes infection,
neutropaenia/
lymphopaenia, anaemia/
pancytopaenia, renal
failure (Good pastures
syndrome), cardiac/
respiratory events, severe
myelosuppression,
haematological toxicity
Active systemic
infection or
underlying
immune-deficiency
Precautions and Monitoring
Always pre-medicate with oral or IV
corticosteroid, oral antihistamine
and paracetamol before first dose
and during dose increases.
Anti-infective prophylaxis (IV
acyclovir) is recommended from the
start of the treatment till completion.
Monitor full blood count (FBC), renal
function test and urine analysis monthly.
Monitor thyroid function test (TFT)
3-monthly.
Monitor FBC and TFT for 48 months
after the last infusion.
12 mg od for 5
consecutive days,
followed by 3 days
infusion at 12 and
24 months
Acute Treatment
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
105
Drug
Indication
IV Cyclophosphamide
(CYC)
Pregnancy category:D
Moderate to severe
refractory and
aggressive RRMS
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Haemorrhagic cystitis,
nausea, vomiting, oral
mucosal ulceration,
thrombocytopaenia,
leucopaenia, anaemia,
non-haemorrhagic cystitis
and/or bladder fibrosis,
gonadal suppression, skin
and nail pigmentation,
alopecia, dermatitis,
myelosuppression,
increased risk of
developing acute
leukaemias, amenorrhoea
Bone-marrow
aplasia
Acute infection
Precautions and Monitoring
Blood disorders
Elderly or debilitated patients
Renal/liver impairment
History of cytotoxic agents use
Bladder dysfunction
Secondary malignancy
Maintain adequate hydration and
frequent micturition to reduce the
risk of cystitis (3 L of fluid on the
day of and the day after treatment).
Premedication for
cyclophosphamide as per standard
pre-infusion protocol
Contraception before planning
cyclophosphamide and pregnancy
test prior to dosing
Monitor haematological profile and
presence of red blood cells in urine
regularly.
Cystoscopy: if abnormal; yearly
after 3 years of treatment
Seminal fluid analysis when
accumulative dose >300 mg/kg
Induction 5 µg/kg/day for 4 days
with Granulocyte-Colony
Stimulating Factor coverage if
absolute neutrophil count <1.0 x
109/L.
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
WBC/mm
3
Dose
>4000
100%
3000 - 4000
75%
2000 - 3000
50%
<2000
Skip
Next dose of CYC
Nadir
WBC/
mm
3
Dose (mg/m
2)
1500
-
2000
Full dose
<1500
Decrease by 100 -
200 mg/m
2
>2000
Increase by 100 -
200 mg/m
2
700 - 800 mg/m2
monthly for the first
year, and then
bimonthly for the
second year with
re-evaluation every 6
months
Max lifetime dose: 80
- 100 g
First dose of CYC
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
106
Drug
Indication
Oral Dimethyl
fumarate
Pregnancy category:C
Oral Fingolimod
Pregnancy category: C
RRMS
RRMS
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Flushing (dose-related),
rash, abdominal pain,
diarrhoea, nausea,
vomiting,
lymphocytopaenia
Bradycardia, reversible
lymphopaenia, increased
liver enzymes, infections
(influenza,
herpes-varicella zoster
virus (VZV), hypertension,
macular oedema,
decrease forced
expiratory volume in 1
second FEV1, alopecia
Hypersensitivity
Patients who in the last
6 months experienced
myocardial infarction
(MI), unstable angina,
stroke, transient
ischemic attack,
decompensated heart
failure requiring
hospitalisation or class
III/IV heart failure
Mobitz type II 2nd- or
3rd-degree
atrioventricular (AV)
block or sick sinus
syndrome (unless
patient has a functioning
pacemaker)
Baseline QTc interval
Precautions and Monitoring
PML (1 case reported in Oct 2014,
caution in patients with persistent
lymphopaenia)
Pre-medication, consider non-
enteric-coated aspirin up to 325 mg
orally 30 minutes prior to DMF to
reduce flushing
Take with food to decrease flushing.
Swallow capsule whole; do not cut,
chew or sprinkle on food.
Monitor FBC with lymphocyte count;
at baseline, after 1 month, then
every 3 to 6 months.
Cardiology consultation if risk
factors or abnormal baseline
electrocardiogram (ECG) results
Ophthalmological evaluation prior to
treatment initiation and at 3 - 4
months and patients with uveitis
and diabetes mellitus (DM) require
more frequent examination
Varicella Zoster Vaccination prior to
initiation of treatment in VZV
antibody negative patients postpone
treatment for 1 month after VZV
vaccination.
Lymphopaenia may continue up to
2 months after discontinuation of
therapy (precaution if reinitiate).
First dose observation
Perform ECG prior to first dose and
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Initial, 120 mg bd for
7 days, then
increase to 240 mg
bd
0.5 mg od
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
107
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
LVEF <50% or clinically
significant reduction in
LVEF
Discontinue if
extravasation occurs
IV Mitoxantrone
Pregnancy category: D
SPMS
RRMS
12 mg/m2 by IV
infusion over 5 - 15
min
Initially, dose may be
given once every 3
month provided
neutrophil count is
>1500 cells/mm3 and
LVEF >50%
Urinary tract infection,
upper respiratory tract
infection, infection/
sepsis, headache,
nausea, anorexia, fatigue,
weakness, alopecia,
amenorrhoea, haematologic disorders
(leukaemia), elevated
liver function test (LFT),
Precautions and Monitoring
Pre-existing myelosuppression
Perform periodic blood counts.
Hepatic impairment
Monitor cardiac function - ECG
before starting and yearly up to 2 - 5
years for delayed cardiotoxicity.
≥500 ms.
Treatment with class Ia
beta blockers or class III
antiarrhythmic drugs
end of 6-hours observation period
(continuous ECG monitoring if
post-dose symptomatic bradycardia
occurs).
Monitor heart rate and blood
pressure hourly during the 6-hours
observation period.
Extended monitoring for at least 2
hours if heart rate is lowest at 6
hours after first administered dose
or <45 beats/minute
Monitoring should continue
overnight or until problem has
resolved for patients developing
bradycardia, QTc interval ≥500 ms
or new onset second degree or
higher grade AV block.
Isoproterenol and atropine are
recommended in symptomatic
bradycardia.
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
108
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Hypersensitivity
IV Natalizumab
Pregnancy category:C
RRMS
Total lifetime
cumulative dose:
<140 mg/m2
300 mg infused over
1 hour, given at
4-weekly intervals
blue urine, increased
blood urea nitrogen and
creatinine, diarrhoea
Infusion reactions,
hepatotoxicity,
anaphylaxis, PML,
immune reconstitution
syndrome, herpes virus
infection of CNS
Precautions and Monitoring
Encephalitis and meningitis (caused
by herpes simplex and varicella
zoster) - discontinue if confirmed
Dose interruptions (recommencing
therapy may increase risk of
hypersensitivity reactions)
Monitor patients for any new sign or
symptom that may be suggestive of
PML and discontinue therapy at the
first sign or symptom suggestive of
PML.
Increased risk of PML if
• anti-JCV antibody positive
• prior antineoplastic or
immunosuppressant therapy use
• immunocompromised
• prolonged duration of therapy with
natalizumab beyond 2 years
Baseline FBC and LFT monitoring,
then every 6 months
JCV serology and brain MRI every 6
months in seronegative patients
Seropositive patients or patients
who are possibly symptomatic for
PML, brain MRI every 3 months
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
109
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to
murine proteins
Patients with active,
severe infections
Severely immunocompromised state
Concomitant use with
live viral vaccines
Severe hepatic
impairment
Concomitant use with
other hepatotoxic drugs
may increase risk of liver
injury
Pregnancy or potential
for pregnancy
Pregnancy must be
avoided during
teriflunomide treatment
or prior to the
completion of the drug
IV Rituximab
Pregnancy category:C
Oral Teriflunomide
Pregnancy category X
RRMS
RRMS
1 g at day 1 and 1 g
at day 15 every 6 - 12
months
Initial infusion:
Start at 50 mg/hour,
increase rate by 50
mg/hour every 30 min
till 400 mg/hour
Subsequent infusions
provided that initial
infusion is tolerated:
Start at 100 mg/hour,
increase rate by 100
mg/hour every 30 min
till maximum rate 400
mg/hour
7 or 14 mg od
Infusion-related reactions,
flushing, fever, pruritus,
headache, rigors,
bronchospasm,
angioedema, transient
hypotension, skin rashes,
dyspnoea, thrombocytopaenia, neutropaenia,
anaemia, renal failure,
exacerbation of heart
failure and angina
pectoris, reversible
interstitial pneumonia and
interstitial fibrosis,
reactivation of hepatitis B
virus
Hair thinning, diarrhoea,
nausea, increased liver
enzymes, influenza,
hypertension, SJS, TEN,
neutropaenia,
agranulocytosis,
pancytopaenia,
thrombocytopaenia, liver
failure, peripheral
neuropathy, raised serum
creatinine
Precautions and Monitoring
Pre medication before giving
rituximab with IV
methylprednisolone 125 mg, IV
chlorpheniramine 10 mg, tablet
paracetamol 1 g
Monitor FBC regularly or hepatitis in
hepatitis B carriers. Discontinue
therapy if viral hepatitis develops.
Cardiac monitoring should be
performed during and after all
infusions.
Pre-existing pulmonary conditions
should be closely monitored for
possible infusion-related toxicity.
Monitor renal function
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)
Severe mucocutaneous reactions
Pre-existing liver disease
Major birth defects may occur if
used during pregnancy.
Do not initiate treatment in patients
with active acute or chronic
infections.
Concomitant use with
immunosuppressive or
immunomodulating therapies may
increase risk of haematologic
toxicity.
Concomitant use of live vaccines is
not recommended during or
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
110
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
elimination procedure
after treatment
Severe depressive
disorders and/or suicidal
ideation
Hypersensitivity to
natural or recombinant
interferon beta
IM Interferon beta-1a
Pregnancy category: C
SC Interferon beta-1a
Pregnancy category: C
SC Interferon beta-1b
Pregnancy category: C
SC Pegylated
interferon beta-1a
Pregnancy category: C
RRMS
RRMS
RRMS
RRMS
30 μg once weekly
44 μg 3 times/week
250 μg every
alternate day
125 μg every 2 weeks
Injection site reactions,
flu-like symptoms, fever,
fatigue, headache,
leukopaenia, depression,
vomiting, nausea,
abdominal pain,
increased liver enzymes,
myalgia, arthralgia, rigors,
asthenia, hypertoniaincrease spasticity,
pruritus, rash,
neutropaenia,
lymphopaenia,
thrombocytopaenia,
anaemia, thyroid
dysfunction, chills,
Precautions and Monitoring
potentially following completion of
therapy.
Increased blood pressure have
been reported; monitor blood
pressure (including baseline)
regularly
Baseline and regular FBC every 6
months
Baseline and monthly LFT for 6
months, then every 6 months
Baseline pregnancy test and
tuberculosis
Refer to Chapter on Treatment
(Teriflunomide) on wash-out period
and issues related to pregnancy.
Caution when used in patients with
depression or psychiatric disorders,
or other CNS diseases, poorly
controlled thyroid dysfunction,
pulmonary disease, DM, renal or
hepatic impairment, cardiac
disorders, myelosuppression,
auto-immune diseases, coagulation
disorders, or a history of these
conditions
Pre-medicate with paracetamol 30
minutes before administration.
Topical methods to treat injection
site reactions if necessary
Dose titration needed during
initiation.
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
111
peripheral oedema,
insomnia
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Precautions and Monitoring
Monitor hepatic and renal function
regularly.
Monitor FBC and LFTs at baseline
at 1, 3 and 6 months, then
periodically.
If abnormal, temporarily discontinue
treatment rechallenge at lower
dose.
Maintenance Treatment (Drug Listed According To Alphabetical Order)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
112
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Hypersensitivity
Epilepsy or other seizure
disorders
Severe renal impairment
Gastric ulceration
Hypersensitivity
Severe hepatic
dysfunction
Concomitant use with
ciprofloxacin or
fluvoxamine
Hypersensitivity
Known/suspected
history or family history
Oral Amantadine
Pregnancy category: C
Oral Baclofen
Pregnancy category: C
Oral Tizanidine
Pregnancy category: C
Oromucosal Spray
Nabiximols
Fatigue
Spasticity
Spasticity
Spasticity
100 mg od,
then increased to 100
mg bd after a week or
more
Titrate according to
response
Max dose: 400 mg
daily
Initially, 5 mg tds for 3
days, may increase 5
mg per dose every 3
days, until either 20
mg tds is reached or
until desired effect is
obtained
Max: 80 mg daily
Initially 2 mg on night,
then titrate according
to response,
2 - 4 mg tds
Max dose: 36 mg/day
(limited experience
with dose > 24
mg/day)
Titration period
necessary
Hallucinations, confusion,
ataxia, orthostatic
hypotension, blood
dyscrasias, urinary
retention, GI
disturbances, livedo
reticularis, congestive
heart failure, convulsions
Sedation, ataxia,
dizziness, headache,
confusion, hallucinations,
GI symptoms
Somnolence,
hypotension, dizziness,
fatigue, headache,
anxiety, nausea, dryness
of mouth, GI
disturbances,
bradycardia, transient
increase in serum
transaminases,
hallucinations
Dizziness, fatigue,
anorexia, change in
appetite, depression,
Precautions and Monitoring
Cardiovascular disease
Liver/renal impairment
Recurrent eczema
Elderly
Withdrawal of the drug should be
gradual
Seizure disorder
Confusional/psychotic states
Respiratory depression
Hepatic impairment
Renal impairment
Elderly
Avoid sudden withdrawal
Liver/renal insufficiency
Elderly
Avoid abrupt withdrawal of therapy.
Monitor LFT regularly.
Stop treatment if liver enzymes are
raised persistently >3 times upper
limit of normal range.
History of epilepsy/recurrent
seizures
Psychiatric symptoms
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
113
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
of schizophrenia/other
psychotic illness
History of severe
personality
disorder/other significant
psychiatric disorders
other than depression
associated with MS
Do not continue
spraying onto sore or
inflamed mucous
membrane
Not recommended in
patients with serious
cardiovascular disease
Hypersensitivity
Pregnancy category:
B2
Botulinum Toxin Type A
Pregnancy category: C
Spasticity
Overactive bladder
Number/timing of
sprays will vary
between patients
Number of sprays
increased daily
according to
Summary of Product
Characteristics table,
up to maximum of 12
sprays per day with
minimum 15 minutes
between sprays
IM individualised dose
based on patient size,
extent, location of
muscle movement,
and response to prior
treatment
Intradetrusor: 30
injections of 6.7 units
disorientation,
dissociation, euphoria,
amnesia, balance
disorder/fall, disturbance
in attention, dysarthria,
lethargy, somnolence,
blurred vision, vertigo,
constipation, diarrhoea,
dry mouth, mouth
ulceration, nausea, oral
discomfort/pain, vomiting,
asthenia, feeling drunk
Injection site reactions,
muscle weakness,
abnormal gait, fatigue,
flu-like syndrome
Haematuria, urinary retention,
pelvic pain, flu-like syndrome
Precautions and Monitoring
Liver/renal impairment
Risk of falls
Elderly
Reliable contraception during
treatment and for 3 months after
therapy discontinuation
History of substance abuse may be
more prone to abuse sativex
Withdrawal symptoms tend to be
limited to transient disturbances of
sleep, emotion or appetite
Monitor pulse rate and blood
pressure following initial dosing
titration.
Perform regular inspection of oral
mucosa in long-term administration
and vary site of application.
Advise patient to check legal status
of medicine before travelling to
other countries.
Contains 50% volume for volume
ethanol
Subclinical or clinical evidence of
marked defective neuromuscular
transmission
Concomitant use with
aminoglycosides
Effects start after 2 weeks
Follow-up at 2 weeks to review
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
114
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Urinary retention
GI obstruction or atrophy
Severe toxic megacolon
Significant bladder
outflow obstruction
Glaucoma
Hypersensitivity
Creatinine clearance
<50 mL/min
Decompensated cardiac
failure with ongoing
diuretic treatment
Type IIb von
Willebrand's disease
and nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus
Oral Oxybutinin
Pregnancy category: B
Oral Desmopressin
Pregnancy category: B
Detrusor
overactivity
Nocturnal diuresis
Enuresis
/ml for a total dose of
200 units per 30 ml:
may consider
treatment with
diminishing effect but
not sooner than 12
weeks from previous
administration
Immediate release
2.5 - 50 mg bd or tds
Max: 5 mg qid if
needed
200 - 400 µg at
bedtime
flu-like syndrome
Dry mouth, dry eyes,
constipation, memory
impairment, blurred
vision, headache,
dizziness, drowsiness,
dry skin, rash
Hyponatraemia, oedema,
nausea, transient
headache, nasal
congestion, rhinitis,
epistaxis, stuffiness,
hypertension, water
intoxication
Precautions and Monitoring
treatment outcome
Cognitive impairment
Hepatic impairment
Renal impairment
Prostatic hyperplasia
Hiatus hernia
Reflux oesophagitis
Ulcerative colitis
Myasthenia gravis
Fluid and electrolyte imbalance
Cardiovascular diseases
Oedema
Hypertension
Cystic fibrosis
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
115
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Hypersensitivity
Bone marrow
depression
Porphyria
Hypersensitivity to
dronabinol, cannabinoid,
sesame oil or any other
components
Concomitant use with
MAOIs
Hepatic impairment
Severe renal impairment
Oral Carbamazepine
Pregnancy category: D
Oral Dronabinol
Pregnancy category: C
Oral Duloxetine
Pregnancy category: C
MS pain
MS pain
MS pain
Initial: 100 mg 1 - 2
times/day, may
increase slowly
Maintenance: 400 -
800 mg/day in 2 - 4
divided doses
Max: 1200 mg/day
10 mg od
Initially 30 mg od for 1
week, then increase
to 60 mg od as
tolerated
Max dose: 120 mg od
Dizziness, drowsiness,
ataxia, blurred vision,
nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, leucopaenia,
hyponatraemia, aplastic
anaemia, hepatic failure,
SJS, TEN
Euphoria, hypotension,
palpitations, vasodilatation, abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting,
dizziness, somnolence,
hallucinations, ataxia,
depression
Headache, somnolence,
fatigue, dizziness,
nausea, dry mouth,
insomnia, diarrhea,
decreased appetite,
erectile dysfunction,
hyperhidrosis, elevated
liver enzymes
Precautions and Monitoring
History of blood disorders or
haematological reactions to other
drugs
Cardiovascular diseases
Hepatic impairment
Renal impairment
Elderly
History of substance abuse and risk
of dronabinol abuse
Cardiac disorders (hypotension,
hypertension, syncope, tachycardia)
Elderly
May impair cognitive and motor
performance
May exacerbate psychiatric illness
(mania, depression, schizophrenia)
May lower the seizure threshold
Seizures
Uncontrolled hypertension
Renal impairment
Concomitant use with
antidepressants
Hyponatraemia
Hepatitis/increased liver enzymes
Elderly
Monitor for suicidal
ideation/behaviour
Monitor blood glucose
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
116
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity
Oral Gabapentin
Pregnancy category: C
Oral Lamotrigine
Pregnancy category: C
Oral Levetiracetam
Pregnancy category: C
MS pain
MS pain
MS pain
300 - 3600 mg/day in
divided doses
Dose may increase in
increments of 300 mg
every 2 - 3 days
25 mg od for 2
weeks, followed by 50
mg od for 2 weeks
Thereafter, increase
dose by max 50 - 100
mg every 1 - 2 weeks
until optimal response
Maintenance: 100 -
200 mg daily in 1 - 2
divided doses
Starting dose: 250 mg bd
Increase dose to 500
mg bd after 2 weeks
Dose can be further
increased by 250 mg
bd every 2 weeks
depending upon the
clinical response
Max: 1500 mg bd
Dizziness,
somnolence/sedation,
ataxia, fatigue, peripheral
oedema, fever,
nervousness, rash,
leucopaenia, visual
disturbances, weight gain
Skin rash, SJS, TEN,
nausea, insomnia,
dizziness, nystagmus,
headache, irritability,
drowsiness, tremor,
ataxia, diplopia
Somnolence, dizziness,
headache, anorexia,
tremor, pruritus, rash,
haematological disorder,
GI disturbances, cognitive
disturbance
Precautions and Monitoring
Not recommended for patients who
needed to sleep during daytime and
remain awake at night
Abrupt withdrawal may cause
rebound seizures
Renal impairment and to those
undergoing haemodialysis
Monitor for signs of suicidal ideation
and behaviours
Avoid abrupt withdrawal (reduce
dosage over a period of 2 weeks)
unless serious skin reaction occurs
Hepatic impairment
Renal impairment
History of allergy or rash to other
antiepileptic drugs
Women who are starting or stopping
hormonal contraceptives
Patients at high risk of suicide in
bipolar disorder
Avoid abrupt withdrawal
Renal impairment
Severe hepatic impairment
May affect ability to drive or operate
machinery
Elderly
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
117
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity
Heart failure
Complete AV block
without implanted
pacemaker or high risk
of complete AV block
Concomitant use with:
1. Drugs containing
quinidine, quinine or
mefloquine
Oral Oxcarbazepine
Pregnancy category: C
Oral Pregabalin
Pregnancy category: C
Oral
Dextromethorphan/
quinidine
Pregnancy category: C
MS pain
MS pain
MS pain
Pseudo-bulbar
affect
Initially, 600 mg daily
in 2 divided doses
Increase at a max
increments of 600 mg
daily at weekly
intervals depending
on response
Maintenance: 600 -
1200 mg daily
May titrate up to 2400
mg daily
Initially, 150 mg/day
in 2 - 3 divided doses
May be increased to
300 mg/day after 3 - 7
days
Max: 600 mg/day
after an additional 7
days interval
Dextromethorphan 20
mg/quinidine 10 mg
od for the first 7 days
Then,
dextromethorphan 20
mg/quinidine 10 mg
bd
Reassess periodically
for spontaneous
Rash, SJS, TEN,
dizziness, somnolence,
headache, ataxia, fatigue,
vertigo, vomiting, nausea,
hyponatraemia
Peripheral oedema,
dizziness, somnolence,
diplopia, increased
appetite, increased
weight, confusion,
irritability, ataxia, attention
disturbances, tremor,
vertigo, constipation
Peripheral oedema,
diarrhea, vomiting,
asthenia, dizziness,
cough, prolonged QT
interval,
immune-mediated
thrombocytopaenia,
hepatitis
Precautions and Monitoring
Cross-sensitivity to carbamazepine
may occur.
Renal impairment
Hepatic impairment
Patients at risk of hyponatraemia
May impair ability to drive or
operate machinery
Anaphylaxis
Monitor for signs and symptoms of
depression, suicidal tendencies and
unusual behaviour
Renal impairment
Diabetes
Congestive heart failure
May affect ability to drive or operate
machinery
Elderly >65 year old
Monitor for signs and symptoms of
depression, suicidal tendencies and
unusual behaviours
Immune-mediated
thrombocytopaenia
CYP2D6 poor metabolisers
Left ventricular dysfunction or
hypertrophy
Hepatitis
Myasthenia gravis
QTc prolongation
Torsade de pointes dysrhythmia
Dizziness and risk of falls
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
118
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
2. Drugs that both
prolong the QT
interval and are
metabolised by
CYP2D6 (e.g.
thioridazine,
pimozide)
3. Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors or their use
within 14 days
(serotonin syndrome)
Hypersensitivity to
quinine, mefloquine,
quinidine or
dextromethorphan/quini
dine with a history of
thrombocytopaenia,
hepatitis, bone marrow
depression or lupus-like
syndrome
Prolonged QT interval
History of torsades de
pointes
Hypersensitivity
Co-administration with
nitrates in any form
Oral Sildenafil Citrate
Erectile dysfunction
improvement and the
need for continued
treatment
50 mg od, taken 1
hour before sexual
activity
The dose may be
increased to 100 mg
or decreased to 25
mg
Headache, flushing,
dizziness, dyspepsia,
nasal congestion, altered
vision, hypotension,
insomnia, epistaxis,
rhinitis
Precautions and Monitoring
Concomitant use with
• strong and moderate CYP3A
inhibitors
• drugs that undergo extensive
CYP2D6 metabolism
• selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
Hypotension (<90/50 mmHg)
Severe cardiovascular disorders
(e.g. unstable angina, cardiac
failure)
Recent history of stroke or MI
Anatomical deformation of the penis
Conditions which may predispose to
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
119
Drug
Indication
Dosages
Side Effects
Contraindications
Max: 100 mg od
Elderly >65 years
Initially 25 mg, may
increase to 50 - 100
mg based on efficacy
and tolerability
Precautions and Monitoring
priapism (sickle cell anaemia,
multiple myeloma or leukaemia)
Patients with bleeding disorders,
active peptic ulceration or untreated
proliferative diabetic retinopathy
Known hereditary degenerative
retinal disorders (retinitis
pigmentosa)
Renal impairment
Hepatic impairment
Symptomatic Treatment (Drug Listed According To Indication)
References:
1. Master Index of Medical Specialities Gateway Service Portal, 2014. Available from: http://www.mimsgateway.com/Malaysia/Overview.aspx
2. Pharmaceutical Services Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Drug Formulary No. 2/2013. Available from: http://www.pharmacy.gov.my
3. Dana WJ, Fuller MA, Goldman MP, et al. Drug Information Handbook with International Trade Names Index. Ohio: Lexicomp: 2013
4. National Clinical Guideline Centre. Multiple sclerosis, management of multiple sclerosis in primary and secondary care. London: NCGC; 2014
5. Summary of Product Characteristics, Plegridy (Pegylated Interferon), Biogen Idec. Available from: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/
label/2014/125499s000lbl.pdf
6. Summary of Product Characteristics, Sativex (Nabiximols), GW Pharma Ltd. Available from: http://sativex.co.uk/static/media/images/pdf/SATIVEX2012.pdf
7. Summary of Product Characteristics, MabThera (Rituximab), Roche Pharma. Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/
EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/000165/WC500025821.pdf
8. Clanet MC, Wolinsky JS, Ashton RJ, et al. Risk evaluation and monitoring in multiple sclerosis therapeutics. Mult Scler. 2014;20(10):1306-11
9. Wingerchuk DM, Carter JL. Multiple sclerosis: current and emerging disease-modifying therapies and treatment strategies. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89(2):225-40
10. Awad A, Stüve O. Cyclophosphamide in multiple sclerosis: scientific rationale, history and novel treatment paradigms. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2009;2(6):50-61
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
120
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
µg
microgramme
µL
microlitre
µm
micrometre
ACE
angiotensin converting enzyme
ACTM
acute complete transverse myelitis
ADEM
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
ADL
activities of daily living
ANA
anti-nuclear antibody
ANCA
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
anti-AQP4 Ab
anti-aquaporin 4 antibody
anti-dsDNA
anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
anti-MOG
autoantibodies against myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
APTM
acute partial transverse myelitis
ARR
annualised relapse rate
AV
atrioventricular
BBB
blood brain barrier
bd
twice daily
BTX
botulinum toxin
CBT
cognitive behavioural therapy
CDMS
clinically definite multiple sclerosis
CDP
confirmed disability progression
CI
confidence interval
CIS
clinically isolated syndrome
cm
centimetre
CNS
central nervous system
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
CS
contrast sensitivity
CT
computerised tomography
CYC
cyclophosphamide
DG
development group
DIS
dissemination in space
DIT
dissemination in time
dL
desilitre
DMF
dimethyl fumarate
DM
diabetes mellitus
DMT(s)
disease modifying treatments
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
ECG
electrocardiogram
EDSS
Extended Disability Status Scale
EPs
evoked potentials
ES
effect size
FBC
full blood count
FLAIR
fluid attenuation inversion recovery
FS
functional system
g
gramme
GA
glatiramer acetate
Gd
gadolinium
GI
gastrointestinal
HAM-D
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
121
HR
hazard ratio
IIDD(s)
idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating disease(s)
IFNβ
ß-interferons
Ig
immunoglobulin
IM
intramuscular
IV
intravenous
IVIG
intravenous immunoglobulin
JCV
John Cunningham virus
kg
kilogramme
L
litre
LFT
liver function test
LVEF
left ventricular ejection fraction
m
metre
MAT
mobility assistive technology
max
maximum
mcg
microgramme
MD
mean difference
MDR
multidisciplinary rehabilitation
mg
miligramme
MI
myocardial infarction
ml
mililitre
mm
milimetre
mm3
millimetre cube
MMF
mycophenolate mofetil
MoH
ministry of health
MR(I)
magnetic resonance (imaging)
MS
multiple mclerosis
NICE
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
nm
nanometre
NMOSD
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder
NNT
number needed to treat
NPL
no perception to light
NPV
negative predictive value
OCBs
oligoclonal bands
OCP(s)
oral contraceptive pill(s)
od
once daily
ONTT
Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial
OR
odds ratio
OT
occupational therapy
PE
plasma exchange
PML
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
PPMS
primary progressive multiple sclerosis
PRMS
progressive relapsing multiple sclerosis
PTS
painful tonic spasms
PVRV
post-void residual volume
qid
four times a day
QoL
quality of life
rs
spearman’s rank correlation coefficient
RC
review committee
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RRMS
relapsing-remitting multiple mclerosis
RR
relative risk
Management of Multiple Sclerosis
122
SC
subcutaneous
SE
spin echo
SJS
stevens-johnson syndrome
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
SPMS
secondary progressive multiple sclerosis
T1-Gd
gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted
T2WI
T2-weighted imaging
tds
three times daily
TEN
toxic epidermal necrolysis
TENS
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
TFT
thyroid function test
TM
transverse myelitis
TN
trigeminal neuralgia
UTI
urinary tract infection
US FDA
United States Food and Drug Administration
VA
visual acuity
VZV
varicella zoster virus
VEPs
visual evoked potentials
VF
visual field
vs
versus
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their gratitude
and appreciation to the following for their contributions:-
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Ms. Loong Ah Moi (Nursing Matron) and Mr. Fadhlurahman Kamarudin
(Assistant Medical Officer) for searching and retrieving the evidence
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC have completed disclosure forms.
None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such
firms. (Details are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Multiple Sclerosis was
supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health Malaysia.