CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
FEBRUARY 2008 [MOHPPAKY 156.08 (GU)
~
MANAGEMENT
OF
HIV INFECTION
IN PREGNANT WOMEN
Meus OF HEATH MALAYA ACAOEMY OF MEDICINE OF MALAYSIA
This guideline was issued in 2008 and will be reviewed in 2011or
sooner if new evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
4th floor, Block E1, Parcel E
62590,Putrajaya.
Electronic version available on the following website:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
This guideline is meant to be a guide for clinical practice, based
on the best available evidence at the time of development.
Adherence to this guideline may not necessarily guarantee the
best outcome in every case. Every health care provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based
on the clinical picture presented by the patient and the management
options available locally.
GUIDELINES
DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVE
The development group for this guideline comprised of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists, Consultant Physicians (Infectious Disease Specialist) and
a Family Medicine Specialist from the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of
Education, Malaysia. During the process of development of this guideline,
there was active involvement of a review committee who consisted of
healthcare professionals both from the public and private sector.
This document is the first Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on The
Management of HIV infection in Pregnant Women in Malaysia and has been
developed in parallel with the CPG on Management of HIV Infection in
Children.
Literature search was carried out at the following electronic databases,
International Health Technology Assessment Website, PUBMED, Cochrane
Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) Journal full text via the OVID search
engine, Cochrane Controlled Trials Registered, CINAHL via EBSCO search
engine. The search was limited to publications from 1985 – 2007 and for
articles in the English language. Reference lists of all relevant articles
retrieved were searched to identify further studies. The following free text
terms or MeSH terms were used as the keywords: HIV infection AND
pregnancy, screening, diagnostic test, confirmatory test, rapid test, Western
Blot, immunoabsorbent assay, immunofluorescent assay, specificity,
sensitivity, false positive, false negative AND accuracy; management and
HIV and pregnancy; mother to child transmission and HIV; HIV and pregnancy;
HIV and MTCT; HIV and membrane rupture; HIV and premature rupture of
membrane; HIV and prom; HIV and preterm labour, ‘HIV’, ‘pregnancy’, ‘CD4’,
‘viral load’, ‘monitoring’, ‘disease progression’, ‘vertical transmission’;
HAART and pregnancy; zidovudine and pregnancy; efarvirenz and pregnancy;
nevirapine and pregnancy; HIV and postpartum care; HIV and post natal
care; HIV and nursing care; HIV and breastfeeding; HIV and formula feeding;
HIV and complications; HIV/ AIDS and contraception. This guideline is based
largely on the findings of systemic reviews and meta-analysis in the literature.
Reference was also made to other guidelines namely Management of HIV
in Pregnancy by the Royal College Obstetricians Gynaecologists (2004),
Public Health Service Task Force recommendations for Use of Antiretroviral
Drugs in Pregnant HIV infected women (2006), DHSS Panel on Guidelines
for the use of ARV agents in HIV-1-infected adults and adolescents (2006),
Revised CDC guidelines for HIV on counselling, testing and referral (1999),
World Health Organisation guidelines for antiretroviral drugs for treating
pregnant women and preventing HIV infection in infants 2006, Centre for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) revised recommendations for HIV
testing of adults, adolescents and pregnant women in health care settings,
2001, CDC guidelines on introduction of routine HIV testing in prenatal care
– Botswana, 2004 and British HIV Association guidelines for the management
of HIV infection in pregnant women and the prevention of mother-to child
transmission of HIV, March 2005.
The articles were graded using the modified version of those used by the
Catalonian Agency for Health Technology Assessment and Research
(CAHTAR) Spain, while the grading of recommendation in these guidelines
was modified from the Scottish Intercollegiate guidelines Network (SIGN).
The clinical questions were divided into major subgroups and members of
the development group were assigned individual topics within these
subgroups. The group members met a total of twenty one times throughout
the development of the guideline. All literature retrieved were appraised by
individual members and presented and discussed during group meetings.
All statements and recommendations formulated were agreed by both the
development group and review committee. Where the evidence was
insufficient the recommendations were derived by consensus of the
development group and review committee.
The draft guideline was posted on both the Ministry of Health Malaysia and
Academy of Medicine, Malaysia websites for comment and feedback. This
guideline has also been presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for
Clinical Practice Guidelines, and the Health Technology Assessment and
Clinical Practice Guidelines Council, Ministry of Health Malaysia for review
and approval.
OBJECTIVE
The aim of the guideline is to assist clinicians in making evidence based
decisions about the appropriate management and treatment of HIV infection
in pregnant women.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
•
How to screen and confirm HIV in pregnant women?
•
What is the appropriate treatment for HIV in pregnant women?
•
How to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV?
EXCLUSION
This guideline does not cover investigation and counselling during
pre-pregnancy period.
TARGET POPULATION
This guideline is applicable to HIV positive pregnant women.
TARGET USER
This guideline is meant for all health care providers that are involved in the
management of HIV positive pregnant women.
POSSIBLE CLINICAL INDICATORS FOR QUALITY MANAGEMENT
iii
Indicator
Percentage of pregnant women screened for HIV infection
during the first antenatal care visit in government facilities.
Percentage of pregnant women detected HIV positive
receiving antiretroviral therapy
Standard
95%
100%
Dr. Leong Chee Loon
Consultant Physician
(Infectious Disease)
Hospital Sg. Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Mohd Zulkifli Kassim
Senior Consultant and Head of
Department Obstetrics &
Gynaecology Department
Hospital Kuala Terengganu
Terengganu
Dr. Noor Sham Yahya Luddin
Consultant and Maternal
Foetal Medicine Specialist
Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Department
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Suhaila Ahmad
Senior Consultant and Maternal
Foetal Medicine Specialist
Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia,
Selangor
Dr. Vickneswari Ayadurai
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Shah Alam,
Selangor
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Chow Ting Soo
Consultant Physician
(Infectious Disease)
Hospital Pulau Pinang,
Pulau Pinang
Dr. Chua Hock Hin
Clinical Specialist
(Infectious Disease)
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Johor Baharu, Johor
Dr. Ker Hong Bee
Consultant Physician
(Infectious Disease)
Hospital Ipoh, Perak
Dr. H. Krishna Kumar
Senior Consultant and Maternal
Foetal Medicine Specialist
Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Department
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar,
Seremban
Prof. Dr. Jamiyah Hassan
Senior Consultant and
Feto-Maternal Specialist
Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Department
Universiti Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Ghazali Ismail,
Senior Consultant and Head of Department
Obstetrics & Gynaecology Department
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan,
Pahang.
Coordinators
Dr. Sheamini Sivasampu
Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Ms Mariammah Krishnasamy
Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guideline was reviewed by a panel of independent expert referees,
who were asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and
accuracy of interpretation of the evidence supporting the recommendations
in the guideline.
Chairman
Dr. Mukundan Krishnan
Head of Services and Senior Consultant
Obstetrics & Gynaecology Department
Hospital Ipoh, Perak
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Irene Cheah Guat Sim
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
(Neonatologist)
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. S. Raman
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecology and Representative
of the Malaysian Society of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Fetal Medicine & Gynaecology
Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Ravindran Jegasothy
Senior Consultant and Head of
Department
Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Department
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar,
Seremban
Dr. Revathy Nallusamy
Senior Consultant and Head of
Department
Paediatric Department
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Dr. Rohani Ali
Senior Principal Assistant Director
AIDS/ STD Unit
Disease Control Division
Ministry of Health
Dr. Safurah Jaafar
Deputy Director
Family Health Development Division
Ministry of Health
Dr. Suresh Kumar
Consultant Physician
(Infectious Disease)
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Selangor
Dr. Zainah Sa’at
Clinical Virologist
Virology Unit
Infectious Disease Research Centre
Institute of Medical Research
Prof. Dr Zaleha Abdullah Mahdy
Senior Consultant and Senior
Lecturer
Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Department
Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
The draft guideline was also reviewed by a panel of external reviewers.
Dr. Ravichandran Jeganathan
Senior Consultant and Head of Department
Obstetrics & Gynaecology Department
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Johor Baharu
Dr. Rob Condon
UNICEF adviser on PMTCT of HIV
Public Health Physician and Medical
Epidemiologist
Australia
Dr. Christopher Lee Kok Chong
National Advisor for Infectious Diseases,
Senior Consultant and Head of Department
Medical Department
Hospital Sg Buloh
Selangor
Dr. Iskandar Firzada bin Osman
Family Medicine Specialist
Polyclinic Jaya Gading
Kuantan
Puan Rosiah Binti Harun
Head Pharmacist
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Selangor
Start ARV therapy
Pregnant women attending ANC
Pregnant women in labour
whose HIV status is
unknown
Reactive
Group Pre -Test Counselling
Rapid Test /
EIA
Pre-test counselling
And Confirmatory Test
Confirmed positive
Post  test counselling
Contact tracing
Notification
Delivery
Rapid Test
Reactive
Non-reactive
End
End
Non-reactive
High risk group
Low risk group
Repeat
Rapid Test / EIA 12
weeks after 1st test is
negative OR before 36
weeks gestation
Refer paediatrician
Pretest counselling
Confirmatory test immediately post delivery
Notification
Contact tracing
Negative
Refer to:
Combined clinic and
Paediatrician
Non-reactive
Footnote: EIA= ELISA
Reactive
ALGORITHM 1 - HIV SCREENING FOR PREGNANT WOMEN
viii
ALGORTHM 1- HIV SCREENING FOR PREGNANT WOMEN
Pregnant women attending ANC
Confirmed positive
Pre-test counselling
And Confirmatory Test
Group Pre-Test Counselling
Post - test counselling
Contact tracing
Notification
Refer to:
Combined clinic and
Paediatrician
Repeat
Rapid Test / EIA 12
weeks after 1st test is
negative OR before 36
weeks gestation
Refer paediatrician
Pretest counselling
Confirmatory test immediately post delivery
Notification
Contact tracing
Delivery
Start ARV therapy
Rapid Test
End
Rapid Test /
EIA
End
Low risk group
High risk group
Non-reactive
Negative
Reactive
Non-reactive
Reactive
Non-reactive
Reactive
Pregnant women in labour
whose HIV status is
unknown
Newly Diagnosed/
Not on ART
On HAART
CD4>250
CD4<250
Diagnosed in
labour no prior
therapy
Counselling
Initiate START  lopinavir/ ritonavir
ZDV/ 3TC after 1st trimester
Do VL at 34-36 weeks
If VL<1000 copies/ ml at 34-36
weeks, may allow vaginal delivery;
otherwise ELECTIVE LSCS about
38 weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
Discuss with ID Physician /
physician regarding continuing
ART post delivery
Counselling
Initiate HAART combination -ZDV/3TC/NVP
after 1st trimester
Do VL baseline and at 34-36 weeks
If VL<1000 copies/ ml at 34-36 weeks, may
allow vaginal delivery; otherwise ELECTIVE
LSCS about 38 weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
Continue ZDV/3TC/NVP post delivery
Counselling
Continue HAART
Refer ID physician
If VL < 1000 at 34-36 weeks,
may allow vaginal delivery
otherwise elective LSCS about
38 weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for
mother
Continue HAART post delivery
IP ZDV + 3TC + single
dose NVP
Followed by ZDV + 3TC x
7 d
Stable on HAART
Failing HAART
Refer ID physician
Resistance testing if
available
ELECTIVE LSCS about 38
weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for
mother
HIV POSITIVE MOTHER
BabyÆ Refer immediately to paediatrician.
Refer to CPG Management of HIV in Children
for details
Mother ÆRefer to ID physician
IP= intrapartum
ALGORITHM 2- MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF HIV POSITIVE MOTHER
Non-reactive
ALGORTHM 2- MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF HIV POSITIVE MOTHER
ix
IP=intrapartum
Stable on HAART
Counselling
Continue HAART
Refer ID Physician
If VL <1000 at 34-36 weeks,
may allow vaginal delivery
otherwiseelevtive LSCS about
38 weeks.
During delivery, IP ZDV for
mother
Continue HAART post delivery
HIV POSITIVE MOTHER
Failing HAART
CD4<250
CD4>250
Newly Diagnosed/
Not on ART
Diagnosed in
labour no prior
therapy
On HAART
IP ZDV + 3TC single
dose NVP
Followed by ZDV +3TC x
7 d
Counselling
Initiate START - lopinavir / ritonavir
ZDV / 3TC after 1st trimester
Do VL at 34-36 weeks
If VL<1000 copies / ml at 34-36
weeks, may allow vaginal delivery;
otherwise ELECTIVE LSCS about
38 weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
Discuss with ID Physician /
physician regarding continuing
ART post delivery
Counselling
Initiate HAART combination - ZDV/3TC/NVP
after 1st trimester
Do VL baseline and at 34-36 weeks
If VL<1000 copies / ml at 34-36 weeks, may
allow vaginal delivery; otherwise ELECTIVE
LSCS about 38 weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
Continue ZDV/3TC/NVP post delivery
Baby
Refer immediately to paediatrician.
Refer to CPG Management of HIV in Children
for details
Mother
Refer to ID physician
Refer ID physician
Resistance testing if
available
ELECTIVE LSCS about 38
weeks
During delivery, IP ZDV for
mother
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVE........................................
I
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE..............................................
IV
REVIEW COMMITTEE................................................................................ VI
EXTERNAL REVIEWER………………………………................................
VII
ALGORITHM 1 - HIV SCREENING FOR PREGNANT MOTHER.................. VIII
ALGORITHM 2 - MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF HIV POSITIVE MOTHER...
IX
1.0
GENERAL INTRODUCTION.....……………………………………..............
1-2
2.0
RISK OF TRANSMISSION………………………………………..................
3
3.0
SCREENING………………………....……………………………….............
4
3.1
Counselling…..………...…………………………………................
4
3.2
Recruitment Strategy…...………….....……..……………...............
4
3.3
Timing of screening…………………………...…………................
4-5
3.4
Methods of HIV screening……...………………………................
5-6
3.5
Screening During Labour…………………..…………....................
6
3.6
Notification And Contact Tracing……………………..……...…......
8
4.0
INVESTIGATIONS AND MONITORING……………………………...............
8
5.0
MANAGEMENT OF HIV PREGNANT WOMEN……………………..............
9
6.0
MEDICAL TREATMENT……………………………………………................10-12
6.1
CLINICAL SITUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE USE
OF ARV PROPHYLAXIS……………………………......................... 13
A.
Newly Diagnosed HIV Pregnant Women not on ARV……............. 13
A.1
HIV women with CD4 T Cell Count < 250 Cells / µL………………
13
A.2
HIV Pregnant women with CD4 T cell count > 250 cells / µL……... 16
A.3
Women diagnosed in with labour without prior therapy……….......17
B.
HIV positive women who are already on a HAART regime…….... 18
B.1
Women stable on HAART……………………………………............ 18
B.2
Women failing HAART………………………………………………... 19
7.0
OBSTETRIC MANAGEMENT..................................................................... 19
7.1
Vaginal Disinfection To Reduce MTCT……………………………… 19
7.2
Management of Ruptured Membranes……………………………… 20
7.3
Mode Of Delivery And Viral Load………………………………….. 20-21
7.4
Safety Issues…………………………………………………………. 21
8.0
BREASTFEEDING…………………………………………………............... 21-22
9.0
POST NATAL CARE…………………………….....……………................. 22-23
10.0 CONTRACEPTION……………....………………………………….............. 23-24
11.0 REFERENCES………………………….……………………………............. 25-32
APPENDIX 1 - ANTIRETROVIRAL DRUGS …………...........................
33-34
APPENDIX 2 - PNEUMOCYSTIS (CARINII) JIROVECI PNEUMONIA (PCP)
PROPHYLAXIS…………................................................ 35
APPENDIX 3 - WHO CLINICAL STAGING / AIDS FOR ADULTS AND
ADOLESCENTS WITH CONFIRMED HIV INFECTION.... 36-37
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS....................................................................... 38
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT………………………………………………………. 39
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT………………………………………………….... 39
SOURCES OF FUNDING………………………………………………………. 39
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE & GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
1.0
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) is the most common and important
source of HIV infection in childhood. In the absence of any intervention,
between 30% and 45% of children born to HIV positive mothers will become
infected with HIV; the lower end of the range applies to higher income country
settings, while the upper end of the range applies to lower income, higher
prevalence settings1
Transmission is believed to be uncommon during early pregnancy, but the
risk increases sharply in late pregnancy and during labour and delivery.
Overall, about 15-20% of children who acquire HIV infection from their
mothers are infected during the antenatal period, 50% during delivery and
33% through breast feeding.2
In June 2001, through its Declaration of Commitment, the United Nations
General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS) on HIV/AIDS undertook to
reduce the proportion of infants infected with HIV by 20% by 2005 and by
50% by 2010, through a four-pronged strategy:
I.
primary prevention of HIV infection in women of reproductive age;
II.
prevention of unintended pregnancy in HIV-positive women;
III. prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV by:
a.
providing antiretroviral therapy (ART) during pregnancy,
b.
implementing safer delivery practices,
c.
providing counselling and support on infant feeding methods
IV. provision of care, treatment and support to HIV-infected parents,
infants and families.
From 1986 till December 2006, there have been 76, 389 cases of HIV
reported by Ministry of Health (MOH) with 9,155 deaths.3 Although males
account for more than 93% of all the HIV infections reported in Malaysia to
date, the proportion of new cases among females has increased sharply,
from 1.4% in 2000 and 15% in 2006.
Determination of HIV status enables appropriate counselling, timely ARV
therapy and management of HIV positive pregnant women to be provided to
reduce the risk of vertical transmission.4
The Malaysian Ministry of Health (MOH) initiated a National Prevention of
Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV (PMTCT) Program in 1998. The Program
is based partly on UNGASS “prong” 2 (i.e. detection of HIV infection during
the antenatal period) and more strongly on UNGASS “prong” 3 (i.e. the
provision of ARV therapy to mother and baby, safer modes of delivery and
safer infant feeding practices for HIV positive mothers (through artificial
feeding).
Since the introduction of the PMTCT program, a total of 2,925,472 mothers
were screened for HIV during antenatal period from 1998 until the end of
2006 in government facilities. The coverage has been good and for the last
five years, increased from 92.8% (2002) to 99.5% (2006). However the
percentage of HIV positive pregnant women detected was maintained at
below 0.04% (graph below). The vertical transmission rate of HIV from 1998
– 2006 was 3.8%. (* These data do not include the availability or result of
testing in non-government facilities nor the outcomes in HIV infected pregnant
women who do not seek antenatal testing or care).
In Malaysia, any woman in whom HIV infection is detected during pregnancy5
is entitled to free ARV prophylaxis or, if indicated, highly active anti-retroviral
therapy (HAART).The dual goals of antiretroviral (ARV) therapy in pregnant
women are to provide treatment for the mother and to reduce the likelihood
of transmission of the virus to the foetus or neonate.
In view of increasing numbers of HIV positive women and advancements in
management, this guideline will facilitate the care of these women by
disseminating relevant and contemporary information to all levels of health
care workers in a systematic fashion.
*In 2006, the outcome of only 62 babies out of the 170 positive pregnant women is
presently known.
In this guideline :
Women’ refers to pregnant women with HIV infection
Combined clinic’ refers to a clinic where both obstetrician and physician
attend jointly to these women.
START refers to short- term- antiretroviral therapy/ short term HAART for
the purposes of PMTCT
HAART- highly active antiretroviral therapy (long term)
2.0
RISK OF TRANSMISSION
The risk of transmission of HIV in pregnancy depends on maternal health
status (WHO clinical stage of HIV –refer Appendix 3), viral load and a variety
of obstetrical factors. In general the risk of transmission will be highest if the
maternal viraemia is high and / or CD4 counts are low.6,level 6;7,Level 6;8 Level 6
However, transmission has been reported in patients with low viral load of
less than 1000 copies/ml. There is no evidence at which viral load
transmission occurs.9,Level 1
Based on 13 cohort studies the risk of vertical transmission without ARV
treatment was estimated to be about 15 to 30% worldwide.4 Level 1 As
maternal health plays an important role in reducing perinatal transmission,
the strategy to improve HIV-related care for HIV-infected women is crucial
to reduce HIV infection in children.
The most important obstetric factors that influence the transmission rate are
duration of membrane rupture and mode of delivery. Invasive monitoring,
instrumental delivery and prematurity have also been shown to increase the
rate of perinatal transmission.10, Level 9 Studies in twins suggest that the first
born twin is at higher risk of transmission than the second born. This supports
the evidence that the presence of virus in the genital tract influences vertical
transmission.11, Level 8
Any invasive procedure (e.g. amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling) for
prenatal diagnosis is not recommended unless the potential benefits outweigh
the risks.10,Level 9;12 ,Level 9
Recommendation for reducing risk of transmission
••••• Invasive procedures (e.g. amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling)
in HIV pregnant women are not recommended (Grade C)
3.0
SCREENING
3.1
Counselling
Group pre-test counselling has been advocated during booking to shorten
counselling time.1,Level 8 This is followed by individual pre-test counselling to
screen-positive pregnant women to enable them to give informed consent
for confirmatory testing.
Post-test counselling is provided to ensure these women receive appropriate
treatment.14, Level 8 The testing-result interval should be as short as possible.15, Level 9
There remains general consensus that HIV testing should be voluntary and
performed after obtaining informed consent.9,Level 1;16,Level 2. Women are much
more likely to get tested if they perceive their provider strongly recommends
HIV testing.17 ,Level 3
A meta-analysis of 27 studies concluded that HIV counselling and testing
was an effective intervention for HIV positive participants. These decreased
their risk behaviours, however little effect was seen in HIV negative
participants.18, Level 1
3.2
Recruitment strategy
In a systematic review carried out by The US Preventive Services Task Force
it was noted that the acceptance rates for voluntary HIV testing among more
than 174,000 pregnant women ranged from 23% to 100%. The HIV test rates
during pregnancy appear to be higher using “opt-out” testing policies.9,Level 1
In order to ensure better coverage, intrapartum testing should be offered to
women who have not been screened. 19,Level 8
Opt-out screening is defined as performing a HIV test after notifying the
patient that the test will be done; consent is inferred unless the patient
declines.20,Level 9
3.3
Timing of Screening
Health care providers should perform a HIV test as early as possible during
every pregnancy to ensure informed and timely management. 21,Level 9
A repeat HIV test is necessary in high risk patients who were first screened
negative. This is because some women seroconvert during pregnancy after
first antenatal check-up. This test should be performed between 3 to 18
weeks after the initial test. 22, Level 9
High risk factors include:
• Women whose past or present sexual partners were HIV infected,
bisexual or IVDU 9, Level 1
• Women seeking treatment for sexually transmitted disease (STD)
9,Level 1
• Commercial sex worker9,Level 1
• Women with past or present history of intravenous drug use
(IVDU)9 ,Level 1
• Women with history of blood transfusion before 1986
• Unprotected vaginal or anal intercourse with more than one sex
partner23,Level 9
3.4
Methods of HIV testing
The standard diagnostic testing for HIV infection in adults also applies to
HIV testing of pregnant women.
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA), in combination with a confirmatory Western
Blot is considered the ‘gold standard’ for determining HIV infection. Together,
these two tests have a sensitivity and specificity greater than 99%. 9 , Level 1
However in the WHO HIV testing strategy, a reactive Enzyme Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) / Enzyme Immuno Assay (EIA) result is
followed by Particle Agglutination (PA). A reactive PA test result will then require
a confirmatory Western Blot test.23 Level 9
An alternative to the classic Western Blot confirmatory test is the Line
Immunoassay (LIA). In this assay, recombinant or synthetic peptide antigens
are applied on a nitrocellulose strip, rather than electrophoresed. Several
studies have verified the accuracy of LIA is equivalent to the Western Blot
test.24,Level 4;25 Level 4
In the Ministry of Health Malaysia (MOH), the Rapid test has been selected
as a screening test. The MOH bases the selection of the Rapid test on the
evaluation by IMR that it has a 99.9% sensitivity and 99.8% specificity.
Despite the high sensitivity and specificity of rapid tests, the issue of
indeterminate or false-positive results in pregnant women is not resolved. A
negative test result effectively rules out HIV except in the case of recent
infection in which antibodies have not yet developed. A positive HIV rapid test
result still requires a confirmatory test. 27,Level 9
Some studies have shown that the Rapid test followed by the PA test
constitutes a reasonable alternative to the standard ELISA / Western Blot
combination.28, Level 4;29, Level 4
3.5
Screening during Labour
Rapid HIV testing using a highly sensitive test is feasible and delivers
accurate and quick results for women in labour who have not been previously
screened. This strategy provides HIV-positive women prompt access to
intrapartum and neonatal ARV prophylaxis. Median time from blood collection
to patient notification of result is faster than compared to EIA.30 ,Level 8
Rapid HIV tests, using similar principles to ELISA / EIA, offer a quick, accurate
and less resource-intensive alternative to traditional HIV testing methods.26
,Level 4; 9 Level 1 Therefore they can be used in remote areas where basic laboratory
infrastructure is lacking.
There are a few types of Rapid tests used in the United States. The sensitivity
ranges from 95.8% to 100%, specificity from 98% to 100% with a positive
predictive value of 33% to 100%.9 Level 1
Recommendations for antenatal HIV counselling and screening
• HIV testing should be offered to all pregnant women as part of
routine antenatal care using the opt-out strategy. (Grade A)
• Screening should be voluntarily undertaken with the patient’s
knowledge and consent. (Grade A)
• Screening should be done as early as possible during every
pregnancy. (Grade A)
• Group pre test of counselling is an acceptable method. (Grade C)
• If the rapid/ screening test is positive, individual pre- and post-test
counselling are essential elements to enable women to give
informed consent. (Grade C)
• In high risk patients, a repeat test should be done preferably after
12 weeks of the first test if the initial test is negative (Grade C)
OR
before 36 weeks of gestation if the initial test is negative. (Grade C)
• 3 test strategies are required for diagnosis of HIV (Grade C)
o
For screening, Rapid test/ Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) /
Enzyme linked immunosorbent immunoassay (ELISA) is
recommended. ( Grade A)
o
A positive screening test should be followed by a Particle
Agglutination (PA).(Grade B)
o
Final confirmation with LIA / Western Blot is required.(Grade B)
• Screening during labour
o
Rapid test is to be done in patients who have not been screened.
(Grade C)
o
All positive tests should be verified with standard confirmatory
tests. (Grade A )
For details, please refer to algorithm on HIV screening for pregnant
women (pg viii)
3.6
Notification and contact tracing
Under the Infectious Disease Act 342 (1988), health care providers are legally
bound to notify the local health authority about anyone found to be HIV
positive.31 Providers should recommend that their partners receive HIV
testing. Health departments can assist patients by notifying, counselling
and providing HIV testing for partners without disclosing the patient’s
identity.32, Level 9; 33, Level 9
Under the Infectious Disease Act 342 (1988), health care providers are
legally bound to notify the local health authority anyone found to be HIV
positive.
4.0
INVESTIGATIONS AND MONITORING
HIV is known to cause progressive impairment of the immune system that
will put the patient at risk of opportunistic infection and tumours. In pregnancy,
the progression of the disease will further increase the risk of perinatal
transmission.
There are several markers that have been looked into as the best monitoring
tool, such as plasma viral load (HIV- RNA), CD4 count, â2-microglobulin and
HIV-1 p24 antigen. 34, level 9; 35, Level 2 Plasma viral load is the best marker as it
correlates well with disease progression and predicts the risk of perinatal
transmission.34,Level 2; 36, Level 4; 37, Level 4
Plasma viral load should be monitored in patients with HIV especially
those who receive HAART and the test should be done at 36 weeks
gestation.38, Level 9 The plasma viral load at 36 weeks gestation is the best
predictor of perinatal transmission and it can also be used to determine
mode of delivery.
As HIV increases the risk of opportunistic infection, all patients with HIV
should be screened for Hepatitis B & C, syphilis, gonorrhoea, toxoplasmosis
and Chlamydia.39, Level 9; 40, Level 8
The relationship of bacterial vaginosis and maternal to child transmission
(MTCT) of HIV is still controversial.41,Level 9;42, Level 8;43,Level 8
Recommendations for investigations and monitoring
• Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels should be monitored in all women on
HAART and START. (Grade A)
• CD4 counts should be monitored in all women on HAART and
START. (Grade C)
• All HIV positive women should be examined for genital infections
and treated appropriately. If negative, the examination should be
repeated at 28 weeks.(Grade C)
• Co-infections (Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, syphilis, gonorrhoea,
toxoplasmosis and chlamydia) should also be screened in these
women. (Grade C)
5.0
MANAGEMENT OF HIV PREGNANT WOMEN
There should be a proper referral pathway for these patients to the combined
clinic. The availability of an ID physician is an additional option.10, Level 9 Public
health nurses play a pivotal role in ensuring that these women are compliant
to their Anti Retroviral Therapy (ART) and antenatal follow-up.
It is important that all healthcare professionals involved in the management
of a HIV positive pregnant woman are aware of the diagnosis and the plan of
her care. Confidentiality must be respected and ensured. Health
professionals should not presume that the woman’s partner or her relatives
are aware of her illness even though they may attend clinics as well as the
delivery. 10, Level 9
Interventions to reduce the risk of HIV transmission should be discussed
with the women. These measures would include the use of ARV therapy,
elective caesarean delivery and avoidance of breastfeeding. The
implementation of these 3 interventions will reduce the vertical transmission
risk to below 2%. 44, Level 2;45 Level 8; 46,Level 9;10, Level 9
Multidisciplinary team should comprise of an obstetrician, physician,
family medicine specialist and paediatrician. Optional members in the
team would include the ID physician, specialist midwives, social workers,
psychiatrist, clinical psychologist, counsellors and relevant non
government organisation (NGO’s).
Modified from 10, Level 9
Recommendations for management of HIV pregnant women
• Women with HIV positive in pregnancy should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team including community healthcare personnel.
(Grade C)
• Women diagnosed as HIV positive after 28 weeks gestation should be
referred to hospital URGENTLY for initiation of antiretroviral therapy.
(Grade C)
• Women should be informed that use of antiretroviral therapy, elective
caesarean delivery and avoidance of breastfeeding can reduce the
mother to child transmission rates to <2%. (Grade A)
• After delivery, the patient should be followed up by the physician.
(Grade C)
• The baby will be followed up by a paediatrician*. (Grade C)
* Please refer to the MOH CPG on Management of HIV Infection in Children
(2008) for further details
6.0
MEDICAL TREATMENT
Introduction
ARV therapy is given for two reasons during pregnancy; first for the prevention
of MTCT and secondly for the treatment of mother to prevent maternal disease
progression (therapy continued indefinitely after delivery). 10, Level 9;47,Level 9;38,
Level 9
The current treatment of pregnant women infected with HIV has evolved from
monotherapy to Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy (HAART). Zidovudine
(ZDV) has been the most extensively studied ARV in pregnant women and
forms a component of treatment in most trials.
PACTG 07644,Level 2 was the first major study that demonstrated the
effectiveness of a 3-part regimen (antepartum, intrapartum and postpartum)
in reducing MTCT from 22.6% to 7.6%. The vertical transmission rate was
further reduced to < 2 % when elective Caesarean Section was performed
and breastfeeding was not permitted.48,Level 6; 49,Level 6
In a systematic review of 4 RCTs comparing ZDV with placebo, it was
demonstrated that ZDV significantly reduced MTCT. 50,Level 1 There is also
no evidence ZDV influences the incidence of premature delivery or low birth
weight.
Development of ZDV drug resistance with PACTG 076 ZDV regimen alone
appears uncommon in women with higher CD4 count and low viral load.
51,Level 8; 52, Level 9 It has been demonstrated to be more common in women who
have more advanced disease and lower CD4 count. 53, Level 6
In the North American Women and Infant Transmission study (WITS) cohort
there was reduction in transmission from 7.8% in mother-infants pairs
receiving ZDV monotherapy to 1.1% in mother exposed to triple therapy.
53, Level 6 In PACTG 367, the transmission rate among 3081 women in N. America
fell from 4.2% in 1998 to 0.5% in 2002. Among women who did not receive
any ARV therapy, transmission was 18.5% falling to 5.1% with ZDV
monotherapy, 1.4% with dual NRTIs and 1.3% with three or more drugs.
54 ,Level 2
Combination antiretroviral therapy of three or more ARVs or HAART (usually
from >” 2 classes), is the recommended standard treatment for HIV-1 infected
adults who are not pregnant. 55,Level 9
Pregnancy should not preclude the use of optimal therapeutic regimens.
However, recommendations regarding the choice of antiretroviral drugs for
treatment of infected pregnant women are subject to unique considerations,
including
I. the potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the pregnant woman,
and
II. the potential short- and long-term effects of the antiretroviral drug
on the fetus and newborn. 56, Level 9; 38,Level 9;10,Level,9
Avoid the combination of Stavudine plus Didanosine as part of the triple
therapy whenever possible, due to case reports of fatal lactic acidosis in
pregnancy.57, Level 6
The decision to use any antiretroviral drug during pregnancy should be made
by the woman after discussing with her health-care provider the known and
unknown benefits and risks to her and her foetus.38,Level 9; 56 ,Level 9 ARV should
be initiated by Physician/ ID Physician and /or Obstetrician. The patients will
be monitored in the combined clinic.
Adherence to ARV therapy is of vital importance for the success of treatment
and pregnant women may need extra support and planning in this area,
especially if there are practical or psychosocial issues that may impact
adversely on adherence. 38,Level 9
However there were significant malformations (anencephaly, anophthalmia,
cleft palate) observed in 3 (15%) of 20 infants born to cynomolgus monkeys
receiving efavirenz during the first trimester at a dose giving plasma levels
comparable to systemic human therapeutic exposure.There are three case
reports of neural tube defects in humans after first trimester exposure however
the relative risk was unclear.38, Level 9
Recommendations to start antiretroviral therapy
• Women require antiretroviral therapy to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV. (Grade A)
• Women should be advised to take antiretroviral therapy during
pregnancy and during delivery. (Grade A)
• Combination of more than three or more antiretroviral drugs is
recommended for all HIV pregnant mothers to reduce mother-tochild transmission of HIV. (Grade B)
• Antiretroviral therapy should be started as early as possible in
pregnancy after the first trimester. (Grade B)
• Adherence to antiretroviral therapy is of utmost importance in the
success of treatment. (Grade C)
• A detailed anomaly ultrasound should be performed for all foetus
exposed to HAART during the first trimester. (Grade C)
In utero exposure
Most studies looking at the safety of ARV therapy are based on animal
studies.58, Level 9 One meta-analysis of 5 prospective cohort studies carried
out in the USA and one large European prospective cohort study found no
significant difference in the rates of congenital anomalies, neonatal
conditions or low birth weight between infants exposed to combination ARV
therapy and unexposed infants. 59,Level 9; 60 ,Level 6
Data on the association between combination of ARV regimens and
increased rates of premature delivery are mixed.9, Level 1 Although molecular
and biochemical evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction have been reported
in infants exposed to in utero to ARV agents, 61,Level 6;62 Level 7;63,Level 8 the clinical
impact of such dysfunction was unclear.64, Level 8; 65, Level 8
In pregnant women who refuse HAART/ START or if there is a reasonable
doubt on compliance, ZDV monotherapy is an alternative but an inferior
option.38, Level 9; 56, Level, 9
The following recommendations for the use of ARV therapy to reduce MTCT
are based on scenarios that may commonly present in clinical practice.
A. Newly diagnosed HIV pregnant women not on ARV
A.1
HIV women with CD4 T cell count < 250 cells/uL
Most guidelines recommend that the initiation of HAART should be between
14-28 weeks of gestation.68, Level 9; 38, Level 9;56 Level, 9
6.1
CLINICAL SCENARIOS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE
USE OF ARV PROPHYLAXIS
Women with advanced HIV (refer Appendix 3) or those women with CD4 T
cell count < 250 cells/uL (Scenario A1), should commence treatment with a
combination of three or more drugs (i.e. HAART). The treatment which should
be continued indefinitely after delivery. 10, Level 9;56 Level 9; 38, Level 9
Where ARV therapy is not required during pregnancy for maternal health
(Scenario A2), a combination of three drugs to suppress HIV viral replication
may be prescribed for the duration of pregnancy and after delivery to reduce
transmission: administered correctly, this will preserve future maternal
therapeutic options. In this scenario, ARV therapy is usually discontinued at,
or soon after delivery. 10, Level 9;38 Level 9; 56, Level 9
For women whose CD4 T cell count is > 250 cells/uL, a short term
antiretroviral therapy (i.e. START) combination of 2 (nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor ARVs (NRTIs) and a protease inhibitors (PI) should
be prescribed. The non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI),
nevirapine(NVP), has been shown to have an increased incidence of
hepatotoxicity if initiated in women with pre-treatment CD4 > 250 cells/µl,
66,Level 3; 67,Level 9 hence, a PI based regimen needs to be used in such women
to prevent this occurrence (refer Appendix 1).
In most circumstances initiation of ARV therapy should be delayed until after
the first trimester unless early initiation is judged important for maternal
health. Delaying the initiation of HAART after the first trimester minimises
the risk of drug related teratogenecity and usually results in better adherence
as the nausea associated with pregnancy has usually diminished by this
time.68, Level 9; 38, Level 9; 56 Level, 9
In women who are newly diagnosed as HIV infected, clinical staging
according to symptoms and CD4 count is recommended (refer Appendix 3)
Based on the PACTG 076, PHPT 2 and HIVNET 012 protocols, a safe and
efficacious three-drug combination would be Zidovudine (ZDV), Lamivudine
(3TC) and Nevirapine (NVP). In the intrapartum period regardless of mode
of delivery, intravenous ZDV should be given to the patient. 38, Level 9;69, Level 2; 70,
Level 2;71, Level 2;72, Level 2
After initiating HAART the following should be looked for and monitored:
•
NVP should be stopped immediately in all women who develop
signs and symptoms of hepatitis or severe rash. 38, Level 9
•
Full Blood Count to monitor haemoglobin (ZDV is known to cause
anaemia) if women developed anaemia they need to be investigated
and treated. If anaemia occurs with ZDV therapy (600mg o.d.),
consider dosage reduction to 500mg daily, i.e. 300mg followed by
200mg twelve hours later or substitute with another NRTI drug.
Please refer to Infectious Diseases Physician for further information.
•
Liver Function Test to monitor Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST)
and Alkaline Phosphotase (ALP) (NVP is known to cause hepatitis)
particularly during the first 18 weeks of treatment.38, Level 9
Monitoring should be carried out 2 weekly for the first month after initiating
HAART and then monthly till delivery.CD4 count should be monitored at 4
monthly interval.73, Level 9
HIV RNA viral load should be taken at baseline before initiation of therapy
and at 34-36 week of gestation to help in decision on the mode of delivery. If
HIV viral load at 34-36 week <1000 copies/ml, vaginal delivery may be
allowed.10,Level 9
During the intrapartum period, it is recommended to give i.v. ZDV with elective
Caesarean section.74, Level 1,50, Level 1,75, Level 1
Post partum, HAART should be continued for the mother and the baby will be
followed up by the paediatrician. The mother should be on regular follow up
with physician.
Pneumocyitis (carinii) jiroveci Pneumonia Prophylaxis
Prophylaxis against Pneumocystis (carinii) jiroveci Pneumonia (PCP) is an
important component of HIV related clinical care. There is mixed evidence
linking ingestion of Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX: co- trimxazole)
and other sulfonamides in early pregnancy to increase risk of oral clefts,
neural tube defects, and cardiovascular and urinary tract abnormalities. 76, Level 7
It is recommended that HIV-infected pregnant women with a CD4+ Tlymphocyte count of < 200/µl receive PCP prophylaxis with TMP / SMX. 77, Level
9;78, Level 9;79 Level 8 Use of TMP / SMX in the first trimester should target women at
highest risk for HIV-related illness (those with clinical evidence of advanced
disease, or those who have been previously diagnosed with PCP). The
benefit of improved morbidity and mortality with TMP / SMX prophylaxis among
these high-risk women may outweigh the small risk to the foetus.77, Level 9
Recommendations for HIV pregnant women with CD4 T cell count
< 250 cells/uL
• The preferred first line for HAART regime is zidovudine (ZDV)*,
lamivudine (3TC)* and nevirapine (NVP)* (Grade C)
• For women who have NVP intolerance or allergy,please refer to
infectious disease physician (Grade C)
• Full Blood Count and Liver Function Test should be monitored two
weekly for the first month after initiating HAART and then
monthly.
(Grade C)
• CD4 counts should be monitored 4 monthly in women on HAART.
(Grade C)
• Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels should be monitored in all women on
HAART at baseline and at 34-36 weeks gestation. (Grade A)
• Intrapartum zidovudine (ZDV)* should be given to women.
(Grade A)
• Zidovudine (ZDV)*, lamivudine (3TC)* and nevirapine (NVP)/
combination therapy should be continued post delivery and for life
for the mother. (Grade A)
• Women with a CD4 + T-lymphocyte count of < 200/µl should
receive PCP prophylaxis with TMP/SMX. (Grade C)
* Refer to Appendix 1 and 2 for dosage and side effects
A.2
HIV pregnant women with CD4 T cell count > 250 cells/uL
Initiate combination of Short Term Antiretroviral Therapy (START) as soon as
possible after 14 weeks’ gestation (and, in any case, before 28 weeks’
gestation), to avoid the organogenesis period and to allow adequate time
interval to achieve viral suppression by delivery. 38, Level 9; 56 ,Level 9 The decision
to continue or stop ARV therapy post partum depends on the initial CD4
count. This should be discussed with the ID specialist / physician before
delivery.
The guideline development group recommends a PI based ARV combination
with 2 NRTI. The recommended drug combination is AZT + 3TC + Lopinavir
/ Ritonavir with the intention to achieve undetectable viral loads of <50 copies
per ml prior to delivery. 80, Level 6; 81, Level 6
If the patient presents late in pregnancy i.e. > 28 weeks of gestation, START
should be initiated immediately with AZT/3TC and lopinavir / ritonavir (even
before any CD4 results are available) in the hospital. During follow-up, if the
CD4+ T-lymphocyte count of < 250 cells/uL, consider switching to the
Nevirapine based regimen (i.e. two NRTI drugs + NVP).
Full Blood Count should be done 2 weekly for the first month and then
monthly till delivery for detecting possible anemia due to ZDV.
Hyperglycemia, new-onset diabetes mellitus, exacerbation of existing
diabetes mellitus, and diabetic ketoacidosis have been reported for women
who have been treated with protease inhibitor antiretroviral drugs like lopinavir
/ritonavir. 82, level 9, 83, Level 9 In a Spanish cohort of 609 pregnant women with HIV
infection, the incidence of gestational diabetes was 7% higher than the
expected for the general population. 84, Level 6
Therefore clinicians caring for these women should be aware of the risk of
this complication. Symptoms of hyperglycemia should be discussed with
pregnant women who are receiving protease inhibitors. HIV pregnant women
receiving START should be screened for glucose intolerance 38, Level 9
Plasma viral load should be taken at 36 weeks gestation for women on
START, in order to make informed decisions on the mode of delivery. If HIV is
viral load <1000 copies/ml, allow for vaginal delivery.10, Level 9 During
intrapartum, it is recommended to give i.v. ZDV. 38, Level 9; 50 Level 1; 75, Level 1; 86, Level 8
Postpartum, START will either be discontinued immediately after delivery10, Level 9
or continued indefinitely in the mother, depending on the nadir CD4 on
presentation. This decision has to be discussed with the ID physician/
physician prior to delivery.
The mother should be on regular follow up with the physician whereas the
baby will be followed up by the paediatrician.
• Full Blood Count should be done 2 weekly for the first month and
then monthly. (Grade C)
• Modified glucose tolerance test (MGTT) should be done after
initiating START. (Grade C)
• CD4 count should be monitored 4 monthly. (Grade C)
• Plasma HIV viral load should be done at 34-36 weeks of
gestation. (Grade C)
• Intrapartum intravenous zidovudine (ZDV)* should be given.
(Grade A)
• The decision to stop or continue START (zidovudine+lamivudine+
lopinavir/ritonavir) *post delivery should be individualized after
discussion with the ID physician/physician (Grade C)
* Refer to Appendix 1 for dosage and side effects
A.3.
Women diagnosed in labour without prior therapy
In the HIVNET 012 protocol, a single dose of NVP given to mothers at the
onset of labour and to their babies soon after birth was compared to a
suboptimal course of ZDV given to mothers only during labour and to their
babies for the first week of life. In this trial, the NVP arm had a reduction in
MTCT at 4 to 8 weeks by about 40% with the benefit persisting at 18 months
of life.88, Level 2
If Caesarean section cannot be preformed in time, combination ART is then
indicated to reduce MTCT. The regimen is intrapartum ZDV by intravenous
infusion + Single Dose NVP + 3TC during delivery. To reduce the development
of NVP resistance, continue twice - daily oral ZDV and 3TC for one week post
delivery for the mother.38, Level 9
Recommendations for HIV pregnant women with CD4 T cell count
> 250 cells/uL
• Short term antiretroviral therapy (START) should be initiated after
the first trimester (Grade C)
• The preferred first line regime is zidovudine (ZDV)*, lamivudine
(3TC)* and lopinavir/ritonavir * (Grade C)
* Refer to Appendix 1 for dosage and side effects
B. HIV positive women who are already on a HAART regime
B.1 Women stable on HAART
The data provide conflicting advice as to whether continuation of combination
ARV therapy during pregnancy is associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes such as preterm labour and delivery. Furthermore if HAART is
interrupted during the first trimester, this may cause immunological
deterioration and rebound HIV viraemia with possible development of ARV
drug resistant strains in a HIV infected pregnant woman who is already stable
on HAART.89,Level 8; 90, Level 3
For patients presenting in first trimester while on potentially teratogenic drugs
like efavirenz, the pros and cons of continuing this regimen should be
discussed with her.56,Level 9; 38, Level 9
Women on HAART should be monitored closely for possible toxicities and
complications due to HAART. HIV RNA viral load should be done at 36 weeks
of gestation to determine the mode of delivery for the mother. HAART should
be continued after delivery and the mother will be reviewed by the ID or
physician in their subsequent follow-up.
Recommendations for women diagnosed in labour without prior
therapy
• Regardless of the mode of delivery, provide prophylactic ARVs as
follows:
o
Intrapartum intravenous zidovudine (ZDV)* + oral lamivudine
(3TC)* + Single Dose oral nevirapine (sdNVP)* during delivery
AND
o
Continue oral zidovudine (ZDV)* and 3TC* for one week
post delivery for the mother. (Grade C)
Recommendation for women failing HAART
• Women failing HAART should be referred to the Infectious Disease
Physician. (Grade C)
7.0
OBSTETRIC MANAGEMENT
7.1
Vaginal Disinfection to reduce MTCT
A systematic review of randomised trials has shown that there is no difference
in outcomes of MTCT when vaginal disinfections have been used.91, Level 1
Recommendation for vaginal disinfection to reduce mother-to-child
transmission of HIV
• There is no evidence to support vaginal disinfection in preventing
mother-to-child transmission of HIV. (Grade A)
Recommendations for women stable on HAART
• Women should continue their HAART regime (unless they present
in the first trimester on efavirenz). (Grade C)
• Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels and CD4 should be monitored 4 monthly.
(Grade C)
• They should receive careful, regular monitoring for potential
toxicities*. (Grade C)
• Intrapartum zidovudine (ZDV)* should be given to women.
(Grade A)
* Refer to Appendix 1 for dosage and side effects
B.2 Women failing HAART
Failing HAART therapy (detectable HIV RNA, declining CD4 T cell
count or clinical failure) is an indication to change regime. HIV viral
resistant testing should be done if available to choose the best
optimum regime for the patient 73, Level 9
7.3
Mode of delivery and viral load
Several systematic reviews showed that elective caesarean section reduces
MTCT. This benefit appears additive with prophylactic ZDV monotherapy and
the likelihood of transmission was reduced by approximately 87% with both
elective caesarean section and full-course ZDV compared to other modes
of delivery.38,Level 9; 50, Level 1; 75, Level 1
In a meta-analysis of 7 prospective studies of women with viral loads < 1000
copies /mL at delivery or at the measurement closest to delivery, there was
a 1% risk of transmission rate for those on ARV, compared with 9.8% for
untreated mothers. Elective LSCS has been shown to further reduce
transmission rates. 86 ,Level 1
Women who have a detectable viral load and / or who are not taking HAART
should be offered an elective caesarean section as it reduces MTCT. It is
recommended that delivery by elective caesarean section should take place
after 38 weeks of gestation. 10, Level 9
Increasing geometric levels of plasma HIV-1 RNA were associated with
increasing rates of transmission. The highest transmission rate was among
women whose plasma HIV-1 RNA levels exceeded 100,000 copies who had
7.2
Management of ruptured membranes
A cohort of 525 women infected with HIV-1 demonstrated that ruptured
membranes for > 4 hours and mean CD4+ count < 29% (CD4 count < 500
cells/uL) were significantly associated with higher risk of MTCT.92, Level 6
In a metanalysis of 15 prospective cohort studies, the risk of vertical
transmission increases approximately 2% with an increase of every hour in
duration of ruptured membranes. The estimated probability of transmission
increased from 8% to 31% with duration of ruptured membranes of 2 and 24
hours respectively.93, Level 1
To reduce the risk of MTCT, caesarean section should be performed within
4 hours of membrane rupture (with the exception of women stable on HAART
with viral load <1000 at 34-36 weeks’). 94 Level 9; 10,Level 9
Recommendation for management of ruptured membranes
• The duration of ruptured membranes increases the risk of
perinatal transmission (Grade A) therefore Caesarean section is
of doubtful benefit after 4 hours of membrane rupture. (Grade C)
7.4
Safety Issues
Higher maternal HIV-1 RNA level at or close to delivery significantly increased
disease progression risk with a borderline effect on mortality. Effects were
independent of maternal and infant treatment. 95,Level 1 Post partum morbidity
is generally higher among women who undergo caesarean as compared to
vaginal delivery. There are more minor morbidities (fever, urinary tract infection,
anaemia) than major events (pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, sepsis).
75, Level 1; 97, Level 4; 38,Level 9
Please refer to Ministry of Health Standard Precaution Guidelines 98,Level 9
with regards on standard precaution and disposal of waste hazards in HIV
infected patients.
8.0
BREASTFEEDING
The risk of vertical transmission is significantly higher (14-16%) with
breastfeeding despite receiving ARV 9, Level 1;99,Level 2;100, Level 6;10, Level 9 Strategies
should be made to ensure babies of HIV mothers are formula fed and their
care givers educated on proper hygiene. 68,Level 9
not received ZDV (63.3%). The level of plasma HIV-1 RNA predicts the risk
but not the timing of transmission of HIV-1 to their infants. 96, Level 1
In women who have been treated with START/HAART with a viral load of less
than 1000 copies/ml may opt for a vaginal delivery.10, Level 9
Women who opt for a planned vaginal delivery should have their membranes
intact as long as possible. Women should continue their HAART throughout
labour and be given intravenous ZDV till the cord is clamped as soon as
possible after delivery.10, Level 9
Recommendations for mode of delivery and viral load
• Elective caesarean section is recommended about 38 weeks for
those not on treatment, those who are on zidovudine monotherapy,
or those with START/ HAART but with a viral load of more than 1000
copies/ ml. (Grade A)
• Those who are treated with START/ HAART with a viral load of less
than 1000 copies / ml may opt for a vaginal delivery. (Grade B)
9.0
POST NATAL CARE
Basic postnatal care of the mother and her infant is no different from routine
postnatal care. Multidisciplinary support from the obstetrician, paediatrician,
infectious disease physician and primary care doctors and nurses for the
mother and her family is essential to ensure adequate care.101, Level 9
The community clinic staff should be informed about the mode of delivery,
potential complications to expect and advice about the therapy that the patient
may be on. They can assist in monitoring and managing the patient
adequately. The issue of confidentiality for these patients is of utmost
importance, and health care workers must be reminded to maintain this.
Concerns have been raised about adherence to ARV regimens during the
postpartum period. Studies have shown that adherence is extremely low
during late pregnancy and declines significantly postpartum.102, Level 6; 103, Level 9
The puerperium is a period at risk of postnatal depression, and women with
HIV may require additional support especially while there is uncertainty
regarding the status of their infants.101 ,Level 9; 38,Level 9
A cohort study of 549 children born to HIV women in Africa demonstrated that
mixed feeding carried a higher risk of HIV transmission to the baby compared
to exclusive breastfeeding in their babies less than 3 months of age or those
babies that who were artificially fed.100, Level 6
A Ministry of Health Malaysia circular provides for free infant formula for the
first six months for perinatally exposed babies from low income families
(RM <1200) in the first instance and case to case basis for such infants
whose families income is more then RM1200.87
Recommendations for breastfeeding
• All HIV infected mothers should be advised not to breastfeed their
infants as it is associated with a higher risk of vertical transmission.
(Grade A)
• Families should be counselled against mixed feeding at any time,
as it has carries a higher risk of mother-to-child transmission than
exclusive breastfeeding or formula milk feeding (Grade B)
10.
CONTRACEPTION
Contraception not only prevents unwanted pregnancies, but also plays a
role in prevention of sexual transmission of HIV including HIV super-infection.
The issues related to contraception and HIV are more complex than for
uninfected women.
Consistent, correct condom use has been shown to provide a high degree
of protection against sexual transmission of HIV.104, Level 1; 105,Level 4;106, Level 6
Use of condoms result in pregnancy rates of 3%,107,Level 8; 108 ,Level 9 and also
protects against other sexually transmissible infections (STIs). This is known
as “Dual protection”.
Breast feeding is not recommended for mothers with HIV. Some women
may require medication to suppress lactation and carbegolin may be
prescribed.
Recommendations for post natal care
• Confidentiality should be maintained at all times regarding
the patient’s diagnosis. (Grade C)
• Community health care personnel i.e. public health nurses should
be informed when a mother is discharged to their area and the
potential complications. (Grade C)
• Community health care personnel should provide support and
counselling to help the mother to adhere to her antiretroviral
regime. (Grade C)
• Community health care personnel must help to ensure the
mother and her baby attend their follow up visits to the Infectious
Diseases Clinic and Paediatric Clinic. (Grade C)
• The health care provider should be vigilant for signs of depression.
(Grade C)
• Breast feeding should be avoided and lactation suppression
provided when necessary. (Grade C)
There is an increase in genital shedding in HIV-1 infected women after
starting combined hormonal contraception.109 ,Level 6 This raises the possibility
that use of hormonal contraception may increase the infectivity of HIV-1
infected women to uninfected partners. Therefore partner protection with the
use of condoms is recommended.
There are drug interactions between ARV therapy and hormonal
contraceptives with an increased risk of failure of the contraceptive.
110, Level 8;111, Level 6;112,Level 6.
The insertion of an Intra Uterine Contraceptive Device (IUD) did not
significantly alter the prevalence of cervical shedding of HIV-1 infected cells.
113, Level 4 Therefore IUD use seems safe from the standpoint of infectivity to a
sexual partner. There are low rates of overall and infection-related
complications among HIV-1 infected women after IUD insertion.114, Level 9; 115,Level 9
Spermicides offer very limited protection from pregnancy and may increase
risk of HIV transmission116, Level 1
Ethically, there is no medical reason to deny or force sterilization to patients
with HIV. 117,Level 6;118,Level 6
Recommendations for contraception
• The condom is the only contraceptive method proven to prevent both
pregnancy and sexual transmission of HIV. (Grade A)
• If an intra uterine device or hormonal contraception is to be considered,
they must be used together with the condom. (Grade B)
• There is no medical indication for permanent sterilization of HIVinfected individuals. (Grade B)
1
De Cock KM, Foweler MG, Mercier E, et al. Prevention of mother-to-child HIV
transmission in resource–poor countries- Translating research into policy and practice.
JAMA 2000;283(9); 1175-1182
2
Rashid H. Merchant & Mamatha M. Lala. Prevention of mother-to child transmission of
HIV. Indian .J Med Res 121; April 2005: pp 489-501.
3
AIDS/STD Section, Disease Control Division, Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Summary
of HIV/ AIDS cases,2006
4
Volmink J, Siegfried NL, Van der Merwe L, Brocklehurst P. Antiretrovirals for reducing
the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2007 Jan 24;(1).
5
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Criteria For Commencing Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy
(HAART) In Women detected to be HIV Positive during Antenatal Screening. HIV Bil 1/ 2001.
6
Cooper ER, Charurat M, Mofenson LM, et al.Combination antiretroviral strategies for the
treatment of pregnant HIV-1 infected women and prevention of perinatal HIV-1 transmission.
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol, 2002.29(5):484-494.
7
European Collaborative study, Risk factors for mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1.
European Collaborative. Lancet. 1992 Aug 15; 340(8816):435.
8
Mayaux MJ, Blanche S, Rouzioux C, et al. Maternal factors associated with perinatal
HIV-1 transmission: the French Cohort Study: 7 years of follow-up observation. The
French Pediatric HIV Infection Study Group. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol.
1995 Feb 1;8(2):188-194.
9
Chou R, Smits AK, Huffman LH, et al,. Prenatal screening for HIV: A review of the
evidence for the U.S.Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2005 Jul
5;143(1):38-54
10
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG). Management of HIV in
pregnancy. London (UK): Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG);
2004 Apr. 12 p. (Guideline; no. 39).
11
Goedert JJ. “Prevalence of conditions associated with human immunodeficiency and
hepatitis virus infections among persons with haemophilia, 2001-2003.” Haemophilia.
2005; 11:516-528
12
Burdge DR, Money DM, Forbes JC, et al. The Canadian HIV Trials Network Working
Group on Vertical HIV Transmission, Canadian consensus guidelines for the management of
pregnancy, labour and delivery and for postpartum care in HIV-positive pregnant women
and their offspring (summary of 2002 guidelines). CMAJ. 2003;168(13):1671-1674.
13
Ngidi AC, Myeni ZE, Bland RM, et al; International Conference on AIDS. Acceptability
and limitations of HIV group pre-test counselling for pregnant women in rural KwaZulu
Natal, South Africa. Int Conf AIDS. 2002 Jul 7-12; 14: abstract no. TuPeF5414.
14
Delva W, Mutunga L, Quaghebeur A, et al. Quality and quantity of antenatal HIV
counselling in a PMTCT programme in Mombasa, Kenya. AIDS Care. 2006 Apr;18(3):
189-193.
REFERENCES
15
Obuekwe I.F HIV in pregnancy: the risk of mother-to-child transmission and
possible interventions. Available at: http://mwia.regional.org.au/papers/full/33_flossy.htm
and http://www.regional.org.au
16
Grinstead OA, Gregorich SE, Choi KH, et al. Voluntary HIV-1 Counselling and Testing
Efficacy Study Group. Positive and negative life events after counselling and testing:
the Voluntary HIV-1 Counselling and Testing Efficacy Study. AIDS. 2001 May
25;15(8):1045-1052.
17
Kellock DJ, Rogstad KE. Attitudes to HIV testing in general practice. Int J STD AIDS.
1998 May;9(5):263-267.
18
Weinhardt LS, Carey MP, Johnson BT, et al. Effects of HIV counseling and testing on
sexual risk behaviour: a meta-analytic review of published research, 1985-1997. Am J
Public Health. 1999 Sep;89(9):1397-1405.
19
Homsy J, Kalamya JN, Obonyo J, et al. Routine intrapartum HIV counseling and
testing for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV in a rural Ugandan
hospital. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2006 Jun;42(2):149-154.
20
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Revised guidelines for HIV
counseling, testing, and referral. MMWR Recomm Rep 2001 Nov 9;50(RR-19):1-58.
21
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (CDC). Revised Recommendations for HIV
Testing of Adults, Adolescents, and Pregnant Women in Health-Care Settings
Recommendations and Reports September 22, 2006: Vol. 55 ; No.RR-14.
22
Soorapanth S, Sansom S, Bulterys M, et al. Cost - effectiveness of HIV rescreening during
late pregnancy to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission in South Africa and other
resource-limited settings. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2006 Jun;42(2):213-221.
23
World Health Organization. Antiretroviral drugs for treating pregnant women and preventing
HIV infection in infants in resource limited settings. Towards universal access.
Recommendations for a public health approach. 2006 version.
http://www.who.int/3by5/ PMTCTreport_June2006.pdf. Accessed on 23 September 2007
24
Pollet DE, Saman E, Van der Borght B, et al. Int Conf AIDS Line immunoassay for the
simultaneous detection ofantibodies to HIV-1 and HIV-2 in human sera. 1989 Jun
4-9; 5: 369.
25
Fransen K, Pollet DE, Peeters M, et al. Evaluation of a line immunoassay for simultaneous
confirmation of antibodies to HIV-1 and HIV-2. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis.1991
Nov;10(11):939-946.
26
Orlando M, Tucker JS, Sherbourne CD, et al. A cross-lagged model of psychiatric
problems and health-related quality of life among a national sample of HIV positive adults.
Med Care. 2005 Jan; 43(1):21-7
27
Doran TI, Parra E. False-positive and indeterminate human immunodeficiency virus
test results in pregnant women. Arch Fam Med. 2000 Sep-Oct;9(9):924-929.
28
Mitchell SW, Mboup S, Mingle J, et al. Field evaluation of alternative HIV testing
strategy with a rapid immunobinding assay and an agglutination assay. Lancet. 1991 Jun
1;337(8753):1328-1331
29
Urassa WK, Bredberg-Rådén U, Mbena E, et al. Alternative confirmatory strategies in
HIV-1 antibody testing. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.1992;5(2):170-176.
30
Bulterys M, Jamieson DJ, O’Sullivan MJ, et al. Mother-Infant Rapid Intervention At
Delivery (MIRIAD) Study Group. Rapid HIV-1 testing during labor: a multicenter
study. JAMA. 2004 Jul 14;292(2):219-223
31
Laws Of Malaysia Act 342. Prevention And Control Of Infectious Disease Act 1988.
Avaiable from http://www.dph.gov.my/survelans/Guidelines%202006/
LAWS%20OF%20MALAYSIA.pdf
32.
MMWR (CDC) Revised Guidelines for HIV Counseling, Testing, and Referral Technical
Expert Panel Review of CDC HIV Counseling, Testing, and Referral Guidelines November
9, 2001 / 50(RR19);1-58
33.
AIDS/STD Section, Disease Control Division, Department of Public Health, Malaysia
National Strategic Plan: Prevention and Control of HIV Infection, Malaysia In print
Ministry of Health, Malaysia, 30 June 1998, 26 pp
34.
Churchill DR. Prognostic markers and surrogate markers of clinical progression in HIV
infection. Int J STD AIDS. 1997 Sep;8(9):552-556
35
Mofenson LM, Fowler MG. Interruption of materno-fetal transmission. AIDS. 1999;13
Suppl A:S205-214.
36
Iuliano R, Forastieri G, Brizzi M, et al. Correlation between plasma HIV-1 RNA levels
and the rate of immunologic decline. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol. 1997
Apr 15;14(5):408-414.
37
Garcia PM, Kalish LA, Pitt J, et al. Maternal levels of plasma human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 RNA and the risk of perinatal transmission. Women and Infants Transmission
Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1999 Aug 5;341(6):394-402.
38
Public Health Task Force .Perinatal HIV Guidelines Working Group. Public Health Service
Task Force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant HIV-1-infected
women for maternal health and interventions to reduce perinatal HIV-1 transmission in the
United States. Rockville (MD): U.S. Public Health Service; 2007 Nov 2. 96 p.
39.
Katz, M, Martin J, Roland M, et al. The San Francisco postexposure prevention program:
Lessons and future challenges. Programs and abstracts of the 7th Conference on
Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections, January 30-February 2, 2000; San Francisco.
40
Chaisilwattana P, Chuachoowong R, Siriwasin W, et al. Chlamydial and gonococcal
cervicitis in HIV-seropositive and HIV-seronegative pregnant women in Bangkok:
prevalence, risk factors, and relation to perinatal HIV transmission. Sex Transm Dis.
1997 Oct;24(9):495-502
41
Hashemi FB, Ghassemi M, Roebuck KA, et al. Activation of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 expression by Gardnerella vaginalis. J Infect Dis. 1999 Apr;179(4): 924-930
42
Cohen CR, Duerr A, Pruithithada N, et al. Bacterial vaginosis and HIV seroprevalence
among female commercial sex workers in Chiang Mai, Thailand. AIDS. 1995 Sep;9(9):1093 -1097.
43
Mwanyumba F, Gaillard P, Inion I, et al. Placental inflammation and perinatal transmission
of HIV-1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2002 Mar 1;29(3):262-269
44
Connor EM, Sperling RS, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials
Group Protocol 076 Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1994 Nov 3;331(18):1173-1180
45
Cooper ER, Charurat M, Mofenson LM, et al. Combination antiretroviral strategies for
the treatment of pregnant HIV-1 infected women and prevention of perinatal HIV-1
transmission. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol, 2002.29(5):484-494.
46
European Collaborative study. Risk factors for mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1.
European Collaborative. Lancet. 1992 Aug 15;340(8816):435.
47
Gazzard B; BHIVA Writing Committee. British HIV Association (BHIVA) guidelines for the
treatment of HIV-infected adults with antiretroviral therapy (2005). HIV Med. 2005 Jul;6
Suppl 2:1-61.
48
Mandelbrot L, Landreau-Mascaro A, Rekacewicz C, et al. Lamivudine-Zidovudine
combination for the prevention of maternal Infection transmission of HIV-1.
JAMA,2001;285(160):2083 - 2093.
49
Kind C, Rudin C, Siegrist CA, et al. Prevention of vertical HIV transmission: additive
protective effect of elective Cesarean section and zidovudine prophylaxis. Swiss Neonatal
HIV Study Group. AIDS. 1998 Jan 22;12(2):205-210.
50
Volmink J, Siegfried NL, van der Merwe L, et al. Antiretrovirals for reducing the risk of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan
24; (1) : CD003510.
51
Eastman PS, Mittler J, Kelso R, et al. Genotypic changes in human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 associated with loss of suppression of plasma viral RNA levels in subjects
treated with ritonavir (Norvir) monotherapy. J Virol. 1998 Jun;72(6):5154-5164
52
Larbalestier N, Mullen J, O’Shea S, et al .Drug resistance is uncommon in pregnant
women with low viral loads taking zidovudine monotherapy to prevent perinatal HIV
transmission. AIDS. 2003 Dec 5;17(18):2665-2667.
53
Welles SL, Pitt J, Colgrove R, et al. HIV-1 genotypic zidovudine drug resistance and
the risk of maternal-infant-transmission in the women and infants transmission study.
The Women and Infants Transmission Study Group. AIDS. 2000 Feb 18;14(3):263-271.
54
Dorenbaum A, Cunningham CK, Gelber RD, et al. International PACTG 316 Team.
Two-dose intrapartum/newborn nevirapine and standard antiretroviral therapy to reduce
perinatal HIV transmission: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2002Jul 10;288(2):189-198.
55
Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents.
Jan 28, 2000. [AIDS Treatment Information Service: Current Treatment] Available at:
http://www.hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html. Accessed April 26, 2006
56
British HIV Association (BHIVA) Guidelines for the Management of HIV infection in
Pregnant Women and the Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV Publication
history information: Originally published 2001, updated March 2005
57
Claas GJ, Julg B, Goebel FD, et al. Metabolic and anthropometric changes one year after
switching from didanosine/stavudine to tenofovir in HIV-infected patients. Eur J Med Res,
2007 Feb 26;12(2): 54-60.
58
Taylor GP, Low-Beer N. Antiretroviral therapy in pregnancy: a focus on safety. Drug Saf.
2001;24(9):683-702.
59
No authors. Immunological markers in HIV-infected pregnant women. The European
Collaborative Study and the Swiss HIV Pregnancy Cohort. AIDS. 1997 Dec;11(15):1859-1865.
60
Tuomala RE, Shapiro DE, Mofenson LM, et al. Antiretroviral therapy during pregnancy
and the risk of an adverse outcome. N Engl J Med. 2002 Jun 13;346(24):1863-1870
61
Alimenti A, Burdge DR, Ogilvie GS, et al. Lactic acidemia in human immunodeficiency
virus-uninfected infants exposed to perinatal antiretroviral therapy. Pediatr Infect Dis J.
2003 Sep;22(9):782-789
62
Poirier MC, Divi RL, Al-Harthi L, et al. Women and Infants Transmission Study (WITS)
Group.Long-term mitochondrial toxicity in HIV-uninfected infants born to HIV-infected
mothers. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Jun 1;33(2):175-183
63
Divi RL, Walker VE, Wade NA, et al. Mitochondrial damage and DNA depletion in cord
blood and umbilical cord from infants exposed in utero to combivir. AIDS. 2004 Apr30;
18(7):1013-1021
64
Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and perinatal
exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet. 1999 Sep 25;354(9184):1084-1089
65
Barret B, Tardieu M, Rustin P. Mitochondrial dysfunction in HIV uninfected children.
AIDS 2003;17:1769–1785.
66
Hitti J, Frenkel LM, Stek AM, et al. Maternal toxicity with continuous nevirapine in pregnancy:
results from PACTG 1022. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2004 Jul 1;36(3):772-776.
67
Watts DH. Treating HIV during pregnancy: an update on safety issues. Drug Saf.2006;
29(6):467-490.
68
Burdge DR, Money DM, Forbes JC, et al. Canadian consensus guidelines for the
management of pregnant HIV-positive women and their offspring on behalf of the
Canadian HIV Trials Network Working Group on Vertical HIV Transmission. This article
appears online only and is an appendix to CMAJ 2003;168(13):1683-1688
69
Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. Pediatric AIDS Clinical
Trials Group Protocol 076 Study Group. N Eng J Med. 1994 Nov 3;331(18):1173-1180
70
Lallemant M, Jourdain G, Le Coeur S, et al. A trial of shortened zidovudine regimens to
prevent mother-to-child transmission of human immunodefi ciency virus type 1.Perinatal
HIV Prevention Trial (Thailand) Investigators. N Eng J Med. 2000 Oct 5;343(14):982-991.
71
Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose nevirapine
compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 in
Kampala, Uganda: Lancet. 1999 Sep 4;354(9181):795-802.
72
Petra Study Team. Efficacy of three short-course regimens of zidovudine and lamivudine
in preventing early and late transmission of HIV-1 from mother to child in Tanzania,
South Africa, and Uganda (Petra study): a randomised, double-blind,placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet. 2002 Apr 6;359(9313):1168-1169.
73
DHSS Panel on Guidelines for the use of ARV agents in HIV-1-infected adults and
adolescents 2006
74
Suksomboon N, Poolsup N, Ket-Aim S. Systematic review of the efficacy of antiretroviral
therapies for reducing the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. J Clin
Pharm Ther. 2007 Jun; 32(3):293-311
75
Read JS, Newell MK. Efficacy and safety of cesarean delivery for prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Oct 19;(4)
76
Hernandez-Diaz S, Werler MM, Walker AM et al. Folic acid antagonists during pregnancy
and the risk of birth defects. N Eng J Med 2000; 343: 1608-1614
77
No authors. 1999 USPHS/IDSA guidelines for the prevention of opportunistic infections
in persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus. U.S. Public Health Services
(USPHS) and Infectious Diseases Society of America (ISAA), Infect Dis Object Gynecol
2008;8 (1):5-74
78
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institutes of Health, HIV Medicine
Association/Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treating Opportunistic Infections
among HIV-Infected Adults and Adolescents. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004 Dec 17;
53(RR15);111-112.
79
Walter J, Mwiya M, Scott N et al. Reduction in preterm delivery and neonatal mortality
after the introduction of antenatal cotrimoxazole prophylaxis among HIV-infected
women with low CD4 cell counts. J Infect Dis. 2006 Dec 1;194(11):1510-1518
80
Stek AM, Mirochnick M, Capparelli E, et al. Reduced lopinavir exposure during pregnancy.
AIDS, 2006.20(15):1931-1939
81
Tuboi SH, Harrison LH, Spinz E, et al. Predictors of Virologic Failure in HIV-1- Infected
Patients Starting Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy in Porto Alegre, Brazil. J Acquir
Immune Defic Syndr 2005;40:324-328.
82
Dube MP, Sattler FR. Metabolic complications of antiretroviral therapies. AIDS Clin
Care.1998 Jun;10(6):41-44
83
Khilnani P, Rajdev SK, Uttam R. Characteristics of available antiretroviral drugs - Part
2. Indian J Crit Care Med 2003;7:273-282
84
Justman JE, Benning L, Danoff A, et al. Protease inhibitor use and the incidence of
diabetes mellitus in a large cohort of HIV-infected women. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2003 Mar 1;32(3):298-302
85
U.S .Public Health Service Task Force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant HIV-1-infected women for maternal health and interventions to reduce perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States (revised November 3, 2000).
86
Ioannidis JP, Abrams EJ, Ammann A, et al. Perinatal transmission of human immuno
deficiency virus type 1 by pregnant women with RNA virus loads <1000 copies/ml. J Infect
Dis. 2001 Feb 15;183(4):539-545
87
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Pekeliling Ketua Pengarah Kesihatan Bil. 5/200; Polisi
Penyusuan Susu Ibu bagi bayi-bayi yang dilahirkan oleh ibu-ibu yang HIV positif.
88
Eshleman SH, Hoover DR, Hudelson SE, et al. Development of nevirapine resistance
in infants is reduced by use of infant-only single-dose nevirapine plus zidovudine
postexposure prophylaxis for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1.
J Infect Dis. 2006 Feb 15;193(4):479-781
89
Bucceri A.M, Somigliana E, Matrone R, et al. Discontinuing combination antiretroviral
therapy during the first trimester of pregnancy: Insights from plasma human
immunodeficiency virus-1 RNA viral load and CD4 count. American journal of obstetries
and gynecology. 2003;189:545-551
90
Achenbach CJ, Till M, Palella FJ, et al. Extended antiretroviral treatment interruption in
HIV-infected patients with long-term suppression of plasma HIV RNA. HIV Med. 2005
Jan;6(1):7-12.
91
Wiysonge CS, Shey MS, Shang JD, et al. Vaginal disinfection for preventing motherto-child transmission of HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Oct 19;(4)
92
Landesman SH, Kalish LA, Burns DN, et al. Obstetrical factors and the transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from mother to child. The Women and Infants
Transmission Study. N Engl J Med. 1996; 334(25):1617-1623.
93
International Perinatal HIV Group . Duration of ruptured membranes and vertical transmission
of HIV-1: a meta-analysis from 15 prospective cohort studies. AIDS. 2001 Feb 16;15(3):357-368.
94
Davies, Jill K. Management of HIV in Pregnancy Part II. Contempory Ophthalmology.
26(3): 1-5, February 15, 2006.
95
Ioannidis JP, Tatsioni A, Abrams EJ, et al. Maternal viral load and rate of disease
progression among vertically HIV-1-Infected children : an International meta-analysis.
AIDS. 2004 Jan 2;18(1):99-108.
96
Garcia, JA, Harrich D, Soultanakis E. et al. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1
LTR TATA and TAR region sequences required for transcriptional regulation. EMBO J.
1989;8:765-778
97
Navas-Nacher EL, Read JS, Leighty RM, et al. Women and Infants Transmission Study
Group. Mode of delivery and postpartum HIV-1 disease progression: the Women and
Infants Transmission Study. AIDS. 2006 Feb 14;20(3):429-436
98
Ministry of Health Malaysia. KKM/3,000/2004: Ministry of Health Standard Precaution
Guidelines“AIDS / STI section.
99
Nduati R, John G, Mbori-Ngacha D et al. Effect of Breastfeeding and Formula Feeding
on Transmission of HIV-1: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2000;283:1167-1174.
100
Coutsoudis A, Pillay K, Kuhn L, Spooner E, Tsai WY, Coovadia HM. South African
Vitamin A Study Group. Method of feeding and transmission of HIV-1 from mothers
to children by 15 months of age: prospective cohort study from Durban, South Africa.
AIDS. 2001 Feb 16;15(3):379-387
101
Mandelbro Coll O, Fiore S, Floridia M, et al. Pregnancy and HIV infection:An European
consensus on management. AIDS. 2002 Jun;16 Supp l 2:S1-18
102
Ickovics JR, Wilson TE, Royce RA, et al. Perinatal Guidelines Evaluation Group.Prenatal
and postpartum zidovudine adherence among pregnant women with HIV:results of a
MEMS substudy from the Perinatal Guidelines Evaluation Project. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr. 2002 Jul 1;30(3):311-315.
103
Minkoff H, Ahdieh L, Watts H, et al. The relationship of pregnancy to the use of highly
active antiretroviral therapy Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2001 May;184(6):1221-1227
104
Weller S, Davis K. Condom effectiveness in reducing heterosexual HIV transmission.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002
105
de Vincenzi I. A longitudinal study of human immunodeficiency virus transmission by
heterosexual partners. European Study Group on Hetero sexual Transmission of HIV.
N Engl J Med. 1994 Aug 11;331(6):341-346
106
Deschamps MM, Pape JW, Hafner A, et al. Heterosexual transmission of HIV in Haiti.
Ann Intern Med. 1996; 125(4):324-330
107
Trussell J. Contraceptive efficacy of the personal hormone monitoring system Persona.
Br J Fam Plann. 1999 Jul;25(2):34-35
108
Kubba A, Guillebaud J, Anderson RA, et al. Contraception. Lancet. 2000 Dec
2;356(9245):1913-1919.
109
Wang CC, McClelland RS, Overbaugh J, et al. The effect of hormonal contraception
on genital tract shedding of HIV-1. AIDS. 2004 Jan 23;18(2):205-209.
110
Ouellet D, Hsu A, Qian Jet al. Effect of fluoxetine on pharmacokinetics of ritonavir.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1998 Dec;42(12):3107-3112.
111
Mildvan D, Yarrish R, Marshak A, et al. Pharmacokinetic interaction between nevirapine
and ethinyl estradiol/norethindrone when administered concurrently to HIV-infected women.
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2002 Apr 15;29(5):471-477
112
Clark RA, Theall KP. Trends and correlates of hormonal contraception use among HIVinfected women. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2004 Aug 1;36(4):986-988.
113
Richardson BA, Morrison CS, Sekadde-Kigondu C, et al. Effect of intrauterine device use
on cervical shedding of HIV-1 DNA. AIDS. 1999 Oct 22;13(15):2091-2097.
114
Sinei SK, M’riara G, Schulz KF, et al. The prevalence of Neisseria gonorrhoea and
Chlamydia trachomatis in intra-uterine contraceptive acceptors in Kenya. J Obstet
Gynaecol East Cent Africa. 1988;7(2):71-73.
115
World health Organization (WHO). Department of Reproductive Health And Research.
Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use. 2nd ed. Geneva, WHO,
2004. 170 p
116
Wilkinson D, Tholandi M, Ramjee G, et al. Nonoxynol-9 spermicide for prevention of
vaginally acquired HIV and other sexually transmitted infections: systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials including more than 5000 women.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2002 Oct;2(10):613-617
117
Palella FJ Jr, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, et al. Declining morbidity and mortality among
patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. HIV Out patient Study
Investigators. N Engl J Med. 1998 Mar 26;338(13):853-860.
118
Schwarcz SK, Hsu LC, Vittinghoff E, et al. Impact of protease inhibitors and other
antiretroviral treatments on acquired immunodeficiency syndrome survival in San
Francisco, California, 1987-1996. Am J Epidemiol. 2000; 152(2):178-185
Appendix 1
ANTIRETROVIRAL DRUGS
Nucleoside Analogue Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
DRUG
DOSAGE
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Zidovudine (ZDV)
RETROVIR
Preparations:
Capsules: 100mg
Concentrate for i.v.
infusion/ injection:
10mg/ml in 20ml
vial
300 mg bid
i.v. dosage for
intrapartum usage
2mg /kg loading dose
, then followed by
1mg/kg per hour
infusion until third
stage of labour
oral dosage for
intrapartum usage -
300mg 3 hourly and
to be given during
first stage of labour
More common:
Hematologic toxicity,
including
granulocytopenia
and anemia (which
may require
transfusions),
headache
Less common (more
severe): myopathy,
myositis and liver
toxicity.
Rare:
Lactic acidosis,
severe
hepatomegaly with
steatosis (fatal
cases)
Avoid combination
with stavudine
(antagonism).
Best on an empty
stomach. Can take with
a non-fatty meal to
minimize nausea. Fatty
food result in a 57%
decrease in AZT
concentrations
Decrease dosage in
severe renal impairment
and
significant hepatic
dysfunction.
Significant neutropenia
or anemia may
necessitate interruption
of therapy until marrow
recovery is observed;
use of erythropoietin,
filgrastim, or reduced
ZDV dosage may be
necessary.
Lamivudine (3TC)
EPIVIR
Tablet:
150mg
150mg q12H or
300mg once daily
More common:
Headache, fatigue,
decreased appetite
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, skin rash
and upper
abdominal pain,
Less common (more
severe):
Pancreatitis
peripheral
neuropathy, anemia,
decreased
neutrophil count,
increased liver
enzymes and
lipodystrophy
syndrome.
Lactic acidosis and
severe
hepatomegaly with
steatosis (fatal
cases have been
reported)
When used with
ZDV may prevent
emergence of
resistance.
Can be given with or
without food.
Decreased dosage in
patients with impaired
renal function.
Patients should be
screened for HBV
infection before starting
therapy; exacerbation of
hepatitis has been
reported after
discontinuation of 3TC
Appendix 1
Non-Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
DRUG
DOSAGE
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Nevirapine (NVP)
VIRAMUNE
Preparations:
Tablets:
200 mg
200 mg q12H
initiate therapy at
half dose for the
first 14 days.
Increase to full
dose if no rash or
other untoward
effects.
More common:
Skin rash, StevenJohnson syndrome,
toxic epidermal
necrolysis (some
severe), fever,
headache, nausea and
abnormal liver function
tests.
Less common (more
severe):
Severe, life-threatening
and rare cases fatal
hepatotoxicity, including
fulminant and
cholestatic hepatitis,
hepatic necrosis and
hepatic failure (less
common in children)
Induces hepatic
cytochrome PH50 3A
(CYP3A); autoinduction of
metabolism occurs in
2-4 weeks with a 1.5-2
times increase in
clearance. Potential
for multiple drug
interactions.
Before administration,
the patients
medication profile
should be carefully
reviewed for potential
drug interactions.
Can be given without
regard to food.
Patients experiencing
rash during the 2-week
lead in period should
not have their NVP
dose increased until
the rash has resolved.
If NVP dosing is
interrupted for more
than 7 days, NVP
dosing should be
restarted with once
daily dosing for 14
days, followed by
escalation to the full
twice daily regimen.
Efavirenz
STOCRIN
Preparations:
Tablets:
200mg and 600mg
600mg o.d.
More comon:
skin rash, increased
transaminase levels,
nausea, dizziness,
diarrhea, headache,
psychiatric symptons
(hallucinations,
confusion), agitation,
vivid dreams.
Inducer of CYP3A4
Concentration of
Efavirenz will be
decreased with co
administration of
rifampicin
To improve tolerability
of central nervous
system side effects,
bedtimedosing
recommended during
the first 2-4 weeks.
May be taken with or
without food.
Pregnancy should be
avoided in woman.
PROTEASE INHIBITOR
Lopinavir/Ritonavir
(LPV/r)
Preparations:
Soft gelatin capsule:
Each contain
Lopinavir 133.3 mg
Ritonavir 33.3mg
3 capsules twice
daily during 2nd
trimester and 4
tab bd during 3rd
trimester
More common:
Diarrhea, headache,
asthenia, nausea and
vomiting and rash , lipid
abnormalities
Less common (more
common):
lipodystrophy syndrome
Rare:
New onset of diabetes
mellitus,
hyperglycemia,
ketoacidosis,
exacerbation of preexisting diabetes
mellitus, hemolytic
anemia, pancreatitis,
elevation in serum
transaminases and
hepatitis
Contraindicated with
amiodarone,
piroxicam,
astemizole/terfinadine,
cisapride, alprazolam,
midazolam,zolpidem
LPV/RTV tablets can
be administered
without regard to food
LPV/RTV oral solution
should be administered
with food. A high fat
meal increases
absorption, especially
of the liquid
preparation. Should be
refrigerated and if kept
at room temperature up
to 25oC , used within 2
months
If coadministered with
ddI, ddI should be
given 1 hour before or
2 hours after LPV/r
3 capsule twice
daily during
pregnancy
Appendix 2
PNEUMOCYSTIS (CARINII) JIROVECI PNEUMONIA (PCP) PROPHYLAXIS
DRUG
DOSAGE
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Trimethoprim-
Sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX)
Preparations:
Tablets
400mg SMX and 80 mg
TMP
OR
800mg SMX and 160
mg TMP (double
strength tablet)
Therapeutic dosage
is ‰ dosage of
double strength
tablet to be taken
daily
OR 2 tablets of
400mg SMX and 80
mg TMP to be taken
daily
SMX is associated
with jaundice and
haemolytic anaemia
Used after 1st trimester
because of potential
teratogenicity of TMP
If have to be prescribed
in the first trimester
then folic acid
supplement should be
given
Should be discontinued
(unless medically
indicated) 2-4 weeks
before planned delivery
1-2 tablets of
400mg SMX and
80mg TMP to be
taken daily
OR
1 tablet of 800mg
SMX and 160mg
TMP to be taken
once daily.
Appendix 3
WHO CLINICAL STAGING / AIDS FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS WITH
CONFIRMED HIV INFECTION i
Source : World Health Organisation, WHO Definations of HIV Surveillance and
Revised Clinical Staging and Immunological Classification of HIV related disease
in Adults and Children 2007
Clinical stage 1
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalized lymphadenophathy
Clinical stage 2
Moderate unexplained weight loss (<10% of presumed or measured body weight)i
Recurrent respiratory tract infections sinusitis, tonsillitis, otitis media and
pharyngitis)
Herpes zoster
Angular cheilitis
Recurrent oral ulceration
Papular pruritic eruptions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Fungal nail infections
Clinical stage 3
Unexplainedii severe weight loss (>10% of presumed or measured body weight)
Unexplained chronic diarrhoea for longer than one month
Unexplained persistent fever (above 37.6°C intermittent or constant,for longer
than one month)
Persistent oral candidiasis
Oral hairy leukoplakia
Pulmonary tuberculosis (current)
Severe bacterial infections (such as pneumonia, empyema, pyomyositis, bone or
joint infection, meningitis or bacteraemia)
Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis, gingivitis or periodontitis
Unexplained anaemia (<8 g/dl), neutropaenia (<0.5 × 109 per litre)or chronic
thrombocytopaenia (<50 × 109 per litre)
i. Asessment of body weight in pregnant woman needs to consider the expected weight gain of pregnancy.
ii. Unexplained refers to where the condition is not explained by other causes.
Appendix 3
WHO CLINICAL STAGING /AIDS FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS WITH
CONFIRMED HIV INFECTION
Clinical stage 4iii
HIV wasting syndrome
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Recurrent severe bacterial pneumonia
Chronic herpes simplex infection (orolabial, genital or anorectal of more than one
month’s duration or visceral at any site)
Oesophageal candidiasis (or candidiasis of trachea, bronchi or lungs)
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Cytomegalovirus infection (retinitis or infection of other organs)
Central nervous system toxoplasmosis
HIV encephalopathy
Extrapulmonary cryptococcosis including meningitis
Disseminated non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Chronic cryptosporidiosis (with diarrhea)
Chronic isosporiasis
Disseminated mycosis (coccidiomycosis or histoplasmosis)
Recurrent non-typhoidal Salmonella bacteraemia
Lymphoma (cerebral or B-cell non-Hodgkin) or other solid HIV-associated tumours
Invasive cervical carcinoma
Atypical disseminated leishmaniasis
Symptomatic HIV-associated nephropathy or symptomatic HIV-associated
cardiomyopathy
iii
Some additional specific conditions can also be included in regional classification (Such as reactivation of American
trypanosomiasis [ meningoencephalitis and / or myocarditis ] in the WHO Region of America and disseminated
penicilliosis in Asia.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviations
Generic name
3TC
Lamivudine
ZDV
Zidovudine
EFV
Efavirenz
NVP
Nevirapine
TMP/SMX
Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole
AZT + 3TC
Zidovudine + Lamivudine
MISCELLANEOUS ABBREVIATION
AIDS
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
ARV
Antiretroviral
HIV
Human immunodeficiency virus
HAART
Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy
MTCT
Mother-to-child transmission of HIV
PMTCT
Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
NNRTI
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
NRTI
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
PI
Protease inhibitor
PCP
Pneumocyitis (carinii) jiroveci Pneumonia
STD
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The committee of this guideline would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft form
• Dr Salmah Idris, Virologist from Hospital Sungai Buloh for her input
• Technical Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines for
their valuable input and feedback
• Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri, Head of Health Technology Assessment
Unit, Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose. None
hold shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms.
(Details are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat).
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of HIV Pregnant Women was
supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health Malaysia and
was developed without any involvement of the pharmaceutical industry.
a
ie
7] ea i oe enon ie
‘By ASSESSMENT &BESEARON, OMAR) SPAN