~ CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES ~
FEBRUARY 2008 -MOH/P/PAK/158.08 (GU)
MANA Y
This Guideline is intended a guide for clinical practice, based on
the best available evidence at the time of development.
Adherence to this guideline may not necessarily guarantee the
best outcome in every case. Every health care provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient
based on the clinical picture presented by the patient and the
management options available locally.
Review of the Guidelines
This guideline was issued in 2008 and will be reviewed in 2012
or sooner if new evidence becomes available
CPG Secretariat
Health Technology Assessment Section
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
4th floor, Block E1, Parcel E
62590, Putrajaya.
Electronic version available on the following website:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.mpaeds.org.my
2i
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVE
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
The development group for this guideline comprised of paediatricians, a
family medicine specialist, a medical microbiologist and pharmacist, from
the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia. During
the process of development of this guideline, there was active involvement
of a review committee which consisted of paediatricians from the public and
private sector together with a public health specialist and a clinical virologist.
This document is the first Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) on the
Management of HIV infection in Children and Adolescents for Malaysia,
updating the 2nd Consensus Guideline (2001) and has been developed in
parallel with the CPG on Management of HIV Infection in Pregnancy.
Literature search was carried out at the following electronic databases,
International
Health
Technology
Assessment
Websites,
PUBMED,
Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) Journal full text via the
OVID search engine, Comprehensive; Database of Abstracts of Reviews of
Effectiveness; Cochrane Controlled Trials Registered, Clinical Trial Registry
and EBSCO search engine. MEDLINE search was limited to children "all
child" (0-18 years). References from relevant articles retrieved were
searched to identify further studies. The following free text terms or MeSH
term were used either singly or in combination: "HIV infection, mother-tochild-transmission, perinatal HIV infection, antiretroviral therapy, side
effects, co-infections, tuberculosis, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, hepatitis B
infection, hepatitis C infection, cytomegalovirus infection, human
immunodeficiency virus, diagnosis, HIV DNA PCR, HIV RNA assays,
infants, breastfeeding, infant feeding, HIV prophylaxis AND cotrimoxazole,
HIV prophylaxis AND pneumocystis, AIDS-Related Opportunistic Infections
AND Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole; combination, "immunisation"
"vaccination" and BCG, hepatitis B, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio
(oral and injectable), Haemophilus influenzae type B, measles, mumps,
rubella, meningococcal, pneumococcal and varicella; antiretroviral, HAART,
therapy, initiate, start, commence, "begin" (in various combinations), HIV
AND cardiac ; HIV AND neurology; HIV AND lung; HIV AND renal; HIV AND
oncology; HIV transmitted resistance', 'primary resistance', 'HIV treatment
naïve', “plasma decay HIV”, “HIV immunologic response”, “virologic
response”, “HIV treatment response”, “monitoring”, 'adherence', and 'immune reconstitution syndrome'.
Reference was also made to other guidelines on management which included
the Public Health Service Task Force Recommendations for Use of
Antiretroviral Drugs in Pregnant HIV-Infected Women for Maternal Health
and Interventions to Reduce Perinatal HIV Transmission in the United States
(November 2, 2007), US Department of Health & Human Services
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
3ii
Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1 Infected Adults &
Adolescents (October 2006), American Academy of Pediatrics and
Canadian Pediatric Society Guideline on the evaluation and treatment of the
human immunodeficiency virus -1 -exposed infant (2004), National Institutes
of Health Guidelines for the use of Antiretroviral Agents in Pediatric HIV
infection (2006 & 2008), Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists
Guideline On Management Of HIV In Pregnancy (2004), Guideline by the
Canadian HIV Trials Network Working Group on Vertical HIV Transmission
(2003) and WHO Guidelines Antiretroviral Therapy Of HIV Infection In
Infants And Children In Resource Limited Settings: Towards Universal
Access (2006), British HIV Association (BHIVA) Guidelines 2005, WHO
Guidelines For HIV Drug Resistance Surveillance In Newly Diagnosed And
Treatment-Naïve HIV Infected Subjects (2003). This guideline is based
largely on the findings of systematic reviews and meta-analyses in the
literature.
The evidence in the articles were graded using the modified version of those
used by the Catalonia Agency for Health Technology Assessment and
Research (CAHTAR) Spain, while the grading of recommendations in these
guidelines was modified from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network (SIGN). (Refer to inside back cover).
The clinical questions were divided into major subgroups and members of
the development group were assigned individual topics within these
subgroups. The group members met a total of twenty three times throughout
the development of the guideline. All literature retrieved were appraised by
individual members and presented in the form of evidence tables
and discussed during group meetings. All statements and recommendations
formulated were agreed by both the development group and review
committees. Where the evidence was insufficient the recommendations
were derived by consensus of the development group and review committees.
The draft guideline was posted on both the Ministry of Health Malaysia and
Academy of Medicine, Malaysia websites for comment and feedback. This
guideline has also been presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for
Clinical Practice Guidelines, and the Health Technology Assessment and
Clinical Practice Guidelines Council, Ministry of Health Malaysia for review
and approval.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
OBJECTIVE
The aim of the guideline is to assist clinicians in making evidence based
decisions regarding:
1. Management of newborns with perinatal exposure to HIV infection
2. Appropriate management and treatment of HIV infection in infants,
children and adolescents.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
•
What are the appropriate management strategies for the perinatally
exposed newborn?
•
What are the diagnostic tests available for the detection of HIV infection
in infants and children?
•
What are the appropriate treatment strategies for HIV infection in infants,
children and adolescents?
•
What are the complications associated with HIV infection and
opportunistic infections in children infected with HIV and the management
of these complications?
•
What are the issues regarding disclosure of HIV infection in children and
what are the possible approaches?
TARGET POPULATION
This guideline is developed for the management of HIV infection in
perinatally exposed infants and infected children and adolescents (i.e. all
individuals aged 0-18 years).
TARGET USER
This guideline is applicable to all primary care providers, family medicine
specialists, paediatricians, physicians and other healthcare professionals
who are involved in the management of HIV infection in children and
adolescents aged 0 to 18 years.
EXCLUSION
This guideline does not address in detail issues of prevention, counselling,
HIV and the looked-after child, nutritional aspects, palliative and terminal
care in children with HIV infection.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
iv
CLINICAL INDICATORS FOR QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Indicator
Standard
Perinatal transmission of HIV-1 infection
<2%
Percent of perinatally exposed infants receiving
100%
ZDV within 24hrs of birth
Percent of patients for whom a CD4 test
75%
(absolute and percentage) performed every 3-4 months
6v
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr Revathy Nallusamy
Head of Department & Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Pulau Pinang
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Neoh Siew Hong
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Taiping
Perak
Dr. Nik Khairulddin Nik Yusoff
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kota Bharu, Kelantan
Prof. Dr. Norlijah Othman
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
University Putra Malaysia
Selangor
Dr. Suryati Adnan
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Kemaman
Terengganu
Dr. Zubaidah Abdul Wahab
Senior Consultant Pathologist
(Medical Microbiologist)
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Puan Zubaidah Che Embee
Pharmacist
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Pulau Pinang
Ms Mariammah Krishnasamy
Assistant Director
Health TechnologyAssessment Section
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Dr. Fong Siew Moy
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Likas
Sabah
Dr. Jamaluddin Hj Mohammad
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Tuanku Fauziah
Perlis
Dr. Jalil Ishak
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Ayer Keroh
Melaka
Dr Jeyaseelan P. Nachiappan
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Ipoh
Perak
Dr. Kamarul Azhar Mohd Ramli
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Koh Mia Tuang
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Coordinators
Dr. Sheamini Sivasampu
Principal Assistant Director
Health TechnologyAssessment Section
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
7vi
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guideline was reviewed by a panel of independent expert referees,
who were asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and
accuracy of interpretation of the evidence supporting the recommendations
in the guideline.
1. Dr Hussain Imam (Chairperson)
Head of Service and Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
2. Dr Irene Cheah
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Institute Paediatric
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
3. Dr Rohani Ali
Principal Assistant Director
Disease Control Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
4. Dr Tan Kah Kee
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar
Seremban
5. Dr Winston Yong Sin Chuen
Consultant Paediatrician
Pantai Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
6. Dr Zainah Sa'at
Clinical Virologist
Virology Unit
Infectious Disease Research Centre
Institute of Medical Research
Kuala Lumpur
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
The draft guideline was also reviewed by a panel of external reviewers
1. Dr Annette Sohn (Assistant Professor)
Institute of Global Health
University California,
USA
2. Dr Chan Lee Gaik
Head of Department and Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Umum Sarawak
3. Dr Kuan Geok Lan
Head of Department and Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Melaka
4. Cik Mariam Bintarti
Senior Pharmacist
Pharmacy Department
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
5. Dr Rob Condon
UNICEF Adviser on PMTCT of HIV
Public Health Physician and Medical Epidemiologist
Australia
6. Dr Teh Keng Hwang
Head of Department and Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Alor Setar
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
viii
9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
viii
ALGORITHM 1-MANAGEMENT OF HIV EXPOSED INFANTS
• Initiate HIV prophylaxis in newborn immediately after delivery
- Scenario 1+2: ZDV 2mg/kg/dose qid X 6/52 OR 4mg/kg/dose bd x 6/52
- Scenario 3+4: sd NVP 2 mg/kg + ZDV 2mg/kg/dose qid x6/52 OR
4mg/kg/dose bd x 6/52
• HIV DNA PCR (together with mothers blood) at 0-2 weeks
• FBC at birth and 6/52
• Start PCP prophylaxis at 6/52 till HIV status determined
(Co- trimoxazole - 4mg TMP / 20mg SMX/ kg daily or 150 mg TMP/ 750
SMX mg /m2 /day divided twice daily for 3 days per week)
Mother - HIV positive
PCR Negative ( -ve )
PCR -ve
PCR +ve
Not infected
Repeat HIV PCR at
6 weeks of age
PCR Positive ( +ve)
Infected
Repeat HIV DNA PCR
as soon as possible
• PCP Prophylaxis up to 12
months (Then evaluate for
continued need)
• ART if indicated
• Follow up
• Stop co-trimoxazole
• 3 months follow-up until 18 months
• Ensure that the baby's antibody
status is negative by 18 months
• Then yearly follow - up until
adulthood
Foot note:
Scenario 1- HIV -infected pregnant mother who is already on HAART
Scenario 2- HIV- infected pregnant mother who has been started on ZDV (between 14-28
weeks)
Scenario 3- HIV -infected pregnant mother at delivery who has not received adequate ART
(less than 4 weeks)
Scenario 4 - Infant born to HIV -infected mother who has not received any ART
* For babies found abandoned at birth, the algorithm above is applied according to the
rapid HIV test result while awaiting confirmation
Repeat HIV PCR at
4- 6 months
PCR +ve
PCR +ve
PCR +ve
PCR -ve
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
• Counselling
• Initiate START -lopinavir
/ZDV/ 3TC after 1st trimester
• Do VL at 34-36 weeks
• If VL<1000 copies/ ml at 34-36
weeks, may allow vaginal
delivery; otherwise ELECTIVE
LSCS about 38 weeks
• During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
• Discuss with ID physician/
physician regarding continuing
ART post delivery
• Counselling
• Initiate HAART combination -
ZDV/3TC/NVP after 1st trimester
• Do VL baseline and at 34-36
weeks
• If VL<1000 copies/ ml at 34-36
weeks, may allow vaginal
delivery; otherwise ELECTIVE
LSCS about 38 weeks
• During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
• Continue ZDV/3TC/NVP post
delivery
• Counselling
• Continue HAART
• Refer ID physician
• If VL < 1000 at 34-36 weeks,
may allow vaginal delivery
otherwise elective LSCS about
38 weeks.
• During delivery, IP ZDV for mother
• Continue HAART post delivery
• Baby - Refer immediately to paediatrician.
• Mother - Refer to ID physician
IP=intrapartum
• Refer ID physician
• Resistance testing if available
• ELECTIVE LSCS about 38
weeks
• During delivery, IP ZDV for
mother
On HAART
Diagnosed in labour
no prior therapy
HIV POSITIVE MOTHER
ALGORITHM 2- MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF HIV POSITIVE MOTHER
• IP ZDV + 3TC + single dose NVP
• Followed by ZDV + 3TC x 7d
Newly Diagnosed/
Not on ART
CD4<250 cells/mm3
CD4<250 cells/mm3
Stable on HAART
Failing HAART
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
x
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVE
i
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
REVIEW COMMITTEE
vi
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
vii
ALGORITHM 1: MANAGMENT OF HIV EXPOSED INFANT
viii
ALGORITHM 2: MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF HIV
ix
POSITIVE MOTHER
vii
1
INTRODUCTION
1
2. MANAGEMENT OF THE PERINATALLY EXPOSED INFANT
2
2.1 HIV PROPHYLAXIS
2
2.2 EVALUATION & CARE AT BIRTH
6
2.3 INVESTIGATIONS AT BIRTH
7
2.4 ADVICE AND COUNSELLING
9
2.5 FEEDING
10
2.6 IMMUNISATION
11
2.7 CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MONITORING OF
THE PERINATALLY EXPOSED INFANT
16
2.8 PRIMARY PNEUMOCYSTIS JIROVECI PNEUMONIA
PROPHYLAXIS FOR THE TREATMENT PERINATTALLY
EXPOSED INFANT
18
3. MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTED INFANTS,
21
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENT
3.1 MONITORING DISEASE PROGRESSION
21
3.2 ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY
21
3.2.1 Effectiveness of HAART
3.2.2 When to initiate therapy
3.2.3 Issues and choice for initial antiretroviral therapy
3.2.4 Special Issues For Adolescents
3.2.5 Treatment failure
3.2.6. Management of medication toxicity or intolerance
3.2.7 Short- term therapy interruption
4. COMMON OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS (OI) AND
COMPLICATIONS IN HIV INFECTED CHILDREN
45
4.1 PATTERN OF OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS
45
4.2 PREVENTING OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS
45
4.2.1 Dosage and regimens for OI prophylaxis
4.2.2 Safety of PCP prophylaxis medications
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
12
5. NON INFECTIOUS COMPLICATIONS OF HIV
47
5.1 MALIGNANCY
47
5.2 NEUROLOGIC COMPLICATIONS
47
5.3 HIV-ASSOCIATED NEPHROPAHY
48
5.4 CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS
48
5.5 LYMPHOCYTIC INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONITIS (LIP)
48
6. OTHER ISSUES
6.1 DISCLOSURE
48
6.2 AGE APPROPRIATE EDUCATIONAL & LIFESYLE ADVICE
FOR CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
51
REFERENCES
53-69
APPENDIX 1 - WHO clinical staging of HIV/AIDS for children with
confirmed HIV infection
70
APPENDIX 2 - WHO clinical staging /AIDS for adults and
adolescents with confirmed HIV infection
71
APPENDIX 3 - Immunological Classification
72
APPENDIX 4 - Antiretroviral Drugs
73-79
APPENDIX 5 - Tanner staging in adolescents
80
APPENDIX 6 - Investigations for opportunistic infections
82
APPENDIX 7 - Treatment for opportunistic infections
83-84
APPENDIX 8 - List of HIV Drugs Available in Malaysia
85
APPENDIX 9 - Additional Resources
86
LIST OF ABREVIATIONS
87
ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
88
DICLOSURE STATEMENT
88
SOURCES OF FUNDING
88
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE & GRADE OF RECOMMENDATION
12
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
1
1. INTRODUCTION
By the end of 2006 there were estimated 2.3 million children globally below
15 years of age living with HIV with an estimated half a million new
infections occurring in children for the year 2006.1 In addition, of the
estimated 10 000 new infections that occurred daily worldwide among adults
in 2006, 50% were among women.
In Malaysia, the cumulative number of reported cases of HIV infection at end
2006 was 76 389 with 5830 reported cases for 2006. While women constituted
only 1.16% of total new cases for 1990, this increased to 15.0% for 2006.
Children below of age 12 years of age constituted 1.5% of total reported cases
for 2006, those aged 13-19 years 1.0% and those aged 20-29 years 2.7%.2
The vast majority of paediatric HIV infections are acquired vertically.
Estimates from studies of prevention of mother-to-child transmission
(PMTCT) suggest that in non-breastfeeding populations, about 50% of all
HIV infections occur in the days before delivery and during labour and
another third occur during late labour and actual passage through the birth
canal.
In breastfeeding populations, postnatal exposure could account for 40% of
all transmissions. Studies suggest that transmission risk in infants who are
exclusively breastfed is half that of infants who are given mixed feeding.3
Malaysia introduced antenatal counselling and testing for HIV in 1998 and
utilized the Paediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group (PACTG) 076 protocol for
its PMTCT programme. From its introduction to the end of 2006, almost 3
million pregnant women were screened, representing 99.5% coverage of all
recorded pregnancies. The prevalence of HIV-1 infection among pregnant
women has remained an average of 0.036% over this time with an estimated
average perinatal transmission rate of 3.7% (median 3.95%)2.
In developed countries, the number of children of HIV positive mothers
newly infected with HIV has decreased dramatically with a perinatal
transmission rate of <1% - a result of antiretroviral (ARV) prophylaxis and
the use of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for pregnant HIV
infected mothers, the selection of lower risk delivery practices, neonatal
ARV prophylaxis, and lower risk approaches to infant feeding.
Although studies and advances in the management of HIV infection among
children and adolescents have lagged behind those in adults, there have
been substantial advances in the diagnosis, evaluation, treatment and
monitoring of children exposed to and infected with HIV-1.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
In Malaysia, limited paediatric formulations have been made available by the
MOH free of charge for patients and have enabled the provision of at least
first and second line ARV drugs for children.
Ongoing advances and research in PMTCT and the development of new
ARV drugs and improvements in strategies of ARV management are
occurring at rapid pace. Major online references are provided and the
reader is advised to look these up to obtain the latest data and information
on advances in HIV in children and adolescents.
This CPG addresses two broad clinical areas.
•
The management of the infant with perinatal exposure to HIV infection
•
The management of HIV infection in children and adolescents.
2.
MANAGEMENT OF THE PERINATALLY EXPOSED INFANT
2.1
HIV PROPHYLAXIS
PREVENTION OF MOTHER -TO- CHILD TRANSMISSION (PMTCT)
In the absence of any intervention, the risk of MTCT is between 15 and 45%.
However, several effective prevention measures have been identified that
can reduce the transmission rate to less than 2%. These interventions
include ARV prophylaxis or HAART given to HIV-1 infected pregnant
mothers, ARV prophylaxis for their newborn babies, safer approaches to
delivery (including elective caesarean section) and total substitution of
breastfeeding with infant formula.
The Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group (PACTG 076) protocol 4, Level 2 was the
first major study to demonstrate the effectiveness of a 3-part (antenatal,
intrapartum and neonatal) ZDV prophylactic regimen in reducing the MTCT
by 68%. The protocol was rapidly adopted by many countries (including
Malaysia in 1998), resulting in significant reduction in numbers of infected
infants. Over the years, many more trials have been conducted to evaluate
different ARV prophylactic regimens to reduce MTCT both in breastfeeding
and non-breastfeeding populations. These trials have confirmed the efficacy
of various regimens including ZDV alone, 5, Level 2; 6, Level 2; 7, Level 2; 8 Level 2; 9, Level 2; 10, Level
6; 11, Level 1, ZDV + Lamivudine (3TC)12,Level 2; 13 Level 2;14, Level 2; 15, Level 6, single-dose
nevirapine (sdNVP)16, Level 2; 17, Level 2 and more recently, combinations of ZDV +
sdNVP 18, Level 2; 19, Level 6, ZDV + 3TC + sdNVP
22, Level 9 and triple ART/HAART.
20, Level 6; 21, Level 6.
Although several ARV regimens have been studied using different durations
of either single or combined drugs, questions still remain regarding which
regimen is the best in achieving the largest reduction in MTCT. Direct
comparisons between studies are often difficult as studies are done using
various methodologies and are conducted in different study populations.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
3
Despite these limitations, several conclusions can be drawn from the
findings of these studies:
PREVENTION OF MOTHER TO CHILD TRANSMISSION (PMTCT)
Three components of treatment or prophylaxis (i.e. antenatal, intrapartum
and neonatal) are important as each component contributes towards
reduction in the risk of mother- to-child transmission (MTCT).
Longer courses of antenatal antiretroviral (ARV) prophylaxis or therapy
beginning earlier in pregnancy are more efficacious in reducing MTCT.
Longer ARV prophylaxis for the infant is not a substitute for longer duration
of the maternal antenatal component. However, regimens that provide
longer infant prophylaxis appear to be beneficial if the mother has
received less than 4 weeks of HAART or ARV prophylaxis before delivery.
Combination regimens are generally more efficacious than a single-drug
regimen.
Exposure to antiretroviral therapy or prophylaxis may induce development
of viral resistance towards the drugs used (especially nevirapine, but
also lamivudine) in mothers and potentially also in their infants; this
may limit the choice or efficacy of antiretroviral therapies during the 6
to 12 months following delivery.
Adequate counselling, support and monitoring to ensure adherence to
the prescribed ARV regimen and chosen method of infant feeding are
essential to PMTCT program success.
Four commonly encountered perinatal scenarios and the recommended
approaches to ARV prophylaxis for PMTCT are discussed below:
According to the Malaysian CPG on Management of HIV Infection in
Pregnant Women (2008)23, Level 9, women with World Health Organisation
(WHO) stage 3 or 4 disease or with CD4 lymphocyte counts less than 250
per mm3 at diagnosis should be commenced on HAART, while those who are
asymptomatic and with CD4 cell counts more than 250 per mm3 at diagnosis
are given short term antiretroviral therapy (START).
Scenario 1: HIV infected pregnant mother who is already on HAART
The risk of MTCT in this group is low but not negligible and depends on the
degree of viral suppression in the mother. The duration of ZDV for the infant
is based on the data extrapolated from PACTG 076 study.
As the evidence for the optimal duration of infant component of ZDV is still
inconclusive, the current recommendations differ from country to country,
ranging from one week in some countries to four to six weeks in others.22, Level
9; 24, Level 9;25, Level 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Scenario 1 - Recommendation for newborn infant whose mother is
on HAART
The newborn infant should receive zidovudine* syrup immediately after
birth and this is continued for a total duration of 6 weeks. (Grade B)
* Dosing according to maturity - Refer Appendix 4
Scenario 2: HIV infected pregnant mother on single agent ZDV prophylaxis
(commenced between 14-28 weeks)
The PACTG 076 study of ZDV versus placebo showed a 68% reduction in
transmission in non-breastfeeding infants. A randomized trial in Thailand 26,
Level 2 exploring a less complex regimen using a shorter course of ZDV (for
mother from 36 weeks, with oral ZDV intrapartum and no ZDV for infant)
showed a lower efficacy (50% reduction). The Perinatal HIV Prevention Trial
(PHPT-1) 5, Level 2 evaluated four different durations of antepartum and neonatal
administration of ZDV and showed in utero transmission was significantly
higher with short (starting at 36 weeks) vs long (starting at 28 weeks)
maternal prophylactic regimens (5.1% vs. 1.6%).
Scenario 2 - Recommendation for newborn infant whose mother
commenced single drug zidovudine prophylaxis (between 14-28
weeks)
The newborn infant should receive zidovudine* syrup immediately after
birth and this is continued for a total duration of 6 weeks. (Grade A)
* Dosing according to maturity - Refer Appendix 4
Scenario 3: HIV infected pregnant mother at delivery who has not
received adequate antenatal antiretroviral prophylaxis or therapy (less
than 4 weeks)
Among pregnant women who had not received any antenatal ARV drugs,
intrapartum and postpartum prophylaxis using different ARVs have been
shown in randomized trials to be efficacious in reducing MTCT. The HIVNET
012 study
16, Level 2; 27, Level 2 comparing sdNVP vs ZDV to mothers and infants
showed a 42% reduction in MTCT in the sdNVP group. The SAINT trial in
South Africa 13, Level 2 which compared sdNVP with ZDV/3TC noted no significant
difference in transmission rate between the two regimens.
Ameta-analysis 28, Level 1 of individual records of data fromAfrican MTCT prevention
trials indicated that a combination of ZDV and 3TC started during labour has
similar efficacy to sd-NVP in preventing MTCT.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
5
The choice of ARV prophylaxis for the newborn infant will depend on the
ARV regimen received by the mother. The Malaysian CPG on Management
of HIV Infection in Pregnant Women (2008)23, Level 9 recommends that an HIV
infected mother who presents in labour and who has not commenced
HAART or ARV prophylaxis be given a combination of ZDV/3TC + sdNVP
during the intrapartum period. If Lower Segment Caesarean Section (LSCS)
can be performed, the mother receives intravenous (IV) ZDV only. The
newborn infant receives sdNVP as soon as possible after birth and six
weeks of ZDV. The recommendation to add six weeks of ZDV is extrapolated
from the PACTG 076 and the PHPT-1 studies, which demonstrated that
longer duration prophylaxis was more effective than a shorter course for the
infant if the mother had received ARVs for less than four weeks.
Scenario 3 - Recommendation for newborn infant whose mother
has not received adequate antenatal antiretroviral prophylaxis or
therapy (none or less than 4 weeks)
The newborn infant should be given single dose nevirapine (sdNVP) at
birth and zidovudine* for a duration of 6 weeks. The medications should
be given immediately after birth. (Grade B)
* Dosing according to maturity - Refer Appendix 4
Scenario 4: Infant born to HIV infected mother who has not received
any (antenatal or intrapartum) ARV prophylaxis or therapy
When the mother presents late with unknown status or the baby is found
abandoned, rapid testing is recommended. ARV prophylaxis is instituted
immediately on a positive screening test and the rapid test result confirmed
by standard HIV-1 testing.
Three studies have examined the situation where HIV infected mothers
were diagnosed late and had not received antenatal or intrapartum ART. A
cohort study in New York 29, Level 6 found that administration of ZDV to a newborn
infant for 6 weeks was associated with a reduction in transmission, compared
with no intervention, provided that it was given within 48 hours of delivery
(transmission rate 9.3% vs. 26.6%). A South African trial
30, Level 2 in mixed
feeding infants comparing sdNVP with six weeks of ZDV showed no
difference in transmission rate at 12 weeks. A randomized trial in Malawi
31, Level 2 in a breastfeeding population compared newborn post-exposure
prophylaxis where newborn received either sdNVP or sdNVP + ZDV for 1
week. At 6-8 weeks, transmission rate was 20.9% and 15.3% (p=0.03),
respectively - showing an efficacy of 36% in the combination arm. Thus a
combination of sdNVP and zidovudine is recommended for infants whose
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
mothers had not received any ARTs and based on data extrapolated from
the PHPT-1 study longer course of ZDV (4 weeks) for infants are more
efficacious.
Scenario 4- Recommendation for newborn infants whose mothers
have not received any antiretroviral therapy (antenatal or intrapartum)
Newborn infants should receive single dose nevirapine at birth and
zidovudine* for 6 weeks. The medications should be given immediately
after birth. (Grade B)
The medications may still be beneficial if given within 48 hours. (Grade B)
* Dosing according to maturity - Refer Appendix 4
2.2
EVALUATION & CARE AT BIRTH
Babies born to HIV infected mothers who were diagnosed before pregnancy
or during the antenatal period are likely to be exposed to ART PMTCT or as
part of maternal therapy. In such situations there may be concerns about
possible adverse effects of maternal ART on the foetus. In addition, mothers
may have co-existing infections, in particular sexually transmissible
infections (STIs) and tuberculosis (TB) thus exposing the foetus and
neonate to such infections.
A Swiss study reported a possible association between multiple ART and
preterm labour,
32, Level 6 although this was not observed in another study
involving a larger number of HIV infected mothers.33, Level 6 The latter study
however, seems to suggest a significant difference in the rate of very low
birth weight (VLBW) infants in those mothers who received a protease
inhibitor (PI) compared to those who did not. The European Collaborative
Study
34, Level 6, in its analysis of 3740 mother-infant pairs with 1973 infants
exposed to ART (including 602 exposed to HAART) enrolled between 1986
and 2003 identified 1.6% (31 of 1973) as having various congenital
abnormalities. Congenital abnormalities were also noted in 1.4% (24 of
1767) unexposed children. Concerns have been noted regarding an association
between first trimester efavirenz exposure and neural tube defects based on
a study in monkeys and case reports in humans. 23, Level 9
Thus to date, current evidence suggests that there is no apparent increase
in any particular abnormality with the use of ART or HAART during pregnancy.
With expanded use and development of new ARV drugs however, further
monitoring and research are necessary to assess the teratogenic and other
risks of use of combinations of antiretroviral and other drugs at the time of
conception or in early pregnancy.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
7
The majority of cases of HIV infection from mother-to-child occur at the time
of delivery and these babies are usually asymptomatic at birth. Therefore
the findings of hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy at birth are
unlikely to be due to HIV infection and may reflect other pathology. Such
signs with or without low birth weight therefore warrant a search for causes
other than HIV infection.
Recommendation for evaluation at birth
All perinatally exposed infants should receive standard neonatal
evaluation and care. (Grade C)
2.3
INVESTIGATIONS AT BIRTH
Investigations are done at birth to exclude possible side effects of in-utero
exposure to ARVs, to exclude common co-infections that may have been
transmitted to the infant and to determine the infant's HIV infection status.
2.3.1 Possible adverse effects of maternal ART
A Swiss cohort study
32,Level 6 and a European collaborative study
34, Level 6
showed that ZDV exposure in foetal or neonatal life was strongly associated
with a diagnosis of anaemia. However in all cases, haemoglobin levels
reverted to normal when ZDV was discontinued.32, Level 6; 34 Level 6; 24, Level 9 A full
blood count (FBC) should be performed immediately on the newborn infant
as a baseline evaluation before administration of neonatal ZDV and repeated
at 6 weeks after completion of the ZDV regimen. If abnormal, repeat
measurement should be performed at age 12 weeks. Infants who have
anaemia at birth or who are born prematurely warrant more intensive
monitoring of FBC.24, Level 9
Data are limited concerning potential toxicities in infants whose mothers
have received combination antiretroviral therapy. More intensive monitoring
of haematologic and serum chemistry measurements during the first few
weeks of life is advised for these infants.24, Level 9
2.3.2 Co-Infections
HIV infected mothers may be exposed to other infectious diseases in particular
STIs, TB, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), Herpes simplex
and Hepatitis B and C infections. There is also a risk that latent infections
could be reactivated in the immunocompromised mother and transmitted to
the newborn. However, there is very little knowledge on the relative risk of
such transmission from mother-to-infant with the exception of Hepatitis C
virus (HCV). In the meta-analysis by Bonacini.35, Level 1 HCV co-infected
mothers were significantly more likely to transmit HCV to their children.
There are conflicting reports on the risk of in-utero transmission of CMV in
HIV-1 infected infants.36, Level 6; 37, Level 6 The only common finding in these two
studies was that HIV infected infants with in-utero CMV infection
experienced rapid disease progression.
There is a paucity of data on vertical transmission of toxoplasmosis. The
only study reported the transmission from a chronically infected mother to
infant was uncommon38, Level 9
The transmission rate of Hepatitis B virus (HBV) from a surface antigen
(HBsAg) positive mother to her infant appears to follow the same pattern as
non-HIV infected mother.39,Level 9
One large US cohort conducted from 1988-1994 reported the rate of congenital
syphilis to be substantially higher amongst babies born to HIV infected
women than when the mother was HIV negative.40, Level 6
Congenital TB has been reported among children born to HIV infected
women with active TB.41, Level 6 However, the true incidence and whether the
transmission rate is higher among these children compared with children
born to non HIV infected women with active TB are unknown.42, Level 9
At the time of birth, maternal health information should be reviewed to
determine if the infant may have been exposed to maternal co-infections
such as TB, syphilis, hepatitis B or C, CMV, toxoplasmosis and herpes
simplex virus. Appropriate and standard diagnostic testing of the infant
should be undertaken and treatment provided based on maternal
findings.43, Level 9
2.3.3 HIV infection
All newborn infants born to HIV infected women, will have transplacentally
transferred antibodies at birth which will take many months to clear (median
age of seroreversion is 10 months).44, Level 6 Therefore antigen-based investigations
are required to definitively diagnose HIV in young infants.45, Level 6; 46, Level 9
HIV DNA PCR is a sensitive technique used to detect specific HIV viral
sequences in integrated proviral HIV DNA in a patient's peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). The sensitivity of a single HIV DNA PCR test
performed at <48 hours of age is less than 40%, but increases to over 90%
by 2-4 weeks of age. 45, Level 6; 46, Level 9; 47, Level 1; 48, Level 8; 49, Level 6
Currently available HIV-1 DNA PCR tests are less sensitive in the detection
of non-subtype B HIV, and false-negative HIV-1 DNA PCR assays have
been reported in infants infected with non-subtype B HIV.50, Level 9; 48, Level 8
Non-subtype B viruses predominate in some parts of the world, such as
subtype E in much of Southeast Asia. In Malaysia, a study amongst
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
9
injecting drug users (IDUs) found a predominance of subtype B in more than
90% of the subjects.51, Level 8 However a more recent study in a similar population
(i.e. IDUs) demonstrated that subtype B was present in 50.0% followed by
CRF01_AE/B recombinant in 41.7%.52, Level 8
HIV RNA assays detect extracellular viral RNA in the plasma and are as
sensitive and specific as HIV DNA PCR for early diagnosis of HIV infection
in HIV-exposed infants.53, Level 6; 54, Level 6; 46, Level 9 However no HIV RNA PCR test is
currently licensed in Malaysia for use in diagnosing infection.55, Level 9
The use of the currently approved HIV p24 antigen assay is not recommended
for infant diagnosis because of its lower sensitivity compared to other virologic
tests.46, Level 9; 48, Level 9; 56, Level 8
In general, HIV-1 DNA PCR assay is the preferred diagnostic test. The birth
specimen must be a neonatal, not a cord blood sample.46, Level 9The reference
laboratory (Institute for Medical Research) requests that the first sample
should be sent with mother's sample for antibody re-testing.
Recommendation for investigations at birth
A Full Blood Count (FBC) should be performed on the newborn as a
baseline evaluation before administration of zidovudine and repeated at
6 weeks after completion of the zidovudine regimen. If abnormal, repeat
measurement should be performed at age 12 weeks. (Grade B)
Infants who have anaemia at birth or who are born prematurely
warrant more intensive monitoring of FBC. (Grade C)
At the time of birth, review maternal health information to determine if
the infant may have been exposed to maternal co-infections such as
tuberculosis, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex
and Hepatitis B and C infections. Diagnostic testing and treatment of the
infant are based on maternal and infant findings. (Grade C)
HIV DNA PCR test should be carried out at 14-21 days of age (and at
subsequent intervals - see Section 2.7) (Grade C)
2.4
ADVICE AND COUNSELLING
Counselling and support to address the numerous possible problems faced
by the HIV positive mother are a necessary part of management. Possible
problem areas that should be addressed include social, family, domestic
violence, financial status and unemployment among others.
New parents of an HIV exposed infant would also require information,
support and advice on medical care for the infant. Such counselling should
ideally commence in the antenatal period. Important topics to cover include
risk of transmission, medications to prevent perinatal acquisition of HIV and
PCP prophylaxis, infant feeding advice (and especially the importance of
avoiding mixed breast and formula feeding), importance of and schedule for
follow-up visits, diagnosing infection, clinical assessment and laboratory tests,
availability of formula for the poor, immunization advice, need for prompt
evaluation when ill, and of assurances that the health service will maintain
confidentiality.43, Level 9
Recommendation for counselling parents/caregivers of
HIV-exposed infant
Paediatricians should provide counselling to parents and caregivers of
HIV-exposed infants about HIV infection, future care, diagnostic tests,
infection-control measures, care of the infant including feeding,
immunisations and potential drug toxicity. (Grade C)
2.5
FEEDING
A systematic review involving two meta-analyses, one randomised
controlled trial (RCT) and one observational study showed that breastfeeding
was associated with an increase of vertical transmission of 14% and 16%.
Even in women who received antiretroviral drugs, breastfeeding significantly
increased the MTCT rate.57,Level 1
A large RCT enrolling 425 HIV infected, antiretroviral naïve pregnant women
and randomizing mother-infant pairs to breastfeeding (n = 212) vs. formula
feeding arms (n = 213) showed the cumulative probability of HIV-1 infection
at 24 months was 36.7% in the breastfeeding arm and 20.5% in the formula
arm, giving an estimated rate of breast milk transmission of 16.2%.58, Level 2
Most transmission through breast milk occurred early although transmission
continued throughout the duration of exposure.59,Level 6; 60, Level 2 Diarrhoeal illness
and pneumonia occurred at similar rates, regardless of the mode of feeding.
61,Level 2 More recent studies done in countries with high infant mortality rates
have shown that cumulative infant mortality rates are significantly higher for the
formula-fed group than for the exclusively breastfed infants.62,Level 6; 60, Level 6
A cohort study of 549 children born to HIV infected women in Africa
demonstrated that mixed feeding carried a higher risk of HIV transmission
to the baby compared to exclusive breastfeeding or artificial feeding in
babies less than 3 months of age. 67, Level 6
Where replacement feeding is acceptable, feasible, affordable, safe and
sustainable (AFASS), most guidelines recommend that HIV infected mothers
should not breastfeed their infants.63,Level 9; 43, Level 9; 64,Level 9, 65, Level 9
10
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
11
A Ministry of Health Malaysia circular states that infant formula be made
available to infants below 6 months from low families (income <RM1200) in
the first instance and case to case basis for such infants whose families
income is >RM1200.66, Level 9
Recommendation for feeding
All HIV infected mothers should be advised not to breastfeed their
infants as it is associated with a significant risk of vertical transmission.
(Grade A)
It must be ensured that replacement feeding is acceptable, feasible,
affordable, sustainable, and safe (Grade C)
In the absence of a safe alternative to breast milk, exclusive
breastfeeding is recommended during the first 6 months. (Grade B)
Families should be counselled against mixed feeding at any time, as it
carries a higher risk of MTCT than exclusive breastfeeding or
replacement feeding (Grade B)
2.6
IMMUNISATION
The following section will discuss the available evidence on the safety,
immunogenicity and effectiveness of various vaccines in HIV infected
infants and children.
a) BCG
Administration of Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) to HIV infected infants in
the first month of life is associated with low rates of complications because
immune suppression takes several months to develop.67,Level 6 Complications
arising from BCG vaccination include lymphadenitis, disseminated infection
and immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).
• The rates of complications have been similar in HIV infected and HIVuninfected infants, but lymphadenitis has been more severe in HIV infected
children.68, Level 6;69, Level 8; 70, Level 6;71, Level 6; 72, Level 6; 73, Level 8; 74, Level 9
• Disseminated BCG infection has been reported in HIV infected children.
75, Level 8; 76,Level 8
• IRIS (in the form of severe inflammation and/or ulceration at the BCG
injection site) has been reported in HIV infected infants and children after
commencement of HAART.78, Level 7
Immunogenicity of BCG is difficult to assess as there is no good marker. In
a cohort study in Rwanda, tuberculin skin test was positive in only 37% of
HIV infected infants compared to 70% in infants born to HIV-uninfected
mothers.71, Level 6 There are very little data on the effectiveness of BCG in HIV
infected children. A small case control study77, Level 7 did not show any protection,
but the study did not have sufficient power to detect possible protection
against TB meningitis or military TB. Two adult studies showed some benefit
in HIV infected adults who had received BCG during childhood. Marsh et al
78, Level 7 noted adults with clinical AIDS in Trinidad who received BCG during
childhood have a reduced risk of developing bacteremic TB (2% vs 10%).
Arbelaez et. al79, Level 7 found overall 22% protection from all forms of TB.
b) Polio
Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) is a live-attenuated vaccine. Vaccine-associated
paralytic poliomyelitis (VAPP) is a serious but fortunately rare complication
of the vaccine. Despite its extensive use in many countries in the world,
there have only been 2 case reports of HIV infected children developing
VAPP after OPV.80, Level 9; 81,Level 9 In contrast, Inactivated Polio Vaccine (IPV) is
not associated with VAPP. Although the risk to the child following OPV may
be low, he/she may continue to excrete virus in the stools for some weeks
after vaccine. This may pose potential risk to close contacts who may be
immunocompromised (e.g. parents or siblings who may be HIV infected).
Thus it is recommended that IPV be given to HIV affected or infected
children. IPV is provided free on request from any government health clinic.
Both vaccines are immunogenic and in studies >90% of HIV infected
children developed protective antibodies after 3 doses of the vaccine
although the geometric mean antibody titre (GMT) was lower than in
non-infected individuals. 69,Level 6; 82,Level 6
c) Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR)
MMR vaccine is a live-attenuated vaccine. The risk of adverse reactions
following vaccination was no different for HIV infected (treated and untreated)
and uninfected children.83, Level 6;84,Level 6, 85,Level 6;86,Level 6;87,Level 8 Only one serious
adverse event has been reported in a HIV infected man with a CD4
lymphocyte count <200 at the time when he received his second dose of
MMR: he developed measles-vaccine pneumonitis and died.88,Level 9. No
serious adverse event has been reported with mumps and rubella vaccines.
Studies on the immunogenicity of MMR vaccine in HIV infected children
noted impairment of antibody response with only half developing protective
antibody level after primary immunisation and their antibody also waned
faster than in non-infected individuals.89,Level 6;87, Level 8;85,Level 6 Response to repeat
immunization was variable but generally poor.90,Level 8; 91, Level 9
12
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
There are minimal data on the protective efficacy of MMR vaccine in HIV
infected individuals. Experience in African countries has noted a reduction
in measles incidence in regions with high HIV prevalence by maintaining
high immunisation rates and periodic supplementary campaigns.92,Level 9
d) Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B vaccine is a recombinant vaccine. No significant adverse events
were noted in cohort studies of infants receiving primary immunisation from
birth. 93,Level 6;94,Level 6
Studies on the immunogenicity of hepatitis B vaccine have demonstrated poorer
response rate in HIV infected infants and children with only 25-50% developing
protective antibodies after primary immunisation.95,Level 6;96,Level 6;97,Level 6;98,Level 6
Booster doses or higher doses have not been found to be immunogenic.
99,Level 6;98,Level 6 There are no studies of the protective efficacy of hepatitis B
vaccine in HIV infected children.
e) Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib)
Hib is a conjugated polysaccharide vaccine. The vaccine is safe and
immunogenic in HIV infected infants and children (although the immunogenic
response is less than that seen in normal children.99,Level 4; 100,Level 6; 101,Level 6 Two
recent studies from South Africa suggest that Hib vaccine is effective in
protecting from invasive Hib disease although the level of protection is lower
than that seen in uninfected children (43.9-54.7% vs 83-90.8%).102,Level 6;103, Level 6
f) Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis (DTP)
DTP vaccine is safe and immunogenic in HIV infected infants and children.
82 ,Level 6;69,Level 6; 104,Level 6; 105,Level 6 However, GMTs achieved were lower than those in
non-infected infants. There is no rigorous study on the protective efficacy of
DTP vaccine in HIV infected children.
g) Pneumococcal vaccine
Children infected with HIV have a markedly increased risk of pneumococcal
infection - from 2.8 to 12.6 times the rate compared with those who are not
HIV infected..106, Level 8;107,Level 6;108,Level 6; 109,Level 7
Both pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPV) and pneumococcal conjugate
vaccines (PCV) are safe in HIV infected infants and children.110, Level 4; 111, Level 4 ;112,
Level 6 Approximately 65-100% of HIV infected children developed protective
antibody after vaccination with PCV but GMTs achieved were lower than
those in uninfected children.113, Level 6; 112, Level 6; 111, Level 4
The response to the polysaccharide vaccine is generally poorer than to the
conjugate vaccine.111, Level 6; 115, Level 6A large RCT from South Africa showed PCV
provided 65% protection against invasive pneumococcal disease among
HIV infected infants.116, Level 2
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
In a retrospective case-control study among adults from Spain117, Level 6, ART
and PPV were found to have a significant, independent protective effect
against pneumococcal disease, regardless of CD4 lymphocyte count. It was
therefore concluded that all patients (adults) with HIV infection should be
vaccinated with PPV vaccine to prevent pneumococcal disease.
When both conjugate and polysaccharide vaccines are used, the polysaccharide vaccine should be
given at least two months after the last dose of conjugate vaccine
h) Meningococcal vaccine
So far, there are no data available on the response of HIV infected infants
and children to meningococcal polysaccharide or conjugate vaccines.
i) Varicella vaccine
This is a live-attenuated vaccine. The vaccine is safe and thus far, no
increase in adverse reactions compared to normal controls have been
noted.118, Level 6; 119, Level 6 However, the studies on safety excluded those with
severe immunosuppression. The vaccine induced good immunogenicity in
HIV infected children with 60-79% developing protective antibody 2 months
after completion of 2-dose vaccination.
j) Human Papilloma Virus Vaccine
There is evidence that infections with higher risk human papillomavirus
(HPV) sub-types are more common in HIV infected girls aged 13-19 years than
in HIV non-infected girls of the same age. The rates of squamous intraepithelial
lesions were significantly higher in the HIV infected girls.120, Level 2
The HPV vaccine is indicated in girls and women 9 to 26 years of age for
the prevention of cervical cancer, precancerous or dysplastic lesions, and
genital warts caused by HPV Types 6, 11, 16, and 18. No recommendations
have been made regarding the use of HPV vaccinations in HIV-positive
individuals. Clinical trials are currently underway to assess the safety and
efficacy of the vaccine in individuals with HIV. It should be noted that the
candidate vaccines are preventive rather than therapeutic, the benefits of the
vaccine in individuals who have already been exposed to HPV are doubtful.
121, Level 2
14
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Table 1: Pneumococcal Vaccination Schedule for Children at Special Risk
Age
Conjugate
vaccine
Polysaccharide
vaccine
3 doses,
2 doses,
monthly intervals
monthly intervals
Further dose in second year of life
Then after 2nd birthday single dose of 23-valent
2-6 months
7-11 months
12-23 months
2 doses,
2 months apart
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
15
k) General considerations for immunisation
In general, vaccines may be less effective in HIV infected children due to
their impaired immune response. Even after appropriate vaccination, the
child may still be susceptible to vaccine preventable diseases and should
therefore be given appropriate preventive therapy after exposure to these
diseases where available.
Immunisation with live vaccines carries a risk of causing disease in the
immunocompromised host in addition.
Recommendations
for
immunisation
in
HIV
infected
infants
and
children must take into account available data on the safety, immunogenicity
and effectiveness of each vaccine in this special group of children. A recent
review provides a relevant and detailed discussion of these issues.92, Level 9
Recommendation for routine childhood immunisation
All infants born to HIV infected mothers should receive routine
childhood immunisation at the usual recommended age. (Grade B)
The following precautions are recommended for live-attenuated
vaccines:
•
BCG should not be given in symptomatic HIV infected infants or
children (WHO Stage 2, 3, 4) as they are at higher risk of developing
disseminated disease. (Grade B)
•
OPV should be replaced by injectable Inactivated Polio Vaccine
(IPV). (Grade C)
•
MMR should be given as per schedule except to those who have
severe immunosuppression (CD4 < 15%) (Grade C)
Refer to Appendix 4 on age-related immunological criteria
Additional vaccines:
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine - a single dose should be
given to HIV infected child over 2 years of age. (Grade C)
(Refer to Appendix 7)
Where available all HIV infected children below 5 years of age should
receive pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. (Grade B)
(Refer to Appendix 7)
Varicella vaccine should be offered to an HIV infected child >12
months of age without history of varicella in WHO Clinical Stage 1, 2 or
3 and with CD4 >15%. Two doses of varicella vaccine at a minimum
interval of 3 months should be given. (Grade C)
2.7
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MONITORING OF THE PERINATALLY
EXPOSED INFANT
Clinical, immunological and virological monitoring is done to monitor the
well-being of the infant, determine the HIV infection status and, for those
who are infected, to determine the timing of initiation of ART and response to
therapy.
Clinical monitoring should include:
• Monitoring of physical growth
• Monitoring of developmental milestones
• Early detection of opportunistic infections
• Review of immunization
• Monitoring for adverse effects of drug therapy
16
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Table 2: IMMUNISATION SCHEDULE FOR HIV INFECTED INFANTS AND
CHILDREN
Vaccine
Asymptomatic
Symptomatic
Comment
BCG
Recommended
Omit*
Hepatitis B
Recommended
Recommended
DTP
Recommended
Recommended
Hib
Recommended
Recommended
OPV
Omit
Omit
Replace with IPV
IPV
Recommended
Recommended
MMR
Recommended
Recommended*
Varicella
Recommended
Recommended*
Pneumococcal Recommended
Recommended
Use in children age > 2 years
Polysaccharide
Vaccine (PPV)
Pneumococcal Consider
Consider
Conjugate vaccine is more
Conjugate
immunogenic than
Vaccine (PCV)
polysaccharide vaccine.
However, they are currently
expensive
*Omit if severely symptomatic (WHO Stage 4) or severe immunosuppression
(CD4 < 15%)
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
17
2.7.1 Virologic & serologic monitoring
HIV PCR DNA is done at 14-21 days, at 1 - 2 months of age, and at 4 - 6
months of age to determine the infection status.
Serologic testing after 12 months of age is used to confirm that maternal
HIV-1 antibodies transferred to the infant in utero have disappeared. If the
child is still antibody positive at 12 months of age, then testing should be
repeated at 18 months of age. Loss of HIV-1 antibody in a child with previously
negative HIV-1 DNA PCR test results definitively confirms that the child is
not infected with HIV-1. Positive HIV-1 antibodies at >18 months of age
indicates HIV-1 infection.
Definitions/ interpretation of results:
HIV infection is confirmed when:
• HIV virologic tests (HIV DNA PCR) performed on 2 separate blood
samples are positive, regardless of age;
OR
• HIV antibody tests using two different methods (enzyme immuno
assay (EIA) / particle agglutination (PA)) are positive at >18 months of
age;
OR
• There is a positive HIV antibody test with a confirmatory Western Blot
(or Line Immuno Assay (LIA)) at >18 months of age.
HIV infection can be presumptively excluded* in non-breastfed infants with:
• Two or more negative virologic tests (HIV DNA PCR), with one test
obtained at >14 days of age and one obtained at >1 month of age;
OR
• One negative virologic test result obtained at >2 months of age;
OR
• One negative HIV antibody test result obtained at >6 months of age.
HIV infection can be definitively excluded* in non-breastfed infants when:
• There are >2 consecutive negative HIV virologic tests (HIV DNA PCR)
performed at >1 month of age, with one being performed at the age
>4 months,
AND/OR
• There are >2 negative HIV antibody tests performed at age >6
months, with an interval of at least 1 month between the tests in an
infant with no clinical or virological evidence of HIV infection.
Confirm the absence of HIV infection in infants by documenting:
• Loss of HIV antibody in a child with previously negative virologic tests.
*
With no other laboratory (e.g., no positive virologic test results or low CD4 count)
or clinical evidence of HIV infection
(Adapted from Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in Pediatric HIV
Infection February 28, 2008)
Recommendation for monitoring of the perinatally exposed infant
Clinical monitoring should include:
•
Monitoring of physical growth
•
Monitoring of developmental milestone
•
Early detection of opportunistic infections
•
Review of immunization
•
Monitoring for adverse effects of drug therapy
(Grade C)
HIV DNA PCR is done at 14 - 21 days; 1 - 2 months; and 4 - 6 months.
(Grade C)
For perinatally exposed infants whose HIV DNA PCR is negative:
•
Follow-up should be continued long term. (Grade C)
•
Seroreversion (positive to negative antibody status) should be
documented by 18 months of age. (Grade C)
2.8
PRIMARY PNEUMOCYSTIS JIROVECI PNEUMONIA
PROPHYLAXIS FOR THE PERINATALLY EXPOSED INFANT
Co-trimoxazole (trimethoprim [TMP], sulfamethoxazole [SMX]) is a widely
available, low-cost antibiotic that has been used worldwide for many years
in the treatment of community-acquired infections. In HIV infection, it is highly
effective for treatment of, and prophylaxis against, Pneumocystis jiroveci
pneumonia (PCP). PCP is one of the earliest opportunistic infections (OI) to
arise with increasing immunosuppression. Studies in Malawi
122, Level 8 and
Zambia 123, Level 8 have showed that PCP is an important cause for morbidity
and mortality in HIV infected infants.
2.8.1 Mortality and Morbidity
Madhi et al 124, Level 8 showed that primary TMP-SMX prophylaxis from the age
of 6 weeks to 1 year significantly reduced death in infant/child admitted with
severe PCP. Similarly in a retrospective cohort study,125, Level 6 showed that
primary prophylaxis was highly effective in decreasing the frequency of PCP
and early death. A study by Coutsoudis et al,126, Level 8 initiating primary
TMP-SMX prophylaxis in infants born to HIV positive mothers showed a
significant (30%) reduction in lower respiratory tract infections.
In Thailand, introducing a policy of universal primary TMP-SMX prophylaxis
for infants born to HIV positive mothers significantly decreased admissions
for severe pneumonia. The proportion of PCP cases among children
diagnosed with severe pneumonia decreased from 67% (8 of 12) before
introduction of the policy to 0% 6 months latter.
127, Level 5 The data also
suggests that PCP prophylaxis can prevent both PCP and non-PCP.
18
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
CD4 cell counts are not a good indicator of risk for PCP in infants aged less
than one year. Many young infants with PCP have a CD4 cell count more of
than 1500. 128, Level 9
2.8.2 Dosages
Various dosages of TMP-SMX have been used for prophylaxis; these are
usually based on weight, surface area and age. The report of a WHO Expert
Consultation on TMP-SMX prophylaxis in HIV infection recommends a daily
dose of TMP 20mg / SMX 100mg for children less than 6 months of age.
129, Level 9 Alternatively Chokephaibulkit et al,1 27, Level 9 successfully used
TMP-SMX at a dosage of TMP 150 mg /m2/day divided twice daily for 3 days
per week.
2.8.3 Side effects
Chintu reported that skin rash was the main side effect in infants given
co-trimoxazole.128; Level 2 Other possible side effects include bone marrow
toxicity and hepatotoxicity.129, Level 9 These side effects may be monitored on a
clinical basis, using a symptomatic approach.129, Level 9 Co-trimoxazole can be
used in infants with G6PD deficiency; however caution is advised.130, Level 9
2.8.4 Alternatives to TMP-SMX
Dapsone and aerosolized pentamidine are alternatives for children who are
intolerant to TMP-SMX. In a randomized, multicentre trial comparing different
regimens of dapsone, none of the children in the daily 2mg/kg regimen
developed PCP.131, Level 9 The recommended dose of aerosolized pentamidine
in children aged 5 years and older is 300 mg once monthly.132, Level 9 However
Principi reported that aerosolized pentamidine isethionate delivered by an
ultrasonic Fisoneb nebulizer at doses of either 120 mg once monthly or 60
mg every 2 weeks was effective for PCP prophylaxis in infants and
children.133, Level 2 There are no direct comparisons of these alternatives with
TMP-SMX.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Recommendation for primary PCP prophylaxis using
Co-trimoxazole for the perinatally exposed infant
PCP is recommended for infants with indeterminate HIV infection
status starting at 4-6 weeks of age until they are determined to be
HIV-uninfected or presumptively uninfected with HIV. *(Grade B)
Primary TMP-SMX prophylaxis should be continued until at least 1 year
of age for HIV infected infants and then re-evaluated. (Grade B)
Further use of TMP-SMX prophylaxis (after 1 year of age) will be guided
by clinical staging and CD4 percentage. (Grade C)
Cotrimoxazoleº Dosage
•
TMP 4mg / SMX 20mg per kg daily (Grade B)
OR
•
TMP 150 mg / SMX 750 mg/m2/day divided twice daily for 3 days per
week (Grade B)
Alternatives to Cotrimoxazole
• Dapsone #
2mg /kg daily (Grade B)
OR
• Aerosolized pentamidine
Children less than 5 years of age - either 120 mg once monthly or
60 mg every 2 weeks, after a 4-week period of induction therapy
at 60 mg/week. (Grade B)
* Initiation of PCP prophylaxis can be avoided if the infant has negative virologic tests
at 2 weeks and at 1 month of age or, if prophylaxis was initiated, can be stopped if
virologic testing is negative at or beyond 2 months of age.
º Cotrimoxazole can rarely induce haemolysis in persons with glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and caution should be exercised in such cases.
# Dapsone can increase the risk of haemolysis or methemoglobinemia in patients
with G6PD deficiency. Screen for G6PD deficiency before starting dapsone.
20
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
3.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTED INFANTS, CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS
Management of HIV-1 infected children requires monitoring of disease
progression, timely commencement of a potent HAART regimen, monitoring
of treatment, assessing response and adverse reactions.
3.1
MONITORING DISEASE PROGRESSION
Monitoring of disease progression of the HIV-1 infected child is through
clinical, immunological and virological means.
3.1.1 Clinical
There are two major systems for clinical classification of HIV infection in
children: the WHO Clinical Classification and the CDC Classification
System. The guideline development group has chosen to adopt the WHO
classification for Malaysia (refer Appendix 1 and 2).
3.1.2 Immunologic
Immunologic monitoring is done by serial evaluations of the CD4 lymphocyte
count and percentage. HIV associated immunodeficiency is defined as not
significant, mild, advanced and severe according to age-related cut-off
values of CD4% and count (refer Appendix 3).
3.1.3 Virologic
Virologic monitoring is by the use of plasma viral load (pVL) assays. Current
methods used are the Roche Amplicor
HIV-1 Monitor System - standard
and ultrasensitive and the Roche COBAS Taqman HIV-1 . The lower limits
of detection vary with the type of assay (Amplicor standard <400 copies/mL,
Amplicor ultrasensitive <50 copies/mL and AmpliPrep/Taqman <40 copies/mL).
3.2
ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY
3.2.1 Effectiveness of HAART
HAART with at least three drugs is associated with long term viral suppression,
and sustained clinical and immunological benefits: it has been the standard
recommended treatment worldwide since 1996.
Monotherapy and dual ART have been found not to provide sustained viral
suppression and are ineffective. They also carry an increased risk of ARV
drug resistance and are no longer recommended.
R
R
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
HAART has been shown to provide the following benefits:
• Reduce mortality by 67-80%.134, Level 9 ;135, Level 6 ;136, Level 6 ;137, Level 6 ;138, Level 6 139, Level 6 ;140,
Level 6
• Halt progression to AIDS by 50%.139, Level 6; 140, Level 6; 136, Level 6 However, Doerholt
135, Level 6 found no change in progression to AIDS in young infants.
• Reduce hospitalization rate by 68-80%.134, Level 6 ;135, Level 6 ;137, Level 6; 141, Level 6
However, Bertolli 141, Level 6 noted a slight increase in hospitalisation in those
on HAART, but this association was not noted when analysis was restricted to more recent years (1997-2002).
• Reduce incidence of opportunistic and related infections by 62-93% 142, Level 6,
Positive impact on child growth and psychomotor development.143, Level 6;144,
Level 6
3.2.2 When to initiate therapy
When to start ART in children remains controversial. The only RCT
(PREDICT study) investigating the initiation of HAART therapy has just started
recruiting participants.
In the absence of evidence from RCTs, recommendations on when to start
combination therapy in children (and adults) are based on cohort data that
provide an estimate of the risk of progression to AIDS or death based on
surrogate markers of infection (i.e. the child's CD4 % and pVL).
An important meta-analysis,145, Level 1 of individual data of 3941 children from
17 studies in Europe and US demonstrated short-term risks (12 months) of
progression to AIDS or death at different ages based on child's presenting
CD4% and pVL, with the former being the stronger predictor (Appendix 3).
Progression to AIDS or death also differs according to age, with infants and
young children having a significantly higher risk. In addition, both CD4% and
pVL are poorly predictive of disease progression in infants <12 months of
age, hence the recommendations for starting ART are usually more aggressive
in young infants.
This needs to be balanced against the safety and tolerability of HAART, lack
of data on the pharmacokinetics of HAART in young infants and the difficulty
in achieving viral suppression in view of the high viral load commonly seen
in young infants. Faye 146, Level 6 in a small cohort of 31 infants, found only 50%
of those on HAART had VL suppression (pVL<500) at 6 months and only
18% at 24 months, highlighting the difficulty in sustaining VL suppression in
young infants. A PENTA 7 study 147, Level 6 of 20 infants started on stavudine
(d4T) /didanosine (ddI) / nelfinavir (NFV) combination HAART showed good
clinical and immunological response at 72 weeks but high rate of virological
22
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
failure (n=14) and resistance (n=6). This was attributed to unreliable plasma
levels of NFV in young infants. More recent studies suggest the need for
higher doses of both NFV and NVP to achieve better viral suppression in
young infants.
There is some evidence to suggest that very early treatment of confirmed
HIV infected infants is feasible and moderately effective regardless of CD4%
or cell counts. Faye 148, Level 6 noted that young infants who started HAART <6
months did not show early progression to clinical HIV-related disease when
compared to 6 of 18 who started treatment after 6 months of age. Luzuriaga
149, Level 6 found that young infants who started on quadruple HAART
(d4T/3TC/NVP/NFV) before 3 months of age tolerated the medications well
and had improved long term viral suppression when compared with those
started after age 3 months.
In children more than one year of age the risk of disease progression is less
than in infants but remains higher than in adults.145, Level 1 The response to
HAART may also differ with age. In a United Kingdom cohort study150,
Level 6 of 354 children commencing HAART, greater rises in CD4 cell count
were noted in younger children and those with the lowest CD4% at
treatment initiation but a better virological response was noted in older
children irrespective of their pre-HAART viral load. However, children who
started HAART only after they developed severe immunosuppression (CD4
<15%) had poorer outcome than those starting HAART earlier. 151, Level 8 ; 152, Level 6
A detailed clinical evaluation is essential prior to initiating HAART and
should aim to assess the clinical stage of HIV infection, identify past
HIV-related illnesses, identify current HIV-related illnesses that would
require treatment and identify co-existing medical conditions and treatments
that may influence the choice of therapy.
The decision about when to start ART must also involve evaluation of the
whole child and his social environment. The ability of the caregiver and child
to adhere to the regimen must be fully assessed and support provided if
ART is to succeed. Issues regarding home environment, social, schooling
and financial status that may affect adherence to the regimen must also be
addressed first before commencing HAART. 153, Level 9; 154, Level 9; 46, Level 9 Failure to
adhere to the regimen will allow continued viral replication and subsequent
emergence of drug resistant strains with eventual treatment failure.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Evaluation prior to initiating antiretroviral treatment
Carry out a detailed clinical evaluation prior to initiating antiretroviral
therapy to assess the clinical stage of HIV infection, identify past HIVrelated illnesses, identify current HIV-related illnesses that would require
treatment and identify co-existing medical conditions and treatments that
may influence the choice of therapy.
Fully assess the ability of the child and the caregivers to adhere to the
treatment before initiating HAART regimen.
Intensive education of the child and caregivers about the importance of
adherence to regimen should be provided before therapy is initiated.
Recommendation for when to initiate treatment
Ensure that the child and caregivers will be adherent to the HAART
regimen. (Grade C)
HIV infected infants < 12 months
Initiate HAART in infants who are symptomatic (WHO Stage 2, 3 or 4)
irrespective of CD4 or viral load (Grade B)
Initiate HAART in infants who are asymptomatic (WHO Stage 1 and
CD4<25%) (Grade B)
HIV infected children > 1 year
Initiate HAART in children with AIDS or significant symptoms (WHO
Stage 3* or 4) irrespective of CD4 and viral load (Grade B)
Initiate HAART in asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children (WHO
Stage 1 or 2) who have met age-related CD4 threshold for treatment
(refer to Table 2 for details)
(Grade B)
Consider HAART in asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children
(WHO Stage 1 or 2) who have either met age-related CD4 threshold
(refer Appendix 4) or have viral load > 100,000 copies (see Table 2)
(Grade B)
Defer HAART in asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children (WHO
Stage 1 or 2) who have no immune suppression and viral load <100,000
copies/ml. (Grade B)
*
Except with tuberculosis, lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis (LIP), oral hairy leukoplakia
(OHL) or thrombocytopenia. Starting antiretroviral in children with these conditions will
depend on their CD4%. (Age-related CD4 values - see Appendix 3)
24
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
25
Table 3 - Guidelines for the use of ARV agents in Pediatric HIV infection. (Adapted from 46, Level 9)
Age
Initiate Treatment
Consider
Defer
<12 months
• Symptoms (WHO Stage 2,3,4)
• Asymptomatic (WHO Stage 1)
OR
and CD4 < 25%
• Asymptomatic (WHO Stage 1)
and CD4 ?25%
1-<3 years
• AIDS or significant HIV-related
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
• Asymptomatic and
symptoms (WHO Stage 3* or 4)
and
OR
- CD4 20-24 % or
- CD4 >25 % and
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
- VL >100,000 copies /ml
- VL <100,000 copies /ml
(WHO Stage 1 & 2) and
CD4 <15%
3-12 years
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
• Asymptomatic and
(WHO Stage 3* or 4) and
and
OR
- CD4 15-24 % or
- CD4 >25 % and
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
- VL >100,000 copies /ml
- VL <100,000 copies /ml
(WHO Stage 1 & 2) and
CD4 <15%
>12 years
• AIDS or significant HIV-related
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
• Asymptomatic and
symptoms (WHO Stage 3* or 4)
and
OR
- CD4 201 >350 cells/mm3 and
- CD4 >350 cells/mm3 and
• Asymptomatic or mild symptoms
- VL <100,000 copies /ml
- VL <100,000 copies /ml
(WHO Stage 1 & 2) and
CD4 <200 cells/mm3 or <15%
* Except with TB, lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis (LIP), Oral Hairy leukoplakia (OHL) or thrombocytopeania. Starting antiretroviral in children with these
conditions will depend on their CD4%
3.2.3 Issues and choice for initial antiretroviral therapy
a) Baseline resistance testing
Transmitted or primary drug resistance of HIV-1 has been reported in several
countries with prevalence of genotypic resistance (among adult patients)
ranging from 1% for major mutations in Malaysia
155, Level 8 to 27.4% in San
Francisco.156; Level 6 Trends in the prevalence of transmitted drug resistance
over the last decade have been reported as increasing in several countries
including Europe,157, Level 6 the United States 158, Level 6 and the UK 159, Level 6 while
some others such as Australia 160, Level 8, France 161, Level 8 and Amsterdam 162, Level 8
have reported a decreasing trend. Transmitted resistance has been reported
in both acute and chronic infections.
Among children with HIV infection, data from France and the US have
indicated prevalence of 12-20%.163, Level 6; 164, Level 8
These reports have largely come from countries with history of extensive
use of antiretrovirals (including mono and dual therapy) prior to HAART
becoming available.
There are very little data on primary resistance in Malaysia. The only study
by Tee et al 165, Level 8 from a small single centre cross sectional study among
100 recently diagnosed ARV naïve patients reported a prevalence of 1%
(genotypic resistance) for major mutations conferring high level resistance.
There have been numerous reports of emergence of resistance among
HIV-1 infected pregnant women receiving ARVs for treatment or for PMTCT.
However there are few reports of transmitted resistance and its significance
among infants and children.
Resistance to ZDV is usually seen after several months of partly suppressive
therapy
166, Level 9 and reported rates have ranged from 6.3% genotypic
resistance in the 076 study 167, Level 6 to 24% in the WITS study predominantly
among treatment-experienced women.168, Level 6 Among mothers given ZDV
there have been conflicting reports of the risk of transmission of resistant
viral strains to the newborn ranging from none to 5 fold risk.168, Level 6 ; 169; Level 6
There have been reports of rapid development of resistance to 3TC in
pregnant women especially related to duration of use but overall transmission
to the newborn has been low.170, Level 8;15, Level 6;171, Level 8 Similarly the use of single
dose NVP although associated with development of resistance in the mother,
has not been associated with an increased risk of MTCT of resistant
subtypes.
There have been very few reports evaluating the significance of transmitted
drug resistance and the value of determining baseline resistance prior to
initiating therapy and there have been no such studies in children and
26
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
27
infants. Some have found that time to viral suppression may be significantly
longer in those with any resistance but an equivalent proportion did achieve
suppression on longer follow-up,156, Level 6;158, Level 6 while others found no effect of
any baseline resistance on response to initial therapy.172, Level 6
;173, Level 6 One
study found significant correlation between risk of failure and the number of
mutations in the protease region.174, Level 6 There have been no direct studies
among children to determine clinical significance of baseline resistance. A
recent study from the UK suggests that individuals with transmitted resistance to multiple classes of drugs had significantly impaired response to first
line ART.175, Level 6
Considering the potential for increasing resistance with improved access to
and use of ARVs among HIV infected individuals including infected pregnant
women, WHO has issued the WHO Guidelines for Surveillance of HIV Drug
Resistance in newly diagnosed and treatment-naïve HIV subjects 2003.
176, Level 9
The estimates obtained from such surveillance will support planners and
clinicians in selecting the appropriate regimens for prevention of vertical
transmission and post exposure prophylaxis. The estimates may also aid in
evaluating the initial standard regimens used in the country, and the success
of expanded access treatment programmes. Finally, they will inform
discussions on whether pre-treatment drug resistance testing or screening
should be considered.
Recommendation for baseline resistance testing
There is insufficient evidence currently to support the need for
baseline resistance testing prior to initiation of therapy for children and
adolescents in Malaysia. (Grade B)
As transmitted drug resistance may become an increasing problem in
Malaysia, it may be useful to undertake surveillance resistance testing
among newly diagnosed patients.
b) Choice of drugs and regimen
Research into antiretroviral drugs and improved strategies for the treatment
of HIV infection continue to evolve. There are few randomized phase III
clinical trials of HAART among paediatric patients that provide direct
comparison of different treatment regimens. Most of the data on ART are
based on efficacy data from clinical trials in adults, pharmacokinetic data
and safety data for phase I/II trials in children and nonrandomized open
label studies in children.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
The goal of ART is for effective and durable viral suppression in order to
preserve or restore immune function and prevent HIV-related morbidity and
mortality. The current standard of care for HIV infection is HAART which
comprises 2 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) plus a
3rd active agent (a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor [NNRTI]
based or a protease inhibitor [PI] based). The clinical benefit of HIV therapy
is largely dependent on improving or sustaining immune function and
delaying disease progression over the long term.
The choice of drugs for children and adolescents is based on ability to
achieve durable viral suppression, extent of paediatric/adolescent experience,
acceptable toxicity profile, availability and palatability of paediatric formulations,
dosing profile and drug interactions.
c). Infants & children
The following recommendations are adapted from the US Department of
Health and Human Services Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents
in Pediatric HIV Infection. 46, Level 9
Recommendation for first-line antiretroviral therapy (ART)
(infants & children)
The standard of care is HAART which comprises: 2 NRTI plus 3rd active
agent (NNRTI or PI - based).
NNRTI based:
<3 years:
2 NRTIs + Nevirapine
>3 years:
2 NRTIs + Efavirenz
PI Based:
2 NRTIs + Lopinavir/ritonavir
NRTI combinations:
Zidovudine plus
Lamivudine OR didanosine
Didanosine plus
Lamivudine
(Grade C)
Refer to Appendix 4 for details on individual ARV drugs
Notes:
• WHO encourages the use of fixed-dose combinations when formulations of
assured quality and proven bioequivalence are available and offer operational
advantages.
• Fixed-dose combinations of standard first-line ARV drugs that are suitable for
children however are urgently required to facilitate treatment of HIV in children but
are not yet available in Malaysia.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
29
d) Adolescents
The following recommendations are adapted from the US Department of
Health and Human Services Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents
in HIV-1 Infected Adults & Adolescents.177,Level 9 Adult guidelines for ART are
considered appropriate for post pubertal adolescents.
Recommendation first-line antiretroviral drugs (adolescents)
The standard of care is HAART which comprises: 2 NRTI plus 3rd active
agent (NNRTI based or PI based).
Preferred Agent #
Alternative Agent*
NNRTI based :
Efavirenz
Nevirapine
PI Based:
Lopinavir/ ritonavir
Atazanavir
NRTI combinations
Preferred Combination*
Alternative Combination*
Zidovudine + Lamivudine
Didanosine + Lamivudine
(co- formulated)
(Grade C)
Preferred agents # or combinations for use in treatment-naive patients
are those where clinical trial data have demonstrated optimal efficacy and
durability with acceptable tolerability and ease of use.
Alternative* components refer to those for which clinical trial data efficacy
but also show disadvantages compared with preferred components in
terms of antiviral activity, durability, tolerability, or ease of use.
Refer to Appendix 4 for details on individual ARV drugs
Efavirenz is not recommended for use in the 1st trimester of pregnancy or in sexually
active women with child-bearing potential unless they are using effective contraception
Nevirapine should not be initiated in girls with CD4+ T cell count >250 cells/mm3 or in
boys with CD4+ T cell count >400 cells/mm3 because of increased risk of symptomatic
hepatic events in these patients.
e) Which HAART regimen to use?- NNRTI based or PI based
There have been very few direct comparative studies done - and none in
children - to determine whether PI or NNRTI based regimen is more effective.
There are several factors in determining the optimum choice of regimen as
first line therapy and these include effectiveness and durability of the
regimen (virologic and immunologic), few adverse effects, tolerability,
palatablility with convenient dosing and possessing good future drug
options.
De Luca et al,178, Level 6 in a cohort study determined that there was similar
efficacy and tolerability for EFV- based compared with LPV/r-based first-line
antiretroviral regimens. However, LPV/r was associated with higher rates of
hypertriglyceridaemia. MacArthur et al,179, Level 1 reporting on the FIRST study
(RCT of different regimens) in treatment naïve patients, found that clinical
endpoints of AIDS defining event, death or CD4 decline to <200 were similar for both NNRTI and PI based regimens.
Virologic failure was less common with the NNRTI regimen with a more
rapid decline in VL. Immunologic response (mean CD4 during 6 years
follow-up) was similar in all treatment groups.
In a metanalysis of direct and indirect data189, Level 1, direct analysis found that
NNRTI-based regimens were better than PI-based regimens for virologic
suppression but both regimens did not differ in death or disease progression
or withdrawal due to adverse events
Bartlett et al 181, Level 1, undertook a systematic analysis of studies of HAART in
ARV naïve patients and demonstrated that NNRTI and boosted PI regimens
provided the highest rates of virologic success but that future drug options
were better with PI boosted regimens.
Choice of regimen should be individualized according to needs and patient
factors; however there are numerous advantages of an NNRTI based
regimen as first line and these include high virologic success, convenient
dosing schedule, palatability and less metabolic adverse effects
Recommendation on choice of initial regimen
NNRTI-based regimens are the preferred choice as the first line HAART
regimen for ARV naïve children unless specific patient needs or factors
require a PI-based one. (Grade C)
f) Monitoring of HIV infected child on treatment
Careful monitoring is an essential component of effective ARV use. It
permits assessment of treatment efficacy, early detection of adverse effects
of therapy and ongoing reinforcement of adherence. The type and frequency
of monitoring will be dependent on local resources. Monitoring is carried out
by clinical and laboratory means.
30
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
g) Clinical Monitoring
This should include assessment of growth, development, psychological
wellbeing, improvement in clinical status and absence of new or recurrent
illnesses as well as evaluation of adherence and drug adverse effects.
It is known that weight and height growth of HIV infected children tend to lag
behind that of uninfected children of similar age. HAART has been shown to
improve the average weight gain of HIV infected children from subnormal to
normal after 1 year of treatment and average height growth to nearly normal
after 2 years of therapy.
182, Level 2 Verweel et al
183, Level 6 has also reported
favourable response to height and weight parameters especially among
children responding to HAART.
However, Lindsey et al,184, Level 6 report that despite viral suppression and
improvement in immunologic status with HAART, there appears limited
improvements in neurodevelopmental functioning in young children. Further
studies are needed to further assess mental, neurological and psychological,
physical, emotional and sexual maturation in children maintained on HAART.
h) Virologic monitoring
The aim of therapy is to suppress the plasma viral load to as low as possible
and for as long as possible.
Definitions of response to therapy however are varied. In general, several
studies have illustrated that most patients who respond and have durable
suppression would have pVL decline by 1/10 or 1 log10 from baseline after
8 weeks of therapy and viral suppression (pVL <50c/ml) by 24-32 weeks.
Time to suppression may be longer in those with higher baseline pVL. The
greater the rate of decline from baseline pVL, the higher the probability of
durable suppression.185, Level 7;186, Level 8;187, Level 6 ;188, Level 6
However not all patients can achieve suppression to below detectability. In
such patients, a sustained pVL decline by 1.5-2 log10 is considered
adequate suppression.
i) Intermittent viremia
Among patients achieving viral suppression to undetectable (<50c/ml by
ultrasensitive assay), there are a number who experience episodes of
intermittent low level viremia or 'blips'. These are defined as single VL
measurements of 50-200 c/mL. (sustained elevated results are considered
virologic failure.) These episodes have been reported in 11-40% of patients
on HAART. Several studies indicate that such intermittent viremia do not
represent treatment failure although causes of these blips have yet to be
determined.189, Level 6, 190, Level 6; 191, Level 6; 192, Level 6; 193, Level 6 There has also been no
association with loss of adherence during these blips.194, Level 6;195, Level 6 One
study demonstrated that 26% of these episodes were caused by
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
intercurrent infections.196, Level 6 A recent study by Nettles et al 193, Level 6 suggested
that these blips signify random biological and statistical variation around
mean HIV-1 levels below 50 copies/mL rather than clinically significant
elevations in viremia.
j) Immunologic Monitoring
The majority of patients (adults, children and adolescents) on HAART will
show improvements in CD4 counts and percentages.197, Level 6; 140, Level 6; 198, Level 6; 199,
Level 6 Among adults a plateau appears to be reached by 4 years 197, Level 8 while
the study on children 198, Level 6 showed that improvements in CD4 continued
throughout the second year follow-up.
There is little information on the expected rate of improvement among
children. However, the younger the age and the lower the pre-treatment
CD4 the greater the improvements. Thus an increase of 10% or more at 6
months of treatment was seen among children younger than 2 years of age
where median time to achieve CD4 > 30% (pre-treatment CD < 25%) was
less than 12 months in one study.198, Level 6 This study also demonstrated the
mean CD4 increase at 6 months was 9% with inter-quartile ratio 4-13%.
Recommendation for monitoring
Clinical monitoring (pVL)
•
Children on HAART should be evaluated clinically for adherence, drug
adverse effects and improvements in weight, height and development.
(Grade C)
Virologic monitoring
•
Plasma viral load (pVL) should be monitored at week 8, week 12 and
every 4-6 months thereafter or whenever there is a clinical event or
significant decline in CD4+ T cells. (Grade C)
•
Therapy is considered adequate if pVL declines by at least 1 log 10*
by week eight and optimally to < 50copies/ml by week 24-32. In those
not achieving viral suppression, a sustained decrease in HIV RNA
copy number of 1.5 to 2.0 log10 from baseline (if achieved RNA
levels are low) may also be considered adequate. (Grade C)
Immunologic monitoring
•
CD4 should be monitored 3-4 monthly for patients on HAART. (Grade C)
- CD4 is expected to increase in the majority of children with
increases in CD4% ranging from 5-10% at 6 months with
continued rise through first 2-3 years of HAART.
- Patients with discordant responses (no increase in CD4 despite
viral load suppression, or improved CD4 but with continued
high pVL) should be referred to paediatric infectious diseases
specialist.
32
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
33
k) Adherence
Prospective cohort studies both in adults and children including adolescents
have demonstrated the importance of high level of adherence to HAART of
>90% for viral suppression and durability of response. 201, Level 6 ;202 Level 9 ;203, Level 2
;204, Level 6;205, Level 6 ; 199, Level 6; 206,Level 6 These studies also demonstrate improved
immunologic response with adherence to therapy.
Poor adherence is likely to result in subtherapeutic ARV levels with risk for
virologic failure and emergence of drug resistance, thus not only affecting
current regimen but also limiting future drug options.
Adherence is a major issue in paediatric treatment and there is evidence
that adherence problems are common in children. In one study, 43% of
people caring for a child receiving HAART reported at least one missed dose
in the past week.207, Level 8 A number of factors could contribute to adherence
problems: high pill/medication burden; refusal of young infants to take
syrups due to unpleasant taste; unwillingness among caregivers to inform
schools and care-centres that their child is infected, which could result in
missing out on doses during the day; dietary restrictions; and toxic side
effects of drugs.
l) Adherence assessment and monitoring
A comprehensive assessment for adherence should be carried out prior to
initiation of therapy and should include social, behavioural, family and financial
factors that may affect adherence by the child and family and to identify
areas for intervention. A dialogue and partnership should be established
providing information, obtaining agreement to treatment plan and to identify
strategies for supporting adherence.46, Level 9
m) Monitoring adherence
Adherence is difficult to assess accurately. There is as yet no definite tool to
reliably
and
accurately
assess
adherence.
Multiple
methods
are
recommended. 46,Level 9
Methods to monitor adherence
• Viral load response
• Quantitative report of missed doses by caregivers, child or adolescent
(focusing on recent missed doses during a 3-day or 1-week period)
• Descriptions of medication regimens
• Reports of barriers to administration of medication
• Targeted questions about stress, pill burden and daily routine
• Pharmacy refill data and pill counts
• Electronic devices (Medication Event Monitoring System)
• Home visits
• Hospitalization for supervision and monitoring
• Therapeutic drug monitoring
n) Improving & Supporting Adherence
Intensive follow-up and frequent assessment of adherence are important.
Strategies to improve and support adherence should be identified and instituted.
These include:
o) Regimen Strategies
• Choose the simplest regimen possible
• Choose the regimen that best conforms to daily routines of patient and family
• Choose the most palatable medicine possible
• Choose drugs with fewest side effects
• Simplify food requirements
• Avoid drug interactions
• Prescribe fixed-dose combinations with convenient once a day dosing if
available
p) Child/ family related strategies
This emphasises patient / caregiver education about HIV-related disease,
the need for adherence, providing tools such as written and visual materials,
daily schedules, demonstrating use of syringes for liquid medications, pill
boxes etc.
Behavioural tools can be used such as positive reinforcements with small
incentives. For children who are persistently non-adherent and averse to
taking medications, a gastrostomy tube may be considered. Home nursing
and directly observed dosing are also possible options for the difficult cases.
q) Healthcare provider strategies
Fostering trusting relationship and open communication are important.
Positive characteristics for healthcare providers include consistency, providing
information, asking questions, technical expertise and commitment.
Recommendation for adherence
A comprehensive assessment for adherence should be carried out prior
to initiation of therapy and should include social, behavioural, family and
financial factors (Grade C)
Adherence should be supported by intensive follow-up and frequent
assessment (Grade C)
Strategies to improve and support adherence include:
• Regimen strategies
• Child & family related strategies
• Healthcare provider strategies
Adherence must be monitored with the use of multiple methods as
outlined above. (Grade C)
34
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
35
r) Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome
Case reports and retrospective cohort studies have established immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (also known as immune reconstitution
disease or immune restoration disease), as a significant problem among
patients initiated on HAART. This condition is characterized by a paradoxical
clinical worsening of a known condition or the appearance of a new condition
after initiating ART and results from restored immunity to specific infectious
or non-infectious antigens.
There is no generally accepted case definition due to diverse and still
expanding clinical spectrum of this condition.
Proposed definition of IRIS includes the following: 208, Level 8
Receiving HAART
• Decrease in HIV-1 RNA level from baseline
• Increase in CD4+ cells from baseline (may lag HIV RNA decrease)
Clinical symptoms consistent with inflammatory process
Clinical course not consistent with:
• Expected course of previously diagnosed OI
• Expected course of newly diagnosed OI
• Drug toxicity
Non-infectious etiologies
• Rheumatoid arthritis /
Autoimmune
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE)
• Graves disease, Autoimmune
thyroid disease
• Sarcoidosis & granulomatous
reactions
• Tattoo ink
• AIDS-related lymphoma
• Guillain-Barre' syndrome (GBS)
• Interstitial lymphoid pneumonitis
Infectious etiologies
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis
• Mycobacterium avium complex
• Other mycobacteria
• Cytomegalovirus
• Herpes viruses
• Herpes zoster virus
• Herpes simplex virus
• Herpes virus-associated
Kaposi's sarcoma
• Cryptococcus neoformans
• Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia (PCP)
• Histoplasmosis capsulatum
• Toxoplasmosis
• Hepatitis B virus
• Hepatitis C virus
• Progressive multifocal
leukoencephalitis
• Parvovirus B19
• Strongyloides stercoralis
infection & other parasitic
infections
• Molluscum contagiosum
& genital warts
• Sinusitis
• Folliculitis
Possible infectious and non-infectious aetiologies of IRIS are summarized
below: 209, Level 9
36
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
37
The most common underlying infections associated with IRIS are mycobacteria,
CMV, herpes simplex, varicella-zoster and hepatitis C.
The incidence of this condition has been reported as ranging from 15-45%
among patients with a known underlying OI, majority occurring in the first 60
days, and 15-25% among all patients commencing HAART, majority in the
first 3 months. 208, Level 8
There are few data regarding IRIS among HIV infected children. In a
prospective cohort study from Thailand,210, Level 6 the incidence of IRIS was
19% and median time of onset 4 weeks after start of HAART (range, 2-31
weeks). The majority were caused by mycobacterial organisms, followed by
varicella-zoster virus, herpes simplex virus and by Cryptococcus neoformans.
1 episode of Guillain-Barré syndrome was reported. Features included
exacerbation (often with unusual manifestations) of a previously treated OI,
or unmasking of a previously subclinical infection.
Risk factors for IRIS have not been clearly defined. Factors associated with
this condition include lower baseline CD4 at initiation of therapy, higher
baseline VL, a rise in CD4 after 90 days and a rapid fall in HIV RNA level
during the first 3 months of therapy.
Pathogenesis of IRIS is not fully understood but suggested mechanisms
include recovery of antigen specific immune response, response to high
antigen burden, dysregulation of the immune response and disease
susceptibility genes.
Most cases of IRIS resolve after a few weeks, however some can be severe
with significant morbidity and occasional mortality. Treatment is directed to
the specific aetiology by initiating or continuing specific therapy. A course of
corticosteroids (prednisolone or methylprednisolone) for life threatening or
unresponsive inflammatory responses may be necessary. ART should be
continued but interruption may need to be considered in severe or
unresponsive cases.
Recommendation for Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome
Clinicians initiating HAART should remain vigilant for the occurrence of
Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome. (Grade C)
Treatment is directed towards the specific aetiology though steroids
may need to be given in the severe cases. (Grade C)
Antireroviral therapy should not be interrupted except in very severe or
unresponsive cases. (Grade C)
3.2.4 Special issues for adolescents
Adolescents diagnosed with HIV infection have either been infected by
horizontal transmission (sexual, injecting drug use) or are adolescent
survivors of perinatal infection.
Differences have been described in the natural history and progression of
HIV infection in adolescents when compared with adults. Although
adolescents may be more susceptible to HIV infection, they have better
thymic reserve, demonstrate less rapid disease progression and perhaps
better immune reconstitution with treatment.211, Level 8
Adolescence is a time of rapid physical, cognitive and social changes which
may influence disease progression and ongoing care. Combined management
with an adolescent physician is beneficial. Important elements of care
include access to age-appropriate health care, mental health and substance
abuse services, peer-to-peer support, sexual health, routine screening for
sexually transmitted infections, risk reduction counselling and contraceptive
counselling. Routine cervical screening should be included for adolescent
girls and the possible use of HPV vaccines should be considered.
a) Antiretroviral therapy
Timing and choice of therapy have been outlined in the respective sections.
Particular problems in the adolescent include possible extensive prior treatment
for perinatally acquired disease, drug resistances and regimen failures and
issues of sustaining adherence. In the PACTG 381 study, 212, Level 8only 24% of
adolescents on HAART were completely adherent to their regimen.
b) Dosing
It is recommended that prepubescent adolescents (Tanner stage I or II)
should be dosed according to paediatric guidelines while those in late puberty
(Tanner stage V) should receive adult doses. Refer Appendix 5 for details on
Tanner staging
c) Adolescent Females
Gynecological care is an important part of care for the HIV infected female
adolescent. Adolescents with HIV infection may be sexually active, therefore
contraception and prevention of HIV transmission should be discussed,
including the interaction of specific ARV drugs with hormonal contraceptive
agents. The potential for pregnancy must be considered and this may alter
choices of antiretroviral therapy. For example, efavirenz should be used with
caution in females of child bearing age and should only be prescribed after
intensive counselling and education about the potential effects on the
foetus. PMTCT strategies and regimens during pregnancy are described in
the relevant CPGs.
38
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
d) Barriers to ART Adherence
Barriers to adherence among adolescents include those related to development
such as denial, mistrust, rebellion, concrete thinking and other issues such
as fear of disclosure, poor understanding, chaotic lifestyle, substance abuse
and lack of family support. Low self- esteem, depression and feelings of
hopelessness are other common factors.
Efforts need to be focused on reinforcing adherence as described above
and include pillboxes, timers, reminder systems, peer-to-peer adherence
counselling. A lower pill burden, (e.g. co- formulated fixed dose combinations
and drugs with daily dosing (e.g. Tenofovir) and regimens with minimal
adverse effects all facilitate adherence.
e)Transition to Adult Care
Transition is facilitated if adult clinics are in the same facility, and where one
or more providers work in both settings with similar multidisciplinary support.
3.2.5 Treatment failure
Most children can remain stable on HAART for many years. However, at
some point, assessment of the regimen will become necessary. It must be
noted however that the patient’s best response will be to his/her first-line
HAART regimen.
Treatment failure is defined as suboptimal response or a lack of sustained
response to therapy. It can be defined as an inadequate virologic, immunologic,
or clinical response to antiretroviral therapy. It usually begins with virological
failure, followed by immunological failure and eventually clinical failure.213, Level 9
Careful assessment is required to evaluate the aetiology of treatment failure
and determine the appropriate management strategy. A change in ART may be
considered in a number of different situations, including:
• Suboptimal virologic response to therapy or a sustained increase in viral
load
• Suboptimal immune response to therapy or immunologic deterioration
• Suboptimal clinical response to therapy or clinical disease progression
• Significant drug intolerance or toxicity
• Significant and unmodifiable adherence issues.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
DEFINITIONS OF TREATMENT FAILURE
Virological failure: 46, Level 9
Incomplete viral response to therapy
• Reduction in plasma HIV RNA of less than 0.5 log10 four weeks after
initiation of therapy, and less than 1.0 log10 reduction at eight weeks.*
• Failure to suppress plasma HIV RNA to undetectable levels within six
months of treatment initiation*
Viral rebound
• Confirmed rebound viraemia after initial reduction to undetectable
levels (i.e.repeated detection of HIV RNA >400 copies/mL.)*
• Confirmed >0.5 log10 (greater than 3-fold) increase in HIV RNA copy
number for children age >2 years or >0.7 log10 (greater than 5-fold)
increase for children age <2 years from the nadir achieved.
(For those who demonstrated an initial HIV RNA response but still had low
levels of detectable HIV RNA)
Immunological failure: 213, Level 9
• Non-correction or reappearance of low CD4 percentage in children
(generally 20%, but could be lower in older children) or CD4 count in
adolescents
Clinical failure:154, Level 9
• Presence of clinical symptoms in a child on therapy that are suggestive of a more severe clinical stage
• Development of a new or recurrent stage 3 or 4 clinical event in a
child who had been on treatment for at least 24 weeks.
* Children with higher HIV RNA levels at initiation of therapy may take longer to fully
suppress viral replication. The initial HIV RNA of the child at the start of therapy
and the level achieved with therapy should be considered when contemplating
potential drug changes.
For example, an immediate change in therapy may not be warranted if there is a
sustained 1.5 to 2.0 log10 fall in HIV RNA copy number, even if RNA remains
detectable at low levels 46, Level 9 .
# Continued observation with more frequent evaluation of HIV RNA levels should be
considered if the HIV RNA increase is limited (e.g. < 5,000 copies/mL).
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
41
a) Causes of treatment failure include:
• Poor adherence 213, Level 6
• Inadequate drug levels due to pharmacokinetic issues 213, Level 6
• Inadequate potency of the drugs chosen 213, Level 9
• Baseline characteristics of the child prior to initiation of a new therapeutic
regimen, including viral load and CD4 cell percentage or count; high levels
of immune cell activation; and the presence of drug resistance 46, Level 9
• Absence of suitable paediatric formulations
b) Changing ART
When to change
A diagnosis of treatment failure should only be made after the patient has
had a reasonable trial of treatment for at least 24 weeks. Adherence to
therapy should be assessed and considered prior to switching to second-line
regimen. Clinicians should evaluate both clinical and immunological findings
together before deciding on switching therapy. 154, Level 9
Recommendation for switching therapy to second line regimen for
treatment failure (after 24 weeks of optimum treatment). 154, Level 9
WHO clinical stage
Management options
Stage 1 and stage 2
Consider switching regimen only if two or more
CD4 values below age-related threshold for
severe immunodeficiency are found
Stage 3
Switching regimen is recommended if CD4 at
or below age-related threshold for severe
immunodeficiency
Stage 4
Switch regimen regardless of CD4
Choice of ARV
The new second line regimen should preferably include at least 3 new drugs
one or more of them from a new class in order to increase the likelihood of
treatment success and minimize the risk of cross- resistance. 154, Level 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Recommended second line regimen in infants and children in
the event of treatment failure of first line regimen (Grade C)
First line regimen at failure
Preferred second line regimen
2 NRTI + 1 NNRTI
2 new NRTI's plus PI
2NRTIs + PI
2 new NRTI's plus NNRTI
2 new NRTI's plus alternative PI
(boosted PI)
1 new NRTI plus NNRTI plus
alternative PI (boosted PI)
Notes:
a. It is not recommended to introduce ZDV after use of d4T or vice versa
b. EFV is not currently recommended for children <3 years of age, and should be
avoided in post-pubertal adolescent girls who are either in first trimester of
pregnancy or are sexually active and not using adequate contraception.
c. Alternative NRTIs are Abacavir/ Tenofovir
d. Alternative PIs are Atazanvir, Ritonavir, Saquinavir, Nelfinavir
Recommendation for second line therapy
Patient must be given an adequate trial of treatment for at least 24
weeks before treatment failure is considered. (Grade C)
Adherence to therapy should be assessed prior to switching to
second-line regimen. (Grade C)
Clinicians must evaluate both clinical staging and CD4 value before
considering change of treatment to second line therapy. (Grade C)
Before switching to second line therapy, consultation with Paediatric
Infectious Disease Specialist is recommended. (Grade C)
Salvage therapy and multiple antiretroviral therapy failure
Salvage treatment is treatment reserved for children who have already
received and failed two or more regimens.213, Level 9
Salvage combinations may include more than three drugs. Combinations of
four or five drugs are possible (Mega-HAART). Unfortunately, Mega-HAART
regimens have a high risk of poor tolerability, cumulative toxicity and adherence
problems. Salvage regimens should contain at least one other and ideally
two or three new active drugs to achieve the best chance of success. It is
unwise to add a single new drug to a failing regimen.213, Level 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
43
As there is limited evidence with regards to salvage therapy, no definite
recommendations can be provided and these patients should be referred to
the Paediatric Infectious Diseases Specialist.
Recommendation for salvage therapy
•
Salvage treatment is treatment reserved for children who have already
received and failed two or more regimens. Refer to Paediatric
Infectious Disease specialist for further management. (Grade C)
Resistance testing or genotypic testing
The prevalence of resistance in children who had failed HAART and had
virological failure is high ranging from 71% to 90%. There is a close relationship
between therapeutic failure and genotypic resistance.214, Level 6 ;215, Level 6
Ideally genotypic resistance assays should be carried out in children failing
therapy. These assays should be obtained when the patient is still on the
failing regimen or within 4 weeks of discontinuation of the regimen and while
the patient has a pVL of > 1000c/ml. If resistance testing is not carried out,
a sample should be stored for subsequent analysis.
Some reports in children have shown genotypic resistance testing to be useful
for guiding therapy particularly for children with extensive ARV experience.
46, Level 9
Recommendation for resistance testing
ARV drug resistance testing* is recommended prior to changing therapy for
treatment failure. (Grade B)
Resistance assays* should be obtained when the patient is still on the
failing regimen or within 4 weeks of discontinuation of the regimen and
while the patient has a pVL of > 1000c/ml. (Grade B)
* This test is currently not available for clinical purposes
When to stop ART
If children have failed multiple ART regimens and no further suitable ARVs
are available, stoppingART and keeping them comfortable with symptom-based
palliative care may have to be considered.154 Level 9
These children may experience undue suffering from psychological problems,
pain, diarrhoea, cough, shortness of breath, nausea, weakness, fatigue,
fever and confusion. Palliative care aims at relieving pain, treating the above
symptoms, providing psychological support for patient and family and
helping them with preparation for death. (Refer to palliative care
guidelines). 216, Level 9 ; 217, Level 9
3.2.6 Management of medication toxicity or intolerance
• If a child has severe or life-threatening toxicity, all components of the
drug regimen should be stopped immediately. Once the symptoms
of toxicity have resolved, antiretroviral therapy should be resumed
with substitution of another antiretroviral drug for the responsible
drug.
• Children with moderate medication toxicity should continue on
antiretroviral therapy when possible while an assessment is done to
identify and substitute for the offending agent.
• Children with mild toxicity can be treated symptomatically, and do
not require drug discontinuation or change in drug therapy.
• When changing therapy because of toxicity or intolerance to a
specific drug, changing a single drug in a multi-drug regimen is
permissible; if possible, an agent with a different toxicity and side
effect profile should be chosen. 46, Level 9
3.2.7 Short-term therapy interruption
• Short-term interruptions of ARV drugs may be indicated in some
situations such as serious treatment-related toxicity, acute illness or
surgery.
• When short-term interruptions are required, then all antiretroviral
drugs should be stopped at the same time, if these medications
have similar half-lives.
• However when agents with long half-lives are used (especially the
NNRTIs EFV and NVP) cessation of all ARVs simultaneously could
result in functional monotherapy with risk of resistance to these
agents.
To
prevent
functional
monotherapy,
some
experts
recommend stopping the NNRTI component first and continuing the
other ARV drugs for a period of time (the optimum duration still not
known - WHO recommends a one-week tail of the NRTI drugs).
• In case of serious or life-threatening ARV therapy toxicity, all drugs
should be stopped immediately.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
4.
COMMON OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS (OI) AND
COMPLICATIONS IN HIV INFECTED CHILDREN
4.1
PATTERN OF OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS
The pattern of opportunistic infections (OI) among HIV infected children
differs from that of adults. Many OI in adults are secondary to reactivation of
previously acquired opportunistic pathogens, which were acquired when
host immunity was intact. However, OI among HIV infected children more
often reflect primary infection with the pathogen. In addition, among children
with perinatal HIV infection, the primary infection with the opportunistic
pathogen is occurring after HIV infection is established when the child's
immune system might already be compromised. 218, Level 9
In general children with HIV infection are at increased risk of bacterial infections
such as diarrhoeal disease and pneumonia. Common bacterial pathogens
include Pneumococcus, Staphylococcus, non-typhi Salmonellae and other
gram-negative organisms.219, Level 5
The data for OI locally and globally are limited. A large multicentre prospective
cohort study from the USA (2767 enrolled) has shown the incidence of OI
has decreased in the HAART era.219, Level 5 The most common OI in this study
was bacterial pneumonia with a Cumulative Incident Rate (CIR) of 2.15 per
100 person-years(py). It accounted for 22.2% of all OI. The other OIs found
were
Herpes
zoster/varicella
(CIR
1.55/py),
dermatophyte
infections (IR 0.88/py) and oral candiasis (CIR 0.93/py) Similar findings were
seen in another prospective cohort study.225, Level 5
In descriptive studies from developing and less developed countries
bacterial pneumonia and sepsis are also the most common OIs. However
unlike data from the USA, PCP and pulmonary tuberculosis seem to be
more common.221,Level 8; 222, Level 8 In Thailand, disseminated infection with the
fungus Penicillium marneffei is one of the most common opportunistic
infections. 223, Level 8
4.2
PREVENTING OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS
In a large RCT study (African setting) co-trimoxazole prophylaxis significantly
reduced all-causes mortality by 43% in asymptomatic and symptomatic HIV
infected children (aged >1 year).128, Level 2 A Cochrane review used this single
study to recommend that TMP/SMX prophylaxis be used to decrease
mortality and morbidity among HIV infected children.224, Level 1 This benefit was
seen across a large range of CD4 count thus concluding that the benefit
could be due to a reduction in PCP and non PCP. In this same study Chintu
et al 128 , Level 2
also showed a 23% reduction in hospital admission.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
WHO recommends that TMP/SMX be offered to asymptomatic (WHO Stage
1) children with CD4 <25% (<5 years of age), CD4 < 200/ µl (> 5 years of
age) and all symptomatic (WHO Stage 2, 3 or 4) children older than 12
months, regardless of CD4 percentage or count.129 , Level 9
Commencing a patient on TMP/SMX prophylaxis also provides the opportunity
to assess likely adherence when HAART is eventually commenced.
4.2 (a) Dosage and regimens of co-trimoxazole for OI prophylaxis
Various dosages have been used for the prophylaxis, these are usually
based on weight, surface area or age. WHO Expert Consultation on
TMP/SMX prophylaxis in HIV infection report dated May 2005 recommends
daily doses according to age categories. 129 , Level 9
The Zambian RCT also used age categories for dosing (40mg TMP/200mg
SMX daily for children less than 5 years and 80mg TMP/400mg SMX for
more than 5 years of age). 128, Level 2 A recommendation for dosage extrapolated
from these studies is 3-6mg/kg TMP/15-18mg/kg SMX daily.
4.2 (b) Safety of PCP prophylaxis medications
In a large RCT among children there was no significant difference in the
incidence of adverse effects between placebo and co-trimoxazole.128, Level 8
Madhi reported that skin rash was the main side effect (2.8%) in infants
given co-trimoxazole.124, Level 8 Other possible side effects include bone
marrow toxicity and hepatotoxicity.129, Level 9 These side effects may be
monitored on a clinical basis, using a symptomatic approach129, Level 9 Dapsone
and aerosolized pentamidine are alternatives for a child who is intolerant to
co-trimoxazole. In a randomized, multicenter trial comparing different
regimens of dapsone, none of the children in the daily 2 mg/kg regimen
developed PCP.131, Level 9 The recommended dose of aerosolized pentamidine
in children aged 5 years and older is 300 mg once monthly.226, Level 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
47
Recommendation on prophylaxis using co-trimoxazole
Prophylaxis for an HIV infected child should be guided by age, WHO
staging and CD4 % (Grade C)
Cotrimoxazole dosage -
• 4mg TMP/20mg SMX /kg daily (Grade B)
OR
• 150 mg TMP/ 750 SMX mg/m2/day divided twice daily for 3 days per
week (Grade B)
Alternative to co-trimoxazole
Dapsone (2mg /kg daily ) (Grade B)
OR
Aerosolized pentamidine
• Children 5 years of age and older - 300 mg once every four weeks
(Grade C)
• Children less than 5 years of age- either 120 mg once monthly or 60
mg every 2 weeks, after a 4 week period of induction therapy at 60
mg/week (Grade B)
Please refer to Appendix 6 for details of investigations for opportunistic infections.
5.
NON INFECTIOUS COMPLICATIONS OF HIV
In addition to secondary infections, health care personnel managing HIV
infected children should be vigilant of the non-infectious complications of HIV.
5.1
MALIGNANCY
There is an increased incidence of malignant disease in children with
vertically acquired HIV infection.227, Level 8 However, the number of children with
HIV infection who develop a malignancy is poorly defined. The tumours
seen in HIV infected children are somewhat different than those in adults
and the spectrum appears to be age-dependent. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is
the most common cancer in HIV infected children. Other significant
malignancies occurring in children withAIDS are Kaposi sarcoma, Hodgkin disease,
primary brain lymphomas and leiomyosarcoma.227, Level 8; 228, Level 8
5.2
NEUROLOGIC COMPLICATIONS
Non-infectious neurologic manifestations of AIDS were reported to occur
among 10% of patients less than 18 years of age. 229, Level 8 They presented
with a variety of neurological manifestations including focal motor signs,
altered tonus, retarded neurodevelopment, cognitive disturbances, intractable
headache, seizures, and coma. The study showed that the mean age of
presentation amongst vertically transmitted children was 5.8 years (range,
2-11 years).
5.3
HIV-ASSOCIATED NEPHROPATHY
Strauss reported that 8% of 155 children with AIDS developed HIV-associated
nephropathy (HIVAN) They presented with persistent proteinuria, azotemia,
haematuria, renal tubular acidosis, and end-stage renal disease.230, Level 8
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is the predominant glomerular
lesion in HIVAN. Other reported glomerular lesions in patients with HIV
include IgA nephropathy and cryoglobulinemia.230, Level 8 ;231, Level 8
5.4
CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS
HIV infected children developed cardiac complications ranging from clinically
silent lesions to fatal disease.232, Level 8 The reported complications include left
ventricular dysfunction, cardiomegaly and pericardial effusion. Cardiac dysfunction
is independent risk factor for mortality in HIV infected children.233, Level 8
5.5
LYMPHOCYTIC INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONITIS (LIP)
A study of HIV infected children with chronic lung disease showed that
almost 60% of the patients had lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis.234, Level 8
Up to a third of all HIV infected children develop LIP and this usually
presents in the 2nd or 3rd year of life. Affected children tend to have a better
prognosis than children without LIP but secondary bacterial pneumonias
and eventual bronchiectasis are common. LIP is classified as non-AIDS and
Stage 3 (WHO Classification).
Clinical features that are often associated with LIP include generalised and
symmetrical lymphadenopathy, bilateral chronic non-tender parotid swelling,
digital clubbing and hepatomegaly. Typical radiographic findings are diffuse
bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates. ART improves symptoms and radiographic
appearances of LIP and resolution of LIP has been reported among adults
receiving HAART 235, Level 9; 236, Level 9
6.
OTHER ISSUES
6.1
DISCLOSURE
Perinatally acquired HIV infection has become a chronic illness due to
advances in medical treatment. As an increasing number of children infected
with HIV live to older ages, the question of disclosure of the diagnosis (to the
child and others) becomes more crucial. This maybe particularly challenging
when children reach school going age. Their psychosocial needs are also
changing to more closely resemble the needs of the chronically ill individual,
rather than the terminally ill. Disclosure of the child's HIV diagnosis is
controversial and an emotionally laden issue. The importance of disclosure
relates directly to medication adherence, treatment compliance, child's
developing autonomy and avoids potential transmission to sexual partners.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
6.1.1 Disclosure rates
In a Thai study involving primary caregivers of 96 HIV infected children aged
5 years and older; disclosure was made to only one in 5 HIV infected
children. Common reasons for non-disclosing were concerns that the child
was too young, that the child might be psychologically harmed, and that the
child could not keep the secret.237, Level 8 The fear of the negative impact on the
family due to the stigma associated with HIV infection or 'AIDS' is also a
reason for families to avoid disclosure.244,Level 9; 245,Level 9 However, Battles et al
reported that disclosure was found to be positively related to social support,
self-competence, and decreased problem behavior except in the case of
public disclosure.240, Level 9
6.1.2 Disclosure and adherence
Adherence to daily drug regimens is an important aspect of management.
Among the factors that can influence adherence is the disclosure of
diagnosis to the child. Using in-depth interviews of 42 HIV infected children
on treatment and their care givers in a HIV clinic (Uganda) it was noted that
complete disclosure by caregivers to children & strong parental relationships
were related to good adherence.241, Level 8 In Puerto Rico 70% HIV positive
youth had feelings of normalcy 6 months post-disclosure and most also
improved their adherence to therapy after disclosure. Eighty-five percent of
youth and 97% of caregivers considered disclosure a positive event for
themselves and their families.242, Level 8
6.1.3 When and how
In a Thai cross-sectional study conducted among 103 care givers of HIV
infected children aged >6 years who were receiving HAART, disclosure
rates were 30% and the average age for disclosure was 9.2 years. Almost
all (88.7%) care givers agreed that they should tell the children their diagnosis in the future but half needed health-care providers to help them at the
event.243, Level 8 The frequency of disclosure increased with age - 9% by 5
years; 18% by 6 years; 20% by 7 years; 33% by 8 years; 39% by 9 years;
48% by 10 years; 50% by 11 years; 83% by 12-13 years; 91% by 14-15y;:
100% greater than 15 years.244, Level 9
In a cross-sectional study of 51 HIV infected children (based on medical
records, parent interviews, and child assessments) the probability of earlier
age of disclosure is associated with higher child IQ and more family
expressiveness.245, Level 7 Disclosure should take into consideration the child's
age, maturity, complexity of family dynamics and clinical status.Furthermore,
while parents may be making requests for non-disclosure based on what
they believe is best for their child, health care professional also have a
responsibility to continuously make an independent assessment of a child's
readiness for disclosure.246, Level 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Recommendation for disclosure
Health care professionals need to educate and counsel care givers on
the importance of disclosure of diagnosis to the infected child. This
counselling may need to be repeated. (Grade C)
Disclosure of the diagnosis needs to be individualized, planned and
offered in stages to the child and family. (Grade C)
This process should take into consideration the child's cognitive ability,
developmental stage, clinical status, social circumstances, knowledge
and coping capacity. (Grade C)
Disclosure of HIV infection status should be encouraged by schoolgoing age (7-10 years) and should be achieved by 15 years of age.
(Grade C)
Health care professionals need to facilitate the process of disclosure
and when required play the lead role in the disclosure process. (Grade C)
Health care professional needs to continuously assess and educate
the child after disclosure. (Grade C)
6.1.4 School and Disclosure
Ahealthy school environment reduces the risk of HIV transmission, accommodates
students and staff infected with or affected by HIV, and maintains the
confidentiality of students and staff living with HIV.
There is a need for school policies that address issues raised by HIV infection
including disclosure, confidentiality, infection control and first aid practices
and so on, which can provide essential guidance to educators, reassurance
to families, students, and school staff members, and support for people with
the virus.
An HIV infected child's parent or guardian is not obliged to disclose the
student's HIV status to school personnel. Realistically in a need to know
situation, no more than two staff need to know if a pupil is affected or infected
by HIV. One would normally be the head teacher and the other a designated
staff member, ideally chosen by the pupil and parent, who can oversee the
child's education, care and well-being and provide supportive counselling
when necessary. The majority of infected children spend their school career
healthy, but they may need time off for medical appointments and may
occasionally have periods in hospital. The role of the head teacher will be to
support the designated staff member, to discuss any issues with him or her
and to instigate any discussion between parents and the school on issues
that arise concerning the pupil's education or well-being.247, Level 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
51
6.2
AGE APPROPRIATE EDUCATIONAL & LIFESTYLE ADVICE FOR
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
HIV infected children, adolescents and their caregivers should be given
appropriate advice regarding behaviour and lifestyle to minimize the risk of
HIV transmission. The advice provided must be appropriate to the age and
maturity of the child.
The risk of a young child infecting others is extremely small. Although HIV
has been isolated in the saliva, tears, urine and faeces, there is no evidence
that HIV can be acquired through casual contact with these sources.246, Level 9
Families and caregivers should be assured that sharing of household
utensils, linen, clothes, personal hygiene products and close daily interactions
(including kissing) are safe and do not result in the transmission of HIV.
Having an infected child in a day-care centre or school poses no risk to staff
or other children. No case has ever been recorded of HIV transmission from
child to child by playing, fighting or any other normal childhood interaction.
Although biting poses a theoretical risk of transmission, the risk is believed
to be extremely low. 249, Level 9 ; 250, Level 9 If an infected child has a cut or graze, this
should be dealt with in the normal manner following first aid procedures and
standard hygiene practices. Schools should be assisted to develop a norm
in which universal or standard precautions for infection control are routinely
employed by staff and students (see Appendix 9 for additional resources).
As the child grows up into adolescence, several pertinent issues must be
addressed (see following table). Disclosure of the diagnosis is important and
frank and open discussion is vital so he/she can participate in decisions
regarding treatments, care and prevention of transmission to others. Specific
issues regarding lifestyle or behaviour that potentially could transmit HIV,
especially sexual activity and substance abuse must be addressed. These
prevention messages should be regularly provided to HIV infected
adolescents at every opportunity.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Points to emphasize during counselling of adolescents with HIV
infection:251,Level 9; 252, Level 9
• The need for safer behaviours to protect their own health and the
health of others.
• Providing adequate and accurate information regarding factors that
influence HIV transmission and methods that can reduce the risk,
emphasizing that the most effective methods for preventing transmission
are those that protect non-infected persons against exposure to HIV
(e.g. sexual abstinence; if sexually active, practising safe sex by using
condoms, no needle-sharing).
• Identifying and correcting misconceptions regarding HIV transmission
and methods for reducing risk for transmission. e.g, use of HAART
does not eliminate the risk of transmitting HIV to others.
• Addressing the consequences of involvement in substance abuse.
• Referring to appropriate harm reduction treatment and drug rehabilitation
programmes (e.g. methadone replacement program) for those involved
in injecting drug use.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
53
REFERENCES
1
UNAIDS. Available from :
http://data.unaids.org/pub/EpiReport/2006/Epicore2006_27Oct06_en.pdf
2
HIV/AIDS reporting System Ministry of Health AIDS/STD Division
3
Kourtis AP, Lee FK, Abrams EJ, et al. Mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1: timing and
implications for prevention. Lancet Infect Dis. 2006 Nov;6(11):726
4
Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. Pediatric AIDS Clinical
Trials Group Protocol 076 Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1994 Nov 3;331(18):1173-1180.
5
Lallemant M, Jourdain G, Le Coeur S, et al. A trial of shortened zidovudine regimens to prevent mother-to-child transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Perinatal HIV
Prevention Trial (Thailand) Investigators. N Engl J Med. 2000 Oct 5;343:982-991
6
Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal HIV-1
transmission in Bangkok, Thailand: a randomised controlled trial. Bangkok Collaborative
Perinatal HIV Transmission Study Group. Lancet. 1999 Mar 6;353(9155):773-780.
7
Dabis F, Msellati P, Meda N et al. Six-month efficacy, tolerance, and acceptability of a short
regimen of oral zidovudine to reduce vertical transmission of HIV in breastfed children in
Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso: a double-blind placebo-controlled multicentre trial.
DITRAME Study Group. DIminution de la Transmission Mère-Enfant. Lancet. 1999 Mar
6;353(9155):786-792
8
Wiktor SZ, Ekpini E, Karon JM, et al. Short-course oral zidovudine for prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire: a randomised trial. Lancet.
1999 Mar 6;353(9155):781-785.
9
Leroy V, Karon JM, Alioum A, et al. West Africa PMTCT Study Group et al. Twenty-four
month efficacy of a maternal short-course zidovudine regimen to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV-1 in West Africa. AIDS. 2002 Mar 8;16(4):631-641.
10
Songok EM, Fujiyama Y, Tukei PM, et al. The use of short-course zidovudine to prevent
perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in rural Kenya. Am J Trop Med
Hyg. 2003 Jul;69(1):8-13.
11
Volmink J, Siegfried NL, van der Merwe L, et al. Antiretrovirals for reducing the risk of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan
24;(1):CD003510.
12
PETRA Study Team. Efficacy of three short-course regimens of zidovudine and lamivudine
in preventing early and late transmission of HIV-1 from mother to child in Tanzania, South
Africa, and Uganda (Petra study): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet. 2002; 359(9313):1178-1186
13
Moodley D, Moodley J, Coovadia H, et al. South African Intrapartum Nevirapine Trial
(SAINT) Investigators. et al. A multicenter randomized controlled trial of nevirapine versus
a combination of zidovudine and lamivudine to reduce intrapartum and early postpartum
mother-to-child transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type. J Infect. Dis. 2003
Mar 1;187(5):725-735.
14
Chaisilwattana P, Chokephaibulkit K, Chalermchockcharoenkit A, et al. Short-course
therapy with zidovudine plus lamivudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in Thailand. Clin Infect Dis. 2002 Dec 1;35(11):
1405-1413.
15
Mandelbrot L, Landreau-Mascaro A, Rekacewicz C, et al Lamivudine-zidovudine combination
for prevention of maternal-infant transmission of HIV-1. JAMA. 2001 Apr 25;285(16):
2083-2093.
16
Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose nevirapine
compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 in
Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet. 1999, 354:795-802.
17
Jackson KE, Jackson WL Jr. The right to health and the nevirapine case in South Africa.
N Engl J Med. 2003 Jun 12;348(24):2470-2471
18
Lallemant M, Jourdain G, Le Coeur S, et al. Perinatal HIV Prevention Trial (Thailand)
Investigators. Single-dose perinatal nevirapine plus standard zidovudine to prevent motherto-child transmission of HIV-1 in Thailand. N Engl J Med. 2004 Jul 15;351(3):217-228.
19
Dabis F, Balestre E, Braitstein P, et al. The Antiviral Therapy in Lower Income Countries
(ART-LINC) Study Group. Cohort Profile: Antiretroviral Therapy in Lower Income Countries
(ART-LINC): international collaboration of treatment cohorts. Int J Epidemiol. 2005
Oct;34(5):979-986.
20
European Collaborative Study. Mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection in the era of
highly active antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;40:458-465.
21
Tonwe-Gold B, Ekouevi D, Rouet F, et al. Highly active antiretroviral therapy for the
prevention of perinatal HIV transmission in Africa: Mother-To-Child HIV Transmission Plus,
Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, 2003-2004 [abstract 785]. In; Program and abstracts of the 12th
conference of retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (Boston). Alexandria, VA;
Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health, 2005.
22
Hawkins D, Blott M, Clayden, P, et al. BHIVA Guidelines Writing Committee. Guidelines for
the management of HIV infection in pregnant women and the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV. HIV Med, 2005, 6 (Suppl 2), 107-148.
23
Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of HIV in Pregnant Women, 2008.
24
Public Health Service Task Force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in
pregnant HIV-1-infected women for maternal health and interventions to reduce perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. Rockville (MD): U.S. Public Health Service; 2006
Oct 12. 61 p.
25
World Health Organisation (WHO). Technical consultation on the integration of HIV
interventions into maternal, newborn and child health services: Report of a WHO meeting.
Geneva: WHO, 2006.
26
Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal HIV-1
transmission in Bangkok, Thailand: a randomised controlled trial. Bangkok Collaborative
Perinatal HIV Transmission Study Group.Lancet 1999;353(9155):773-780
27
Jackson JB, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose nevirapine
compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 in
Kampala, Uganda: 18-month follow-up of the HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet. 2003
Sep 13;362(9387):859-868.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Leroy V, Sakarovitch C, Cortina-Borja M, et al. Is there a difference in the efficacy of peripartum
antiretroviral regimens in reducing mother-to-child transmission of HIV in Africa? AIDS.
2005 Nov 4;19(16):1865-1875.
29
Wade NA, Zielinski MA, Butsashvili M, et al. Decline in perinatal HIV transmission in New
York State (1997-2000). J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2004 Aug 15;36(5):1075-1082.
30
Gray GE, Urban M, Chersich MF, et al. A randomized trial of two postexposure prophylaxis
regimens to reduce mother-to-child HIV-1 transmission in infants of untreated mothers.
AIDS 2005;19:1289-1297.
31
Taha TE, Kumwenda NI, Gibbons A, et al. Short postexposure prophylaxis in newborn
babies to reduce mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1: NVAZ randomised clinical trial.
Lancet. 2003 Oct 11;362(9391):1171-1177.
32
Lorenzi P, Spicher VM, Laubereau B, et al. Antiretroviral therapies in pregnancy: maternal,
fetal and neonatal effects. Swiss HIV Cohort Study, the Swiss Collaborative HIV and
Pregnancy Study, and the Swiss Neonatal HIV Study. AIDS. 1998; 12(18): F241-F247.
33
Tuomala RE, Shapiro DE, Mofenson LM, et al. Antiretroviral therapy during pregnancy and
the risk of an adverse outcome. N Engl J Med. 2002 Jun 13;346(24):1863-1870.
34
Patel D, Thorne C, Fiore S, et al. European Collaborative Study. Does highly active
antiretroviral therapy increase the risk of congenital abnormalities in HIV infected women?
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2005 Sep 1;40(1):116-118
35
Bonacini M, Puoti M. Hepatitis C in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection:
Diagnosis, natural history, meta-analysis of sexual and vertical transmission, and
therapeutic issues. Arch Intern Med. 2000 160:3365-3373.
36
Doyle M, Atkins JT, Rivera-Matos IR. Congenital cytomegalovirus infection in infants
infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1.Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1996
Dec;15(12):1102-1106.
37
Kovacs A, Schluchter M, Easley K et al.Cytomegalovirus infection and HIV-1 disease
progression in infants born to HIV-1-infected women. Pediatric Pulmonary and
Cardiovascular Complications of Vertically Transmitted HIV Infection Study Group.N Engl
J Med. 1999 Jul 8;341(2):77-84.
38
Minkoff H, Remington JS, Holman S et al. Vertical transmission of toxoplasma by human
immunodeficiency virus-infected women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1997 Mar;176(3):555-559.
39
Tovo PA, Lazier L, Versace A. Hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections in children.
Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2005 Jun;18(3):261-266.
40
Schulte JM, Burkham S, Hamaker D, et al Syphilis among HIV-infected mothers and their
infants in Texas from 1988 to 1994. Sex Transm Dis. 2001 Jun;28(6):315-320.
41
Pillay T, Sturm AW, Khan M, et al. Vertical transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in
KwaZulu Natal: impact of HIV-1 co-infection. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2004 Jan;8(1):59-69.
42
Benson CA, Kaplan JE, Masur H, et al. CDC; National Institutes of Health; Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Treating opportunistic infections among HIV-infected adults
and adolescents: recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and the
HIV Medicine Association/Infectious Diseases Society of America. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2004 Dec 17;53(RR-15): 1-112. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2005 Apr
1;54(12):311.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
43
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Evaluation and treatment of the human immunodeficiency virus-1-exposed infant. Pediatrics 2004;114:497-505.
44
The European Collaborative Study. Mother-to-child transmission of HIV infection. Lancet
1988 Nov 5;2:1039-1043.
45
Bremer, JW, Lew JF, Cooper, et al. Diagnosis of infection with human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 by a DNA polymerase chain reaction assay among infants enrolled in the
Women and Infants' Transmission Study. J Pediatr 1996;129:198-207.
46
Working Group on Antiretroviral Therapy. Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in
Pediatric HIV Infection and Medical Management of HIV-Infected Children. National
Institutes of Health 2006 October 26 (updated February 28 2008).
47
Owens DK, Holodniy M, McDonald TW, et al. A metaanalytic evaluation of the polymerase
chain reaction for the diagnosis of HIV infection in infants. JAMA. 1996; 275:1342-1348.
48
Young
NL, Shaffer N, Chaowanachan T, et al. Bangkok Collaborative Perinatal HIV
Transmission Study Group Early Diagnosis of HIV-1-Infected Infants in Thailand Using
RNA and DNA PCR Assays Sensitive to Non-B Subtypes. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2000; 24:401-407.
49
Nelson RP Jr, Price LJ, Halsey AB et al. Diagnosis of pediatric human immunodeficiency
virus infection by means of a commercially available polymerase chain reaction gene
amplification. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1996;150:40-45.
50
Kline, NE; Schwarzwald, et al. False negative DNA polymerase chain reaction in an infant
with subtype C human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. The Paediatric Infectious
Disease Journal .2002; 21(9):885-886.
51
Saraswathy TS, Ng KP, Sinniah M. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 subtypes among
Malaysian intravenous drug users. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2000
Jun;31(2):283-286.
52
Tee KK, Saw TL, Pon CK, et al. The evolving molecular epidemiology of HIV type 1 among
injecting drug users (IDUs) in Malaysia. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2005 Dec;
21(12):1046-1050.
53
Nesheim S, Palumbo P, Sullivan K et al. Quantitative RNA testing for diagnosis of HIVinfected infants. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003;32:192-195.
54
Simonds RJ, Brown TM, Thea DM et al .Sensitivity and specificity of a qualitative RNA
detection assay to diagnose HIV infection in young infants. Perinatal AIDS Collaborative
Transmission Study. AIDS. 1998 Aug 20;12(12):1545-1549.
55
Ginsburg AS, Miller A, Wilfert CM. Diagnosis of pediatric human immunodeficiency virusinfection in resource-constrained settings. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2006; 25:1057-1064.
56
Fiscus SA, Wiener J, Abrams EJ, et al. Ultrasensitive p24 antigen assay for diagnosis of
perinatal human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J Clin Microbiol. 2007;45:22742277.
57
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for HIV: Recommendation Statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2005;143:32-37.
58
Nduati R, John G, Mbori-Ngacha D, et al .Effect of Breastfeeding and Formula Feeding on
Transmission of HIV-1: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2000;283: 1167-1174.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Miotti PG, Taha TE, Kumwenda NI, et al. HIV Transmission through breastfeeding: A Study
in Malawi. JAMA. 1999; 282: 744-749.
60
Thior I, Lockman S, Smeaton LM, et al, Mashi Study Team. Breastfeeding plus infant
zidovudine prophylaxis for 6 months vs formula feeding plus infant zidovudine for 1 month
to reduce mother-to-child HIV transmission in Botswana: a randomized trial: the Mashi
Study. JAMA. 2006;296:794-805.
61
Mbori-Ngacha D, Nduati R, John G, et al. Morbidity and mortality in breastfed and formula-fed
infants of HIV-1-infected women: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2001 Nov
21;286(19):2413-2420.
62
Fox MP, Brooks D, Kuhn L, et al. Reduced Mortality Associated With Breast-FeedingAcquired HIV Infection and Breast-Feeding Among HIV-Infected Children in Zambia. J
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2008;48:90-96.
63
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Management of HIV in Pregnancy
Guideline No. 39, April 2004.
64
Burdge, DR, Money DM, Forbes JC, et al. The Canadian HIV Trials Network Working
Group on Vertical HIV Transmission Canadian consensus guidelines for the care of
HIV-positive
pregnant
women:
putting
recommendations
into
practice.
CMAJ.
2003;168:1683-1688.
65
WHO/ UNICEFF 2006. New Data on the Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV
and Their Policy Implications: conclusions and recommendations. WHO Technical Consultation
on Behalf of the UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/UNAIDS Inter-Agency Task Team on Mother-tochild Transmission of HIV. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001 (WHO/RHR/01.28)
(http://www.who.int/reproductive-health/publications/new_data_prevention_mtct_hiv/index.html.
66
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Pekeliling Ketua Pengarah Kesihatan Bil. 5/200. Polisi
Penyusuan susu ibu bagi bayi-bayi yang dilahirkan oleh ibu-ibu yang HIV positif.
67
Coutsoudis A, Pillay K, Spooner E, et al. Influence of infant-feeding patterns on early motherto-child transmission of HIV-1 in Durban, South Africa: a prospective cohort study. South
African Vitamin A Study Group. Lancet. 1999 Aug 7;354(9177):471-476
68
Thaithumyanon P, Thisyakorn U, Punnahitananda S, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccine in children born to HIV-1 infected women. Southeast
Asian J Trop Med Public Health 2000;31:482-486
69
Ryder RW, Oxtoby MJ, Mvula M, et al .Safety and immunogenicity of bacille Calmette-Guerin,
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis, and oral polio vaccines in newborn children in Zaire infected
with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Pediatr. 1993 May;122(5 Pt 1):697-702.
70
Besnard M, Sauvion S, Offredo C, et al. Bacillus Calmette-Guérin infection after vaccination
of human immunodeficiency virus-infected children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1993 Dec;12(12):
993-997.
71
Lallemant-Le Coeur S, Lallemant M, Cheynier D,et al. Bacillus Calmette-Guerin immunization
in infants born to HIV-1-seropositive mothers. AIDS. 1991 Feb;5(2):195-199.
72
CDC. BCG vaccination and pediatric HIV infection - Rwanda, 1988-1990. MMWR
1991;40:833-836.
57
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
73
O'Brien RJ & Perriens JH. Preventive therapy for tuberculosis in HIV infection: the
promise and the reality. AIDS. 1995 Jul;9(7):665-673.
74
Hesseling AC, Schaaf HS, Gie RP, et al. A critical review of diagnostic approaches used in
the diagnosis of childhood tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2002 Dec;6(12):1038-1045.
75
Hofstadler G, Schmitt K, Tulzer G et al . BCG lymphadenitis in an HIV-infected child 9.5
years after vaccination. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 1998 Sep;12(9):677-680.
76
Rosenfeldt V, PaerregaardA& Valerius NH. Disseminated infection with Bacillus Calmette-Guerin
in a child with advanced HIV disease. Scand J Infect Dis. 1997;29(5):526-527.
77
Bhat GJ, Diwan VK, Chintu C et al. Related Articles, HIV, BCG and TB in children: a case
control study in Lusaka, Zambia. J Trop Pediatr. 1993 Aug;39(4):219-223.
78
Marsh BJ, Von Reyn CF, Edwards J. The risks and benefits of childhood bacille Calmette-Guerin
immunization among adults with AIDS. International MAC study groups. AIDS.
1997;11:669-672.
79
Arbelaez MP, Nelson KE, Munoz A. Related Articles, BCG vaccine effectiveness in
preventing tuberculosis and its interaction with human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Int J Epidemiol. 2000 Dec;29(6):1085-1091.
80
Ion-Nedelcu N, Dobrescu A, Strebel PM, et al. Vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis
and HIV infection. Lancet. 1994 Jan 1;343(8888):51-52.
81
Chitsike I, Van Furth R. Paralytic poliomyelitis associated with live oral poliomyelitis
vaccine in child with HIV infection in Zimbabwe: case report. BMJ. 1999 Mar
27;318(7187):841-843.
82
Barbi M, Biffi MR, Binda S, Clerici-Schoeller M, Ferraris G, Luraschi C, et al . Immunization
in children with HIV seropositivity at birth: antibody response to polio vaccine and tetanus
toxoid. AIDS. 1992 Dec;6(12):1465-1469.
83
Lepage P, Dabis F, Msellati P, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of high-dose EdmonstonZagreb measles vaccine in children with HIV-1 infection. A cohort study in Kigali, Rwanda.
Am J Dis Child. 1992;146:550-555.
84
Krasinski K, Borkowsky W. Measles and measles immunity in children infected with human
immunodeficiency virus. JAMA. 1989 May 5;261(17):2512-2516.
85
Thaithumyanon P, Punnahitananda S, Thisyakorn U, et al. Immune responses to measles
immunization and the impacts on HIV-infected children. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public
Health. 2000 Dec;31(4):658-662.
86
Lima M, De Menezes Succi RC, Nunes Dos Santos AM. Rubella immunization in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected children: cause for concern in vaccination
strategies. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2004;23:604-607.
87
Aurpibul L, Puthanakit T, Siriaksorn S, et al. Prevalence of protective antibody against
measles in HIV-infected children with immune recovery after highly active antiretroviral
therapy.HIV Med. 2006 Oct;7(7):467-470.
88
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of varicella, recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), MMWR Recomm Rep
1996;45(RR-11):1-36.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Bekker V, Scherpbier H, Pajkrt D. Persistent humoral immune defect in highly active
antiretroviral therapy-treated children with HIV-1 infection: loss of specific antibodies
against attenuated vaccine strains and natural viral infection. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e315-322.
90
Arpadi SM, Markowitz LE, Baughman AL, et al. Measles antibody in vaccinated human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected children. Pediatrics.1996 May;97(5):653-657.
91
Brunell PA, Vimal V, Sandu M, et al. Abnormalities of measles antibody response in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum
Retrovirol. 1995 Dec 15;10(5):540-548.
92
Moss W, Clements C, Halsey N. Immunization of children at risk of infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Bull WHO 2003;81:61-70.
93
Zuccotti GV, Riva E, Flumine P, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination in infants of mothers infected
with human immunodeficiency virus. J Pediatr. 1994 Jul; 125(1):70-72.
94
Watanaveeradej V, Samakoses R, Kerdpanich A, et al. Antibody response to hepatitis B
vaccine in infants of HIV-positive mothers. Int J Infect Dis. 2002 Sep;6(3):240-241.
95
Zuin G, Principi N, Tornaghi R, et al. Impaired response to hepatitis B vaccine in HIV
infected children. Vaccine. 1992;10(12):857-860.
96
Rutstein RM, Rudy B, Codispoti C, et al. Response to hepatitis B immunization by infants
exposed to HIV.AIDS. 1994 Sep;8(9):1281-1284.
97
Scolfaro C, Fiammengo P, Balbo L, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination in HIV-1-infected children:
double efficacy doubling the paediatric dose. AIDS. 1996 Sep;10(10):1169-1170.
98
Choudhury SA, Peters VB. Responses to hepatitis B vaccine boosters in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1995;14:65-67.
99
Gibb D, Spoulou V, Giacomelli A, et al. Antibody responses to Haemophilus influenzae
Type B and Streptococcus pneumoniae vaccines in children with human immunodeficiency
virus infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1995 Feb;14(2):129-135.
100
Rutstein RM, Rudy BJ, Cnaan A. Response of human immunodeficiency virus-exposed
and - infected infants to Haemophilus Influenzae type B conjugate vaccine. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 1996;150:838-841
101
Read JS, Frasch CE, Rich K, et al. The immunogenicity of Haemophilus Influenzae type B
conjugate vaccines in children born to human immunodeficiency virus-infected women.
Women and Infants Transmission Study Group. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17:391-397.
102
Madhi SA, Petersen K, Khoosal M, et al. Reduced effectiveness of Haemophilus
Influenzae type B conjugate vaccine in children with a high prevalence of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2002 Apr;21(4):315-321
103
Madhi SA, Kuwanda L, Saarinen L, et al. Immunogenicity and effectiveness of
Haemophilus Influenzae type b conjugate vaccine in HIV infected and uninfected African
children. Vaccine. 2005 Dec 1;23(48-49):5517-5525
104
De Martino M, Podda A, Galli L, et al. Acellular pertussis vaccine in children with perinatal
human immunodeficiency virus-type 1 infection. Vaccine. 1997 Aug;15(11):1235-1238.
105
Rosenblatt HM, Song LY, Nachman SA, et al. Tetanus immunity after diphtheria, tetanus
toxoids, and acellular pertussis vaccination in children with clinically stable HIV infection.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Sep;116(3):698-703
59
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
106
Frankel RE, Virata M, Hardalo C, et al. Invasive pneumococcal disease: clinical features,
serotypes, and antimicrobial resistance patterns in cases involving patients with and
without human immunodeficiency virus infection. Clin Infect Dis. 1996;23:577-584.q
107
King JC Jr, Vink PE, Farley JJ, et al. Comparison of the safety and immunogenicity of a
pneumococcal
conjugate
with
a
licensed
polysaccharide
vaccine
in
human
immunodeficiency virus and non-human immunodeficiency virus-infected children. Pediatr
Infect Dis J. 1996 Mar;15(3):192-196.
108
Andiman WA, Mezger J, Shapiro E. Invasive bacterial infections in children born to women
infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Pediatr .1994;124:846.
109
Mao C, Harper M, McIntosh K ,et al. Invasive pneumococcal infections in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected children. J Infect Dis 1996; 173:870-876.
110
Nachman S, Kim S, King J, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of a heptavalent
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in infants with human immunodeficiency virus type 1
infection. Pediatrics. 2003 Jul;112(1 Pt 1):66-73.
111
Rose MA, Schubert R, Strnad N, et al. Priming of Immunological Memory by
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine in Children Unresponsive to 23-Valent Polysaccharide
Pneumococcal Vaccine. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2005 October; 12(10): 1216–1222.
112
Abzug, M J, Pelton SI, Song Lin-Ye, et al. Immunogenicity, safety, and predictors of
response after a pneumococcal conjugate and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine
series in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children receiving highly active
antiretroviral therapy. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 2006; 25:920–929.
113
Madhi SA, Adrian P, Kuwanda L, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy of a 9-valent
conjugate pneumococcal vaccine in human immunodeficient virus infected and non-infected
children in the absence of a booster dose of vaccine. Vaccine. 2006 Sep 20.
114
Spoulou VI, Tsoumas DL, Papaevangelou VG, et al. Immunogenicity and immunological
memory induced by a 7-valent pneumococcal CRM197 conjugate vaccine in symptomatic
HIV-1 infected children. Vaccine. 2005 Nov 16;23(46-47):5289-5293.
115
Tangsinmankong N, Kamchaisatian W, Day NK, et al. Immunogenicity of 23-valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine in children with human immunodeficiency virus
undergoing highly active antiretroviral therapy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2004
May;92(5):558-564.
116
Klugman KP, Madhi SA, Huebner RE, et al. A trial of a 9-valent pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine in children with and those without HIV infection. N Engl J Med. 2003 Oct
2;349(14):1341-1348.
117
Peñaranda M, Falco V, Payeras A, et al. Effectiveness of polysaccharide pneumococcal
vaccine in HIV-infected patients: a case-control study. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Oct
1;45(7):e82-87.
118
Levin MJ, Gershon AA, Weinberg A, et al. Immunization of HIV-infected children with
varicella vaccine. J Pediatr. 2001 Aug;139(2):305-310.
119
Levin MJ, Gershon AA, Weinberg A, et al. Administration of live varicella vaccine to HIVinfected children with current or past significant depression of CD4(+) T cells. J Infect Dis.
2006 Jul 15;194(2):247-255.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Vermund SH, Holland C, Wilson CM, et al .Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and HIV
status in adolescent girls: the Reaching for Excellence in Adolescent Care and Health
(REACH) Project. Int Conf AIDS. 1998; 12: 142-143.
121
Joura EA, Leodolter S, Hernandez-Avila M, et al. Efficacy of a quadrivalent prophylactic
human papillomavirus (types 6, 11, 16, and 18) L1 virus-like-particle vaccine against
high-grade vulval and vaginal lesions: a combined analysis of three randomised clinical
trials. Lancet. 2007;369:1693-1702.
122
Graham SM, Mtitimila EI, Kamanga HS, et al. Clinical presentation and outcome of
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in Malawian children.Lancet. 2000 Jan 29;355
(9201):369-73. Lancet. 2000 Mar 4;355(9206):850.
123
Chintu C, Mudenda V, Lucas S, et al. Lung diseases at necropsy in African children dying
from respiratory illnesses: a descriptive necropsy study. Lancet. 2002 Sep 28;360
(9338):985-990.
124
Madhi SA, Cutland C, Ismail K, et al. Ineffectiveness of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
prophylaxis and the importance of bacterial and viral coinfections in African children with
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis. 2002.35:1120-1126.
125
Thea DM, Lambert G, Weedon J, et al. Benefit of primary prophylaxis before 18 months of
age in reducing the incidence of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and early deaths in a
cohort of 112 human immunodeficiency virus–infected infants. Pediatrics. 1996; 97:59–64.
126
Coutsoudis A, Pillay K, Spooner E, et al. Routinely available cotrimoxazole prophylaxis and
occurrence of respiratory and diarrhoeal morbidity in infants born to HIV-infected mothers
in South Africa. S Afr Med J. 2005 May;95(5):339-345.
127
Chokephaibulkit K, Wanachiwanawin D, Chearskul S, et al. Pneumocystis carinii severe
pneumonia among human immunodeficiency virus-infected children in Thailand: the effect
of a primary prophylaxis strategy. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1999 Feb;18(2):147-152.
128
Chintu C, Bhat GJ, Walker AS, et al. Co-trimoxazole as prophylaxis against opportunistic
infections in HIV-infected Zambian children (CHAP): a double-blind randomised
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2005 Feb 26-Mar 4;365(9461):749-750.
129
WHO Expert Consultation on Cotrimoxazole Prophylaxis in HIV Infection Geneva
International Conference Centre Report of a WHO Expert Consultation, Geneva, 10-12
May 2005.
130
Paediatric Formulary Committee. British National Formulary for Children
London: BMJ
Publishing Group, 2006.
131
McIntosh K, Cooper E, Xu J, et al. Toxicity and efficacy of daily vs. weekly dapsone for
prevention of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in children infected with human
immunodeficiency virus. ACTG 179 Study Team. AIDS Clinical Trials Group.Pediatr Infect
Dis J. 1999 May;18(5):432-439.
132
US Public Health Service and Infectious Diseases Society of America, 1999 USPHS /IDSA
guidelines for the prevention of opportunistic infections in persons infected with human
immunodeficiency virus. MMWR Morb Wkly Rep. 1999; 48 (RR- 10) : 1-6.
133
Principi N, Marchisio P, Onorato J, et al. Long-term administration of aerosolized
pentamidine as primary prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in infants and
children with symptomatic human immunodeficiency virus infection. The Italian Pediatric
Collaborative Study Group on Pentamidine. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol.
1996 Jun 1;12(2):158-163.
61
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
134
Gibb DM, Duong T, Tookey PA, et al. National Study of HIV in Pregnancy and Childhood
Collaborative HIV Paediatric Study. Decline in mortality, AIDS, and hospital admissions in
perinatally
HIV-1
infected
children
in
the
United
Kingdom
and
Ireland.
BMJ.
2003;327:1019.
135
Doerholt K, Duong T, Tookey P, et al. Outcomes for human immunodeficiency virus1-infected infants in the United kingdom and Republic of Ireland in the era of effective
antiretroviral therapy. Pediatr Infect Dis J, 2006 May;25(5):420-426.
136
Gortmaker SL, Hughes M, Cervia J, et al .Effect of combination therapy including protease
inhibitors on mortality among children and adolescents infected with HIV-1. N. Engl J Med.
2001 Nov 22;345(21):1522-1528.
137
Granados JMS, Amador JTR, Miguel SF, et al. Impact of highly active antiretroviral
therapy on the morbidity and mortality in Spanish human immunodeficiency virus-infected
children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2003;22:863-867.
138
De Martino M, Tovo PA, Balducci M, et al. Reduction in mortality with availability of
antiretroviral therapy for children with perinatal HIV-1 infection. Italian Register for HIV
Infection in Children and the Italian National AIDS Registry. JAMA. 2000 Jul 12;284(2):
190-197.
139
McConnell MS, Byers RH, Frederick T, et al; Pediatric Spectrum of HIV Disease
Consortium. Trends in antiretroviral therapy use and survival rates for a large cohort of
HIV-infected children and adolescents in the United States, 1989-2001. J Acquir Immune
Defic Syndr. 2005 Apr 1;38(4):488-494.
140
Resino S, Resino R, Maria Bellón J, et al. Spanish Group of Pediatric HIV Infection. Clinical
outcomes improve with highly active antiretroviral therapy in vertically HIV type1-infected children. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Jul 15;43(2):243-252.
141
Bertolli J, Hsu HW, Sukalac T T, et al. Hospitalization trends among children and youths
with perinatal human immunodeficiency virus infection, 1990-2002. Pediatr Infect Dis J.
2006 Jul;25(7):628-633.
142
Gona P, Van Dyke RB, Williams PL, et al Incidence of opportunistic and other infections in
HIV-infected children in the HAART era. JAMA. 2006 Jul 19;296(3):292-300.
143
Verweel G, Van Rossum AM, Hartwig NG, et al. Treatment with highly active antiretroviral
therapy in human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected children is associated with a
sustained effect on growth. Pediatrics. 2002 Feb;109(2):E25.
144
Puthanakit T, Oberdorfer A, Akarathum N, et al. Efficacy of highly active antiretroviral
therapy in HIV-infected children participating in Thailand’s National Access to Antiretroviral
Program. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Jul 1;41(1):100-107.
145
Dunn D; HIV Paediatric Prognostic Markers Collaborative Study Group. Short-term risk of
disease progression in HIV-1-infected children receiving no antiretroviral therapy or
zidovudine monotherapy: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2003 Nov 15;362(9396):1605-1611.
146
Faye A, Bertone C, Teglas JP, et al. Early multitherapy including a protease inhibitor for
human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected infants.Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2002
Jun;21(6):518-525.
147
Aboulker JP, Babiker A, Chaix ML, et al.
Highly active antiretroviral therapy started in
infants under 3 months of age: 72-week follow-up for CD4 cell count, viral load and drug
resistance outcome. AIDS. 2004 Jan 23;18(2):237-245.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Faye A, Le Chenadec J, Dollfus C et al. Early versus deferred antiretroviral multidrug
therapy in infants infected with HIV type 1. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39(11):1692-1698.
149
Luzuriaga K, McManus M, Mofenson L, et al. PACTG 356 Investigators. A trial of three
antiretroviral regimens in HIV-1-infected children. N Engl J Med. 2004;350 (24):2471-2480.
150
Walker AS, Doerholt K, Sharland M, et al. Response to Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy
Varies With Age: the UK and Ireland Collaborative HIV. Paediatric Study AIDS
2004;18:1915-1924.
151
Chearskul P, Chokephaibulkit K, Chearskul S, et al. Effect of antiretroviral therapy in
human immunodeficiency virus-infected children. J Med Assoc Thai. 2005 Nov;88 Suppl
8:S221-231.
152
Resino S, Alvaro-Meca A, de José MI, et al. Low immunologic response to highly active
antiretroviral therapy in naive vertically human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected
children with severe immunodeficiency. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2006 Apr;25(4):365-368.
153
Sharland M, Blanche S, Castelli G, et al; PENTA Steering Committee. PENTA guidelines
for the use of antiretroviral therapy, 2004. HIV Med. 2004 Jul;5 Suppl 2:61-86.
154
World Health Organization [WHO]. Department of HIV / AIDS. Antiretroviral therapy for HIV
infection in infants and children: towards universal access: Recommendations for a
public health approach. 2007. [147] p.
155
Tee KK, Kamarulzaman A, Ng KP. Short communication: low prevalence of genotypic drug
resistance mutations among antiretroviral-naive HIV type 1 patients in Malaysia. AIDS Res
Hum Retroviruses. 2006 Feb;22(2):121-124.
156
Grant RM, Hecht FM, Warmerdam M, et al. Time trends in primary HIV-1 drug resistance
among recently infected persons. JAMA 2002, 288:181–188.
157
Wensing AM, Van de Vijver DA, Angarano G, et al. Prevalence of drug-resistant HIV-1
variants in untreated individuals in Europe: implications for clinical management. J Infect
Dis. 2005;192(6):958-966.
158
Little SJ, Holte S, Routy JP, et al. Antiretroviral-drug resistance among patients recently
infected with HIV. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:385–894.
159
UK Collaborative Group on Monitoring the Transmission of HIV Drug Resistance. Analysis
of prevalence of HIV-1 drug resistance in primary infections in the United Kingdom. BMJ
2001; 322:1087–1088.
160
Ammaranond P, Cunningham P, Oelrichs R, et al. No increase in protease resistance and
a decrease in reverse transcriptase resistance mutations in primary HIV-1 infection: 19922001.AIDS. 2003 Jan 24;17(2):264-267.
161
Descamps D, Joly V, Flandre P, et al. Genotypic resistance analyses in nucleosidepretreated patients failing an indinavir containing regimen: results from a randomized
comparative trial: (Novavir ANRS 073).J Clin Virol. 2005 Jun;33(2):99-103.
162
Bezemer D, Jurriaans S, Prins M, et al . Declining trend in transmission of drug-resistant
HIV-1 in Amsterdam. AIDS. 2004 Jul 23;18(11):1571-1577.
163
Parker MM, Wade N, Lloyd RM Jr, et al .Prevalence of genotypic drug resistance among
a cohort of HIV-infected newborns. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Mar 1;32(3):292297.
63
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
164
Masquelier B, Neau D, Chene G et al. Mechanism of virologic failure after substitution of
a protease inhibitor by nevirapine in patients with suppressed plasma HIV-1 RNA. J Acquir
Immune Defic Syndr. 2001 Dec 1;28(4):309-312.
165
Tee KK, Kamarulzaman A, Ng KP. Prevalence and pattern of drug resistance mutations
among antiretroviral-treated HIV-1 patients with suboptimal virological response in
Malaysia.Med Microbiol Immunol. 2006;195(2):107-112.
166
Nolan M, Fowler MG, Mofenson LM. Antiretroviral Prophylaxis of Perinatal HIV1 transmission
and the potential impact of antiretroviral resistance. JAIDS. 2002;30:216-229.
167
Eastman PS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral genotypic zidovudine
resistance and infrequent failure of zidovudine therapy to prevent perinatal transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group Protocol
076.J Infect Dis. 1998 Mar;177(3):557-564.
168
Welles SL, Pitt J, Colgrove R, et al. HIV-1 genotypic zidovudine drug resistance and the
risk of maternal-infant transmission in the women and infants transmission study. The
Women and Infants Transmission Study Group. AIDS. 2000;14(3):263-271.
169
Palumbo P, Holland B, Dobbs T, et al. Antiretroviral resistance mutations among pregnant
human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected women and their newborns in the United
States: vertical transmission and clades. J Infect Dis. 2001 Nov 1;184(9):1120-1126.
170
Clarke JR, Braganza R, Mirza A, et al. Rapid development of genotypic resistance to
lamivudine when combined with zidovudine in pregnancy. J Med Virol. 1999 Nov;
59(3):364-368.
171
Cunningham CK. Chaix ML. Rekacewicz C, et al Development of resistance mutations in
women receiving standard antiretroviral therapy who received intrapartum nevirapine to
prevent perinatal human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transmission: a substudy of
pediatric AIDS clinical trials group protocol 316. Journal Infect Dis 2002;186:181-186.
172
Shet A, Berry L, Mohri H,
et al Tracking the prevalence of transmitted antiretroviral
drug-resistant HIV-1: a decade of experience. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2006 ;41(4):
439-446.
173
CASCADE Virology Collaboration. The impact on transmitted drug resistance on the
natural history of HIV infection and response to first-line therapy. AIDS. 2006 20: 21-28.
174
Perno CF, Cozzi-Lepri, Balotta C, et al. Secondary Mutations in the Protease Region of
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Virologic Failure in Drug-Naive Patients Treated with
Protease Inhibitor–Based Therapy JID 2001;184:983-991.
175
Fox J, Dustan S, McClure M, et al. Transmitted drug-resistant HIV-1 in primary HIV-1
infection; incidence, evolution and impact on response to antiretroviral therapy. HIV
Medicine. 2006; 7(7): 477-483.
176
WHO guidelines for Surveillance of HIV Drug Resistance in newly diagnosed and
treatment –naïve HIV subjects 2003.
177
Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-Infected Adults and Adolescents
Developed by the DHHS Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents - A
Working Group of the Office of AIDS Research Advisory Council (OARAC), October 10,
2006.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
De Luca A, Cozzi-Lepri A, Antinori A, et al. Lopinavir/ritonavir or efavirenz plus two
nucleoside analogues as first-line antiretroviral therapy: a non-randomized comparison.
Antivir Ther. 2006;11(5):609-618.
179
MacArthur RD, Novak RM, Peng G, et al. A comparison of three highly active antiretroviral
treatment strategies consisting of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors,
protease inhibitors, or both in the presence of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
as initial therapy (CPCRA 058 FIRST Study): a long-term randomised trial. Lancet. 2006
Dec 16;368(9553):2125-2135.
180
Chou R, Fu R, Huffman LH, et al. Initial highly-active antiretroviral therapy with a protease
inhibitor versus a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor: discrepancies between
direct and indirect meta-analyses. Lancet. 2006 Oct 28;368(9546):1503-1515.
181
Bartlett JA, Fath MJ, Demasi R, et al. An updated systematic overview of triple combination
therapy in antiretroviral-naive HIV-infected adults. AIDS. 2006 Oct 24;20(16):2051-2064.
182
Nachman SA, Lindsey JC, Moye J, et al. Growth of human immunodeficiency virusinfected children receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2005
Apr;24(4):352-7.
183
Verweel G, Van Rossum AM, Hartwig Ng, et al. Treatment with highly active antiretroviral
therapy in human immunodeficiency virus type 1- infected children is associated with a
sustained effect on growth. Pediatrics. 2002 Feb;109(2):E25.
184
Lindsey JC, Malee KM, Brouwers P, et al. PACTG 219C Study Team. Neurodevelopmental
functioning in HIV-infected infants and young children before and after the introduction of
protease inhibitor-based highly active antiretroviral therapy. Pediatrics. 2007 Mar;
119(3):e681-693
185
Raboud JM, Montaner JS, Conway B, et al. Wainberg MA, Robinson P, Myers M, Hall D.
Suppression of plasma viral load below 20 copies/ml is required to achieve a long-term
response to therapy. AIDS. 1998 Sep 10;12(13):1619-1624.
186
Powderly WG, Saaga MS, Chapman S, et al. Predictors of optimal virological response to
potent antiretroviral therapy AIDS 1999;13:1873–1880.
187
Maggiolo F, Migliorino M, Pirali A, et al. Duration of Viral Suppression in Patients on Stable
Therapy for HIV-1 Infection Is Predicted by Plasma HIV RNA Level After 1 Month of
Treatment .JAIDS. 2000;25:36-43.
188
Bekker V, Scherpbier HJ, Steingrover R, et al. Viral dynamics after starting first line HAART
in HIV-1 infected children. AIDS 2006;20:517-523.
189
Havlir DV, Bassett R, Levitan D, et al. Prevalence and predictive value of intermittent
viremia with combination hiv therapy.JAMA. 2001 Jul 11;286(2):171-179.
190
Sklar PA, Ward DJ, Baker RK, et al. Prevalence and clinical correlates of HIV viremia
(‘blips’) in patients with previous suppression below the limits of quantification. AIDS.
2002;16(15):2035-2041.
191
Mira JA, Macias J, Nogales C, et al. Transient rebounds of low-level viraemia among HIVinfected patients under HAART are not associated with virological or immunological failure.
Antivir Ther. 2002;7(4):251-256.
65
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
192
Sungkanuparph S, Overton ET, Seyfried W. Intermittent episodes of detectable HIV
viremia in patients receiving nonnucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitor-based or
protease inhibitor-based highly active antiretroviral therapy regimens are equivalent in
incidence and prognosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;1;41(9):1326-1332.
193
Nettles RE, Kieffer TL, Kwon P, et al. Intermittent HIV-1 viremia (Blips) and drug resistance
in patients receiving HAART.JAMA. 2005 Feb 16;293(7):817-829.
194
Di Mascio M, Markowitz M, Louie M, et al. Viral blip dynamics during highly active
antiretroviral therapy. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(22):12165-12172.
195
Miller LG, Golin CE, Liu H, et al. No evidence of an association between transient HIV
viremia (“Blips”) and lower adherence to the antiretroviral medication regimen. J Infect Dis.
2004 ;189:1487-96.
196
Easterbrook PJ, Ives N, Waters A, et al. The natural history and clinical significance of
intermittent viraemia in patients with initial viral suppression to < 400 copies/ml. AIDS
2002; 16:1521-1527.
197
Moore RD, Keruly JC. CD4+ cell count 6 years after commencement of highly active
antiretroviral therapy in persons with sustained virologic suppression. Clin Infect Dis. 2007
Feb 1;44(3):441-446.
198
Walker SA, Doerholt K, Sharland M, et al Response to highly active antiretroviral therapy
varies with age: the UK and Ireland Collaborative HIV paediatric study. AIDS.
2004;18:1915-1924.
199
Flynn PM, Rudy BJ, Douglas SD, et al.
Virologic and immunologic outcomes after 24
weeks in HIV type 1-infected adolescents receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy.J
Infect Dis. 2004 Jul 15;190(2):271-279.
200
Garcia F, De Lazzari E, Plana M, et al. Long-term CD4+ T-cell response to highly active
antiretroviral therapy according to baseline CD4+ T-cell count. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr. 2004 Jun 1;36(2):702-13.
201
Watson DC, Farley JJ. Efficacy of and adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy in
children infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1999
Aug;18(8):682-689.
202
Paterson DL, Swindells S, Mohr J, et al. Adherence to protease inhibitor therapy and
outcomes in patients with HIV infection. Ann Intern Med. 2000 Jul 4;133(1):21-30. Erratum
in: Ann Intern Med 2002 Feb 5;136(3):253.
203
Van Dyke RB, Lee S, Johnson GM, et al. Reported adherence as a determinant of
response
to
highly
active
antiretroviral
therapy
in
children
who
have
human
immunodeficiency virus infection. Pediatrics 2002; 109(4):e61.
204
Katko E, Johnson GM, Fowler SL, et al. Assessment of adherence with medications in
human immunodeficiency virus-infected children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2001 Dec;
20(12):1174-1176.
205
Ickovics JR, Meade CS. Adherence to antiretroviral therapy among patients with HIV: a
critical link between behavioral and biomedical sciences. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2002 Dec 15;31 Suppl 3:S98-102.
206
Wiener, L., Riekert, K., Ryder, C, et al. Assessing medication adherence in adolescents
when electronic monitoring is not feasible. AIDS Patient Care and STDs. 2004; 18:
527–538.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Reddington C, Cohen J, Baldillo A et al. Adherence to medication regimens among
children with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2000; 19:11481153.
208
Shelburne SA, Montes MM, Hamill RJ. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome:
more answers, more questions.J Antimicrob Chemother. 2006 Feb;57(2):167-170.
209
Murdoch DM, Venter WD, Van Rie A et al. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS): review of common infectious manifestations and treatment options. AIDS Res Ther.
2007 May 8;4:9.
210
Puthanakit T, Oberdorfer P, Akarathum N, et al. Immune reconstitution syndrome after
highly active antiretroviral therapy in human immunodeficiency virus-infected thai children.
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2006 Jan;25(1):53-58.
211
Lee JC, Boechat MI, Belzer M, et al. Thymic volume, T-cell populations, and parameters
of thymopoiesis in adolescent and adult survivors of HIV infection acquired in infancy.
AIDS. 2006; 21:667-674.
212
Flynn PM, Rudy BJ, Lindsey JC, et al. PACTG 381 Study Team. Long-term observation of
adolescents initiating HAART therapy: three-year follow-up. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses.
2007 Oct;23(10):1208-1214.
213
Sharland M, Blanche S, Castelli G, et al. PENTA Steering Committee. PENTA guidelines
for the use of antiretroviral therapy, 2004. HIV Med. 2004 Jul;5 Suppl 2:61-86.
214
Machado DM, Fernandes SC, Freire WS, et al . Genotypic resistance profiles and
subtypes of HIV-1 in brazilian children failing HAART. Int Conf AIDS. 2002 Jul 7-12; 14.
215
Chaix ML, Rouet F, Kouakoussui K ,et al. Genotypic Human Immunodeficiency Virus type
1 Drug Resistance in HAART treated children in Abidjan, Cote d’ Ivoire. Pediatr Infect Dis
J .2005:24: 1072-1076.
216
World Health Organization. HIV/AIDS Topics. Palliative Care.
<http://www.who.int/hiv/topics/palliative/PalliativeCare/en/>.
217
World Health Organization. HIV/AIDS UNAIDS Publications. AIDS: Palliative Care
http://data.unaids.org/Publications/IRC-pub05/jc453-pallicare-tu_en.pdf.
218
Mofenson LM, Oleske J, Serchuck L et al; CDC; National Institutes of Health; Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Treating opportunistic infections among HIV-exposed and
infected children: recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004 Dec 3;53(RR-14):
1-92. Erratum in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2006 Aug 4;55(30):824.
219
Gona P, Van Dyke RB, Williams PL et al. GR 3rd.Incidence of Opportunistic and Other
Infections in HIV-Infected Children in the HAART Era JAMA. 2006 Jul 19;296(3):292-300.
220
Ylitalo N, Brogly S, Hughes MD, et al. Risk factors for opportunistic illnesses in children
with human immunodeficiency virus in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2006 Aug;160(8):778-787.
221
Pierre R, Steel-Duncan JC, Evans-Gilbert T, et al. CDC-defined diseases and opportunistic
infections in Jamaican children with HIV/AIDS. West Indian Med J. 2004 Oct;53(5):
315-321.
67
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
222
Madhivanan P, Mothi SN, Kumarasamy N, et al. Clinical manifestations of HIV infected
children. Indian J Pediatr. 2003 Aug;70(8):615-620.
223
Sirisanthana V,
Sirisanthana T. Disseminated Penicillium marneffei infection in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1995 Nov;14(11):935-940.
224
Grimwade K, Swingler GH. Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis for opportunistic infections in
children with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Jan 25;(1):CD003508.
225
Madhi SA, Petersen K, Khoosal M, et al. Reduced effectiveness of Haemophilus
influenzae type b conjugate vaccine in children with a high prevalence of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2002 Apr;21(4):315-321.
226
Kaplan JE, Masur H & Holmes KK; USPHS; Infectious Disease Society of America.
Guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among HIV-infected persons-2002.
Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service and the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2002 Jun 14;51(RR-8):1-52.
227
Evans JA, Gibb DM, Holland FJ, et al. Malignancies in UK children with HIV infection
acquired from mother to child transmission. Arch Dis Child. 1997;76(4):330-333.
228
Biggar RJ, Frisch M, Goedert JJ. Risk of cancer in children with AIDS. AIDS-Cancer Match
Registry Study Group. JAMA. 2000 Jul 12;284(2):205-9.
229
Fragoso YD, Andalaft R, Adamo AP, et al. Neurologic Manifestations of AIDS in Children
and Adolescents: A Review of Cases in Santos, Brazil. MedGenMed. 1999 Sep 24:E3.
230
Strauss J, Zilleruelo G, Abitbol C, et al.
Human immunodeficiency virus nephropathy.
Pediatric Nephrology. April, 1993,7(2): 220-225.
231
Pardo V, Aldana M, Colton RM ,et al. Glomerular lesions in the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 1984; 101:429-434.
232
Starc TJ, Langston C, Goldfarb J, et al. Unexpected non-HIV causes of death in children
born to HIV-infected mothers.Pediatric Pulmonary and Cardiac Complications of Vertically
Transmitted HIV Infection Study Group. Pediatrics. 1999 Jul;104(1):e6.
233
Lipshultz SE, Easley KA, Orav EJ, et al. Cardiac dysfunction and mortality in HIV-infected
children: The Prospective P2C2 HIV Multicenter Study. Pediatric Pulmonary and Cardiac
Complications of Vertically Transmitted HIV Infection (P2C2 HIV) Study Group. Circulation.
2000 Sep 26;102(13):1542-1548.
234
Jeena PM, Coovadia HM, Thula SA, et al. Persistent and chronic lung disease in HIV-1
infected and uninfected African children. AIDS. 1998;12(10):1185-1193.
235
Dufour V, Wislez M, Bergot E, et al. Improvement of symptomatic human immunodeficiency
virus-related lymphoid interstitial pneumonia in patients receiving highly active antiretroviral
therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2003 May 15;36(10):e127-130.
236
Innes A L, Huang L, Nishimura S L. Resolution of lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis in an
HIV infected adult after treatment with HAART. Transm Infect 2004;80:417-418.
237
Boon-Yasidhi V, Kottapat U, Durier Y, et al. Diagnosis disclosure in HIV-infected Thai
children. J Med Assoc Thai. 2005 Nov;88 Suppl 8:S100-105.
238
Wiener L, Mellins CA, Marhefka S, et al. Disclosure of an HIV diagnosis to children:
history, current research, and future directions. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2007;28:155-166.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Battles HB, Wiener LS. From adolescence through young adulthood: psychosocial
adjustment associated with long-term survival of HIV. J Adolesc Health. 2002
Mar;30(3):161-168.
240
Wiener LS, Battles HB, Heilman N. Public disclosure of a child’s HIV infection: impact on
children and families. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2000 Sep;14(9):485-497.
241
Bikaako-Kajura W, Luyirika E, Purcell DW, et al. Disclosure of HIV status and adherence
to daily drug regimens among HIV-infected children in Uganda. AIDS Behav. 2006 Jul;10(4
Suppl):S85-93.
242
Blasini I, Chantry C, Cruz C, et al. Disclosure model for pediatric patients living with HIV
in Puerto Rico: design,implementation, and evaluation. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2004;
25(3):181-189.
243
Oberdorfer P, Puthanakit T, Louthrenoo O, et al. Disclosure of HIV/AIDS diagnosis to
HIV-infected children in Thailand. J Paediatr Child Health. 2006 May;42(5):283-8.
244
Brady MT, Clark C, Weedy C, el al. Disclosure of HIV diagnosis to children in ACTG
clinical trials (ACTG 219). Int Conf AIDS. 1996 Jul 7-12; 11: 43
245
Lester P, Chesney M, Cooke M, et al. When the time comes to talk about HIV: factors
associated with diagnostic disclosure and emotional distress in HIV-infected children.
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2002 Nov 1;31(3):309-317.
246
Committee on Pediatric Aids American Academy of Pediatrics. Policy Statement
Disclosure of Illness Status to Children and Adolescents With HIV Infection Pediatrics
1999; 103 No. 1: 164-166 (A statement of reaffirmation for this policy was published on
September 1, 2005.)
247
Conway M. HIV in Schools. Good practice guide to supporting children infected or affected
by HIV children-young people HIV network. National Children’s Bureau, UK 2005.
248
Rogers
MF,
White
CR,
Sanders
R,
et
al.
Lack
Of Transmission
Of
Human
Immunodeficiency Virus From Infected Children To Their Household Contacts, Pediatrics
1990; 85: 210-214.
249
Pretty IA, Anderson GS, Sweet DJ. Human bites and the risk of human immunodeficiency
virus transmission. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 1999 Sep;20(3):232-9.
250
Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus through human bites. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 1993 Apr;6(4):402-406.
251
American Academy Of Pediatrics. Committee on Pediatric AIDS and Committee on
Adolescence. Adolescents And Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection: The Rock Of
The Pediatriccian In Prevention And Intervention. Pediatrics. 2001;107:188-190
(Reaffirmed May 2005)
252
Branson BM, Handsfield HH, Lampe MA, et al; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and
pregnant womwn in health-care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006 Sep 22;55
(RR-14):1-17
69
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 1
WHO CLINICAL STAGING OF HIV/AIDS FOR CHILDREN WITH CONFIRMED HIV
INFECTION.
Source : World Health Organisation, WHO Definations of HIV Surveillance and Revised Clinical Staging
and Immunological Classification of HIV related disease in Adults and Children 2007
Clinical Stage 1
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
Clinical stage 2
Unexplained persistent hepatosplenomegaly
Papular pruritic eruptions
Fungal nail infection
Angular cheilitis
Lineal gingival erythema
Extensive wart virus infection
Extensive molluscum contagiosum
Recurrent oral ulcerations
Unexplained persistent parotid enlargement
Herpes zoster
Recurrent or chronic upper respiratory tract infections
(otitis media, otorrhoea,sinusitis or tonsillitis)
Clinical stage 3
Unexplained i moderate malnutrition or wasting not adequately responding to standard therapy
Unexplained persistent diarrhoea (14 days or more)
Unexplained persistent fever (above 37.5˚C intermittent or constant for longer than one month)
Persistent oral candiasis (after first 6- 8 weeks of life)
Oral hairy leukoplakia
Acute necrotizing ulceration gingivitis or periodontitis
Lymph node tuberclulosis
Pulmonary tuberclulosis
Severe recurrent bacterial pneumonia
Symptomatic lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis
Chronic HIV-associated lung disease including brochiectasis
Unexplained anaemia (<8g/dl), neutropaenia (<0.5 x 10 9 per litre) and or chronic thrombocytopaenia
(<50 x 10 9 per litre)
i . Unexplained refers to where the condition is not explained by other causes
Clinical stage 4 ii
Unexplained severe wasting,stunting or severe malnutrition not responding to standard therapy
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Recurrent severe bacterial infections (such as empyema, pyomyositis, bone or joint infection or
meningitis but excluding pneumonia)
Chronic herpes simplex infection (orolabial or cutaneous of more than one month’s duration or
visceral at any site)
Oesophageal candidiasis(or candidiasis of trachea, bronchi or lungs)
Extrapulmonary tuberclulosis
Kaposi sarcoma
Cytomegalovirus infection: retinitis or cytomegalovirus infection affecting another organ,with onset
at age older than one month
Central nervous system toxoplasmosis (after one month of life)
Extrapulmonary crytococcosis (including meningitis)
HIV encephalopathy
Disseminated endemic mycosis (coccidiomycosis or histoplasmosis)
Disseminated non- tuberculous mycobacterial infection
Chronic cryptosporidiosis (with diarrhea)
Chronic isosporiasis
Cerebral or B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Symptomatic HIV-associated nephropathy or HIV- associated cardiomyopathy
ii . Some additional specific conditions can also be included in regional classifications (such as reactivation of American
trypanosomiasis [meningoencephalitis and/or myocarditis] in the WHO Region of the Americas, disseminated
penicilliosis in Asia and HIV-associated rectovaginal fistula in Africa).
Appendix 2
WHO CLINICAL STAGING /AIDS FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS WITH
CONFIRMED HIV INFECTION
Source : World Health Organisation, WHO Definations of HIV Surveillance and Revised Clinical Staging and
Immunological Classification of HIV related disease in Adults and Children 2007
Clinical stage 1
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalized lymphadenophathy
Clinical stage 2
Moderate unexplained weight loss (<10% of presumed or measured body weight) i
Recurrent respiratory tract infections sinusitis, tonsillitis, otitis media and pharyngitis)
Herpes zoster
Angular cheilitis
Recurrent oral ulceration
Papular pruritic eruptions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Fungal nail infections
Clinical stage 3
Unexplained ii severe weight loss (>10% of presumed or measured body weight)
Unexplained chronic diarrhoea for longer than one month
Unexplained persistent fever (above 37.6°C intermittent or constant,for longer than one month)
Persistent oral candidiasis
Oral hairy leukoplakia
Pulmonary TB (current)
Severe bacterial infections (such as pneumonia, empyema, pyomyositis, bone or joint infection,
meningitis or bacteraemia)
Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis, gingivitis or periodontitis
Unexplained anaemia (<8 g/dl), neutropaenia (<0.5 × 10 9 per litre)
or chronic thrombocytopaenia (<50 × 10 9 per litre)
i. Asessment of body weight in pregnant woman needs to consider the expected weight gain of pregnancy.
ii. Unexplained refers to where the condition is not explained by other causes
WHO CLINICAL STAGING /AIDS FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS WITH
CONFIRMED HIV INFECTION
Clinical stage 4 iii
HIV wasting syndrome
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Recurrent severe bacterial pneumonia
Chronic herpes simplex infection (orolabial, genital or anorectal of more than one month’s duration or
visceral at any site)
Oesophageal candidiasis (or candidiasis of trachea, bronchi or lungs)
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Cytomegalovirus infection (retinitis or infection of other organs)
Central nervous system toxoplasmosis
HIV encephalopathy
Extrapulmonary cryptococcosis including meningitis
Disseminated non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Chronic cryptosporidiosis (with diarrhea)
Chronic isosporiasis
Disseminated mycosis (coccidiomycosis or histoplasmosis)
Recurrent non-typhoidal Salmonella bacteraemia
Lymphoma (cerebral or B-cell non-Hodgkin) or other solid HIV-associated tumours
Invasive cervical carcinoma
Atypical disseminated leishmaniasis
Symptomatic HIV-associated nephropathy or symptomatic HIV-associated cardiomyopathy
iii . Some additional specific conditions can also be included in regional classification (such as reactivation
of American trypanosomiasis [ meningoencephalitis and /or myocarditis] in the WHO Region of America
and disseminated penicilliosis in Asia]
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 3
IMMUNOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
Table : WHO classification of HIV-associated immunodeficiency using CD4 count
Classification of
Age-related CD4 values
HIV-associated
Immunodeficiency
<11 months
12-35 months
36-59 months
>5 years
(CD4%)
(CD4%)
(CD4%)
(cells/mm3 or CD4%)
Not significant
>35
>30
>25
>500
Mild
30-35
25-30
20-25
350-499
Advanced
25-29
20-24
15-19
200-349
Severe
<25
<20
<15
<200 or <15%
• CD4 (absolute count or %) is the recommended measurement to assess immune deficiency.
• The CD4% /count should be used in conjunction with clinical assessment; however, CD4% /count
allows early detection of worsening of HIV disease, as the CD4% / count usually falls before clinical
progression takes place.
• CD4 monitoring can aid in the decision to initiate ART or switch to another ARV drug.
• Younger children normally have higher CD4 counts than older children and adults.
• CD4% is the preferred measurement in children <5 years old, as it varies less in them than in older
children.
• At >5 years of age, either CD4% or absolute CD4 count can be used.
(Recent studies in adults suggest that CD4% may predict disease progression independent of
absolute CD4 (Moore et al 2006, Pirzada et al 2006, Hulgan et al 2007 Level 6)
• The threshold CD4 levels for severe immunodeficiency in children >1 year of age correspond with a
12-month mortality risk of <5%. In children <1 year of age, especially those <6 months, the CD4% /
count is less predictive of mortality and there is a high risk for death even if the CD4% is high.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
73
Didanosine (ddl)
VIDEX
Preparations:
Pediatric powder for
oral solution, 2G
(must be mixed with
antacid): 10mg/ml
Chewable tablets
with buffers: 25mg ,
100mg
Enteric Coated (EC)
Delayed Release
Capsule:
125mg, 200mg,
250mg, 400mg
Pediatric Dose:
2 weeks to 8 months
of age:
100 mg/m2 q12H
8 months of age and
older, 120 mg/m2
twice daily,clinical
studies have used a
pediatric dose range
of 90 - 150mg/m2
q12H
Adolescent/ Adult
Dose:
Tablets
< 60kg:
125 mg twice daily
or 250 mg once
daily;
> 60kg:
200 mg twice daily or
400 mg once daily
(twice daily dosing is
preferred, it provides
better therapeutic
response than once
daily dosing)
Delayed-release
capsules
< 60kg:
250 mg once daily;
> 60kg:
400 mg once daily
More common:
Diarrhea, abdominal
pain, nausea,
vomiting
Less common
(more severe):
Pancreatitis(dose
related - less in
children),
peripheral neuropathy
(dose related),
electrolyte
abnormalities,
hyperuricemia,
severe
hepatomegaly with
steatosis, (some
fatal cases),
increased liver
enzymes,
Serious in pediatric
age groups:
Diabetes mellitus,
retinal or optic nerve
changes (rare)
Possible decrease
in absorption of
ketoconazole,
itraconazole;
administer at least
2 hrs before or 2 hrs
after ddl.
Ganciclovir may
increase peak levels
of ddl and predispose
to toxicity.
Administration with
protease inhibitors:
Indinavir should be
administered at least
one hour apart from
ddl on an empty
stomach. Ritonavir
should be
administered at least
2 hours apart from
ddl.
Combination with
Hydroxyurea is not
recommended ,
appears to increase
the risk of pancreatitis
Combination of d4T
and ddI is not
recommended
because of
overlapping toxicities.
The dosing interval
(BID) should be every
12 hours.
Decreased dosage
should be used for
patients with impaired
renal function.
Ddl formulation
contains buffering
agents or antacids.
Food decreases
absorption; administer
ddl on an empty
stomach (30 minutes
before or 2 hrs after a
meal).
EC Capsules should
be swallowed intact
(not chewed).
For oral solution:
Shake well, and keep
refrigerated;
admixture stable for
30 days.
When administering
chewable tablets, at
least two tablets
should be given to
ensure adequate
buffering capacity
(e.g. if the child's
dose is 50 mg,
administer two 25 mg
tablets and not one 50
mg tablet).
Can also crush /
dissolve buffered
tablets in water, apple
juice or chocolate
milk
DRUG
Abacavir (ABC)
ZIAGEN
Preparations:
Pediatric oral solution
20mg/ml
Tablets:
300mg
DOSAGE
Pediatric Dose:
3 months to 16 years of
age; 8 mg/kg twice
daily; (maximum dose
300 mg twice daily)
Adolescent/Adult Dose:
300 mg orally twice
daily or 600 mg once
daily
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
More common:
Nausea, vomiting,
fever, headache,
diarrhea, rash and
anorexia
Less common (more
severe):
Hypersensitivity
reaction: symptoms
include fever,
malaise, fatigue ,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and
abdominal pain or
respiratory symptoms
such as shortness of
breath, STEVENSJOHNSON
SYNDROME (some
fatal cases) Lactic
acidosis, severe
hepatomegaly with
steatosis
Rare: Increased liver
enzymes, elevated
blood glucose and
elevated triglycerides
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
Combination with
Ribavarin has
resulted in fatal or
nonfatal lactic
acidosis therefore
coadministration of
these two agents
should only occur if
the potential benefit
outweighs the
potential risks
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
May take with or
without food.
Store oral solution at
room temperature.
Abacavir should
NEVER be re-started
following a
hypersensitivity
reaction or if
hypersensitivity
cannot be ruled out
BECAUSE
HYPOTENSION AND
DEATH HAVE
OCCURRED UPON
RECHALLENGE.
ANTIRETROVIRAL DRUGS
Nucleoside Analogue Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
Appendix 4
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 4
Lamivudine (3TC)
EPIVIR
Preparation:
Solution:
10mg/ml
Tablets:
150mg
Neonatal Dose
(< 30 days old) :
2 mg/kg q12H daily
3 months - 16 years
pediatric Dose:
4 mg/kg q12H up to a
maximum of 150mg
q12H daily
Adolescent 12 years
and older/ Adult
Dose:
< 50kg:
4mg/kg q12H
(maximum dose,150
mg) q12H daily
> 50kg:
150mg q12H or
300mg once daily
More common:
Headache, fatigue,
decreased appetite
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, skin rash
and upper abdominal
pain,
Less common
(more severe):
Pancreatitis
peripheral
neuropathy, anemia,
decreased neutrophil
count, increased liver
enzymes and
lipodystrophy
syndrome.
Lactic acidosis and
severe hepatomegaly
with steatosis (fatal
cases have been
reported)
TMP/SMX increases
lamivudine blood
levels; unknown
significance.
When used with
ZDV may prevent
emergence of
resistance.
Do not use in
combination with FTC
(Emtricitabine)
because of similar
resistance profiles
and no potential
additive benefit.
Can be given with or
without food.
For oral solution:
Store at room
temperature.
Can also crush
tablets.
Decreased dosage in
patients with impaired
renal function.
Patients should be
screened for HBV
infection before
starting therapy;
exacerbation of
hepatitis has been
reported after
discontinuation of
3TC
Stavudine (d4T)
ZERIT
Preparations:
Solution:
1mg/ml
Capsules:
30mg
Neonatal Dose Birth
to 13 days of age:
0.5mg/kg/dose every
12 hours
Pediatric Dose:
1 mg/kg q12H (max
30mg/dose)
Adolescent/ Adult
Dose:
30 mg q12H
More common:
Headache,
gastrointestinal
disturbances,
diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting, skin rashes,
Lipoatrophy
Less common (more
severe):
peripheral
neuropathy,
lipodystrophy.
pancreatitis,
Lactic acidosis,
hepatomegaly with
steatosis, muscle
weakness (rare)
Should not be
administered in combination with zidovudine (poor antiretroviral effect).
Additive
pancreatoxicity in
combination with
pentamidine. Due to
prolonged half-life of
pentamidine, do not
restart stavudine until
one week after
pentamidine therapy
is concluded. Monitor
amylase, lipase
monthly. Avoid
combination if
possible.
Can be given with or
without food.
Reduce dose in renal
impairment.
For oral solution:
Shake well and keep
refrigerated; Solution
stable for 30 days.
DRUG
Emtricitabine (FTC)
(EMTRIVA)
Preparation:
Oral solution 10mg/ml
Capsule:
200mg
DOSAGE
Neonatal/Infant Dose:
Not approved use in
below age 3 months
Pediatric Dose:
3 months - 17 years
Oral solution:
6mg/kg(maximum
dose 240mg) once
daily
Capsules (for patients
weighing > 33kg :
200mg once daily
Adolescent/Adult:
200mg once daily
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
More common:
Headache, diarrhea,
nausea, rash and skin
discoloration
(hyperpigmenta-tion
on palms and/or
soles, predominantly
observed in
non-Caucasian
patients)
Less common (more
severe):
Neutropenia, lactic
acidosis and severe
hepatomegaly with
steatosis
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
Do not use in
combination with 3TC
because of the similar
resistance profiles
and no potential
additive benefit
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Can be given without
regard to food. It is
recommended be
administered on an
empty stomach
Oral solution should
be refrigerated, can
be kept at room
temperature if used
within 3 month
Nucleoside Analogue Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
75
Appendix 4
Zidovudine (ZDV)
RETROVIR
Preparations:
Syrup: 10mg/ml
Capsules: 100mg
Concentrate for i.v.
infusion/ injection:
10mg/ml in 20ml vial
Usual Dose:
Oral: 160 mg/m2 q8H,
twice daily dosing has
been used to improve
compliance (180mg -
240mg per m2) q12H
Infants and children
over 90 days of age:
I.V. (intermittent
infusion) 120 mg/m2
q6H I.V. (continuous
infusion) 20 mg/m2/h
Full term and Infants:
< 90 days of age:
1.5mg/kg q6H
Dose in Premature
Infants
< 35 weeks
gestational age:
1.5 mg/kg
intravenously q12H
or 2mg/kg orally q12H
> 30 weeks gestation
at birth:
1.5mg/kg or 2mg/kg
orally q8H at 2 weeks
of age
< 30 weeks gestation
at birth:
1.5mg/kg or 2mg/kg
orally q8H at 4 weeks
of age
Neonatal Dose (Fullterm and infants less
than 90 days old
Oral: 2 mg/kg q6H
I.V.: 1.5 mg/kg q6H
Adolescent/ Adult
Dose:
200 mg tid or
300 mg bid
More common:
Hematologic toxicity,
including
granulocytopenia and
anemia (which may
require transfusions),
headache
Less common (more
severe): myopathy,
myositis and liver
toxicity.
Rare:
Lactic acidosis,
severe hepatomegaly
with steatosis
(fatal cases)
Increased toxicity
may be observed with
concomitant
administration of
ganciclovir,
TMP-SMX, acyclovir,
interferon-alpha,
fluconazole,
methadone,
pentamidine,
phenytoin,
probenecid,
valproic acid
Decreased renal
clearance with
cimetidine
ZDV metabolism may
be increased with co
administration of
rifampicin
Clarithromycin
decreases
concentration of ZDV
(administer 2 hrs
apart)
Avoid combination
with stavudine
(antagonism).
Best on an empty
stomach. Can take
with a non-fatty meal
to minimize nausea.
Fatty food result in a
57% decrease in ZDV
concentrations
May open capsules
and give in small
portion of food or 510ml cool water.
Decrease dosage
in severe renal
impairment and
significant hepatic
dysfunction.
Significant
neutropenia or
anemia may
necessitate
interruption of therapy
until marrow recovery
is observed; use of
erythropoietin,
filgrastim, or reduced
ZDV dosage may be
necessary.
Infuse i.v loading
doses or intermittent
dose over 1 hr. For
I.v. solution: Dilute
with D5W to conc.
? 4mg/ml; refrigerated
diluted solution is
stable for 24 hours.
DRUG
Tenofovir
Disoproxil
fumarate(TDF)
VIREAD
Preparations:
Tablets: 300mg
DOSAGE
Pediatric:
2 - 8 years:
8mg/kg as suspension
Over 8 years:
175mg/m2 daily
(under study)
< 18 years:
6mg/kg daily (under
study)
Adolescent/ Adult
Dose:
300mg daily
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
Common:
Diarrhea,
Flatulence, Nausea,
Vomiting
Osteopenia
Asthenia
Less common:
Lipodystrophy
Serious:
Lactic acidosis, Some
fatal cases
Hepatomegaly
(Severe), Some fatal
cases, Relapsing type
B viral hepatitis,
Steatosis of liver,
Some fatal cases
Acute renal failure,
Fanconi syndrome,
Renal impairment
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
Increased ddI plasma
concentrations and
risk of ddI toxicity
(neuropathy, diarrhea,
pancreatitis, severe
lactic acidosis)
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Food will enhance the
absorption.
May be taken without
food or with a light
meal if given together
with didanosine
enteric coated
capsules, where as
didanosine buffered
tablets should be
taken without food
Monitor patients for
ddI toxicity because
serum concentration
increased when given
together
Tablet may be
crushed and dissolves
in 100ml water in 20
minutes; grape juice
may also be used
Nucleoside Analogue Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 4
Efavirenz (EFV)
STOCRIN
Preparations:
Oral solution
30mg/ml
Tablets:
50mg, 200mg and
600mg
Usual Dose:
In PI &/or NRTI
combination,
600mg od
Children
(17 yrs & under):
13-15 kg
200mg
15-20 kg
250mg
20-25 kg
300mg
25-32.5 kg 350mg
32.5-40 kg 400mg
Children above 40kg
to use adult dose
More comon:
skin rash, increased
transaminase levels,
nausea, dizziness,
diarrhea, headache,
psychiatric symptons
(hallucinations,
confusion), agitation,
vivid dreams.
Inducer of CYP3A4
As IDV levels are
decreased with
coadministered, the
dose of IDV needs to
be increased to
1000mg q8hrs when
taken with EFV.
Monitoring of liver
enzymes recommended
when given together
with ritonavir.
Use with saquinavir
as the sole PI is NOT
recommended.
Administration with
clarithromycin may
increased risk of rash
use alternative like
azithromycin
Concentration of EFV
will be decreased with
co-administration of
rifampicin
The concomitant use
of voriconazole and
EFV is contraindicated
due to significant
decreases in
voriconazole plasma
concentrations.
Concomitant use is
also associated with
significant increases
in EFV plasma
concentrations.
To improve tolerability
of central nervous
system side effects,
bedtimedosing
recommended during
the first 2-4 weeks.
May be taken with or
without food.
Pregnancy should be
avoided in woman
receiving
EFAVIRENZ; barrier
contraception,
in combination with
other contraception
methods should be
considered.
DRUG
Nevirapine (NVP)
VIRAMUNE
Preparations:
Suspension:
10mg/ml
Tablets:
200 mg
DOSAGE
Dose
200mg q12H (lead-in
dosing of 200mg daily
for first 14 days)
Infants and children
2 months up to 8
years 4 mg/kg) once
daily for 14 days
followed by 7 mg/kg
q12H
Children 8 years and
older
4 mg/kg once daily for
14 days followed by 4
mg/kg q12H daily.
The maximum daily
dose is 400 mg
Adolescent/ Adult
Dose:
200 mg q12H initiate
therapy at half dose
for the first 14 days.
Increase to full dose
if no rash or other
untoward effects.
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
More common:
Skin rash, StevenJohnson syndrome,
toxic epidermal
necrolysis (some
severe), fever,
headache, nausea
and abnormal liver
function tests.
Less common
(more severe):
Severe, lifethreatening and
rare cases fatal
hepatotoxicity,
including fulminant
and cholestatic
hepatitis, hepatic
necrosis and hepatic
failure (less common
in children)
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
Induces hepatic
cytochrome PH50 3A
(CYP3A); auto-in
duction of metabolism
occurs in 2-4 weeks
with a 1.5-2 times
increase in clearance.
Potential for multiple
drug interactions.
Before administration,
the patient's
medication profile
should be carefully
reviewed for potential
drug interactions.
Administration with
protease inhibitors
decreases IDV
concentrations
significantly; may also
decrease ritonavir
concentration. Not
known if increased
doses of protease
inhibitors are needed.
Fluconazole,
voriconazole,
clarithromycin, may
increased NVP
toxicity
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Can be given without
regard to food.
Can crush tablets in
water.
May be administered
concurrently with ddl.
Patients experiencing
rash during the
2-week lead in period
should not have their
NVP dose increased
until the rash has
resolved.
If NVP dosing is
interrupted for more
than 7 days, NVP
dosing should be
restarted with once
daily dosing for 14
days, followed by
escalation to the full
twice daily regimen.
For suspension:
Must be shaken
well; store at room
temperature.
Non-Nucleoside Analogue Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
77
Appendix 4
Indinavir (IDV)
CRIXIVAN
Preparations:
Capsules: 100, 200
mg & 400 mg
Dose
Investigational:
500 mg/m2 q8H in
children aged 4 to 15
years
Neonatal Dose
Should not be
administered to
neonates due to the
risks associated with
hyperbilirubinemia
(kernicterus)
Adolescent/
Adult Dose
800 mg q8H
More common:
Nausea, abdominal
pain, headache,
dizziness,
metallic taste,
asymptomatic
hyperbilirubinemia
(10%) and lipid
abnormalities
Less common
(more severe):
Nephrolithiasis.
Rare:
Hemolytic anemia
and hepatitis
(life threatening)
New onset of
diabetes,
hyperglycemia,
ketoacidosis,
exacerbation of
pre-existing diabetes
mellitus
Not recommended
for concurrent use:
IDV increases the
drug's metabolism,
resulting in increased
drug levels and
potential toxicity:
astemizole,
terfenadine, cisapride,
midazolam.
IDV levels significantly
reduced with
concurrent use:
Rifampicin.
NVP coadministration
may decrease
indinavir serum
concentration.
Administration with
other protease
inhibitors: ritonavir
decreases the
metabolism of IDV
and results in greatly
increased IDV
concentrations.
Increased IDV serum
concentrations and
Administer on an
empty stomach 1 hour
before or 2 hours
after a meal (or can
be administered with
a light meal). When
given in combination
with RTV, meal
restrictions are no
longer necessary
Adequate hydration
required to minimize
risk of nephrolithiasis
(at least 48 oz =
1.44L of fluid daily in
adult patients)
If coadministered with
ddl, give at least
1hour apart on an
empty stomach.
Decrease dose in
patients with cirrhosis.
Capsules are
sensitive to moisture
& should be stored in
original container with
dessicant.
DRUG
Atazanavir (ATV)
(REYATAZ)
Preparation:
Capsules:
100,150 and 200mg
DOSAGE
Neonatal:
Drug should be
avoided in patients
under 3 months of
age due to a risk of
kernicterus
Pediatric:
Age 4 - 13 years,
400mg once daily
>13 years:
600mg once daily
Adult:
400mg once daily
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
More common:
Asymptomatic
elevations in indirect
bilirubin (30% of
patients), jaundice
(10% of patients),
headache, fever,
dizziness, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea
and paresthesias.
Less common
(more severe):
Prolongation of PR
interval on ECG,
abnormalities in AV
conduction, rash,
generally mild to
moderate, StevenJohnson
Syndrome (rare)
Rare:
New onset of
diabetes mellitus,
hyperglycemia,
ketoacidosis,
exacerbation of
existing diabetes
mellitus, and
elevation in serum
transaminases
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
Increase QTc
prolongation with
clarithromycin
administration,
consider reduce
dose by 50% or use
alternative such as
azithromycin
Contraindicated
Drugs: Terfenadine,
Astemizole,
Cisapride, Ergot
Alkaloids, Midazolam,
Rifampicin.
Antacids decrease
ATV concentrations,
therefore ATV should
be administered
2 hours before or
1 hour after these
medications
H-2 Receptor
Antagonists:,
decrease ATV
concentrations,
recommended to
separate dosing as
far apart as possible,
preferably by 12
hours.
Proton-pump
Inhibitors: Decrease
ATV concentrations
and therapeutic
effect, hence
coadministration is
not recommended.
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Should be taken with
food to enhance
absorption
Atazanavir should be
taken at least 1 hr
before or after antacid
or ddI
Use with caution
in patients with
pre-existing cardiac
conduction system
disease or with other
drugs known to
prolong the PR
interval (e.g calcium
channel blockers,
beta blockers,
digoxin, verapamil)
Protease Inhibitors
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 4
Nelfinavir (NFV)
VIRACEPT
Preparations:
Powder for oral
suspension:
50 mg per one level
gram full scoop
(200 mg per one level
teaspoon)
Tablets:
250 mg
and film-coated
250mg
Dose
20-30 mg/kg tid
Children:
3 months to 2 years
of age a dose of 20 to
30 mg/kg/dose 3
times a day
2 to 13 years of age
is 45 to 55
mg/kg
twice a day or 25 to
35 mg/kg three times
a day with a meal.
The maximum daily
dose is 2500 mg
Neonatal Dose
Under study in
PACTG 353:
10 mg/kg tid
(investigational)
Adolescent/
Adult Dose
750 mg tid
More common:
Diarrhea (most
common) asthenia,
abdominal pain,
rash and lipid
abnormalities
Less common
(more severe):
Exacerbation of
chronic liver disease,
lipodystrophy
syndrome
Rare:
New onset of
diabetes mellitus,
hyperglycemia,
ketoacidosis,
exacerbation of
existing diabetes
mellitus, and
elevation in serum
transaminases
Before administration,
the patient's
medication profile
should be carefully
reviewed for potential
drug interactions.
Not recommended
for concurrent use:
Astemizole,
terfenadine,
cisapride, midazolam.
NFV levels are
greatly reduced with
concurrent use of
Rifampicin.
Administration with
other protease
inhibitors: NFV
increases levels of
IDV; coadministration
with ritonavir
increases nelfinavir
levels 1.5 fold,
without change in
ritonavir
concentrations.
Administer with meal
or light snack.
For oral solution:
Powder may be mixed
with water, milk,
pudding, ice cream,
or formula (mixture is
stable for up to 6
hours).
Do not mix with any
acidic food or juice
because of resulting
poor taste.
Do not add water to
bottles of oral powder;
a special scoop is
provided with oral
powder for measuring
purposes.
Tablets readily
dissolve in a small
amount of water,
mix a cloudy mixture
well and consume it
immediately. The
glass should be
rinsed with water and
the rinse swallowed to
ensure that the entire
dose is consumed.
Tablets can also be
crushed &
administered with
pudding
Ritonavir
NORVIR
Preparations:
Oral solution:
80 mg/ml
Capsules:
100 mg
Neonatal Dose
Investigational
Dose:
450 mg/m2 q12H
Pediatric dose:
Age > 1 month)
350-450 mg/m2 q12H
(not to exceed 600mg
per dose)
To minimize
nausea/vomiting,
initiate therapy at 250
mg/m2 q12H and
increase dose every
2 to 3 days by 50
mg/m(2) twice daily
until target dose or
maximum tolerated
dose is reached
More common:
Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, headache,
abdominal pain,
anorexia, circumoral
paresthesias and lipid
abnormalities.
Less common
(more severe):
exacerbation of
chronic liver disease,
lipodystrophy
syndrome.
Rare:
New onset diabetes
mellitus, exacerbation
of pre-existing diabetes,
increased levels of
triglycerides &
cholesterol,
hyperglycemia &
diabetes, pancreatitis,
hepatitis.
Ritonavir decreases
levels of
sulfamethoxazole.
Increase metabolism
of theophylline levels.
Increase levels of
warfarin &
clarithromycin.,
May increase or
decrease digoxin
levels.
Administration with
other protease
inhibitors: Decrease
the metabolism of
indinavir & saquinavir
& results in greatly
increased
concentrations of
these drugs;
increases nelfinavir
concentration
1.5-fold.
Administration with
food increases
absorption and
helps decrease
gastrointestinal side
effects.
If administered with
ddl, should be
administered 2 hours
apart.
Oral capsules
must be kept
refrigerated but not
required if capsules
are used within
30days and stored
below 25oC .
For oral solution: Do
not refrigerate. Shake
well before use,
recommended
storage temperature
is 20 - 25 oC.
DRUG
DOSAGE
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
potential indinavir
toxicity (nausea,
headache,
nephrolithiasis,
asymptomatic
hyperbilirubinemia)
when coadministered
with itraconazole and
ketoconazole
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Protease Inhibitors
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
79
Appendix 4
DRUG
Adolescent/
Adult Dose
600 mg q12H
To minimize
nausea/vomiting,
initiate therapy at
300mg q12H and
increase stepwise to
full dose over 5 days
as tolerated
DOSAGE
ADVERSE
REACTIONS
Allergic
reactionsincluding
bronchospasm,
urticaria and
angioedema
DRUG
INTERACTIONS
SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
Oral solution has
limited shelf-life (6
months), use by
product expiration
date.
To minimize nausea,
therapy should be
initiated at a low dose
& increase to full dose
as tolerated.
Techniques to
increase tolerance:
Mix oral solution with
milk, chocolate milk or
pudding, ice cream.
Dulling the taste buds
before administration
by chewing ice.
Coat the mouth by
giving peanut butter to
eat before the dose or
administer strongtasting foods such as
cheese or strongflavored chewing
gum immediately after
dose
In children 6 months
to 12 years of age,
the recommended
dose is as follows:
7 to < 15kg
12mg/kg LPV/
3mg/kg RTV twice
daily
15 - 40kg:
10mg/kg LPV/
2.5mg/kg RTV twice
daily
< 40kg:
400mg LPV/
100mg RTV twice
daily
Adolescent/Adult:
400mg/100mg
(3 capsules or 5ml )
twice daily
Lopinavir/Ritonavir
(LPV/r)
(KALETRA)
Preparations:
Pediatric oral solution
80mg LPV/20mg RTV
per ml
Soft gelatin capsule:
Each contain
Lopinavir 133.3 mg
Ritonavir
33.3mg
More common:
Diarrhea, headache,
asthenia, nausea and
vomiting and rash,
lipid abnormalities
Less common
(more common):
lipodystrophy
syndrome
Rare:
New onset of
diabetes mellitus,
hyperglycemia,
ketoacidosis,
exacerbation of
pre-existing diabetes
mellitus, hemolytic
anemia, pancreatitis,
elevation in serum
transaminases and
hepatitis
Contraindicated
with amiodarone,
piroxicam,
astemizole/terfinadine,
cisapride, alprazolam,
midazolam,zolpidem
LPV/r tablets can be
administered without
regard to food
LPV/r oral solution
should be
administered with
food. A high fat meal
increases absorption,
especially of the
liquid preparation.
Should be refrigerated
and if kept at room
temperature up to
25oC , used within
2 months
If coadministered with
ddI, ddI should be
given 1 hour before or
2 hours after LPV/r
Saquinavir
INVIRASE
(hard capsule)
FORTOVASE (softgel capsule)
Preparations:
Capsule:
200 mg
Neonatal Dose:
Unknown
Pediatric Dose:
SGC - Under Study in
PACTG 397 : 50
mg/kg tid
Usual Dose:
Adolescent/
Adult Dose: 1200mg
tid (Fortovase)
600mg tid (Invirase)
400mg bid (Invirase)
In double PI regimens
(e.g. with ritonavir or
nelfinavir)
More common:
Diarrhea, abdominal
discomfort, nausea,
headache, paresthesias
skin rash and lipid
abnormalities
Less common (more
severe): Exacerbation
of chronic liver
disease, lipodystrophy
syndrome
Rare: New onset
diabetes mellitus,
hyperglycemia,
ketoacidosis,
exacerbation of
pre-existing diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis
and elevation in
serum transaminases
Drugs that induce
CYP 3A4 may reduce
saquinavir levels.
Rifampicin reduces
saquinavir levels
greatly and should
not be used in
combination.
Contraindicated
Drugs: Terfenadine,
Astemizole, Cisapride,
Ergot Alkaloids,
Midazolam, Rifampicin.
Drugs that increase
saquinavir levels:
Ritonavir,
Ketoconazole,
Nelfinavir,
Delavirdine.
Administer within 2
hours of a full meal to
increase absorption
(high fat meal
preferred)
Sun exposure can
cause photosensitivity
reactions; therefore,
sunscreen or
protective clothing is
recommended
Capsules should be
kept refrigerated.
Once brought to room
temperature, use
within 3 months.
Protease Inhibitors
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 5
TANNER STAGING IN ADOLESCENTS
Female
Male
Age range
(years)
0-15
8-15
10-16
10-17
12.5-18
Stage
I
II
III
IV
V
Breast
growth
Pre-adolescent
Breast budding
(thelarche);
areolar hyperplasia
with small amount
of breast tissue
Further enlargement
of breast tissue and
areola, with no
separation of their
contours
Separation of
contours; areola
and nipple form
secondary mound
above breast tissue
Large breast with
single contour
Pubic hair
growth
None
Long downy pubic
hair near the labia,
often appearing with
breast budding at
several weeks or
months later
Increase in amount
and pigmentation of
hair
Adult in type but not
in distribution
Adult in distribution
Other
changes
Pre-adolescent
Peak growth
velocity often
occurs soon after
stage II
Menarche occurs
in 2% of girls late
in stage III
Menarche occurs
in most girls in
stage IV, 1-3
years after
thelarche
Menarche occurs
in 10% of girls in
stage V
Testes
growth
Pre-adolescent
testes (2.5cm)
Enlargement of
testes;
pigmentation of
scrotal sac
IFurther
enlargement
Further
enlargement
Adult in size
Age range
(years)
0-15
10-15
10.5-16.5
Variable
12-17
13-18
Penis
growth
Pre-adolescent
Minimal or no
enlargement
Significant
enlargement,
espacially in
diameter
Further
enlargement
especially in
diameter
Adult in size
Public hair
growth
None
Long downy pubic
hair, often appearing
several months after
testicular growth;
variable pattern
noted with pubarche
Increase in amount
curling
Adult in type but not
in distribution
Adult in distribution
(medial aspects of
thighs; linea alba)
Other
changes
Pre-adolescent
Not applicable
Not applicable
Body hair
continues to
grow and
muscles continue
to increase in
size for several
months to years;
20% of boys
reach peak
growth velocity
during this period
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
81
Investigations for Opportunistic infections*
Appendix 6
Specimen
• Blood
• Induced Sputum
• Pleural Fluid
• Bronchoalveolar Lavage
(Bal)
• Endotracheal Aspirate
• Skin, Conjunctiva, Or
Mucosal Lesion
Scrapings
• Skin Scrapings
• Biopsy
• Mucosal Scraping
• Induced Sputum
• Bal
• Endotracheal Aspirate
• Lung Biopsy
Opportunistic
Infections
Bacterial
Pneumonia
Herpes zoster
Cutaneous fungal
infections
Oral esophageal
candida
Pneumo jiroveci
pneumonia(carinii)
Investigation
• Culture
• Gram Stain, Culture
• Gram Stain
• Culture And Sensitivity
• Direct
Immunofluorescence
• Tzanck Smear
• Culture
• PCR
• KOH Preparation
• Culture
• KOH Preparation
• Culture
• Silver Stains
• Monoclonal
Immunofluorescent
Antibodies
Notes
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b
(Hib), Staphylococcus aureus, or Escherichia coli
Zar HJ, Tannenbaum E, Hanslo D, Hussey G. Sputum
induction as a diagnostic tool for community acquired
pneumonia in infants and young children from a high HIV
prevalence area. Pediatr Pulmonol 2003;36:58.
Poor negative predictive value for sputum
Bronchoscopy with BAL is the diagnostic procedure of
choice for infants
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 6
Opportunistic
Infections
Pneumo jiroveci
pneumonia(carinii)
Tuberculosis
Penicillium
marneffei
* Only the more common opportunistic infections are discussed
Specimen
• Lung Biopsy
• Biopsied Lung
• Peripheral Lymph Node
• Other Tissue Depending
On Location Of Disease)
• Sputum
• Induced Sputum
• Gastric Lavage
• BAL
• Blood
• Skin lesions
• Blood
• Lymph nodes
• Bone marrow
Investigation
• Histopathology
• Histopatology
• Culture Conventional/
Automat
• ZN Stain
• PCR
• Mycobacterial Culture
• Direct microscopy
• Culture
Notes
Alvarez F, Bandi V, Stager C, Guntupalli KK. Detection of
Pneumocystis carinii in tracheal aspirates of intubated
patients using calcofluor-white (Fungi-Fluor) and
immunofluorescence antibody (Genetic Systems) stains.
Crit Care Med. 1997 Jun;25(6):948-52. Search Pubmed
endotracheal Suction Pneumocystis
= 2 titles one relevant
Histopathology shows alveoli filled with eosinophilic,
acellular, proteinaceous material that contains cysts and
trophozoites but few inflammatory cells
Two PCR commercial kits are available for rapid, direct
detection of M. tuberculosis, and both are labeled for use on
sputum only. One is labeled for use on sputum only with
AFB detected on the smear. When these tests are used for
other specimens, sensitivity and specificity might be
unsatisfactory.
Specimens should be cultured with radiometric culture
methods and DNA probes for species identification. M.
tuberculosis can be isolated and identified in 7--14
days.
Investigations for Opportunistic infections*
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
83
Treatment for opportunistic Infections*
Appendix 7
Other options/issues
Indications for corticosteriods:
- PaO2 <70 mm Hg at room air or alveolar-arterial
oxygen gradient >35 mm Hg
Continue secondary prophylaxis
Pyridoxine should be administered if isoniazid is
administered
In antiretroviral-naïve child, initiate therapy for TB
4-8
weeks before starting antiretroviral drugs
Optimal timing of commencement of HAART in
newly diagnosed HIV infected children with TB
disease remains unclear. In general, antiretroviral
therapy should be commenced at least 1-2
months after commencement of antituberculous
therapy. For children already on HAART when TB
is diagnosed, treatment should be continued however alteration of drug combinations may be
required to minimize potential toxicities and drugdrug interactions.
Treatment duration
Pulmonary TB: 9 months for HIV infected child
Alternative therapies
Intolerant or clinical treatment
failure after 5-7 days of
TMP/SMX therapy:
Pentamidine 4 mg/kg body
weight intravenously once daily
Alternative drug for ethambutol is streptomycin
Ethionamide should be used
for tuberculosis meningitis
Preferred therapies and duration
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMX) 15-20 mg/kg body weight TMP
plus 75-100 mg/kg body weight SMX
administered IV or Oral 3 or 4 times daily
for 21 days
Intensive
Isoniazid (INH) 10-15 mg/kg(max: 300 mg/day)
oral daily
Rifampicin 10-20 mg/kg body weight
(max:600 mg/day) oral daily
pyrazinamide 20-40 mg/kg
(max: 2 g/day) body weight oral daily
ethambutol 15-25 mg/kg body weight
(max: 1.0 g/day) oral daily
Continuation phase (for drug sensitive TB):
Daily:
Isoniazid 10-15 mg/kg body weight
(max: 300 mg/day) oral daily plus
rifampicin 10-20 mg/kg body weight
(max: 600 mg/ day) oral daily
OR
Intermittent:
Isoniazid 20-30 mg/kg body weight (max:
900 mg/day) by mouth once daily
administered two to three times a week plus
rifampicin 10-20 mg/kg body weight (max:
600 mg/day) by mouth once daily
administered two to three times a week
Pathogen
Pneumocystis
jiroveci
pneumonia
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (TB)
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Appendix 7
Pathogen
Oropharyngeal
Candida
Varicella zoster
virus
Penicillium
marneffei
Preferred therapies and duration
Fluconazole 3-6 mg/kg body
weight (max: 400 mg/dose) by
oral daily for 7-14 days
Chickenpox/ Zoster: Severe
Acyclovir 10 mg/kg IV three times daily
for 7 days or until no new lesions have
appeared for 48 hours
Children with mild immunesuppression
and mild disease
Acyclovir 20 mg/kg oral (max: 800
mg/dose)
four times daily for 7 days or until no new
lesions have appeared for 48 hours
Amphotericin B 0.6 - 1.0mg/kg per day for
two weeks followed by maintenance
treatment with itraconazole
Alternative therapies
(fluconazolerefractory):
Itraconazole cyclodextrin
oral solution
2.5 mg/kg body weight by
mouth twice daily (max: 200 -
400 mg/day) for 7-14 days
OR
Amphotericin B oral
suspension 1ml
(100 mg/ml) by mouth four
times daily for <14 days
For patients not responding
to acyclovir:
Foscarnet 40-60 mg/kg IV
three times daily for 7-10
days
Currently not available for
use in Malaysia
http://www.aidsmap.com/cms
1032622.asp
Other options/issues
Pienaar,Young & Holmes Cochrane Database
2006
Due to only one study in children it is not possible
to make recommendations for treatment or prevention of oropharyngeal candidiasis
Suppressive treatment will be necessary for as
long as the immune system remains severely
impaired
* Only the more common opportunistic infections are discussed
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
85
Appendix 8
Table 2 LIST OF HIV DRUGS AVAILABLE IN MALAYSIA
Abacavir 300mg Tab
Abacavir oral solution 20mg/ml, 240ml
Didanosine 100mg Tab
Didanosine EC 250mg Cap
Didanosine EC 400mg Cap
Didanosine pediatric powder for oral suspension 2G
Efavirenz 200mg Cap
Efavirenz 50mg Cap
Efavirenz 600mg Tab
Indinavir 400mg Cap
Lamivudine 150mg Film-coated Tab
Lamivudine oral solution 10mg/ml, 240ml
Lopinavir 133.3 mg + Ritonavir 33.3 mg Cap
Lopinavir 80mg + Ritonavir 20mg/ml Solution, 160ml
Nevirapine tablet 200mg
Ritonavir 100mg Cap
Ritonavir 80mg/ml solution, 240ml
Saquinavir 200mg Cap
Stavudine 30mg + Lamivudine 150mg + Nevirapine 200mg Tab
Stavudine 30mg Cap
Stavudine 40mg + Lamivudine 150mg + Nevirapine 200mg Tab
Stavudine 40mg Cap
Zidovudine 100mg Cap
Zidovudine 300mg Cap + Lamivudine 150mg Tab
Zidovudine 10mg/ml Syrup, 200ml
Zidovudine 10mg/ml, 20ml IV Inj
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
Additional Resources
Infant feeding
http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/HIV_IF_guide_for_healthcare.pdf
http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/HIV_IF_Transmission.pdf
HIV and Infant Feeding Update
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2007/9789241595964_eng.pdf
http://www.uniteforchildren.org/knowmore/files/Module_4PM.pdf
HIV and Infant Feeding. http://www.avert.org/hiv-breastfeeding.htm
Adherence
HIV/AIDS Primary Care Guide. Adherence in the Pediatric HIV Population Ana M. Puga, MD
http://www.faetc.org/PDF/Primary_Care_Guide/Chapter_32-Adherence_in_the_Pediatric.pdf
Baylor International Pediatric AIDS Initiative Educational Resources. Primer on Pill Swallowing.
2007 http://bayloraids.org/resources/pillprimer/
Opportunistic Infections
HIV/AIDS Primary Care Guide. Prevention and Management of Opportunistic Infections in
Children Daniela Chiriboga, MD Patricia Emmanuel, MD.
http://www.faetc.org/PDF/Primary_Care_Guide/Chapter_31-Management_of_OIs_in_Children.pdf
Disclosure, Counselling & Supportive Care
Guidelines for Couselling Children Who are Infected with HIV or Affected by HIV and AIDS. South
African AIDS Trust. 2003
http://www.satregional.org/attachments/Publications/Skills%20Training%20E/CABA.pdf
Therapeutic education: Recommendations regarding disclosure of HIV status to children under
ARV In MSFproject. MSF Paris. 2005
http://www.who.int/hiv/topics/vct/toolkit/additional_resources/MSF_recommendations_disclosure.pdf
School
HIV/AIDS
Policy
Tool
Kit
Wisconsin
Department
of
Public
Instruction
2003.
http://dpi.state.wi.us/sspw/pdf/hivtoolkit.pdf
HIV/AIDS Primary Care Guide. Supportive Care for HIV-Infected Children and Their Families
Gwendolyn B. Scott, MD
http://www.faetc.org/PDF/Primary_Care_Guide/Chapter_34-Supportive_Care.pdf
HIV/AIDS Primary Care Guide. Adolescent Issues Lawrence B. Friedman, MD, Jeri A. Dyson, MD,
Mobeen H. Rathore, MD
http://www.faetc.org/PDF/Primary_Care_Guide/Chapter_35-Adolescent_Issues.pdf
HIV in Schools. Good practice guide to supporting children infected or affected by HIV. Magda
Conway 2005
http://www.ncb.org.uk/dotpdf/open%20access%20-%20phase%201%20only/hivforum_schoolsgpg.pdf
Palliative Care
HIV/AIDS Palliative Care Guidance#1 - For the United States Government in-Country Staff
And Implementing Partners. The President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Office of the U.S.
Global AIDS Coordinator 2006. http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/64416.pdf
Schools
Guidance On First Aid For Schools. Department for Employment and Education, UK.
http://www.teachernet.gov.uk/_doc/4421/GFAS.pdf
Appendix 9
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AIDS
Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome
ARV
Antiretroviral
ART
Antiretroviral therapy
BCG
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin
CMV
Cytomegalovirus
EC
Enteric coated
FBC
Full blood count
GMT
Geometric Median Titre
HAART
Highly Active Anti-Retroviral
Therapy
Hib
Haemophilus influenzae B
HPV
Human papilloma virus
HIV
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IP
Intrapartum
IRIS
Immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome
LIP
Lymphocytic interstitial
pneumonitis
MMR
Mumps, measles and rubella
MTCT
Mother-to-child transmission
OPV
Oral polio vaccine
PCV
Pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine
PMTCT
Prevention of mother-to-child
transmission
pVL
Plasma viral load
PCP
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Pneumonia
OI
Opportunistic infection
RCT
Randomised controlled trial
sd
Single dose
STls
Sexually transmitted infections
TB
Tuberculosis
VLBW
Very low birth weight
WHO
World Health Organisation
ATV
Atazanavir
3TC
Lamivudine
ZDV
Zidovudine
D4T
Stavudine
DDI
Didanosine
EFV
Efavirenz
FTC
Emtricitabine
IDV
Indinavir
IPV
Injected Polio Vaccine
INH
Isoniazid
LPV/r
Ritonavir-boosted
lopinavir (Kaletra)
NLV
Nelfinavir
NNRTI
Non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors
NRTI
Nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors
NVP
Nevirapine
PI
Protease inhibitors
RTV
Ritonavir
SQV
Saquinavir
sdNVP
Single -dose Nevirapine
TDF
Tenofovir
TMP-SMX
TrimethoprimSulfamethoxazole
ZDV
Zidovudine
ZDV+3TC
Zidovudine+ Lamivudine
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The committee of this guideline would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contribution:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft guidelines
• Technical Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines for their
valuable input and feedback
• Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri, Head of Health Technology Assessment
Section, Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have completed disclosure forms. None holds shares
in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are
available on request form the CPG secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of HIV Infection in Children
was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health Malaysia
and was developed without any involvement of the pharmaceutical industry.
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
MANAGEMENT OF HIV INFECTION IN CHILDREN
89
A
At least one meta analysis, systematic review, or RCT, or evidence
rated as good and directly applicable to the target population
B
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable to the
target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of results;
or evidence extrapolated from meta analysis, systematic review, or
RCT
C
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and /or clinical
experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence of directly
applicable clinical studies of good quality
SOURCE: MODIFIED FROM SCOTTISH INTERCOLLEGIATE GUIDELINES
NETWORK (SIGN)
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE SCALE
Level
Strength
Study design
of evidence
1
Good
Meta-analysis of RCT, Systematic review
2
Good
Large sample RCT
3
Good to Fair
Small sample RCT
4
Non-randomised controlled prospective trial
5
Fair
Non-randomised controlled prospective trial with
historical control
6
Fair
Cohort studies
7
Poor
Case-control studies
8
Poor
Non-controlled clinical series, descriptive studies
multi-centre
9
Poor
Expert committees, consensus, case reports,
anecdotes
SOURCE: ADAPTED FROM CATALONIAN AGENCY FOR HEALTH TECHNOLOGY
ASSESSMENT, (CAHTAR) SPAIN