STATEMENT OF INTENT
This guideline was developed to be a guide for best clinical practice
in the role and management of percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) in patients with coronary artery disease. It is based on the best
available evidence at the time of development. Adherence to this
guideline does not necessarily lead to the best clinical outcome in
individual patient care. Thus, every health care provider is responsible
for the management of his/her unique patient, based on the clinical
presentation and management options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINE
This guideline was issued in 2009 and will be reviewed in 2013 or
earlier if important new evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Level 4, Block EI, Parcel E
Government Offices Complex
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Available on the following websites:
http://www.malaysianheart.org
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
2
MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH
Clinical Practice Guidelines for PCI
Treatment of ischemic heart disease has evolved rapidly over
the last decade. In Malaysia, we have now published Guidelines
on treatment of various aspects of heart disease, including
hypertension and myocardial infarction.
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is now an established
method of treating atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. The
advent of modern stents, delivery systems and allied technologies
has allowed interventional cardiologists in the country to improve
their means of delivering a PCI service.
The wealth of evidence on PCI, both local and international, has led
to an expert panel of interventional cardiologists being convened
to draw up these Guidelines. Clinical evidence, technical ‘tips and
tricks’ and information on other aspects of cardiovascular disease
management, make these Guidelines useful for cardiologists and
non-cardiologists alike.
While PCI is still a popular option for many Malaysian patients with
documented obstructive coronary artery disease, it is not the only
option. Aggressive pharmacotherapy and coronary artery bypass
surgery are two other important avenues of treatment. Hence, these
Guidelines serve to aid clinicians to help patients make informed
consent about their treatment.
I congratulate the panel and the National Heart Association of
Malaysia on these Guidelines, which I believe will be an important
resource for all concerned.
Y. Bhg Tan Sri Datuk Dr Hj Mohd Ismail Merican
Director General of Health Malaysia
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
3
FOREWORD FROM THE PRESIDENT,
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY
The American College of Cardiology supports the use of Clinical
Practice Guidelines to help improve the quality of care for all patients
with cardiovascular disease. We believe these are particularly
important steps in efforts to achieve better patient outcomes in those
patients with serious disease. I congratulate the writing committee
on this comprehensive set of guidelines. The National Heart
Association of Malaysia has been a strong affiliate of the College.
It has also been involved with clinical care registries to measure
performance and adherence to Guidelines. This guideline provides
recommendations for the use of percutaneous intervention in both
stable and unstable coronary artery disease. The document is
easy to read, contains key messages and also provides specific
technique suggestions for complicated procedures.
The American College of Cardiology looks forward to further
collaboration with the National Heart Association of Malaysia on
future efforts to improve the care that we provide our patients with
cardiovascular disease.
W. Douglas Weaver, MD, FACC
President (2008)
American College of Cardiology
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
4
Members of the Expert Panel
Chairperson:
Dr Robaayah Zambahari
Consultant Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Secretary:
Dr. Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Consultant Cardiologist,
Sime Darby Medical Center
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Aris Chandran
Consultant Physician,
Hospital Sultanah Bainun
Dr. Choo Gim Hooi
Consultant Cardiologist,
KPJ Selangor Specialist Hospital
Dr. Omar Ismail
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Besar Pulau Pinang
Dr. Rosli Mohd. Ali
Consultant Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Sree Raman
Consultant Physician,
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar
Dr. Sim Kui Hian
Consultant Cardiologist,
Sarawak General Hospital
Dr. Wan Azman
Consultant Cardiologist,
University Malaya Medical Center
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
5
External Reviewers (in alphabetical order):
Physicians
Dr. Chan Hiang Chuan
Emergency Care Physician
Sarawak General Hospital
Professor Chia Yook Chin
Consultant Family Physician
University Malaya Medical Center
Dr. Kauthaman Mahendran
Consultant Physician
Malacca General Hospital
Dr Paranthaman
Family Physician
Klinik Kesihatan Jelapang, Ipoh
Dr Shanta Kumari
Consultant Physician
Hospital Tuanku Ampuan Rahimah
Cardiologists
Dr. David Chew
Consultant Cardiologist
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Tan Kim Heung
Consultant Cardiologist
Sunway Medical Center
Dr. Oteh Maskon
Consultant Cardiologist
Hospital UKM
Dr. Zurkurnai Yusof
Consultant Cardiologist
Hospital USM
Cardiac Surgeons
Mr. Abdul Rahman Ismail
Consultant Cardiac Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Aminah,
Johore Baru
Mr. Prashant Joshi
Consultant Cardiac Surgeon
Sarawak General Hospital
Mr. Venugopal Balchand
Consultant Cardiac Surgeon
Institut Jantung Negara
Cardiac Anaesthesiologist
Dr Jahizah Hassan
Consultant Cardiac Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Besar Pulau Pinang
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
6
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
Rationale:
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is an important cause of morbidity and
mortality in Malaysia. It can be treated by optimal medical therapy,
percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) and coronary artery bypass
graft surgery (CABG). Recently there has been an increase in the
number and complexity of PCI cases being performed in this country.
Objectives:
The objectives of this guideline are to critically evaluate the use of PCI in
the management of CAD based on currently available literature. It aims to:
• assist health care providers in clinical decision making regarding
the appropriate use of coronary revascularisation procedures
• improve patient outcomes following PCI
• improve the standard of care in patients undergoing PCI
This Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) has been drawn up by a
committee appointed by the National Heart Association of Malaysia,
Ministry of Health and the Academy of Medicine. It comprises
cardiologists and general physicians from the government and private
sectors as well as from the Universities.
Process:
Evidence was obtained by systematic review of current medical
literature on PCI for CAD using the usual search engines – PubMed,
Medscape and Ovid. The other international guidelines (American and
European) on PCI were also studied. After much discussion, the draft
was then drawn up by the members of the Expert Panel and submitted
to the Technical Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines,
Ministry of Health Malaysia and key health personnel in the major
hospitals of the Ministry Of Health and the Private Sector for review
and feedback.
The clinical questions were divided into major subgroups and
members of the Expert Panel were assigned individual topics. The
group members met several times throughout the development of the
guideline. All retrieved literature were appraised by individual members
and subsequently presented for discussion during group meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated were agreed collectively
by members of the Expert Panel. Where the evidence was insufficient
the recommendations were derived by consensus of the Panel. The
draft was then sent to local external reviewers for comments. It was
also sent to members of the American College of Cardiology and the
European Society of Cardiology for feedback.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
7
The level of recommendation and the grading of evidence used in this
guideline was adapted from the American Heart Association and the
European Society of Cardiology (ACC/ESC) and outlined on page 8.
In the text, this is written in black on the outer margin.
Clinical Questions Addressed:
• What is the best management of patients with CAD based on
currently available evidence?
• What is the role of optimal medical therapy, PCI and CABG in the
management of CAD?
Target Group:
This guideline is directed at general practitioners, general and family
physicians, medical officers, cardiologists as well as cardiac surgeons
and anaesthesiologists.
Target Population:
All patients with CAD.
Period of Validity of the Guidelines:
This guideline needs to be revised at least every 5 years to keep
abreast with recent developments and knowledge that is being learnt
regarding PCI.
Implementation of the Guidelines:
The implementation of the recommendations of a CPG is part of good
clinical governance. To ensure successful implementation of this CPG
we suggest:
• Increasing public awareness of CAD and its therapies.
• Continuing medical education and training of healthcare providers
on the roles of optimal medical management, PCI and CABG in the
management of CAD.
• Clinical audit by the National Cardiovascular Disease Database
– PCI Registry on all interventional cardiac procedures being
performed in the country, both in public and in private hospitals.
• All mortality and morbidity following PCI should be investigated and
reviewed by a selective in-house committee.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
8
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Adapted from the American Heart Association /
American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) and
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement
that a given procedure/therapy is beneficial, useful and/or
effective.
Conditions for which there is conflicting evidence and/or
divergence of opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of a
procedure/therapy.
Weight of evidence/opinion is in favor of its usefulness/efficacy.
Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion.
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement
that a procedure/therapy is not useful/effective and in some
cases may be harmful.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Data derived from multiple randomised clinical trials or meta
analyses.
Data derived from a single randomised clinical trial or large non
randomised studies.
Only consensus of opinions of experts, case studies or standard
of care.
I
II
II-a
II-b
III
A
B
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
9
Table of Contents
Statement of Intent
1
Review of Guidelines
1
Message from the Director General of Health
2
Foreword from the President, American College of Cardiology
3
Members of the Expert Panel
4
External Reviewers
5
Rational and Process of Guideline Development
6-7
Grades of Recommendation and Levels of Evidence
8
Table of Contents
9-11
Table 1: Indications for PCI in STEMI
12
Table 2: Indications for PCI in UA/NSTEMI
13
Table 3: Indications for PCI in Stable CAD
14
1. Introduction
15
PART A: THE ROLE OF PCI IN THE MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH CAD
2. Indications for PCI
2.1 ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI)
16-23
2.1.1 Indications for Primary PCI
16-18
2.1.2 Transfer of Patient
18
2.1.3 PCI Post Fibrinolysis
18-20
2.1.4 Technical considerations during Primary PCI
20-21
2.1.5 Cardiogenic Shock
22
Flow Chart 1: Management of patients presenting with STEMI
23
2.2 Unstable Angina/ Non St Elevation Myocardial Infarction 24-27
(UA/NSTEMI)
2.2.1 Risk Stratification
24
2.2.2 Management Strategy
24-26
Flow Chart 2: Management of patients presenting with
27
UA/NSTEMI
2.3 Stable coronary artery disease 28-30
2.3.1 PCI versus medical therapy
28-29
2.3.2 PCI versus CABG
29-30
2.4 Non cardiac surgery in the Post PCI patient
31
3. Adjunctive Therapies in PCI
32-36
3.1 Antiplatelet Agents
32-33
3.1.1
Oral Antiplatelet Agents
32-33
3.1.2
Intravenous Antiplatelet Agents
33
3.2 Anti Thrombotic Agents
33-35
3.3 Other Agents
35
4. Specific clinical conditions
37-42
4.1 Diabetes
37-38
4.2 Chronic Kidney Disease
38-41
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
10
4.2.1
Prognosis
38
4.2.2
Acute renal failure post intervention
38-39
4.2.3 Bleeding Risks
39
4.3 Women
41
4.4 Elderly
41-42
4.5 History of bleeding diasthesis,bleeding gastrointestinal or
42
Previous haemorrhagic stroke
PART B: TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF PCI AS A REVASCULARISATION STRATEGY
5. PCI Devices
43-48
5.1 Balloon catheters
43-44
5.1.1
Cutting balloons
43-44
5.1.2 Focus force (Safe cut) balloons
44
5.1.3
Drug-eluting balloons
44
5.2 Stents
44-46
5.2.1 Bare Metal stents (BMS)
45
5.2.2
Drug Eluting Stents (DES)
45
5.2.3
Endothelial Progenitor Cell Capture Stents
45-46
5.2.4
Covered Stents
46
5.2.5 Biodegradable (Bioabsorbable) stents and polymers
46
5.3 Rotational atherectomy
46
5.4 Directional atherectomy
47
5.5 Microcatheters
47
5.6 Thromboaspiration catheters
47
5.7 Thromboectomy Devices
47
5.8 Protection Devices
47
5.9 Laser Therapy
47
5.10 Coil Embolization
48
5.11 Intravascular Imaging Devices
48
5.11.1 Intravascular Ultrasound
48
5.11.2 Optical Coherence Tomography
48
5.11.3 Virtual Histology
48
5.11.4 Angioscopy
48
5.12 Others
48
5.12.1 Pressure Wire
48
6. Lesion/Device Specific Conditions
49-58
6.1 Left Main Stem Disease
49
6.1.1 Technical considerations
49
6.2 Multivessel Disease
49-50
6.2.1
Stable coronary artery disease
49-50
6.2.2 Acute coronary syndrome (UA/NSTEMI)
50
6.2.3 STEMI
50
6.3 Chronic Total Occlusions
50-51
6.3.1 Technical considerations
51
6.4 Bifurcation lesions
51-52
6.4.1
Classification
52
6.4.2 Technical considerations
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
11
6.5 Ostial lesions
52-53
6.5.1
Technical considerations
53
6.6 Saphenous Vein Grafts
53-54
6.6.1 Technical considerations
54
6.6.2 Arterial Conduit- Internal Mammary Artery (IMA)
54
6.7 Coronary Aneurysms
54-55
6.8 Stent Related Complications
55-58
6.8.1 Stent Thrombosis (ST)
55-57
6.8.2 In-stent restenosis (ISR)
57-58
7. Post Procedure complications
58-59
7.1 Vascular Access Complications
58-59
7.1.1 Retroperitoneal hematoma
58
7.1.2 Pseudoaneurysms
58
7.1.3
Arterio-Venous fistula
58-59
7.2 Acute Renal Failure Post Intervention
59
8. Long term follow up and care
59
8.1 Evaluation of Ischemia
59
8.2 Secondary Prevention
59
9. Radiation protection
59
References
60-75
Appendix : I-XIII:
76-85
Appendix I: Contraindications to Fibrinolytic therapy
76
Appendix II: Classification of TIMI Flow grade
77
Appendix III: Classification of TIMI Myocardial Perfusion grade(TMP)
77
Appendix IV: Classification of Unstable Angina
78
Appendix V: TIMI Risk Score for UA/NSTEMI
79
Appendix VI: Classification of Angina Severity
80
Appendix VII: Risk factor goals in patients with CAD
80
Appendix VIII: Calculation of creatinine clearance
81
Appendix IX: Commonly used iodinated contrast agents
81
Appendix X: Patient and lesion characteristics for recanalisation
82
Success (EURO CTO Club)
Appendix XI: Medina Classification of Bifurcation Lesions
83
Appendix XII: Classification of Instent Restenosis (ISR)
84
Appendix XIII: Grade of recommendation and level of evidence for
85
Secondary prevention of CAD
Acknowledgements
86
Disclosure statement
86
Source of funding
86
Abbreviations
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
12
Primary PCI in patients presenting < 12 hours of
chest pain and :
  < 3 hours and PCI time delay is < 60 mins
  3-12 hours in a PCI center or PCI transfer
delay < 2 hours
Primary PCI in patients presenting more than
12 hours of chest pain and continuing signs of :
  Cardiac ischaemia, LVF and/or
hemodynamic instability
Primary PCI in patients who have:
high risk features - section 2.1.1.(b)
contraindications to fibrinolytics
Rescue PCI in patients with failed fibrinolysis
and have continuing signs of :
  Chest pain, LVF, hemodynamic instability
and/or persistent hyperacute changes in the
ECG
Facilitated PCI
Post fibrinolysis and :
  Routine invasive angiography with view to
PCI and stenting < in 24 hours in all patients
  Delayed selective angiography depending on
presence of hemodynamic instability or
residual ischemia
PCI of totally occluded vessel 3-28 days after MI
and no reversible ischemia
PCI in Cardiogenic shock and:
  Age < 75 years
  Age > 75 years
ACC/ESC
Classification
I, A
I, A
IIa, C
I, A
I, C
I, A
III, A
IIa, A
I, A
III, B
IIa, B
IIb, B
TABLE 1: INDICATIONS FOR PCI IN STEMI
INDICATIONS
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
13
High Risk Patients:
Routine Invasive angiography in all high risk
patients prior to hospital discharge
Delayed selective angiography depending upon
presence of residual ischemia and hemodynamic
instability
Low Risk Patients:
- Routine invasive angiography in all patients who
at low risk (negative cardiac biomarkers, normal
ECG and/or TIMI score <3*)
- Only a small area of myocardium at risk
- Insignificant disease (less than 50% coronary
stenosis)
I, A
I, A
IIb, C
III, C
III, C
* see Appendix V, page 79
TABLE 2: INDICATIONS FOR PCI IN UA/NSTEMI
INDICATIONS
ACC/ESC
Classification
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
14
In patients requiring revascularization, PCI may be
considered in:
- 1 or 2 vessel disease with lesion(s) amenable to
PCI and a high likelihood of success
- 3 vessel disease and :
discrete lesions suitable for PCI
complex lesions and ineligible for CABG
complex lesions and eligible for CABG
diabetes
- restenosis after PCI
- chronic total occlusions
- unprotected left main and:
high surgical risk and not eligible for CABG
eligible for CABG
reduced LV function and eligible for CABG
associated 3-vessel disease
I, A
IIa, B
IIa, B
IIb, B
IIb, B
IIb, B
IIb, B
IIa, B
IIb, B
IIb, C
IIb, C
* The treatment of choice for patients with significant left main stem
disease and 3- vessel disease is CABG89,91.
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
TABLE 3: INDICATIONS FOR PCI IN STABLE CAD*
I
C
P
R
O
F
N
O
I
T
A
C
I
D
N
I
C
S
E
/
C
C
A
Classification
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
15
1.
INTRODUCTION
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is an important cause of morbidity and
mortality in Malaysia1. It accounted for about a fifth of the total burden
of disease (admissions in government hospitals) in 2000. Coronary
artery disease (CAD) and cerebrovascular disease accounted for 50%
and 32% of the cardiovascular burden respectively1. In 2006, CVD was
the commonest cause of deaths in government hospitals accounting
for 24.2% of total deaths2.
Management of CAD includes aggressive risk factor modification and
lifestyle changes, medical therapy and revascularisation procedures.
Revascularisation is by percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and
coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
In Malaysia, there has been an increase in the number of diagnostic
and interventional cardiac procedures performed over the last few
years. With technical improvement in devices and skills, more complex
PCI cases are now being addressed.
The National Cardiovascular Disease (NCVD) - PCI Registry was
initiated in 2006 to obtain data and for clinical audit.
The objectives of this clinical practice guideline are to critically evaluate
the use of PCI in the management of CAD based on currently available
literature. It aims to:
•
assist health care providers in clinical decision making regarding
the appropriate use of coronary revascularisation procedures
•
improve patient outcomes following PCI
•
improve the standard of care in patients undergoing PCI
For this purpose, this guideline is divided into 2 parts:
•
Part A: The role of PCI in the management of patients with CAD
•
Part B: Technical aspects of PCI as a revascularisation strategy
Guidelines help in the management of patients. Not all eligible
patients will have access to all the recommendations stated in
this guideline. Patient care should be individualised and clinical
judgement plays an important role in decision making.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
16
PART A: THE ROLE OF PCI IN THE MANAGEMENT OF
PATIENTS WITH CAD
2.
INDICATIONS FOR PCI
2.1. ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI)
Definition:
Myocardial infarction is myocardial necrosis due to acute total
occlusion of the coronary artery.
The culprit vessel should be reopened as early as possible to
prevent cell death and for myocardial salvage. Reperfusion may
be achieved by either primary PCI or fibrinolytic therapy. Primary
PCI is defined as intervention in the culprit vessel without prior
thrombolytic therapy. (see Flow Chart 1, page 23)
When compared to fibrinolysis, patients with STEMI treated by
primary PCI have consistently been shown to have3:
• lower short term mortality
• fewer non fatal reinfarctions
• fewer intracranial hemorrhages and strokes
High risk patients have the greatest mortality benefit with
primary PCI. The short term benefits persisted during long term
(6-18months) follow–up4,5.
Timing is one of several factors that should be considered when
determining the appropriate reperfusion strategy. In patients
undergoing primary PCI, the optimal door to balloon time should
be within 90 minutes. However, with every 15 minute delay in
the time between arrival at the door and restoration of TIMI 3
flow, mortality increases6.
The mortality benefits of primary PCI is seen when the
incremental delay to PCI (door to balloon time minus door to
needle time) is no more than 60 minutes of the patient’s arrival
at the hospital7. A more recent study suggests that even if the
incremental delay is up to 2 hours, primary PCI has mortality
benefits beyond fibrinolytic therapy8.
“TIME IS MYOCARDIUM”
Most of the trials comparing primary PCI to fibrinolytic therapy
have been carried out by experienced operators with skilled
support staff. Thus to obtain the same benefits as seen in these
trials, it is important that primary PCI be performed promptly by
experienced operators and in centers performing a sufficient
number of primary PCI procedures.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
17
2.1.1. Indications for Primary PCI (Table 1, page 12)
The following factors help guide the choice of reperfusion
strategies:
• Time from symptom onset to first medical contact
• Time to hospital fibrinolysis (time from hospital arrival to
administration of fibrinolytic therapy “door to needle time”)
• PCI time delay (time from hospital arrival to balloon dilatation
“door to balloon time” minus “ door to needle time”)
• Contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy (Appendix I, page 76)
• The presence of high risk features (section B)
The best reperfusion strategy will depend upon:
A) Time from onset of symptoms
Early presentation (within 3 hours)
If both PCI and fibrinolytic treatment options are readily available,
they have been shown to be equally effective9,10 except for
the following situations where primary PCI is the preferred
strategy:
• fibrinolytic therapy is contraindicated (Appendix I, page 76)
• presence of high-risk features [as listed in section 2.1.1.(B)]
• PCI time delay [(door-to-balloon time) minus (door-to-needle
time)] is less than 60 minutes7
Late presentation (3 to 12 hours)
Primary PCI is preferred 3,10. The door to balloon time should be
within 90 min if the patient presents at a PCI capable facility7.
If transferred from a center with no PCI facilities, it should be
less than 2 hours (including transfer delay)11,12
If the time delay to primary PCI is longer than as mentioned
above, then fibrinolytic therapy should be given.
Very late presentation (> 12 hours)
Both primary PCI and fibrinolytic therapy are not routinely
recommended except for the following patients:
• Severe HF
• Hemodynamic or electrical instability
• Evidence of persistence ischaemia
B) Presence of High risk features
These include:
• Large infarcts
• Anterior infarcts
• LV failure
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
18
•
Hemodynamic or electrical instability
•
Cardiogenic shock
•
Elderly patients
•
Post revascularisation (post CABG and post PCI)
•
Post infarct angina
•
Previous MI
Primary PCI is the preferred strategy in these patients13,14,15.
The fibrinolytic agents available in Malaysia are streptokinase,
tissue plasminogen activator and tenecteplase. (Refer 2nd CPG
STEMI 2007)
2.1.2.
Transfer of patient
Transfer of patients with STEMI to PCI capable centers should
be considered in the following situations:
•
when
fibrinolytic
therapy
is
contraindicated
or
unsuccessful16,17,18
•
when cardiogenic shock occurs13,14
•
when symptoms have been present for more than 3 hours
and PCI can be performed within 2 hours
•
in patients with high risk patients [listed in section 2.1.1 (B)]
given thrombolysis within 6 hours at a non-PCI centre 19,20
2.1.3.
PCI Post Fibrinolysis
Following fibrinolysis, PCI may be performed as21,22 :
•
rescue PCI - for ongoing/recurrent ischemia
•
immediate PCI [Facilitated PCI] - performed routinely
immediately after fibrinolysis
•
delayed routine PCI – stable patients undergo angiography
and PCI irrespective of the absence or presence of
myocardial ischaemia or viability
•
delayed selective PCI – only patients with spontaneous or
inducible ischaemia undergo angiography and PCI
2.1.3.1. Rescue PCI
Rescue PCI is initiated as soon as there are features indicating
failed fibrinolytic therapy manifested as:
•
ongoing chest pains
•
persistent hyper-acute ECG changes (< 50% resolution of
ST elevation in the lead showing the greatest degree of ST
elevation at presentation)
•
hemodynamic and electrical instability
•
heart failure
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
19
Rescue PCI is associated with a reduction in heart failure,
reinfarction and a trend towards reduction in mortality, but with
increased risk of bleeding and stroke16,17,18. Hence these patients
should be individually evaluated.
2.1.3.2. Facilitated PCI
Facilitated PCI refers to a strategy of planned immediate PCI after
an initial pharmacologic regimen consisting of either a fibrinolytic
agent, glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors or a combination of
these agents. The purpose is to bridge the delay between first
medical contact and primary PCI.
This strategy however has not been shown to reduce infarct size
or improve patient outcomes. It is also associated with an increase
in mortality, recurrent ischaemia, reinfarction rates and major
bleeding. It is thus not recommended 22-26.
2.1.3.3. Delayed routine angiography and PCI
This refers to stable patients post fibrinolysis undergoing
angiography and PCI irrespective of the absence or presence of
myocardial ischaemia or viability.
Recent studies show that routine angiography and PCI with stent
implantation (as opposed to routine balloon PCI only) in the early
hours after fibrinolysis improved patient outcomes as compared to
symptom or ischaemia guided delayed intervention16-19,21,27-32.
This strategy of immediate or early angiography with the intent to
perform PCI with stenting as necessary, within hours of fibrinolysis
(< 24 hours), has resulted in a significant reduction in mortality
and reinfarction rates without an increase in adverse events. The
optimal timing interval between fibrinolytic therapy and PCI is
however still unknown.
2.1.3. 4. Delayed selective angiography and PCI
This strategy refers to patients undergoing angiography and PCI
only if there is spontaneous or inducible ischaemia.
Stable patients who are at low risk and who did not undergo early
(< 24 hours) angiography should undergo stress testing33,34. If
spontaneous or inducible ischaemia is present, then angiography
and appropriate revascularisation should be performed.
Routine PCI of totally occluded coronary arteries 3-28 days
after STEMI is not recommended unless there is ischaemia
demonstrated35.
However if the patient is admitted to a non PCI center and is stable
post fibrinolysis, an initial conservative approach with delayed
selective angiography and PCI may be adopted guided by the
attending physician’s discretion.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
20
2.1.4.
Technical considerations during primary PCI
For a favourable outcome, it is important to obtain good TIMI 3
epicardial flow as well as optimum reperfusion of the myocardial
microvasculature (TIMI myocardial perfusion grade – TMP).
(Appendix II and III, page 77)
2.1.4.1. Pre-procedure
• If breathless, the patient should be treated appropriately before
being taken to the catheterisation laboratory.
• Optimise patient’s haemodynamics and oxygen saturation.
• oral aspirin 300 mg
• clopidogrel 300-600 mg
• anti-thrombotic therapy:
- heparin or
- bivalirudin
(For dosages see Table 5 & 8, page 36 and 41)
• Femoral access is usually preferred because this allows for the
use of larger devices if necessary and the use of intra-aortic
balloon pump (IABP) when indicated.
2.1.4.2. Technical Tips during Procedure
• Primary PCI should only be performed on the infarct related
artery (IRA) because dilating a non-IRA at the same sitting may
cause stress on too much of the myocardium acutely.
• Occasionally, complete revascularisation may be attempted on
significant lesions in non culprit vessels when time and patient
safety permit36.
• A soft or floppy-tipped 0.014 inch streerable guide wire is preferred.
• When flow is re-established, reperfusion arrhythmias may occur.
• If thrombus is present, consider the use of an aspiration
catheter.
• The first balloon is usually a smaller balloon than the reference
vessel.
• Consider giving intra-coronary nitroglycerine to ensure that the
vessel is not vasospastic and for appropriate stent sizing.
• Randomised trials have shown that bare metal stents (BMS)
reduced restenosis and target vessel revascularisation (TVR)
when compared to plain balloon angioplasty (POBA) but did
not improve mortality or ventricular function37,38. Stents have
become the strategy of choice for primary PCI.
2.1.4.3. Drug Eluting Stents (DES) vs BMS for STEMI
Both DES and BMS are effective in the setting of STEMI.
Randomised trials have not shown any mortality advantage of
DES over BMS. However, DES is associated with lower TVR
without an increase in all cause mortality39,40.
2.1.4.4. Distal Embolisation and the Use of Adjunctive
Devices and Pharmacotherapy.
Thrombus burden is usually large if the patient presents late or the
IRA is ectatic. Predictors of slow flow (TIMI 1 and 2 – Appendix II,
page 77) and no-reflow (TIMI 0) of the IRA are41:
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
21
•
vessel diameter ≥ 3.5 mm
•
treatment of the right coronary artery
•
higher TIMI thrombus score42
•
angiographic findings such as :
-
“cut-off” sign (ie abrupt occlusion of the epicardial vessel)
seen on the coronary angiogram
-
persistent contrast stasis just proximal and/or distal to the
obstruction
-
longer lesions
-
accumulated thrombus of > 5 mm proximal to occlusion
-
floating thrombus
To prevent distal embolization the following devices have been
studied:
•
aspiration catheter:- In recent studies, aspiration of thrombus
prior to PCI was associated with improved tissue reperfusion
(TMP grade – Appendix III, page 77) and medium term survival
when compared with conventional PCI43,44,45.
•
distal embolic protection:- meta-analysis showed that these
devices had a neutral effect on mortality43
•
Glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors - Abciximab therapy during
primary PCI showed short term benefit especially in high risk
patients46-50. The data on its effect on long term survival is
however conflicting.
2.1.4.5. Management of No Reflow
No reflow (TIMI 0) or slow reflow (TIMI 1 and 2) may occur transiently
or may persist after primary PCI.
No-reflow may occur as a consequence of:
•
microvascular dysfunction from vasospasm
•
distal embolisation
•
endothelial injury
It is associated with poor recovery of LV function and a higher
incidence of post MI complications.
Management includes:
•
Intracoronary (IC) Nitroglycerin
•
IC Verapamil 100 – 200 µg boluses
•
IC Adenosine 100 – 200 µg boluses
•
IC Nitroprusside 50 – 100 µg boluses
•
Others: IC Papaverine, IC Nicorandil
2.1.5. Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock is defined as a systolic BP of < 90 mmHg
associated with signs of tissue hypoperfusion, and central filling
pressure [pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)] of >20mmHg
or cardiac index of <1.8L/min/m.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
22
KEY MESSAGES:
•
Primary PCI is the treatment of choice in STEMI for all patients
with high risk features and in those presenting between 3-12
hours of symptom onset.
•
In patients presenting <3 hours, both primary PCI and fibrinolytic
therapy are equally effective except in patients with high risk
features and in those where the PCI time delay is < 60 minutes.
In these cases, the treatment of choice is primary PCI.
Cardiogenic shock may occur after STEMI or Non ST Elevation
MI (NSTEMI) and carries a very high mortality rate. It may be
present at admission or may develop during hospitalisation
(in-hospital onset). In Europe, the rate of cardiogenic shock at
admission has remained the same but the rate of in-hospital
onset has decreased. This was due to increased rates of primary
PCI51.
Cardiogenic shock is usually due to left ventricular pump failure
although occasionally it may be due to right ventricular infarction
or mechanical complications such as acute valvular insufficiency
and ventricular septal rupture. Mechanical complications should be
considered for early surgical repair although surgical risks are high.
Emergency PCI or urgent CABG is the treatment of choice and
should be considered early. Patients who are less than 75 years
of age should be considered for PCI13,52 whatever the time delay;
the earlier the intervention the better the outcome.
Recent data seem to indicate that selected patients older than 75
years also do better with primary PCI if this is done early51,53,54.
2.1.5.1. Technical considerations in Cardiogenic Shock
Patients in cardiogenic shock should be treated appropriately
with the early use of mechanical ventilation, inotropes and
vasopressors. An IABP should be used early (preferably even
before starting the procedure) to help maintain perfusion and to
augment LV performance. In a number of small clinical studies,it
has been shown to improve survival even in patients not
undergoing PCI 55-58. A recent meta-analysis however, showed
mixed results59. The role of IABP in the management of patients
in cardiogenic is currently being addressed in an ongoing trial60.
Patients in cardiogenic shock often have multivessel disease
and all critical lesions besides the culprit lesion, should be
dilated taking into consideration the amount of contrast used
and the length of the procedure. This is in contrast to the usual
recommendation to only treat the culprit vessel in primary PCI
for STEMI without cardiogenic shock. If multivessel PCI is not
possible, then the patient should be evaluated for urgent CABG.
The use of stents and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors has been associated
with improved outcomes36.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
24
2.2.
Unstable Angina / Non ST segment Elevation
Myocardial Infarction (UA/NSTEMI)
Definition:
Unstable angina may be defined as61: (Appendix IV, page 78)
1. new onset of severe angina or accelerated angina; no
rest pain
2. angina at rest within past month but not within preceding
48 hour (angina at rest, subacute)
3. angina at rest within 48 hour (angina at rest, acute).
It may be further classified according to clinical circumstances
into either:
a) primary – absence of extracardiac disease
b) secondary – presence of extracardiac disease
c) post-infarct – chest pains occuring within 2 weeks of an
acute MI
NSTEMI may be defined as MI as indicated by the history and
elevation of cardiac biomarkers but with the absence of ST
elevation in the ECG.
2.2.1. Risk stratification
Patients with UA/NSTEMI should be risk stratified as outlined
in the CPG for UA/NSTEMI. The TIMI risk score is yet another
risk stratification model that can be used to assist in decision
making. This risk score is based on the patient’s clinical condition
at admission. (Appendix V, page 79)
Risk stratification is important because it will help decide:
•
site of care – general ward or critical care ward
•
intensity of medical therapy (e.g. need for GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors)
•
invasive versus conservative strategy
2.2.2. Management strategy (Flow chart 2, page 27)
2.2.2.1. Invasive strategy (Table 2, page 13)
Patients requiring early angiography with view to revascularisation
(invasive strategy) are those:
• at very high risk – in these patients urgent angiography
may be necessary within 24 hours of admission
• at high risk – early angiography within hospital admission
The following high risk patients should be considered for an
invasive strategy:
• elevated cardiac biomarkers (troponins and/or CKMB
levels)
• dynamic ST segment changes
• heart failure
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
25
The following high risk patients should also be considered for an
invasive strategy:
• Recurrent resting chest pain despite optimum medical therapy
• Worsening mitral regurgitation
• Reduced LV systolic function (LVEF< 35%)
• Haemodynamic instability
• Major arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation)
• History of known coronary artery disease (CAD), previous
MI, prior PCI or CABG
These high risk patients require early angiography following
intensive antithrombotic and anti ischaemic medications to “cool
off” the plaque.
The value of medical stabilisation before angiography and
the timing of intervention in these high risk patients have been
assessed in 3 studies. In one study, patients randomised to
immediate angiography (< 24 hours) had fewer deaths and MI’s
at 30 days compared to those whose angiograms were deferred
to a mean of 86 hours62.
Two recent studies however, have shown that even in moderate to
high risk patients both the early invasive strategy (<24 hours) and
the delayed invasive strategy (>24 hours but within that hospital
admission) were equally effective and safe 63,64.
2.2.2.2. Conservative strategy
A conservative strategy involves optimal medical therapy and
consideration for selective coronary angiography in those:
• who have recurrent chest pains at rest or on minimal exertion
• abnormal resting ECG, stress ECG or other tests for
myocardial ischaemia
There have been a number of studies addressing the issue of
routine early invasive therapy versus a conservative strategy with
selective coronary angiography.
Meta-analysis of recent randomised trials of UA/NSTEMI have
shown mortality and morbidity benefits in the routine early invasive
strategy with appropriate revascularisation. This is as opposed to
a conservative strategy with selective coronary angiography only
in those with ischaemia65,66,67.
It has also been found to be beneficial in women as well as in the
elderly68,69.
If the patient is admitted to a non PCI center with limitations for
immediate/early transfer, guided by the attending physician’s
discretion and patient preferences, an initial conservative
approach may be adopted70.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
26
These patients should have tests for myocardial ischaemia
(stress tests, nuclear scans etc) and LV function. The presence
of significant residual ischaemia (large anterior or multiple
perfusion defects) and a depressed LV function is an indication
for angiography and revascularisation.
Low risk patients (negative cardiac biomarkers, normal ECG
and/or TIMI risk score <3) can be treated conservatively.
However a coronary or computer tomographic (CT) angiogram
may be considered for diagnostic and prognostic purposes and
for planning management strategy.
KEY MESSAGES:
•
All patients with UA/NSTEMI should be risk stratified.
•
High risk patients should undergo early (in-hospital)
coronary angiography and appropriate revascularisation.
•
Low risk patients (negative cardiac biomarkers and normal
ECG and/or TIMI score <3) can be treated conservatively
and undergo non invasive tests for ischaemia.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
27
* TIMI risk score – Appendix V, page 79
** High Risk Features
-
Recurrent resting chest pain despite optimum
medical therapy Continue medical
-
Heart failure symptoms and or worsening mitral
regurgitation therapy
-
Reduced LV systolic function (LVEF< 35%)
-
Hemodynamic instability
-
Major arrythmias (ventricular tachycardia,
ventricular fibrillation)
-
History of known CAD, previous MI, prior PCI
or CABG
Flow chart 2: MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS
PRESENTING WITH UA/NSTEMI
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
28
2.3.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease (CAD)
Stable CAD refers to stable angina, asymptomatic myocardial
ischaemia and coronary atherosclerosis detected by coronary or
CT angiogram. Stable angina is defined as a clinical syndrome
characterized by discomfort in the chest, jaw, shoulder, back or
arms, typically elicited by exertion or emotional stress and relieved
by rest or nitroglycerine. (Appendix VI, page 80)
The objectives of treatment of stable CAD are to:
• minimise or relieve symptoms
• slow down /prevent progression of disease
• improve prognosis by preventing myocardial infarction and
death
Treatment strategies include:
• medical therapy
• PCI
• CABG surgery
The choice of treatment strategy will depend on the:
• severity of symptoms (Appendix VI, page 80)
• degree of myocardial ischaemia
• coronary anatomy, severity and complexity of coronary stenosis
and lesion morphology
2.3.1. PCI vs medical therapy
Meta-analysis of randomised trials comparing PCI vs medical
therapy in patients with stable CAD concluded that PCI71,77,73.
• was more effective than medical therapy alone in relieving
angina
• was associated with better exercise tolerance
• did not reduce the risk of death or myocardial infarction (MI)
A recent large study (done in the stent era) comparing an initial
management strategy of PCI in combination with optimal medical
therapy to optimal medical therapy alone showed that the invasive
strategy:
• did not reduce the risk of death, MI, or other major cardiovascular
events74
• provided small but significant incremental benefits in quality of
life75 i.e angina stability, angina frequency or limitation of exercise
capacity. These benefits however disappeared by 36 months.
• provided a greater benefit (symptom relief) in those patients
with more severe ischaemia and more frequent angina75
Thus patients with stable CAD should be treated with
optimal medical therapy using a combination of antiplatelet
agents, statins, β-blockers and angiotensin converting
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
29
enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I)76. These medications have been shown
to improve long term survival by preventing death, MI and other
major cardiovascular events. The survival of patients post MI
who were on all 4 medications (aspirin, β-blockers, statins and
ACE-I) was greater than those on zero, one, two or three of these
medications only77,78.
Nitrates, calcium channel blockers and other anti ischaemic agents
(such as trimetazidine and ivabradine) may also be added for
relief of angina and for reducing myocardial ischaemia. Reduction
in ischaemia was associated with a significant reduction in risk
and better long term outcomes79.
It is important to achieve risk factor treatment goals (Appendix VII,
page 80). Patients who attained these treatment goals generally
did better78,80. These medications should be continued long term
provided that there are no contraindications.
2.3.1.1. Indications for revascularisation
The following individuals should be considered for revascularisation:
• patients with significant and/or disabling angina especially
within 3 months of a recent MI81
• patients with large areas of ischaemia on non invasive testing
• those whose symptoms were initially well controlled but with
recurrence of symptoms or objective evidence of worsening
ischaemia on non invasive testing74
In general, all stable asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic
patients should undergo testing for reversible ischaemia prior to
coronary angiography.
If this was not done, certain coronary angiographic features may
help decide the need for revascularisation81:
• Subtotal occlusions supplying non infarcted myocardium
• Stenosis greater than 90%
• Significant complex lesions that are prone to develop total
occlusions
• Reduced fractional flow reserve (< 0.8)82,83
• Minimal Luminal Area (MLA) <4.0 mm2 in proximal 2/3 of epicardial
vessels as assessed by intra-vascular ultrasound (IVUS)84
2.3.2. PCI versus CABG
Both strategies are equally effective for the treatment of symptoms.
There is also no significant difference in mortality between the 2
strategies in randomised patients in clinical trials at 1, 3, 8 years85
and 10 years86. To obtain the same long term clinical benefits as
seen in patients undergoing CABG, it is important that patients
undergoing PCI have complete revascularisation87. In general,
repeat revascularisation procedures are less with CABG. With the
use of stents, however, the need for repeat procedures following
PCI has also been reduced by as much as 50%88.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
30
CABG has been shown to have a survival benefit in high risk
individuals with complex coronary anatomy (e.g. left main stem,
triple vessel disease) 89,90. These patients were often not included
in the randomised clinical trials done in the pre-stent era.
In the early trials done in the pre – DES era, CABG has been
shown to have a lower 5 year risk of death in patients with:
• diabetes85,88,91 (see section on Diabetes)
• multi-vessel disease with impaired Left Ventricular (LV) systolic
function (LVEF < 35%)
Patients with impaired LV function were not randomised in most
of the trials. These patients are traditionally better treated with
CABG although treatment needs to be individualised.
When compared to medical therapy, patients with significant
left main stem narrowing (> 50%) do better with CABG. Most of
the early trials of PCI for left main stem disease have used bare
metal stents. Procedural success was high but there was high
early restenosis and mortality92,93. More recent trials using DES
have had more promising results91. When left main stem disease
is associated with poor LV function, CABG is the preferred
revascularisation strategy (see section on Left main stem disease).
A recent large trial comparing PCI (with DES) and CABG for
patients with triple vessel CAD and left main stem disease
showed that both procedures were equally effective in reducing
death and MI91. Patients undergoing PCI however, had more
repeat revascularisation procedures. Generally patients with
more complex disease (higher “SYNTAX” scores94) did better
with CABG. There was a lower incidence of strokes in patients
undergoing PCI85,91.
Ideally, the best strategy for revascularisation in a patient with
CAD should be made by mutual discussion by a “heart team”
consisting of cardiologists and surgeons taking into consideration
the coronary anatomy, the presence of co-morbidity and the
patient’s preferences89. The patient and family must be informed of
the advantages and disadvantages of each of the strategies90,95.
Registry data indicate that when the choice of revascularisation
strategy is guided by physician selection, the long term outcome
is similar irrespective of the choice of revascularisation strategy –
i.e. PCI or CABG96,97,98.
2.3.2.1.
Indications for PCI as a revascularisation
strategy- Table 3, page 14
KEY MESSAGES:
• All patients with stable CAD should receive optimal medical
therapy consisting of antiplatelet agents, β-blockers, ACE-I,
statins and anti-ischaemic drug therapy.
• Patients with significant angina or large areas of reversible
ischaemia on non invasive testing should undergo appropriate
revascularisation.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
31
KEY MESSAGES:
• Patients with DES should be managed optimally by the
physician, cardiologist, surgeon and the anaesthesiologist
prior to non cardiac surgery.
• Dual anti-platelet therapy should not be discontinued
prematurely in patients with DES.
2.4.
Non-cardiac surgery in the post PCI patient
Patients with significant cardiac disease (unstable CAD, significant
arrhythmias, decompensated HF and severe valvular stenosis) should
be properly evaluated and treated prior to non cardiac surgery99.
In patients with CAD, routine prophylactic coronary angiography
and PCI is not recommended in stable patients undergoing noncardiac surgery100.
Patients with UA/NSTEMI, recent MI and Class III and IV
angina (Appendix VI, page 80) should undergo appropriate
revascularisation prior to elective surgery. Where PCI is the chosen
revascularisation strategy, POBA or if stents are necessary, BMS
should be used instead of DES.
Patients post PCI with DES requiring elective or emergency
surgeries pose significant challenges. These patients are exposed
to the risks of either:
• possible life threatening surgical bleeding due to the
continuation of their anti platelet therapy
• acute MI and cardiac death due to stent thrombosis resulting
from the premature or inappropriate discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy.
The situation is aggravated by surgery itself which creates a
prothrombotic and pro–inflammatory state. These risks must be
carefully balanced against the risk of delaying the operation to
such time as is considered safe to stop antiplatelet therapy101,102.
Antiplatelet therapy should not be stopped casually.
The peri-operative physicians, anaesthesiologists and surgeons
should contact the patient’s cardiologist prior to surgery to discuss
optimal patient management. Patients should also be advised
to inform any healthcare provider who instructs them to stop
antiplatelet therapy to consult their cardiologist first.
Low risk surgical procedures where bleeding is minimal or can
be easily controlled such as routine dental procedures or simple
surgical operations such as removal of skin cysts/ lumps should
not justify cessation of dual antiplatelet therapy.
Wherever possible, elective surgery should be deferred for at least
4-6 weeks after BMS implantation and at least for a year after DES
implantation.
If surgery cannot be delayed, clopidogrel should be stopped for a
minimum of 5 days and preferably for 7 days prior to surgery and
restarted as soon as possible after the procedure. Aspirin should
be continued throughout the surgery if possible103,104,105.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
32
3. ADJUNCTIVE THERAPIES FOR PCI
3.1.
Antiplatelet agents
3.1.1. Oral Antiplatelet Therapy
3.1.1.1.
Aspirin
• Patients on long term aspirin therapy undergoing elective PCI
should continue taking their usual dose before the PCI procedure.
• Patients not on aspirin therapy should be given 300mg of
aspirin at least 2 hours and preferably 24 hours before the PCI
procedure. Enteric coated aspirin should not be given because
of the slow onset of action.
• After the PCI procedure, patients should be on life long aspirin
therapy106.
• The daily long term aspirin dose should be 100-150mg
indefinitely106.
• The optimal loading dose and maintenance dose of aspirin
following PCI is being addressed in an ongoing study
(CURRENT/OASIS-7).
3.1.1.2. Thienopyridines
a) Clopidogrel
• A loading dose of clopidogrel 300-600mg should be administered
before PCI107-111. This loading dose is important in patients
admitted with STEMI and ACS111,112.
• However, in patients with chronic stable angina undergoing PCI,
a recent study found no benefit in pretreating with clopidogrel. It
was found that giving clopidogrel in the catheterisation lab just
prior to ad-hoc PCI did not result in an increase in ischaemic
complications113,114.
• In patients who have undergone PCI, clopidogrel 75mg daily
should be given for at least 1 month after bare-metal stent
implantation (unless the patient is at increased risk of bleeding;
then it should be given for a minimum of 2 weeks)115.
• After DES, clopidogrel should be given at 75mg daily for at least
a year116,117.
• In patients with an absolute contraindication to aspirin, it is
reasonable to give a 300-600mg loading dose of clopidogrel,
administered at least 6 hours before PCI. This is followed by a
maintenance dose of 75-150 mg daily.
• The dose of clopidogrel may be increased to 150 mg per day if
platelet aggregration studies show that there is less than 50%
inhibition of platelet aggregation118.
• Patients who are at high risk of very late stent thrombosis (eg.
multiple overlapping stents, long stents, small vessels, ostial
or bifurcation lesions, LMS, sub-optimal stent result), may be
considered for long term dual antiplatelet therapy (beyond a
year)102.
b) Ticlopidine
• It may be considered as an alternative to clopidogrel following
POBA or BMS implantation. It has however, not been investigated
following implantation of DES.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
33
• It is associated with neutropenia in 1% of patients119. Due to this
safety reason, it is not commonly used in patients following PCI.
Patients on ticlopidine should have their total white cell count
monitored regularly for the initial 3 months.
• Patients who are not on ticlopidine should be given 250mg b.i.d.
for at least 3 days prior to procedure.
• Patients not on maintenance dose of ticlopidine may be given a
loading dose of 500mg.
• Patients already on long term ticlopidine undergoing PCI may be
continued at a dose of 250mg b.i.d120,121,122.
• In patients who have undergone PCI, ticlopidine 250mg b.i.d.
should be given together with aspirin for at least 1 month after
bare-metal stent implantation (unless the patient is at increased
risk of bleeding; then it should be given for a minimum of 2
weeks)121,122,123.
c) Prasugrel
• A new antiplatelet agent, prasugrel, has been shown to be more
effective than clopidogrel in reducing ischaemic events but was
associated with increased bleeding124,125.
• In a recent study, prasugrel was found to be more effective
than clopidogrel in reducing cardiovascular death, non fatal MI
and non fatal stroke in patients with STEMI. Only patients who
subsequently went on to CABG had increased bleeding with
prasugrel126.
3.1.2. Intravenous Antiplatelet Therapy – Glycoprotein (GP)
IIb/IIIa Inhibitors
• If clopidogrel is given at the time of an ad-hoc procedure,
supplementation with GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors can be beneficial
to facilitate earlier platelet inhibition than with clopidogrel
alone127,128.
• In STEMI, GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors may be given in the presence of
intra-coronary thrombus.
• In a recent small study, tirofiban administered in the pre-hospital
setting prior to primary PCI, was found to be associated with
significant ST segment resolution129.
• In patients with high risk ACS, it may be administered as
an upstream therapy or in the catheterisation laboratory (inlab)130,131.
• A recent study showed that patients with NSTEMI treated with
aspirin, clopidogrel, and heparin, there was no benefit to the
upstream use of the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor, eptifibatide compared
with provisional use immediately prior to PCI. Routine upstream
use of eptifibatide increased major bleeding as well as the need
for transfusion132.
• In low to intermediate risk elective PCI patients, GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors do not confer additional benefits in those who are
already pre-loaded with 600mg clopidogrel133.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
34
• A meta analysis indicated that diabetics undergoing PCI
benefited from abciximab134.
For dosages see Table 4, page 35
3.2.
Antithrombotic Therapy
These include:
- Unfractionated Heparin (UFH)
- Low Molecular Weight Heparin (LMWH)
- Bivalirudin
- Fondaparinux
• Unfractionated heparin (UFH) should be administered to
patients undergoing PCI.
• Bivalirudin may be used as a substitute for heparin in patients
with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)135.
• It is reasonable to use bivalirudin as an alternative to UFH
and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in patients undergoing elective
PCI127,136,137,138.
• In patients with STEMI, the use of bivalirudin instead of UFH
was associated with lower major bleeding and all cause
mortality but with a small increase in stent thrombosis137.
• Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) is a reasonable
alternative to UFH in patients with UA/NSTEMI undergoing
PCI139. A dose of enoxaparin at 0.75 mg per kilogram given
intravenously (IV) yields bleeding rates similar to those for
unfractionated heparin, with more predictable anticoagulation
levels140.
• Fondaparinux is best used in UA/NSTEMI and STEMI patients
treated conservatively.
• Fondaparinux is associated with an increase in catheter-related
thrombus and coronary angiographic complications. It is not
recommended as the sole anticoagulant during PCI141,142.
• If fondaparinux is used in UA/NSTEMI and the patient requires
an invasive strategy, UFH should be given during the procedure.
When used in PCI, it is associated with lower bleeding rates
than LMWH141,142,143.
• No benefit was seen with the use of fondaparinux in Primary
PCI142.
For dosages refer table 5, page 36.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
35
TABLE 4: RECOMMENDED DOSAGES OF GP IIb / IIIa
RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS IN UA / NSTEMI AND DURING PCI*
3.3. Other Agents
3.3.1 Cilostazol
•
Cilostazol, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, was shown to
result in reduced rates of stent thrombosis when given as
part of a triple anti platelet regime in patients with BMS144.
•
Studies have also shown that cilostazol at a dose of 100 mg
bid resulted in significantly reduced rates of restenosis and
TVR at 6 months without an increase in the rate of bleeding
or stent thrombosis145-148.
3.3.2 Statins
•
Pre-treatment with statins 7 days prior to elective PCI has
been shown to reduce post-procedure MI149.
•
A loading dose of statin pre-procedure has also been
shown to reduce post-procedure MI in statin-naive150 and in
patients already on regular statins151.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
36
TABLE 5: DOSES OF ANTI-THROMBOTIC AGENTS IN UA/
NSTEMI AND DURING PCI*
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
37
4. SPECIAL CLINICAL CONDITIONS
4.1. Diabetes
Diabetics have higher cardiovascular morbidity and mortality
following both CABG and PCI. Early studies showed that
CABG [with left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to left anterior
descending artery] was associated with a better long term survival
than POBA152,153,154. This was due to:
• accelerated
atherosclerosis.
New
lesions
(plaque
progression) were more frequent among diabetics. This
occurred more commonly in arteries that were dilated during
the initial procedure155. Accelerated disease progression has
also been seen after surgical revascularisation.
• restenosis: restenosis rates were higher in diabetics and
these frequently presented as occlusive restenosis156,157. The
long term survival of these patients was worse than those
diabetics without restenosis or those who presented with
non-occlusive restenosis158.
Diabetics especially insulin dependent diabetics with poor
glycemic control (HbA1c > 7%) were more likely to have restenosis
and adverse outcomes following PCI159. They also have worse
outcomes following primary PCI for STEMI, the higher the blood
glucose levels, the worse the prognosis160.
The prognosis of diabetic patients following PCI has improved
with the use of:
• GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors: In a meta-analysis, the use of abciximab,
resulted in 1 year mortality rates in diabetic patients being the
same as placebo-treated non-diabetics134.
• stents: Stents, especially DES, has resulted in significant
reduction in restenosis rates in diabetics although it still
remains higher than in non-diabetics88,91,161-164.
PCI in diabetic patients:
• is appropriate in “less severe” disease165,166 i.e. 1 or 2 vessel
disease with discrete lesions in combination with stents and
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors167,168,169.
• with multi vessel disease – The optimal method of
revascularisation is still being addressed in ongoing trials
(e.g. BARI 2, FREEDOM). More recent trials comparing PCI
with DES to CABG found that the 3 year combined rates of
death, MI and stroke were similar for diabetics treated by
stenting or by surgery. The diabetics however had a higher
rate of repeat revascularisation91,170,171,172.
Lesion characteristics, vessel size and clinical judgement can help
guide the choice of revascularisation strategy. Generally patients
with discrete high grade stenosis in large vessels do well with
PCI. On the other hand, patients with long stenosis in diffusely
diseased calcified vessels do better with CABG88,91.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
38
4.1.1. Technical considerations
• Wherever possible, stents, preferably DES, should be used.
• If there are no contraindications, abciximab should be used.
4.2. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
4.2.1. Prognosis
In patients with CKD:
• PCI was associated with a higher in-hospital and long term
mortality compared to patients without CKD; the higher the serum
creatinine, the worse the outcome173,174. Even patients with a serum
creatinine of 1.1 and 1.2 mg/100ml (96.8 and 105.6 µmol/l) had a
non-significant trend towards higher mortality175.
• and on renal replacement therapy (dialysis) CABG was associated
with a better 2 year survival compared to PCI176.
• the use of stents was associated with significantly better
survival175,177.
There is insufficient data at present on the best means of revascularisation
in patients with less advanced stages of CKD.
In patients with ACS, the presence of CKD is an additional high-risk
feature associated with increased mortality, the more severe the CKD,
the higher the mortality. A recent meta-analysis showed that patients
presenting as UA/NSTEMI and treated with an early invasive strategy
had better outcomes178.
All patients with CAD should be screened for kidney disease by estimating
their glomerular filtration rate (GFR), looking for microalbuminuria and
measuring the urine albumin: creatinine ratio. Estimated GFR can be
calculated using the Cockroft-Gault formula (Appendix VIII, page 81).
Patients with CKD are at increased risk of:
• Acute Renal Failure Post Intervention
• Bleeding
4.2.2. Acute Renal Failure Post Intervention
Acute renal failure (ARF) following PCI is defined as 0.5mg/100ml (44.2
µmol/l) rise in serum creatinine levels from baseline or a relative increase
of ≥25% from baseline, 2 to 7 days following contrast administration179.
Diabetic patients with baseline serum creatinine values <2.0 mg/100ml
(<176 µmol/l) are at higher risk than non-diabetic patients, whereas all
patients with a serum creatinine >2.0 mg/100ml (>176 µmol/l) and poor
LV function are at high risk for ARF180,181.
Acute renal failure following PCI, is an independent predictor of 30 day
and long term mortality and morbidity180,181.
Possible causes of ARF include contrast nephropathy and cholesterol
embolisation.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
39
4.2.2.1.
Contrast induced nephropathy
Acute renal failure due to contrast nephropathy is generally reversible.
The serum creatinine peaks between 2 and 5 days after contrast
exposure and returns to normal within 14 days182.
Contrast induced nephropathy (CIN) is more likely to occur in:
• the elderly
• diabetics
• pre-existing renal impairment
• hypotension
• poor LV function
• dehydration
The optimal strategy to prevent CIN is uncertain. Preventive measures
include182: (Table 6 and 7, page 40)
• using iso-osmolar, non-ionic, contrast medium183 . A recent trial
showed that low osmolar contrast medium was as safe as isoosmolar agents184,185. (Appendix IX, page 81)
• discontinuation of nephrotoxic drugs, such as non-steroidal antiinflammatory medications and metformin
• use of a minimum volume of contrast including staging of
procedure
• provision of intravenous hydration
• administration of N-acetylcysteine186,187
• use of sodium bicarbonate188,189. The renoprotective effect of sodium
bicarbonate is hypothesized as being due to urinary alkalinization
making it less amenable to the formation of free radicals.
4.2.2.2.
Cholesterol Embolisation
Acute renal failure may occur due to microembolisation of cholesterol
particles into the renal vessels. It is often associated with cholesterol
embolisation to other visceral organs and the peripheral vessels. It is
associated with a high mortality.
4.2.3. Bleeding Risks
Patients with CKD have increased bleeding risks. This is partly due to
platelet dysfunction and also because many cardiac drugs especially
some anti thrombotic agents are excreted by the kidneys. In patients
with CKD, their doses need to be adjusted to avoid excessive bleeding
(Table 8, page 41). Bivalirudin and fondaparinux seem to be associated
with less bleeding than heparin or enoxaparin138,190.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
40
TABLE 6: PREVENTION OF CONTRAST INDUCED
NEPHROPATHY
TABLE 7: PREVENTION OF CONTRAST INDUCED
NEPHROPATHY
154mEq/L in
5%dextrose in
water (154ml of
1000mEq/l of
sodium bicarbonate
+ 850ml of 5%
Dextrose)
Rate of 1.0-1.5 ml/kg/hr
for 3h-12h before and
6h-24h after the
procedure ensuring a
urine flow rate of
150ml/hour
Reduce rate to
0.5ml/kg/hr if LVEF<40%
3ml/kg/hr for 1 hour
before the contrast
followed by an infusion
of 1ml/kg/hr for 6 hours
after the procedure
1200mg twice daily,
one day before and
one day after the
contrast
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
41
TABLE 8: DOSAGES OF ANTITHROMBOTIC
AGENTS IN CKD
4.3. Women
Women undergoing PCI:
• tend to be older and have a higher incidence of diabetes and other
co-morbid illnesses.
• especially those less than 50 years of age had a much higher
mortality following PCI than men 191,192.
• with ACS who were biomarker positive had better outcomes than
when treated with a conservative strategy68
A recent large retrospective study over 25 years found that the procedural
success rate following PCI was similar in both gender193. After adjusting
for age and risk factors, however there were no gender differences in
survival rates.
Women tend to have smaller coronary arteries and thus higher
restenosis rates after POBA194. Coronary dissection and acute coronary
occlusion are also more common in women. These complications are
effectively managed with the use of stents. In fact, it has been suggested
that stenting may be the primary reason for the improvement in cardiac
outcomes with PCI in women195.
4.3.1. Technical considerations
Women’s smaller blood vessels predispose them to more vascular
access site complications.
They also tend to have more bleeding complications with the use of antithrombotic agents and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors.
4.4. Elderly
The elderly tend to have a higher rate of complications following both
PCI196,197 and CABG198. This includes death, MI, strokes, renal failure
and vascular complications196. This is partly due to their more extensive
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
42
disease with calcified vessels. They also tend to have lower left
ventricular function and more co-morbidity.
With the use of stents, procedural success is higher than with POBA and
restenosis rates are comparable to that of younger patients197,199,200.
Elderly patients presenting with ACS have better outcomes with
PCI69,199,200. However the bleeding and vascular complication rates are
higher.
Clinical decision should take into consideration the biological age rather
than the chronological age.
4.4.1. Technical considerations
In view of their often calcified vessels, rotablation may sometimes be
necessary prior to stent deployment.
Anti-thrombotic agents, GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors and X-ray contrast agents
must be used judiciously.
4.5. History of bleeding diasthesis, bleeding gastrointestinal or
previous hemorrhagic stroke
In these patients the choice of revascularisation strategy should be
carefully balanced against the risks associated with bleeding. If PCI is
the chosen strategy, POBA or using BMS should be considered.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
43
PART B: TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF PCI AS A
REVASCULARISATION STRATEGY
5. PCI DEVICES
5.1. Balloon catheters
Balloon catheters come in different sizes and lengths. The diameter
sizes are between 1.25 to 5.0mm and lengths of between 5 to 30mm.
Their main uses are:
• to predilate a lesion to prepare for other device therapy eg stent
deployment
• as a definitive therapy with successful POBA treatment being
defined as < 50% residual stenosis
• to deploy balloon expandable stents
• post stent dilatation for better stent apposition
• to add support for wire and guiding catheter in treating complex
lesions e.g. chronic total occlusions (CTO)
There are two terms that are frequently used in balloon dilatation:
• Nominal Pressure – this is the pressure at which the balloon attains
its stated size e.g. a 3.0 mm balloon attaining this size at 8 Atm
• Rated burst pressure – it is the pressure beyond which there is a
high probability that the balloon will burst
There are 2 different balloon systems:
• Monorail (Rapid exchange) – it is easy to use
• Over the wire (OTW) – it has the following advantages:
- it gives better support especially in treating difficult lesions like
crossing a total occlusion
- it allows wire exchange which cannot be performed with the
rapid exchange system
- contrast may be injected directly into it to visualize distal flow
- medications may be given through it
There are 2 types of coronary balloons:
• Semi-compliant balloon – this is the main workhorse balloon. It can
increase in size by up to 0.25 to 0.5 mm at higher pressures. Its
rated burst pressure is lower, typically between 12 to 16 Atm.
• Non-compliant balloon – this balloon minimally increases in size
and its rated burst pressure can be as high as between 24 to 26
Atm. It is usually used to post dilate a stent for optimal results and
to “crack” open hard lesions e.g. calcified or fibrotic lesions. The
balloon profile is poor after initial dilatation and deflation. As such it
may not be reusable.
5.1.1. Cutting Balloons
This device has 3 to 4 very fine blades within the folds of the balloon.
When the balloon is expanded, the blades will cut into the tissue and
produce controlled dissections. This in turn leads to less inflammatory
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
44
response and reduced neo-intimal proliferation. Conflicting results
have been obtained in the treatment of de novo lesions with the cutting
balloon as compared to POBA 201,202.
It is useful in:
• treating resistant lesions that may not “give way” to normal balloon
dilatation
• treating focal in-stent restenosis (ISR). It avoids the occurrence
of “watermelon seeding” (balloon slippage) that commonly occurs
when a regular balloon is used. It was however found to be non
superior to POBA203.
• the treatment of bifurcation and ostial side-branch lesions as it
results in less plaque shifting.
5.1.2. Focus force (Safe cut) Balloons
This balloon is used in the same way as a cutting balloon. It utilizes the
very same guidewire in the artery to cut into the tissue. It may not cut as
effectively as a cutting balloon but it has a lower crossing profile.
5.1.3. Drug-eluting Balloons
This balloon is coated with an anti-proliferative drug with a special coating
to retain the drug whilst the balloon is being delivered to the target site.
At present only the balloons coated with paclitaxel are available. Since
the drug is coated onto a balloon it gives a more homogenous drug
delivery to the tissue as compared to a DES whereby the drug is located
only on the stent struts.
It has been shown to be better than POBA and the Taxus DES in the
treatment of ISR with lower late loss, target lesion revascularization
(TLR) and major adverse coronary events at 6 months and better event
free survival at 12 months 204,205,206.
It may be useful in the treatment of small vessel disease. Studies are
ongoing in the treatment of subsets of high risk patients e.g. in multivessel disease, diabetics and bifurcation lesions.
5.2. Stents
This metallic device is used to scaffold the vessel. Its uses include:
• treating dissections to prevent abrupt/acute closure
• preventing restenosis following suboptimal results after balloon
dilatation – residual stenosis of > 30% following POBA.
• preventing restenosis in high risk lesions (e.g. chronic total occlusion,
left main stem lesions and saphenous vein graft lesions)
Stenting reduces recurrence of ischaemic symptoms and re-intervention
but do not affect mortality outcomes36-40,207,208.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
45
5.2.1. Bare Metal Stents (BMS)
Currently available coronary stents are made of either stainless steel
316L or cobalt chromium. The latter has thinner struts thus resulting in
lower risk of restenosis. It is more flexible and conformable whilst at the
same time having similar radial strength as the stainless steel stents.
However it is less radio-opaque.
Coronary stents come in different sizes ranging from 2.25 to 5.0 mm in
diameter and from 8 to 38 mm in length. Larger and longer stents are
less deliverable. When dealing with a tortuous vessel, it is better to use
a shorter stent.
Another consideration in the choice of a stent will be its side branch
access. Good side branch access allows easier passage of devices
through the stent struts.
Most stents can be delivered through a 5F guiding catheter (except for
the larger stents which are >3.5 mm in diameter). Generally, for the
simultaneous deployment of 2 stents, the minimum size of the guiding
catheter should be 7F.
5.2.2. Drug Eluting Stents (DES)
The Achilles heel of angioplasty and stenting has been restenosis as a
result of neointimal proliferation. If substantial, it can lead to significant
in-stent restenosis (ISR). The rates of restenosis with BMS can be as
high as 50% in certain situations e.g. CTO, long lesions, small vessels,
diabetics, ostial and bifurcation lesions. In large vessels (>3.5 mm) with
discrete lesions the restenosis rates with BMS is low.
Stents may be coated with antiproliferative agents to inhibit neointimal
proliferation and therefore reduce the risk of restenosis. They act on
specific sites in the cell growth cycle. The current agents used are the
limus group e.g. sirolimus, everolimus, zotarolimus and biolimus and the
taxol group i.e. paclitaxel.
The clinical studies were mainly conducted in uncomplicated (i.e. type
A and B lesions). In the real world setting however, it is mainly used in
complex lesions with a higher tendency for restenosis.
There are several concerns with DES:
• Cost consideration – DES generally cost more than BMS.
• Stent Thrombosis – section 6.8.1 (page. 55)
In making a choice between a BMS and DES, it is important to take into
consideration the patient’s risk for stent thrombosis, ISR and bleeding. If
the patient is unlikely to comply with long term dual antiplatelet therapy,
is at increased risk of bleeding or may need a non-cardiac operation in
the near future, one should consider alternative strategies such as using
BMS, endothelial progenitor cell capture stents or refer for CABG.
5.2.3. Endothelial Progenitor Cell Capture Stents
This stent is coated with antibody that captures circulating endothelial
progenitor cells. These cells rapidly transform into endothelial cells. This
leads to rapid healing with a functional endothelium. With this stent,
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
46
dual antiplatelet therapy is recommended for only a month followed by
long term aspirin therapy.
A recent study however, showed that it was inferior to BMS in patients
with STEMI due to a high incidence of adverse events, late lumen loss
and stent thrombosis at 6 months209.
5.2.4. Covered stents
These are useful for sealing coronary perforations and excluding
aneurysms. They have a higher profile and are less trackable. They are
also associated with higher rates of stent thrombosis and restenosis.
These patients require long term dual anti platelet therapy.
5.2.5. Biodegradable (Bioabsorbable) polymers and stents
5.2.5.1. Biodegradable Polymer
One of the concerns with polymer based stents is the risk of inflammation
that may predispose to stent thrombosis. Biodegradable polymer
reduces this risk. A study has shown that they are as efficacious as
other first generation DES but they have not been shown to be any safer
at 1 year210.
5.2.5.2. Biodegradable DES
The potential advantage of this type of stent is the avoidance of
stent thrombosis. It also offers the possibility of allowing that stented
segment to be grafted during CABG after it has degraded. Typically an
ideal biodegradable DES will be degraded over 18 to 24 months after
overcoming the problem of elastic recoil and neointimal proliferation.
These stents are currently being evaluated in ongoing trials.
5.3. Rotational Atherectomy (Rotablator)
This device rotates at very high speeds (target usually between
140,000 to 200,000 rotations per minute) to selectively break down
the atheromatous plaque into very small particles which is then
washed downstream. There is a steep learning curve in utilizing this
technology.
Its use is now mainly limited to:
• debulking calcified lesions that may impede delivery of devices and
good stent deployment
• pre-treating uncrossable and undilatable lesions prior to stenting
Adjunctive devices like a temporary pacemaker is required to avoid
bradyarrhythmias particularly when dealing with right coronary artery
and dominant left circumflex lesions.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
47
5.4. Directional Atherectomy
This device is able to cut though atheromatous plaque and the
“shavings” are then brought out from the catheter. It is used mainly for
bulky lesions especially for LMS and ostial lesions. However directional
atherectomy is rather cumbersome to use and the advent of DES has
limited its usage.
5.5. Microcatheters
These catheters are mainly used in the treatment of CTO lesions. It
lends support for the wire in crossing the CTO and also facilitates wire
exchange.
5.6. Thromboaspiration catheters
These devices are useful in the treatment of thrombus-laden lesions
especially during primary PCI. These catheters are effective in removing
the thrombus and improving TIMI flow and myocardial perfusion (TMP
flow) post-procedure. A recent meta-analysis showed that catheter
thrombus aspiration during STEMI reduces mortality over a mean
follow-up of 5 months43,44,45.
5.7. Thrombectomy Devices
These devices are used in decimating thrombus during primary PCI
for the same purpose as thromboaspiration catheters. Mechanical
thrombectomy appeared to increase mortality during primary PCI43.
5.8. Protection Devices
These devices help to protect the distal vessels to reduce distal
embolization. Situations in which these devices are useful are in the
treatment of thrombus laden vessels (especially in primary PCI) and in
degenerated SVG intervention211,212.
Protection devices may be placed either distal or proximal to the lesion.
Distal protection devices come in the form of balloon occlusive devices
and filter devices. Proximal protection devices are useful for distal SVG
lesions that do not have an adequate landing zone. However this device
cannot be used for ostial SVG lesions.
When used during Primary PCI, these distal protection devices had a
neutral effect on mortality43.
5.9. Laser Therapy
Besides being used in primary PCI to lyse thrombus, the laser device
can be used in CTO lesions to create a channel to facilitate balloon
passage before subsequent balloon dilatation and stent deployment.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
48
5.10.
Coil Embolisation
Coils are used to seal off persistent perforations created by wire
manipulation and for closure of arterio-venous (AV) fistulae. These are
delivered through a large lumen microcatheter.
5.11.
Intravascular Imaging Devices
5.11.1. Intravascular Ultrasound (IVUS)
IVUS is the most common imaging device introduced on the guidewire.
Its uses are:
• assessing the severity of borderline lesions
• assessing the degree of calcification
• assessing vessel size especially in small vessels, LMS
• aiding stent size selection and assessing results post-stent
deployment eg stent apposition and deployment, edge dissections,
coverage of ostial lesions, stent malapposition
• guiding wire crossing in CTO lesions
5.11.2. Optical Coherence Tomography
This device gives a more detailed imaging of the vessel wall as compared
to images obtained from IVUS. It gives a clearer image of red and white
thrombus, plaque rupture, plaque protrusion through stent struts and
stent malapposition. However the depth of image tissue penetration is
lower than those obtained from IVUS.
5.11.3. Virtual Histology
This imaging modality uses the same IVUS catheter but a special software
program allows lesion characterization to be made. Atherosclerotic
lesions can be divided into fibrous, fatty, necrotic, calcified and fibrocalcified components. Presently it is used mainly as a research tool for
identifying vulnerable plaques.
5.11.4. Angioscopy
This is mainly an investigative tool. It allows direct visualisation of the
vessel and can be used to observe thrombus, plaque, inflammation
and stent apposition. However in order to visualise the vessel a balloon
needs to be dilated proximally to obstruct flow during the whole duration
of imaging. Thus care needs to be given to prevent the occurrence of
ventricular fibrillation.
5.12.
Others
5.12.1. Pressure Wire
Pressure wire is useful in the assessment of borderline lesions. The wire
has a small transducer at the tip of a 0.014 inch wire which can be used
as a regular guidewire.
Following bolus intracoronary adenosine injections, the pressure
difference between the aorta and distal to the lesion is measured. A
value of < 0.8 indicates a significant lesion82,83.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
49
6. LESION / DEVICE SPECIFIC CONDITIONS
6.1. Left Main Stem (LMS) Disease
The conventional treatment for unprotected LMS (>50%) is
CABG. PCI of unprotected LMS is feasible and promising but
the early studies have showed high morbidity and mortality
rates91,92,213-218.
With the use of DES, the results have improved and the incidence
of adverse events has decreased. In a recent trial comparing the
use of DES and CABG, both treatment strategies had similar
rates of death and MI at 1 year91.
When undertaking PCI for unprotected LMS disease the following
are important considerations:
• anatomical location of the lesion – the results of PCI with
DES for ostial and body lesions are better as compared to
distal lesions involving the bifurcation
• LV function – in the presence of depressed LV function,
CABG is the preferred strategy
• associated multi vessel disease – CABG is a better option
(Table 3, page 14 for recommendations and grading)
6.1.1.
Technical considerations
PCI of the unprotected LMS should be done by skillful operators
in high volume centers with surgical back-up.
PCI should be performed preferably with DES216,217,218. If a DES
is used for a vessel that is >4.0 mm then it should be upsized
appropriately. The stent must be well deployed and apposed.
An IVUS is highly recommended to ensure optimal stent
deployment.
If the LV function is depressed and when dealing with high risk
unprotected LMS lesions, IABP support is recommended.
Close surveillance either by coronary or CT angiogram is
recommended at about 3 to 9 months after the procedure.
Long term dual antiplatelet therapy is recommended.
6.2. Multi-vessel disease
An important factor determining treatment strategies in a patient
with multi-vessel disease is the clinical status of the patient i.e.
elective versus an urgent procedure.
6.2.1.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease
The choice of strategy would depend upon:
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
50
• lesion characteristics – discrete lesions in multi vessels do well with
PCI while long calcified lesions are better treated with CABG
• LV function – in the presence of depressed LV function, CABG is
the preferred option
• diabetes – generally diabetics have higher restenosis rates with
PCI (see section on diabetes)
• renal impairment – an important consideration is contrast
nephropathy
• surgical risk and patient’s co-morbidities
• cost constraints – the cost of multiple stents and the possibility of
• repeat revascularisation for restenosis versus CABG. A procedure
with 2-3 DES may cost as much as CABG.
• patient’s preferences
(Table 3, page 14 for recommendations and grading)
It is important that patients treated with PCI have complete
revascularisation to obtain the same mortality benefits as seen with
CABG87,219.
All lesions may be dealt with at the same time or it may be staged
depending upon the duration of the procedure, amount of contrast used
and patient comfort and safety.
6.2.2. UA/NSTEMI
In the setting of ACS, it is recommended to treat the culprit lesion and
stage the procedure. However in certain situations where the patient
is stable and the anticipated procedure is uncomplicated, complete
revascularisation may be attempted at the same sitting36.
6.2.3. STEMI
In STEMI, where the patient is noted to require CABG as a definitive
procedure, PCI of the infarct related vessel may serve as a bridge to
stabilise the patient. Wherever possible, use of a BMS is advocated in
this setting to avoid the risk of peri-operative (CABG) stent thrombosis.
The culprit lesion is usually identified by the site of the MI on the resting
ECG and the presence of an ulcerated plaque with thrombus. Occasionally
it may be difficult to identify the culprit lesion angiographically.
6.3. Chronic Total Occlusions (CTO)
CTO is defined as coronary occlusion of >3 months duration.
Patients with CTO and having significant ischemia should be
revascularised. Studies have shown that this improves the symptoms and
exercise tolerance, enhances LV function and improves survival220,221.
The indications for PCI in CTO include:
• presence of symptoms (angina or heart failure) and/or
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
51
• objective evidence of ischemia in CTO territory with other vessels
suitable for PCI
• absence of significant LMS disease
• contraindications for CABG
PCI for CTO has a steep learning curve with the use of additional
hardware and different techniques. It is also associated with a higher
complication rate (e.g. coronary perforation and cardiac tamponade).
Hence it requires experienced, skillful operators performing in high
volume centers with cardiothoracic surgical back-up.
Certain lesion characteristics favor successful recanalisation with PCI.
(Appendix X, page 82)
6.3.1. Technical Considerations
Generally an antegrade approach is utilised aided with contra-lateral
injections of contrast to delineate the distal segment. Retrograde and
Control Antegrade and Retrograde Techniques (CART) techniques
should be performed only by experienced operators.
Challenges in CTO intervention include:
• good guide support – sometimes “mother and child” technique (2
guiding catheters – 1 bigger and 1 smaller) is utilised for better
support
• wires for crossing the lesion – these include 0.010 inch tip,
intermediate wire, stiff hydrophilic or polymer coated wire (from the
Miracle and Conquest series). These special wires are used for
penetration of CTO lesion with innovative techniques which include
parallel wire and anchor balloon.
• devices for crossing the lesion – these include OTW and small
balloons, microcatheter, Tornus, rotablation
• IVUS guidance may be used to help identify the true lumen
Radiation dose to the operator can be reduced by lower dose (kV)
setting, extra shield, pulsed fluoroscopy and extra collimation. Radiation
dose to the patient can be reduced by lower dose (kV) setting and
avoiding extreme angulations.
Indications for stopping the attempted procedure:
• Excessive contrast (> 600 ml in non-diabetic with normal renal
function)
• Complications (false lumen, excessive staining)
• Long procedure
DES is preferred for CTO222.
6.4. Bifurcation Lesions
About 15-20% of PCIs involve a bifurcation lesion223. Generally, these
are technically more challenging with greater complication rates and
poorer long term outcomes.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
52
6.4.1. Classification
There are many different classifications for bifurcation lesions. The
preferred is the Medina classification224. It however does not provide
details of the angle of bifurcation and the size of the proximal healthy
segment which are important determinants of success and long term
outcome. (Appendix XI, page 83)
It is important to make the distinction of whether it is a ‘true’ bifurcation
or a ‘non-true’ bifurcation lesion.
6.4.2. Technical Considerations
A number of strategies have been described and used to treat bifurcation
disease223. These include:
• simple strategy – one that involves a single-stent.
• complex strategies – involve double (or multiple) stents for bi-/trifurcation lesions
• dedicated bifurcation stent – still in development
Different techniques which are often utilized are:
• V stenting
• T stenting
• Culotte
• simultaneous kissing stents
• minicrush, reversed crush
Most bifurcations can be treated with a single-stent strategy in the main
vessel with a provisional plan for a second stent implantation in the
side-branch in the event of suboptimal results223,225,226. The definition of
suboptimal result varied among the different trials. It will depend upon
the size of the side-branch223.
The 2-stent strategy tends to be more time-consuming, uses more
contrast and is related to more biomarker release. It may look better
angiographically immediately after the procedure, but, in the long
term is associated with greater restenosis, TVR rates and stent
thrombosis226,227,228.
If the 2-stent strategy is utilised, DESs are preferred223. In post stent
deployment it is crucial to have kissing balloon inflation especially in
the crush and Cullote techniques229,230. There are some studies that
suggest that simultaneous kissing balloon inflation after each stent
deployment may further improve long term result (Double Kissing-Crush
technique)231.
An IVUS is generally recommended when a large area of myocardium
is at risk e.g. LMS bifurcation disease.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
53
6.5. Ostial Lesions
Ostial lesions are usually defined as lesions within 3mm of the takeoff of a major coronary artery. Native aorto-ostial, aorto-graft-ostial and
branch-ostial lesions can be distinguished.
Treating ostial lesions is technically difficult and is associated with a
higher risk of complication and re-stensosis rates.
6.5.1. Technical considerations
• Precise placement of the stent is important to ensure that the ostium
is well covered and to avoid excessive jutting of the stent struts into
the main vessel.
• Ideally the ostium needs to be ‘well prepared’ prior to stent
deployment.
• The vessel needs to be dilated appropriately (balloon sized to the
vessel size) before stent deployment to allow for good stent expansion.
This will reduce the risk of re-stenosis.
• Directional atherectomy may be useful to debulk the lesion first.
• DES is preferred.
Problems that may occur include:
• fall in BP when engaging the vessels – a smaller size guiding catheter
or the use of side holes may help alleviate this.
• risk of dissection – the dissection may spiral down the vessel and
occasionally it can occur retrogradely into the aortic root. This
complication may be due to guiding catheter manipulation.
6.6. Saphenous Vein Grafts (SVG)
Following CABG:
• between one and six years, the annual graft attrition rate is 1% to 2%
and becomes 4% to 6% per year after that, so that about half of SVGs
have significant stenosis or are occluded after 10 years.
• up to 15% of SVGs are closed within 1 year232,233,234 and by 10 years,
nearly a third of patients require repeat revascularisation235.
This could be due to new disease in vessels not previously bypassed,
progressive disease in native vessels beyond the graft anastomosis, or
disease in the bypass grafts themselves.
Treatment options for Saphenous Vein Graft Disease include:
1. Redo-CABG
• Redo-CABG is associated with 2- to 4-fold higher risk than the
initial CABG, with periprocedural deaths in 2-5% and myocardial
infarctions in 2-8% of patients. Five- and 10-year survival rates are
84-94% and 75%, respectively236,237.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
54
• Difficulties in redo-CABG include:
- risk of injuring the other patent grafts especially the
internal mammary artery
- patient subsets who tend to be older and sicker with more
diseased target vessels, poorer LV function, availability of
conduit and serious co-morbid medical problems
2. PCI
• the main limitation of POBA in SVGs is the high restenosis
rates of up to 23-73% of patients within 6 months and the
risk of distal embolisation
• DES is a reasonable option but its definite role remains to
be defined
• PTFE-covered stents may be useful for treatment of graft
rupture or aneurysm
Some trials comparing PCI and repeat CABG demonstrated
less in-hospital death and MI after PTCA, but more complete
revascularisation and less target lesion revascularisation (TLR)
at 4 years after repeat CABG238,239.
6.6.1.
Technical considerations during SVG
Percutaneous Intervention:
Degenerated SVGs are characterised by friable plaques
with overlying thrombus which increases the procedural
risks of distal embolisation manifesting as slow or no-reflow
phenomenon. As such the use of protection devices is strongly
recommended211,212, 240. (section 5.8, page 47) Thrombectomy
devices may be considered when there is a significant thrombus
burden is present.
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors have not been found to be helpful in SVG
intervention241,242. Vasodilators eg. adenosine, verapamil, sodium
nitroprusside may be used for situations of slow-flow or no-reflow.
6.6.2.
Arterial conduit – Internal Mammary Artery (IMA)
Angioplasty and stenting procedure to the IMA has high success rates
with less acute complications of abrupt closure, distal embolisation,
acute myocardial infarction or need for emergency surgery.
Technical issues related to IMA percutaneous intervention include:
• good guiding catheter support
• IMA tortuosity
• danger of dissecting the ostia of the IMA
• may require shorter guiding catheters and longer wires and
balloon catheters to reach a distal lesion
6. 7. Coronary Artery Aneurysm
The optimal treatment of coronary aneurysms remains
controversial. Coronary aneurysm may lead to ischemia and MI.
Surgical therapy is the treatment of choice243,244.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
55
Percutaneous intervention is an emerging strategy using autologous
vein graft–coated stents245 and PTFE-coated stents246 with a good
short-term angiographic result. It is associated with stent thrombosis
and these patients should be on long term dual antiplatelet therapy.
6.8.
Stent Related Complications
6.8.1. Stent Thrombosis
Stent thrombosis is a serious complication as it may result in MI and
death. The mortality rate can be as high as 45%247. It can be classified
as definite, possible or probable according to the Academic Reseach
Consortium (ARC) classification248.(Table 9, page 55)
* The incidental angiographic documentation of stent occlusion in the absence
of clinical signs or symptoms (silent occlusion) is (for this purpose) not
considered a confirmed stent thrombosis.
It may occur as:
TABLE 9: Definition of Stent Thrombosis as proposed by the
Academic Research Consortium (ARC)248
It is diagnosed when either angiographic or pathological
confirmation is present
- Angiographic confirmation of ST*:
The presence of a thrombus originating in the stent or
in the segment 5 mm proximal or distal to the stented
region and at least one of the following criteria within a
48-h time window:
• Acute onset of ischemic symptoms at rest (typical
chest pain of 20 min)
• New ischemic ECG changes suggestive of acute
ischemia
• Typical rise and fall in cardiac biomarkers
- Pathological confirmation of stent thrombosis:
Evidence of recent thrombus within the stent determined
at autopsy
It is diagnosed after intracoronary stenting in the following
cases:
• Any unexplained death within the first 30 days,
regardless of the time after the index procedure
• any MI that is related to documented acute ischemia
in the territory of the implanted stent without
angiographic confirmation of ST and in the absence
of any other obvious cause
It is diagnosed with any unexplained death from 30 days
after intracoronary stenting until the end of trial follow-up
Definite stent
thrombosis
Probable
stent
thrombosis
Possible
stent
thrombosis
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
56
• acute (occurring within 24 hrs) – this is mainly due to mechanical
causes e.g. stent not well deployed or not well apposed or
undetected edge dissection. The incidence is less than 1%249
• Sub-acute (1 to 30 days) – this may be due to mechanical causes,
platelet resistance or premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet
agents. The incidence is less than 1 %249
• Late stent thrombosis (LST) - 30 days to 1 year
• Very late stent thrombosis (VLST) - > 1 year
Acute and subacute stent thrombosis may occur with both BMS and DES.
LST and VLST may be due to various factors:
• discontinuation of antiplatelet agents
• stent factors (late stent malapposition, aneurysm formation,
hypersensitivity to polymer)
• vessel (non-healing with poor endothelisation)
The annualized risk for VLST is 0.6% per year250,251. It is more common
with DES than BMS252.
6.8.1.1.
Management of Stent thrombosis
Urgent re-PCI is the treatment of choice253. Most thrombotic stent
occlusions can be treated with balloon angioplasty alone, aided
by thrombus aspiration. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists may be
administered to improve microvascular reperfusion and to overcome
increased platelet aggregation253.
Systemic fibrinolysis should be considered in the presence of ongoing
significant ischemia and unavailability of prompt PCI. If platelet
aggregation studies reveal insufficient (<50%) inhibition of platelet
aggregation with standard dual antiplatelet therapy, a higher dose
clopidogrel - 150 mg/day- should be considered119.
Additional stent implantation should be limited to bail out significant
residual dissections. The implantation of a second stent for stent
thrombosis is associated with a worse 6 month outcome254.
PCI for stent thrombosis due to either BMS or DES have similar
poor outcomes with low rates of reperfusion and high rates of death
and adverse cardiac events254. This further highlights the importance
of preventing stent thrombosis and choosing the appropriate
revascularisation strategy for the individual patient.
In preventing stent thrombosis, it is important to consider253:
• Patient factors: Patient compliance and absence of contraindication to
dual antiplatelet therapy is pivotal during the decision making process
for stent selection254.
• Technique: The stent must be well deployed and fully
expanded throughout its entire length. This can be done
using a short non compliant balloon at high pressure. Care
should be taken to avoid dissections. If it occurs, it should be
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
57
treated appropriately. It is important to avoid excessive stent length
and usage of multiple overlapping stent255 since this correlates with
stent thrombosis.
• Anti platelet therapy: It is crucial that dual antiplatelet therapy not
be discontinued prematurely256. It should be continued for at least a
year and in some complex cases, long term.
6.8.2. In-stent Restenosis (ISR)
Balloon angioplasty is associated with up to 40% risk of restenosis207.
BMS have reduced the risk of restenosis but the rates of ISR remains
considerable (17-32%)208.
With DES, the rates of restenosis have been further reduced
(0-9.1%)257,258 depending on the complexity of the lesion and the type
of stent used.
Restenosis may be due to elastic recoil, vascular remodelling and neointimal hyperplasia. It may be:
• focal
• diffuse
• proliferative
(Appendix XII, page 84)
Some predictors of ISR are:
• diabetes mellitus
• acute coronary syndromes
• Small vessel
• Long lesions requiring long or multiple overlapping stents
• SVG
• CTO
• Ostial lesion
• Bifurcation lesion
Prevention of ISR involves using DES and optimal stent implantation
techniques. These include:
• adequate stent coverage of all segments pre-treated with balloon
dilatation
• high pressure balloon dilatation to ensure adequate stent wall
apposition
• prevention of stent edge injury with careful balloon post-dilatation
within stent margins using shorter post-dilatation balloon
• using IVUS to optimise results
In managing ISR it is important to use IVUS to ascertain if the stent
is well deployed. It will also allow the assessment of plaque volume
which will help determine management strategy. Management includes
using:
• POBA – may be adequate for treating focal ISR259,260
• cutting balloon – results are variable and is useful to prevent
“watermelon seeding” (balloon slippage)203.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
58
• rotational atherectomy– results are variable261,262.
• directional atherectomy – results are no better than POBA259.
• DES implantation - superior to POBA and in some instances better
than brachytherapy263,264,265. For DES ISR, the use of another DES
with a different drug group may be considered.
• Drug Eluting Balloon204,205,206 – section 5.1.3,page 44
• Brachytherapy – both catheter based gamma and beta irradiation
have been shown to reduce ISR by about 50-60% when compared
to POBA266,267,268,269. Radiation therapy however is associated with
increased risk of edge restenosis (“candy-wrapper effect”) and
LST.
7. POST PROCEDURE COMPLICATIONS
The femoral arterial sheath may be removed if the ACT is < 180secs.
In patients, who had received enoxaparin, sheath removal may be
performed 4 hours after the last intravenous dose or 6-8 hours after
the last subcutaneous dose. Use of closure devices e.g. Angioseal,
Perclose allow immediate removal of sheaths.
7.1.
Vascular access complications
7.1.1. Retro-peritoneal hematoma
This is more common after a ‘high’ groin puncture. It may not be
detected early as the bleeding occurs in the retro-peritoneal space. One
should suspect this complication if the patient develops unexplained
tachycardia, pallor or hypotension after the procedure. This can be
confirmed by ultrasound or computed tomogram (CT) scan of the
abdomen.
Management includes:
• IV fluids
• blood transfusion
• reversal of coagulopathy may be considered
• using a covered stent to seal off the femoral site perforation
• vascular surgical consult may be necessary if there is persistent or
recurrent hypotension
7.1.2. Pseudo-aneurysm
Pseudo-aneurysm may be suspected if there is a bruit over the
puncture site. It can be confirmed by ultrasound. Most times this can be
managed conservatively by prolonged compression preferably guided
by ultrasound. Occasionally, vascular consult may be necessary.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
59
7.1.3. Arterio-Venous (A-V) Fistula
This can be prevented by avoiding a through-and-through puncture of
the artery and vein. Most A-V fistula can be treated conservatively.
Most of these access site complications are more common with femoral
rather than with radial punctures. Thus radial punctures are generally
preferred270,271. However the radial artery is also a good arterial conduit
during CABG with good long term results272,273. Thus the choice of
access will depend upon the patient characteristics, the operator and
the institution.
7.2 Acute Renal Failure Post Intervention
Section 4.2.2, page 38
8. LONG TERM FOLLOW UP AND CARE
The objectives of follow-up post-PCI patients are:
• to look for recurrent symptoms
• for secondary prevention
8.1. Evaluation of Ischemia
Neither exercise testing nor any form of imaging has been proven to be
beneficial for the routine, periodic monitoring of asymptomatic patients
after PCI without specific indications.
For high risk patients (e.g. diabetes mellitus and suboptimal PCI results)
stress imaging is preferred to evaluate for ischemia after PCI.
8.2. Secondary Prevention
It is important that the patient should adhere to medical therapies
and secondary prevention programs to prevent progressive disease.
(Appendix XIII, page 85)
9. RADIATION PROTECTION
The largest source of radiation comes from medical radiation and the
largest users of medical radiation are interventional cardiologists. It is
important to be know the biohazards of radiation.
Interventional cardiologists should be aware of radiation protection. This
entails reducing the radiation exposure to as low a level as reasonably
achievable to patients, medical staff and themselves.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
60
1.
Health Prioritization: Burden of disease approach. Division of burden of disease,
Institute of Public Health, National Institute of Health, Ministry of Health, Malaysia 2004.
2.
Number of discharges and deaths in government hospitals. Information and
Documentation System Unit. Ministry of Health, Putrajaya 2008.
3.
Keeley EC, Bovia JF, Grines CL. Primary angioplasty versus intravenous
thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction: a qualitative review of 23 randomized
trials. Lancet 2003; 361 : 12-20.
4.
Grines C, Patel A, Zijlstra F et al. Primary coronary angioplasty compared with
intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction: six month follow up and
analysis of individual patient data from randomized trials. Am Heart J 2003; 145 : 47-57.
5.
Zijlstra F, Hoorntje JC, de Boer MJ et al. Long term benefit of primary angioplasty as
compared with thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1999;
341: 1413-1419.
6.
Juliard JM, Feldman LJ, Golmard JL et al. Relation of mortality of primary angioplasty
during acute myocardial infarction to door – to – Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction
(TIMI) time. Am J Cardiol 2003; 91 : 1401-5.
7.
Nallamuthu BK, Bates ER. Percutaneous coronary intervention versus fibrinolytic
therapy in acute myocardial infarction, is timing (almost) everything? Am J Cardiol 2003;
92 : 824-6.
8.
Boersma E, for the Primary Coronary Angioplasty vs. Thrombolysis Group. Does
time matter? A pooled analysis of randomized clinical trials comparing primary
percutaneous coronary intervention and in-hospital fibrinolysis in acute myocardial
infarction patients. Eur Heart J 2006; 27 : 779–788.
9.
Bonne Foy E, Lapostolle F, Leizorovicz A et al for the Comparison of Angioplasty and
Pre hospital Thrombolysis in Acute Myocardial Infarction study group. Primary angioplasty
versus prehospital fibrinolysis in acute myocardial infarction: a randomized study. Lancet
2002; 360 : 825-9.
10. Widimsky P, Budensinsky T, Vorac D et al. Long distance transport for primary
angioplasty vs immediate thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction: final results of the
randomized national multicentre trial: PRAGUE 2. Eur Heart J 2003; 24 : 94-104.
11. Aversano T, Aversano LT, Passamani E et al for the Atlantic Cardiovascular Patient
Outcomes Research Team (C-PORT). Thrombolytic therapy vs primary percutaneous
coronary intervention for myocardial infarction in patients presenting to hospitals without
onsite cardiac surgery: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002; 287 : 1943-51
12. Andersen HR, Nielsen TT, Rasmussen K, et al for the DANAMI-2 Investigators. A
comparison of coronary angioplasty with fibrinolytic therapy in acute myocardial infarction.
N Engl J Med 2003; 349 : 733-42.
13. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG et al. for the Should We Emergently
revascularise Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock. Early revascularization in acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med 1999; 341 : 625-34.
14. Wu AH, Parsons L, Every NR et al. for the Second National Registry of Myocardial
Infarction. Hospital outcomes in patients presenting with congestive heart failure
complicating acute myocardial infarction: a report from the Second National registry of
Myocardial Infarction (NRMI-2) J Am Coll Cardiol 2002; 40 : 1389-94.
15. Zahn R, Schiele R, Schneider S et al. Primary angioplasty versus intravenous
thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction: Results from the pooled data of the maximal
individual therapy in acute myocardial infarction registry and the myocardial infarction
registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001; 37 : 1827-35.
16. Gershlick AH, Stephens– Lloyd A, Hughes S et al for the REACT Trial Investigators.
Rescue Angioplasty after failed thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction. N
Engl J Med 2005; 353 : 2758-68.
REFERENCES
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
61
17. Collet JP, Montalescot G, Le May M et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention after
fibrinolysis: a multiple meta-analyses approach according to the type of strategy. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2006; 48 : 1326–1335.
18. Wijeysundera HC, Vijayaraghavan R, Nallamothu BK, et al. Rescue angioplasty or
repeat fibrinolysis after failed fibrinolytic therapy for ST-segment myocardial infarction: a
meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49 : 422–30.
19. Di Mario C, Dudek D, Piscione F, et al. Immediate Angioplasty Versus Standard
Therapy With Rescue Angioplasty After Thrombolysis in the Combined Abciximab
REteplase Stent Study in Acute Myocardial Infarction (CARESS-in-AMI): An Open,
Prospective, Randomised, Multicentre Trial. Lancet 2008; 371: 559-568.
20. Cantor W . Trial of Routine ANgioplasty and Stenting After Fibrinolysis to Enhance
Reperfusion in Acute Myocardial Infarction (TRANSFER-AMI).Presented at the SCAI-ACC
i2 Summit/American College of Cardiology Annual Scientific Session, Chicago, IL,
March/April 2008.
21. Stone GW. Angioplasty Strategies in ST-Segment–Elevation Myocardial Infarction:
Part I: Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Circulation 2008; 118 : 538-551.
22. Stone GW. Angioplasty Strategies in ST-Segment–Elevation Myocardial Infarction:
Part II: Intervention After Fibrinolytic Therapy, Integrated Treatment Recommendations,
and Future Directions. Circulation 2008; 118 : 552-566.
23. Borden WB, Faxon DP. Facilitated Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2006; 48 : 1120-8.
24. The ASSENT 4 Investigators. Assessment of the safety and efficacy of a new
treatment strategy with percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with ST-segment
elevation acute myocardial infarction (ASSENT 4 PCI): randomized trial. Lancet 2006; 367
: 569-78.
25. Ellis SG, Tendera M, de Belder MA, et al., on behalf of the FINESSE Investigators.
Facilitated PCI in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2008; 358
: 2205-2217.
26. Keeley EC, Boura JA, Grines CL. Comparison of primary and facilitated
percutaneous coronary interventions for ST-elevation myocardial infarction: quantitative
review of randomised trials. Lancet 2006; 367 : 579–88.
27. Scheller B, Hennen B, Hammer B et al. Beneficial effects of immediate stenting after
thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003; 42 : 634-41.
28. Fernandez – Aviles F, Alonso JJ, Castro-Beiras A et al. Routine invasive strategy
within 24 hours of thrombolysis versus ischaemia guided conservative approach for acute
myocardial infarction with ST segment elevation (GRACIA-1): a randomized controlled
trial. Lancet 2004; 364 : 1045 – 53.
29. Widimský P, Groch L, Zelízko M et al. Multicentre randomized trial comparing
transport to primary angioplasty vs. immediate thrombolysis vs. combined strategy for
patients with acute myocardial infarction presenting to a community hospital without a
catheterization laboratory. Eur Heart J 2000; 21 : 823–831.
30. Armstrong PW, for the WEST Steering Committee. A comparison of pharmacologic
therapy with/without timely coronary intervention vs. primary percutaneous intervention
early after ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J 2006; 27 : 1530–1538.
31. Thiele H, Engelmann L, Elsner K et al. Comparison of pre-hospital combinationfibrinolysis plus conventional care with pre-hospital combination-fibrinolysis plus facilitated
percutaneous coronary intervention in acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J 2005; 26 :
1956–1963.
32. Le May MR, Wells GA, Labinaz M et al. Combined angioplasty and pharmacological
intervention versus thrombolysis alone in acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol
2005; 46 : 417–424.
33. Madsen JK, Grande P, Saunamaki K et al. Danish Multicenter randomized study of
invasive versus conservative treatment in patients with inducible ischemia after
thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction (DANAMI). DANish trial in Acute Myocardial
Infarction. Circulation 1997; 96 : 748-55.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
62
34. Erne P, Schoenenberger AW, Burckhardt D, et al. Effects of percutaneous coronary
interventions in silent ischaemia after myocardial infarction: the SWISSI II randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 2007; 297 : 1985-1991.
35. Hochman JS, Lamas GA, Buller CE et al. Coronary Intervention for persistent
occlusion after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2006; 355 : 2395-407.
36. Qarawani D, Nahir M, Abboud M et al.Culprit only versus complete coronary
revascularization during primary PCI. Int J Cardiol 2008; 123 : 288–292.
37. Grines CL, Cox DA, Stone GW, et al. Coronary angioplasty with or without stent
implantation for acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1999; 341 : 1949-6.
38. DeLuca G, Suryapranata H, Stone GW, et al.Coronary stenting versus balloon
angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction: a meta-regression analysis of randomized
trials. Int J Cardiol 2008; 126 : 37-44.
39. Kastrati A, Dibra A, Spaulding C, et al. Meta-analysis of randomized trials on drugeluting stents vs. bare metal stents in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J
2007; 28 : 2706-13.
40. Pasceri V, Patti G, Speciale G et al. Meta-analysis of clinical trials on use of drugeluting stents for treatment of acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J 2007; 153 : 749-54.
41. Napadano M, Ramondo A, Tarantini G et al. Predictors and time related impact of
distal embolization during primary angioplasty. Eur Heart J 2009; 30 : 305-313.
42. Gibson CM, de Lemos JA, Murphy SA et al. Combination therapy with abciximab
reduces angiographically evident thrombus in acute myocardial infarction: a TIMI 14
substudy. Circulation 2001; 103 : 2550-2554.
43. Bavry AA, Kumbhani DJ, Bhatt DL et al. Role of adjunctive thrombectomy and
embolic protection devices in acute myocardial infarction: a comprehensive meta-analysis
of randomized trials. Eur Heart J 2008: 29: 2989-3001.
44. Vlaar PJ, Svilaas T, van der Horst IC et al. Cardiac death and reinfarction after 1 year
in the Thrombus Aspiration during Percutaneous coronary intervention in Acute myocardial
infarction Study (TAPAS)): a 1 year follow-up study. Lancet 2008 : 371 : 1915-1920.
45. Sardella G, Mancone M, Bucciarelli-Ducci C et al. Thrombus Aspiration During
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Improves Myocardial Reperfusion and
Reduces Infarct Size: The EXPIRA (Thrombectomy With Export Catheter in Infarct-Related
Artery During Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) Prospective, Randomized
Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53 : 309 - 315.
46. De Luca G, Suryapranata H, Stone GW et al. Abciximab as Adjunctive Therapy to
Reperfusion in Acute ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction: A Meta-analysis of
Randomized Trials. JAMA. 2005; 293 : 1759-1765.
47. Ortolani P, Marzocchi A, Marrozzini C et al. Long-term effectiveness of early
administration of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa agents to real-world patients undergoing primary
percutaneous interventions: results of a registry study in an ST-elevation myocardial
infarction network. Eur Heart J 2009; 30 : 33-43.
48. Frans Van de Werf*, Bax J, Betriu A et al . Management of acute myocardial
infarction in patients presenting with persistent ST-segment elevation.The Task Force on
the management of ST-segment elevation acute myocardial infarction of the European
Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 2008; 29 : 2909-2945
49. Antman EA, Hand M, Armstrong PW et al. 2007 Focused Update of the ACC/AHA
2004 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction.
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines: Developed in Collaboration With the Canadian Cardiovascular
Society Endorsed by the American Academy of Family Physicians: 2007 Writing Group to
Review New Evidence and Update the ACC/AHA 2004 Guidelines for the Management of
Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, Writing on Behalf of the 2004 Writing
Committee. Circulation 2008; 117 : 296-329.
50. De Luca. Adjunctive antithrombotic therapy during primary percutaneous coronary
intervention. Eur Heart J Suppl 2008;10 : J2-J14.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
63
51. Jeger RV, Radovanovic D, Hunziker PR, et al. Ten-year trends in the incidence and
treatment of cardiogenic shock. Ann Intern Med 2008; 149: 618-626.
52. Urban P, Stauffer JC, Bleed D et al. A randomized evaluation of early
revascularization to treat shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. The (Swiss)
Multicenter Trial of Angioplasty for Shock (S)MASH. Eur Heart J 1999; 20 : 1030-8.
53. Dzavik V, Sleeper LA, Cocke TP et al for the SHOCK Investigators. Early
revascularization is associated with improved survival in elderly patients with acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock: a report from the SHOCK Trial
Registry. Eur Heart J 2003; 24 : 828-837.
54. Prasad A, Lennon RJ, Rihal CS et al. Outcomes of elderly patients with cardiogenic
treated with early percutaneous revascularisation. Am Heart J 2004; 147: 1066-70.
55. Reynolds HR, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic Shock: Current Concepts and Improving
Outcomes. Circulation. 2008;117:686-697
56. Ohman EM, George BS, White CJ, et al. Use of aortic counterpulsation to improve
sustained coronary artery patency during acute myocardial infarction: results of a
randomized trial: the Randomized IABP Study Group. Circulation 1994; 90 : 792-9.
57. Stone GW, Marsalese D, Brodie BR, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of
prophylactic intraaortic balloon counterpulsation in high risk patients with acute myocardial
infarction treated with primary angioplasty: Second Primary Angioplasty in Myocardial
Infarction (PAMI-II) Trial Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997; 29 : 1459-67.
58. Barron HV, Every NR, Parsons LS et al. For the Investigators in the National Registry
of Myocardial Infarction 2. The Use of Intra-Aortic Balloon Counterpulsation in Patients
With Cardiogenic Shock Complicating Acute Myocardial Infarction: Data From the National
Registry of Myocardial Infarction 2. Am Heart J 2001; 141 : 933-939.
59. Sjauw KD, Engstrom AE, Vis MM et al. A systemic review and meta-analysis of intraaortic balloon pump therapy in ST elevation myocardial infarction: should we change the
guidelines? Eur Heart J 2009; 30 : 459-468.
60. Prondzinsky R, Lemm H, Swyter M et al. A prospective randomized evaluation of
intraaortic balloon counterpulsation for the prevention of multiorgan dysfunction and –
failure in patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock.
Circulation 2006; 114 : II-2668.
61. Hamm CW, Braunwald E. A classification of unstable angina revisited. Circulation
2000; 102 : 118-22.
62. Neumann FJ, Kastrati A, Pogatsa-Murray G, et al. Evaluation of prolonged
antithrombotic pretreatment ("cooling-off" strategy) before intervention in patients with
unstable coronary syndromes: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2003; 290 : 1593-1599.
63. Mehta S. Timing of Intervention in Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes
(TIMACS )— Presented at American Heart Association meeting New Orleans, Louisiana,
November 2008.
64. Montalescot G . Immediate Versus Next Day Catheterization in Non-ST Elevation
Acute Coronary Syndrome: Results of the Multicenter Randomized ABOARD Study.
Presented at ACC.09/i2 Orlando, Florida, March 2009.
65. Bavry AA, Kumbhani DJ, Rassi AN et al. Benefit of early invasive therapy in acute
coronary syndromes: a meta-analysis of contemporary randomized clinical trials. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2006; 48 : 1319-1325.
66. Mehta SR, Cannon CP, Fox KA, et al. Routine vs selective invasive strategies in
patients with acute coronary syndromes: a collaborative meta-analysis of randomized
trials. JAMA 2005; 293 : 2908-2917.
67. Biondi-Zoccai GG, Abbate A, Agostoni P, et al. Long-term benefits of an early
invasive management in acute coronary syndromes depend on intracoronary stenting and
aggressive antiplatelet treatment: a metaregression. Am Heart J 2005; 149 : 504-511.
68. O'Donoghue M, Boden WE, Braunwald E, Cannon CP, et al. Early invasive vs
conservative treatment strategies in women and men with unstable angina and non-STsegment elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2008;300:71-80
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
64
69. Bauer T, Koeth O, Junger C, et al. Effect of an invasive strategy on in-hospital
outcome in elderly patients with non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Eur Heart J 2007;
28 : 2873-2878.
70. de Winter RJ, Windhausen F, Cornel JH, et al. Early invasive versus selectively
invasive management for acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 353: 2005; 1095–104.
71. Katritsis DG, Ioannidis JP. Percutaneous coronary interventions versus conservative
therapy in nonacute coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Circulation 2005; 111 :
2906-12.
72. Katritsis DG, Ioannidis JP. PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2007; 357 :
414-5.
73. Holmes DR, Gersh BJ, Whitlow P et al. Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for
Chronic Stable angina J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2008; 1 ; 34-43.
74. Boden WE, O’ Rouke RA, Teo KK et al. Optimum medical therapy with or without
PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2007 : 356 : 1503-16.
75. Weintraub WS, Spertus JA, Kolm P et al. Effect of PCI on Quality of Live in Patients
with Stable Coronary Disease . N Engl J Med 2008 : 359 : 677-687.
76. Fraker TD Jr, Fihn SD writing on behalf of the 2002 Chronic Stable Angina Writing
committee. 2007 Chronic Angina Focused Update of the ACC/AHA 2002 Guidelines for
the Management of patients with Chronic Stable Angina. A report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines Writing Group
to Develop the Focused Update of the 2002 Guidelines for the Management of Patients
with Chronic Stable Angina; J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50; 2264-2274.
77. Sleight P, Pouleur H and Zannad F. Benefits, challenges, and registerability of the
polypill. Eur Heart J 2006: 27 :1651-1656.
78. Schuster S, Koch A, Burczyk U et al. Early treatment of acute myocardial infarct:
implementation of therapy guidelines in routine clinical practice, MITRA pilot phase. Z
Kardiol 1997; 86 : 273–283.
79. Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maren DJ et al. Optimal Medical Therapy with or without
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention to Reduce Ischaemic Burden : Results from the
Clinical Outcome Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE)
Trial Nuclear Substudy. Circulation 2008 : 117 ; 1283-1891.
80. Danchin N, Cambou JP, Hanania G et al. USIC 2000 Investigators. Impact of
combined secondary prevention therapy after myocardial infarction: data from a nationwide
French registry. Am Heart J 2005; 150 : 1147–1153.
81. Katritsis DG, Meier B. Percutaneous coronary intervention for stable coronary artery
disease. J am Coll Cardiol 2008; 52 : 889-893.
82. Tonino PAL, De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, et al. Fractional flow reserve versus
angiography for guiding percutaneous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med 2009; 360 :
213-24.
83. Legalery P, Schiele F, Seronde MF, et al. One-Year Outcome of Patients Submitted
to Routine Fractional Flow Reserve Assessment to Determine the Need for Angioplasty.
Eur Heart J 2005; 26 : 2623-2629.
84. Abizaid AS, Mintz GS, Mehran R et al et al.Long term follow-up after percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty was not performed based on intravascular ultrasound
findings:importance of lumen dimensions. Circulation 1999; 100 : 256-261.
85. Hoffman SN, TenBrook JA, Wolf MP et al. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials comparing coronary artery bypass graft with percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty: one to eight year outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003; 41 : 1293-1304.
86. Bravata DM, Gienger AL, McDonald KM et al. Systematic Review: The Comparative
Effectiveness of Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
Surgery. 2007; 147 : 703-716.
87. van den Brand MJ, Rensing BJ, Morel MA et al. The effect of completeness of
revascularization on event-free survival at one year in the ARTS trial. J Am Coll Cardiol
2002 ; 39 : 559-64.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
65
88. Serruys PW, Unger F, Sousa JE et al. Comparison of coronary artery bypass surgery
and stenting for the treatment of multivessel disease. Circulation 2004; 109 : 1114-20.
89. Patel M, Dehmar GJ, Hirshfield JW et al .ACCF/SCAI/STS/AATS/AHA/ASNC 2009
Appropriateness Criteria for Coronary Revascularization. A Report by the American
College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriateness Criteria Task Force, Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, American
Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, and the American Society
of Nuclear Cardiology. Endorsed by the American Society of Echocardiography, the Heart
Failure Society of America, and the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53 : 530-553.
90. Taggart DP. Thomas B. Ferguson Lecture. Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting is Still
the Best Treatment for Multivessel and Left Main Disease, But Patients Need to Know.
Ann Thorac Surg 2006; 82 : 1966-1975.
91. Serruys P, Morice M-C, Kappetein P et al for the SYNTAX Investigators.
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention versus Coronary Artery Bypass grafting for severe
coronary artery disease.The SYNTAX Study. N Engl J Med 2009 360 : 961-972.
92. Tan WA, Tamai H, Park SJ et al. Long term clinical outcomes after unprotected left
main trunk percutaneous coronary revascularization in 279 patients. Circulation 2001; 104
: 1609-14.
93. Takagi T, Stankovic G, Finci L et al. Results and long term predictors of adverse
clinical events after elective percutaneous coronary interventions on unprotected left main
coronary artery. Circulation 2002; 106 : 698- 702.
94. Sianos G, Morel M-A, Kappetein P et al. The SYNTAX Score: an angiographic tool
grading the complexity of coronary artery disease. EuroInterv 2005; 1 : 219-227.
95. Lange RA, Hillis LD . Coronary revascularization in context. N Engl J Med 2009; 360
: 1024-1026.
96. Feit F, Brooks MM, Sopko G, et al. Long-term clinical outcome in the Bypass
Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation Registry: comparison with the randomized
trial. BARI Investigators. Circulation. 2000; 101: 2795–2802.
97. Srinivas VS, Brooks MM,; Detre KM et al. Contemporary Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention Versus Balloon Angioplasty for Multivessel Coronary Artery Disease.
Circulation. 2002; 106 : 1627-1633.
98. Sedlis SP, Morrison DA, Lorin JD et al. Investigators of the Dept. of Veterans Affairs
Cooperative Study, the Angina With Extremely Serious Operative Mortality Evaluation
(AWESOME). Percutaneous coronary intervention versus coronary bypass graft surgery
for diabetic patients with unstable angina and risk factors for adverse outcomes with
bypass: outcome of diabetic patients in the AWESOME randomized trial and registry. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2002; 40 : 1555-66.
99. Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA et al ACC/AHA 2007 Guidelines on
Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation and Care for Noncardiac Surgery.A Report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines on Perioperative
Cardiovascular Evaluation for Noncardiac Surgery) Developed in Collaboration With the
American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, and Society for
Vascular Surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 59 : 159-242.
100. Poldermans D, Hoeks SE, Feringa HH. Pre-Operative Risk Assessment and Risk
Reduction Before Surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008 ; 51:1913-1924
101. Newsome LT, Weller RS, Gerancher JC et al. Coronary Artery stents: Part II.
Perioperative considerations and management. Anesth Analg. 2008 ; 107 : 570-590.
102. Grines CL, Bonow RO, Casey Jr DE et al. Prevention of Premature Discontinuation
of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary Artery Stents. A Science Advisory
From the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American College of Surgeons, and
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
66
American Dental Association, With Representation From the American College of
Physicians J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49 : 734-739.
103. Biondi-Zoccai GG, Lotrionte M, Agostoni P, et al. A systematic review and metaanalysis on the hazards of discontinuing or not adhering to aspirin among 50,279 patients
at risk for coronary artery disease. Eur Heart J 2006; 27 : 2667-2674.
104. King SB III, Smith SC, Hirshfield JW et al Writing on Behalf of the 2005 Writing
Committee. 2007 Focused Update of the ACC/AHA/SCAI 2005 Guideline Update for
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention.American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 2007 Writing Group to Review New
Evidence and Update the ACC/AHA/SCAI 2005 Guideline Update for Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 51 : 172-209.
105. Burger W, Chemnitius JM, Kneissl GD, Rucker G. Low-dose aspirin for secondary
cardiovascular prevention—cardiovascular risks after its perioperative withdrawal versus
bleeding risks with its continuation—review and meta-analysis. J Intern Med 2005; 257 :
399-414.
106. Antithrombotic Trialists' Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised
trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in
high-risk patients. Br Med J 2002; 324 : 71-86.
107. Yusuf S, Zhao F, Mehta SR, et al. Effects of clopidogrel in addition to aspirin in
patients with acute coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med.
2001; 345 : 494-502.
108. Sabatine MS, Cannon CP, Gibson CM, et al. Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin and
fibrinolytic therapy for myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation. N Engl J Med.
2005; 352 : 1179-89.
109. Mehta SR, Yusuf S, Peters RJ, et al. Effects of pretreatment with clopidogrel and
aspirin followed by long-term therapy in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention: the PCI-CURE study. Lancet. 2001; 358 (9281) : 527-33.
110. Patti G, Colonna G, Pasceri V et al. Randomized Trial of High Loading Dose of
Clopidogrel for Reduction of Periprocedural Myocardial Infarction in Patients Undergoing
Coronary Intervention .Results From the ARMYDA-2 (Antiplatelet therapy for Reduction of
MYocardial Damage during Angioplasty) Study. Circulation. 2005; 111 : 2099-2106.
111. Lotrionte M, Biondi-Zoccai GGL, Agostino P et al. Meta-Analysis Appraising High
Clopidogrel Loading in Patients Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Am J
Cardiol 2007; 100 : 1199-1206.
112. Vlaar PJ, Svilaas T, Damman K et al. Impact of Pretreatment With Clopidogrel on
Initial Patency and Outcome in Patients Treated With Primary Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention for ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction. Circulation 2008; 118 : 18281836.
113. Widimsky P, Motovska Z, Simek S on behalf of the PRAGUE-8 Investigators.
Clopidogrel pre-treatment in stable angina: for all patients >6 h before elective coronary
angiography or only for angiographically selected patients a few minutes before PCI? A
randomized multicentre trial PRAGUE-8. Eur Heart J 2008; 29 : 1495-1503.
114. Kandzari DE, Berger PB, Kastrati A et al. ISAR-REACT Study Investigators Influence
of treatment duration with a 600-mg dose of clopidogrel before percutaneous coronary
revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 44 : 2133–2136.
115. Collet J-P, Silvain J, Landivier A et al. Dose Effect of Clopidogrel Reloading in
Patients Already on 75-mg Maintenance Dose: The Reload With Clopidogrel Before
Coronary Angioplasty in Subjects Treated Long Term With Dual Antiplatelet Therapy
(RELOAD) Study. Circulation 2008; 118 : 1225 - 1233.
116. Bertrand ME, Rupprecht HJ, Urban P, Gershlick AH, for the CLASSICS Investigators.
Double-blind study of the safety of clopidogrel with and without a loading dose in
combination with aspirin compared with ticlopidine in combination with aspirin after
coronary stenting: the CLopidogrel ASpirin Stent International Cooperative Study
(CLASSICS). Circulation 2000; 102 : 624–629.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
67
117. Ho PM, Peterson ED, Wang L, et al. Incidence of death and acute myocardial
infarction associated with stopping clopidogrel after acute coronary syndrome JAMA 2008;
299 : 532-539.
118. Angiolillo DJ, Shoemaker SB, Desai B, et al. Randomized comparison of a high
clopidogrel maintenance dose in patients with diabetes mellitus and coronary artery
disease: results of the Optimizing Antiplatelet Therapy in Diabetes Mellitus (OPTIMUS)
study. Circulation 2007; 115 : 708-16.
119. Bennett JS.: Novel platelet inhibitors. Annu. Rev Med 2001; 52: 161.
120. Schömig A, Neumann F-J, Kastrati A et al. A Randomized Comparison of Antiplatelet
and Anticoagulant Therapy after the Placement of Coronary-Artery Stents. N Engl J Med
1996; 334 : 1084-9.
121. Leon MB, Baim DS, Gordon P et al. Clinical and angiographic results from the Stent
Anticoagulation Regimen Study (STARS). Circulation. 1996;94(suppl I):I-685. Abstract.
122. Bertrand ME, Legrand V, Boland J, et al. Randomized multicenter comparison of
conventional anticoagulation versus antiplatelet therapy in unplanned and elective
coronary stenting. The full anticoagulation versus aspirin and ticlopidine (FANTASTIC)
study. Circulation 1998; 98 :1597-603.
123. Schuhlen H, Kastrati A, Pache J.u. et al. Incidence of thrombotic occlusion and major
adverse cardiac events between two and four weeks after coronary stent placement:
analysis of 5,678 patients with a four-week ticlopidine regimen. J Am Coll. Cardiol 2001;
37: 2066 - 2073.
124. Wiviott SD, Trenk D, Frelinger AL, et al., on behalf of the PRINCIPLE-TIMI 44
Investigators. Prasugrel Compared With High Loading- and Maintenance-Dose Clopidogrel
in Patients With Planned Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: The Prasugrel in
Comparison to Clopidogrel for Inhibition of Platelet Activation and Aggregation–
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 44 Trial. Circulation 2007; 116 : 2923-2932.
125. Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients
with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 2007; 357: 2001-15.
126. Montalescot G, Wiviott SD, Braunwald E et al for the TRITON-TIMI 38 Investigators.
Prasugrel compared with clopidogrel in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention for ST –elevation myocardial infarction (TRITON-TIMI 38): double blind,
randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2009; 373 : 723-731.
127. Kastrati A, Neumann F-J, Mehilli J, et al. ISAR-REACT 3 Trial Investigators
Bivalirudin versus unfractionated heparin during percutaneous coronary intervention. N
Engl J Med 2008; 359 : 688-696.
128. Giugliano RP,Braunwald E. The year in Non STEMI. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 52 :
1095-1103.
129. Van’t Hof AW, Ten Berg J, Heestermans T, et al., on behalf of the Ongoing Tirofiban
In Myocardial infarction Evaluation (On-TIME) 2 Study Group. Prehospital initiation of
tirofiban in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction undergoing primary angioplasty
(On-TIME 2): a multicentre, double-blind, randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2008; 372 :
537-46.
130. Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, et al. Comparison of early invasive and
conservative strategies in patients with unstable coronary syndromes treated with the
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor Tirofiban. N Engl J Med 2001; 344: 1879–87.
131. The PURSUIT Trial Investigators. Inhibition of platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa with
eptifibatide in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 1998; 339: 436–43.
132. Giugliano RP, White JA, Bode C, et al., on behalf of the EARLY ACS Investigators.
Early versus delayed, provisional eptifibatide in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med
2009; March 30: Epub ahead of print)
133. Stone GW, Ware JH, Betrand ME et al for the ACUITY Investigators. Antithrombotic
strategies in patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoing early invasive
management: one-year results from the ACUITY trial. JAMA 2007; 298 : 2497-2506.
134. Bhatt DL, Marso SP, Lincoff AM et al. Abciximab reduces mortality in diabetics
following percutaneous coronary interventions. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000; 35 : 922-8.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
68
135. Gurbuz AT, Elliot WG, Zia AA. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in the
cardiovascular patient: diagnostic and treatment guidelines. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2005;
27 : 138-149.
136. Lincoff AM, Bitti JA, Harrington RA for the REPLACE-2 Investigators. Randomized
Evaluation of PCI Linking Angiomax to Reduced Clinical Events (REPLACE 2). JAMA
2003; 289 : 853-863.
137. Stone GW, Ware JH, Betrand ME et al for the ACUITY Investigators. Antithrombotic
strategies in patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoing early invasive
management: one-year results from the ACUITY trial. JAMA 2007; 298 : 2497-2506.
138. Stone GW, Witzenbichler B, Guagliumi G et al for the HORIZONS-AMI Trial
Investigators. Bivalirudin during primary PCI in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med
2008; 358 : 2218–2230.
139. Montalescot G, White HD, Gallo R et al. Enoxaparin versus Unfractionated Heparin
in Elective Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. N Engl J Med 2006; 355: 1006-1017.
140. Mahaffey KW, Cohen M, Garg J et al for the SYNERGY Trial Investigators. High-Risk
Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes Treated With Low-Molecular-Weight or
Unfractionated Heparin : Outcomes at 6 Months and 1 Year in the SYNERGY Trial .
JAMA. 2005; 294 : 2594-2600.
141. Mehta S, Granger C , Eikelboom J et.al. Efficacy and Safety of Fondaparinux Versus
Enoxaparin in Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes Undergoing Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention. Results From the OASIS-5 Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50 :17421751.
142. Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, et al. Effects of fondaparinux on mortality and
reinfarction in patients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: the OASIS-6
randomized trial. JAMA 2006; 295 : 1519–30.
143. Mehta SR, Boden WE, Eikelboom JW, et al., on behalf of the OASIS 5 and 6
Investigators Antithrombotic Therapy With Fondaparinux in Relation to Interventional
Management Strategy in Patients With ST- and Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute
Coronary Syndromes. An Individual Patient-Level Combined Analysis of the Fifth and Sixth
Organization to Assess Strategies in Ischemic Syndromes (OASIS 5 and 6) Randomized
Trials. Circulation 2008; 118 : 2038-2046.
144. Lee SW, Park SW, Hong MK, et al. Triple versus dual antiplatelet therapy after
coronary stenting: impact on stent thrombosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2005; 46 : 1833-1837.
145. Douglas JS, Holmes DR, Kereiakes DJ, et.al. Coronary Stent Restenosis in Patients
Treated With Cilostazol for the Cilostazol for Restenosis Trial (CREST) Investigators.
Circulation 2005; 112 : 2826-2832.
146. Lee SW, Park SW, Kim YH, et.al. Comparison of triple versus dual antiplatelet
therapy after drug-eluting stent implantation (from the DECLARE-Long trial). Am J Cardiol
2007; 100 : 1103-8.
147. Lee SW, Park SW, Kim YH, et al. Drug-eluting stenting followed by cilostazol
treatment reduces late restenosis in patients with diabetes mellitus the DECLAREDIABETES Trial (A Randomized Comparison of Triple Antiplatelet Therapy with Dual
Antiplatelet Therapy After Drug-Eluting Stent Implantation in Diabetic Patients). J Am Coll
Cardiol 2008; 51 : 1181-7.
148. Biondi-Zoccai GGL, Lotrionte M, Anselmino M, Moretti C, et.al. Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials Appraising the Impact of Cilostazol After
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Am Heart J 2008; 155: 1081-1089.
149. Pasceri V, Patti G, Nusca A, et al. Randomized trial of atorvastatin for reduction of
myocardial damage during coronary intervention. Results from the ARMYDA (Atorvastatin
for Reduction of MYocardial Damage during Angioplasty) study. Circulation 2004;110 :
674-8.
150. Briguori C. Novel Approaches for Preventing or Limiting Events (NAPLES) II Trial:
Impact of Loading Dose of Atorvastatin on Periprocedural Myocardial Infarction. Presented
at ACC.09/i2, Orlando, Florida, March 2009.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
69
151. DiSciascio G. Efficacy of Atorvastatin Reload in Patients on Chronic Statin Therapy
Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Preliminary Results of the ARMYDARECAPTURE (Atorvastatin for Reduction of Myocardial Damage during Angioplasty)
Randomized Trial. Presented at ACC.09/i2, Orlando, Florida, March 2009.
152. The BARI Investigators. Influence of diabetes on 5 year mortality and morbidity in a
randomized trial comparing CABG and PTCA in patients with multivessel disease. The
Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI). Circulation 1997; 96 : 176169.
153. King SBIII, Kosinski AS, Guyton RA et al. Eight year mortality in the Emory
Angioplasty versus Surgery Trial (EAST). J Am Coll Cardiol 2000; 35 : 1116-21.
154. Kurbaan AS, Bowker TJ, Ilseley CD et al. Differences in the mortality of the CABRI
diabetic and nondiabetic populations and its realtion to coronary artery disease and the
revascularization mode (Abstr). J Am Coll Cardiol 2001; 87 : 947-50.
155. Rozenman Y, Sapoznikov D, Mosseri M et al. Long term angiographic follow –up of
coronary balloon angioplasty in patients with diabetes mellitus. A clue to the explanation of
the results of the BARI study. Balloon Angioplasty Revascularization Investigators. J Am
Coll Cardiol 1997; 30 : 1420-25.
156. Van Belle E, Abolmaali K, Bauters C et al. Restenosis, late vessel occlusion and left
ventricular function 6 months after balloon angioplasty in diabetic patients. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1999; 94 : 1818-25.
157. Van Belle E, Bauters C, Hubert E et al. Restenosis rates in diabetic patients: A
comparison of coronary stenting and balloon angioplasty in native coronary vessels.
Circulation 1997; 96 : 1454-60.
158. Van Belle E, Ketelers R, Bauters C et al. Patency of percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty sites at 6 months angiographic follow – up: A key determinant of
survival in diabetics after coronary balloon angioplasty. Circulation 2001; 103 : 1218-24.
159. Corpus RA, George PB, House JA, et al. Optimal glycemic control is associated with
a lower rate of target vessel revascularization in treated type II diabetic patients
undergoing elective percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 43 : 8-14.
160. Fefer P, Hod H, Ilany J et al. Comparison of Myocardial Reperfusion in Patients With
Fasting Blood Glucose 100, 101 to 125, and >125 mg/dl and ST-Elevation Myocardial
Infarction With Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Am J Cardiol 2008; 102 : 1457-1462.
161. Serruys PW, Unger F, Sousa JE et al. Comparison of coronary artery bypass surgery
and stenting for the treatment of multivessel disease. N Engl J Med 2001; 344 : 1117-24.
162. Serruys PW, Unger F, Crean PA et al. Arterial Revascularization Therapy Study
(ARTS): A randomized randomized trial of stenting in multivessel coronary disease versus
bypass surgery. Two year results. Eur Heart J 2001: 22 (suppl): 232 .
163. Stone GW, Ellis SG, Cox DA et al. A polymer based paclitaxel-eluting stent in
patients with coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 2004; 350 : 221-31.
164. Holmes DR Jr, Leon MB, Moses JW et al. Analysis of 1-Year Clinical Outcomes in
the SIRIUS Trial .A Randomized Trial of a Sirolimus-Eluting Stent Versus a Standard Stent
in Patients at High Risk for Coronary Restenosis . Circulation 2004; 109 : 634-640.
165. Weintraub WS, Stein B, Kosinski A et al. Outcome of coronary bypass surgery
versus coronary angioplasty in diabetic patients with multivessel coronary artery disease. J
Am Coll Cardiol 1998; 31 : 10-19.
166. Kuntz RE. Importance of considering atherosclerosis progression when choosing a
coronary revascularization strategy: the diabetes –percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty dilemma. Circulation 1999; 99 : 847-51.
167. The EPIC Investigators. Use of a monoclonal antibody directed against the platelet
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors in high risk coronary angioplasty. The EPIC investigation. N
Engl J Med 1994; 330 : 956-61.
168. The EPILOG Investigators. Platelet glycoprotein IIb / IIIa receptor blockade and low
dose heparin during percutaneous coronary revascularization. N Engl J Med 1997; 336 :
1689-96.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
70
169. The Epistent Investigators. Randomized placebo controlled and balloon angioplasty
controlled trail to assess safety of coronary stenting with use of platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
blockade. Lancet 1998; 352 : 87-92.
170. Abizaid A, Cosat MA,Centemero M et al. Clinical and economic impact of diabetes
mellitus on percutaneous and surgical treatment of multivessel coronary disease patients:
insight from the Arterial Revascularization Therapy Study (ARTS) trial. Circulation 2001;
104 : 533-8.
171. Sedlis SP, Morrison DA, Lorin DA eta l. Percutaneous coronary intervention versus
coronary bypass graft surgery for diabetic patients with unstable angina and risk factors for
adverse outcomes with bypass: outcome of diabetic patients in the AWESOME
randomized trial and registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002; 40 : 1555-66.
172. Coronary artery bypass surgery versus percutaneous coronary intervention with stent
implantation in patients with multivessel coronary artery disease (the Stent or Surgery
trial). Lancet 2003; 360,965-70.
173. Rubenstein MH, Sheynberg BV, Harrel LC et al. Effectiveness of and adverse events
after percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with mild versus severe renal failure.
Am J Cardiol 2001; 87 : 856-60.
174. Best PJ, Lennon R, Ting HH et al. The impact of renal insufficency on clinical
outcomes in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol
2002; 39 : 1113-9.
175. Reinecke H, Trey T, Matzkies F et al. Grade of chronic renal failure and acute and
long term outcome after percutaneous coronary intervention. Kidney Int 2003; 63 : 696-70.
176. Herzog CA, Ma JZ, Collins AJ. Comparative survival of dialysis patients in the United
States after coronary angioplasty, coronary artery stenting and coronary artery bypass
surgery and the impact of diabetes. Circulation 2002; 106 : 2207-11.
177. Gruberg L, Weissman NJ, Waksman R et al. Comparison of outcomes after
percutaneous coronary revacularization with stents in patients with and without mild
chronic renal insufficiency. Am J Cardiol 2002; 89 : 54-7.
178. McCullough PA, Adam A, Becker CR et al. Epidemiology and prognostic implications
of contrast induced nephropathy. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98 : 5-13.
179. Rihal CS, Textor CS, Grill DE et al. Incidence and prognostic importance of acute
renal failure after percutaneous coronary intervention. Circulation 2002; 105 : 2259-64.
180. Roghi A, Savonitto S, Cavallini C et al. Impact of acute renal failure following
percutaneous coronary intervention on long-term mortality. J Cardiovasc Med 2008; 9 :
375-81.
181. Gupta R, Gurm HS, Bhatt DL et al. Renal Failure after percutaneous coronary
intervention is associated with high mortality. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2005; 64 : 44950.
182. Mc Cullough PA. Contrast induced acute kidney damage. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 51
: 1419-28.
183. McCullough PA, Bertrand ME, Brinker JA, Stacul F. A meta-analysis of the renal
safety of isosmolar iodixanol compared with low-osmolar contrast media. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 48: 2006; 692–9.
184. Pannu N, Wiebe N, Tonelli M for the Alberta Kidney Disease Network. Prophylaxis
Strategies for Contrast-Induced Nephropathy JAMA. 2006; 295 : 2765-2779.
185. Wessely R . Randomized Clinical Trial to Compare the Nephrotoxic Effects of IsoOsmolar Versus Low-Osmolar Contrast Medium in Patients With Impaired Renal Function
Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: The COntrast Media and NephroToxicity
Following Coronary Revascularization by AngioplaSTy (CONTRAST) Study. Presented at
ACC Annual Scientific Session Chicago, USA, March 2008.
186. Tepel M, Van der Giet M, Schwarzfeld C et al. Prevention of radiographic-contrastagent-induced reductions in renal function by acetylcysteine. N Engl J Med. 2000; 343:
180–184.
187. Briguori C, Colombo A, Violante A et al. Standard vs double dose of N-acetylcysteine
to prevent contrast agent associated nephrotoxicity. Eur Heart J 2004; 25 : 206-211.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
71
188. Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV et al. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy
with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004; 291: 2328–2334.
189. Briguori C, Airoldi F, D’Andrea D et al .Renal Insufficiency Following Contrast Media
Administration Trial (REMEDIAL): A Randomized Comparison of 3 Preventive Strategies.
Circulation 2007; 115: 1211 - 1217.
190. Fox KA, Bassand JP, Mehta SR, et al. Influence of renal function on the efficacy and
safety of fondaparinux relative to enoxaparin in non ST-segment elevation acute coronary
syndromes. Ann Intern Med 2007; 147 : 304-310.
191. Radovanovic D, Erne P, Urban P et al. Gender differences in management and
outconmes in [patients with acute coronary syndromes: results on 20,290 patients from the
AMIS Plus Registry. Heart 2007; 93 : 1369-75.
192. Cowley MJ, Mullin SM, Kelsey SF et al. Sex differences in early and long term results
of coronary angioplasty in the NHLBI PTCA registry. Circulation 1985; 71 : 90- 7.
193. Singh M, Rihal CS, Gersh BJ et al. Mortality differences between men and women
after percutaneous coronary interventions: 25 year, single center experience. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2008; 51 : 2313 -20.
194. Dodge JT, Brown BJ, Bolson EL et al. Lumen diameter of normal human coronary
arteries: influence of age, sex, anatomic variation and left ventricular hypertrophy or
dilation. Circulation 1992; 86 : 232-46.
195. Wilson RF, Raveendran G . What’s good for the gander is now good for the goose. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 51 : 2321-22.
196. Batchelor WB, Anstrom KJ, Muhlbaier LH et al for the National Cardiovascular
Network Collaboration. Contemporary outcome trends in the elderly undergoing
percutaneous coronary interventions: results in 7472 octogenarians. J Am Coll Cardiol
2000; 36 : 723-30.
197. Assali AR, Moustapha A, Sdringola S et al. The dilemma of success: percutaneous
coronary intervention in patients > or = 75 years of age – successful but associated with
higher vascular complications and cardiac mortality. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2003; 59 :
195-9.
198. Tsai TP, Chaux A, Kass RM et al. Aortocoronary bypass surgery in septuagenarians
and octogenarians. Cardiovasc Surg ( Torino) 1989; 30 : 364-8.
199. The TIME Investigators. Trial of invasive versus medical therapy in elderly patients
with chronic symptomatic coronary artery disease (TIME): A randomized trial. Lancet 2001;
358 : 951-7.
200. Cohen HA, Wiliams DO, Holmes DR Jr et al. Impact of age on procedural and 1 year
outcome in percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty: a report from the NHLBI
Dynamic registry. Am Heart J 2003; 146 : 513-9.
201. Izumi M, Tsuchikane E, Funamoto M, et al. Final results of the CAPAS trial. Am
Heart J 2001;142 : 782-789.
202. Bonan R, Roose P, Suttorp M, et al. cutting balloon global randomized trial:
Restenosis and revascularization rate (Abstr). Circulation 1997; 96 : I-324.
203. Albiero R, Silber S, Di Mario C,et. Al. Cutting Balloon Versus Conventional Balloon
Angioplasty for the Treatment of In-Stent Restenosis: Results of the Restenosis Cutting
Balloon Evaluation Trial (RESCUT). J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 43 : 943–9.
204. Scheller B, Hehrlein C, Bocksch W, et al. Treatment of coronary in-stent restenosis
with a paclitaxel-coated balloon catheter. N Engl J Med 2006; 355 : 2113-24.
205. Scheller B. PACCOCATH ISR 1 and 2: A Prospective, Randomized Trial of a
Paclitaxel-Eluting Balloon in In-Stent Restenosis: 2-Year Results. Presented at TCT
Washington, October 2008.
206. Unverdorben M. Paclitaxel-Eluting PTCA-Balloon Catheter in Coronary Artery
Disease II-In-Stent Restenosis (PEPCAD II-ISR) study. Presented at SCAI Annual
Scientific Sessions in Partnership with ACC i2 Summit (SCAI-ACCi2) Chicago, March
2008.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
72
207. Serruys PW, de Jaegere P, Kiemeneij F, et al. A comparison of balloon-expandablestent implantation with balloon angioplasty in patients with coronary artery disease:
Benestent Study Group. N Engl J Med 1994; 331 : 489-95.
208. Fischman DL, Leon MB, Baim DS, et al. A randomized comparison of coronary-stent
placement and balloon angioplasty in the treatment of coronary artery disease: Stent
Restenosis Study Investigators. N Engl J Med 1994;331:496-501.
209. Cervinka P. A Randomized Comparison of Genous Stent Versus Chromium-Cobalt
Stent for Treatment of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction: A 6-Month Clinical,
Angiographic, and IVUS Follow-up: GENIUS-STEMI trial. Presented at ACC.09/i2,
Orlando, Florida, March 2009.
210. Windecker S, Serruys PW, Wandel S, et al. Biolimus-eluting stent with biodegradable
polymer versus sirolimus-eluting stent with durable polymer for coronary revascularization
(LEADERS): a randomized noninferiority trial. Lancet 2008; 372 : 1163-73.
211. Baim DS, Wahr D, George B, et al on behalf of the SAFER Trial Investigators.
Randomized trial of a distal embolic protection device during percutaneous intervention of
saphenous vein aorto-coronary bypass grafts. Circulation 2002; 105 : 1285–1290.
212. Kereiakes DJ, Turco MA, Breall J etal. A novel filter based embolic protection device
for percutaneous intervention of saphenous vein graft lesions: results of the AMEthyst
randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2008 : 1 : 248-257.
213. Silvestri M, Barragan P, Sainsous J, et al. Unprotected left main coronary artery
stenting: immediate and medium-term outcomes of 140 elective procedures. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2000; 35 : 1543-50.
214. Kelley MP, Klugherz BD, Hashemi SM, et al. One-year clinical outcomes of protected
and unprotected left main coronary artery stenting. Eur Heart J 2003; 24 : 1554-9.
215. Park SJ, Park SW, Hong MK, et al. Long-term (three-year) outcomes after stenting of
unprotected left main coronary artery stenosis in patients with normal left ventricular
function. Am J Cardiol 2003; 91: 12-6
216. Park SJ, Kim YH, Lee BK, et al. Sirolimus-eluting stent implantation for unprotected
left main coronary artery stenosis: comparison with bare metal stent implantation. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2005; 45 : 351-6.
217. Valgimigli M, Van Mieghem CA, Ong AT, et al. Short- and longterm clinical outcome
after drug-eluting stent implantation for the percutaneous treatment of left main coronary
artery disease: insights from the Rapamycin-Eluting and Taxus Stent Evaluated At
Rotterdam Cardiology Hospital registries (RESEARCH and TSEARCH). Circulation
2005;111: 1383-9.
218. Chieffo A, Stankovic G, Bonizzoni E, et al. Early and mid-term results of drug-eluting
stent implantation in unprotected left main. Circulation 2005; 111: 791-5.
219. Palmer ND, Causer MD, Ramsdale DR et al. Effect of Completeness of
Revascularization on Clinical Outcome in Patients with Multivessel Disease Presenting
with Unstable Angina Who Undergo Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. J Invasive
Cardiol 2004; 16:185-188.
220. Suero JA, Marso SP, Jones PG, et al. Procedural outcomes and long-term survival
among patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention of a chronic total occlusion
in native coronary arteries: a 20-year experience. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38 : 409–414.
221. Simes PA, Myreng Y, Molstad P et al. Improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction
and wall motion after successful recanalization of chronic coronray opclusions. Eur Heart J
1998; 19 : 273-81.
222. Suttorp MJ, Laarman GJ, Rahel BM et al. Primary Stenting of Totally Occluded
Native Coronary Arteries II (PRISON II). A Randomized Comparison of Bare Metal Stent
Implantation With Sirolimus-Eluting Stent Implantation for the Treatment of Total Coronary
Occlusions. Circulation 2006; 114 : 921-928.
223. Latib A, Colombo A. Bifurcation Disease: What Do We Know, What Should We Do?
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. Intv. 2008; 1 ; 218-226.
224. Medina A, Suarez de Lezo J, Pan M. A new classification of coronary bifurcation
lesions. Rev. Esp. Cardiol 2006; 59: 183 .
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
73
225. Steigen TK, Maeng M, Wiseth R et al. Randomized study on simple versus complex
stenting of coronary artery bifurcation lesions. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn 1996; 37 : 311313.
226. Routledge HC, Morice M-C, LeFevre T et al. 2 year outcome of patients treated for
bifurcation coronary disease with provisional side branch T stenting using drug eluting
stents. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2008; 1 : 358-365.
227. Finn AV, Kolodgie FD, Harnek J et al. Differential response of delayed healing and
persistent inflammation at sites of overlapping sirolimus or paclitaxel eluting stents.
Circulation 2005; 112 : 270-278.
228. Daemon J, Wenaweser P, Tsuchida K et al. Early and late coronary stent thrombosis
of sirolimus-eluting and pcalitaxel-eluting stents in routine clinical practice: data froma
large two institutional cohort study. Lancet 2007; 369 : 667-678.
229. Waksman R, Bonello L. The 5 T’s of Bifurcation Intervention: Type, Technique, Two
stents, T-stenting, Trials. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2008; 1: 366-368.
230. Ge L, Airoldi F, Iokovou I et al. Clinical and angiographic outcome after implantation
of drug-eluting stents in bifurcation lesions with the crush stent technique: importance of
final kissing balloon post dilatation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2005; 46 : 613-620.
231. Ormiston JA, Webster MW, Webber B et al. The Crush Technique for coronary artery
bifurcation stenting: Insights from micro-computed tomographic imaging of bench
deployments. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2008; 1 : 351-357.
232. Campeau L, Enjalbert M, Lesperance J, et al. The relation of risk factors to the
development of atherosclerosis in saphenous vein bypass grafts and the progression of
disease in the native circulation. N Engl J of Med 1984; 311 : 1329-1332.
233. Bourassa M. Fate of venous grafts: the past, the present and the future. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1991; 5 : 1081–3.
234. Fitzgibbon G, Kafka H, Leach A, et al. Coronary bypass graft fate and patient
outcome: angiographic follow-up of 5,065 grafts related to survival and reoperation in
1,338 patients during 25 years. J Am Coll Cardiol 1996; 28 : 616 –26.
235. Weintraub W, Jones E, Craver J, et al. Frequency of repeat coronary bypass or
coronary angioplasty after coronary artery bypass surgery using saphenous venous grafts.
Am J Cardiol 1994; 73 : 103–12.
236. Foster E, Fisher L, Kaiser G, et al. Comparison of operative mortality and morbidity
for initial and repeat coronary artery bypass grafting: The CASS Registry Experience. Ann
Thorac Surg 1984; 38 : 563-570.
237. Schaff H, Orszulak T, Gersh B, et al. The morbidity and mortality of reoperation for
coronary artery disease and analysis of late results with use of actuarial estimate of
eventfree interval. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983; 85 : 508-515.
238. Weintraub WS, Jones EL, Morris DC et al. Outcome of reoperative coronary bypass
surgery versus coronary angioplasty after previous bypass surgery. Circulation 1997; 95 :
868-877.
239. Stephan WJ, O’Keefe JH, Piehler JM, et.al. Coronary angioplasty versus repeat
coronary artery bypass grafting for patients with previous bypass surgery. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1996; 28 : 1140-1146.
240. Stone GW, Rogers C, Hermiller J, et al. Randomized comparison of distal protection
with a filter-based catheter and a balloon occlusion and aspiration system during
percutaneous intervention of diseased saphenous vein aorto-coronary bypass grafts.
Circulation 2003;108:548–553.
241. Ellis SG, Linkoff AM, Miller D, et al. Reduction in complications of angioplasty with
abciximab occurs largely independent of baseline lesion morphology. J Am Coll Cardiol
1998; 32 : 1619–23.
242. Roffi M, Mukherjee D, Chew DP et al. Lack of benefit from intravenous platelet
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibition as adjunctive treatment for percutaneous
interventions of aortocoronary bypass grafts: a pooled analysis of five randomized clinical
trials. Circulation 2002; 106 : 3063- 3067.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
74
243. Tanaka H, Narisawa T, Hirano J, et al. Coronary artery bypass grafting for coronary
aneurysms due to Kawasaki disease. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001; 7 : 307–310.
244. Bauer M, Redzepagic S, Weng Y, et al. Successful surgical treatment of a giant
aneurysm of the right coronary artery. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.1998; 46 : 152–154.
245. Clarke, NR; Banning, AP. Obliteration of a coronary artery aneurysm with a covered
coronary stent. Heart 2001; 86 :198.
246. Briguori C, Sarais C, Sivieri G, et al. Polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stent and
coronary artery aneurysms.Cathet Cardiovasc Intervent 2002 ; 55 : 326 –330.
247. Iakovou I, Schmidt T, Bonizzoni E, et al. Incidence, predictors, and outcome of
thrombosis after successful implantation of drug-eluting stents. JAMA 2005; 293 : 21262130.
248. Cutlip DE, Windecker S, Mehran R, et al. Clinical end points in coronary stent trials: a
case for standardized definitions. Circulation 2007; 115 : 2344-2351.
249. Mauri L, Hsieh WH, Massaro JM, et al. Stent thrombosis in randomized clinical trials
of drug-eluting stents N Engl J Med 2007; 356 : 1020-10.
250. Stone GW, Moses JW, Ellis SG, et al. Safety and efficacy of sirolimus- and
paclitaxel-eluting coronary stents N Engl J Med 2007; 356 : 998-1008.
251. Jaffe, R., Strauss, B. H. Late and Very Late Thrombosis of Drug-Eluting Stents:
Evolving Concepts and Perspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50: 119-127.
252. Lagerqvist B, James SK, Stenestrand U et al. Long-term outcomes with drug eluting
stents versus bare-metal stents in Sweden. N Engl J Med 2007; 356 : 1009-1019.
253. Windecker S, Meier B. Late Coronary Stent Thrombosis. Circulation 2007; 116 :
1952-1965.
254. Burzotta F, Parma A, Pristipino C et al. Angiographic and clinical outcome of
invasively managed patients with thrombosed coronary bare metal or drug-eluting stents:
the OPTIMIST study. Eur Heart J 2008; 29 : 2011-3021.
255. Orford JL, Lennon R, Melby S et al. Frequency and correlates of coronary stent
thrombosis in the modern era. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002; 40: 1567–1572.
256. Chieffo QA, Briguori C, Melzi EGG et al. Incidence and Predictors of Drug-Eluting
Stent Thrombosis During and After Discontinuation of Thienopyridine Treatment.
Circulation 2007;116 : 745-754.
257. Morice MC, Serruys PW, Sousa JE,et al RAVEL Study Group. Randomized Study
with the Sirolimus-Coated Bx Velocity Balloon-Expandable Stent in the Treatment of
Patients with de Novo Native Coronary Artery Lesions. A randomized comparison of a
sirolimus-eluting stent with a standard stent for coronary revascularization. N Engl J Med.
2002; 346 : 1773–1780.
258. Dawkins KD, Grube E, Guagliumi G et al. Clinical efficacy of polymer-based
paclitaxel-eluting stents in the treatment of complex, long coronary artery lesions from a
multicenter, randomized trial: support for the use of drug-eluting stents in contemporary
clinical practice. Circulation 2005; 112 : 3306-13.
259. Radke PW, Kaiser A, Frost C, Sigwart U. Outcome after treatment of coronary instent restenosis; results from a systematic review using meta-analysis techniques. Eur
Heart J 2003; 24 : 266-73.
260. Mehran R, Mintz GS, Popma JJ, et al. Mechanisms and results of balloon
angioplasty for the treatment of in-stent restenosis. Am J Cardiol 1996; 78 : 618-22.
261. Sharma SK, Annapoorna SK, King T, et al. Multivariate predictors of target lesion
revascularization in the Randomized Trial of PTCA versus Rotablator for Diffuse In-Stent
Restenosis (ROSTER). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001; 37 : 55A. Abstract.
262. Vom Dahl J, Dietz U, Haager PK, et al. Rotational atherectomy does not reduce
recurrent in-stent restenosis: results of the angioplasty versus rotational atherectomy for
treatment of diffuse in-stent restenosis trial (ARTIST). Circulation 2002; 105 : 583-8.
263. Neumann FJ, Desmet W, Grube E, et al. Effectiveness and safety of sirolimus-eluting
stents in the treatment of restenosis after coronary stent placement. Circulation 2005; 111 :
2107-11.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
75
264. Holmes DR, Tierstein P, Satler L et al for the SISR Investiagtors. Sirolimus-Eluting
Stents vs Vascular Brachytherapy for In-Stent Restenosis Within Bare-Metal Stents. The
SISR Randomized Trial. JAMA 2006; 295 : 1264-1273.
265. Ellis SG, O’Shaughnessy CD, Martin SL, et al. Two-year clinical outcomes after
paclitaxel eluting stent or brachytherapy treatment for bare metal stent restenosis: the
TAXUS V ISR trial Eur Heart J 2008; 29: 1625–1634.
266. Teirstein PS, Massullo V, Jani S, et al. Catheter-based radiotherapy to inhibit
restenosis after coronary stenting (SCRIPPS). N Engl J Med 1997; 336 : 1697-703.
267. Waksman R, White RL, Chan RC, et al. Intracoronary gamma radiation therapy after
angioplasty inhibits recurrence in patients with in-stent restenosis (WRIST). Circulation
2000; 101 : 2165-71.
268. Waksman R, Raizner AE, Yeung AC, et al on behalf of the INHIBIT Investigators.
Use of localized intracoronary radiation in the treatment of instent restenosis: the INHIBIT
randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2002; 359 : 551-7.
269. Raizner AE, Oesterle SN, Waksman R, et al. Inhibition of restenosis with betaemitting radiotherapy: report of the proliferation reduction with vascular energy trial
(PREVENT). Circulation 2000;102:951-8.
270. Hamon M, Nolan J. Should radial artery access be the "gold standard" for PCI? Heart
2008 ; 94 : 1530-1532.
271. Chase AJ, Fretz EB, Warburton WP, et al.. Association of arterial access site at
angioplasty with transfusion and mortality. The M.O.R.T.A.L study: (Mortality benefit Of
Reduced Transfusion after percutaneous coronary intervention via the Arm or Leg). Heart
2008; 94 :1019–25.
272. Desai ND, Cohen EA, Naylor CD, et al. Radial Artery Patency Study Investigators. A
randomized comparison of radial-artery and saphenous-vein coronary bypass grafts. N
Engl J Med 2004; 351 : 2302–9.
273. Collins, P., Webb, C. M., Chong, C. F., et al. for the Radial Artery Versus Saphenous
Vein Patency. Radial Artery Versus Saphenous Vein Patency Randomized Trial: Five-Year
Angiographic Follow-Up. Circulation 2008; 117 : 2859-2864.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
76
APPENDIX I: CONTRAINDICATIONS TO
FIBRINOLYTIC THERAPY
Absolute contraindications
Risk of Intracranial haemorrhage
Any history of intracranial haemorrhage
Ischaemic stroke within 3 months
Known structural cerebral vascular lesion (e.g. arteriovenous
malformation)
Known intracranial neoplasm
Risk of bleeding
Active bleeding or bleeding diathesis (excluding menses)
Significant head trauma within 3 months
Suspected aortic dissection
Relative contraindications
Risk of intracranial haemorrhage
Severe uncontrolled hypertension on presentation (BP >
180/110 mm Hg)*
Ischaemic stroke more than 3 months ago
History of chronic, severe uncontrolled hypertension
Risk of Bleeding
Current use of anticoagulation in therapeutic doses
(INR > 2)
Recent major surgery < 3 weeks
Traumatic or prolonged CPR >10 minutes
Recent internal bleeding (e.g. gastrointestinal or urinary tract
haemorrhage) within 4 weeks
Non-compressible vascular puncture
Active peptic ulcer
Others
Pregnancy
Prior exposure (>5 days and within 12 months of first usage)
to streptokinase (if planning to use same agent)
* The blood pressure should be reduced prior to institution of
fibrinolytic therapy.
Adapted from : 2nd CPG STEMI 2007
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
77
APPENDIX II: CLASSIFICATION OF TIMI FLOW
APPENDIX III: CLASSIFICATION OF TIMI MYOCARDIAL
PERFUSION GRADE(TMP)
The TIMI Study Group. The Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) trial. N Engl J
Med. 1985; 312: 932–936.
Gibson CM, Cannon CP, Murphy SA, et al, for the TIMI study group. Relationship of
TIMI myocardial perfusion grade to mortality after administration of thrombolytic drugs.
Circulation. 2000;101:125–130.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
78
APPENDIX IV : CLASSIFICATION OF UNSTABLE ANGINA*
UA : Unstable angina; T : Tropinins
*Hamm CW, Braunwald E. A classification of unstable angina revisited. Circulation. 2000
;102 :118-22.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
79
APPENDIX V : TIMI RISK SCORE FOR UA/NSTEMI
The TIMI risk score is determined by the sum of the presence of 7
variables at admission:
1 point is given for each of the following variables:
•
Age 65 y or older
•
At least 3 risk factors for CAD ( family history of premature
CAD, hypertension,elevated cholesterols, active smoker,
diabetes)
•
Known CAD (coronary stenosis of ≥ 50%)
•
Use of aspirin in prior 7 days
•
ST-segment deviation (≥0.5mm) on ECG
•
At least 2 anginal episodes in prior 24 h
•
Elevated serum cardiac biomarkers
Total Score = 7 points
Low Risk : ≤ 2 point
Moderate Risk: 3-4 points
High Risk : ≥5 points
Adapted from :
•
Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJ, et al. The TIMI risk score for unstable angina/
non-ST elevation MI: a method for prognostication and therapeutic decision
making. JAMA 2000; 284 : 835–42 .
•
Sabatine MS, Morrow DA, Giugliano RP, et al. Implications of upstream glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa inhibition and coronary artery stenting in the invasive management of
unstable angina/non ST elevation myocardial infarction. A comparison of the
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) IIIB trial and the Treat angina with
Aggrastat and determine Cost of Therapy with Invasive or Conservative Strategy
(TACTICS)-TIMI 18 trial. Circulation 2004; 109 : 874-880.
All-Cause Mortality, New or Recurrent
MI, or Severe Recurrent Ischemia
Requiring Urgent Revascularization
Through 14 d After Randomization, %
4.7
8.3
13.2
19.9
26.2
40.9
TIMI Risk Score
0-1
2
3
4
5
6-7
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
80
APPENDIX VI : CLASSIFICATION OF ANGINA SEVERITY
APPENDIX VII: RISK FACTOR GOALS IN PATIENTS
WITH CAD
* the lower the better.
In clinical trials, plaque regression was seen when LDL-C was <1.8mmol/l.
In patients with progressive disease, one should aim for LDL-C <1.8mmol/l.
** in patients with significant co-morbidities and complex CAD, an alternative target of <
7% is acceptable
Classification of angina severity according to the Canadian
Cardiovascular Society
Level of symptoms
“Ordinary activity does not cause angina”.
Angina with strenuous or rapid or prolonged exertion
only.
“Slight limitation of ordinary activity”.
Angina on walking or climbing stairs rapidly, walking
uphill or exertion after meals, in cold weather, when
under emotional stress, or only during the first few
hours after awakening.
“Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity”. Angina
on walking one or two blocks* on the level or one flight
of stairs at a normal pace under normal conditions.
“Inability to carry out any physical activity without
discomfort” or “angina at rest”
Class
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class IV
* Equivalent to 100-200 m
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
81
APPENDIX VIII : CALCULATION OF CREATININE
CLEARANCE
APPENDIX IX: COMMONLY USED IODINATED CONTRAST
AGENTS
Estimated GFR (ml/min) = (140-age) x weight or 1.2 (140-age)
(0.814 x SCr [µmol/L ]) SCr [µmol/L ]
SCr : serum creatinine
Women: multiplication with 0.85
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
82
APPENDIX X: PATIENT AND LESION CHARACTERISTICS
FOR RECANALISATION SUCCESS (EURO CTO CLUB*)
* European perspective in the recanalisation of Chronic Total Occlusions (CTO):
Consensus document from the EuroCTO Club. EuroInterv2007; 3 : 30-43
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
83
APPENDIX XI: MEDINA CLASSIFICATION OF BIFURCATION
LESIONS
Adapted from Medina A, Suarez de Lezo J, Pan M. A new classification of coronary
bifurcation lesions. Rev. Esp. Cardiol. 59(2), 183 (2006).
In the Medina classification a binary value (1,0) is given to each of the
3 components of a bifurcation (main branch proximal, main branch
distal, and the side branch) according to whether each of these
segments is compromised (1) or not (0).
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
84
APPENDIX XII: CLASSIFICATION OF INSTENT RESTENOSIS
(ISR)
Adapted from Mehran R, Dangas G, Abizaid AS, et al. Angiographic Patterns of InStent Restenosis : Classification and Implications for Long-Term Outcome. Circulation
1999;100;1872-1878
Class I: Focal ISR group. Lesions are ≤10 mm in length and are
positioned at the unscaffolded segment (ie, articulation or
gap), the body of the stent, the proximal or distal margin (but
not both), or a combination of these sites (multifocal ISR)
Class II: “Diffuse intrastent” ISR. Lesions are > 10 mm in length
and are confined to the stent(s), without extending outside the
margins of the stent(s).
Class III: “Diffuse proliferative” ISR. Lesions are >10 mm in length
and extend beyond the margin(s) of the stent(s).
Class IV: ISR with “total occlusion.” Lesions have a TIMI flow grade
of 0.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
85
APPENDIX XIII: GRADE OF RECOMMENDATION AND LEVEL
OF EVIDENCE* FOR SECONDARY PREVENTION OF CAD
* ACC/AHA and ESC Classification
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
86
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The committee of this guideline would like to express their gratitude
and appreciation to the following for their contribution:
•
Technical Advisory Committee, Clinical Practice Guidelines,
Ministry of Health for their valuable input and feedback
•
Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
•
Secretariat from sanofi-aventis
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
This CPG was made possible by an unrestricted educational grant
from Sanofi-Aventis (M) Sdn Bhd.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on
management of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) 2009
87
ABBREVIATIONS