CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT
OF TUBERCULOSIS
JRTH EDITION)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, sold or used to promote or endorse any
product or service, or used in an inappropriate or misleading context.
e-ISBN: 978-967-288-726-3
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guidelines should not override the responsibility
of the practitioners to make clinical decisions appropriate to the
circumstances of the individual patient. This should be done in
consultation with the patients and their families or guardians, taking
into account the management options available locally.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
This CPG was issued in 2021 and will be reviewed in a minimum period
of four years (2025) or sooner if new evidence becomes available.
When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or National
Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A discussion
will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised
CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed, and the latest systematic
review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at
the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions,
corrections will be published in the web version of this document, which
will be the definitive version. This version can be found on the websites
mentioned above.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guideline Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group Members
vii
Review Committee Members
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1: Management of Active Tuberculosis
x
Algorithm 2: Management of Latent Tuberculosis Infection
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
SECTION I: ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS
2
2.1. Smear Positive Pulmonary Tuberculosis
2
2.2. Smear Negative Pulmonary Tuberculosis
8
2.3. Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis
11
2.4. Recurrent Tuberculosis
17
2.5. Tuberculosis in Special Situations
20
2.6. Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Tuberculosis (HIV-TB) 22
Co-infection
2.7. Tuberculosis in Children
27
2.8. Patient-Centred Care
35
3.
SECTION II: LATENT TUBERCULOSIS
37
3.1. Latent Tuberculosis Infection in Adults
37
3.2. Latent Tuberculosis Infection in Children
48
4.
SECTION III: ANTI-TUBERCULOSIS ADVERSE DRUG
58
REACTIONS AND DRUG INTERACTIONS
4.1. Anti-Tuberculosis Adverse Drug Reactions
58
4.2. Anti-Tuberculosis Drug Interactions
64
5.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
68
5.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
68
5.2 Potential Resource Implications
68
5.3 Clinical Audit Indicators
69
REFERENCES
71
Appendix 1. Example of Search Strategy
77
Appendix 2. Clinical Questions
78
Appendix 3. Procedure for Sputum Induction for
79
Children and Adults
Appendix 4. Specimen Collection for Diagnosis of
80
Tuberculosis
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Appendix 5. Grading of Pulmonary Tuberculosis Severity
81
Based on Chest Radiograph in Adults
Appendix 6. First-Line Anti-Tuberculosis Drug Dosage and 82
Adverse Drug Reactions
Appendix 7. Tuberculosis Treatment Outcome Definition
84
Appendix 8. Chest Radiograph Changes for Tuberculosis
85
in Children
Appendix 9. Procedure for Gastric Aspiration and
86
Nasopharyngeal Aspiration in Children
Appendix 10. Procedure for Tuberculin Skin Test
88
Appendix 11. QuantiFERON Specimen Collection and
89
Handling
Appendix 12. Proposed Latent Tuberculosis Infection
91
Treatment Outcome Definition
Appendix 13. Drugs With Potential Interactions Involving
92
Rifamycin
Appendix 14. Drugs With Potential Interactions Involving
98
Isoniazid
Appendix 15. Antiretroviral and Rifamycin Drug Interactions 100
Glossary
103
List of Abbreviations
104
Acknowledgement
106
Disclosure Statement
106
Source of Funding
106
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
In this CPG the word ‘should’ is used to reflect a strong recommendation
and ‘may’ to reflect a weaker recommendation.
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Active TB
• Sputum should be sent for mycobacterial culture and drug
susceptibility testing for patients with pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB).
• Sputum should be sent for Xpert Ultra if smear negative PTB is
suspected.
• Sputum should be sent for both Xpert Ultra and mycobacterial culture
(BACTEC MGIT) for individuals suspected to have recurrent PTB.
• Standard anti-tuberculosis regimen of 2EHRZ/4HR should be used
in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB).
• Only daily anti-tuberculosis regimen should be used throughout the
treatment of PTB.
• The following standard regimens should be used for extrapulmonary
tuberculosis (EPTB):
 2EHRZ/4-7HR for tuberculosis of the bone or joint
 2EHRZ/10HR for tuberculous meningitis
 2EHRZ/4HR for other forms of EPTB
• Corticosteroids should be used in tuberculous meningitis and
pericarditis.
• In HIV-tuberculosis (TB) co-infection, antiretroviral treatment (ART)
should be initiated within eight weeks of anti-TB treatment.
 However, for HIV-TB patients with a CD4 count <50 cells/mm3,
ART should be initiated within the first two weeks of anti-TB
treatment.
• For people living with HIV with TB meningitis, ART should be delayed
until two months after initiation of TB treatment.
• For HIV-TB co-infected patients on a protease inhibitor-based
antiretroviral therapy, rifabutin should be used instead of rifampicin.
• Co-trimoxazole preventive therapy should be given during TB
treatment in HIV-TB co-infection with an unknown CD4 count or a
CD4 count <200 cells/mm3.
• Directly observed treatment (DOT) should be done in patients on
tuberculosis (TB) treatment.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
iii
 Video observed treatment (VOT) should be an alternative to DOT
in selected patients where facilities are available.
 Self-administered treatment may be offered to patients who
cannot perform VOT or DOT.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Latent TB Infection
• Interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) or tuberculin skin test (TST)
should be used to test for latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) for
adults in the target groups.
• IGRA or TST should be used to test for LTBI in children at risk of
progressing to active tuberculosis.
• In the treatment of all adults with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI):
 3HR or 3HP regimens should be the first-line regimen unless
contraindicated.
 4R may be used for patients who cannot tolerate or who are
contraindicated for INH-based regimens.
 6H or 9H may be used for patients who cannot tolerate or who are
contraindicated for rifamycin-based regimens.
 1HP may be considered for HIV-positive adults.
• In the treatment of children with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI),
the preferred regimens are:
 4R for all children >28 days of age or 3HP for children aged >2
years.
 6H for all newborns aged 28 days and below.
• Alternative regimes of LTBI in children are 3HR, 6H or 9H.
• In HIV-infected children with LTBI, 6H is the preferred regimen for:
 children <2 years of age.
 children ≥2 years of age on antiretroviral treatment with rifamycin
drug interaction.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
iv
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for this Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry
of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary
Review Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published in English
on studies conducted in humans, from year “2012 to Current”. In
addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines
were searched, and experts in the field were contacted to identify
relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 19 November 2018
to 26 February 2019. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 30 June 2021 to be included. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from
the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on Tuberculosis e.g.:
• World Health Organization - WHO consolidated guidelines on
tuberculosis. Module 1: Prevention - Tuberculosis preventive
treatment (2020)
• National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) –
Tuberculosis (updated September 2019)
• World Health Organization (WHO) - Treatment of Tuberculosis:
Guidelines for treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis and
patient care (2017 Update)
• American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of America - Official
American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of America Clinical
Practice Guidelines: Treatment of Drug-Susceptible Tuberculosis
(2016)
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to their use as references.
A total of 13 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
v
members met 21 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG was developed
largely based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles
of GRADE (refer to page i). The writing of the CPG strictly follows the
requirement of AGREE II.
Upon completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at
http://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.
pdf?mid=634).
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
vi
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of tuberculosis (TB) in the
following aspects:
a) diagnosis
b) treatment
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Active TB and Latent TB
Exclusion Criteria
The following topics are covered by separate guidelines and hence
have been excluded:
• Drug-resistant TB
• TB in healthcare workers
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of TB at any healthcare level including:
i. healthcare
providers
(doctors,
pharmacists,
allied
health
professionals)
ii. professional organisations
iii. policy makers
iv. patients and their advocates
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
vii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Goon Ai Khiang
Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Asmah Razali
Public Health Physician
TB/Leprosy Sector, Disease Control Division
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Azlina Samsudin
Respiratory Physician
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah, Terengganu
Dr. Cheng Joo Thye
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Choo Chong Ming
Consultant Infectious Disease Paediatrician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Kartina Md Noor
Pathologist (Medical Microbiology)
Hospital Sultan Abdul Halim, Kedah
Ms. Khoo Ming-Yi
Pharmacist
Institut Perubatan Respiratori,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kumaresh Raj Lachmanan
Respiratory Physician
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Ms. Koh Hui Moon
Pharmacist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section, Ministry of Health,
Putrajaya
Dr. Noor Ayuni Bazura Muhamad
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Norlizah Paidi
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Mas, Johor
Dr. Rachael Shamini Danasamy
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Tasek Mutiara
Pulau Pinang
Dr. Rosminah Md Kassim
Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sathya Rao Jogulu
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Tonnii Sia Loong Loong
Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Wong Chee Kuan
Respiratory Physician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Wong Ke Juin
Infectious Disease Paediatrician
Hospital Wanita & Kanak-kanak Likas,
Sabah
Dr. Zamzurina Abu Bakar
Respiratory Physician
Institut Perubatan Respiratori,
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
viii
Professor Dato’ Dr. Hj Abdul Razak Muttalif
Senior Consultant Respiratory Physician
Professor and Head of Medicine
MAHSA University, Selangor
Dr. Benedict Sim Lim Heng
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Iskandar Firzada Osman
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jaya Gading, Pahang
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Jeyaseelan P Nachiappan
Head of Department & Consultant
Infectious Disease Paediatrician
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Kuppusamy Iyawoo
Visiting Consultant Respiratory Physician
Assunta Hospital, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Nik Sherina
Haidi Hanafi
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Pang Yong Kek
President
Malaysian Thoracic Society
Dr. Rahela Ambaras Khan
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sathesh Kumar Periyasamy
Patient Advocate
Malaysian Association for the Prevention of
Tuberculosis
Dr. Suhaila Md. Hanapiah
Pathologist (Medical Microbiology)
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Thilaka a/p Chinnayah@Nadarajah
Head of TB/Leprosy Sector & Consultant
Public Health Physician
Disease Control Division
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Yun Sii Ing
Head of Radiology Services &
Senior Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Irfhan Ali Hyder Ali
Head of Respiratory Services &
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Members
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Datuk Dr. Aziah Ahmad Mahayiddin
Senior Consultant Chest Physician
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Cynthia Chee Bin Eng
Visiting Consultant
TB Control Unit, Ministry of Health
Singapore
Dr. Fong Siew Moy
Head of Paediatric & Consultant
Infectious Disease Paediatrician
Hospital Wanita & Kanak-kanak Likas
Sabah
Dr. Han Yung Wen
Family Medicine Specialist
EcoSoul Clinic, Selangor
Mr. Ibrahim Hamzah
President
Malaysian Association for the Prevention
of Tuberculosis (MAPTB), Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Jaya Muneswarao A/L Ramadoo@
Devudu
Pharmacist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Noor Ain Noor Affendi
Paediatric Respiratory Specialist
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah
Terengganu
Ms. Rohana Hassan
Deputy Director
Pharmaceutical Care Branch
Pharmaceutical Services Programme,
Ministry of Health, Selangor
Dr. Salmiah Md Sharif
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Siti Roszilawati Ramli
Pathologist (Medical Microbiologist)
Institute for Medical Research
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Timothy William
Consultant Infectious Disease Physician
Gleneagles Hospital Kota Kinabalu,
Sabah
Assistant Professor Dr. Tin Myo Han
Public Health Specialist
Grand Hantha International Hospital
Yangon, Myanmar
Dr. Zaleha Abd Manaf
Radiologist
Hospital Pakar Al Islam, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
x
ALGORITHM 1: MANAGEMENT OF ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS
Investigate for PTB
Investigate for EPTB
Adults
Sputum/IS for AFB,
mycobacterial
culture, Xpert Ultra*,
CXR
Children
Sputum/IS/GA/NPA
for AFB, mycobacterial
culture, Xpert Ultra*
CXR#
TST/IGRA
Extrapulmonary specimens for
Xpert Ultra*, mycobacterial culture
(BACTEC MGIT), AFB
± HPE
± Biochemistry, ADA*
± Diagnostic imaging
TB diagnosis confirmed
TB diagnosis not confirmed
Use the following standard regimens
PTB: 2EHRZ/4HR
TB Meningitis: 2EHRZ/10HR
Bone and joint TB: 2EHRZ/4-7HR
Other EPTB: 2EHRZ/4HR
Refer to a specialist
Monitor treatment
Response to
treatment
Good treatment response
and treatment tolerance
Poor treatment response
complications due to TB or
severe ADR
Continue and complete
treatment
Refer to a specialist
#Symptoms of TB and CXR findings in children may be different from adults
*When indicated
Important note: Please refer to the texts in the relevant sections in the CPG for further details.
Abbreviations:
ADA=adenosine deaminase, ADR=adverse drug reaction, AFB=acid fast bacilli, CXR=chest
radiograph, EPTB=extrapulmonary tuberculosis, GA=gastric aspirate, HPE=histopathological
examination, IS=induced sputum, IGRA=Interferon Gamma Release Assay,
NPA=nasopharyngeal aspirate, PTB=pulmonary tuberculosis, TB=tuberculosis,
TST=tuberculin skin test
People with symptoms# of active TB
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
ALGORITHM 2: MANAGEMENT OF LATENT
TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION
Target population at risk of progression to active TB*
Active TB excluded
(Asymptomatic and Normal CXR)
Active TB not excluded
(Symptomatic or Abnormal CXR)
TST/IGRA
Investigate for active TB and
treat accordingly
In cases involving children,
refer to a paediatrician
Positive
Negative#
LTBI Treatment in Adults
Preferred regimens:
3HR or 3HP
Alternative regimens:
4R, 6H or 9H (adults)
1HP (adult PLHIV)
LTBI treatment in Children
Refer to Section 3.1(d)
PLHIV aged >12 months or
household PTB contact aged
<5 years
Other at-risk groups
No contraindication for LTBI
treatment
Active TB excluded
Monitor treatment
LTBI treatment tolerated
Continue and complete
treatment
Severe ADR or
progression to active TB
Refer to a specialist
Follow-up for progression to active TB
*Refer to Section II on Latent TB Infection
#IGRA/TST may be repeated if the initial testing was done with less than 2 months of exposure
to an index case, initiate LTBI treatment if repeat testing is positive. For children <5 years old,
refer to a specialist to consider withholding the treatment if 2 consecutives IGRA/TST were
negative
Abbreviations:
ADR=adverse drug reaction, CXR=chest radiograph, IGRA=Interferon Gamma Release
Assay, LTBI=latent tuberculosis infection, PLHIV=people living with HIV, PTB=pulmonary
tuberculosis, TB=tuberculosis, TST=tuberculin skin test
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
The Global Tuberculosis Report 2020 estimated 10.0 million people
contracted tuberculosis (TB) and 1.4 million people died of it in 2019.1, level III
The World Health Organization (WHO) proposed the End TB Strategy
to improve TB management with targets of a 90% decrease in TB
incidence and 95% decrease in TB mortality by 2035 compared with
2015.2, level III
TB is endemic in Malaysia and continues to be a major public health
concern. The TB incidence for Malaysia in 2015 was 79.0/100,000
population. In 2020, the TB incidence was reduced to 72.4/100,000
but it was still below the End TB Strategy target. There were 1,696 TB
deaths (TB mortality rate of 5.5/100,000 population) in 2015 and this
increased to 2,320 deaths (7.1/100,000 population) in 2020.3, level III By
2035, Malaysia aims to reduce TB death to fewer than 85 deaths per
year.
In 2019, the number of people living with HIV (PLHIV) was estimated
at 87,000 with 3,564 newly notified.4, level III The incidence of HIV-TB
co-infection in Malaysia in 2020 was 1,700 (5.2/100,000 population).
In terms of drug resistance, the occurrence of multi-drug resistant TB
(MDR TB) among patients with TB infections was 0.34%.5, level III 221
cases of laboratory-confirmed rifampicin-resistant and MDR TB was
reported in 2020.6, level III
The vision of the National Strategic Plan for TB Control (2016 - 2020) is
for Malaysia to be a TB-free country by year 2035 (<1 case/1,000,000
population). To achieve this, it is vital to ensure timely universal access
to quality-assured diagnosis and treatment for all forms of TB.7, level III
Malaysia faces many challenges in her TB control programme, from
delays in the diagnosis of smear negative PTB, extrapulmonary TB
(EPTB) and TB in children to treatment default and non-adherence.
The newly launched programmatic management of latent TB infection
(LTBI), also known as TB preventive treatment, will take time to mature
and produce results. The socially disadvantaged still have difficulty
accessing TB services due to various reasons e.g. transportation
issues and poor social networking.
This CPG hopes to address some of these challenges and to provide
updated information on diagnostic tests available in Malaysia since the
previous edition in 2012. It will supersede all earlier MoH guidelines
of drug-susceptible TB. The management of drug-resistant TB was
addressed earlier in the CPG on Management of Drug Resistant
Tuberculosis (1st Edition) 2016.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
2. SECTION I: ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS
The summary on the management of people with active TB is illustrated
in Algorithm 1 on Management of Active Tuberculosis.
2.1 Smear Positive Pulmonary Tuberculosis
a.
Introduction
In Malaysia, 23, 644 cases of TB were notified in 2020, 91.7% of them
new cases and 58.0% smear positive PTB.3, level III
Adult patients with active PTB typically present with a history of
productive cough, haemoptysis, loss of appetite, unexplained weight
loss, fever, night sweats and fatigue. However, typical symptoms may
be absent in the immunocompromised or elderly patients.
When reviewing a patient with suspected TB, taking a full history and
conducting a complete clinical examination is a must, followed by
performing a chest radiograph (CXR) and sputum smear microscopy.
In a centre where radiography facilities are not available, diagnosis of
PTB can be made based on clinical findings and positive sputum smear
results. All patients should be routinely screened for HIV and diabetes
mellitus.
• All patients with clinically diagnosed or bacteriologically confirmed
tuberculosis must be notified under the Prevention and Control of
Infectious Diseases Act, 1988 (Act 342) to the District Health Office.
TB notification is mandatory within seven days of diagnosis and
failure to notify is compoundable.
b.
Diagnosis
•
Laboratory investigations
All patients suspected of having PTB should submit at least two sputum
specimens for microscopic examination. When possible, at least one
early morning specimen should be obtained as sputum collected at this
time has the highest yield.8 For patients who are unable to expectorate
sputum spontaneously, sputum induction may be done. Refer to
Appendix 3 on Procedure for Sputum Induction.
Sputum should be sent for mycobacterial culture at the initiation of TB
treatment to confirm the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.
tuberculosis) and to exclude drug-resistant TB. In a patient suspected
of drug resistant TB, rapid molecular tests should be done prior to
treatment for early confirmation of drug resistance. Refer to Appendix
4 on Specimen Collection for Diagnosis of Tuberculosis for further
information.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Recommendation 1
• Sputum should be sent for mycobacterial culture and drug
susceptibility testing for patients with pulmonary tuberculosis.
•
Chest radiography
Chest radiography should be used as the primary imaging modality to
aid the diagnosis and management of PTB. Radiographic abnormalities
are often seen in the apical and posterior segments of the upper lobe
or in the superior segments of the lower lobe. However, lesions may
appear anywhere in the lungs and may differ in size, shape, density and
cavitation, especially in immunosuppressed patients.8 The Grading of
Pulmonary Tuberculosis Severity Based on Chest Radiograph in
Adults is shown in Appendix 5.
•
Lateral Flow Urine Lipoarabinomannan Assay
Lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF-LAM) is a new method
for the diagnosis of TB. It detects lipoarabinomannan, a component of
the mycobacterial cell wall, within one hour. Compared with sputum
tests, LF-LAM is easier to perform and without the risk of laboratory
TB transmission. Besides, urine is also easier to collect compared with
sputum.
AlereLAM is the first commercially available LF-LAM recommended
by WHO as an adjunct for the detection of TB in HIV-positive adults.9
However, it is not recommended by WHO for use in HIV-negative adults
due to its low sensitivity of 4 - 31%.10, level II-2
FujiLAM, a new LF-LAM, has been shown to be more sensitive than
AlereLAM for the diagnosis of TB in HIV-positive adults.11, level II-2; 12, level III
Its accuracy for the diagnosis of PTB in HIV-negative adults is still being
studied.
In a cohort study involving 372 HIV-negative adults, both LF-LAMs
showed low sensitivity for the diagnosis of PTB compared with sputum
smear microscopy or Xpert MTB/RIF as shown in Table 1:10, level II-2
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 1: Accuracy of AlereLAM, FujiLAM, sputum smear
microscopy and sputum Xpert MTB/Rif for the diagnosis of
PTB in HIV-negative adults
In smear positive PTB, the sensitivity of FujiLAM was only 68.4% (95%
CI 57.3 to 77.8).10, level II-2
Recommendation 2
• Lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay should not be used for
the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in HIV-negative adults.
c.
Treatment
The aims of TB treatment are to:
• reduce morbidity
• reduce mortality
• prevent relapse
• decrease transmission
• prevent emergence of drug-resistant TB
The current standard anti-TB regimen recommended by WHO consists
of a 2-month (8-week) intensive phase with isoniazid (INH), rifampicin
(RIF), pyrazinamide (PZA) and ethambutol (EMB), followed by a
4-month (18-week) continuation phase with INH and RIF (2EHRZ/4HR).
Among the first-line anti-TB drugs, INH has the greatest early
bactericidal activity, while RIF the greatest sterilising power.13 EMB is
bacteriostatic and is combined with other more potent drugs to prevent
the emergence of resistant bacilli. The major justification for using this
treatment regimen is to reduce TB relapse and to reduce emergence
of drug-resistant TB. However, the long duration of TB treatment is
associated with non-adherence and loss to follow-up. Therefore, more
research is being carried out to shorten treatment with existing or
repurposed drugs.
•
Anti-tuberculosis regimens
A meta-analysis of three high-quality RCTs of adults with drugsusceptible PTB comparing 4-months moxifloxacin-based regimen
with standard regimen (2EHRZ/4HR±E) found that the former was
associated with higher relapse rate (RR=3.56, 95% CI 2.37 to 5.37).
However, there were non-significant differences in treatment failure,
acquired drug resistance, serious adverse events and death.14, level I
AlereLAM
FujiLAM
Sputum smear
microscopy
Sputum Xpert
MTB/RIF
10.8% (95% CI 6.3 to 18.0)
53.2% (95% CI 43.9 to 62.1)
61.3% (95% CI 52.0 to 69.8)
76.6% (95% CI 67.8 to 83.6)
92.3% (95% CI 88.5 to 95.0)
98.9% (95% CI 96.7 to 99.6)
100% (95% CI 98.5 to 100.0)
100% (95% CI 98.5 to 100.0)
Test
Sensitivity
Specificity
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
In a recently published RCT, a 4-month regimen containing rifapentine
and moxifloxacin was non-inferior to standard 6-month regimen in terms
of unfavourable treatment outcome and adverse effect at 12-months
after randomisation. However, long-term follow-up results were not
published yet.15, level I
International guidelines recommend the use of standard 2EHRZ/4HR
regimen for the treatment of PTB.13; 16; 17
For further information on renal dosing and adverse drug reactions
(ADR), please refer to Appendix 6 on First-Line Anti-Tuberculosis
Drug Dosage and Adverse Drug Reactions.
Recommendation 3
• Standard anti-tuberculosis regimen of 2EHRZ/4HR* should be used
in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis.
 Pyridoxine 10 mg/day should be given to patients on isoniazid.
Those with high risk of neuropathy** should be given pyridoxine
30 mg/day.
*Two months of ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide followed by four
months of isoniazid and rifampicin.
**Those at high risk of isoniazid induced neuropathy including pregnant women,
PLHIV, elderly patients, patients with diabetes, alcoholism, malnutrition or chronic
renal failure.
•
Fixed-dose combination of anti-tuberculosis treatment
Fixed-dose combination (FDC) tablets are combinations of two or
more anti-TB drugs in a tablet. They have been available since the
1980s. The aim of FDC tablets is to simplify TB treatment, to prevent
monotherapy and to improve patient compliance as well as to prevent
development of drug-resistant TB. The FDC tablets also simplify drug
procurement, reduce storage space, and improve medicine distribution
while reducing drug supply management and cost errors.
Two meta-analyses comparing FDC and separate-drug formulations
showed no difference in the following outcomes:18 - 19, level I
 treatment failure and/or relapse
 sputum smear conversion at end of treatment
 adverse events leading to discontinuation of therapy
 serious adverse events
 acquired drug resistance
 death
The risk of bias of primary studies in both meta-analyses were
heterogeneous.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
In the first meta-analysis, FDC showed favourable patients’ adherence
and satisfaction although most results were non-significant.19, level I In the
Cochrane systematic review, patients reported better taste tolerability
(RR=1.39, 95% CI 1.27 to 1.51) and convenient number of tablets
(RR=1.5, 95% CI 1.37 to 1.64) in FDC.18, level I
WHO recommends the use of FDC over separate drug formulations in
the treatment of patients with drug-susceptible TB.17 The recommended
daily dosing for FDC is shown in the following table.
Table 2: Recommended dose for FDC* in adults
*FDC refers to either 2-, 3- or 4-anti-TB drug combinations.
A 4-drug FDC tablet contains isoniazid 75 mg, rifampicin 150 mg, ethambutol 275 mg
and pyrazinamide 400 mg.
A 3-drug FDC tablet contains isoniazid 75 mg, rifampicin 150 mg and pyrazinamide
400 mg.
A 2-drug FDC tablet contains isoniazid 75 mg and rifampicin 150 mg.
Recommendation 4
• Fixed-dose combination is preferred over separate drug formulation
in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis.
For patients who are unable to tolerate FDC tablets or who use separate
drug formulations in alternative regimens, the recommended dose for
first-line drugs is shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Recommended dose of first-line anti-TB in adults
*High dose rifampicin for the treatment of TB is being evaluated.
**The maximum dose of anti-TB drugs may be adjusted according to the individual’s
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data.
Body weight (kg)
30 - 37
38 - 54
55 - 70
>70
Number of FDC tablets daily
2
3
4
5
Dose (range) in mg/kg
body weight daily
5 (4 - 6)
10 (8 - 12)*
15 (15 - 20)
25 (20 - 30)
Maximum** dose in mg daily
300
600
1600
2000
Drugs
Isoniazid (INH)
Rifampicin (RIF)
Ethambutol (EMB)
Pyrazinamide (PZA)
Recommended doses
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Pyridoxine 25 - 50 mg/day is recommended by ATS for individuals
receiving INH who are at high risk of neuropathy.13 In Malaysia,
pyridoxine has been given at 10 mg/day for all adult patients. The
CPG DG now recommends a higher pyridoxine dose of 30 mg/day for
individuals at high risk of neuropathy.
•
Intermittent vs daily dosing anti-tuberculosis regimens
Intermittent therapy had been widely used in first-line TB treatment
for over 30 years. It was used with directly observed treatment (DOT)
to reduce costs of medication and healthcare worker workload, and
improve treatment compliance. Unfortunately, it was noted to cause
high rates of relapse and acquired drug resistance.
In a meta-analysis of 56 RCTs on newly diagnosed PTB patients treated
with first-line drugs using RIF for >6 months, thrice weekly throughout
regimen showed worse outcomes compared with daily treatment in
terms of:20, level I
 failure (IRR=3.7, 95% CI 1.1 to 12.6)
 relapse (IRR=2.2, 95% CI 1.2 to 4.0)
 acquired drug resistance (IRR=10.0, 95% CI 2.1 to 46.7)
In another comparison, a twice-weekly regimen in the continuation
phase after daily treatment in the intensive phase had higher risks of
failure (IRR=3.0, 95% CI 1.0 to 8.8) and relapse (IRR=1.8, 95% CI 1.0
to 3.3) but the results were not statistically significant. There were also
no significant difference in the outcomes with thrice weekly continuation
phase after daily intensive phase.20, level I
This meta-analysis did not address adverse event outcomes and gave
no report on risk of bias of the primary papers.
WHO recommends daily dosing treatment in all patients with drugsusceptible PTB. The use of thrice-weekly dosing is not recommended
at all.17
Recommendation 5
• Only daily anti-tuberculosis regimen should be used throughout the
treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis.
d.
Follow-up and monitoring
All patients with anti-TB treatment should be monitored as shown in
Table 4. Assessment of clinical response, adherence to treatment
and monitoring of ADR must be done at every in-person visit. Sputum
mycobacterial culture and drug susceptibility results should be traced
two months after specimen collection to detect any positive result in a
timely manner.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 4: Monitoring schedule of adult patients on PTB treatment
*for return to work/school purposes
**requires in-person visit
#sputum direct smear for AFB should be done at the end of five months of standard
anti-TB treatment
FBC=full blood counts, FBS=fasting blood sugar, RP=renal profile, LFT=liver
function test, HIV=Human immunodeficiency virus, AFB=acid fast bacilli, CXR=chest
radiograph
• Patients with persistent smear positive PTB should be referred to
specialists for further management.
• Patients who completed TB treatment should be asked to watch out
for recurrence of TB symptoms and if present to contact their nearest
health care providers.
• Patients who develop complications of PTB (e.g. bronchial stenosis
or haemoptysis) need to be referred to respiratory physicians.
• For patients on ethambutol, visual acquity and Ishihara tests are
required at baseline and subsequently if symptomatic.
The outcomes of TB patients treated should be reported to the National
TB Control Programme according to Appendix 7 on Tuberculosis
Treatment Outcome Definition.
2.2 Smear Negative Pulmonary Tuberculosis
a.
Introduction
Smear negative PTB accounts for 27.9% of all PTB cases in Malaysia
in 2020.3, level III The reasons for a negative sputum smear in PTB are
immunosuppression, early disease, or poor quality specimens. CXR is
a sensitive tool for identifying and excluding PTB.21 The accuracy of
PTB diagnosis can be further increased with mycobacterial culture and/
or Xpert Ultra.
1**
2**
3**
4
5**
0 month
2 - 4 weeks
2 months
5 months
6 months
EHRZ
EHRZ
HR
HR
Treatment
complete
FBC, FBS, RP, LFT, HIV screening
Sputum direct smear for AFB
Sputum mycobacterial culture and drug
susceptibility testing
CXR
LFT
Sputum direct smear for AFB*
Sputum direct smear for AFB
CXR
Sputum direct smear for AFB#
Sputum direct smear for AFB
CXR
Visit
Treatment
duration
Investigations
Regimen
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
b.
Diagnosis
The symptoms of smear negative PTB are similar to smear positive
PTB. However, smear negative results may delay PTB diagnosis. This
may be related to the lack of knowledge or experience of healthcare
providers in detecting the disease or the poor sensitivity of diagnostic
methods to detect cases at an early stage. In patients suspected to
have smear negative PTB, referral to a centre with experience in TB
management is indicated.
•
Chest radiography
In general, CXR is helpful in detecting PTB. Its sensitivity ranged from
87 to 98% when compared with mycobacterial culture.21
In a cross-sectional study comparing two community screening tests for
TB, CXR was more sensitive in diagnosing PTB compared with Xpert
MTB/ RIF sputum examination, 80% versus 34% respectively.22, level III
Thus, CXR is helpful to diagnose smear negative PTB. However, its
use is limited by the need for experienced readers, quality of the CXR
film, radiation exposure risk and logistic issues.
•
Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert Ultra
Sputum smear microscopy has poor sensitivity in the detection of
PTB because a positive smear requires 5,000 - 10,000 AFB/ml from
a sputum sample. Whereas, sputum mycobacterial culture, the gold
standard for confirmation of PTB, requires only 10 - 100 AFB/mL.
Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert Ultra are WHO recommended nucleic acid
amplification tests for the detection of TB and RIF resistance.9 The new
Xpert Ultra, has a lower limit of detection for PTB (15.6 CFU/mL of
sputum) compared with the older Xpert MTB/RIF (112.6 CFU/mL) in
in-vitro studies.23, level III In MoH facilities, only Xpert Ultra is currently
available. In a Cochrane systematic review of seven studies with low
risk of bias, the pooled sensitivity and specificity of Xpert Ultra against
culture were 90.9% (95% CI 86.2 to 94.7) and 95.6% (95% CI 93.0
to 97.4) respectively. For Xpert MTB/RIF, the pooled sensitivity and
specificity were 84.7% (95% CI 78.6 to 89.9) and 98.4% (95% CI 97.0
to 99.3).24, level III
Recommendation 6
• Sputum should be sent for Xpert Ultra if smear negative pulmonary
tuberculosis is suspected.
Figure 1 illustrates Rapid diagnosis of smear negative PTB.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
†Clinical symptoms: current cough, haemoptysis, weight loss, fever or night sweats
*Sputum sample should be sent for mycobaterial culture and drug susceptibility
testing in all cases of smear negative PTB but clinical decision should not be delayed
by culture result.
Figure 1: Rapid diagnosis of smear negative PTB
•
Tuberculosis Loop-mediated Isothermal Amplification Test
Eiken Tuberculosis Loop-mediated Isothermal Amplification Test
(TB-LAMP) is the only commercially available TB-LAMP assay
recommended for the diagnosis of PTB by WHO.25
In a meta-analysis of 13 studies with high risk of bias, Eiken TB-LAMP
showed no significant difference in sensitivity and specificity compared
with Xpert MTB/RIF in the diagnosis of PTB. It was also lower in
sensitivity (42.2%, 95% CI 27.9 to 57.9), with no significant difference
in specificity, compared with mycobacterial culture, for smear negative
PTB.26, level III
Although it showed no significant difference in accuracy compared with
Xpert MTB/RIF, Eiken TB-LAMP was not able to detect drug resistance.9
Therefore, it is inferior to Xpert MTB/RIF for the diagnosis of smear
negative pulmonary tuberculosis.
Not detected
Features suggestive of active PTB
•
Clinical symptoms†
• CXR
Sputum direct smear for AFB
were negative twice*
Refer to a specialist immediately
for further management
Sputum Xpert Ultra
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
Detected
RIF Resistance
Treat as drug susceptible PTB
Not detected
Indeterminate/Detected
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
c.
Treatment
The treatment and monitoring for smear negative PTB are the same as
that for smear positive PTB.
The outcomes of TB patients treated should be reported to the National
TB Control Programme according to Appendix 7 on Tuberculosis
Treatment Outcome Definition.
2.3. Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis
The incidence of EPTB cases reported in Malaysia had shown a
general trend of proportionate increment from 13.3% in 2015 to 15.7%
in 2020. These figures excluded EPTB occurring with PTB, which were
classified under the latter.3, level III EPTB often presents as a diagnostic
and therapeutic challenge due to difficulties associated with accessing
the site of involvement and assessment of therapeutic response.
a.
Diagnosis
In cases of suspected EPTB, a wide range of tests are employed to
confirm the diagnosis. Microbiological tests, e.g. mycobacterial culture
and molecular tests, are specific but not sensitive for the detection of
EPTB. In these patients, work-up for possible concomitant PTB should
also be done.
•
Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert Ultra
The use of Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert Ultra for the diagnosis of EPTB
has been practised because it gives faster results than culture. A
large Cochrane systematic review of moderate quality primary papers
compared Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert Ultra with culture for various types
of specimens in suspected EPTB. The sensitivity of Xpert MTB/RIF
and Xpert Ultra varied across different extrapulmonary specimens,
while specificity was high in most specimens.27, level II-2 The results are
summarised below.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 5: Summary accuracy of Xpert MTB/RIF and
Xpert Ultra for detection of EPTB
The sensitivity of Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert Ultra compared with a
composite reference standard was lower than that of mycobacterial
culture as shown in Table 5. A composite reference standard might
be based on the results of microbiological tests, culture or nucleic acid
amplification test, imaging studies; histology and clinical characteristics.
As expected, EPTB, which is paucibacillary by nature, is harder to
diagnose using microbiological tests compared with a composite
reference standard.
Recommendation 7
• In patients suspected to have extrapulmonary tuberculosis, the
following specimens should be sent for Xpert Ultra when indicated:
 cerebrospinal fluid
 urine
 lymph node aspirate or tissue
 bone and joint tissue
 pericardial fluid
Type of
specimen
Test
Reference
standard
Pooled sensitivity %
(95% CI)
Xpert Ultra
Culture
89.4
91.2
(79.1 to 95.6)
(83.2 to 95.7)
Xpert Ultra
Composite
62.7
99.1
(45.7 to 77.0)
(96.6 to 99.9)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
71.1
99.1
(62.8 to 79.1)
(95.4 to 98.0)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Composite
42.3
99.8
(32.1 to 52.8)
(99.3 to 100)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
88.9
86.2
(82.7 to 93.6)
(78.0 to 92.3)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Composite
81.6
96.4
(61.9 to 93.3)
(91.3 to 98.6)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
82.4
80.3
(73.5 to 89.7)
(60.3 to 91.5)
Xpert Ultra
Culture
75.0
87.0
(58.0 to 86.4)
(63.1 to 97.9)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
49.5
98.9
(39.8 to 59.9)
(97.6 to 99.7)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Composite
18.9
99.3
(11.5 to 27.9)
(98.1 to 99.8)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
97.9
97.4
(93.1 to 99.6)
(80.2 to 100.0)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
59.1
97.6
(42.1 to 76.2)
(95.4 to 98.9)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
61.4
89.7
(32.4 to 82.4)
(74.9 to 99.0)
Xpert MTB/RIF
Culture
85.9
98.1
(71.4 to 94.3)
(93.1 to 99.7)
Pooled specificity %
(95% CI)
CSF
Lymph node
aspirate
Lymph node
biopsy
Pleural fluid
Bone/joint
aspirate
Peritoneal
fluid
Pericardial
fluid
Urine
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
•
Tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction
TB Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) targeting IS6110 is an
alternative diagnostic test for EPTB in Malaysia. A diagnostic study on
extrapulmonary samples showed a sensitivity of 66.66% (95% CI 24.1
to 94) and specificity of 74.41% (95% CI 67.1 to 80.6). The positive and
negative predictive values of IS6110 PCR were 8.33% (95% CI, 2.7 to
20.8) and 98.46% (95% CI 93.9 to 99.7) respectively.28, level III
•
Adenosine deaminase
The measurement of adenosine deaminase (ADA) in pleural fluid
is a useful diagnostic test for tuberculous pleural effusion. From the
previous edition of this CPG, measurement of ADA level in pleural or
cerebrospinal fluid may be considered as an adjunct in diagnosing
pleural TB and tuberculous meningitis respectively.8
In a recent local cohort study of 93 participants, ADA values of 29.6 U/L
gave a sensitivity of 97.6% and specificity of 90.4% in diagnosing TB
pleural effusion.29, level II-2
A cohort study on the utility of ADA (clinical cut-off point of 30 U/L) vs
Xpert Ultra when compared with composite reference standard in the
diagnosis of pleural TB showed that:30, level II-2
 pleural fluid ADA was more sensitive (84.4% vs 28.6%, p<0.0001),
but
 Xpert Ultra was more specific (98.8% vs 87.5%, p=0.004)
Recommendation 8
• In patients suspected to have pleural tuberculosis, pleural adenosine
deaminase may be used as an adjunct in the diagnostic workup.
Refer to Appendix 4 on Specimen Collection for Diagnosis of
Tuberculosis for further information.
•
Central nervous system imaging
Imaging is essential for the diagnosis of central nervous system (CNS)
TB, although the radiological appearances do not confirm the diagnosis.
Computed tomography scan (CT scan) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) are commonly used imaging methods for CNS TB.
The findings of CNS TB on CT scan are non-specific. In contrast, MRI
could provide more diagnostic information. It can better define the
neuroradiological features of CNS TB, particularly when evaluating
brainstem and spinal disease.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
CNS TB has various imaging appearances, including meningitis,
tuberculoma, miliary TB, abscess, cerebritis and encephalopathy. In
addition, the radiologic manifestations of this disease are not always
typical and sometimes may be mistaken with other lesions. Familiarity
with the various imaging presentations of CNS TB is of key importance
for radiologists and clinicians to make a timely diagnosis, thereby
reducing the morbidity and mortality of this potentially life-threatening
disease.
NICE recommends the use of CT scan and MRI in patients with
suspected CNS TB.16
Recommendation 9
• Computed tomography scan and/or magnetic resonance imaging
should be used in the diagnosis of tuberculosis of the central nervous
system.
b.
Treatment
Duration of treatment in EPTB is not precisely known due to insufficient
evidence and the governing principles with regards to treatment is
mainly derived from evidence and experience from PTB treatment.
International guidelines recommend six months duration of treatment
with standard anti-TB regimen for EPTB and 6 - 9 months of treatment
(2EHRZ/4-7HR) for bone or joint tuberculosis.13; 31 A recent openlabeled, RCT did not show significant difference in effectiveness
between 6 and 12 months of anti-TB treatment in biopsy proven spinal
TB.32, level I
A meta-analysis on different fluoroquinolones-based regimens in the
treatment of TB meningitis showed fluoroquinolones and high dose
RIF (20 mg/kg/day) compared with standard regimen had significantly
higher rate of seizure and vision loss but no significant differences in
overall ADR and death. However, the five RCTs in the meta-analysis
were of low to moderate quality.33, level I
There was no significant difference in either ADR or death in the
following comparison:33, level I
• fluoroquinolones plus standard regimen vs standard regimen
alone
• fluoroquinolone substitution for EMB in standard regimen vs
standard regimen alone
• fluoroquinolone substitution for RIF in standard regimen vs
standard regimen alone
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
NICE recommends treating TB meningitis with 2 months of EHRZ
followed by 10 months of HR (2EHRZ/10HR).16
Recommendation 10
• The following regimens should be used for extrapulmonary
tuberculosis (EPTB):
 2EHRZ/4-7HR* for tuberculosis of the bone or joint
 2EHRZ/10HR** for tuberculous meningitis
 2EHRZ/4HR*** for other forms of EPTB
*two months of ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide, followed by four to
seven months of isoniazid and rifampicin
**two months of ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide, followed by 10
months of isoniazid and rifampicin
***two months of ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide, followed by four
months of isoniazid and rifampicin
•
Adjunctive corticosteroids regimen
Corticosteroids are associated with improvement in TB symptoms and
survival in HIV-negative patients with TB meningitis and TB pericarditis.
Adjuvant corticosteroids treatment is recommended for TB meningitis
and TB pericarditis.8; 17
A Cochrane systemic review of nine RCTs with mixed quality showed
that corticosteroids use in TB meningitis reduced deaths by almost
one quarter (RR=0.75, 95% CI 0.65 to 0.87) up to 18 months follow
up.34, level I
A retrospective cohort study of 98 patients with TB meningitis treated
with initial IV dexamethasone looked into the effectiveness of different
regimens of corticosteroids. Oral prednisolone was introduced when
patients had sustained improvement in headache and vomiting and, at
least a two-point improvement in Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) for at
least 48 hours. However, they will be put back on IV dexamethasone if
they had reappearance of symptoms or deterioration in consciousness
and later overlapped with oral prednisolone. Those who continued with
oral prednisolone had shorter duration of hospitalisation compared
with those receiving the overlapped treatment (6.97±3.20 days vs
20.05±12.98 days, p<0.001). There was also no significant difference
in mortality, readmission rate and surgical complications between the
two groups of patients.35, level II-2 However, more evidence is warranted
before early introduction of oral corticosteroids can be recommended.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
The recommended corticosteroids regimen for TB meningitis is shown
below.
Table 6: Corticosteroids regimen for TB meningitis
Source: National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Tuberculosis (NG 33).
London: NICE; 2019.
A Cochrane systematic review evaluated the addition of corticosteroids
to drug regimens of tuberculous pleural effusions. In the corticosteroids
group, although there was evidence of benefit in terms of faster
symptom and radiological responses, there was also high risk of ADRs
and limited data on long-term respiratory function.36, level I
In an RCT assessing the role of add-on prednisolone in cervical lymph
node TB, results showed that:37, level I
• at two months, significantly more patients with add-on prednisolone
showed symptom relief compared with those without.
• at two months, complications in the form of abscess, sinus and/
or appearance of new lymph nodes were significantly higher in
patients without add-on prednisolone.
• at the end of therapy, complete resolution was significantly higher
in patients with add-on prednisone.
• gastrointestinal side effects were higher in patients with add-on
prednisolone but skin rashes and joint pain were higher in those
without add-on prednisolone; the differences were not statistically
significant.
Although clinical benefits were seen, this was a single-centre study
with no post-treatment follow-up to monitor for possibility of higher TB
relapse in the corticosteroids group. More evidence is warranted before
oral corticosteroids can be recommended as an adjunct for treatment
of TB lymphadenitis.
Regimen (Dexamethasone dose)
Week 1: 0.3 mg/kg/day (IV)
Week 2: 0.2 mg/kg/day (IV)
Week 3: 0.1 mg/kg/day (oral)
Week 4: 3 mg/day (oral)
Week 5: 2 mg/day (oral)
Week 6: 1 mg/day (oral)
Week 1: 0.4 mg/kg/day (IV)
Week 2: 0.3 mg/kg/day (IV)
Week 3: 0.2 mg/kg/day (IV)
Week 4: 0.1 mg/kg/day (IV)
Week 5: 4 mg/day (oral)
Week 6: 3 mg/day (oral)
Week 7: 2 mg/day (oral)
Week 8: 1 mg/day (oral)
Stages of TB Meningitis*
Stage 1
Stage 2 and 3
*According to the modified British Medical Research Council criteria for disease severity:
Stage 1: GCS of 15 without focal neurological deficits; alert and oriented
Stage 2: GCS of 14 - 11 or 15 with focal neurological deficits
Stage 3: GCS of 10 or less, with or without focal neurological deficits
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
In another Cochrane systematic review:38, level I
• corticosteroids reduced death from tuberculous pericarditis
(RR=0.39, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.80) but did not reduce need for repeat
pericardiocentesis in non-HIV infected individuals.
• corticosteroids did not reduce death from tuberculous pericarditis
or need for repeat pericardiocentesis in HIV-positive individuals.
The corticosteroids regimen used for the treatment of tuberculous
pericarditis varied between studies. There was no study comparing
the type or duration of corticosteroids used in terms of safety and
efficacy.38, level I
Recommendation 11
• Corticosteroids should be used in tuberculous meningitis and
pericarditis.
• Patients who develop complications of EPTB (e.g. hydrocephalus or
constrictive pericarditis) need to be referred to specialists.
The outcomes of TB patients treated should be reported to the National
TB Control Programme according to Appendix 7 on Tuberculosis
Treatment Outcome Definition.
•
Disseminated tuberculosis
Disseminated TB is the term used to describe TB involving two or more
organs/systems from hematogenous or lymphatic spread. All cases with
positive mycobacterial blood culture should be referred to a specialist
for further management.
The pharmacological treatment of disseminated TB is dictated by the
organ/system involved. For example, when a patient is diagnosed with
PTB and TB meningitis, the length of treatment is based on the duration
of TB meningitis treatment (2EHRZ/10HR). In this case, adjunctive
corticosteroid is used as per treatment for TB meningitis.
2.4. Recurrent Tuberculosis
TB recurs in a number of patients despite completion of treatment
because of reactivation of TB (relapse) or a new episode of infection.
Patients with relapsed TB have higher risk of drug-resistant TB
compared to new cases. In high TB transmission areas, reinfection is
relatively more common than reactivation. In these areas, intensified
case finding measures are needed to bring TB under control.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
a.
Diagnosis
Microbiological tests should be done to confirm recurrent TB and rule out
drug resistance. Xpert Ultra is recommended by WHO for confirmation
of diagnosis and rifampicin resistance.9 However, the specificity of
Xpert Ultra for the diagnosis of active TB is reduced in patients with
recurrent TB. The pooled sensitivity and specificity of Xpert Ultra in a
meta-analysis of four cohort studies of patients with previously treated
TB were only 84.2% (95% CI 72.5 to 91.7) and 88.2% (95% CI 70.5 to
96.6), respectively. These figures were low compared with the pooled
sensitivity of 90.9% (95% CI 84.7 to 95.3) and pooled specificity of
94.9% (95% CI 91.3 to 97.2) in participants with newly diagnosed PTB
from the meta-analysis of five cohort studies.24, level III
The reduction in specificity in patients with previously treated TB may
be due to the presence of dead tuberculous bacilli which may remain
detectable for years.39, level II-2
WHO gave a strong recommendation for Xpert Ultra as the initial test
for patients with suspected recurrent TB if they had completed TB
treatment >5 years because of high certainty of evidence for the test
accuracy. For patients who had completed their TB treatment within the
past 5 years, WHO gave a weak recommendation because of the low
certainty of evidence.9
Only mycobacterial culture is able to differentiate live from dead
tuberculous bacilli. Liquid media (BACTEC MGIT) for mycobacterial
culture is the reference standard for bacteriological confirmation of
TB.40 Furthermore, it can provide a faster result compared to solid
media. Therefore, mycobacterial culture using BACTEC MGIT should
be sent for patients suspected of recurrent TB.
Recommendation 12
• Sputum should be sent for both Xpert Ultra and mycobacterial
culture (BACTEC MGIT) for individuals suspected to have recurrent
pulmonary tuberculosis.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
b.
Treatment
The initial treatment regimen for recurrent TB is determined by the
earlier drug resistance pattern and results of current drug susceptibility
testing.
• International guidelines no longer recommend a standard retreatment
regimen for TB.13; 16; 17
• The drug resistance pattern of earlier episodes of TB should be used
to guide initial treatment.
 In patients with previous drug susceptible TB with no drugresistant genes detected, a drug susceptible regimen should be
initiated.
 An initial drug-resistant TB regimen may be appropriate for patients
with previous episode(s) of drug-resistant TB or detectable drugresistant gene(s).
 The final treatment regimen for patients with recurrent TB rests on
the results of the mycobacterial culture and susceptibility test.
These are summarised in Figure 2 on The initial treatment regimen
for recurrent TB.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
*drug resistance confirmed on mycobacterial culture
Figure 2: The initial treatment regimen for recurrent TB
2.5. Tuberculosis in Special Situations
a.
Tuberculosis in pregnancy and lactation
Prompt diagnosis and early treatment of maternal TB is crucial because
it is associated with increased risk of maternal mortality and perinatal
morbidity.31 Successful treatment of TB is paramount in ensuring
best outcome. The risk of untreated TB to pregnant women and their
foetuses should be clearly explained.13
For pregnant and lactating women, standard anti-TB regimens can
be administered safely.8; 13; 31 The CPG DG opines that standard antiTB regimen should be given to pregnant and lactating women and
pyridoxine 30 mg/day is recommended in those taking INH.
RIF may cause yellow or orange coloured-milk, which is harmless.41, level III
Breastfeeding should be continued in lactating mothers because the
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Individuals with recurrent
TB disease
History of drug
resistant TB
Investigate and
manage as for drug
resistant TB
Drug resistant
gene detected
Initiate a drug susceptible
treatment regimen
Drug resistance
confirmed*
Continue with a drug
susceptible treatment
regimen
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
amount of anti-TB drug in breastmilk is minimal. However, surgical
mask should be used if the mother is infectious.8; 13
Patients on RIF taking oral contraceptive pills should use alternative
contraception methods until one month after RIF is stopped.8; 31
Recommendation 13
• Standard anti-tuberculosis (TB) regimens should be used in pregnant
and breastfeeding women with TB.
 Pyridoxine 30 mg/day should be given to those taking isoniazid.
• Women on rifampicin-based anti-TB treatment should use alternative
contraception methods other than oral contraceptive pills.
b.
Tuberculosis with renal impairment
Patients with renal insufficiency or end-stage renal disease are
immunocompromised. TB patients with chronic renal failure have worse
clinical outcomes than those without renal failure and thus, they should
be closely monitored.13
The clearance of ethambutol and pyrazinamide metabolites are impaired
in patients with chronic renal failure when their creatinine clearance
falls below 30ml/min, Hence, thrice weekly dosing is recommended in
international guidelines. Conversely, RIF and INH do not require dose
adjustment in renal failure as they are metabolized by the liver.8; 13; 31
Refer to Appendix 6 on First-Line Anti-Tuberculosis Drug Dosage
and Adverse Drug Reactions for medication dosage in chronic renal
failure.
A cross-sectional study looked at the safety and effectiveness of antiTB treatment in 241 PTB patients with and without CKD. The results of
the study showed that the renal dose adjusted regimen was safe and
effective. There were no significant differences between the patients
with CKD or without CKD in terms of:42, level III
• frequency of in-hospital TB-related death
• sputum conversion rate at two months
• any adverse events
Hence, renal dose adjusted standard anti-TB regimen should be used
for patients with renal failure or severe renal insufficiency. All four antiTB drugs may be administered after hemodialysis to facilitate DOT as
well as to avoid premature drug removal.8; 13
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Recommendation 14
• Standard anti-tuberculosis (TB) regimens should be used in patients
with TB and renal failure.
 Pyrazinamide and ethambutol should be given three times per
week in patients with a creatinine clearance <30 ml/min or those
receiving haemodialysis.
c.
Tuberculosis with liver impairment
The management of TB in patients with chronic liver disease is
challenging due to the risk of decompensated liver failure. These
patients should be referred for specialist care.
2.6. Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Tuberculosis (HIV-TB) Co-infection
TB is one of the most important opportunistic infections and causes of
death amongst PLHIV.
The number of patients with HIV-TB co-infection in Malaysia had fallen
from 1,401 in 2015 to 1,205 in 2020. In 2020, PLHIV accounted for only
5.0% of all patients with TB. The majority (>97.5%) of HIV-TB coinfected
patients from 2015 till 2020 were diagnosed with HIV prior to TB.43, level III
Smear negative PTB and EPTB are more common in PLHIV compared
with HIV-negative individuals.44, level III PTB may show atypical features
especially in advanced HIV infection. PLHIV with TB may not have
cough, positive sputum smear microscopy or abnormal CXR.8
WHO recommends TB symptom screening (current cough, weight
loss, night sweats and fever) for PLHIV. The four-symptom screening
rule is more sensitive in untreated PLHIV than those on antiretroviral
treatment (ART).45
PLHIV with any TB symptoms should be investigated with sputum
smear microscopy, mycobacterial culture (BACTEC MGIT), Xpert Ultra
and CXR. In addition, blood for mycobacterial culture and investigations
for EPTB may be needed if disseminated TB is suspected.
•
LF-LAM in diagnosis of active TB in HIV-positive adults
LF-LAM is a new urine test for the diagnosis of TB. Although it is not
currently available in Malaysia, it has several advantages compared to
sputum tests, namely:
i. urine can be collected any time of the day, whereas early morning
sputum is preferred for TB diagnosis
ii. urine is easier to produce and collect compared with sputum
iii. it can detect disseminated TB
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
WHO recommends AlereLAM, the first commercially available LF-LAM,
as an adjunct for the diagnosis of TB in selected hospitalised HIVpositive individuals with either:9
 signs and symptoms of TB (pulmonary and/or extrapulmonary)
 advanced HIV disease or who are seriously ill
 irrespective of signs and symptoms of TB and with a CD4 cell
count of <200 cells/mm3
FujiLAM, a newer LF-LAM, has been found in a number of studies to
be more sensitive than AlereLAM for the diagnosis of TB in HIV-positive
adults although it is not commercially available yet.
In a recent observational study involving 450 HIV-positive adults,
FujiLAM was more sensitive than AlereLAM [sensitivity of 74.2% (95%CI
62.0 to 84.2) vs 53.0% (95%CI 40.3 to 65.4)] albeit at lower specificity
[89.3% (95% CI 85.8 to 92.2) vs 95.6% (95% CI 93.0 to 97.4)] for PTB
diagnosis.11, level II-2 Both LF-LAMs did not meet the optimal diagnostic
accuracy standard of WHO for PTB.46, level III Furthermore, although
FujiLAM was more sensitive than AlereLAM, it was less accurate
than Xpert Ultra, which had a sensitivity of 87.6% (75.4 to 94.1) and
specificity of 92.8% (82.3 to 97.0).24, level III
FujiLAM was also found to be more sensitive than AlereLAM in the
diagnosis of EPTB with or without PTB in a diagnostic study involving
553 HIV-positive participants.12, level III
 For EPTB, FujiLAM had a sensitivity of 67% (95% CI 59 to 75) and
AlereLAM 41% (95% CI 33 to 49).
 For PTB with EPTB, FujiLAM had a sensitivity of 91% (95% CI 87
to 94) and AlereLAM sensitivity 61% (95% CI 55 to 67).
The sensitivity of FujiLAM varies depending on the type of EPTB. It has
high sensitivity for bacteremic (94%, 95% CI 90 to 97) and urinary TB
(88%, 95% CI 84 to 92) but low sensitivity for TB meningitis (47%, 95%
CI 24 to 71) compared with mycobacterial culture/Xpert MTB/RIF.12, level III
• LF-LAM can be considered as an adjunct for the diagnosis of EPTB
with or without PTB in hospitalised HIV-positive adults with either:
 advanced HIV disease
 serious illness
 a CD4 cell count of less than 200 cells/mm3
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
“Serious illness” is defined by WHO as having at least one of the
following:47
 respiratory rate >30/minute
 temperature >39°C
 heart rate >120 beats/minute
 unable to walk unaided
False positive FujiLAM may occur from the presence of several bacteria,
including non-tuberculous mycobacteria species, in the urine. Sterile
urine collection method is needed to reduce this situation.
b.
Treatment
Starting antiretroviral treatment (ART) during TB treatment reduces
mortality and results in earlier conversion of sputum smear and cultures
to negative.8 In HIV-TB coinfected patients, ART should be initiated
regardless of their CD4 cell count. However, TB treatment should be
initiated first in ART-naïve patients.
Two meta-analyses that studied the timing of ART in HIV-TB coinfected
patients showed that early ART initiation when compared with later
initiation:
• reduced all-cause mortality with IRR of 0.75 (95% CI 0.59 to
0.95)48, level I and RR of 0.81 (95% CI 0.66 to 0.99).49, level I
• had fewer TB treatment failure with RR of 0.63 (95% CI 0.46 to
0.85).49, level I
However early ART was associated with a higher risk of immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) (RR=1.83, 95% CI 1.24 to
2.70) and IRIS-related death (RR=6.05, 95% CI 1.06 to 34.59).49, level I
In HIV-TB co-infection, it is recommended that ART should be initiated
within eight weeks of TB treatment. However, patients with a CD4
cell count <50 cells/mm3 should receive ART within two weeks of TB
treatment.17
For PLHIV with TB meningitis, ART should be delayed until two months
after the start of anti-TB treatment to reduce the risk of severe ADRs
associated with early ART.13
Recommendation 15
• In HIV-tuberculosis (TB) co-infection, antiretroviral treatment (ART)
should be initiated within eight weeks of anti-TB treatment.
 for HIV-TB patients with a CD4 count <50 cells/mm3, ART should
be initiated within the first two weeks of anti-TB treatment.
• For people living with HIV with TB meningitis, ART should be delayed
until two months after initiation of TB treatment.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
•
Antiretroviral treatment regimen for HIV-TB co-infection
Drug-drug interactions (DDI) and overlapping drug toxicities are
important issues when treating PLHIV with anti-TB and antiretroviral
drugs (ARVs). Rifampicin interaction with ART is especially significant
and thus requires special attention. Anti-TB drugs should be carefully
chosen to avoid/minimise interactions with protease inhibitor (PI) and
integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTI). Refer to Table 7.
Table 7: Preferred Anti-TB regimen in PLHIV on ART
ART-naïve PLHIV with suspected ARV drug resistance need to be
referred to Infectious Disease Physician/Paediatrician to discuss
on anti-TB regimen. Otherwise, standard anti-TB regimen should be
initiated.
A prospective cohort study among HIV-TB patients on ART compared
RIF- and rifabutin (RFB)-based therapies, even though the RIF group
showed better improvement in the immune and virological response,
both groups of patients had no significant difference in the following
outcomes:50, level II-2
 TB treatment default and cure rates
 interruption of therapy due to ADR
 IRIS
 mortality
Daily anti-TB regimen is recommended in HIV-TB co-infected patients
as in non-HIV-TB population.13; 16; 17; 51; 52
Recommendation 16
• Daily anti-tuberculosis regimens should be used throughout the
treatment of HIV-tuberculosis coinfected patients.
Further details on the interactions of ARV with anti-TB are discussed
under Subchapter 4.2 on Anti-tuberculosis Drug Interactions.
Current ART regimen
Preferred anti-TB regimen
Non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors
(NNRTI)-based ART
Standard anti-TB regimen
Protease inhibitor (PI)-
based ART
Rifabutin based anti-TB regimen
Integrase strand transfer
inhibitors (INSTI)-based
ART
Rifabutin based anti-TB regimen is preferred; however,
if rifampicin-based regimen is to be chosen, the INSTI
dose need to be adjusted
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
•
Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome
IRIS is an augmented inflammatory response in patients commenced
on ART and anti-TB. It may cause clinical deterioration but does not
primarily contribute to mortality.
While early initiation of ART in HIV-TB co-infection reduces all-cause
mortality, it may also lead to IRIS which usually occurs within three
months of TB treatment, typically within two to twelve weeks after the
initiation of ART.
The major manifestations of IRIS are fever (40%), followed by
lymphadenitis (38%).8
EPTB is the most significant risk factor associated with the emergence
of IRIS. Other risk factors include baseline haemoglobin <100 g/L
(OR=2.2, 95% CI 1.1 to 4.6) and baseline CD4 count <50 cells/mm3
(OR=4.1. 95% CI 1.8 to 9.5).8
The severity of IRIS ranges from mild to life-threatening. Patients with
severe IRIS should be referred to an Infectious Disease Physician for
further management.
A 4-week course of prednisolone i.e. 1.5 mg/kg/day for two weeks,
followed by 0.75 mg/kg/ day for two weeks improve symptoms and
chest radiography findings as early as two weeks (p<0.05) in TBassociated IRIS.8
• Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome should be suspected if
there is paradoxical worsening of symptoms especially in patients with
CD4 count <50 cells/mm3, anaemia or extrapulmonary tuberculosis
in HIV-TB co-infection on ART.
•
Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis
WHO recommends co-trimoxazole preventive therapy be given as
soon as possible and throughout TB treatment for all HIV-TB coinfected
patients.31 However, the ATS/CDC/IDSA recommends co-trimoxazole
prophylaxis to be given only in HIV-TB coinfected patients with CD4
counts <200 cells/mm3 (or less than 14%).13
In newly diagnosed HIV patients or those without baseline CD4 count,
co-trimoxazole 960 mg daily should be initiated together with TB
treatment.8 Co-trimoxazole can be stopped once the CD4 count is >200
cells/mm3 for two consecutive readings or CD4 count is 100- 200 cells/
mm3 and HIV viral load is undetectable at least once according to the
Malaysia HIV consensus guidelines.53, level III
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Recommendation 17
• Co-trimoxazole preventive therapy should be given during
tuberculosis (TB) treatment in HIV-TB co-infection with an unknown
CD4 count or a CD4 count <200 cells/mm3 .
2.7. Tuberculosis in Children
TB in children is common wherever adult TB is endemic. In 2019, WHO
estimated 12% of the 10 million who had TB were children.1, level I In
2020, the proportion of registered TB cases among children in Malaysia
was <5% of the total registered TB cases. Further analysis showed
that the total TB cases among children <15 years old was 771 with
an incidence rate of 9.9/100,000 population.43, level III Diagnosis of TB
in children is challenging due to the paucibacillary and disseminated
nature of the disease, and the wide range of clinical presentations
mimicking common childhood illnesses. A positive TB contact history
(usually an adult index TB case) would be a strong clue for TB in a
symptomatic child. The risk factors for rapid TB progression in children
are age <5 years old, malnutrition and HIV infection.
WHO recommends symptoms-based screening to exclude active TB
based on the following scenarios:54
i. Non-HIV infected household contacts: any cough, fever, night
sweats, haemoptysis, weight loss, chest pain, shortness of breath
or fatigue. In children <5 years old, it should also include anorexia,
failure to thrive, poor feeding, decrease activities or playfulness.
ii. Children living with HIV <10 years old: any current cough, fever,
history of contact with TB, reported weight loss, confirmed weight
loss >5% since last visit or growth curve flattening or weight for
age < -2 Z-scores.
iii. Children living with HIV ≥10 years old: any current cough, fever,
weight loss or night sweats.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
a.
Diagnosis
The expert consensus case definition classifies intrathoracic TB in
children into the following categories:55, level III
TB=tuberculosis, CXR=chest radiograph, TST=tuberculin skin test, IGRA=interferon
gamma release assay
*Unconfirmed TB: Clinically-diagnosed TB
CXR findings in children can be non-specific. Primary PTB findings
include perihilar lymphadenopathy which is often missed by
inexperienced clinicians. Post-primary PTB changes are not common in
children. Absence of these changes do not exclude TB in children. Refer
to Appendix 8 on Chest Radiograph Changes for Tuberculosis in
Children.
A good prospective cohort study using Xpert Ultra on 535 children
demonstrated that induced sputum (IS) specimen was more sensitive
than nasopharyngeal aspirate (NPA) in diagnosing intrathoracic TB.
Sending two respiratory samples for Xpert Ultra improved the sensitivity
and specificity of both IS and NPA. These findings are summarized in
Table 8.56, level II-2
Table 8: Accuracy of Xpert Ultra using different respiratory
specimen in diagnosis of TB in children
IS=induced sputum, NPA=nasopharyngeal aspirate, CI=confident interval
A large Cochrane systematic review on children <15 years old with
suspected TB showed that Xpert MTB/RIF from gastric aspirate (GA)
had the highest pooled sensitivity, 73.0% (95% CI 52.9 to 86.7) followed
by sputum, 64.6% (95% CI 55.3 to 72.9) and NPA, 45.7% (95% CI 27.6
to 65.1) compared with culture in diagnosing PTB. However, there was
unclear risk of bias in the reference standard domain in 53% of the
included studies.57, level III
Confirmed TB
M. tuberculosis confirmed by culture or Xpert MTB/RIF
Unconfirmed
TB*
Unlikely TB
At least two of the following criteria in the absence of microbiological
confirmation:
• symptoms/signs suggestive of TB
• CXR consistent with TB
• close TB exposure or immunologic evidence of M. tuberculosis
infection (TST and/or IGRA positive)
• positive response to TB treatment
None of the criteria for confirmed or unconfirmed TB are met
Specimen
1 sample of IS
1 sample of NPA
Repeated second NPA
1 IS and 1 NPA
1 IS and 2 NPA
Sensitivity
74.3% (95% CI 56.7 to 87.5)
37.5% (95% CI 18.8 to 59.4)
54.2% (95% CI 32.8 to 74.4)
80.0% (95% CI 63.1 to 91.6)
87.5% (95% CI 67.6 to 97.3)
Specificity
96.9% (95% CI 92.9 to 99.0)
98.0% (95% CI 93.4 to 99.8)
96.2% (95% CI 90.6 to 99.0)
95.0% (95% CI 90.4 to 97.8)
93.4% (95% CI 86.9 to 97.3)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
In children who are symptomatic with more severe TB, GA and
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) have significantly better yield than
NPA in both smear for AFB and mycobacterial culture in a tertiary
setting.58, level III
However, a good diagnostic study in primary care involving 119 children
with TB contact or mild disease, IS, GA and NPA all have low yield for
positive smear, Xpert MTB/RIF and TB culture. One limitation of the
study was the small number of confirmed TB (four cases, study TB
prevalence, 4.76%).59, level III
• This CPG DG advocates that two or three smears for AFB, and one
sample each for Xpert Ultra and mycobacterial culture be obtained to
increase the diagnostic yield in children with TB.
Recommendation 18
• In children suspected to have intrathoracic tuberculosis:
 induced sputum should be performed in children who can
expectorate.
 gastric lavage/aspiration or nasopharyngeal aspirate should be
performed in children who cannot expectorate.
The procedure for sputum induction is described in Appendix 3 and the
Procedure for Gastric Aspiration and Nasopharyngeal Aspiration
in Children is described in Appendix 9.
•
Lateral Flow Lipoarabinomannan Assay in suspected
intrathoracic tuberculosis
Two small cohort studies compared the accuracy of AlereLAM and
FujiLAM with Xpert MTB/RIF, Xpert Ultra or mycobacterial culture in
children with intrathoracic TB. The sensitivity of FujiLAM ranged from
41.7% (95% CI 31.7 to 52.3) to 61.8% (95% CI 36.6 to 85.5) while its
specificity ranged from 78.5% (95% CI 69.1 to 86.0) to 97.4% (95%
CI 86.8 to 99.5). For AlereLAM, its sensitivity was between 38.8%
(95% CI 0.4 to 98.9) and 50% (95% CI 39.5 to 60.5) while its specificity
was between 74.4% (95% CI 58.9 to 85.4) and 80.5% (95% CI 68.3
to 89.4).60 - 61,level II-2 The sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of
intrathoracic TB in children in the studies were low. The two studies
differ as to which of the LF-LAMs were more accurate in children.
Although LF-LAMs were not as accurate as Xpert MTB/RIF, Xpert Ultra
or mycobacterial culture, they were able to detect intrathoracic TB
missed by Xpert MTB/RIF, Xpert Ultra or mycobacterial culture.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Drug
Dose (range) in mg/kg body weight
Maximum dose (mg)
Isoniazid
10 (7 – 15)a
300
Rifampicin
15 (10 – 20)
600
Pyrazinamide
35 (30 – 40)
2000 (2 g)
Ethambutol
20 (15 – 25)
1000 (1 g)
aThe higher end of the range for INH dose applies to younger children. As the
children grow older the lower end of the dosing range becomes more appropriate.
Source: World Health Organization. Guidance for National Tuberculosis
Programmes on The Management of Tuberculosis in Children (2nd Edition).
Geneva: WHO;2014
Pyridoxine 5 - 10 mg daily needs to be added if INH is prescribed.
• LF-LAM may be considered as an adjunctive test for the diagnosis of
smear negative, Xpert Ultra negative intrathoracic TB in children.
Sterile method for urine collection is required to reduce false positive
LF-LAM results from urine bacterial contamination.
The investigations for EPTB in children are similar to adults. Refer to
Subchapter 2.3 on Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis.
b.
Treatment
•
Anti-tuberculosis regimens
The TB treatment regimen in children for both PTB and EPTB are the
same as in adults.
In children <5 years old, higher doses of anti-TB drugs are required
to achieve effective bactericidal activity compared with older children
and adults.62, level III Anti-TB dose in children should be calculated in
mg/kg body weight and the total dose must not exceed the maximum
dose. Refer to Table 9 on Recommended Dose of Anti-TB Drugs in
Children.
Medication dose requires recalculation every two to four weeks as
children gain weight rapidly, particularly in neonates and young children.
Since the last edition of the CPG, there has been some revisions in the
WHO recommendations on anti-TB dose for children. The revised dose
has good safety profile and is not associated with increased risk of INH
or PZA hepatotoxicity, or optic neuritis related to EMB.63, level I; 64, level I
Difficulty in serving anti-TB drugs by caregivers and vomiting after
medication needs to be addressed during follow-up as these can lead
to treatment failure in the children.
Table 9: Recommended dose of anti-TB drugs in children
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
For further information on renal dosing and ADR, refer to Appendix
6 on First-Line Anti-Tuberculosis Drug Dosage and Adverse Drug
Reactions
•
Fixed-dose combination of anti-tuberculosis regimen
WHO recommends flavoured, dispersible child-friendly FDCs in treating
children with TB. The new formulary contains anti-TB drugs according
to the revised anti-TB dose for children (refer to Table 10).65, level III
Table 10: WHO recommended dose for FDC in children
*Ethambutol should be added in the intensive phase for children with extensive disease.
Source: Fixed-dose combinations for the treatment of TB in children. World Health
Organization, 2018. Available from: https://www.who.int/tb/FDC_Factsheet.pdf.
The currently available adult anti-TB FDC tablet is not suitable for use
in children <25 kg.
The benefits of the new anti-TB formulary include:65, level III
 avoidance of incorrect dosage due to broken pill and crushed
tablets.
 patient- and caretaker-friendly (less pill burden, water dissolvable
and palatable).
 easy storage and dispensing especially in remote areas.
Recommendation 19
• Child-friendly fixed-dose combinations* should be used to treat
tuberculosis in children.
*The WHO recommended child-friendly FDC is not yet available in Malaysia.
The outcomes of patients treated for TB should be reported to
the National TB Control Programme according to Appendix 7 on
Tuberculosis Treatment Outcome Definition.
Intensive phase:
RHZ 75/50/150*
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Adult FDC doses recommended
Continuation phase
RH 75/50
Weight band (kg)
4 - 7
8 - 11
12 - 15
16 - 24
≥25
Numbers of tablets daily
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
c.
BCG lymphadenitis
In Malaysia, BCG is given intradermally at birth. It is effective in
preventing disseminated TB including TB meningitis in childhood.
However, its effectiveness in preventing PTB is equivocal.
BCG lymphadenitis usually occurs two to four months after BCG
vaccination (ranging from two weeks to six months) and 30 - 80% of
cases can become suppurative. The most commonly involved lymph
nodes are ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes, followed by supraclavicular
or cervical lymph nodes.66, level III
Most non-suppurative BCG lymph nodes will regress without intervention
in 4 - 6 months and can be managed conservatively. Once suppuration
sets in, spontaneous rupture with chronic discharging sinus will occur.
Healing will eventually take place by scarring.
A systematic review of five RCTs involving 237 children showed that
fine needle aspiration shortens the resolution of BCG abscess at 6
months (RR=0.13, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.55). There is no evidence that oral
antibiotics (e.g. erythromycin) or oral anti-TB prevent the progression
of BCG abscess.67, level I
Children with unusually large, suppurative BCG lymphadenitis
with constitutional symptoms, generalised lymphadenopathy and
hepatosplenomegaly should be referred to the Infectious Disease
Paediatrician for further management.
d.
Congenital and neonatal tuberculosis
Congenital TB is caused by the transplacental spread of TB through
umbilical vessels, or the aspiration or ingestion of infected amniotic
or cervico-vaginal fluid in utero or intra-partum. Symptoms onset are
usually within 3 weeks. Pulmonary, abdominal or disseminated TB are
the usual manifestations.
Neonatal TB is TB acquired postnatally when a newborn is exposed to
an infectious adult, usually the mother but sometimes other household
members.
It is difficult to distinguish between the two conditions since clinical
presentations are often non-specific. Both tend to be disseminated and
have high mortality. Symptoms include poor feeding, failure to thrive,
fever, respiratory distress, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy,
abdomen distension with ascites or “clinical sepsis” in disseminated
TB. Identifying an infectious adult would be the key to the diagnosis of
neonatal TB.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Investigations for both congenital and neonatal TB are similar to older
children and adults. It is important to note that congenital TB tends to
be disseminated involving the abdomen and central nervous system.
Ultrasound abdomen or liver biopsy and lumbar puncture would need
to be considered if there is clinical suspicion of TB. When congenital TB
is suspected, the placental, vaginal and endometrial samples or biopsy
should be sent for mycobacterial culture and HPE.8
The management of newborns of mothers with TB depends on the
mothers’ state of TB infectiousness. All newborns to mothers with
active TB need to be screened for TB. Mothers whose current sputum
smear is positive or who have received less than two months of PTB
treatment are considered infectious. Refer Figure 3 on Management
of newborn to mother with active infectious TB.
For mothers diagnosed to have PTB post-partum, their newborns
should be screened for active TB. Once excluded, LTBI treatment
should be initiated (refer to Subchapter 3.2 on Latent TB Infection in
Children). The newborns should be managed by a paediatrician with
experience in treating TB.
It is crucial to screen and treat other household members for active TB
to prevent repeated exposure to the newborn or other children.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Figure 3: Management of newborn to mother with active infectious TB
Newborn to mother with active infectious TB
NO
Alternative option
YES
NO
TST#/IGRA
positive
TST#/IGRA
negative
YES
Clinical features suggestive of congenital TB or active TB*
Maternal TB diagnosed and treated
≥2 months before delivery?
Refer to a paediatrician for
further investigations and
management of congenital
or active TB
No treatment for
newborn and give
BCG vaccine at birth
Defer BCG vaccine at
birth, treat with
isoniazid for six months
Defer BCG at birth, treat with
isoniazid for three months then
perform TST/IGRA
Give BCG
vaccine at the
end of treatment
Complete six
months of
isoniazid in total
Stop treatment and
give BCG
vaccine
Follow up for two years to look for active TB, including patients who have completed isoniazid treatment
*Refer text in Subchapter 2.7 on TB in Children for diagnosis of active TB and congenital TB. #TST <5 mm is negative, TST ≥5 mm is positive
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
2.8. Patient-Centred Care
Patient-centred care is one of the main pillars of the WHO End TB
Strategy of ending TB by year 2035. In Malaysia, directly observed
treatment (DOT) is supervised by healthcare providers, family
members or community volunteers. DOT should be tailored to patient’s
preference and their risk of default. In 2015, the practice of DOT during
intensive phase for TB cases in Malaysia was 89.6% while DOT during
continuation phase was 87.9%. The DOT supervisor were healthcare
providers in 59.6% of cases, family members in 39.8% and, nongovernmental organisations and community volunteers in 1.2%.7, level III
A systematic review and meta-analysis of 22 RCTs comparing DOT
with self-administered treatment in adults with active TB found that
DOTS was superior in cure rate (RR=1.18, 95% CI 1.08 to 1.28) and
default rate (RR=0.51, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.84).68, level I
Self-administered treatment is unavoidable for those who could not
travel to a DOT centre and have no treatment supervisor at home.
Video-observed treatment (VOT) is recommended by WHO as a new
form of DOT.69 In Malaysia, VOT has been implemented in some
healthcare facilities since 2019 and has been well received by patients
and staff. VOT may be conducted by live streaming e.g. via Teleconsult
in BookDoc App or recorded videos. It may be done in healthcare
facilities with appropriate infrastructure. The major advantage of VOT is
its ability to monitor patients from a distance. This will reduce visits by
healthcare providers and travelling by patients. VOT also allows more
flexibility for patients to manage their time. Patients should be educated
on VOT and give consent for the procedure. A large RCT showed that
VOT was more effective than DOT. A total of 70% of patients on VOT
successfully completed ≥80% of a 2-month observation compared with
only 31% of those on DOT (OR=5.48, 95% CI 3.10 to 9.68).70, level I
Besides DOT, patient adherence to anti-TB treatment could be achieved
by combining several strategies e.g. patient education/counselling
and financial incentives. A meta-analysis showed that patients given
education/counselling had better cure rate (RR=1.16, 95% CI 1.05 to
1.29) and default rate (RR=0.87, 95% CI 0.77 to 0.98) compared with
no education/counselling. In addition, financial incentives used during
anti-TB treatment may help patients adhere to and complete treatment.
The use of incentives compared with no incentive decreased default
rate by 26% (RR=0.74, 95% CI 0.61 to 0.90).68, level I Financial incentives
may be in the form of travel or phone allowances for DOT/VOT.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Recommendation 20
• Directly observed treatment (DOT) should be done in patients on
tuberculosis (TB) treatment.
 Video observed treatment (VOT) should be an alternative to DOT
in selected patients where facilities are available.
 Self-administered treatment may be offered to patients who
cannot perform VOT or DOT.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
3. SECTION II: LATENT TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION
LTBI is a state of persistent immune response to stimulation of
M. tuberculosis antigen without clinical evidence of active TB.8 About
a quarter of the world population (approximately 1.7 billion people) are
estimated to have LTBI.71, level III
An estimated 30% of individuals exposed to M. tuberculosis will
develop LTBI and, if untreated, about 5% to 10% of will progress to
active TB.72 Identification and treatment of LTBI, the reservoir for
M. tuberculosis, should be an effective strategy to prevent and reduce
further transmission, morbidity and mortality of TB disease. This is in
accordance with WHO End TB Strategy.2, level III
Under Pillar 1, Strategy 6 of the National Strategic Plan for TB
Control (2016 - 2020), Malaysia aims to strengthen the programmatic
management of LTBI.7, level III
The general approach to the management of people with LTBI is
illustrated in Algorithm 2 on Management of Latent Tuberculosis
Infection.
3.1. Latent Tuberculosis Infection in Adults
a.
At-risk groups for progression from latent TB to active TB
LTBI treatment should be targeted to the group of affected people
at highest risk for progression to active TB, to be cost effective and
minimise risk of treatment ADR.
The at-risk population that WHO recommends for systematic testing
and treatment are:54
• household and close contacts of bacteriologically confirmed PTB
• PLHIV
• patients initiating anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) treatment
• patients receiving dialysis
• patients preparing for organ/haematological transplant
• patients with silicosis
While the following groups may be considered for LTBI testing and
treatment:
• healthcare workers
• immigrants from high TB burden countries
• prisoners
• illicit drug users
• homeless people
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
• The CPG DG recommends the following target populations to be
systematically tested and treated for LTBI:
 household and close contact of bacteriologically confirmed PTB
 PLHIV
 patients initiating anti-TNF treatment
 patients receiving dialysis
 patients preparing for organ/haematological transplant
 patients with silicosis
• The testing and treatment of LTBI in other at-risk populations as
shown below can be considered on an individual basis:
 healthcare workers
 immigrants from high TB burden countries
 prisoners
 illicit drug users
 homeless people
•
Household or close contacts
Household or close contacts are individuals who live in the same
household or share the same air space with the index case for a
reasonable duration of time before the index patient received TB
treatment.73, level III Contacts living in close proximity for prolonged
periods of time with an infectious TB patient are at greater risk of being
infected with the disease. A retrospective cohort study of 369 household
contacts showed that the incidence of TB in contacts correlated with
the amount of TB aerosolized by the index case.74, level II-2 However, the
minimum physical distance or duration of exposure has not been wellestablished.75, level I
•
People living with HIV
PLHIV are 18 times more likely to develop TB disease than people
without HIV. TB is also the leading cause of death among them.1, level III
The annual risk of TB disease due to reactivation of LTBI for persons
with untreated HIV infection has been estimated at 3% to 16% per year.
The risk of TB begins in the first year of diagnosis of HIV infection. TB
infection can occur at any CD4 cell count with the risk increasing with
progressive immunodeficiency.51 Even PLHIV on ART benefit from LTBI
treatment.54 All PLHIV should be screened for LTBI when diagnosed
with HIV regardless of their epidemiologic risk factors or TB exposure
history. However, testing is not a requirement prior to starting LTBI
treatment as the benefits of treatment clearly outweigh the risks.54
•
Other at-risk groups
Other at-risk groups for progression to active TB compared with general
population are patients having anti-TNF treatment (RR range=1.6
to 25.1), dialysis (RR range=6.9 to 52.5), organ or haematological
transplant (RR range=20 to 70) and silicosis (RR 2.8).76, level III These
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
groups of people are at risk due to their immunocompromised health
status.
•
Diagnosis of LTBI
Active TB must be ruled out before considering the diagnosis and
treatment of LTBI. WHO recommends either a Tuberculin Skin Test
(TST) or Interferon Gamma Release Assay (IGRA) be used for the
diagnosis of LTBI.54
• The criteria for diagnosis of LTBI are:
 Absence of any clinical features suggestive of active TB
(productive cough, haemoptysis, loss of appetite, unexplained
weight loss, fever, night sweats and fatigue).
 Normal or static CXR findings (healed TB lesions are often
characterised by nodules and fibrotic lesions that are well
demarcated). If changes are present, consider repeating
sputum induction, or bronchoalveolar lavage smear for AFB
and mycobacterial culture. In the presence of any unexplained
abnormal findings, consider sending the CXR for reporting.
 A positive TST or IGRA.
•
Tuberculin skin test
TST is performed via the Mantoux technique, which consists of
intradermal injection of purified-protein derivative on the inner aspect
of the forearm. This stimulates a delayed T-lymphocyte mediated
hypersensitivity response in patients with prior mycobacterial exposure.
The test must be read between 48 - 72 hours later.
There is no new evidence on the ideal cut-off value for TST in an
intermediate to high TB burden country like Malaysia. Therefore, the
CPG DG has decided to retain the existing Mantoux cut-off values from
the previous guideline in Table 11.8
According to CDC and National Tuberculosis Controller Association
(NTCA), the window period for TST and IGRA conversion (duration
between infection and skin test reactivity) is 8 - 10 weeks after exposure
to an infectious TB case. Consequently, a negative test result obtained
<8 weeks after exposure is considered unreliable for excluding infection
and the test should be repeated at the end of the window period.77
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 11: TST cut-off value for different groups
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (Third Edition).
Putrajaya: MoH Malaysia; 2012
Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination has limited effect on the
interpretation of TST results later in life as it is given at birth for most of
the population in Malaysia.54
Refer to Appendix 10 on Procedure for Tuberculin Skin Test
•
Interferon Gamma Release Assays
IGRAs are blood tests that detect cell-mediated immune response. The
test measure T-cell release of interferon gamma following stimulation
by protein antigens secreted by M. tuberculosis and a few other
mycobacteria. However, it does not detect M. bovis, BCG and most of
the non-tuberculous mycobacteria.78 IGRA does not require a follow-up
visit for reading of results (in contrast with the TST).
IGRA cannot distinguish between LTBI and active TB. Thus, it should
not be used to diagnose active TB.
All IGRAs are not affected by BCG vaccination which makes them
useful for evaluating LTBI in BCG-vaccinated individuals.79, level III
In Malaysia, QuantiFERON-TB Gold Plus (QFTR-Plus) is currently the
more widely used IGRA. It has two TB antigen tubes instead of one
because it measures response of both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. The
test is positive when either tube containing the TB antigen shows a
positive response.
A QuantiFERON assay may yield an indeterminate result. This may
be due to in-vitro or in-vivo factors. Hence, proper handling of the
QuantiFERON specimens is important. If the first result is indeterminate,
the test may be repeated or TST can be performed. Refer to Appendix
11 on Procedure for QuantiFERON Specimen Collection.
Positive (TST) reaction
At-risk groups
• PLHIV
• Organ transplant recipients
• Persons who are immunosuppressed for other reasons
(e.g. those taking the equivalent of >15 mg/day
prednisolone for ≥1 month or taking anti-TNF treatment)
• All other high risk individuals including healthcare
workers and children (except newborns and infants <3
months)
• Individuals from countries with low incidence of TB
≥5 mm
≥10 mm
≥15 mm
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
In a well conducted meta-analysis of 40 studies involving 50,592
adults and children comparing IGRA and TST, the former was better in
predicting the progression of LTBI to active TB.80, level II-2
• The pooled RR for disease progression in untreated individuals:
 IGRA positive vs IGRA negative was 9.35 (95% CI 6.48 to
13.49)
 TST positive vs TST negative was 4.24 (95% CI 3.30 to 5.46)
A positive IGRA has a significantly higher predictive ability than a
positive TST (p=0.008).
• PPV for IGRA was 4.5% (95% CI 3.3 to 5.8) compared with 2.3%
(95% CI 1.5 to 3.1) for TST (p=0.002).
• NPV for IGRA was 99.7% (95% CI 99.5 to 99.8) compared with
99.3% (95% CI 99.0 to 99.5) for TST (p=0.02).
• IGRA positive individuals who were untreated vs those who were
treated was 3.09 (95% CI 2.08 to 4.60) compared with 1.11 (95%
CI 0.69 to 1.79) for the same populations who were TST positive.
A retrospective cohort study of 416 HIV-infected adults found that a
positive IGRA had substantial predictive ability for progression to active
TB.81, level II-2
• The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of IGRA were 80.0%
(95% CI 28.4 to 99.5), 85.9% (95% CI 82.1 to 89.1), 6.5% (95%
CI 4.0 to 10.2) and 99.7% (95% CI 98.4 to 99.9) respectively.
• The progression to active TB was significantly more frequent in
the IGRA positive vs IGRA negative group (p=0.001).
• LTBI testing is desirable but not required in PLHIV prior to initiation
of LTBI treatment.
Recommendation 21
• Interferon gamma release assay or tuberculin skin test should be
used to test for latent tuberculosis infection for adults in the target
groups.
• All patients diagnosed with LTBI should be notified to the National
TB Control Programme for surveillance purposes.
•
Treatment
LTBI treatment is designed to prevent the progression of LTBI to active
TB. Evidence show that treatment of LTBI can prevent 60 - 90% of
cases from developing active TB.45
The benefit of treating individuals with LTBI should outweigh its harm.
This is because safety is particularly important in LTBI treatment as the
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
patients are asymptomatic without active disease. To ensure treatment
adherence and successful completion of treatment, an effective, safe
and short regimen is preferred for both adults and children.
•
HIV-negative adults
A local technology review showed the following LTBI treatment regimens
were effective compared with placebo in preventing active TB:82, level I
 INH 6 months with OR=0.65 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.83)
 INH 12 - 72 months with OR=0.50 (95% CI 0.41 to 0.62)
 RIF 3 - 4 months with OR=0.41 (95% CI 0.19 to 0.85)
 RIF-INH 3 - 4 months with OR=0.53 (95% CI 0.36 to 0.78)
 RIF-INH-PZA 12 months with OR=0.35 (95% CI 0.19 to 0.61)
 RIF-PZA 12 months with OR=0.53 (95% CI 0.33 to 0.84)
In another comparison, the regimens containing rifamycin showed
no difference in the risk of developing active TB compared with those
containing INH.
In a well-designed RCT, 4R was non-inferior to 9H in HIV-negative adults
with LTBI in preventing active TB. The 4R treatment arm had fewer
grade 3 to 5 ADRs requiring treatment to be stopped permanently (RD
in percentage points= -1.1, 95% CI -1.9 to -0.4) and better treatment
completion rate (difference in percentage points=15.1, 95% CI 12.7 to
17.4).83, level I
The median rate of withdrawals from adverse events due to LTBI
treatment regimens were as follows:82, level I
In one small cross-sectional study, LTBI patients on 4R and 3HP
were more likely to complete treatment than patients on 9H with RR
of 1.39 (95% CI 1.07 to 1.81) and 1.67 (95% CI 1.27 to 2.19)
respectively.84, level III
•
HIV-positive adults
A large RCT on HIV-positive adults with LTBI comparing 1HP and 9H
showed the following:85, level I
 lower treatment interruption due to liver toxicity in 1HP (OR=2.09,
95% CI 1.32 to 1.33)
 lower combined grade 3 and 4 serious adverse events in 1HP
(2.9 vs 4.6 events per 100 person-years, p= 0.01)
 higher treatment completion rate in 1HP (97% vs 90%, p<0.001)
 no difference in development of active TB
LTBI treatment regimen
Median withdrawal rate
Range
6H
5.8%
2.3% to 24.5%
3HP
4.3%
1.3% to 8.4%
9H
2.6%
0.4% to 26.8%
3-4HR
1.8%
0.5% to 5.1%
3-4R
0%
0% to 5.2%
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
In a systematic review of four RCTs, there was no significant difference
between 3HP and 6H/9H or continuous INH (36 months) for LTBI
treatment in HIV-positive adults on the following outcomes:86, level I
 development of active TB
 all-cause mortality
However, treatment completion rate was higher in the 3HP group
compared with the other two groups:
 3HP vs 6H/9H (RR=1.25, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.55)
 3HP vs continuous INH (RR=1.59, 95% CI 1.40 to 1.80)
In the same review, 3HP was safer compared with its comparators:86, level I
 lower risk of any adverse events compared with 6H/9H (RR=0.63,
95% CI 0.43 to 0.92) or continuous INH (RR=0.20, 95% CI 0.12
to 0.32)
 lower risk of hepatotoxicity compared with 6H/9H (RR=0.26,
95%CI 0.12 to 0.55) or continuous INH (RR=0.05, 95% CI 0.02 to
0.13)
The above evidence supports the use of a short and effective LTBI
treatment regimen with high treatment completion rate in adults with
LTBI.
Recommendation 22
• In the treatment of all adults with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI):
 3HR or 3HP* regimens should be the first-line regimen unless
contraindicated
 4R may be used for patients who cannot tolerate or who are
contraindicated for INH-based regimens
 6H or 9H may be used for patients who cannot tolerate or who
are contraindicated for rifamycin-based regimens
 1HP* may be considered for HIV-positive adults
3HR=three months daily isoniazid and rifampicin, 3HP=three months weekly
isoniazid and rifapentine, 4R=four months daily rifampicin, 6H=six months
daily isoniazid,
9H=nine
months
daily
isoniazid,
1HP=one
month
daily
isoniazid and rifapentine
*rifapentine is not yet available in Malaysia
• The use of 3HR/3HP/4R:
 is contraindicated in patients receiving protease inhibitor-based
antiretroviral therapy
 requires dose adjustment of dolutegravir and raltegravir
For further information on RIF-drug interaction, refer to Subchapter 4.2
on Anti-tuberculosis Drug Interactions.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
The dosing for LTBI treatment in adults is shown in Table 12 below.
Table 12: Recommended dosage for LTBI treatment in adults
Adapted: World Health Organization. WHO Consolidated Guidelines on Tuberculosis:
Tuberculosis Preventive Treatment: Module 1: Prevention. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2020
Note: Pyridoxine 10 mg/day should be given for all adult patients on INH and a higher
dose of 30 mg/day for individuals at high risk of neuropathy.
d.
Monitoring
Ensuring treatment adherence in patients tolerating LTBI treatment is
important to obtain maximum benefit. This can be achieved by providing
health education and patient support. Patients should be advised to
contact their healthcare providers whenever they have the following
symptoms: loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort,
persistent fatigue or weakness, dark-coloured urine, pale stools,
jaundice, confusion or drowsiness. If a healthcare provider cannot
be consulted at the onset of such symptoms, the patient should stop
treatment immediately.
Regular follow-up is needed to ensure early identification of active TB
and treatment ADR in patients receiving LTBI treatment. A surveillance
system for treatment outcome as well as resistance to TB drugs should
be established. The CPG DG recommended monitoring schedule for
individuals on LTBI treatment is shown in Table 13 below.
Drug
Duration
Interval
Dosage
Doses
Isoniazid (6H/9H)
Six months/
Daily
180/270
5 mg/kg, max 300 mg
nine months
Isoniazid +
Three months
Daily
90
INH: 5 mg/kg, max 300 mg
rifampicin (3HR)
RIF: 10 mg/kg, max 600 mg
Rifapentine +
Three months
Weekly
12
INH: 15 mg/kg, max 900 mg
isoniazid (3HP)
RPT:
<50 kg; 750 mg
>50 kg: 900 mg
Rifampicin (4R)
Four months
Daily
120
10 mg/kg, max 600 mg
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 13: Recommended follow-up schedule for
LTBI treatment monitoring
FBC=full blood count, RP=renal profile, LFT=liver function test, HIV=human
immunodeficiency virus, CXR=chest x-ray, TB=tuberculosis
*Day 1, week 2 - 4 and end of treatment monitoring is done by a medical officer/
specialist while the rest can be monitored by the paramedics
**With risk factors for HIV
Individuals with LTBI, whether or not they received treatment, are
advised to be followed-up regularly for two years. Adults who developed
active TB while on LTBI treatment or during follow-up should be referred
to a specialist experienced in managing TB. TB drug resistance testing
should be done to rule out acquired drug resistance.
WHO has not defined the treatment outcomes for LTBI. Patients started
on LTBI treatment should have their outcomes reported. The LTBI
treatment outcomes proposed by this CPG DG is shown in Appendix 12.
The management of LTBI in adults is shown in Figure 4.
The management of HIV-positive adults with LTBI is shown in Figure 5.
Time*
Management
Investigations
Day 1
FBC, RP, LFT, HIV**
CXR
Week 2 - 4
LFT
End of LTBI treatment
CXR
Three months after end
-
of treatment
Nine months after end
-
of treatment
18 months after end of
CXR
treatment
Other activities
Provide health education on:
• Adherence
• Side effects
• Symptoms of active TB
Initiate LTBI treatment
Ensure treatment adherence
Monitor for ADR and
symptoms of active TB
Monitor for symptoms of active TB
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Adapted: World Health Organization. WHO Consolidated Guidelines on Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis Preventive Treatment: Module 1: Prevention. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020
Figure 4: LTBI testing and TB preventive treatment for adult household contacts and other targeted at-risk groups
Household/close contacts* and
other LTBI target groups
Features suggestive of active TB
i. Clinical symptoms†
ii. Chest x-ray
YES
NO
Investigate for
active TB
No active TB
Defer preventive
treatment
Give preventive
treatment
Suggestive of
active TB
Refer
to a specialist
TST or IGRA
POSITIVE
NEGATIVE
YES
NO
Other LTBI target groups:
• patients initiating anti-tumour
necrosis factor treatment
• patients receiving dialysis
• patients preparing for
organ/haematological transplant
• patients with silicosis
Preventive treatment contraindicated?
Follow-up for progression to active TB, except for individuals who tested negative for IGRA
*Household or close contacts are individuals who live in the same household or share the same air space with an index case for a reasonable duration
of time before the index patient started TB treatment. †Clinical symptom: current cough, fever, weight loss or night sweats
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Adapted: World Health Organization. WHO Consolidated Guidelines on Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis Preventive Treatment: Module 1: Prevention. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020
Figure 5: LTBI testing and TB preventive treatment for people living with HIV (PLHIV)
YES
NO
Defer LTBI
treatment
Give LTBI
treatment
POSITIVE/NEGATIVE/UNAVAILABLE
YES
NO
Preventive treatment contraindicated?
Follow-up for progression to active TB, except for individuals who tested negative for IGRA
*Close contacts are individuals who live in the same household or share the same air space with an index case for a reasonable duration of time
before the index patient started TB treatment. †Clinical symptom: current cough, fever, weight loss or night sweats
PLHIV/HIV close contact*
Features suggestive of active TB
i. Clinical symptoms†
ii. Chest x-ray
Investigate for
active TB
No active TB
Suggestive of
active TB
TST or IGRA
Refer to a
specialist
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
3.2. Latent Tuberculosis Infection in Children
Children below 2 - 4 years of age with LTBI have the highest risk of
progression to active TB including disseminated and central nervous
system TB.87, level III In a meta-analysis of 46 cohort studies in 34
countries involving 130,512 children, the 2 ­year cumulative TB incidence
in untreated close contact with positive baseline TST or IGRA results
was greatest among children below five years of age (19.0%, 95% CI
8.4 to 37.4). Most cases occurred within weeks of contact investigation
initiation.88, level II-2 Thus, early investigation and treatment for LTBI are
necessary to prevent active TB especially in children below 5 years of
age who are at higher risk for LTBI and/or progression to TB disease.
As in adults, LTBI in children is a clinical diagnosis established by:
• demonstrating prior TB infection using a LTBI test
• excluding active TB disease
a.
LTBI tests
There is no gold standard for LTBI diagnosis in children; available tests
include the TST and IGRAs. These tests measure immune response
(type IV or delayed-type hypersensitivity) to mycobacterial protein
antigens that might occur following exposure to mycobacteria. A
negative TST or IGRA result is not reliable in infants younger than three
months of age as their cell-mediated immune response may not be fully
developed.
•
Tuberculin skin test
The Interpretation of TST results in children is the same as for adults
(refer Table 11, Subchapter 3.1 on Latent Tuberculosis Infection in
Adults). Children may take 8 - 12 weeks to develop a positive TST
result after exposure to TB.
•
Interferon Gamma Release Assays
IGRAs are in vitro blood tests of cell-mediated immune response to TBspecific antigens. The tests do not measure immune response to the
antigens of the BCG vaccine and most nontuberculous mycobacteria.
Compared to TST, IGRAs have a similar sensitivity but greater specificity
for the diagnosis of TB infection. (A positive TST could be due to a
recent BCG vaccination and nontuberculous mycobacterial infection).
For the diagnosis of LTBI in children ≥ 2 years old, either IGRA or TST
may be used;54 IGRA is preferred if available. In a study in the United
States of America (USA) involving 3,593 children (25% of whom <5 years
old and 92% born outside the USA) with risk for LTBI or progression to
TB disease, the IGRAs (Quantiferon Gold In-Tube test [QFT-GIT] and
T-SPOT) were found to have higher specificities [90.1% (95% CI 89.1
to 91.1) for QFT-GIT and 92.9% (95% CI 92.0 to 93.7) for T-SPOT] and
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
equally high NPVs (100 (95% CI 99.8 to 100) for QFT-GIT and 99.9
(95% CI 99.8 to 100) for TST-SPOT] compared to TST [specificity of
73.4% (95% CI 71.9 to 74.8) and NPV of 99.9 (95% CI 99.7 to 100)] at
two years of follow-up. None of the 533 children (including 54 children
<2 years old) with a TST-positive but IGRA-negative results developed
TB disease although they were not treated for LTBI. The results of the
study supported the use of IGRAs to screen for LTBI in children of any
age, especially those who are born outside of the USA.89, level II-2
The use of IGRAs in children aged <2 years has been controversial
and WHO cautions on their use in children <2 years old and children
living with HIV because of concerns about the reduced sensitivity of the
test.54 However, a study in an USA-based health system involving 116
children <2 years (7 to 23 months), none of the untreated children who
were TST positive, but IGRA negative developed TB disease.90, level III The
American Academy of Paediatrics preferred TST for children <2 years
but recommends the use of IGRA in combination with TST to improve
the diagnosis of LTBI in certain clinical situations.91, level III
Either a positive IGRA or TST result should be considered indicative
of M. tuberculosis infection. A negative IGRA or TST results cannot
conclusively exclude the diagnosis of LTBI and should be interpreted
in the context of other clinical data. An indeterminate or invalid IGRA
result should not be used for clinical decision making.92, level III
• In immunocompromised children, both IGRAs and TST should be
interpreted with caution.
b.
Excluding active TB
Similar to adults, all treatment for LTBI in children should be initiated
only after active TB has been ruled out. WHO recommends symptomsbased screening to exclude active TB (refer Subchapter 2.7 on
Tuberculosis in Children).54 Evaluation for active TB must be pursued
in all children with a positive TST or IGRA.
CXRs are usually normal in children with LTBI but may show dense
nodules with calcifications, calcified non-enlarged regional lymph nodes,
or pleural thickening (scarring).93, level III If there are any unexplained
CXR abnormalities or diagnostic uncertainties, the child should be
referred to a centre with a paediatrician experienced in managing TB
disease in children.
WHO concludes that for household contacts, symptoms screening
for active TB with or without addition of CXR should be acceptable.
However, a normal CXR increases the confidence that active PTB has
been excluded and reduces the risk of inadvertently treating active TB
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
with LTBI regimen. For adults and adolescents living with HIV, WHO
reiterated that the requirement for CXR should not pose a barrier to
LTBI treatment. However, there was no clear statement on the role of
CXR for infants and children living with HIV.54
• CXR should be done prior to LTBI treatment. For children whose
CXR cannot be done prior to treatment, it should be done within 14
days of treatment initiation.
c.
Children at risk of progression to active TB and recommended
for LTBI treatment
WHO makes the following recommendations for the high-risk group of
children to be screened and given LTBI treatment.54
• Children <5 years (irrespective of HIV status) who are household
contacts of people with bacteriologically confirmed PTB should be
given TB preventive treatment even if LTBI testing is not available.
• Children ≥5 years (irrespective of HIV status) who are household
contacts of people with bacteriologically confirmed PTB may be
given TB preventive treatment.
• Children ≥12 months of age living with HIV in a setting with high
TB transmission, should be offered TB preventive treatment
regardless of contact with TB.
• Infants aged <12 months living with HIV who are in contact with a
person with TB should receive TB preventive treatment.
The following are high-risk groups of children for progression to active
TB:
•
Household contacts of bacteriologically confirmed PTB
Child contact of bacteriologically confirmed PTB must be evaluated for
active TB with history, physical examination, CXR, and TST or IGRA.
Evaluation should be performed as soon as the contact is identified.
Testing for TB infection with TST or IGRA shortly following exposure
may be negative. If the initial TST or IGRA is negative, it should be
repeated 8 to 12 weeks following the last known exposure to TB as
immune response to TB may take up to 10 weeks (of window period)
to develop.
i.
Children aged <5 years
Treatment for LTBI should be initiated if there is no evidence for active
TB, even in the absence of positive TST or IGRA results. This approach
is known as “window prophylaxis”.94, level III It is warranted because the
child’s cellular immune response to TB may not be fully developed at the
time of testing, and children <5 years of age with recent TB exposure
are at relatively high risk for progression to active TB (40% risk in
infants <12 months and 25% in children 1 to 2 years of age).95, level III If
the initial TST or IGRA is negative, the child may be retested at 8 to 12
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
weeks from the last date of contact with the index case. If the repeat
test remains negative, treatment may be discontinued at the discretion
of the clinician. In a setting where LTBI test is not available, all child
contacts <5 years should be offered LTBI treatment as recommended
by WHO.54
ii.
Children aged ≥5 years
For immunocompetent child contacts ≥5 years of age with positive TST
or IGRA without signs of active TB, LTBI treatment may be given.54
However, if the initial LTBI testing is negative, decision regarding
treatment may be deferred pending results of a second test, performed
8 to 12 weeks from the last date of contact with the index case. If the
repeat test is negative, no treatment is warranted. If the repeat test is
positive, a course of LTBI treatment may be completed.
•
Infant and children living with HIV
All HIV-infected children should undergo annual screening for TB from
3 through to 12 months of age (for perinatal infected infant) or at the
time HIV diagnosis (in older children and adolescents)
For HIV-infected children aged ≥12 months in a high TB transmission
setting, treatment for LTBI should be offered regardless of CD4 cell
count or if LTBI test is unavailable.54 LTBI treatment administered in the
absence of LTBI testing has been associated with a 40 - 50% reduction
in active TB among HIV-infected male (employees of a South African
gold-mining company with median age of 37 years) living in areas
with very high TB incidence.96, level I WHO strongly recommends LTBI
treatment for children aged ≥12 months living with HIV after excluding
active TB despite the inconsistent/low quality evidence in the relevant
studies. This is because of the clear benefits seen in adults with HIV
and the high-risk of active TB among all PLHIV including children.54
If LTBI test is available and the result is negative for HIV-infected
children aged ≥12 months, the decision on LTBI treatment should be
made on an individual case basis, taking into account the potential
benefits and harms of LTBI treatment.54
For HIV-infected infants <12 months old, the evidence of adult studies
cannot be applied. WHO recommends that infants <12 months of age
to be offered LTBI treatment only if there is history of contact with TB.54
•
Children in other risk groups
For immunocompromised children or children in other high-risk groups
for progression to active TB disease, the approach is the same as for
adults. They should be tested for LTBI and if the result is positive, LTBI
treatment should be offered after excluding active TB.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Recommendation 23
• Interferon gamma release assay or tuberculin skin test should be
used to test for latent tuberculosis infection in children at risk of
progressing to active tuberculosis
• All children diagnosed with LTBI should be notified to the National
TB Control Programme for surveillance purposes.
d.
LTBI treatment regimen
Similar to adults, this CPG DG prefers an effective but shorter regimen
for LTBI treatment in children to ensure treatment adherence and
treatment completion.
Current regimens used to treat LTBI in children include:
a. RIF daily for four months (4R)
b. INH and rifapentine weekly for three months (12 doses) (3HP)
c. INH and RIF daily for three months (3HR)
d. INH daily for six or nine months (6H/9H)
3HP should preferably be administered under DOT.
In a systematic review involving children below 15 years old with LTBI,
3- or 4-months of daily RIF and INH (3HR/4HR) was safe and showed
better completion rate than 6 or 9 months of daily INH (6H/9H) based
on the following outcomes:97, level I
• risk of active TB development based on radiological changes was
lower in 4HR than 9H (RR=0.492, 95%CI 0.318 to 0.762)
• significantly higher GI-related ADR and transient increased liver
enzyme in 9H than 4HR
• no significant difference in the rate of liver function impairment
between 3HR and 9H
• treatment completion rate was higher in 3HR than 6H (RR=2.41,
95%CI 1.70 to 3.43)
Two recent good RCTs looked at alternative LTBI treatment regimens in
children compared with 9H.
In the first RCT involving 884 non-HIV infected children <18 years old,
4R had better adherence with no significant difference in effectiveness
and side-effects compared with 9H. Treatment completion with 4R
showed an adjusted difference of 13.4 percentage points (95% CI 7.5
to 19.3).98, level I
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
The second RCT of 905 children aged 2 to 17 years showed that 3HP
was non-inferior to 9H for LTBI treatment. Apart from that, 9H had
lower overall treatment completion rate (OR= -7.2, 95% CI -2.0 to
-2.5) and higher treatment discontinuation rate (OR=4.9, 95% CI 2.5 to
7.4). Neither arm had any hepatotoxicity, grade 4 ADRs or treatmentattributed death.99, level I
In a large retrospective cohort study of 1174 children <18 years old
treated for LTBI, treatment completion was higher in the 4R group
than in the 9H group (OR=1.64, 95% CI 1.07 to 2.52). ADR was
uncommon in either group and there were no instances of symptomatic
hepatotoxicity.100, level II-2
The choice of LTBI treatment regimen is based largely on the likelihood
of adherence, the potential for adverse effects and preference of
the patient, provider, and/or public health programme. The CPG DG
recommends daily RIF for four months (for children of all ages except
newborn 28 days and below) and weekly INH and RPT for three months
(for children >2 years) as the preferred regimens, given the good
safety profile and better completion rate. However, RPT is currently
not available in Malaysia. Alternative regimens are 3HR and 6H if the
preferred regimen is contraindicated or not available.
For children ≥2 years of age on ART, regimens should be reviewed
carefully for compatibility of ART with the LTBI regimen. Children on
ART incompatible with rifamycin-based regimens should be treated
with INH monotherapy.
For children <2 years of age on ART, INH monotherapy is preferred
as the potential for DDI with rifamycin-based regimens are high. WHO
recommends six-month daily INH monotherapy for children aged <2
years in high-incidence settings (TB incidence rate ≥ 40 per 100,000
population).54
Pyridoxine 5 to 10 mg daily should be administered together with INH
especially for infants who are being exclusively breastfed, children
on meat and milk deficient diets, and those with conditions that can
predispose to neuropathy (including diabetes, uraemia, malnutrition,
and HIV infection).
The algorithm for LTBI testing and treatment recommendation for
children at risk of progressing to active TB disease is summarised in
Figure 6.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Recommendation 24
• In the treatment of children with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI),
the preferred regimens are:
 4R for all children >28 days of age or 3HP* for children aged >2
years.
 6H for all newborns aged 28 days and below.
• Alternative regimens of LTBI in children are 3HR, 6H or 9H.
• In HIV-infected children with LTBI, 6H is the preferred regimen for:
 children <2 years of age.
 children ≥2 years of age# on antiretroviral treatment with rifamycin
drug interaction.
3HR=three months daily isoniazid and rifampicin, 3HP=three months
weekly isoniazid and rifapentine, 4R=four months daily rifampicin, 6H=six
months daily isoniazid
*Rifapentine is not yet available in Malaysia.
#for HIV-infected children ≥2 years old on ART without rifamycin drug interaction,
follow the recommendation for HIV-negative children ≥2 years old.
The dosage of recommended LTBI regimen for children is as shown in
Table 14 below.
Table 14: Recommended dosage for LTBI treatment in children
*Given in total of 12 doses
Pyridoxine 5 - 10 mg/day should be given to patients on Isoniazid.
Source: World Health Organization. WHO Consolidated Guidelines on Tuberculosis:
Tuberculosis Preventive Treatment: Module 1: Prevention. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2020
Drug
Duration
Interval
Dosage
Isoniazid
6 months
Daily
1. Age 10 years and older: 5 mg/kg/day
2. Age <10 years: 10 mg/kg/day (Range 7-
15 mg/kg)
Maximum dose: 300 mg
Rifampicin (4R)
4 months
Daily
1. Age 10 years and older: 10 mg/kg/day
2. Age <10 years: 15 mg/kg/day (Range 10-
20 mg/kg)
Maximum dose: 600 mg
Isoniazid +
3 months
Daily
Dose of INH and RIF same as above
rifampicin (3HR)
Rifapentine +
3 months*
Weekly
Isoniazid:
isoniazid (3HP)
10 - 15 kg: 300 mg 10 - 15 kg: 300 mg
16 - 23 kg: 500 mg 16 - 23 kg: 450 mg
24 - 30 kg: 600 mg 24 - 30 kg: 600 mg
>31 kg: 700 mg >31 kg: 750 mg
(For children age (For children age
2-14 years old) 2-14 years old)
Rifapentin:
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
a.
Monitoring and follow-up
• The objectives of follow-up during and after LTBI treatment in
children are to:
i. monitor progression to active TB
ii. identify possible ADR
iii. monitor and ensure adherence
iv. adjust treatment dose according to the latest body weight
• In general, clinical monitoring every four to six weeks for the first
three months is appropriate, followed by every two to three months
thereafter, regardless of regimen used.
• The duration of follow-up is at least two years from initiation of
treatment.
Breakthrough TB infection or LTBI treatment failure is still possible
while a child is on LTBI treatment. Thus, signs and symptoms of active
TB need to be monitored. Weighing and plotting serial weight in an
age-gender appropriate growth chart is very important to ensure early
detection of active TB.
Frequent dose adjustment for LTBI treatment will be needed for young
infants due to relatively rapid weight gain, therefore 2 - 4 weeks follow
up is required while for older children, 4 - 6 weeks follow-up would be
adequate.
Baseline liver enzyme testing is not required for otherwise healthy
children. However, it is warranted for children with malnutrition, preexisting liver disease, obesity and HIV infection as well as those on
potentially hepatotoxic drugs.45; 93, level III Children with deranged LFT
should be referred to a specialist for initiation of LTBI treatment.
Routine LFT monitoring is not needed in children receiving LTBI
treatment. However, laboratory evaluation is warranted for children
who develop clinical symptoms of liver injury. Early signs of hepatitis
include anorexia, nausea, vomiting and abdominal discomfort.
Reduced activities and persistent fatigue/malaise/weakness that last
for a few days, dark-coloured urine, pale stools, jaundice, confusion or
drowsiness are late signs. Urgent LFT should be done, and if deranged
the patient should be referred urgently to a paediatrician with experience
in the management of TB.
Counselling and support of patients and families on the importance
of LTBI treatment will improve treatment acceptance and adherence.
The child must complete the course to ensure the effectiveness of
treatment. As LTBI treatment is given to a child who is otherwise well
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
and healthy, development of any unexpected ADR may affect the
adherence and parents may default subsequent follow-up. Therefore,
it is important to educate the patient and family about potential ADRs.
They should understand the need to stop treatment and notify the
healthcare provider immediately if signs or symptoms of drug toxicity
are suspected. Refer to the Subchapter 4.1 on Anti-tuberculosis
Adverse Drug Reactions for the discussion on further management.
All children with TB contact, including those not given LTBI treatment,
should be followed-up for two years with recommended interval as
summarised in yellow box above. Children should be reinvestigated for
active TB, including a CXR, if there is repeated TB exposure or presence
of any signs and symptoms of active TB during follow-up. However, if
the child has a positive TST or IGRA before, there is no clinical value to
repeat the test unless a false positive result is suspected earlier. There
is also no role of repeating a TST or IGRA to assess the effectiveness
of LTBI treatment.91, level III
Children with breakthrough active TB while on LTBI treatment or who
develop active TB within the two years of follow-up should be referred
to a centre with a paediatrician experienced in managing TB. For
all children who develop active TB during or after completing LTBI
treatment, it is important to test for drug-resistant TB.
WHO has not defined the treatment outcomes for LTBI. Patients started
on LTBI treatment should have their outcome reported. The LTBI
treatment outcome proposed by this CPG DG is shown in Appendix
12.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Figure 6: LTBI testing and treatment in children at risk of progressing to active TB¥
Children living with HIV
Household contact*
Children in other risk group
Active TB excluded?†
(asymptomatic and normal CXR)
Active TB excluded?†
(asymptomatic and normal CXR)
Active TB excluded?†
(asymptomatic and normal CXR)
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
Investigate for active TB
and manage accordingly#
Investigate for active TB
and manage accordingly#
TST or IGRA
TST or IGRA
LTBI
treatment
LTBI
treatment
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
Age ≥12
months
Age <12
months
LTBI treatment if
benefits > harms
LTBI treatment only
if contact with TB
Defer treatment and
repeat the test at 8
to 12 weeks after
exposure
No treatment
≥5 years of age
<5 years of age
Initiate treatment but consider
retest at 8 to 12 weeks after
exposure. If test remain
negative, treatment may be
withheld after consultation with
specialist
TST or IGRA
Follow-up for active TB/progression to TB disease even for patients who have completed preventive treatment
Adapted: World Health Organization. WHO Consolidated Guidelines on Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis Preventive Treatment:
¥Important notes: This algorithm should not be used alone for clinical decision. Refer to the text in the chapter for further details and discussions.
*Refer to Glossary for definition of “household contact”. †Refer to Subchapter on Excluding active TB and Subchapter on Diagnosis of TB in children. #If
active TB is confirmed, to treat accordingly. If no active TB detected after investigations, follow the pathway as active TB excluded.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
4. SECTION
III:
ANTI-TUBERCULOSIS
ADVERSE
DRUG
REACTIONS AND DRUG INTERACTIONS
4.1. Anti-tuberculosis Adverse Drug Reactions
a.
Diagnosis
The rate of anti-TB ADR in Malaysia is unknown. Data from the
Pharmacovigilance Section, Centre of Compliance and Quality Control
National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency (NPRA), MoH indicates
underreporting of these events, even for severe ADRs. Knowledge
about anti-TB ADR rate is important to the national TB control
programme, as recommendations on treatment regimen are partly
based on adverse effects and treatment completion rates. Although
reporting of these events is not mandatory, clinicians and their support
staff should proactively report ADRs.
Risk factors for anti-TB ADR depend on the type of ADR. For anti-TB
drug-induced liver injury (DILI), risk factors include abnormal baseline
ALT, advanced liver disease, liver transplant, hepatitis C infection,
advanced age, female gender, slow acetylator status, malnutrition
and HIV infection.13; 101, level III For INH-induced neuropathy, risk factors
include pregnancy, extremes of age, HIV infection, diabetes mellitus,
alcoholism, malnutrition and chronic renal failure.13
Anti-TB ADRs present in a myriad of ways, with different frequency
(common to rare) and severity (mild to severe). Hence, a high index of
suspicion is required to make the diagnosis. Children are believed to
experience less anti-TB ADR compared with adults.
Identification of the offending drug may be challenging in anti-TB ADR
because of the use of combination antibiotic therapy. In such instances,
the WHO-Uppsala Monitoring Centre causality assessment system
may be used.102, level III
The use of skin or laboratory tests for the diagnosis of anti-TB ADRs
are still experimental. Studies using skin or laboratory tests were
small, isolated and used home-grown tests. Therefore, they cannot be
recommended for the diagnosis of anti-TB ADRs.
In patients with suspected severe ADRs, full blood count, renal and
liver function tests should be obtained. The presence of eosinophilia
supports the diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity syndrome. While the
presence of cytopenia, renal or liver impairment help to narrow the
list of offending drugs. Additional investigations may be required as
dictated by the clinical presentation.
The proper grading of ADR facilitates its management. Although there
are many standards for the grading of ADRs the Common Terminology
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) is preferred because of its
detailed description. The general description of an ADR by CTCAE is
summarised below. It is worthwhile reiterating that patients who suffer
from disabling symptoms despite appropriate treatment should be
graded as severe.
CTCAE principle for grading severity of ADR
Grade 1 Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or
diagnostic observations only; intervention not indicated
Grade 2
Moderate; minimal, local or non-invasive intervention
indicated;
limiting
age-appropriate
instrumental
activities of daily living (ADL)*
Grade 3
Severe or medically significant but not immediately
life-threatening; hospitalisation or prolongation of
hospitalisation indicated; disabling; limiting self-care
ADL**
Grade 4
Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention
indicated
Grade 5
Death related to adverse event
*Instrumental ADL refer to preparing meals, shopping for groceries or clothes, using
the telephone, managing money, etc.
**Self-care ADL refer to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using the
toilet, taking medications, and not bedridden.
•
Anti-tuberculosis cutaneous adverse drug reactions
Cutaneous ADRs are among the common ADRs due to anti-TB
drugs in clinical practice. Their features are diverse and non-specific.
Furthermore, they may occur in isolation or be a part of a drug
hypersensitivity reaction.
Anti-TB cutaneous ADR range in severity from mild to severe.
Maculopapular rash is a common cutaneous anti-TB ADR. Its severity is
graded by the size of the rash, which is expressed as a percentage of the
individual’s body surface area. The CTCAE grading of maculopapular
rash is shown in Table 15.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 15: Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
Severity of Maculopapular Rash Version 5
*CTCAE severity grade: 1 = mild ADR, 2 = moderate, 3 - 5 = severe
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) Version 5.0. 2017
Severe cutaneous adverse reaction (SCAR) is a term specifically used
to describe drug-induced Stevens Johnson Syndrome, Toxic Epidermal
Necrolysis, Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms,
and Acute Generalised Exanthematous Pustulosis.103, level III SCARs are
potentially life-threatening and hence patients with suspected SCAR
should be referred to dermatologists for co-management.
•
Anti-tuberculosis drug-induced liver injury
Anti-TB drugs may cause an elevation of ALT either through liver
adaptation or liver injury. Liver adaptation to drugs is a benign process
that is associated with transient, mild ALT elevation that resolves
despite continuation of treatment. DILI, on the other hand, is more
sinister and leads to serious complications if treatment is continued.
Therefore, anti-TB treatment that contains RIF, INH or PZA must be
stopped immediately when DILI is suspected.
Two criteria may be used to diagnose anti-TB DILI:
1. The American Thoracic Society criteria distinguishes between
symptomatic and asymptomatic drug-induced hepatitis:104
i. in patients with symptomatic hepatitis, an ALT ≥3 times the upper
limit of normal (ULN).
ii. in patients without any symptoms, an ALT ≥5 times the ULN.
2. The international drug-induced liver injury expert consensus criteria
uses any of the following, regardless of symptoms.105, level III
i. an ALT ≥5 times the ULN
ii. an ALP ≥2 times the ULN
iii. an ALT ≥3 times and total bilirubin 2 times the ULN
Duration
CTCAE term
Rash maculopapular
Grade 1
Macules/papules covering <10% BSA with or without symptoms
(e.g. pruritus, burning, tightness)
Grade 2
Macules/
papules covering 10 -30% BSA with or without symptoms
(e.g. pruritus, burning, tightness) limiting instrumental ADL; rash
covering >30% BSA with or without mild symptoms
Grade 3
Macules/
papules covering >30% BSA with moderate or severe symptoms;
limiting self-care ADL
Grade 4
-
Grade 5
-
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Elevation of liver enzymes are not specific for DILI. In order to diagnose
DILI, other causes of abnormal liver function should be ruled out.
• In anti-TB DILI, liver function should be monitored closely, and antiTB drugs be reintroduced when the liver function becomes normal.
Physicians/paediatricians with experience managing TB should be
consulted.
•
Drug challenge and de-challenge in anti-TB ADR
Both drug challenge and de-challenge are used in the diagnosis of ADR.
The drug most likely to cause the ADR is the last to be reintroduced and
sometimes may be omitted in severe or life threatening ADRs.
i.
Drug challenge
Drug challenge is the gold standard for diagnosing anti-TB ADR
including drug hypersensitivity reaction.106, level III Drug challenge is used
when multiple drugs may be responsible for the suspected ADR.
It is done by introducing the drug least likely to cause ADR first or
the most important drug first. In severe or life-threatening ADR, drug
challenge should be done in a graded manner when the patient has
recovered.
The patient undergoing a drug challenge should be carefully monitored.
Any ADR occurring during drug challenge should be treated promptly
and effectively. Further drug challenge with the same drug should be
stopped.
Continue drug challenge on other drugs once the patient recovers. If
a drug is tolerated, it is continued even as drug challenge is done on
other drugs as shown in Table 16.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Table 16: An example of a drug challenge schedule for severe
ADR in an adult weighing 60 kg
*EMB challenge may be omitted if the patient tolerated RIF, INH and PZA.
It is not necessary to challenge with all anti-TB drugs in the regimen.
Drug challenge may stop once enough drugs are found to be safe to
form a new regimen. A negative drug challenge provides assurance
that the drug is safe to use.
Recurrence of an ADR during drug challenge identifies the offending
drug. However, sometimes more than one drug may cause the same
reaction. It is prudent to continue drug challenge with other suspected
drugs in cutaneous drug reactions and DILI.
ii.
Drug de-challenge
Drug de-challenge is done when one drug is suspected of causing an
ADR and it is not safe to perform drug challenge. Examples include
suspected
RIF-induced-immune
thrombocytopenia,
-haemolytic
anaemia or -acute renal failure.107, level III
Drug de-challenge is done by omitting the suspected offending drug
from the anti-TB regimen and ruling out other causes. Resolution of
the event and absence of alternative causes establishes the diagnosis.
b.
Management of adverse drug reactions in active tuberculosis
The management of anti-TB ADR is determined by the:
i. severity of the reaction
ii. severity of the disease
In principle,
• symptomatic management and reassurance should be offered to
all patients with ADR.13
Drugs in daily dose
Day
Rifampicin
Isoniazid
Pyrazinamide
Ethambutol*
150 mg
300 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
600 mg
-
-
-
50 mg
100 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
300 mg
-
-
-
-
-
-
250 mg
500 mg
1500 mg
1500 mg
1500 mg
1500 mg
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
200 mg
400 mg
1200 mg
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
• for mild to moderate ADR, treat the symptom and continue TB
treatment.13, 31
• for severe ADR, withhold or switch the anti-TB regimen.13; 16
For a patient with severe TB and severe anti-TB ADR, switching to a
bridging/interim regimen is preferred until an alternative regimen could
be found.13; 16 The bridging or alternative anti-TB regimen should contain
at least three effective drugs in the intensive phase and two in the
continuation phase. An example of such a regimen is the streptomycinEMB-levofloxacin regimen used in EHRZ-associated DILI.
•
Drug desensitisation
Drug desensitisation may be attempted in cutaneous ADR except for
SCARs. A retrospective review of 34 drug desensitisation procedures in
HIV-positive adults with anti-TB ADR showed:108, level II-2
 a success rate of 78.9%
 no severe ADR from failed desensitisation
The limitation of the study was its retrospective nature, a multiple drug
hypersensitivity population and the small number of desensitisation
procedures performed.
Recommendation 25
• In rifampicin- or isoniazid-induced cutaneous adverse drug reactions
other than severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR), drug
desensitisation may be attempted.
Drug desensitisation may be started at 1:100 of the full dose of the
offending drug. The dose is then doubled in subsequent doses until
full dose is achieved.109 Two drug desensitisation techniques are used.
 In rapid desensitisation, the drug is given in escalating doses at
hourly intervals or less. The daily cumulative dose should not
exceed the maximum daily dose for the drug.
 Slow desensitisation is done at a slower rate than rapid
desensitisation. It is typically done daily or twice a day. It may also
be attempted in patients who have failed rapid desensitisation.
Patients should be monitored closely during drug desensitisation for
breakthrough reactions. Symptomatic treatment should be given
immediately at the first sign of such a reaction. Further desensitisation
for the day should be stopped. The same technique or principle of
desensitisation can be applied on children with the help from a clinical
pharmacist and after consultation with a paediatrician experienced in
management of TB.
For severe cutaneous ADR and other ADR, anti-TB drugs that are
tolerated during drug challenge or de-challenge are incorporated into
an alternative treatment regimen.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
•
Alternative anti-TB regimens
The standard 2EHRZ/4HR regimen is the most effective regimen
for PTB. It has the highest treatment success rate and lowest TB
relapse rate compared with other regimens.14, level I; 110, level I Hence,
alternative anti-TB regimens are only used when standard regimens
are contraindicated or poorly tolerated.
Some of the alternative regimens using first-line drugs for the treatment
of PTB include:
a. 2EHRZ/6HE111
b. 2HRZ/4HR13
c. 6RZE13
d. 2EHR/7HR13
•
New alternative anti-TB regimens
There was no RCT that substituted rifamycins with other drugs for drugsusceptible TB.
In a meta-analysis of 2265 participants, four-month moxifloxacincontaining anti-TB regimens that replaced EMB or INH had higher
relapse rate compared with standard regimen (RR 3.56, 95% CI 2.37
to 5.37).14, level I
New anti-TB regimens that do not include RIF or INH are mainly
used in drug-resistant TB treatment. For patients who have absolute
contraindication to INH or RIF, an INH- or RIF-resistant regimen
may be used.13 These patients should be referred to specialists for
management.
c.
Management of adverse drug reactions during latent
tuberculosis infection
ADRs during LTBI treatment are rare but important events. Higher rates
occur with combination therapy and longer regimens.112, level I
The principles of management for ADR are similar in both LTBI and
active TB. Reassurance, symptomatic treatment, desensitisation and
alternative regimens may be used when appropriate.
Individuals who develop severe ADR to 3HP or 3HR may switch to 4R
or 6H once the patients recover.
4.2. Drug-Drug Interactions
Anti-TB drugs, particularly rifamycins and isoniazid, interact with many
commonly prescribed drugs. These drug-drug interactions may lead to
adverse events because of/resulting from the reduction in efficacy or
the increase in toxicity of the affected drug. Popular drug interaction
databases, such as Micromedex and Lexicomp provide searchable
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
information on drug-drug interactions. These databases are often used
to advise clinicians on potential drug-drug interaction.
However, these databases differ in the way they classify and grade
the seriousness of DDI, report the strength of evidence, and make
their recommendation due to the lack of standards/guidelines for DDI
reporting.113, level III
In general, the quality of evidence guiding DDI databases vary from low
to high quality.113, level III The actual percentage of patients with potential
DDI that manifested drug interactions was shown to be less than 10%
in a recent systematic review.114., level III
It is advisable to check with several databases (to look for consistency)
if there is uncertainty about potential drug-drug interactions. Potential
DDIs are even more complicated in real life because patients may be
on more than one drug that interacts with another.
a.
Anti-tuberculosis drug interactions
Anti-tuberculous rifamycins (RIF, RFB and RPT) are key drugs in active
and latent TB treatment. Rifamycins are enzyme inducers of a variety of
metabolic pathways and hence they interact with many commonly used
drugs. Rifamycins vary in their enzyme inducing potency with RIF being
the strongest, and weekly RPT the weakest.13 Clinicians managing TB
must be familiar with rifamycin-drug interaction, particularly with new
drugs. Refer to Appendix 13 on Drugs with Potential Interactions
Involving Rifamycin for the description and management of rifamycin
drug interaction.
In contrast with the rifamycins, INH inhibits drug metabolism. It
increases the toxicity of antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, phenytoin),
and certain benzodiazepines (diazepam). Combining RIF with INH
leads to a net drug metabolizing effect due to the stronger enzyme
inducing effect of RIF.13 Refer to Appendix 14 on Drugs with Potential
Interactions Involving Isoniazid for the description and management
of INH drug interaction.
b.
Antiretroviral and anti-tuberculosis drug interactions
Rifamycins affect the ARV classes differentially and may compromise
the effectiveness of ART. But because of the importance of rifamycins
in TB treatment, they are only replaced if there is an absolute
contraindication. No clinically significant interactions are expected
between ARVs with INH, EMB or PZA.
•
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
There are no clinically significant interactions between NRTIs with
either RIF or RFB.8 However, there is limited evidence on the safety
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
of tenofovir alafenamide when used in combination with rifampicin and
hence they should be used with caution. Tenofovir alafenamide should
not be combined with rifabutin and rifapentine until more evidence is
available.
•
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
i.
Efavirenz (EFV) and Nevirapine (NVP)
Two meta-analyses comparing EFV (600 mg daily) and NVP (200 mg
twice daily) in patients on RIF-based anti-TB treatment showed no
significant difference in mortality.115 - 116, level I
In the first meta-analysis, there was also no significant difference in
virological success, progression to AIDS and discontinuation rate.115, level I
In the second meta-analysis, there was no significant difference in TB
treatment outcomes. However, the EFV group was superior to NVP
with:116, level I
 better virological response in terms of plasma viral load <400
copies/ml at the end of follow-up (RR=1.10, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.17)
but not for plasma viral load <50 copies/ml.
 lower risk of ART discontinuation due to adverse events
(RR=0.43, 95% CI 0.23 to 0.81).
The primary papers used in these meta-analyses were of mixed quality.
Recommendation 26
• Efavirenz is the preferred non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor when combined with rifampicin-based anti-tuberculosis
regimen.
•
Protease inhibitors
RIF-based anti-TB regimen should not be used with PI-based ART.8; 31
RFB 150 mg once daily is preferred in PLHIV on a PI-based ART.31
Recommendation 27
• For HIV-tuberculosis co-infected patients on a protease inhibitorbased antiretroviral therapy, rifabutin should be used instead of
rifampicin.
•
Integrase strand transfer inhibitors
i.
Raltegravir
A recent large RCT on HIV-TB co-infected adults who were receiving
RIF-based anti-TB treatment failed to show non-inferiority of raltegravir
(RAL) 400 mg twice daily compared with EFV 600 mg once daily.117, level I
The recommended dose of RAL when co-administered with RIF is 800
mg twice daily.118
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
ii.
Dolutegravir
A network meta-analysis of nine very low to moderate quality studies
showed better outcomes for DTG relative to EFV in HIV-TB co-infected
patients on RIF-based anti-TB treatment, in terms of:119, level I
 viral suppression at 4 weeks (OR=6.52, 95% CrI 2.44 to 17.40)
and at 12 weeks (OR=2.98, 95% CrI 1.27 to 6.99).
 increase in CD4 cell count at 24 weeks (mean change=53.25,
95% CrI 15.06 to 89.30).
In the same network meta-analysis, DTG was comparable to EFV,
NVP and RAL in terms of tolerability. DTG was also safer than EFV in
treatment-emergent ADR (OR=0.29, 95% CrI 0.08 to 0.89). In terms of
neuropsychiatric ADRs, the two drugs were comparable.119, level I
In an RCT with 113 participants, TB-associated IRIS was uncommon in
both DTG and EFV groups, with no discontinuation of treatment due to
it. DTG trough concentrations were similar between 50 mg twice daily
(with anti-TB) and 50 mg once daily (without anti-TB).120, level I
In patients receiving INSTI-based ART, rifabutin-based anti-TB
treatment may be used without adjusting INSTI dose.118
Recommendation 28
• In patients on rifampicin-based anti-tuberculosis treatment:
 the dose of raltegravir should be increased to 800 mg twice daily.
 the dose of dolutegravir should be increased to 50 mg twice daily.
• Alternatively, rifampicin may be substituted with rifabutin without
increasing the dose of the integrase strand transfer inhibitors.
Refer to Appendix 15 which summarises important DDI between ART
and rifamycins.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
5. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of TB should be guided by an evidence-based
approach, in order to provide quality care to the TB patients. Several
factors may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
5.1. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitating factors for application of the recommendations in
the CPG include:
• the regular TB training activities conducted at state level
• an MoH CPG web site that is well known and easily accessible
• the widely available basic microscopic tests and radiology
services for TB
• the availability of Xpert Ultra in almost all states and even some
health clinics in Malaysia
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• the inadequacy in frequency, breadth and depth of the current TB
training programme, particularly on TB in children
• the lack of awareness and knowledge on LTBI among the
healthcare providers and the public
• the lack of healthcare facilities and human resources in remote or
high TB burden areas for TB control and management
• the unavailability of rifapentine at present in Malaysia
5.2. Potential Resource Implications
The recommendations in this CPG may require additional resources in
terms of budget, healthcare infrastructures and human resources for
their successful implementation as discussed below.
Although Xpert Ultra and radiological services for diagnosis of TB are
available throughout the country, they are concentrated in hospitals and
major health clinics. Other more specialised laboratory test like the ADA
test is currently available only in the Sabah Public Health Laboratory.
In order to diagnose TB early and prevent TB transmission, these
diagnostic tests need to be expanded to more healthcare centres.
In terms of accuracy for the diagnosis of LTBI, IGRA is more specific
than TST. However, it is not widely available, and testing can only
be done by appointment. This is because the test is costly and the
specimens need to be sent to reference laboratories for testing. At
present, IGRA is recommended for testing only once in adult contacts
of TB due to financial constraints.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Several drug formulations which are not currently in the national
formulary need to be procured. These include child-friendly FDCs for
the treatment of active TB; syrup INH (in health clinics) and RPT for
LTBI treatment. These formulations are vital in ensuring treatment
adherence.
The nationwide expansion of the programmatic management of LTBI
since 2020 needs a strong surveillance system. Creation of dedicated
TB teams for health clinics in high TB burden areas and the development
of a web-based LTBI surveillance should be considered to facilitate the
smooth running of the programme.
Online training modules on active TB and LTBI treatment need to be
developed. The availability of such modules will rapidly increase the
number of health care providers trained and improve the outreach of the
training programme. This will enhance health care provider knowledge
and skills in TB management.
Policy/decision makers should take the above issues into consideration
when planning, implementing, monitoring and reviewing TB control
activities.
5.3. Clinical Audit Indicators
Several MoH key performance indexes on TB management may serve
as clinical audit indicators for the CPG. These clinical audit indicators
are:
Target TB treatment success rate ≥ 90%
Target TB mortality rate ≤5 in 100,000 population
Target LTBI treatment coverage for priority groups ≥ 90%
TB treatment
success rate
=
X 100%
Number of registered TB cases (all
forms) in the same year
Number of successfully treated TB
cases in a year
TB mortality
rate
=
X 100,000
Estimated mid-year population
in the same year
Number of TB deaths in a year
LTBI treatment
coverage
for each of the
three priority
groups*
=
X 100%
Number of people in each priority
groups eligible for LTBI treatment in the
same year
Number of people in each priority groups
enrolled on LTBI treatment in a year
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
*1. People newly enrolled in HIV care; 2. Children aged <5 years who
are household contacts of people with bacteriologically confirmed PTB;
3. People aged ≥5 years who are household contacts of people with
bacteriologically confirmed PTB
Implementation strategies for the CPG, including the launching of
the CPG; Quick Reference and Training Module, will be developed
following the approval of the CPG by the MoH.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report 2020. Geneva: WHO;
2020.
2.
World Health Organization. The End TB Strategy. Geneva: WHO; 2015.
3.
Tuberculosis & Leprosy Sector, Disease Control Division. National Tuberculosis
Prevention and Control Programme Achievement (2020). Putrajaya: MoH; 2020.
(Unpublished document)
4.
Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Global AIDS Monitoring 2020 Malaysia HIV/AIDS
Progress Report. Putrajaya: Disease Control Division, MoH; 2020.
5.
Rajendran MR, Ahmad Zaki R, Abu Bakar Z, et al. Prevalence of multidrug
resistant tuberculosis among TB patients in Malaysia. 2020. (Unpublished
document)
6.
World Health Organization. Tuberculosis Profile: Malaysia. [Available at: https://
worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/tb_profiles/?_inputs_&entity_type=%22country%2
2&lan=%22EN%22&iso2=%22MY%22]
7.
Ministry of Health, Malaysia. National Strategic Plan for Tuberculosis Control
(2016-2020). Putrajaya: Disease Control Division, MoH; 2018.
8.
Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (3rd Edition).
Putrajaya: MoH; 2012.
9.
World Health Organization. WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis:
Module 3: diagnosis – rapid diagnostics for tuberculosis detection. Geneva:
WHO; 2021.
10. Broger T, Nicol MP, Sigal GB, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 3 urine
lipoarabinomannan tuberculosis assays in HIV-negative outpatients. J Clin
Invest. 2020;130(11):5756-64.
11. Bjerrum S, Broger T, Székely R, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of a novel and rapid
lipoarabinomannan test for diagnosing tuberculosis among people with human
immunodeficiency virus. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2020;7(1):ofz530.
12. Kerkhoff AD, Sossen B, Schutz C, et al. Diagnostic sensitivity of SILVAMP TBLAM (FujiLAM) point-of-care urine assay for extra-pulmonary tuberculosis in
people living with HIV. Eur Respir J. 2020;55(2).
13. Nahid P, Dorman SE, Alipanah N, et al. Official American Thoracic Society/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society
of America Clinical Practice Guidelines: Treatment of Drug-Susceptible
Tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(7):e147-e95.
14. Grace AG, Mittal A, Jain S, et al. Shortened treatment regimens versus the
standard regimen for drug-sensitive pulmonary tuberculosis. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2019;12(12):CD012918.
15. Dorman SE, Nahid P, Kurbatova EV, et al. Four-month rifapentine regimens with
or without moxifloxacin for tuberculosis. N Engl J Med. 2021;384(18):1705-18.
16. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Tuberculosis (NG 33). London:
NICE; 2019.
17. World Health Organization. Guidelines for treatment of drug-susceptible
tuberculosis and patient care, 2017 update. Geneva: WHO; 2017.
18. Gallardo CR, Rigau Comas D, Valderrama Rodríguez A, et al. Fixed-dose
combinations of drugs versus single-drug formulations for treating pulmonary
tuberculosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;2016(5):CD009913.
19. Albanna AS, Smith BM, Cowan D, et al. Fixed-dose combination antituberculosis
therapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Respir J. 2013;42(3):72132.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
20. Johnston JC, Campbell JR, Menzies D. Effect of intermittency on treatment
outcomes in pulmonary tuberculosis: an updated systematic review and metaanalysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(9):1211-20.
21. World Health Organization. Chest radiography in tuberculosis detection.
Summary of current WHO recommendations and guidance on programmatic
approaches. Geneva: WHO; 2016
22. Nguyen TBP, Nguyen TA, Luu BK, et al. A comparison of digital chest radiography
and Xpert(®) MTB/RIF in active case finding for tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung
Dis. 2020;24(9):934-40.
23. Chakravorty S, Simmons AM, Rowneki M, et al. The new Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra:
improving detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and resistance to rifampin in
an assay suitable for point-of-care testing. mBio. 2017;8(4).
24. Zifodya JS, Kreniske JS, Schiller I, et al. Xpert Ultra versus Xpert MTB/RIF for
pulmonary tuberculosis and rifampicin resistance in adults with presumptive
pulmonary tuberculosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;2:CD009593.
25. World Health Organization. The use of loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(TB-LAMP) for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis: policy guidance.
Geneva: WHO; 2016.
26. Shete PB, Farr K, Strnad L, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of TB-LAMP for
pulmonary tuberculosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis.
2019;19(1):268.
27. Kohli M, Schiller I, Dendukuri N, et al. Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra and Xpert MTB/
RIF assays for extrapulmonary tuberculosis and rifampicin resistance in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;1(1):CD012768.
28. Makeshkumar V, Madhavan R, Narayanan S. Polymerase chain reaction
targeting insertion sequence for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
Indian J Med Res. 2014;139(1):161-6.
29. Huan N-C, Khor IS, Ramarmuty HY, et al. Optimising the utility of pleural
fluid adenosine deaminase for the diagnosis of tuberculous pleural effusion.
Proceedings of Singapore Healthcare. 2021;30(4):271-278.
30. Meldau R, Randall P, Pooran A, et al. Same-day tools, including Xpert Ultra and
IRISA-TB, for rapid diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis: a prospective observational
study. J Clin Microbiol. 2019;57(9).
31. World Health Organization. Management of Tuberculosis Fourth Edition.
Geneva: WHO; 2010.
32. Nene AM, Patil S, Kathare AP, et al. Six versus 12 months of anti tubercular
therapy in patients with biopsy proven spinal tuberculosis: a single center, open
labeled, prospective randomized clinical trial-a pilot study. Spine. 2019;44(1):e1e6.
33. Rizvi I, Malhotra HS, Garg RK, et al. Fluoroquinolones in the management
of tuberculous meningitis: Systematic review and meta-analysis. J Infect.
2018;77(4):261-75.
34. Prasad K, Singh MB, Ryan H. Corticosteroids for managing tuberculous
meningitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;4(4):CD002244.
35. Paliwal VK, Das A, Anand S, et al. Intravenous steroid days and predictors of
early oral steroid administration in tuberculous meningitis: a retrospective study.
Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2019;101(5):1083-6.
36. Ryan H, Yoo J, Darsini P. Corticosteroids for tuberculous pleurisy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2017;3(3):CD001876.
37. Bunkar ML, Agnihotri SP, Gupta PR, et al. Add-on prednisolone in the management
of cervical lymph node tuberculosis. Indian J Tuberc. 2016;63(2):96-9.
38. Wiysonge CS, Ntsekhe M, Thabane L, et al. Interventions for treating tuberculous
pericarditis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;9(9):CD000526.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
39. Theron G, Venter R, Smith L, et al. False-positive Xpert MTB/RIF results in
retested patients with previous tuberculosis: frequency, profile, and prospective
clinical outcomes. J Clin Microbiol. 2018;56(3).
40. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis (1st
Edition). Putrajaya: MoH; 2016.
41. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) - Rifampin [Internet]. National
Library of Medicine (US). [Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK501348/?report=reader]
42. Saito N, Yoshii Y, Kaneko Y, et al. Impact of renal function-based antituberculosis drug dosage adjustment on efficacy and safety outcomes in
pulmonary tuberculosis complicated with chronic kidney disease. BMC Infect
Dis. 2019;19(1):374.
43. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Sistem Maklumat Tibi Kementerian Kesihatan
Malaysia. [Available at: https://mytb.moh.gov.my]
44. Sterling TR, Pham PA, Chaisson RE. HIV infection-related tuberculosis: clinical
manifestations and treatment. Clin Infect Dis. 2010;50 Suppl 3:S223-30.
45. World Health Organization. Latent tuberculosis infection: updated and
consolidated guidelines for programmatic management. Geneva: WHO; 2018.
46. Drain PK, Gardiner J, Hannah H, et al. Guidance for studies evaluating the
accuracy of biomarker-based nonsputum tests to diagnose tuberculosis. J Infect
Dis. 2019;220(220 Suppl 3):S108-s15.
47. World Health Organization. Lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LFLAM) for the diagnosis of active tuberculosis in people living with HIV. Policy
update (2019). Geneva: WHO; 2019.
48. Yan S, Chen L, Wu W, et al. Early versus delayed antiretroviral therapy for HIV
and tuberculosis co-infected patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. PLoS One. 2015;10(5):e0127645.
49. Chelkeba L, Fekadu G, Tesfaye G, et al. Effects of time of initiation of antiretroviral
therapy in the treatment of patients with HIV/TB co-infection: A systemic review
and meta-analysis. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2020;55:148-58.
50. Schmaltz CAS, Demitto FO, Sant’Anna FM, et al. Tuberculosis-HIV treatment
with rifampicin or rifabutin: are the outcomes different? Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz.
2019;114:e180420.
51. Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents with HIV. Guidelines
for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-infected
Adults and Adolescents: Recommendations from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, and the HIV Medicine
Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America; .2020. [Available at:
http://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/adult_oi.pdf]
52. Bracchi M, van Halsema C, Post F, et al. British HIV Association guidelines for the
management of tuberculosis in adults living with HIV 2019. 2019;20(S6):s2-s83.
53. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Malaysian Consensus Guidelines on Antiretroviral
Therapy 2017. The Malaysian Society for HIV Medicine; 2017.
54. World Health Organization. WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis:
Tuberculosis preventive treatment: Module 1: Prevention. Geneva: WHO; 2020.
55. Graham SM, Cuevas LE, Jean-Philippe P, et al. Clinical case definitions for
classification of intrathoracic tuberculosis in children: An update. Clin Infect Dis.
2015;61Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S179-87.
56. Zar HJ, Workman LJ, Prins M, et al. Tuberculosis diagnosis in children using
Xpert Ultra on different respiratory specimens. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2019;200(12):1531-8.
57. Kay AW, González Fernández L, Takwoingi Y, et al. Xpert MTB/RIF and Xpert
MTB/RIF Ultra assays for active tuberculosis and rifampicin resistance in
children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;8(8):CD013359.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
58. Çakır E, Özdemir A, Daşkaya H, et al. The value of nasopharyngeal aspirate,
gastric aspirate and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in the diagnosis of childhood
tuberculosis. Turk J Pediatr. 2018;60(1):10-3.
59. Hanrahan CF, Dansey H, Mutunga L, et al. Diagnostic strategies for childhood
tuberculosis in the context of primary care in a high burden setting: the value of
alternative sampling methods. Paediatr Int Child Health. 2019;39(2):88-94.
60. Nicol MP, Schumacher SG, Workman L, et al. Accuracy of a novel urine
test, Fujifilm SILVAMP tuberculosis lipoarabinomannan, for the diagnosis of
pulmonary tuberculosis in children. Clin Infect Dis. 2021;72(9):e280-e8.
61. Nkereuwem E, Togun T, Gomez MP, et al. Comparing accuracy of
lipoarabinomannan urine tests for diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in
children from four African countries: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Infect Dis.
2021;21(3):376-84.
62. Thee S, Seddon JA, Donald PR, et al. Pharmacokinetics of isoniazid,
rifampin, and pyrazinamide in children younger than two years of age with
tuberculosis: evidence for implementation of revised World Health Organization
recommendations. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011;55(12):5560-7.
63. Donald PR. Antituberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity in children. Pediatr
Rep. 2011;3(2):e16.
64. Donald PR, Maher D, Maritz JS, et al. Ethambutol dosage for the treatment
of children: literature review and recommendations. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis.
2006;10(12):1318-30.
65. World Health Organization. Fixed-dose combinations for the treatment of TB in
children. WHO; 2018. [Available at: https://www.who.int/tb/FDC_Factsheet.pdf]
66. Goraya JS, Virdi VS. Bacille Calmette-Guérin lymphadenitis. Postgrad Med J.
2002;78(920):327-9.
67. Cuello-García CA, Pérez-Gaxiola G, Jiménez Gutiérrez C. Treating BCG-induced
disease in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2013(1):CD008300.
68. Müller AM, Osório CS, Silva DR, et al. Interventions to improve adherence to
tuberculosis treatment: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Tuberc Lung
Dis. 2018;22(7):731-40.
69. World Health Organization. WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis:
Module 4: Treatment - Drug-resistant tuberculosis treatment. Geneva: WHO;
2020.
70. Story A, Aldridge RW, Smith CM, et al. Smartphone-enabled video-observed
versus directly observed treatment for tuberculosis: a multicentre, analystblinded, randomised, controlled superiority trial. Lancet. 2019;393(10177):121624.
71. Houben RM, Dodd PJ. The global burden of latent tuberculosis infection: a reestimation using mathematical modelling. PLoS Med. 2016;13(10):e1002152.
72. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ, et al. Screening for latent
tuberculosis infection in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2016;316(9):962-9.
73. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Manual Sistem Maklumat Tibi Kebangsaan
(Semakan 2018). Putrajaya: Disease Control Division, MoH; 2019.
74. Jones-López EC, Acuña-Villaorduña C, Ssebidandi M, et al. Cough aerosols of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the prediction of incident tuberculosis disease in
household contacts. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(1):10-20.
75. Braganza Menezes D, Menezes B, Dedicoat M. Contact tracing strategies in
household and congregate environments to identify cases of tuberculosis
in low- and moderate-incidence populations. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2019;8(8):CD013077.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
76. Ai JW, Ruan QL, Liu QH, et al. Updates on the risk factors for latent tuberculosis
reactivation and their managements. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2016;5(2):e10.
77. Mazurek GH, Jereb J, Vernon A, et al. Updated guidelines for using Interferon
Gamma Release Assays to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection - United
States, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59(Rr-5):1-25.
78. Lewinsohn DM, Leonard MK, LoBue PA, et al. Official American Thoracic
Society/Infectious Diseases Society of America/Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention Clinical Practice Guidelines: Diagnosis of Tuberculosis in Adults and
Children. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(2):111-5.
79. Zellweger JP, Sotgiu G, Corradi M, et al. The diagnosis of latent tuberculosis
infection (LTBI): currently available tests, future developments, and perspectives
to eliminate tuberculosis (TB). Med Lav. 2020;111(3):170-83.
80. Zhou G, Luo Q, Luo S, et al. Interferon-γ release assays or tuberculin skin test
for detection and management of latent tuberculosis infection: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;20(12):1457-69.
81. Lee S, Lee JE, Kang JS, et al. Long-term performance of the IGRA to predict and
prevent active tuberculosis development in HIV-infected patients. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis. 2019;23(4):422-7.
82. Romli EZ, Sabirin J. Programmatic Management of Latent Tuberculosis Infection.
Putrajaya: Ministry of Health, Malaysia; 2019.
83. Menzies D, Adjobimey M, Ruslami R, et al. Four months of rifampin or nine months
of isoniazid for latent tuberculosis in adults. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(5):440-53.
84. Macaraig MM, Jalees M, Lam C, et al. Improved treatment completion with
shorter treatment regimens for latent tuberculous infection. Int J Tuberc Lung
Dis. 2018;22(11):1344-9.
85. Swindells S, Ramchandani R, Gupta A, et al. One month of rifapentine plus
isoniazid to prevent HIV-related tuberculosis. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(11):100111.
86. Hamada Y, Ford N, Schenkel K, et al. Three-month weekly rifapentine plus
isoniazid for tuberculosis preventive treatment: a systematic review. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis. 2018;22(12):1422-8.
87. Cruz AT, Starke JR. Pediatric tuberculosis. Pediatr Rev. 2010;31(1):13-25.
88. Martinez L, Cords O, Horsburgh CR, et al. The risk of tuberculosis in children
after close exposure: a systematic review and individual-participant metaanalysis. Lancet. 2020;395(10228):973-84.
89. Ahmed A, Feng PI, Gaensbauer JT, et al. Interferon-γ release assays in children
<15 years of age. Pediatrics. 2020;145(1).
90. Soler-Garcia A, Gamell A, Santiago B, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of QuantiFERONTB Gold Plus Assays in children and adolescents with tuberculosis disease. J
Pediatr. 2020;223:212-5.e1.
91. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Red Book
(2018) Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 31st Edition. Itasca, IL:
AAP; 2018.
92. Starke JR. Tuberculin skin test versus the interferon-γ release assays: out with
the old, in with the new. Pediatrics. 2020;145(1).
93. Saiman L, Colson P. Targeted tuberculin skin testing and treatment of latent
tuberculosis infection in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114:1175201.
94. Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection.
American Thoracic Society. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2000;49(RR-6):1-51.
95. Starke JR. Interferon-γ release assays for diagnosis of tuberculosis infection and
disease in children. Pediatrics. 2014;134(6):e1763-73.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
96. Grant AD, Charalambous S, Fielding KL, et al. Effect of routine isoniazid
preventive therapy on tuberculosis incidence among HIV-infected men in
South Africa: a novel randomized incremental recruitment study. JAMA.
2005;293(22):2719-25.
97. Assefa Y, Assefa Y, Woldeyohannes S, et al. 3-month daily rifampicin and
isoniazid compared to 6- or 9-month isoniazid for treating latent tuberculosis
infection in children and adolescents less than 15 years of age: an updated
systematic review. Eur Respir J. 2018;52(1).
98. Diallo T, Adjobimey M, Ruslami R, et al. Safety and side effects of rifampin
versus isoniazid in children. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(5):454-63.
99. Villarino ME, Scott NA, Weis SE, et al. Treatment for preventing tuberculosis
in children and adolescents: a randomized clinical trial of a 3-month, 12dose regimen of a combination of rifapentine and isoniazid. JAMA Pediatr.
2015;169(3):247-55.
100. Gaensbauer J, Aiona K, Haas M, et al. Better completion of pediatric latent
tuberculosis treatment using 4 months of rifampin in a US-based tuberculosis
clinic. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2018;37(3):224-8.
101. Tostmann A, Boeree MJ, Aarnoutse RE, et al. Antituberculosis druginduced hepatotoxicity: concise up-to-date review. J Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2008;23(2):192-202.
102. World Health Organization. The use of the WHO-UMC system for standardised
case causality assessment. Geneva: WHO; 2013. [Available at: http://www.who.
int/publications/m/item/WHO-causality-assessment]
103. Duong TA, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, et al. Severe cutaneous adverse
reactions to drugs. Lancet. 2017;390(10106):1996-2011.
104. Saukkonen JJ, Cohn DL, Jasmer RM, et al. An official ATS statement:
hepatotoxicity of antituberculosis therapy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2006;174(8):935-52.
105. Aithal GP, Watkins PB, Andrade RJ, et al. Case definition and phenotype
standardization in drug-induced liver injury. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011;89(6):80615.
106. Ariza A, Mayorga C, Bogas G, et al. Advances and novel developments in drug
hypersensitivity diagnosis. Allergy. 2020;75(12):3112-23.
107. Aberer W, Bircher A, Romano A, et al. Drug provocation testing in the diagnosis of
drug hypersensitivity reactions: general considerations. Allergy. 2003;58(9):85463.
108. Siripassorn K, Ruxrungtham K, Manosuthi W. Successful drug desensitization
in patients with delayed-type allergic reactions to anti-tuberculosis drugs. Int J
Infect Dis. 2018;68:61-8.
109. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (Second Edition).
Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2002.
110. Jindani A, Nunn AJ, Enarson DA. Two 8-month regimens of chemotherapy for
treatment of newly diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis: international multicentre
randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;364(9441):1244-51.
111. World Health Organization. Treatment of Tuberculosis: Guidelines for National
Programmes Third Edition. Geneva: WHO; 2003.
112. Pease C, Hutton B, Yazdi F, et al. A systematic review of adverse events of
rifapentine and isoniazid compared to other treatments for latent tuberculosis
infection. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2018;27(6):557-66.
113. Scheife RT, Hines LE, Boyce RD, et al. Consensus recommendations for
systematic evaluation of drug-drug interaction evidence for clinical decision
support. Drug Saf. 2015;38(2):197-206.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
114. Gonzaga de Andrade Santos TN, Mendonça da Cruz Macieira G, Cardoso
Sodré Alves BM, et al. Prevalence of clinically manifested drug interactions
in hospitalized patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2020;15(7):e0235353.
115. Mbuagbaw L, Mursleen S, Irlam JH, et al. Efavirenz or nevirapine in three-drug
combination therapy with two nucleoside or nucleotide-reverse transcriptase
inhibitors for initial treatment of HIV infection in antiretroviral-naïve individuals.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;12(12):CD004246.
116. Jiang HY, Zhang MN, Chen HJ, et al. Nevirapine versus efavirenz for patients
co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Int J Infect Dis. 2014;25:130-5.
117. De Castro N, Marcy O, Chazallon C, et al. Standard dose raltegravir or efavirenzbased antiretroviral treatment for patients co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis
(ANRS 12 300 Reflate TB 2): an open-label, non-inferiority, randomised, phase
3 trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2021;21(6):813-22.
118. Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for
the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in Adults and Adolescents with HIV. Department
of Health and Human Services. [Available at: http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/
ContentFiles/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf]
119. Kanters S, Vitoria M, Zoratti M, et al. Comparative efficacy, tolerability and safety
of dolutegravir and efavirenz 400mg among antiretroviral therapies for firstline HIV treatment: A systematic literature review and network meta-analysis.
EClinicalMedicine. 2020;28:100573.
120. Dooley KE, Kaplan R, Mwelase N, et al. Dolutegravir-based antiretroviral
therapy for patients coinfected with tuberculosis and human immunodeficiency
virus: a multicenter, noncomparative, open-label, randomized trial. Clin Infect.
2020;70(4):549-56.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: Are fixed-dose anti-TB combinations safer and
more effective than separate drug formulations in:
• PTB
1. TUBERCULOSIS, PULMONARY/ (73851)
2. pulmonary tuberculos*.tw. (32391)
3. ptb.tw. (5261)
4. 1 or 2 or 3 (83602)
5. ANTITUBERCULAR AGENTS/ (35943)
6. ((antitubercular or tuberculostatic) adj1 (drug* or agent*)).tw. (2236)
7. Anti tb.tw. (3359)
8. Antitb.tw. (33)
9. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 (38274)
10. DRUG COMBINATIONS/ (71218)
11. (drug adj1 combination*).tw. (13525)
12. fdc.tw. (2544)
13. Fixed-dose combination*.tw. (3226)
14. 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 (86654)
15. Single drug formulation*.tw. (28)
16. Separate drug*.tw. (186)
17. Sdf.tw. (6414)
18. separate drug regim*.tw. (1)
19. standard drug treatment*.tw. (87)
20. 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 (6714)
21. 14 and 20 (80)
22. 4 and 9 and 21 (10)
23. limit 22 to (english language and yr=”2012 -Current”) (5)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Diagnosis
5.1
How accurate are the following diagnostic tools for the diagnosis
of PTB?
• Xpert MTB/RIF, Xpert Ultra
• CXR vs Xpert MTB/RIF, Xpert Ultra in smear negative PTB
• LF-LAM
• TB LAMP
5.2
How accurate are the following diagnostic tools for the diagnosis
of EPTB?
• Xpert MTB/RIF, Xpert Ultra
• LF-LAM
• ADA vs Xpert MTB/RIF for pleural TB
• CNS Imaging
5.3
What is the most accurate TST cut-off value for predicting
progression from latent to active TB?
5.4
Is IGRA more accurate than TST in predicting progression of
latent to active TB?
Treatment
5.5
Are there safer and more effective alternative anti-TB regimens
than the current standard regimen in:
• PTB
• EPTB (TB meningitis/TB LN/pleural TB/TB spine)
• LTBI (adult & children/HIV adults & children)
5.6
Are fixed-dose anti-TB combinations safer and more effective
than separate drug formulations in: (Standard dose vs higher
dose)
• PTB
• EPTB
5.7
Is intermittent anti-TB dosing safer and more effective than daily
dosing in PTB?
5.8
What is the most effective and safe corticosteroids dosing
regimen in EPTB?
5.9
Is early initiation of ART safer and more effective than late
initiation of ART in HIV and TB co-infection?
5.10 What are the safe and effective ARTs in HIV and TB co-infection?
5.11 What are the effective interventions to promote adherence to TB
treatment?
• DOTs/modified DOTs vs SAT
5.12 How accurate are diagnostic tests compared with drug rechallenge in diagnosing anti-TB ADR?
5.13 Which alternative anti-TB regimens are safe and effective in
patients with ADR to isoniazid and/or rifampicin?
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 3
PROCEDURE FOR SPUTUM INDUCTION FOR
CHILDREN AND ADULTS
1. Patients should rinse their mouth and gargle with boiled water.
2. Fill the nebuliser with 3% saline (5 ml for children, 20 - 30 ml for
adults). Use an ultrasonic nebuliser if available.
3. Patients should sit upright. Apply the nebuliser mask or mouthpiece
with a nose clip before turning on the nebuliser.
4. Inhale and exhale through the nebuliser mask or mouthpiece.
5. Gentle chest physiotherapy may be carried out during the
procedure.
6. The procedure should be stopped when:
• the patient has produced 1 - 2 ml of sputum for each test,
• 15 minutes of nebulisation is reached, or
• the patient develops dyspnoea, chest tightness or wheeze
7. Transport the specimen in a cool box to the laboratory for processing
within 4 hours.
8. If the specimens need to be kept >4 hours, place them in a
refrigerator at 4 - 8 °C until time for transportation.
9. The specimen should be labelled as “induced-sputum”.
The procedure should be done cautiously in patients with asthma
or poor lung function (FEV1 <1 L) as sputum induction may induce
bronchospasm. Patients with asthma should be premedicated with
inhaled salbutamol to prevent asthma exacerbation.
Drugs and equipment for resuscitation should be available onsite.
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (Third Edition).
Putrajaya MoH; 2012.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 4
SPECIMEN COLLECTION FOR DIAGNOSIS OF TUBERCULOSIS
Further information can be obtained from Makmal Kesihatan Awam Kebangsaan
website at: http://mkak.moh.gov.my/ms/
Adapted from:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. The National Public Health Laboratory Test Handbook
2018: 1st Edition. Sg Buloh: National Public Health Laboratory; 2018.
2. Kohli M, Schiller I, Dendukuri N, et al. Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra and Xpert MTB/RIF
assays for extrapulmonary tuberculosis and rifampicin resistance in adults. The
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2021;1(1):CD012768.
Type of TB
PTB
Quantity and
type of specimen
● 3 - 5 ml of
sputum
Recommended
TB tests
● AFB smear
● Mycobacterial culture (MGIT for
suspected drug-resistant TB and
recurrent TB)
● Xpert Ultra (when indicated)
● GenoType MTBDRplus Line Probe
Assay (when indicated)
Tuberculous
meningitis
● 1 - 5 ml CSF;
● tuberculoma
tissue biopsy
● Xpert Ultra
● Mycobacterial culture
● AFB smear (if Xpert Ultra is not available)
Bone or
joint TB
● 1 - 2 ml of joint fluid
or periarticular pus;
● periarticular tissue
biopsy;
● 3 - 5 ml of bone
marrow aspirate
● Xpert Ultra (joint fluid or tissue biopsy
only)
● Mycobacterial culture in MycoF blood
culture bottle
● HPE
Pleural TB
● 2 - 5 ml pleural
fluid;
● pleural tissue
biopsy
● Mycobacterial culture
● Xpert Ultra
● ADA
● HPE
Genitourinary
TB
● 50 ml of urine;
● tissue biopsy of
affected organs
● Xpert Ultra
● Mycobacterial culture
● AFB smear
● HPE
Pericardial TB
● 1 - 2 ml of
pericardial fluid;
● pericardial
tissue biopsy
● Xpert Ultra
● Mycobacterial culture
● AFB smear
● HPE
Peritoneal TB
● 1 - 2 ml ascitic
fluid;
● peritoneal tissue
biopsy
● Xpert Ultra
● Mycobacterial culture
● AFB smear
● HPE
Disseminated
(miliary) TB
● 5 ml of blood in
plain tube for
PCR;
● 5 ml of blood in
MycoF blood
culture bottle
● TB PCR
● Mycobacterial culture
● AFB smear
Lymph node
TB
● fine-needle
aspirate;
● lymph node
biopsy specimen;
● excised lymph
node
● Mycobacterial culture
● Xpert Ultra
● HPE
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Minimal
• Minimal
lesions
without
demonstrable cavitations and
confined to a small part of one
or both lungs. The total extent
of the lesions should not
exceed the volume of the lung
on one side which lies above
the second chondrosternal
junction and the spine of the
fourth or the body of the fifth
thoracic vertebrae.
Moderately Advanced
• One or both lungs may be
involved but the total extent of
the lesions should not exceed
the following limits:
i. disseminated
lesions of
minimal to moderate density
not exceeding the total
volume of one lung or the
equivalent in both lungs
ii. dense and confluence lesions
not exceeding one third of
the volume of one lung
iii. total diameter of cavitations,
if present, must be <4 cm.
Far Advanced
• Lesions are more extensive
than moderately advanced
APPENDIX 5
GRADING OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS SEVERITY BASED
ON CHEST RADIOGRAPH IN ADULTS
Adapted:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (Third Edition).
Putrajaya MoH; 2012.
2. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Practice Guidelines for the Control and Management
of Tuberculosis (Second Edition). MoH; 2002.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 6
FIRST-LINE ANTI-TUBERCULOSIS DRUG DOSAGE AND ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS
Dose range
(mg/kg/day)
Maximum
dose
(mg/day)
Maximum dose
(mg/day)
Dose range
(mg/kg/day)
Dose in renal impairment
Dose in renal
impairment:
CrCl <30 ml/min
or HD
Common adverse drug
reactions
Drug
Isoniazid
Rifampicin
Ethambutol
5 (4 - 6)
10 (8 - 12)
15 (15 - 20)
10 (7 - 15)
15 (10 - 20)
20 (15 - 25)
Skin rash, jaundice,
hepatitis, anorexia,
nausea, abdominal pain,
burning/numbness/
tingling sensation in
hands or feet
Skin rash, jaundice,
hepatitis, anorexia,
nausea, abdominal pain,
orange/red urine, flu
syndrome (fever, chills,
malaise, headache,
bone pain)
Visual impairment
300
600
1600
600
1000
No dose
adjustment
required
No dose
adjustment
required
20 - 25
mg/kg/dose
3 times/week
300
(200 mg/day if
CrCl < 10ml/min/
CAPD/HD/
HDF/High Flux)
No dose adjustment required
No dose adjustment needed till
CrCl <10 ml/min
CrCl <10
ml/min/CAPD/HD/HDF/High
Flux: 50 - 100% of normal dose
CAV/VVHD: Unknown drug
dialysability Dose as in normal
renal function
CrCl 10 - 20 ml/min/CAV/VVUD:
50% of normal dose
CrCl <10
ml/min/CAPD/HD/HDF/High Flux:
25% of normal dose. Give
4-6 hours before dialysis.
Adults
Children*
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
References:
1. Ashley C & Dunleavy A, Editors. The Renal Drug Handbook: The Ultimate Prescribing Guide for Renal Practitioners 5th Edition. Boca Raton: CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group; 2019.
2. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (3rd Edition). Putrajaya: MoH; 2012.
3. Nahid P, Dorman SE, Alipanah N, et al. Official American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of
America Clinical Practice Guidelines: Treatment of Drug-Susceptible Tuberculosis. Clinical infectious diseases: an official publication of the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. 2016;63(7):e147-e95.
4. Paediatric Formulary. UBQO Limited (Mobile Application Software).
5. Tomlin S & Kirk E, Editors. Guy’s and St. Thomas’, King’s College and University Lewisham Hospitals Paediatric Formulary 9th Edition (Revised Dec
2012). Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust; 2012.
Pyrazinamide
25 (20 - 30)
35 (30 - 40)
Skin rash, jaundice,
hepatitis, anorexia,
nausea,
abdominal pain, joint pain
2000
2000
25 - 35
mg/kg/dose
3 times/week
CrCl <10 ml/min: 50 - 100% of
normal dose
CAPD: Drug not dialysed
Dose as for CrCl < 10 ml/min
HD: 50 - 100% dialysed
Dose as for CrCl <10 ml/min or
25 - 30 mg/kg post dialysis
HDF/High Flux: Drug dialysed
Dose as for CrCl <10 ml/min or
25 - 30 mg/kg post dialysis
CAV/VVHD: Unknown drug
dialysability
Dose as in normal renal function
CrCl=creatinine clearance, HD=haemodialysis, CAPD=continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, HDF=haemodiafiltration, High Flux=high-flux haemodialysis,
CAV/VVHD= CAVHD(continuous arteriovenous haemodialysis)/CVVHD(continuous veno-venous haemodialysis)
*For paediatric patients, anti-TB dose should be calculated based on measured body weight except in obese patients where ideal body weight should be used.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 7
TUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT OUTCOME DEFINITION
Source:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (Third Edition).
Putrajaya, MoH; 2012.
2. World Health Organization. Definitions and reporting framework for tuberculosis
- 2013 revision (Updated December 2014 and January 2020). Geneva: WHO;
2020.
Outcome
Definition
A PTB patient with bacteriologically confirmed TB
at the beginning of treatment who is smear- or
culture-negative in the last month of treatment and
on at least one previous occasion.
A TB patient who completed treatment without
evidence of failure but with no record to show that
sputum smear or culture results in the last month of
treatment and on at least one previous occasion
are negative, either because tests are not done or
because results are unavailable.
The sum of cured and treatment completed.
A TB patient who dies for any reason before
starting or during the course of treatment.
A TB patient whose sputum smear or culture is
positive at month 5 or later during treatment.
A TB patient who does not start treatment or whose
treatment is interrupted for two consecutive months
or more.
A patient who has been transferred to another
recording and reporting unit and for whom the
treatment outcome is not known.
A TB patient for whom no treatment outcome is
assigned. This includes case “transferred out” to
another treatment unit as well as case for whom
the treatment outcome is unknown to the reporting
unit.
Cured
Completed
treatment
Treatment success
Died
Treatment failed
Loss to follow-up
Transferred out
Not evaluated
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 8
CHEST RADIOGRAPH CHANGES FOR TUBERCULOSIS
IN CHILDREN
Fig. 1: Chest radiographs in a 5-year-old girl with primary tuberculous
disease. Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) views show a middle lobe
opacity (*) with right hilar lymphadenopathy ().
Fig. 2: Chest radiographs in a 1-year-old boy with primary tuberculous
disease and lymphadenopathy. Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) views
show hilar lymphadenopathy () on the right without ipsilateral lung
abnormality. A left retrocardiac opacity (*) is noted.
Source: Concepcion NDP, Laya BF, Andronikou S, et al. Standardized radiographic
interpretation of thoracic tuberculosis in children. Pediatr Radiol.
2017;47(10):1237-1248
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 9
PROCEDURE FOR GASTRIC ASPIRATION AND
NASOPHARYNGEAL ASPIRATION IN CHILDREN
Gastric Aspiration (Lavage)
Gastric aspiration should be performed on three consecutive mornings
for each patient. The child must be fasted for at least four hours (three
hours for infants) prior to the procedure. A child with a low platelet count
or bleeding tendency should not undergo the procedure.
Gastric aspiration is generally not an aerosol-generating procedure,
and can safely be performed at the child’s bedside or in a routine
procedure room.
1. Prepare the child and required equipment for nasogastric tube
insertion.
2. Attach a syringe to the nasogastric tube.
3. Aspirate 2 - 5 ml of gastric contents.
4. If no fluid is aspirated, instil 5 - 10 ml sterile water or normal saline
and repeat aspiration.
5. Transfer the gastric aspirate from the syringe into a sterile sputum
container.
Nasopharyngeal Aspiration
1. Fasting is not necessary prior to nasopharyngeal aspiration.
2. Position the child on his/her back or side. Restrain the child by
wrapping him/her in a piece of cloth.
3. Prepare the suction machine and mucous extractor (Picture 1).
4. Suction pressure used:
• <12 months old: 80 - 100 mmHg/10 - 13 kPa
• 1 - 5 years old: 100 - 120 mmHg/13 - 16 kPa
5. Measure the length of the suction tube by placing the end of the
tube at the external opening of the ear and extend it to the tip of the
nose (Picture 2). Mark the length on the tube.
6. Instil two drops of sterile saline into each of the child’s nostrils.
7. Without applying suction, insert the tube through the nostril until the
marked length is reached. (similar to performing a nasal suction)
8. Apply suction.
9. Using a rotating movement, collect respiratory secretion by slowly
pulling out the tube. Do not push in the tube forward when aspirating
10. Collection should be >1 ml.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Picture 1: Mucus extractor
Picture 2: Measuring correct
length of suction tube
Adapted:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Tuberculosis (Third Edition).
Putrajaya MoH; 2012
2. Universite de Bordeaux. TB Speed Nasopharyngeal Aspirate (NPA) Collection.
(Available at: http://www.tb-speed.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/TB-Speed_
SOP_NPA.pdf)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 10
PROCEDURE FOR TUBERCULIN SKIN TEST
As with other medical procedures, TST should be explained to the
patient and consent obtained verbally. Ensure that the correct patient
information is written or printed in the form. Follow the steps below
when performing the TST.
• Clean the area 2 - 4 inches below the elbow joint on
the ventral aspect of the forearm for injection.
• Make sure the area is free from scars or any
infection.
• Check the expiry date on the vial.
• Use a 1 cc syringe to draw 2 tuberculin units of
Purified Protein Derivative Statens Serum Institute
RT23 in 0.1 ml solution.
• Inject intradermally at 5° to 15° to the skin with the
bevel pointing upwards.
• A firm pale wheal about 6 - 10 mm in diameter
usually appears. If it does not, then repeat the test
at least two inches away from the original site.
• The skin test should be read 48 - 72 hours after
injection.
• Feel the edges of the induration (hard, dense,
raised area) and measure the longest diameter of
the induration perpendicular to the long axis of the
forearm.
• The erythema surrounding the induration should
not be measured.
• Reading should be recorded in millimetres.
• If there is no induration, record as 0 mm.
• The interpretation and cut-off values for different
populations is discussed in Subchapter 3.1 on
LTBI in Adults.
Adapted: Centre for Disease Control and Prevention. Mantoux Tuberculin SkinTesting
Products. (Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/tb/education/mantoux/pdf/
Mantoux_TB_Skin_Test.pdf)
Wheal
Area to measure
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 11
QUANTIFERON SPECIMEN COLLECTION AND HANDLING
As with other medical procedures, explain to the patient and obtain
verbal consent before drawing blood for a Quantiferon test. Ensure that
the correct patient information is written or printed in the labels and
form. Follow the steps below when drawing blood for a Quantiferon test.
Collect 1 ml of whole blood into each four QFTPlus blood collection tubes.
• The grey cap tube (Nil) serves as the negative
control and adjust for background levels of
IFN-γ.
• The green cap tube (TB1) and yellow cap tube
(TB2) assess the interferon gamma (IFN-γ)
response to TB-specific antigens.
• The purple cap tube (Mitogen) serves as a
positive control, which can be useful to indicate
the immune status of the person being tested
and that correct blood handling has occurred.
There are two options for collecting the sample
Option 1
Option 2
Blood collection
• Fill the Lithium heparin tube
with >5 ml of the patient’s
blood.
• Gently mix the specimen
by
inverting
the
tube
several times to dissolve
the heparin. Label the tube
appropriately including the
time of blood collection.
Transport to laboratory
• Transport tube to laboratory
at 22°C ± 5°C.
• Incubation of blood in QFTPlus tubes must be initiated
at the laboratory within 16
hours of blood collection.
Transfer blood to QFT-Plus
tubes in the laboratory.
• Gently invert the lithium
heparin tube again at the
laboratory.
• Transfer 1 ml into each
four QFT-Plus tubes (to the
centre of the black mark on
the side of the QFT-Plus
tube label). Replace the
tube caps securely and mix
as per QFT-Plus.
Draw blood directly into
QFT®-Plus blood collection
tubes.
Blood collection
• Label QFT-Plus
blood collection tubes
appropriately. Tubes
should be kept at room
temperature (17 - 25°C).
• Collect 1 ml into each
four QFT-Plus tubes (to
the centre of the black
mark on the side of the
QFT-Plus tube label).
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Source: QuantiFERON-TB Gold Plus (QFT-Plus) ELISA Package Insert. (Available
at: http://www.quantiferon.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/English_
QFTPlus_ELISA_R04_022016.pdf)
Replace the tube caps
securely and mix as
per QFT-Plus once the
tube appears to have
completed filling.
• The black mark on
the side of the tubes
indicates the validated
range of 0.8 to 1.2 ml.
• New sample needs to
be taken if blood level
is outside the indicator
mark.
Tube handling
• Immediately after filling
the tubes, invert them
10 times just firmly
enough to make sure the
entire inner surface of
the tube is coated with
blood. This will dissolve
antigens on tube walls.
Important: Overly vigorous
shaking may cause gel
disruption and could lead
to aberrant results.
Transport and incubation
• QFT-Plus tubes must
be transferred to a 37°C
± 1°C incubator within
16 hours of collection
(labelled as incubated).
OR
• Transport tubes to
the testing laboratory
at 22°C ± 5°C. Then
proceed with incubation
(labelled as not
incubated).
Blood should be
filled to the centre
of
black
mark
(indicated in green).
Invert the bottles
10 times to coat
bottle like below to
dissolve antigen on
tube walls
Shake 10x
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 12
PROPOSED LATENT TB INFECTION TREATMENT
OUTCOME DEFINITION
Outcome
Definition
An LTBI patient who has completed treatment.
An LTBI patient who dies for any reason during the
course of treatment.
An LTBI patient who has developed active TB
during
treatment
or
within
18
months
post-treatment.
An LTBI patient whose treatment is interrupted for
≥1 months.
A patient who has been transferred to another
recording and reporting unit and for whom the
treatment outcome is not known.
An LTBI patient whose LTBI treatment is stopped
prematurely.
An LTBI patient for whom no treatment outcome is
assigned. This includes a case “transferred out” to
another treatment unit as well as a case for whom
the treatment outcome is unknown to the reporting
unit.
Completed treatment
Died
Treatment failed
Loss to follow-up
Transferred out
Treatment
discontinued
Not evaluated
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 13
DRUGS WITH POTENTIAL INTERACTIONS INVOLVING RIFAMYCINS
Anti-infectives
Antimycobacterials/
antiprotozoals
Antimalarials
Hepatitis C direct-acting
antivirals
Clarithromycin
Rifamycins ↓ Clarithromycin,
Clarithromycin ↑ Rifamycins
Clinical relevance uncertain
Be careful when combining drugs
Moxifloxacin
RIF ↓ Moxifloxacin
Clinical relevance uncertain
Doxycycline
RIF, RPT ↓ Doxycycline
Clinical relevance uncertain
Caspofungin
Dapsone
RIF ↓ Caspofungin
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ hepatitis C
direct-acting antivirals
Avoid combination
Artemether/ Lumefantrine
Rifamycins ↓ Dapsone
Rifamycins ↓ Artemether/
Lumefantrine
RIF, RPT: Avoid combination
Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Voriconazole
RIF, RPT ↓ Fluconazole,
Fluconazole ↑ RFB
Rifamycins ↓ Itraconazole,
Itraconazole ↑ RFB
Rifamycins ↓ Voriconazole,
Voriconazole ↑ RFB
Be careful when combining drugs
Avoid combination
RIF, RFB: Avoid combination
RPT: Be careful when combining drugs
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Daclatasvir, Sofosbuvir
Glecaprevir/ Pibrentasvir,
Sofosbuvir/ Ledipasvir,
Sofosbuvir/ Velpatasvir
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Immunosuppressive
agents
Hormone therapy
Mycophenolate mofetil,
Mycophenolate sodium
RIF ↓ Mycophenolate mofetil,
Mycophenolate sodium
Avoid combination
Dexamethasone,
Fludrocortisone,
Hydrocortisone,
Methylprednisolone,
Prednisolone,
Triamcinolone
Rifamycins ↓ Dexamethasone,
Hydrocortisone,
Methylprednisolone,
Prednisolone
RIF ↓ Fludrocortisone,
Triamcinolone
Be careful when combining drugs
Cyclosporine, Everolimus,
Sirolimus, Tacrolimus
Rifamycins ↓ Cyclosporine,
Everolimus, Sirolimus, Tacrolimus
Be careful when combining drugs
Estrogens
Ethinyl estradiol, Estradiol,
Estriol
Rifamycins ↓ estrogens
Be careful when combining drugs
Alternative forms of contraception should
be used during and for four weeks after
completion of rifamycin therapy
Be careful when combining drugs
Alternative forms of contraception should
be used during and for four weeks after
completion of rifamycin therapy
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Progestogens
Cyproterone, Desogestrel,
Dienogest, Drospirenone,
Dydrogesterone, Ethisterone,
Etonogestrel, Gestodene,
Rifamycins ↓ progestogens
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Enzalutamide
Anticonvulsants
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Hydroxyprogesterone,
Levonorgestrel,
Medroxyprogesterone,
Megestrol, Norelgestromin,
Norethisterone, Norgestrel,
Progesterone
Enzalutamide
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine, Lamotrigine,
Phenytoin, Valproic acid
Antipsychotics
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ antipsychotics
Haloperidol, Quetiapine,
Risperidone
Antidepressants
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Mirtazapine
Mirtazapine
Barbiturates
Be careful when combining drugs
RPT ↓ Phenobarbitone
Phenobarbitone
Benzodiazepines
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ benzodiazepines
Diazepam, Midazolam,
Triazolam, Zolpidem
Opioid agonists
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Alfentanil, Codeine,
Fentanyl, Oxycodone
RIF ↓ Morphine
Alfentanil, Codeine, Fentanyl,
Morphine, Oxycodone,
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ Levothyroxine
Levothyroxine
RIF: Avoid combination
RFB, RPT: Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Tamoxifen
Tamoxifen
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Methadone
Methadone
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Warfarin
Warfarin
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ Enalapril
Enalapril
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ Losartan
Losartan
Antiplatelet agents
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF: Avoid combination
RFB, RPT: Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↑ Clopidogrel
Rifamycins ↓ Ticagrelor
Clopidogrel
Ticagrelor
Cardiovascular agents
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ calcium channel
blockers
Calcium channel blockers
Verapamil, Diltiazem,
Amlodipine, Felodipine,
Nifedipine
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ beta-blockers
Beta-blockers
Bisoprolol, Carvedilol,
Metoprolol, Propranolol
Avoid combination
RIF ↓ direct oral anticoagulants
Direct oral anticoagulants
Apixaban, Dabigatran,
Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban
Oral anticoagulants
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ Digoxin
Avoid combination
Rifamycins ↓ Ivabradine,
Ranolazine
Digoxin
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Propafenone
Propafenone
Ivabradine, Ranolazine
RIF: Avoid combination
RFB, RPT: Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Ceritinib, Crizotinib,
Ibrutinib, Nilotinib
Ceritinib, Crizotinib, Ibrutinib,
Nilotinib
Antihyperlipidemics
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ Atorvastatin, Simvastatin
Atorvastatin, Simvastatin
Proton pump inhibitors
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
Avoid combination
RIF ↓ Esomeprazole, Omeprazole
Esomeprazole, Omeprazole
Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Imatinib,
Osimertinib
Imatinib, Osimertinib
Methylxanthines
Be careful when combining drugs
RIF ↓ Aminophylline,
Theophylline
Aminophylline, Theophylline
Antiemetics
RIF: Avoid combination
RFB, RPT: Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Aprepitant
Aprepitant
Be careful when combining drugs
Avoid combination
RIF ↓ Afatinib
RIF ↓ Nintedanib
Afatinib
Nintedanib
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Abbreviations: INH=isoniazid, RIF=Rifampicin, RFB=rifabutin, RPT=rifapentine
Disclaimer:
The drugs and information listed above are not exhaustive. The suggestions above do not replace sound clinical judgement. Patients with complex medical
issues and DDI should be discussed with an expert before therapy modification.
Note:
Be careful when combining drugs = monitor the patient clinically and with laboratory tests, including therapeutic drug monitoring when appropriate. Modify
treatment if needed. Titrate drug dose according to clinical, laboratory or therapeutic drug monitoring.
Rifamycins = include RIF, RFB and RPT
↓ = reduces drug concentration
↑ = increases drug concentration
References:
1. Nahid P, Dorman SE, Alipanah N, et al. Official American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of
America Clinical Practice Guidelines: Treatment of Drug-Susceptible Tuberculosis. Clinical infectious diseases: an official publication of the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. 2016;63(7):e147-e95.
2. University of Liverpool HEP Drug Interactions Interaction Checker (Available at: https://www.hep-druginteractions.org/checker)
3. UpToDate – Lexicomp® Drug Interactions (Available at: http://uptodate.com/drug-interactions)
4. Sparkes T, Lemonovich TL. Interactions between anti-infective agents and immunosuppressants – Guidelines from the American Society of
Transplantation Infectious Diseases Community of Practice. Clin Transplant. 2019;33:e13510.
5. The Sanford Guide to Antimicrobial Therapy, copyright 1969-2019 by Antimicrobial Therapy, Inc.
6. The John Hopkins POC-IT ABX Guide, copyright 2000-2021, The John Hopkins University.
7. IBM Micromedex Drug Interaction (electronic version).
8. ClinicalInfo.HIV.gov. Significant Pharmacokinetic Interactions between Drugs Used to Treat or Prevent Opportunistic Infections (Available at: https://
clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/table/table-5-significant-pharmacokinetic-interactions-between-drugs-used-treat-or-prevent)
Cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Avoid combination
Rifamycins ↓ Abemaciclib
Abemaciclib
RIF: Avoid combination
RFB, RPT: Be careful when combining drugs
Rifamycins ↓ Palbociclib,
Ribociclib
Palbociclib, Ribociclib
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 14
DRUGS WITH POTENTIAL INTERACTIONS INVOLVING ISONIAZID
Azole antifungal agents
Rifamycins
Antipsychotics
Anti-Parkinsonian drugs
Analgesics
Oral anticoagulants
Antihyperlipidemics
Immunosuppressive agents
Anticonvulsants
Methylxanthines
Benzodiazepines
Category of drugs
Type of drugs
Interactions
Suggestions
Be careful when combining drugs
Be careful when combining drugs
Be careful when combining drugs
INH ↓ Itraconazole
Additive hepatotoxicity with INH
INH ↑ Clozapine
INH ↓ Levodopa
Additive hepatotoxicity with INH
INH ↑ Warfarin
INH ↑ Simvastatin
INH ↑ Sirolimus, Tacrolimus
INH ↑ Carbamazepine, Valproic
acid, Phenytoin
Carbamazepine ↑ INH
INH ↑ Aminophylline, Theophylline
INH ↑ Benzodiazepines
Itraconazole
RIF
Clozapine
Levodopa
Paracetamol
Warfarin
Simvastatin
Sirolimus, Tacrolimus
Carbamazepine (CBZ)
Valproic acid (VPA)
Phenytoin (PHT)
Aminophylline, Theophylline
Alprazolam, Diazepam,
Midazolam, Triazolam
Abbreviations: INH=isoniazid, RIF=rifampicin
Disclaimer:
The drugs and information listed above are not exhaustive. The suggestions above do not replace sound clinical judgement. Patients with complex medical
issues and DDI should be discussed with an expert before therapy modification.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Note:
Be careful when combining drugs = monitor the patient clinically and with laboratory tests, including therapeutic drug monitoring when appropriate. Modify
treatment if needed. Titrate drug dose according to clinical, laboratory or therapeutic drug monitoring.
↓ = reduces drug concentration
↑ = increases drug concentration
References:
1. Lexicomp Drug Interactions. UpToDate Inc. Accessed April 07, 2022. (Available at: http://uptodate.com/drug-interactions)
2. The Sanford Guide to Antimicrobial Therapy, copyright 1969-2019 by Antimicrobial Therapy, Inc.
3. The John Hopkins POC-IT ABX Guide, copyright 2000-2021, The John Hopkins University.
4. IBM Micromedex Drug Interaction (electronic version).
5. CLINICAL INFO.HIV.GOV. Significant Pharmacokinetic Interactions between Drugs Used to Treat or Prevent Opportunistic Infections (Available at:
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/table/table-5-significant-pharmacokinetic-interactions-between-drugs-used-treat-or-prevent)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
APPENDIX 15
ANTIRETROVIRAL AND RIFAMYCINS DRUG INTERACTIONS
Rifampicin
Rifabutin
Once weekly rifapentine
Antiretroviral drug
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitors
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitors
Abacavir, emtricitabine, lamivudine,
stavudine, tenofovir disoproxil
fumarate, zidovudine
May be combined
May be combined
Do not combine
Efavirenz
May be combined
Avoid combination. If no
alternative, ↑RFB 450mg once daily
Nevirapine
Avoid combination. If no
alternative, use NVP 200 mg
twice daily with rifampicin (with
no lead-in phase)
May be combined
May be combined
Etravirine
Rilpivirine
Do not combine
May be combined but not with
boosted PI
RFB: 300mg once daily
↑RPV 50mg once daily
Do not combine
Tenofovir alafenamide
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
Integrase strand transfer inhibitors
Protease inhibitors
Do not combine
↓RFB 150mg once daily
LPR/r dose unchanged
↓RFB 150mg once daily
ATZ/r dose unchanged
↓RFB 150mg once daily
DRV/r dose unchanged
Do not combine
Lopinavir/ritonavir
Atazanavir/ritonavir
Darunavir/ritonavir
Raltegravir
Dolutegravir
Rifabutin is preferred. If rifampicin
is used, ↑RAL 800mg twice daily
Rifabutin is preferred. If rifampicin
is used, ↑DTG 50 mg twice daily
May be combined
May be combined
Rifampicin
Rifabutin
Once weekly rifapentine
Antiretroviral drug
Abbreviations: NVP=nevirapine, RFB=rifabutin, RPV=rilpivirine, LPR/r=Lopinavir/ritonavir, ATZ/r=Atazanavir/ritonavir, DRV/r=Darunavir/ritonavir,
RAL=raltegravir, DTG=dolutegravir
↓ = reduce drug to stated dosage
↑ = increase drug to stated dosage
Note: Certain ARV combinations may lead to complex drug-drug interactions, and it may be difficult to predict their significance. Always use
other equally effective treatment options to avoid the interaction; but if unavoidable, seek expert advice.
References:
1. De Castro N, Marcy O, Chazallon C, et al. ANRS 12300 Reflate TB2 study group. Standard dose raltegravir or efavirenz-based antiretroviral
treatment for patients co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis (ANRS 12 300 Reflate TB 2): an open-label, non-inferiority, randomised, phase 3 trial.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2021;21(6):813-822.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
2. Dooley KE, Kaplan R, Mwelase N, et al. International Study of Patients with HIV on Rifampicin ING study group. Dolutegravir-based Antiretroviral
Therapy for Patients Coinfected With Tuberculosis and Human Immunodeficiency Virus: A Multicenter, Noncomparative, Open-label, Randomized
Trial. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;70(4):549-556.
3. Dooley KE, Savic R, Gupte A, et al. DOLPHIN Study Team. Once-weekly rifapentine and isoniazid for tuberculosis prevention in patients with HIV
taking dolutegravir-based antiretroviral therapy: a phase 1/2 trial. Lancet HIV. 2020;7(6):e401-e409.
4. Jiang HY, Zhang MN, Chen HJ, et al. Nevirapine versus efavirenz for patients co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 2014; 25: 130-135.
5. Liverpool HIV Pharmacology Group [database on the Internet] Cheshire, United Kingdom: The University of Liverpool and Clubzap Ltd; 2021. HIV
Drug Interaction Checker. (Available at: http://www.hiv-druginteractions.org)
6. Mbuagbaw L, Mursleen S, Irlam JH, et al. Efavirenz or nevirapine in three-drug combination therapy with two nucleoside or nucleotide-reverse
transcriptase inhibitors for initial treatment of HIV infection in antiretroviral-naïve individuals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;12(12):CD004246.
7. Podany AT, Bao Y, Swindells S, et al. AIDS Clinical Trials Group A5279 Study Team. Efavirenz Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics in HIVInfected Persons Receiving Rifapentine and Isoniazid for Tuberculosis Prevention. Clin Infect Dis. 2015;61(8):1322-7.
8. Cerrone M, Alfarisi O, Neary M, et al. Rifampicin effect on intracellular and plasma pharmacokinetics of tenofovir alafenamide. J Antimicrob
Chemother. 2019 Jun 1;74(6):1670-1678.
9. Martin TCS, Hill LA, Tang ME, Balcombe SM. Tenofovir alafenamide and rifabutin co-administration does not lead to loss of HIV-1 suppression:
A retrospective observational study. Int J Infect Dis. 2020 Nov;100:470-472.
10. European AIDS Clinical Scociety (EACS) Guidelines version 11.0, October 2021. Accessed 14 April 2022 (Available at: https://www.eacsociety.
org/media/final2021eacsguidelinesv11.0_oct2021.pdf)
11. Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents with HIV. Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in
HIV-infected Adults and Adolescents: Recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health,
and the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, 2020. (Available at: http://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/
inline-files/adult_oi.pdf)
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
GLOSSARY
Term
Definition
A person aged 10 to 19 years
A person over 19 years of age
Any group of people in which the prevalence or
incidence of TB is significantly higher than in the
general population
TB diagnosed in a biological specimen by smear
microscopy, culture or a WHO-approved molecular
test e.g. Xpert MTB/RIF®
A person under 10 years of age
Individuals who are sharing the same air space
with the index case for a reasonable duration of
time before the index patient starts TB treatment
Any individual who was exposed to a person with
TB disease
A setting with a high frequency of individuals with
undetected or undiagnosed TB disease, or where
infectious TB patients are present and there is a
high risk of TB transmission
Individuals who live in the same household or are
sharing the same air space with the index case for
a reasonable duration of time before the index
patient starts TB treatment
Initially identified person of any age with new or
recurrent TB in a specific household or other
comparable setting in which others may have been
exposed
A child under one year (12 months) of age
A state of persistent immune response to
stimulation by M. tuberculosis antigens with no
evidence of clinically manifest TB disease
Adolescent
Adult
At-risk group
Bacteriologically
confirmed TB
Child
Close contact
Contact
High TB transmission
setting
Household contact
Index case of TB
Infant
Latent tuberculosis
infection
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ADA
adenosine deaminase
ADL
activities of daily living
ADR
adverse drug reactions
AFB
acid fast bacilli
AGREE II
Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation II
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
ART
antiretroviral treatment
ARV
antiretroviral drug
BCG
Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccine
CI
confidence interval
CNS
central nervous system
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CQ
clinical question
CrI
credible interval
CXR
chest x-ray (it refers to chest radiograph/chest radiography in this CPG)
DDI
drug-drug interaction
DG
development group
DILI
drug induced liver injury
DOT
directly observed treatment
DTG
dolutegravir
EFV
efavirenz
EMB
ethambutol
EPTB
extrapulmonary tuberculosis
FDC
fixed-dose combination
GA
gastric aspirate
GCS
Glasgow Coma Score
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HPE
Histopathological examination
IGRA
Interferon Gamma Release Assay
INH
isoniazid
INSTI
integrase strand transfer inhibitors
IRIS
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
IRR
incidence rate ratio
IV
intravenous
kPa
kilopascal
LFT
liver function test
LF-LAM
lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay
LTBI
latent tuberculosis infection
M. tuberculosis Mycobacterium tuberculosis
max
maximum
MDR
multi-drug resistant
mg
milligramme
mg/kg
milligramme per kilogramme
ml
millilitre
mmHg
millimeter mercury
MoH
Ministry of Health
NICE
National Institute of Health and Excellence
NNRTIs
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
NPA
nasopharyngeal aspirate
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
NPV
negative predictive value
NVP
nevirapine
OR
odds ratio
p
p-value
PI
protease inhibitor
PLHIV
people living with HIV
PPV
positive predictive value
PTB
pulmonary tuberculosis
PZA
pyrazinamide
QFT
quantiferon
RAL
raltegravir
RC
review committee
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RFB
rifabutin
RIF
rifampicin
RPT
rifapentine
RR
relative risk
SCAR
severe cutaneous adverse reaction
TB
tuberculosis
TDM
therapeutic drug monitoring
TST
tuberculin skin test
U/L
unit per liter
ULN
upper limit of normal
VOT
video-observed treatment
WHO
World Health Organization
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The CPG DG members would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Dr Junainah Sabirin, Consultant Public Health Physician, on the
development of the CPG
• Ms. Wong Wai Chee on retrieval of evidence
• Ms. Farhana Hassan, Ms. Michella Ong Wei Min, Ms. Regina Tan
Sze Mei and Ms. Tew Xin Nee on the design of the CPG front cover
• National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency for their contribution in
CPG development
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
Management of Tuberculosis (Fourth Edition)