MANAGEMENT OF
2021
MOH/P/PAK/467.21(GU)-e
(SECOND EDITION)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e-ISBN: 978-967-2887-32-4
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.psychiatry-malaysia.org
Also available as an app for Android and iOS platforms: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2021 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2025) or sooner if new evidence
becomes available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of
the CPG or National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed, and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which will be the definitive version at all times. This version
can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1. Management of Schizophrenia
x
Algorithm 2. Pharmacotherapy for Schizophrenia
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EARLY DETECTION AND REFERRAL
3
2.1 Risk Factors
3
2.2 Screening
3
2.3 Referral
4
3.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
6
3.1 Bio-psychosocial Assessment
6
3.2 Criteria of Diagnostic Classifications
9
4.
TREATMENT
11
4.1 Pharmacological Intervention
11
4.1.1 Pharmacological agents
11
4.1.2 Rapid tranquillisation in acute exacerbation
14
4.1.3 Depot/long-acting injectable antipsychotics in
16
achieving remission
4.1.4 Antipsychotics in relapse prevention
17
4.1.5 Intermittent treatment in relapse prevention
18
4.1.6 Treatment for extrapyramidal signs, sedation
19
and weight gain associated with antipsychotics
4.2 Physical Intervention
24
4.2.1 Electroconvulsive therapy
24
4.2.2 Transcranial magnetic stimulation
24
4.2.3 Transcranial direct current stimulation
24
4.3 Psychosocial Intervention
24
4.3.1 Psychoeducation
24
4.3.2 Supported Employment
26
4.3.3 Cognitive Remediation Therapy
26
4.3.4 Social Skills Training
27
4.3.5 Peer Support Services
28
4.3.6 Family Therapy
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
4.3.7 Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
29
4.3.8 Supportive psychotherapy/Counselling
30
4.3.9 Others
30
5.
SERVICE LEVEL INTERVENTION
32
5.1 Crisis and Emergency Service
32
5.2 Assertive Community Treatment
33
5.3 Intensive Case Management
33
5.4 Collaborative Community-based Service Intervention
34
5.5 Day Hospitalisation/Day Treatment
35
5.6 Residential Services
35
5.7 Early Intervention in Psychosis
36
6.
TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
38
7.
CHALLENGES IN MANAGEMENT
39
7.1 Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia
39
7.1.1 Definition
39
7.1.2 Predictors
39
7.1.3 Treatment
40
7.2 Treatment in Special Population
43
7.2.1 Co-morbid substance use and
43
tobacco use disorders
7.2.2 Pregnancy and breastfeeding
45
7.2.3 Suicide
47
7.3 Social issues
49
8.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
51
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
51
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
51
REFERENCES
53
Appendix 1. Example of Search Strategy
60
Appendix 2. Clinical Questions
61
Appendix 3. Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia (DSM-5)
63
Appendix 4. International Statistical Classification of Diseases 65
and Related Health Problems, 10th Revision
(ICD 10)
Appendix 5. Dosing Regimen for Oral Antipsychotics
67
Appendix 6. Dosing Regimen for Depot Injections of
70
Antipsychotics
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Appendix 7. Clozapine Initiation and Titration Regimen for
73
In-Patient
Suggested Titration Regimen for
74
Clozapine Initiation in the Community
Appendix 8. Monitoring Parameters for Antipsychotics
76
Appendix 9. Consensus Criteria for Assessment and
79
Definition of Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia
List of Abbreviations
81
Acknowledgement
83
Disclosure Statement
83
Source of Funding
83
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
In this CPG the word ‘should’ is used to reflect a strong recommendation
and ‘may’ to reflect a weaker recommendation.
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
REFERRAL
• Early referral to psychiatric service should be considered for people
with schizophrenia having diagnostic or treatment issues.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
• People with possible schizophrenia should be assessed thoroughly
by history taking, (self-report and collateral), physical examination,
mental state examination and relevant investigations (if indicated).
• Schizophrenia should be diagnosed using either Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) or
International Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problem
10th Revision (ICD-10).
TREATMENT
a. Pharmacological intervention
• Antipsychotics (APs) should be offered in schizophrenia as it is the
mainstay of the treatment.
• Treatment adherence should be regularly monitored and maximised
until the termination of treatment is indicated in schizophrenia.
• Long-acting (depot) injectable AP in schizophrenia:
 should be offered when there is medication adherence issue
 may be considered based on patient’s preference
• APs should be offered to prevent relapse in schizophrenia.
 Second-generation APs are the preferred choice.
 Standard dose of APs should be considered as maintenance
treatment.
• Intermittent treatment using APs should be avoided in schizophrenia.
b. Physical intervention
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be considered in schizophrenia to
achieve rapid and short-term improvement of severe symptoms
after an adequate trial of AP is proven ineffective and in treatmentresistant schizophrenia.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
iii
c. Psychosocial intervention
• Psychoeducation which includes early warning signs interventions
should be given in addition to other interventions in schizophrenia.
• Supported employment should be offered in schizophrenia.
• Cognitive remediation therapy may be considered as an intervention
for cognitive difficulties in schizophrenia.
• The following may be offered in schizophrenia:
 social skills training
 peer support
 family therapy
 cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis
SERVICE LEVEL INTERVENTION
• Crisis intervention services should be offered to people with
schizophrenia in acute phase.
• Assertive community treatment should be provided for people with
schizophrenia who have difficulties engaging with the mental health
services.
• Intensive case management should be considered for people with
schizophrenia who are at risk of treatment non-adherence.
• Collaborative community-based service intervention may be offered
for people with schizophrenia.
• Early intervention in psychosis service should be provided for people
with first episode of psychosis.
TREATMENT OF TREATMENT-RESISTANT SCHIZOPHRENIA
• Clozapine should be offered in treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
CHALLENGES IN MANAGEMENT
• People with schizophrenia and co-morbid substance use disorder
should be referred to a psychiatric service for further management.
• People with schizophrenia and smoking should be offered help with
smoking cessation.
• Pre-pregnancy care which includes counselling should be offered to
all women in reproductive age with schizophrenia.
• Multidisciplinary care should be offered in the management of
pregnant women with schizophrenia.
• Clozapine may be considered in schizophrenia with persistent
suicidal risk.
• Patient’s rights in schizophrenia should be included in the training of
healthcare providers and family members.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans,
“all adults (19 plus years)”, publication from year “2009 to Current” and
English language. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature
and guidelines were searched and, experts in the field contacted to
identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 19 Nov
2018 to 26 Feb 2019. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 30 June 2021 to be included. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from
the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on schizophrenia e.g.:
• Practice Guideline for The Treatment of Patients with Schizophrenia
(Third Edition) [The American Psychiatric Association (APA),
2021]
• Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults [National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 2014]
• Management of Schizophrenia [Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network (SIGN), 2013]
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 35 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 33 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed at each DG meeting. All statements and
recommendations formulated were agreed upon by both the DG and
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
v
RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations were made
by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG was developed largely
based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and, the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634).
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
vi
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide recommendations on the
management of schizophrenia on following aspects:
a) early detection and referral
b) assessment and diagnosis
c) treatment and follow-up
d) challenges in management including special groups
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
Adults (aged ≥18 years old) with a diagnosis of schizophrenia
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of schizophrenia at any healthcare level including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients and their advocates
v. professional organisations
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
vii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Siti Nor Aizah Ahmad
Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Ahmad Zabidin Zakaria
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Pakar Sultanah Fatimah, Johor
Dr. Hilwa Abdullah @ Mohd. Nor
Senior Lecturer & Clinical Psychologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Selangor
Dr. Izyan A. Wahab
Senior Lecturer & Pharmacist
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section, Ministry of Health
Putrajaya
Prof. Dr. Muhammad Najib Mohamad Alwi
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Psychiatrist
International Medical School
Management & Science University
Selangor
Ms. Nor Asmawati Mohamad Ali Abdul
Rahman
Medical Social Work Officer
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Ms. Norhameza Ahmad Badruddin
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Permai, Johor
Dr. Parveen Thanabalen
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Ranimah Yahya
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Rahmat, Terengganu
Associate Prof. Dr. Salina Mohamed
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Psychiatrist
Universiti Teknologi Mara, Selangor
Dr. Sharifah Nurul Aida Syed Ghazaili
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bestari Jaya, Selangor
Dr. Siti Hazrah Selamat Din
Consultant Psychiatrist (Community &
Rehabilitation)
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Suhaila Mohd Som
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Permai, Johor
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
viii
Dr. Abdul Kadir Abu Bakar
Consultant Psychiatrist
Gleneagles Hospital, Johor
Datin Dr. Ang Kim Teng
Secretary General
Malaysia Mental Health Association
Ms. Anita Abu Bakar
President
Mental Illness Awareness and Support
Association
Dr. Baizury Bashah
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Putrajaya
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Hazli Zakaria
President
Malaysia Psychiatric Association
Ms. Noor Ratna Naharuddin
Pharmacist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Noraini Darus
Head of Clinical Psychology Services
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norhayati Nordin
Director & Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Mr. Zulhan Ambi
Head of Medical Social Work
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Chairperson
Professor Dr. Ahmad Hatim Sulaiman
Head of Department & Consultant Psychiatrist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Mr. Abd Halim Jamil
Head of Medical Social Work Profession
Ministry of Health, Hospital Sultanah
Aminah Johor
Professor Dr. Alvin Lai Oon Ng
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Psychologist
Sunway University, Selangor
Professor Dr. Chee Ng
Healthscope Chair of Psychiatry
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Dr. Ganeshabala Thanabalen
General Practitioner
Kinta Medical Center, Ipoh, Perak
Dr. Hassan Basri Mukhali
Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin
Terengganu
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Jamilah Hanum Abdul
Khaiyom
Assistant Professor & Clinical Psychologist
Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dato Seri Dr. Lau Keen Lee
General Practitioner &
President of Pertubuhan Sokongan
Kesihatan Minda (MINDA), Johor
Dr. Lim Chong Hum
Consultant Psychiatrist &
Clinical Epidemiologist
Ramsay Sime Darby/ParkCity Medical Centre
Selangor
Professor Dr. Manit Srisurapanont
Department of Psychiatry
Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University
Chiang Mai, Thailand
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mohd. Pazudin Ismail
Head of Department &
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
Kelantan
Mr. Muhammad Zairul Rezal Zainol Abidin
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nik Ruzyanei Nik Jaafar
Lecturer & Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norizzati Bukhary Ismail Bukhary
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Baru Bangi
Bandar Baru Bangi, Selangor
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Roger Ho
Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
National University of Singapore &
National University Health System
Singapore
Dr. Salina Abdul Aziz
National Advisor for Psychiatry Service &
Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Selvasingam Ratnasingam
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Ms. Shamini Rama
Pharmacist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Siobhan Gee
Principal Pharmacist, South London &
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust &
Honorary Senior Lecturer at King’s College
London, London, United Kingdom
Dr. Suresh Sundram
Chair and Head of Department of Psychiatry
& Director of Research, Mental Health
Program, Monash University, Selangor
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
x
ALGORITHM 1. MANAGEMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Acute phase/exacerbation
Stable phase/relapse prevention
Adequate
response**
Adequate
response**
Follow-up at
health/psychiatric
clinic
AP
= antipsychotic
SGA = second-generation
AP
ACT = assertive community
treatment
EPS = extrapyramidal side
Yes
• Offer AP, preferably SGA***
• Psychoeducation
• Monitor clinical response,
side effect & treatment
adherence
Refer to hospital with psychiatric services
• Exclude substance use disorder,
treatment non-adherence & co-
morbidities
• Optimise AP usage (adequate dose &
duration)
• Optimise psychosocial interventions
• Rule out treatment-resistant
schizophrenia
• Offer AP, preferably SGA***
• Psychoeducation
• Monitor clinical response,
side effect & treatment
adherence
• Plan for recovery (psychoeducation, ACT, family intervention, social skill
training, cognitive remediation therapy and supported employment)
• AP monotherapy; use depot when non-adherent
• Monitor for clinical response, side effect & treatment adherence
• Oral SGA if patient is
cooperative*
• Intramuscular haloperidol +
parenteral benzodiazepine if
patient is not cooperative*
Need for rapid
stabilisation
Diagnosis of
schizophrenia
*Cases to be referred
urgently to psychiatric
services
**Adequate response: A
reduction in symptoms
as a result of treatment
that is associated with
clinically significant
benefit in functioning
and/or quality of life
***Prevention &
management of side
effect of AP at all phases
• Monitor EPS/akathisia/
weight gain/diabetes/
cardiovascular disease/
sexual dysfunction
• Follow schedule of
physical care
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 2. PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA
xi
Initial Phase
Follow-Up Phase
Yes
No
Yes
No
Psychiatric Service
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
IR/SE
present?
IR/SE
present?
IR/SE
present?
IR/SE
present?
Augment
clozapine with
another AP for
>8 - 10 weeks
or ECT
Start different
AP for 6
weeks
Adequate
response
Relapse prevention
management
Start AP
for 2 - 6
weeks
Diagnosis of
schizophrenia
IR/SE: Inadequate
response or
intolerable side
effect
In inadequate
response, review
diagnosis &
consider
co-morbidities
AP
= antipsychotic
ECT = electroconvulsive
therapy
Primary/Secondary Care
Psychiatric Services
Primary/Secondary Care
Persistent
suicidal risk present?
Start clozapine
for >8 weeks
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Schizophrenia is a term that describes a major psychiatric disorder
that alters an individual’s perception, thought, affect and behaviour.
Globally, it was ranked as the 11th leading cause of disability in 2013.1
In the Second Report of the National Mental Health Registry on
Schizophrenia in 2003 to 2005, the incidence rate of schizophrenia in
Malaysia was stated as 5 cases/100,000 population/year. However, the
expected rate was 100 cases/100,000 population/year and possible
reasons for low reported incidence were delayed or under reporting and
administrative reasons. The duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) was
long with a mean of 28.7 months and longer among females. The clinical
importance of DUP was that it was one of the few prognostic factors
which can be altered through changes in health service delivery.2 This
emphasises the value of early recognition and the necessity for early
referral and intervention including during prodromal period.
Although the prevalence of schizophrenia worldwide was low,3 its
impact on health, social and economy are tremendous for patients,
families/caregivers and society. In an economic evaluation in Malaysia,
based on a total estimated number of treated cases of 15,104, the total
economic burden of treatment for schizophrenia stood at USD100
million which was equivalent to 0.04% of the national gross domestic
product. On average, the mean cost per patient was USD6,594. Of
the total economic burden, 72% was attributed to indirect cost (USD72
million), followed by direct medical cost at 26% and the remaining on
direct non-medical cost.4 This huge magnitude of this disease burden is
vital for policymakers to prioritise service for schizophrenia.
Worldwide, mental health services have experienced a series of
paradigm shifts along with the development of medical technologies
and the human rights movements where the services are delivered in
the community.5; 6 The community-based mental health service takes
into account the fact that people with schizophrenia face difficulties
in essential issues e.g. employment, housing, and relationship
with families and friends,6; 7 besides stigma and discrimination. Ideally,
such service should include care and treatment delivered close to
home.8, level III In Malaysia, efforts on integrating the care for mentally
ill patients in the community have started since 1997 as outlined in
the National Mental Health Policy.9; 10 Subsequently, the development
of community mental health centre (CMHC) begun in 2011. CMHC,
or Mentari as it is branded in Malaysia, is a centre for treatment and
care of mental health that offers screening, diagnosis, treatment
and rehabilitation of any person suffering from any mental disorder
in accordance with the Mental Health Act 2001 and Mental Health
Regulation 2010.11
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
The holistic management of schizophrenia encompasses biologicalpsychosocial-spiritual approach to various dysfunction domains
i.e. positive symptoms, negative symptoms, cognitive dysfunction,
mood symptoms and motor symptoms. Since the first edition of
Management of Schizophrenia in Adults in 2009, numerous advances
in the management of mental disorder have developed including
treatment targeting those who are difficult to treat or have intolerable
to medications and non-adherence to treatment. In this edition of CPG,
more clinical questions were added to address the advances. New
issues being addressed are screening, early intervention in psychosis,
special population and social issues. The summary on management
and pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia are illustrated in Algorithm 1
and 2.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
2. EARLY DETECTION AND REFERRAL
2.1 Risk Factor
Latest meta-analysis/systematic review showed significant risk factors
for schizophrenia were:
a. substance-induced
psychoses
associated
with
cannabis,
hallucinogens and amphetamines had an increased risk of
transition to schizophrenia12, level II-2
b. increasing paternal age with RR ranging from 1.05 to 1.7913, level II-2
c. most urban environment compared with most rural environment
(OR=2.37, 95% CI 2.01 to 2.81)14, level II-2
d. prenatal exposure to a range of infections and inflammatory
responses may be a risk factor e.g. Herpes Simplex (HSV-2)
with OR ranging from 1.5 to 1.8 and toxoplasma gondii (OR=1.79,
95% CI 1.01 to 3.15)15, level II-2
In a recent systemic review, there was a risk to develop schizophrenia
in the offspring of mother with prenatal Toxoplasma gondii infection.
Association with HSV-2 infection was likely due to confounding factor.
In contrast, maternal influenza infection was a viable risk factor for
schizophrenia.16, level III However, quality of the included primary papers
were not mentioned.
Other risk factors would include:
• family history of schizophrenia17
• history of obstetric complications e.g. pre-eclampsia and extreme
prematurity17
• cannabis use17
• history of childhood central nervous system infection17
• refugee and migrant status with HR of 2.90 (95% CI 2.31 to 3.64)
and 1.75 (95% CI 1.51 to 2.02) respectively18, level II-2
2.2 Screening
A new 32-item self-rating screening tool (SPro) was developed for prepsychotic states. SCL-90-R-PARA/PSYC was generated based on
“Paranoid Ideation” (PARA) and “Psychoticism” (PSYC) subscales of
Symptom-Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R) to explore psychosis-like
symptoms. A study examining predictive validity of SPro against SCL90-R-PARA/PSYC on military men showed an AUC of 0.74 (95% CI
0.65 to 0.84).19, level III
In another study on preliminary validity of the brief version self-report
Prodromal Questionnaire (PQ-B) among adolescents and young adults
at two prodromal psychosis research clinics showed good validity of
prodromal psychosis syndromes (AUC=0.78, 95% CI 0.70 to 0.84).20, level III
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
A two-stage study to screen relatives of people with schizophrenia
and general individuals for sub-threshold psychosis used Screening
Questionnaire (SQ) and General Health Questionnaires-12 (GHQ-12)
in the initial stage. Those who screened positive were reassessed using
the Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk Mental State in the second
stage. Of 29% people initially screened positive by both SQ and GHQ-12,
only 4% were positive after final assessment. These indicated that both
SQ and GHQ-12 were not suitable for screening early psychosis.21, level III
• More evidence is warranted before screening tools for pre-psychosis
in schizophrenia can be recommended.
• Prodromal phase is characterised by impairments in psychosocial
functioning, odd and eccentric behaviour, poor communication
and motivation, blunted or flattened affect and neglect of personal
hygiene.
• People with risk factors* in developing schizophrenia and with
prodromal symptoms may require further assessment to rule out
schizophrenia; this may be repeated if indicated over time.
*refer to Subchapter 2.1
2.3 Referral
Since the integration of mental health care into the primary care
services in 1996,10 most health facilities in Malaysia are able to provide
mental health services that focus on mental health promotion and
provide early detection and treatment for people with mental disorders.
These facilities include the primary care clinics (both in the government
and private sectors) and the district hospitals. The integration program
underlines the importance of both the primary and tertiary centres
working together to create a seamless pathway for people with mental
illness in receiving care.
• For people with schizophrenia treated in primary care, early
referral to psychiatric service should be considered in the following
circumstances:17; 22
 presence of prodromal or attenuated symptoms
 unclear diagnosis
 plan for psychosocial rehabilitation
 treatment adherence issues
 poor response to treatment
 potential violent behaviour to self or others
 intolerable side effects from medication
 co-morbid substance use disorder
 special group e.g. pregnancy, paediatric and geriatric age
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
For group of people at high risk of developing psychosis, emerging
practices advocate that they should be referred for mental health
assessment preferably to the early intervention services, e.g. person in
distress with declining social function plus any of the following:22
• transient or attenuated psychotic symptoms
• experiences or behaviour suggestive of possible psychosis
• a first-degree relative with psychosis or schizophrenia
Recommendation 1
• Early referral to psychiatric service should be considered for people
with schizophrenia having diagnostic or treatment issues*.
*refer to the preceding yellow box
In addition to the primary care clinics, the Community Mental Health
Centres or Mentari also plays a role in screening and early intervention
in mental illness including schizophrenia. Mentari offers walk-in services
where people in the community who have symptoms of mental illness
can visit nearby Mentari to have assessment done on them.17
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
3. ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
3.1 Bio-Psychosocial Assessment
Bio-psychosocial assessment is essential in the diagnosis of
schizophrenia. Established tools e.g. Mini International Neuropsychiatric
Interview (MINI) and Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders
(SCID) are used for diagnosis, while Brief Psychiatric Rating Scales
(BPRS) and Positive and Negative Symptoms Scale for Schizophrenia
(PANSS) are performed for severity assessment. It can be used in both
primary and secondary/tertiary care.
In two cross-sectional studies, Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-5 Disorders-Clinician Version (SCID-5-CV) showed κ value
of >0.8 for diagnosis of schizophrenia with sensitivity and specificity
>0.70.23 - 24, level III
New evidence on assessments for people with schizophrenia are
discussed below:
• A small cross-sectional study showed Self-evaluation of Negative
Symptoms had excellent psychometric properties in measuring the
symptoms (Cronbach’s α of 0.867 at baseline and 0.897 at 4 - 8
weeks).25, level III
• The 4-item Negative Symptom Assessment (NSA-4) on speech
quantity, emotion, social drive and interest was effective in rapidly
assessing negative symptoms in people with schizophrenia. It
was not affected by geographic regions of practice, professional
credentialing or their familiarity with the use of schizophrenia
symptom rating instruments.26, level III
• A small validation study demonstrated that Personal and Social
Performance (PSP) scale was significantly correlated with other
similar functioning measures such as PANSS, Global Assessment
of Functioning (GAF), Quality of Life Scale (QLS) and Clinical
Global Impression Scale (CGI-S) with r of -0.31, 0.35, 0.37 and
-0.27 respectively for construct validity at baseline. A stronger
correlation between PSP and CGI-S at follow-up was noted with
r= -0.60 in test-retest reliability.27, level III In another study on those with
acute symptoms, PSP had good interclass reliability of 0.87. The
correlations between baseline severity based on PANSS and CGI-S
with PSP were also significant.28, level I
• Among neurocognitive assessments, the Brief Cognitive Assessment
Tool for Schizophrenia (B-CATS) had an administration time
of approximately 10 minutes. It correlated significantly (r=0.76)
with widely used neurocognitive battery i.e. the Measurement
and Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia
(MATRICS).29, level III
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• In a large multicentre validation study in people with schizophrenia,
Brief Negative Symptom Scale showed excellent internal consistency
(Cronbach’s α=0.94), strong correlation with the PANSS negative
subscale score (ρ=0.76) but weak correlations with the PANSS
positive subscale (ρ=0.21) and Calgary Depression Rating Scale for
schizophrenia (CDSS) total score (ρ=0.27).30, level III
Besides the above assessments, the self-administered WHO Disability
Assessment Schedule II (WHODAS 2.0) has been used for assessing
health status and disability in people with schizophrenia and mentally
ill patients.31, level III
Assessment of people with possible schizophrenia consists of
thorough history taking (collaborative history from patient/family/
caregiver), physical examination, mental state examination (MSE) and
investigations where indicated. This is summarised in Table 1.
Table 1. Initial Psychiatric Assessment
History taking
Reason for current visit
Current symptom
Precipitating factor
Hospitalisation and emergency visit for psychiatric
issues including substances abuse
Psychiatric treatment including type and duration,
treatment setting, dose of medication and, response and
adherence to treatment
Prior psychiatric diagnosis and symptom including
hallucination, delusion, negative symptom, aggressive
idea or behaviour, suicidal idea or attempt, impulsivity
Tobacco, alcohol or illicit substance
Recent or current substance use
Allergy or drug sensitivity
All current medication use and side effect including
non-prescribed medication or supplement
Current or past medical/surgical illness including related
hospitalisation e.g.
• endocrine disease e. g. diabetes mellitus, thyroid
disorder
• cardiovascular disease e.g. hypertension
• dyslipidemia
• neurological disease
• connective tissue disease e.g. systemic lupus
erythematosus
• infectious disease e.g. human immunodeficiency
virus, tuberculosis, sexually transmitted infections
• malignancy
• physical trauma or head injury
Traditional and complementary medicine
History of present
illness
Past psychiatric
history
Substance use
history
Medical history
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
History of mental illness including history of suicidal or
aggressive behaviour
Presence of psychosocial stressors e.g. financial,
housing,
legal,
school/occupation,
interpersonal
relationship, social support, disfiguring or terminal
illness
Exposure to physical, sexual or emotional trauma or
childhood abuse
Temperament, stress management, interest or hobby,
relationship, beliefs and personality traits. These include
highest and current level of functioning/education/
vocation, interpersonal relationships and independent
living
Full physical examination including height, weight and
body mass index (BMI), vital signs, cardiovascular and
neurological examinations
• Level of consciousness
• General
appearance
-
body
build,
posture,
cleanliness, dressing, evidence of weight loss,
self-harm
• Face - eye contact, emotional expression
• Posture and movement - posture of depressed or
anxious person, agitated, restless, biting nails etc.
• Motor - fast or slow movement, choreoathetosis,
tardive dyskinesia, dystonias, abnormal movement
(e.g. grimacing, echopraxia, tics, mannerism/
stereotyped movement)
• Attitude to examination and social behaviour - friendly,
hostile, suspicious
• Production - spontaneity, speed (pressured or
retarded), loudness, quantity, tone, quality (dysarthria)
• Forms - neologism, punning and clang associations,
expressive dysphasia
• Content - obscene words, poor fluency (shyness, poor
education, thought disorder or circumstantiality,
receptive
dysphasia,
echolalia,
perseveration),
coherence, relevance
• Mood (by asking the patient about predominant mood
or subjective mood) - euthymic, depressed, elevated
• Affect (by observation of the expression or objective
mood) - types (anxious, sad, happy, angry, euphoria,
elation), range (broad, restricted, blunted, flat),
stability/lability (labile, non-labile), appropriateness/
congruity (congruent/incongruent)
Family history
Social history
Pre-morbid
personality
Physical
examination
MSE
Appearance and
behaviour
Speech
Mood and affect
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Adapted from: Keepers GA, Fochtmann LJ, Anzia JM, et al. The American Psychiatric
Association Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With
Schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2020:1;177(9):868-872.
To date, there is no evidence found on biological assessment for
schizophrenia. Nevertheless, relevant investigations should be
performed if a medical condition is suspected.
3.2 Criteria of Diagnostic Classifications
The diagnosis and classification of schizophrenia is important and
based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
5th Edition (DSM-5) or International Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problem 10th Revision (ICD-10). Refer to Appendix 3
on Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia:(DSM-5) and Appendix 4
on International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems, 10th Revision (ICD 10).
Abnormal thought content - delusional, non-delusional
a. Delusion
• primary delusion (delusional mood, delusional
perception, autochthonous delusion)
• possession
of
thought
(thought
withdrawal,
insertion, broadcast)
• passivity phenomena (experience of action,
thought, feeling under control)
• theme/content (persecutory, grandiose, nihilistic,
somatic)
• secondary
delusion
(mood
congruence/
incongruence)
b. Non-delusional
• phobia, obsession, suicidal ideation
Abnormal thought form
• fluency
(circumstantiality,
loosening
of
associations)
• flow (pressured, poverty of thought, thought
blocking, perseveration, derailment, tangential,
flight of idea)
• word (punning, neologism)
Suicidal thought
Homicidal thought
• Hallucination - auditory, visual, olfactory, gustatory,
tactile
• Illusion
• Pseudo-hallucination
• Depersonalisation, derealisation
Orientation/memory/attention and concentration/abstract
thinking/general knowledge
Patient’s recognition of consequences of action
Patient’s awareness and understanding of illness and
need for treatment
Thought
disturbances
Perceptual
disturbance
Cognitive
function
Judgement
Insight
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
The ICD-11 was released on June 18, 2018 and was officially presented
at the World Health Assembly in May 25, 2019. It will be used as the
official reporting system by member states on January 1, 2022.
Issues arise on the sufficiency of current ICD-10 or DSM-5 on
therapeutic and prognostic management of schizophrenia. The stability
of the diagnostic criteria are as below.
• A large randomised controlled trial (RCT) on second-generation
antipsychotic (SGA) in acute schizophrenia showed 99.5%
of the patients with DSM-IV met DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for
schizophrenia.32, level I
• In a small prevalence study on individuals with DSM-IV schizophrenia,
DSM-5 changes in criteria A showed a negligible effect on the
prevalence of schizophrenia as over 98% of individuals continued to
receive a DSM-5 diagnosis of schizophrenia.33, level III
• A meta-analysis of 42 studies showed a high diagnostic stability in
schizophrenia spectrum using either DSM-IV or ICD-10.34, level II-2
In a Cochrane systematic review of 21 studies of old and limited
qualities, first rank symptoms correctly identified schizophrenia 75% to
95% of the time.35, level III
• Disease severity is assessed based on presenting psychopathology
and risk assessment (risk to self and/or others). The psychopathology
may be assessed using the severity scale e.g. PANSS or BPRS by
trained personnel.
Recommendation 2
• People with possible schizophrenia should be assessed thoroughly
by history taking (self-report and collateral), physical examination,
mental state examination and relevant investigations (if indicated).
• Schizophrenia should be diagnosed using either Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) or
International Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problem
10th Revision (ICD-10).
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
4. TREATMENT
The modalities of treatment in schizophrenia are:
• pharmacological intervention
• physical intervention
• psychosocial intervention
• service level intervention
These are offered both in acute and relapse prevention phases.
People with schizophrenia who present early and for the first time at
primary care should be provided with the following:17
• assessment and early treatment
• early referral to specialist care in the following circumstances
(refer to Subchapter 2.3)
• initial treatment and urgent referral in the acutely-ill cases
• collaboration with hospital-based psychiatric services
• registration of cases at health clinics and the National Mental
Health Registry
• Current available guidelines for mental health services in primary
care:
 Garispanduan Perkhidmatan Rawatan Susulan Pesakit Mental di
Klinik Kesihatan 2009
 Garispanduan Pelaksanaan Perkhidmatan Pemulihan Psikososial
Bagi Pesakit Mental Di Penjagaan Kesihatan Primer 2000
4.1 Pharmacological Intervention
Antipsychotics (APs) treat the symptoms of schizophrenia. Since the
discovery of chlorpromazine in 1952, APs remain the cornerstone of
schizophrenia treatment in both acute as well as maintenance phases.
They generally can be classified as first-generation APs (FGA) and
second-generation APs (SGA). The FGAs derive their effect on positive
symptoms by predominantly blocking the dopamine 2 (D2) receptors,
which often results in debilitating extrapyramidal side effects (EPS).
The SGAs are however more versatile and act by blocking other
subtype dopamine receptors (e.g. clozapine blocks D1 and D4) as well
as serotonergic, adrenergic and histaminergic receptors. SGAs tend to
cause more metabolic issues.
Although there may be meaningful distinctions in clinical response and
tolerability of different APs in an individual patient, there is no definitive
evidence that one AP is superior to another, with the possible exception
of clozapine.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
It is essential for clinicians to discuss with the patients on the best
possible medication for them in terms of both effectiveness and
tolerability and, develop a dosing regimen that will minimise the impact
of side effects on daily functions. Their previous experiences with
medication should also be considered. An evidence-based ranking
of FGAs and SGAs or an algorithmic approach to AP selection is not
possible because of the significant heterogeneity in clinical trial designs
and, limited numbers of head-to-head comparisons of APs and clinical
trial data for a number of APs.36
The APs registered in Malaysia, either in oral, intramuscular (IM) or
long-acting injectable (LAI) depot IM preparations in alphabetical orders
are listed below:
In the treatment of acute phase of schizophrenia, the recommended
optimal oral dose of AP is two or three times minimum effective dose
(MED) [(RR for 2-fold MED is 1.24 (95% CI 1.00 to 1.54) and for 3-fold
MED is 1.44 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.89)] and adverse effects (AEs) should
be closely monitored.37, level I In relapse prevention, the standard doses
should be used.17 APs should be used for at least 6 - 8 weeks with
adequate dosage before switching to other APs.38, level III The CPG DG
opines that 2 - 6 weeks duration of APs should be used to assess
response in schizophrenia.
Refer to:
i. Appendix 5 (Dosing Regimen for Oral Antipsychotics) and
Appendix 6 (Dosing Regimen for Depot Injections of Antipsychotics)
ii. Table 2 (Relative AEs of APs) and Table 3 (Common AEs of APs
and their management strategies)
iii. Appendix 8 on Monitoring Parameters for Antipsychotics
4.1.1
Pharmacological agents
In a meta-analysis of 20 RCTs on people with schizophrenia with
follow-up from 5 to 14 years, those on any APs had lower mortality risk
• Chlorpromazine
• Flupenthixol
• Fluphenazine
• Haloperidol
• Perphenazine
• Sulpiride
• Trifluoperazine
• Zuclopenthixol
• Amisulpride
• Aripiprazole
• Asenapine
• Brexpiprazole
• Cariprazine
• Clozapine
• Olanzapine
• Paliperidone
• Quetiapine
• Risperidone
• Ziprasidone
FGAs
SGAs
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
compared with those without the treatment (RR=0.57, 95% Cl 0.46 to
0.76). Causes of death reported were cardiovascular disease in 15.7%
and suicide in 6.7%. The remaining causes were described as other
natural, unnatural or undetermined. However, reasons for the increased
risk of death for those without APs requires further research. Quality of
the primary studies was variable but most scored as moderate.39, level I
A network meta-analysis on schizophrenia showed that APs reduced
overall symptoms compared with placebo, with SMD ranging from -0.89
(95% CrI -1.08 to -0.71) for clozapine to -0.03 (95% CrI -0.59 to 0.52)
for levomepromazine. The effectiveness differences between APs were
mostly small. Only clozapine, amisulpride, zotepine, olanzapine and
risperidone were significantly more effective for the primary outcome
(change in overall symptoms) than other APs. With regard to side
effects:40, level I
• the RR for sedation ranged from 0.92 (95% CrI 0.17 to 2.03) for
pimozide to 10.20 (95% CrI 4.72 to 29.41) for zuclopenthixol
• the MD for weight gain ranged from -0.16 kg (-0.73 to 0.40) for
ziprasidone to 3.21 kg (2.10 to 4.31) for zotepine
• the MD for prolactin elevation ranged from -77.05 ng/mL (-120.23
to -33.54) for clozapine to 48.51 ng/mL (43.52 to 53.51) for
paliperidone
• the MD for QTc prolongation ranged from -2.21 ms (-4.54 to 0.15)
for lurasidone to 23.90 ms (20.56 to 27.33) for sertindole
In addition, the RR on the use of antiparkinsonian medication as a
measure of EPS ranged from 0.46 (0.19 to 0.88) for clozapine to 6.14
(4.81 to 6.55) for pimozide. The certainty of the evidence in this network
meta-analysis was generally low.
In a Cochrane systematic review, AP combination may improve clinical
response compared with AP monotherapy in schizophrenia (RR=0.73,
95% CI 0.64 to 0.83). There was no significant difference in relapse
(RR=0.63, 95% CI 0.31 to 1.29) and rate of hospitalisation (RR=0.96,
95% CI 0.36 to 2.55). There was also no significant difference for
serious AEs, movement disorders and weight gain. Most evidence was
from short-term trials and graded very low in quality.41, level I
In a network meta-analysis of 19 RCTs on acute treatment in first
episode of schizophrenia:42, level I
• for overall reduction of symptoms, amisulpride (SMD= -0.37, 95%
CI -0.61 to -0.14), olanzapine (SMD= -0.25, 95% CI -0.39 to -0.12),
ziprasidone (SMD= -0.25, 95% CI -0.48 to -0.01) and risperidone
(SMD= -0.14, 95% CI -0.27 to -0.01) were more effective than
haloperidol
• in improvement of negative symptoms, olanzapine was more
effective than risperidone (SMD= 0.20, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.37) and
haloperidol (SMD= 0.31, 95% CI 0.13 to 0.48)
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• in treatment of parkinsonism,
 olanzapine showed less frequent use of drugs compared with
haloperidol (OR=0.10, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.29), zuclopenthixol
(OR=0.02, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.37) and risperidone (OR=0.24,
95% CI 0.07 to 0.78)
 quetiapine showed less frequent use of drugs compared with
haloperidol (OR=0.10, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.75) and zuclopenthixol
(OR=0.02, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.66)
• haloperidol showed less weight gain compared with olanzapine
(SMD=0.63, 95% CI 0.11 to 1.16)
The primary evidence was of very low to moderate quality.
There was no RCT found on the use of depot AP on first episode of
schizophrenia.
• APs are the mainstay of pharmacological treatment in schizophrenia.
• There is small difference in effectiveness between APs except for
clozapine.
• All APs are different in their side effects profiles.
• Reasons to switch include lack of clinical response, intolerability and
drug interaction.
• The choice of APs mainly depends on their differences in side-effect
profiles.
• APs should be used for at least 1 - 2 years for the first episode and
for a longer duration in those with chronic schizophrenia.
• If AP is to be withdrawn, it should be done gradually whilst symptoms
of potential relapse are monitored for at least two years.
• There is limited evidence in using combination APs.
Recommendation 3
• Antipsychotics should be offered in schizophrenia as it is the mainstay
of the treatment.
4.1.2
Rapid tranquillisation in acute exacerbation
In rapid tranquillisation, medications are used to calm the patient and
not to induce sleep, so that he/she can be more accurately assessed
by healthcare providers when stable. The medications commonly used
are FGA, SGA and benzodiazepines. Side effects should be anticipated
and antidotes should be readily available. The choice of medication
depends on the underlying cause of the aggression.43
Parenteral [intramuscular (IM) or intravenous (IV)] medications are
used during acute exacerbation of schizophrenia to stabilise the
aggressiveness of the patients. Evidence supporting the effectiveness
and safety of this clinical practice is as follows:
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• A meta-analysis of 167 RCTs showed that APs were more effective
than placebo in reducing positive symptoms (SMD=0.45, 95% CI
0.40 to 0.50) and negative symptoms (SMD=0.35, 95% CI 0.31
to 0.40). However, they had more movement disorders (RR=1.93,
95% CI 1.65 to 2.29), sedation (RR=2.80, 95% CI 2.30 to 3.55) and
weight gain (SMD= -0.40, 95% CI -0.47 to -0.33).44, level I
• In a Cochrane systematic review, IM aripiprazole:45, level I
 prevented the need of additional injection to achieve tranquilisation
by 31% compared with placebo at 24 hours (RR=0.69, 95%
CI 0.56 to 0.85); in addition, it was more effective in reducing
agitation in two hours (RR=1.50, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.92)
 showed no difference with IM haloperidol in the need of additional
injection to achieve tranquilisation and reducing agitation in two
hours
 was less effective in reducing agitation in two hours compared
with IM olanzapine (RR=0.77, 95% CI 0.60 to 0.99)
 showed no difference in adverse effects with placebo, IM
haloperidol and IM olanzapine
The primary evidence was of very low quality. IM olanzapine is not
available in Malaysia.
• In another Cochrane systematic review, IM haloperidol compared
with placebo:46, level I
 prevented non-tranquillisation by 12% at two hours (RR=0.88,
95% CI 0.82 to 0.95)
 reduced the need of repeated injection by 49% at 24 hours
(RR=0.51, 95% CI 0.42 to 0.62)
 was more effective in reducing agitation in two hours (RR=1.62,
95% CI 1.28 to 2.07)
 had more overall adverse events at 72 hours (RR=1.78, 95% CI
1.23 to 2.59)
The primary papers were mainly on schizophrenia and of very low
quality.
• In an RCT, oral haloperidol 15 mg, olanzapine 20 mg and risperidone
2 - 6 mg improved PANSS psychotic agitation subscale score
significantly as early as two hours from baseline and sustained
until day five in acute severe psychotic agitation in schizophrenia.
However there was no difference between the three medications.47, level I
• NICE recommends IM haloperidol combined with promethazine for
rapid tranquillisation in adults.22
• In the previous MoH CPG, IM preparations recommended for rapid
tranquillisation are lorazepam, midazolam, haloperidol, olanzapine,
ziprasidone and zuclopenthixol acetate. Wherever possible, a single
agent is preferred. When rapid tranquillisation is urgently needed,
a combination of IM haloperidol plus lorazepam or promethazine
should be considered.17
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• If patient is cooperative, oral medications e.g. olanzapine or
risperidone is preferred.
• If patient is uncooperative, parenteral medications e.g. IM haloperidol
and IM midazolam or IV diazepam can be used.
4.1.3
Depot/long-acting injectable antipsychotics in achieving
remission
Treatment adherence is a widely recognised problem in schizophrenia
but knowledge on improving it is still limited. About 50 - 70% of people
with schizophrenia had treatment non-adherence which includes
failure to enter a treatment programme, default outpatient clinic
appointments and incomplete implementation of instructions (including
prescriptions).17; 22 Clinically effective management will result in low
non-adherence rate. Studies have shown that non-adherence in
psychiatric patients resulted in high morbidity and mortality.
In a prospective cohort study, clinic defaulters had lower social
functioning and more severe mental disorder e.g. schizophrenia than
those who attended the clinic. Patients who missed their appointment
more than 12 months were more likely to have been admitted than
clinic attendees.48, level II-2
Depot or LAI APs may be considered based on patient’s preference or
when there is medication adherence issue for maintenance treatment
in schizophrenia.22; 36; 49 Available such preparations in Malaysia are:
• fluphenazine decanoate
• flupenthixol decanoate
• zuclopenthixol decanoate
• risperidone microspheres
• paliperidone palmitate
• aripiprazole
A meta-analysis of five RCTs showed that depot AAPs had higher
remission rate than oral AAPs for follow-up lasting ≥1 year (RR=1.42,
95% CI 1.18 to 1.71). However, extrapyramidal symptoms (RR=1.61,
95% CI 1.27 to 2.04) and prolactin-related adverse effects (RR=2.48,
95% CI 1.60 to 3.84) occurred more frequently in the depot
preparation.50, level I The primary evidence was of moderate to high
quality.
A cross-sectional study showed that 17.6% of psychiatrists had initiated
depot APs for people with schizophrenia having non-adherence issues.
The initiation was significantly and positively associated with public
insurance, prior inpatient admission, longer duration of non-adherence,
average or above average intellectual functioning and living in a mental
health residence. The use of depot was inversely associated with
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
SGA and other oral psychotropic medications prior to medication nonadherence.51, level III
Recommendation 4
• Treatment adherence should be regularly monitored and maximised
until the termination of treatment is indicated in schizophrenia.
• Long-acting (depot) injectable antipsychotic in schizophrenia:
 should be offered when there is medication adherence issue
 may be considered based on patient’s preference
4.1.4
Antipsychotics in relapse prevention
In a large Cochrane systematic review of 75 RCTs, APs were better than
placebo in preventing relapse in schizophrenia at 12 months (RR=0.38,
95% CI 0.32 to 0.45; NNTB=3). Furthermore, they also:52, level I
• reduced hospitalisation (RR=0.43 95% CI 0.32 to 0.57; NNTB=8)
• lessen aggressive behaviour (RR=0.35, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.66;
NNTB=50)
• improved quality of life (QoL) (SMD= -0.32, 95% CI -0.57 to -0.07)
However, they increased movement disorders (RR=1.52, 95% CI 1.25
to 1.85; NNTH=20), sedation (RR=1.52, 95% CI 1.24 to 1.86) and
weight gain (RR=1.69, 95% CI 1.21 to 2.35; NNTH=25). The evidence
for relapse prevention and hospitalisation were of high quality.
A meta-analysis showed that SGA was more effective than FGA in
preventing relapse in schizophrenia (RR=0.80, 95% CI 0.70 to 0.91;
NNT=17).53, level I There was no quality assessment of primary paper
mentioned. However, in the recent Cochrane systematic review,
subgroup analysis found no significant difference in reduction of relapse
risk in schizophrenia between FGA (RR=0.35, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.48) and
SGA (RR=0.39, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.48).52, level I
In a network meta-analysis on schizophrenia, olanzapine was more
effective than chlorpromazine (OR=0.35, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.88) and
haloperidol (OR=0.50, 95% CI 0.30 to 0.82) in reducing relapses. The
primary papers were of moderate quality.54, level I
In another meta-analysis, studies before 1991 which were exclusively
on long-acting injection (LAI) fluphenazine showed that the medication
was more effective in preventing relapse compared with oral FGA in
schizophrenia (RR=0.79, 95% CI 0.65 to 0.96). There was no difference
in effectiveness between SGA LAI and oral SGA.55, level I However,
there was no quality assessment of primary paper mentioned. Depot
preparations may be considered when treatment adherence issue
arises.17
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
A large meta-analysis of 24 RCTs compared the effectiveness and
safety of standard vs reduced dose of APs. The median duration of
follow-up was 52 weeks (IQR 46 - 53). Doses were classified as:56, level I
• standard dose (above or equal to the lower limit of the
recommended target dose range for acute treatment)
• low dose (50 - 99% of the lower limit)
• very low dose (<50% of the lower limit)
Compared with standard dose:
• low dose increased risk of relapse by 44% (RR=1.44, 95% CI 1.10
to 1.87) and all-cause discontinuation by 12% (RR=1.12, 95% CI
1.03 to 1.22)
• very low dose increased risk of relapse by 72% (RR=1.72, 95%
CI 1.29 to 2.29) and all-cause discontinuation by 31% (RR=1.31,
95% CI 1.11 to 1.54)
In terms of safety, there were no significant differences between
different doses in intolerability -related discontinuations, anticholinergic
use and rating scale-based assessments of akathisia, dyskinesia and
parkinsonism. Most primary studies in the meta-analysis were classified
as having some concerns in risk of bias assessment.
Recommendation 5
• Antipsychotics (APs) should be offered to prevent relapse in
schizophrenia.
 Second-generation APs are the preferred choice.
 Standard dose of APs should be considered as maintenance
treatment.
4.1.5
Intermittent treatment in relapse prevention
In a Cochrane systematic review on people with schizophrenia,
intermittent AP treatment compared with maintenance treatment at ≥26
weeks follow-up showed:57, level I
• higher relapse (RR=2.46, 95% CI 1.70 to 3.54)
• higher hospitalisation rate (RR=1.65, 95% CI 1.33 to 2.06)
• no difference in tardive dyskinesia (RR=1.15, 95% CI 0.58 to
2.30)
The quality of evidence in the first two outcomes was moderate while
the last outcome low.
In a later meta-analysis of ten studies, stabilised people with
schizophrenia who had been exposed for at least six months to
intermittent or placebo strategies had higher risk of relapse compared
with those on continuous treatment with OR of (3.36, 95% CI 2.36 to
5.45) and 5.64 (95% CI 4.47 to 7.11) respectively.58, level I
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 6
• Intermittent treatment using antipsychotics should be avoided in
schizophrenia.
4.1.6
Treatment for extrapyramidal signs, sedation and weight
gain associated with antipsychotics
There are several common adverse effects of APs e.g. sedation, EPS,
weight gain, constipation, cardiovascular complications and metabolic
syndrome. These adverse effects can happen at any point of time and
majority are dose dependent.
Summary of Relative AEs of APs and Common AEs of APs with
their management strategies are shown in Table 2 and Table 3.
• Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a rare medical
emergency but potentially life-threatening condition caused by APs.
It is characterised by fever, rigidity, tremors, sympathetic nervous
system dysregulation and creatinine kinase elevation. Immediate
diagnosis and treatment are essential and this condition should be
referred to the medical team.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Table 2. Relative AEs of APs
+++ High incidence/severity
++ Moderate incidence/severity
+ Low incidence/severity
- Very low incidence/severity
Source:
1. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (14th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2021
2. Stroup TS, Gray N. Management of common adverse effects of antipsychotic medications. World Psychiatry. 2018;17(3):341-35
Amisulpride
Aripiprazole
Asenapine
Brexpiprazole
Cariprazine
Chlorpromazine
Clozapine
Flupentixol
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Olanzapine
Paliperidone
Perphenazine
Quetiapine
Risperidone
Sertindole
Sulpiride
Trifluoperazine
Ziprasidone
Zuclopenthixol
++
+
+
-
++
++
+++
+
+
++
++
++
+
++
++
-
++
-
+
++
-
-
+
-
-
+++
+++
+
+
+
++
+
+
++
+
-
-
+
+
++
+
-
+
-
-
++
+++
++
+
+
+++
++
+
++
++
+
+
+
-
++
+
+
+
-
+
+
-
++
++
+++
-
+
++
-
++
+
+
+
+
++
+
-
-
-
-
++
-
++
+++
+++
-
+
+++
-
+
-
+
+++
+
++
-
-
-
-
-
++
+++
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
+
-
++
-
-
-
-
-
+++
+++
+
+
+
+
++
+
++
++
+++
-
+
+
+
++
+
+
-
-
++
-
+
+
++
+
+
+
++
+
+++
+
-
++
-
+++
-
+
-
-
+++
-
+++
+++
++
+
+++
+++
-
+++
-
+++
+++
+
+++
+
+
+
-
-
++
-
+
+
++
+
+
++
+
+
+
-
+
+
APs
Constipation
Sedation
Weight gain
Akathisia
Parkinsonism
Tardive
dyskinesia
Anticholinergic
Hypotension
QT
prolongation
Prolactin
elevation
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Table 3. Common AEs of APs and their management strategies
• Clozapine-induced
gastrointestinal hypomotility
is a common AE, 3 times
that seen with other APs
• Avoid bulk-forming laxatives
• Stop other medicines that
may contribute to
constipation if possible
• Majority of patients do not
require long-term
anticholinergic medication
(its use should be reviewed
at least every 3 months and
not to be prescribed at night)
Where symptoms do not
respond to simpler measures,
including switching to an AP
with low propensity for EPS,
botulinum toxin may be
effective
• 5-HT2 antagonists e.g.
cyproheptadine,
mirtazapine, trazodone, and
mianserin may help
• Antimuscarinic or
benzodiazepine may also be
useful
• Anticholinergics are generally
unhelpful
-
Anticholinergic
medication (e.g.
trihexyphenidyl,
benztropine)
Benzodiazepine
(e.g. clonazepam,
diazepam)
Beta-blockers (e.g.
propranolol)
Change to AP with
lower risk (refer to
Table 2)
Change to AP
with lower risk
(refer to Table 2)
Antihistaminic
medication (e.g.
diphenhydramine)
Change to AP with
lower risk (refer to
Table 2)
• Ensure adequate
fibre, fluid and
exercise
• Osmotic laxatives
(e.g. lactulose)/
stimulant laxatives
(e.g. senna)
Reduce dose of
AP
Anticholinergic
medication (e.g.
trihexyphenidyl,
procyclidine)
Reduce dose of
AP
Within the first four
months of AP
administration
Days to weeks
after AP
administration or
dose increase
Within hours to
days of AP
administration or
dose increase
Within hours to
weeks of AP
administration or
dose increase
Constipation
EPS:
Pseudoparkinsonis
m (tremor, rigidity,
bradykinesia)
EPS: Dystonia
Akathisia
Adverse effects
Onset
Dose
dependent
Management strategies
First choice
Second choice
Third choice
Comments




Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• Change to AP with lower
propensity for TD e.g.
clozapine and quetiapine
Stimulants have unclear
benefit
Valbenazine,
tetrabenazine or
deutetrabenazine
(not available in
Malaysia yet)
Change to AP
with lower risk
(refer to Table 2)
• Reduce dose of
AP
• Stop
anticholinergic if
prescribed
After months to
years of AP
administration
Tardive dyskinesia
Reduce dose
Dose at night
before sleep
Within hours to
days of AP
administration
Sedation
Treat accordingly and refer to Clinical
Practice Guidelines Management of Type
2 Diabetes Mellitus (6th Edition)*
Treat accordingly and refer to local CPG
on Management of Dyslipidaemia (5th
Edition)**
Change to AP with
lower risk(haloperidol,
aripiprazole,
amisulpride,
ziprasidone)
Within one month
of AP
administration
Diabetes mellitus
-
Adverse effects
Onset
Dose
dependent
Management strategies
First choice
Second choice
Third choice
Comments






Change to less
sedating APs
(refer to Table 2)
Stimulants have unclear
benefit
Behavioural
modification (diet,
exercise) + change AP
Within three
months of AP
administration
Dyslipidaemia
Pharmacological medication
e.g. metformin should be
considered only where
behavioural methods, switching
of AP have failed or where
obesity presents clear, immediate
physical risk to the patient
Behavioural
modification +
change AP
Behavioural
modification (diet,
exercise)
Within three
months of AP
administration
Weight gain
Add aripiprazole/
cariprazine to
existing treatment
Metformin has been shown to
improve prolactin related
symptoms and levels
respectively
Add aripiprazole
Change to
‘prolactin-sparing’
APs (aripiprazole,
quetiapine,
clozapine)
Within hours to
months of AP
administration
Hyperprolactinaemia
Consider
dopamine agonists
(cabergoline,
bromocriptine,
amantadine) or
referral to
endocrinologist
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Avoid APs that are potent α
1-adrenergic receptor
antagonist (clozapine,
quetiapine) and/or
concomitant intake of
medications that can reduce
BP
Change to AP
with lower risk
(refer to Table 2)
Adequate
hydration
Adjust dose or
slow dose
titration
Within hours to
days of AP
administration or
dose increase
Orthostatic
hypotension
-
• >440 ms (men)/
>470 ms (women)
but <500 ms:
reduce dose or
switch AP with
lower risk (refer to
Table 2 below
• >500 ms:
 repeat ECG
 stop suspected
causative drugs
and switch to
lower risk AP
 immediately
refer to
cardiologist
Abnormal T-wave
morphology: review
treatment, consider
reduce dose or
switching to lower
risk AP
After 2 - 4 weeks
of AP
administration
Adverse effects
Onset
Dose
dependent
Management strategies
First choice
Second choice
Third choice
Comments


Electrocardiogram
(ECG) changes - QT
prolongation
Risk is high with any IV AP or
combination of APs with
doses exceeding
recommended maximum
*Available at https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/Endocrine/CPG_T2DM_6th_Edition_2020_13042021.pdf
Adapted:
1. Pillinger T, McCutcheon RA, Vano L, et al. Comparative effects of 18 antipsychotics on metabolic function in patients with schizophrenia, predictors
of metabolic dysregulation, and association with psychopathology: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;7(1):64-77
2. Stroup TS, Gray N. Management of common adverse effects of antipsychotic medications. World Psychiatry. 2018;17(3):341-35
3. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (13th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2018
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
4.2 Physical Intervention
4.2.1
Electroconvulsive therapy
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be a useful adjunct to AP when
there is a need for rapid improvement and reduction of symptoms or
limited response to AP in schizophrenia.17; 36; 49; 59 ECT in combination
with AP may be beneficial in people with treatment-resistant
schizophrenia (refer to Subchapter 7.1.3 on Treatment for treatmentresistant schizophrenia)
4.2.2
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
In a Cochrane SR of 41 RCTs on schizophrenia or schizoaffective/
related disorder, temporoparietal transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) compared with sham TMS or others showed:60, level I
• improved global state on CGI scale (MD= -0.5, 95% CI -0.76 to -0.23)
• positive symptoms on PANSS scale (MD= -6.09, 95% CI -10.95 to
-1.22)
However, study subjects showed no significant clinical improvement in
global state or early withdrawal from study when TMS was used as
adjunctive therapy.
4.2.3
Transcranial direct current stimulation
A meta-analysis of 10 RCTs found no effect of transcranial direct current
stimulation compared with sham treatment on auditory hallucinations,
positive symptoms or negative symptoms in schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder.61, level I
Recommendation 7
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be considered in schizophrenia to
achieve rapid and short-term improvement of severe symptoms
after an adequate trial of antipsychotic is proven ineffective and in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
4.3 Psychosocial Intervention
There are various forms of psychosocial intervention which are
not limited to psychotherapy and psychological techniques in
the management of people with schizophrenia. The aim of these
psychosocial intervention varies depending on the treatment goal. The
commonly used interventions are discussed below.
4.3.1
Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation improves understanding of mental health issues,
recognising early warning signs of relapse and understanding on
the work of psychiatric services.22 A psychoeducation programme
includes key information about diagnosis, symptoms, psychosocial
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
interventions, medications and side effects as well as information about
stress and coping, crisis plans, early warning signs (EWS) and, suicide
and relapse prevention.36
In a Cochrane systematic review of low-quality evidence on people with
schizophrenia, brief psychoeducation either individual, group or family,
was better than routine care in prevention of:62, level I
• non-compliance with medication at short-term (RR=0.63, 95% CI
0.41 to 0.96) and medium-term (RR=0.17, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.54)
• relapse at medium-term (RR=0.70, 95% CI 0.52 to 0.93)
Another Cochrane systematic review on promoting well-being
and reducing distress of siblings of people with schizophrenia,
psychoeducation was better than standard care in coping with (family)
burden at 12 months (MD= -8.80, 95% CI -15.22 to -2.34).63, level I
In an RCT looking on community-based comprehensive intervention
which included psychoeducation, social skills training, cognitive
behaviour therapy (CBT) and, strategies against stigma and
discrimination (SASD) vs control for people with schizophrenia, the
intervention was significantly effective at nine months on the following
outcomes:64, level I
• overcoming stigma
• anticipated discrimination
• functioning based on GAF total score
• reduction in BPRS total score
• reduction in PANSS negative score
EWS are early symptoms that are distinctive to the person with
schizophrenia and often precede acute psychotic relapse. Examples
are change in sleep pattern, irritability, social withdrawal, difficulty in
concentration and decline in self-care. Thus, intervention on EWS aims
to detect and manage these signs for prevention of relapse. A Cochrane
systematic review showed that training to recognise EWS of relapse in
schizophrenia was better compared with treatment as usual in:65, level I
• preventing relapses (RR=0.53, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.79)
• preventing re-hospitalisation (RR=0.48, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.66)
• improving medication compliance (MD=0.57, 95% CI 0.42 to 0.77)
In subgroup analysis, time taken to relapse after treatment was
longer if EWS intervention was delivered to patients only compared
with treatment as usual (HR=0.26, 95% CI 0.13 to 0.53), but no
difference was shown when EWS intervention was delivered to both
patient and their carer/health professionals. Apart from that, time to rehospitalisation after treatment was longer (HR=0.62, 95% CI 0.46 to
0.83) when the intervention was delivered to both patients and their
carer/health professional. In this review, the overall quality of the 34
RCTs was very low.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
SIGN recommends that psychoeducation should not be offered as a
stand-alone intervention to people with schizophrenia and professionals
should ensure that people with schizophrenia and their families/carers
are informed about the illness.49 APA recommends that people with
schizophrenia receive psychoeducation.36
In Malaysia, family psychoeducation programmes have been conducted
for many years based on the Family Link programme module.66
Recommendation 8
• Psychoeducation which includes early warning signs interventions
should be given in addition to other interventions in schizophrenia.
4.3.2
Supported employment
In a Cochrane systematic review for adults with severe mental illness
where schizophrenia disorders were well represented, supported
employment increased levels of any employment compared with other
vocational approaches (RR=3.24, 95% CI 2.17 to 4.82). It also showed
some advantages in other secondary outcomes e.g. duration of any
form of paid employment, job tenure for competitive employment and
time to first competitive employment in long-term. However the primary
papers were of very low quality.67, level I
NICE recommends to offer supported employment programmes to
people with psychosis or schizophrenia who wish to find or return to
work. Apart from that, it is recommended to consider other occupational
or educational activities, including pre-vocational training, for people
who are unable to work or unsuccessful in finding employment.22
APA also recommends that patients with schizophrenia receive
supported employment services.36 Guidelines on implementation of
supported employment programme for people with mental illness
including schizophrenia has also been developed locally.17
Recommendation 9
• Supported employment should be offered in schizophrenia.
4.3.3
Cognitive remediation therapy
Cognitive impairment is a core feature of schizophrenia that is fully
evident at the time of first episode and the most affected areas are
attention, verbal memory and executive functioning. Cognitive deficits
in schizophrenia influence functional outcomes in work, independent
living, social functioning and illness management. Cognitive remediation
therapy (CRT) is a behavioural treatment intervention that aims to
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
improve the cognitive processes e.g. memory, attention, executive
function, metacognition and social cognition. It uses techniques which
modify cognition in people with schizophrenia e.g. errorless learning,
repetition and positive reinforcement.68
A meta- analysis of 38 moderate quality RCTs demonstrated a moderate
effect of CRT on global cognition in people with schizophrenia (Cohen’s
d=0.45, 95% CI 0.31 to 0.59). The CRT also showed significant effect
on all cognitive domains i.e. attention/vigilance (Cohen’s d=0.25),
processing speed (Cohen’s d=0.258), verbal working memory (Cohen’s
d=0.346), verbal learning and memory (Cohen’s d=0.410), reasoning/
problem solving (Cohen’s d=0.572) and social cognition (Cohen’s
d=0.651).69, level I
The meta-analysis also suggested that functioning outcomes were
best achieved by adding cognitive remediation to other rehabilitation
programmes. The cognitive remediation programmes on psychosocial
functioning reported significant stronger effects in studies that provided
adjunctive psychiatric rehabilitation (Cohen’s d=0.59, 95% CI 0.30 to
0.88) compared with those on cognitive remediation alone (Cohen’s
d=0.28, 95% CI -0.02 to 0.58).69, level I
CRT has been suggested for people with schizophrenia.36 It may be
offered as part of a multimodal psychosocial intervention.17 in people
with schizophrenia with persisting problems associated with cognitive
difficulties.49
Recommendation 10
• Cognitive remediation therapy may be considered as an intervention
for cognitive difficulties in schizophrenia.
4.3.4
Social skills training
Social skills training (SST) is a psychosocial intervention, whether group
or individual, aimed at enhancing the social performance and reducing
the distress and difficulty in social situations. A Cochrane systematic
review of 13 studies found that in people with schizophrenia, compared
with standard care, SST:70, level I
• significantly improved social functioning based on various rating
scales
• significantly improved mental state based on various severity rating
scales
• prevented relapse (RR=0.52, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.79)
The primary papers were of very low quality.
Existing evidence-based guidelines do not strongly recommend SST in
the management of schizophrenia.22; 36; 49
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 11
• Social skills training may be offered in schizophrenia.
4.3.5
Peer support services
Peer support is a social emotional support which is mutually provided
by persons having a mental health condition to others sharing a similar
problem in order to bring about a desired social or personal change.22
A Cochrane systematic review found very limited and very low quality
of evidence on the effectiveness of peer support for people with
schizophrenia. In view of that, it could not be recommended as yet.71, level I
NICE recommends to consider peer support for people with
schizophrenia to improve their experience and quality of life. It should
be delivered by a trained peer support worker who has recovered from
schizophrenia and remains stable. The workers should receive support
from their whole team and, support and mentorship from experienced
peer workers.22
Recommendation 12
• Peer support may be offered in schizophrenia.
4.3.6
Family therapy
Family therapy is a form of psychotherapy involving significant family
members together with the person with schizophrenia based on
individual family needs. It focuses on relationship in which the problem
is manifested by providing support, skills and education through
solution-oriented approach. It aims to reduce level of distress and
improve communication within families.49
In a Cochrane systematic review of 53 studies on schizophrenia, family
therapy:72, level I
• decreased frequency of relapse at 7 to 12 months (RR=0.55, 95% CI
0.48 to 0.62; NNT=7, 95% CI 6 to 8)
• reduced hospital admission at 7 to 12 months (RR=0.78, 95% CI
0.63 to 0.98; NNT 8 CI 6 to 13)
• improved non-compliance with medication (RR=0.60, 95% CI 0.49 to
0.73; NNT 6 CI 5 to 9)
The primary papers in the review were of poor methodological quality.
Recommendation 13
• Family therapy may be offered in schizophrenia.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
4.3.7
Cognitive behaviour therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) is a structured, short-term, presentoriented psychotherapy. It focuses on problem solving and modifying
dysfunctional thinking and behaviour. The application of CBT is based
on conceptualisation of individual person’s belief, behaviour and
emotional experience.
Two meta-analyses on CBT against two different comparisons (other
psychosocial intervention and standard care) showed:
• favourable outcomes in relapse, mental state, hospitalisation,
social functioning and QoL in CBT added to standard care
compared with standard care alone at long-term although nonsignificant in a Cochrane systematic review of 60 RCTs. However,
the risk of adverse event was reduced in the combined treatment
(CBT plus standard care) (RR=0.44, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.72). The
quality of primary papers included was low.73, level I
• no significant difference between combination of CBT and
standard care vs standard care and other psychosocial therapies
in relapse, mental state, hospitalisation, adverse event, social
functioning and QoL in another Cochrane systematic review. The
quality of primary papers included was low.74, level I
CBT for psychosis (CBT-p) aims to normalise and make sense of the
individual’s psychotic experiences and also reduce the associated
distress and impact on functioning. In a meta-analysis, CBT-p comparing
with treatment as usual (TAU), CBT-p showed:75, level I
• improved functioning at the end-point of intervention (Hedges’s
g=0.25, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.33) but not sustained at follow-up
(Hedges’s g=0.10, 95% CI -0.07 to 0.26)
• reduced distress (Hedges’s g=0.37, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.69)
• did not improve QoL (Hedges’s g=0.04, 95% CI -0.12 to 0.19)
However, there was no report on quality of primary papers included in
this study.
An RCT comparing Recovery-Oriented Cognitive Therapy (CT-R) with
TAU showed that CT-R had earlier improvement in global functioning
for people with low functioning schizophrenia with shorter duration of
illness ≤12 years (Cohen’s d 0.53).76, level I
Guidelines recommend CBTp in schizophrenia with persistent positive
symptoms and/or depression.17; 36; 49
Recommendation 14
• Cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis may be offered in
schizophrenia.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
4.3.8
Supportive psychotherapy/Counselling
Supportive psychotherapy/counselling relies on therapeutic alliances
with the aim to assist change in attitude and behaviour and, reinforce
the ability to cope.
A Cochrane systematic review of 24 very low quality RCTs found no
significant differences in the relapse, hospitalisation and general
functioning between supportive therapy and standard care in
schizophrenia on medium- and/or long-term follow-up. However,
supportive therapy had poorer outcomes compared with other
psychological or psychosocial treatments at long-term follow-up:77, level I
• increased hospitalisation rates (RR=1.82, 95% CI 1.11 to 2.99)
• no clinical improvement in mental state (RR=1.27, 95% CI 1.04 to
1.54)
• dissatisfaction of treatment for the recipient of care (RR=3.19,
95% CI 1.01 to 10.7)
• Supportive psychotherapy has not been shown to be beneficial in the
treatment of schizophrenia.
4.3.9
Others
•
Life skills training
Life skills programmes for serious mental illness are rehabilitation
programmes that address the needs associated with independent
functioning e.g. financial awareness, communication, domestic care,
personal self-care and community living skills.
A Cochrane systematic review found no good evidence to suggest that
life skills programmes were effective for people with chronic mental
illnesses which were mostly schizophrenia.78, level I
•
Exercise therapy
A Cochrane systematic review of small RCTs looked into the
effectiveness of exercise therapy on people with schizophrenia.
The therapy was defined as any intervention either used alone or
in conjunction with others where physical activity or exercise was
considered to be the main or active element. Compared with standard
treatment, exercise therapy improved depression, anxiety, both negative
and positive PANSS scores and also physical fitness. However, it was
less effective than yoga in total and negative PANSS scores.79, level I
•
Dance therapy
Dance therapy uses movement and dance to explore a person’s
emotion in a non-verbal way by interpreting their dance to personal
feelings.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
In a Cochrane systematic review on schizophrenia, a moderate quality
RCT showed that dance therapy was more effective than standard care
in reducing PANSS negative symptoms score by 20 - 40% (RR=0.62,
95% CI 0.39 to 0.97).80, level I
•
Music therapy
Music therapy is a systematic process of intervention promoting health
using expression of music.
A Cochrane systematic review on schizophrenia, compared with
standard care, showed that music therapy improved:81, level I
• global state at medium-term (NNTB=2, 95% CI 2 to 4)
• general mental state on PANSS at medium-term (SMD= -0.97
95% CI -1.31 to -0.63)
• negative symptoms on SANS at short-term (SMD= -0.5 95% CI
-0.73 to -0.27) and medium-term (SMD= -0.55 95% CI -0.87 to
-0.24)
• social functioning on Social Disability Screening Schedule (SDSS)
at medium-term (SMD= -0.72, 95% CI -1.04 to -0.40)
The quality of primary papers used in the review was low to moderate.
•
Religion/spiritual activities
Religious/spiritual activities are multidimensional approaches that
promote positive coping. It provides sense of meaning and purpose,
emotional comfort, personal control and connection with others and a
higher power.
In a small cross-sectional study on schizophrenia, there was a modest
correlation between positive religious coping and psychological aspect
in QoL (r=0.28, p=0.03).82, level III
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
5. SERVICE LEVEL INTERVENTION
Following the global paradigm shifts from institutionalisation to
community-based mental health services, Malaysia is steadily
progressing towards developing more community-based psychiatric
services. Hence this chapter addresses this issue based on common
service level interventions provided in the management of schizophrenia.
5.1 Crisis and Emergency Service
Crisis and Emergency Mental Health Service provides intensive care
in the community for people with acute psychiatric symptoms, thus
avoiding the need for hospitalisation. A Cochrane systematic review
of mixed quality RCTs on mainly schizophrenia showed that those
receiving crisis intervention services compared with standard care
had:83, level I
• fewer re-admissions after initial crisis (RR=0.53, 95% CI 0.41 to
0.68)
• fewer days in acute care post-crisis (MD= -10.30, 95% CI - 14.77
to -5.83)
• lesser family burden at three months (RR=0.57, 95% CI 0.41 to
0.80) and six months (RR=0.34, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.59)
• higher family satisfaction with treatment at three months (RR=0.63,
95% CI 0.44 to 0.89) and six months (RR=0.57, 95% CI 0.42 to
0.78)
• significantly higher patient satisfaction with treatment at 6 - 20
months
• Crisis resolution and home treatment team provides the following:22
 assessment for admission to acute psychiatric wards
 initiation of home treatment programme with frequent visits as an
alternative to hospitalisation
 continuation of home treatment until the crisis has resolved and
subsequently transfer to other services for further care
 facilitate early discharge from acute wards
NICE recommends offering crisis resolution and home treatment teams
as a first-line service to support people with schizophrenia during an
acute episode in the community and should be considered before
admission to the hospital and as means to enable timely discharge.22
Recommendation 15
• Crisis intervention services should be offered to people with
schizophrenia in acute phase.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
5.2 Assertive Community Treatment
Assertive community treatment (ACT) is a service that provides
continuous care for people with serious mental illness in the community
especially those who have difficulty engaging with the mental health
services. The Assertive Community Treatment in Schizophrenia
Spectrum Disorders (ACCESS II) study showed positive outcomes for
those receiving ACT which sustained even after four years:84, level II-3
• 75.7% were fully adherent to medications compared with baseline
(p < 0.001)
• 73.0% received psychotherapeutic treatment conducted by the
ACT team or private psychotherapists
• significant reduction of inpatient treatment from 22.4 days at year
one to 4.7 days at year four
• significant clinical improvement based on BPRS, CGI-S, GAF and
Q-LES-Q
• Key elements of ACT are as follows:22
 a multidisciplinary approach involving a dedicated psychiatrist
 care for people with serious mental illness
 shared responsibility for the same client by team members
 provision of all psychiatric and social care for each client
 care is provided at home or workplace
 emphasis on medication adherence
People with schizophrenia should receive ACT if there is a history of
poor engagement with services leading to frequent relapse or social
disruption, high use of inpatient services and presence of residual
psychotic symptoms.36; 49
Recommendation 16
• Assertive community treatment should be provided for people with
schizophrenia who have difficulties engaging with the mental health
services.
5.3 Intensive Case Management
Intensive case management (ICM) is a small case-load (up to 20 people)
of community-based psychiatric service for people with serious mental
illness that may follow many models e.g. ACT, case management etc.
In a large Cochrane systematic review, compared with standard care,
people (majority with schizophrenia) receiving ICM had:85, level I
• reduced number of days in hospital per month at 24 months (MD=
-0.86, 95% CI -1.37 to -0.34)
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• reduced number of people living dependently at medium-term
(RR=0.80, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.97) and long-term (RR=0.65, 95% CI
0.49 to 0.88)
• improved functioning outcomes based on GAF at long-term
(MD=3.41, 95% CI 1.66 to 5.16).
• less likely to be lost to psychiatric services (RR=0.43, 95% CI 0.30
to 0.61)
• significantly higher client satisfaction at short-, medium- and longterm
A recent large cohort study investigated the change in medical
utilisation of case management (CM) for psychiatric home care among
mainly people with schizophrenia. CM led to a significant decrement
of psychiatric and involuntary admissions, and the utilisation shifted
toward psychiatric outpatient service. The effect persisted after two
years of intervention. However, CM showed no impact on lowering the
admission rate for co-morbid physical illnesses.86, level II-2
In another cohort study with a long follow-up, ICM significantly improved
treatment adherence and reduced suicide and suicidal attempts
compared with previous standard treatment received in mental health
units. Apart from that, combination of ICM and LAI treatment improved
the outcomes.87, level II-2
NICE recommends for consideration of ICM for people with psychosis or
schizophrenia who are likely to disengage from treatment or services.22
Recommendation 17
• Intensive case management should be considered for people with
schizophrenia who are at risk of treatment non-adherence.
5.4 Collaborative Community-based Service Intervention
Collaborative community-based service intervention is run by the people
in the community who are trained in mental health. This is a strategy
to deliver mental health care in low resource setting. The community
health workers were defined as non-healthcare workers who had at
least 10 years of schooling, good interpersonal skills, systematic
training over six weeks and assessment for competency.
An RCT compared collaborative community-based care delivered
through community health workers plus standard facility-based
care with standard facility-based care alone in schizophrenia. The
community-based intervention had better score in the general subscale
of PANSS (MD= -2.16, 95% CI -4.23 to -0.09) and locally validated
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Indian Disability Evaluation and Assessment (MD= -0.95, 95% CI -1.68
to -0.23) at 12 months.88, level I
Recommendation 18
• Collaborative community-based service intervention may be offered
for people with schizophrenia.
5.5 Day Hospitalisation/Day Treatment
Day hospital or day treatment centre is an ambulatory treatment
programme that emphasises psychosocial and pre-vocational treatment
modalities designed for people with serious mental disorders who
require co-ordinated, intensive, comprehensive and multi-disciplinary
treatment not provided in an outpatient clinic setting.
A Cochrane systematic review found that people with schizophrenia
allocated to day hospital care had less admissions to hospital beyond
one year compared with those receiving out-patient care (RR=0.71,
95% CI 0.56 to 0.89). The heterogeneity was significant while the
quality of primary papers was moderate.89, level I
5.6 Residential Services
A quasi-experimental study on people with serious mental illnesses
(predominantly schizophrenia spectrum disorders) compared those
who were under the Full-Service Partnerships (FSP) programme,
which provided a combination of subsidised permanent housing and
full-fidelity assertive community treatment, and those receiving public
mental health services. FSP participants had significant increase
in:90, level II-1
• number of days spent in either independent or congregate/
residential living situations
• case management
• medication management
• therapy/rehabilitation
• total outpatient visits
There was also significant decline in:
• mean number of days spent homeless per year
• use of inpatient, emergency and justice system services
On quality of life, FSP clients gave significantly more favorable
responses in all domains especially the living situation domain.
In a recent large RCT, there was no significant difference in number
of ED visits and hospital admissions between immediate access to
independent housing and support from the ACT team also known as
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Housing First group and TAU group for people who were homeless with
severe mental disorders with predominantly schizophrenia. However,
the housing first group showed less inpatient days (RR=0.62, 95% CI
0.48 to 0.80).91, level I
• Residential services may be useful in schizophrenia to reduce
homelessness.
5.7 Early Intervention in Psychosis
Psychosis can lead to persistent disability, increased cost in treatment,
social inequalities and suicide if not intervened early.22; 92 The initial 3 - 5
years from a first episode of psychosis is a critical period whereby early
intervention improves outcomes and alters the trajectory of illness and
disability.22 Early intervention in psychosis consists of early detection of
people at risk and phase-specific treatment93; 94, level I
Specialised high-risk service is a psychiatric service meant for those
at risk of psychosis e.g. in Outreach and Support in South London
(OASIS). In a cohort study on patients with first episode psychosis which
mainly consisted of schizophrenia at 24 months follow-up, compared
with conventional service, OASIS showed significantly:95, level II-2
• fewer days in hospital
• shorter median referral-to-diagnosis time
• reduced likelihood of compulsory hospital admission
• lower frequency of admission
In a recent Cochrane systematic review of three RCTs, extended
specialised early intervention (SEI) resulted in fewer disengagements
from mental health treatment compared with standard SEI + TAU for
people with recent-onset psychosis (RR=0.45, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.75).
However, there was no significant difference in remission.96, level I
People with schizophrenia experiencing first episode of psychosis
should receive treatment from the early intervention services which
provide a full range of pharmacological, psychological, social,
occupational and educational interventions.22; 36; 49
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• Key elements in early intervention in psychosis services are:22
 swift assessment through a readily accessed point of contact by
a practitioner competent in recognising first episode psychosis
 staff who build up trust and confidence
 provision of good information on psychosis and treatment options
 a care coordinator who will support throughout their time in the
service, including helping them with self-management skills,
social care issues e.g. housing or debt management, and relapse
prevention work
 a choice of psychological and pharmacological interventions
 support, information and advice for families and carers, including
carers’ assessments where required
 support with employment, training and/or education
 regular physical health checks, monitoring and appropriate
treatment, with support and/or education
 regular monitoring of risk
 routine monitoring of other co-existing conditions, including
depression, anxiety and substance misuse, particularly in the
early phases of treatment
 a crisis plan and prompt service response in crisis
Recommendation 19
• Early intervention in psychosis service should be provided for
people with first episode of psychosis.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
6. TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
In a Cochrane systematic review, acupuncture added to standard AP
may prevent absence of clinical response compared with standard AP
in people with schizophrenia at 3 - 12 months follow-up (RR=0.44, 95%
CI 0.28 to 0.57). In addition, adverse effects were less in combined
treatment (RR=0.30, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.83). However, the certainty of
evidence in this review was generally low and of short duration.97, level I
In another Cochrane review, yoga as part of a package of care
compared with standard care in schizophrenia may have a better
QoL at <6 months follow-up (MD=22.93, 95% CI 19.74 to 26.12). This
review included a few small studies which lacked many key
outcomes.98, level I
In a meta-analysis of eight RCTs, extracted Gingko Biloba used
as adjunct therapy to AP may improve symptoms of schizophrenia
compared with AP alone (SMD= - 0.49, 95% CI -0.69 to -0.30). The
certainty of evidence was generally low because most evidence was
from short-term trials and graded very low in quality.99, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend traditional and
complementary medicine in schizophrenia.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
7. CHALLENGES IN MANAGEMENT
7.1 Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia
7.1.1 Definition
The definition for treatment-resistant schizophrenia (TRS) in guidelines
on schizophrenia is varied. For clinical purposes, TRS is defined as a
condition when patient’s symptoms show no response or partial and
suboptimal response to trial of two different APs for at least six weeks
with each medication used at an adequate dosage of medication. Some
definitions specify on using medications from different classes.36
Due to lack of uniformity in the definition of TRS, the Treatment
Response and Resistance in Psychosis (TRRIP) Working Group has
conducted a systematic review and established minimum and optimum
criteria to identify TRS for future trials.100, level I Refer to Appendix 9 on
Consensus Criteria for Assessment and Definition of TreatmentResistant Schizophrenia. TRS occurs in up to 23% of people with
schizophrenia.101 - 102, level II-2
7.1.2 Predictors
In the Aetiology and Ethnicity in Schizophrenia and Other Psychoses
(AESOP-10) study on first episode psychosis in United Kingdom,
predicted odds of treatment-resistant schizophrenia (TRS) were 1.09
higher in people with negative symptoms compared with those without
negative symptoms. Predicted odds of TRS for people with four and
nine negative symptoms were 1.40 and 2.13 respectively.101, level II-2
A systematic review of 47 studies showed that clinical predictive factors
of TRS were:103, level I
• poor premorbid functioning
• male gender
• younger age at onset
• presence of neurobiological factors
• lower educational level
• single marital status
• negative symptoms
• substance use disorder
• non-adherence
• non-response within two weeks of initiation of treatment
• longer duration of untreated psychosis
However, there was no mention of quality assessment in this review.
A Danish cohort study of 4,674 person-years follow-up showed no
evidence in polygenic risk score for TRS.102, level II-2
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
7.1.3 Treatment
Four Cochrane systematic reviews studied treatment of TRS. The
summary of findings on the effectiveness of pharmacological treatment
from the three reviews were:
• clozapine was more effective than typical AP in improvement in
BPRS endpoint scores at short-term (WMD= -7.83, 95% CI -10.0
to -5.6) and reduction of relapse rate at long-term (RR=0.17, 95%
CI 0.1 to 0.3)104, level I
• clozapine showed inconclusive efficacy compared with AAPs
which required further trials to confirm the findings105, level I
• no significant difference of effect on mental state between very
low, low and standard dose of clozapine106, level I
For adverse events, the reviews showed:
• comparing with medication typical AP, clozapine caused less
movement disorder (RR=0.77, 95% CI 0.7 to 0.9) but more
hypersalivation (RR=2.01, 95% CI 1.7 to 2.3) and weight gain
(RR=1.33, 95% CI 1.1 to 1.6)104, level I
• comparing with AAPs, clozapine produced fewer EPS than
risperidone (RR=0.39, 95% CI 0.22 to 0.68) and zotepine
(RR=0.05, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.86); however, it caused more
reduction in white blood cells count, hypersalivation, sedation,
weight gain and seizures than other AAPs105, level I
• lower dose of clozapine was associated with less weight gain
(MD= -1.60, 95% CI -2.90 to -0.30), lower glucose level after meal
(MD= -1.6, 95% CI -2.90 to -0.30) and lower Treatment Emergent
Side Effect Scale score (MD= -3.99, 95% CI -5.75 to -2.24)106, level I
The quality of primary papers in the reviews varied from moderate to
low quality.
Guidelines of SIGN, NICE and APA recommend to offer clozapine to
TRS.22; 36; 49 Refer to Appendix 7 on Suggested titration regimen for
clozapine initiation in the community and Clozapine initiation and
titration regimen for in-patient.
Recommendation 20
• Clozapine should be offered in treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
• Clozapine augmentation with another medications
For people with schizophrenia whose illness has not responded
adequately to clozapine at an optimised dose, healthcare providers
should consider the followings before adding a second AP to augment
treatment with the clozapine:22
 review the diagnosis
 ensure adherence to AP (adequate dose and duration)
 review engagement with psychosocial intervention
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
 consider other causes of non-response e.g. co-morbid substance
misuse disorder (including alcohol, nicotine), concurrent use of
other prescribed medication or physical illness
In a Cochrane systematic review, augmentation of clozapine with
another APs in five different RCTs (low to very low quality) showed the
following results:107, level I
 clozapine + aripiprazole vs clozapine + haloperidol
- no significant differences in mental state based on BPRS at
12, 24 and 52 weeks
- less side effects in clozapine + aripiprazole based on Liverpool
University Neuroleptic Side Effects Rating Scale (LUNSERS)
at 12 (MD= -4.90, 95% CI -8.48 to -1.32) and 24 (MD= -4.90,
95% CI -8.25 to -1.55) weeks
 clozapine + amisulpride vs clozapine + quetiapine
- clozapine + amisulpride showed better CGI score (MD= -0.90,
95% CI -1.38 to 0.42), BPRS score (MD= -4.00, 95% CI -5.86,
-2.14), SAPS score (MD= -6.90, 95% CI -12.82 to -0.98) and
SANS score (MD= -5.20, 95% CI -7.14 to -3.26) at eight weeks
- no report on side effects
 clozapine + risperidone vs clozapine + sulpiride
- clozapine + risperidone had better PANSS positive score at
eight weeks (MD= -2.55, 95% CI -4.64 to -0.46)
- no significant differences in PANSS total score (20% to 50%
reduction and mean at end point) and PANSS negative score
- no significant differences in weight gain and hypersalivation
 clozapine + risperidone vs clozapine + ziprasidone
- clozapine + risperidone had better HAMD score at six weeks
(MD= -3.40, 95% CI -6.71 to -0.09) but not at 26 weeks
- no significant differences in PANSS, CGI and GAF scores
- no significant differences in EPS and CGI adverse effect
scores
 clozapine + ziprasidone vs clozapine + quetiapine
- clozapine + ziprasidone had better CGI-S (MD= -0.70, 95%
CI -1.18 to -0.22), PANSS total score (MD= -12.30, 95% CI
-22.43 to -2.17) and PANSS positive score (MD= -3.10, 95%
CI -5.52 to -0.68) at 12 weeks
- no significant difference in PANSS negative score
- no significant differences in EPS and overall adverse effect
rate
Recommended duration of augmentation to clozapine varies i.e. 8 - 10
weeks22 or a minimum of 10 weeks.49
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• Augmentation with AP may be beneficial in people with schizophrenia
who did not respond adequately to clozapine.
• Before adding a second AP to clozapine, adequate assessment of
the reasons for treatment failure should be conducted.
• The risks and benefits should be weighed if an augmentation
treatment is introduced.
• It is important to monitor side effects and potential drug-drug
interactions.
• Regular review of the medication regimen should be carried out to
justify the continuity of treatment.
• Electroconvulsive therapy
A Cochrane systematic review of 15 moderate to low quality RCTs on
ECT for TRS showed:108, level I
 no significant difference in clinical response compared with
clozapine
 improvement in clinical response at short-term (RR=1.91, 95%
CI 1.09 to 3.36) and long-term (RR=2.06, 95% CI 1.75 to 2.42)
compared with standard care; however, ECT was associated with
more memory deterioration (RR=27.00, 95% CI 1.67 to 437.68)
 fewer readmissions (RR=0.29, 95% CI 0.10 to 0.85) compared
with sham ECT
In two meta-analyses of moderate to low quality RCTs which compared
combination of ECT and AP vs AP alone in patients with TRS, the
former had:
 better endpoint improvement in total score of PANSS (SMD=
-0.67, 95% CI -0.95 to -0.39)109, level I and BPRS (RR=1.25, 95%
CI 1.14 to 1.37)110, level I
 more side effects
- headache with NNH of 6 (95% CI 4 to 11)109, level I and OR of
9.1 (95% CI 3.97 to 20.86)110, level I
- memory impairment with NNH of 3 (95% CI 2 to 5)109, level I and
OR of 6.48 (95% CI 3.54 to 11.87)110, level I
• ECT in combination with AP may be beneficial in people with
treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
• Common adverse reactions e.g. headache and memory impairment
should be monitored.
• Cognitive behaviour therapy
A large multicentre RCT studied the effectiveness and safety of CBT
in clozapine-resistant schizophrenia. The CBT was more effective
than TAU in reduction of symptoms severity (PANSS total score) at
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
nine months (MD= -2.40 points, 95% CI -4.79 to -0.02) but showed no
difference at 21 months. There was no significant difference in at least
one AE between the two groups.111, level I
7.2 Treatment in Special Populations
7.2.1 Co-morbid substance use and tobacco use disorders
People with schizophrenia have been found to have higher rates of
substance use disorders (SUD). In a meta-analysis of 123 studies
with 165,811 subjects and excluding nicotine dependence, the pooled
prevalence of any SUD was 41.7%, with specific prevalence of 27.5%
for illicit drugs, 26.2% for cannabis, 24.3% for alcohol and 7.3% for
stimulants. The prevalence varies according to geographical distribution
and type of substance use.112, level II-2
The co-morbidity of SUD among people with schizophrenia carries
poorer prognosis and more complex management. Referral to
psychiatric services should be considered for these people. SUD
should always be considered and monitored across all phases of care
for people with schizophrenia.22
Evidence on treatment of schizophrenia with co-morbid SUD is limited
by scarcity of relevant and high-quality studies. The best option is
to offer comprehensive treatment using both pharmacological and
psychosocial interventions in treating these patients.
A Cochrane systematic review of eight very low quality RCTs on people
with schizophrenia and co-occurring substance misuse showed the
following results:113, level I
 risperidone vs clozapine
- clozapine had lower score for endpoint negative symptoms in
PANSS (MD=4.00, 95% CI 0.79 to 7.21) but no difference in
positive symptoms (MD=0.90, 95% CI -2.21 to 4.01)
- clozapine had lower scores in craving for substance in
Marijuana Craving Questionnaire (MD=7.00, 95% CI 2.37 to
11.63) and Obsessive-Compulsive Craving Scale (MD=14.2,
95% CI 4.45 to 23.95)
- no significant difference in adherence to AP, EPS and
reduction in substance use
 risperidone vs olanzapine
- no significant difference in reduction of positive symptoms,
cannabis use, craving for cannabis and parkinsonism
In a systematic review of 14 studies on patients with schizophrenia
and co-morbid substance use disorder, clozapine use in SUD (other
than nicotine) was superior than FGA and risperidone in substance use
reduction and abstinence. However, it was not superior to olanzapine
and ziprasidone. Findings on nicotine use was scarce.114, level I
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Another meta-analysis involving 19 RCTs on schizophrenia subjects
with SUD found that clozapine showed reduction of substance use
compared with any APs (MD= -1.08, 95% CI -1.84 to -0.32) while
risperidone showed reduction for craving compared with olanzapine
(SMD= 0.82, 95% CI 0.18 to 1.46). In terms of symptom reduction,
olanzapine, clozapine and risperidone were more effective than other
APs. The reported side effects followed the established patterns of
each APs. Overall quality of primary studies was of low quality.115, level I
Based on a Cochrane systematic review, there was absence of highquality evidence to support any psychosocial treatment over standard
care for important outcomes e.g. remain in treatment, reduction in
substance use or improved mental or global state in people with serious
mental illnesses and substance misuse. These findings indicated the
complexities in the treatment of dual diagnosis.116, level I
A meta-analysis of worldwide studies demonstrated an association
between schizophrenia and current smoking (OR=5.9, 95% CI 4.9
to 5.7).117, level II-2 A local study showed the prevalence of nicotine
dependence (smoking) among people with schizophrenia in a hospital
at 38.1%.118, level III This was higher than the overall prevalence of
smoking of any tobacco products at 21.3% among Malaysian adults in
the National Health and Morbidity Survey 2019.119, level III
Guidelines recommend that the attending doctor has to assess the
smoking status of all people with schizophrenia.36; 120 People with
schizophrenia should be offered help to stop smoking, even if previous
attempts have been unsuccessful.22
• Tobacco cessation
 Smoking of tobacco and tobacco products (cigarette, electronic
cigarette/vape, shisha, pipe, cigar etc.) can lead to various noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). Worldwide, more than eight
million people die every year because of this habit.121
 Hence, the decision to integrate smoking treatment with NCDs
is important to reduce the prevalence of NCDs and their
complications. This decision was made during the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO
FCTC) Steering Committee Meeting in December 2019 chaired
by the Honourable Health Minister of Malaysia.
 The treatment for smoking should be initiated by the treating
doctor based on the assessment and treatment of tobacco use
disorder as in Table 4. Details on this can be found in the CPG on
Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder 2016, available at:
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/
Respiratory/CPG_TobacoDisorder.pdf
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Table 4. Assessment and Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder
Recommendation 21
• People with schizophrenia and co-morbid substance use disorder
should be referred to a psychiatric service for further management.
• People with schizophrenia and smoking should be offered help with
smoking cessation.
7.2.2
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
The principles of treatment for pregnant women with schizophrenia
should be based on risk-benefit analysis to optimise the outcomes
and reduce the complication for both mothers and their babies. The
management can be of a great challenge due to the limited availability
of evidence. Cohort studies showed that women with schizophrenia
had increased risk of complications in pregnancy and delivery, and
neonatal morbidity.122 - 123, level II-2 Postpartum relapse in mothers with
schizophrenia in a cohort study was:124, level II-2
• highest in 0 to 9 days following childbirth (RR=5.67, 95% CI 3.23
to 9.96), followed by 10 to 19 days after childbirth (RR=4.58, 95%
CI 2.48 to 8.48) compared with 180 days after childbirth
• increased if there was admission during pregnancy (RR=6.83,
95% CI 3.58 to 13.04)
• increased when the child’s father had a mental disorder (RR=1.80,
95% CI 1.21 to 2.69)
1.
Ask and document smoking status for all patients.
2.
Provide brief advice on quit smoking at every visit to all smokers.
3.
Assess level of nicotine addiction using Modified Fagerström Test for
Cigarette Dependence Questionnaire (COMPULSORY) and verify
smoking
status
using
carbon
monoxide
breath
analyser
(IF
AVAILABLE).
4.
Offer pharmacotherapy to all smokers who are attempting to quit, unless
contraindicated.
5.
If selected, use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) for at least eight to
twelve weeks, whereas varenicline should be used for at least twelve
weeks.
6.
Combination therapy (e.g. two NRTs, a non-NRT, e.g. bupropion with an
NRT) is better than monotherapy in smoking cessation treatment and
may be most useful for those smokers at highest risk of relapse.
7.
Use smoking cessation medications with caution in special populations
(e.g. children and adolescents, pregnant, breastfeeding women,
psychiatric and substance abuse disorder patients).
8.
Arrange a minimum of six to eight face to face follow-up sessions for
smoking cessation interventions in six months through counselling
support team (health education officer, pharmacists or any officer
trained for quit smoking services).
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Women with schizophrenia in their reproductive age should receive
pre-pregnancy care (PPC) in a nearby health clinic or an obstetric and
gynaecology clinic at least three months prior to conception. During
PPC, women should be informed regarding their risks and benefits
related to conception and during the perinatal period, as well as options
for contraception. If she wishes for pregnancy, the treatment of preexisting schizophrenia must be optimised and the illness is controlled
prior to pregnancy. Folic acid supplementation of 5 mg/day should be
offered preconceptionally and for the first trimester of pregnancy.125, level III
The risks and benefits of continuing AP and consequences of changing
treatment must also be discussed, taking into consideration the severity
of schizophrenia, risk of relapse, past response to treatment and
individual’s preference. It is essential to collaborate with the patient,
partner and multidisciplinary team in the management of patient
throughout the pregnancy and postpartum period.
Pregnant women with schizophrenia should be managed with lowest
effective dose using a single AP.36 Continuing APs in pregnant
women with schizophrenia is preferable considering the risk of
relapse when they are discontinued, which can further impair the
antenatal care, health and social functioning, and mother-infant
relationship.22; 36; 126, level III Change of treatment is not advisable when a
pregnant woman is stable on a specific AP and she is likely to experience
relapse of schizophrenia without it.36 Changing of APs may expose
the foetus to two different medications and increases possibilities of
relapse in mother.36; 126, level III
Limited evidence suggests that FGAs and SGAs have minimal
teratogenic risk or toxic effects to the foetus.126, level III In a cohort study,
women with schizophrenia who received:127, level II-2
• FGA and SGA did not show higher odds of babies with low birth
weight, small for gestational age or large for gestational age
compared with those not receiving APs during pregnancy
• FGA during pregnancy had higher odds of preterm birth (OR=2.46,
95% CI 1.50 to 4.11)
Use of depot preparation during pregnancy should be avoided in order
to limit the duration of any possible toxic effect to the foetus.17
All APs that have been studied to date cross the placenta, are present
in amniotic fluid and excreted in breast milk.128 Hence, APs withdrawal
symptoms can occur in the newborns when they are used in the third
trimester. The symptoms are crying, agitation, increased suckling,
abnormal increase in tone, tremors, sleepiness, difficulty in feeding
and difficulty in breathing which alleviate within hours or days and do
not require specific treatment. However, the benefits of treatment for
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
mothers and newborns superseded the harm of discontinuing APs and
generally favours continuation of APs.129
Decisions about breastfeeding on exposure to APs in infants and
associated benefits and harms should be discussed with all women with
schizophrenia.22 Women taking APs are usually advised to continue
the treatment used during pregnancy.36; 126, level III Mothers on clozapine
should continue the treatment but advised not to breastfeed.49; 126, level III
• For lactating mothers, the benefits associated with treatment and
risk of exposure to infant are important to be discussed.
• Lactating mother on clozapine are advised not to breastfeed while
on treatment.
• For those who do not wish to continue lactating, formula milk
supplementation should be offered to the infants.
Refer to Appendix 5 (Dosing Regimen for Oral Antipsychotics)
and Appendix 6 (Dosing Regimen for Depot Injections of
Antipsychotics) during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
NICE recommends considering psychological intervention (CBT or
family intervention) for women with psychosis or schizophrenia who
become pregnant and are at risk of relapse due to:22
• stress associated with pregnancy or postnatal period
• change in medication, including stopping APs
Recommendation 22
• Pre-pregnancy care which includes counselling should be offered to
all women in reproductive age with schizophrenia.
• Multidisciplinary care should be offered in the management of
pregnant women with schizophrenia.
7.2.3
Suicide
• Prevalence
The worldwide overall prevalence of suicide in the general population is
about 9.0 per 100,000 population (range 2 to 80 per 100,000 population)
and it is 2.3 times more common in men compared to women.130, level III
A systematic review on the prevalence of suicide in schizophrenia
concluded that the life-time risk of suicide among patients with
schizophrenia was approximately 5%.131, level II-2
A case-control study among 5,650 completed suicides concluded that
the overall prevalence of suicide was 11.7% for schizophrenia and
related mental disorder with 10.3% in males and 15.7% in females.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
In terms of age group, the prevalence was 21.7% in young adults
(25 - 34 years old) and 7.7% in elderly (65 years of old). The patients
who committed suicide were also most likely coming from the urban
poor neighbourhoods, in the younger age group, with more clinically
complex presentation and in those with higher rates of mental health
service utilisation.132, level II-2
• Individuals with schizophrenia account for over 1 in 10 suicide
deaths with a life-time risk of about 5%.
• Risk factors
A meta-analysis of 96 observational studies concluded that significant
risk factors associated with suicide related behaviours in patients with
schizophrenia were:133, level II-2
 suicidal ideation
- presence of depressive symptoms
- higher PANSS general score
- higher number of psychiatric hospitalisations
 suicide attempts
- history of alcohol use
- family history of psychiatric illness
- physical co-morbidity
- history of depression
- family history of suicide
- history of drug use
- history of tobacco use
- presence of depressive symptoms
 completed suicide:
- male gender
- history of attempted suicide
- younger age
- higher intelligence quotient
- poor adherence to treatment
- presence of hopelessness
• The highest risk for suicide in people with schizophrenia is among
those who have symptoms of self-devaluation (perceiving oneself
to be completely flawed and worthless or as having exaggerated
negative qualities and hopelessness).
• Suicide prevention strategy
Clozapine is indicated in the treatment of persistent suicidal thoughts
or behaviours.17 APA recommends patients with schizophrenia to be
treated with clozapine if the risk for suicide attempts or suicide remains
substantial despite other treatments.36
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Refer to Appendix 7 on Suggested Titration Regimen for Clozapine
Initiation in The Community and Clozapine Initiation and Titration
Regimen for In-Patient.
Recommendation 23
• Clozapine should be considered in schizophrenia with persistent
suicidal risk.
7.3 Social Issues
In a cross-sectional study, the prevalence of perceived stigma was
noted to be high at 83.5%. Education status (not able to read and
write), difficulties of adherence to AP and duration of illness <1 year
were associated factors of the stigma with OR of 2.64 (95% CI 1.12
to 6.23), 4.49 (95% CI 2.31 to 8.73) and 3.48 (95% CI 2.24 to 5.42)
respectively.134, level III
An RCT showed that psychoeducation programme significantly reduced
stigma, improved QoL and medication compliance apart from increased
consumer satisfaction of people with schizophrenia and their families,
beyond the effects of AP.135, level I
Factors that affect and impact social engagement, QoL and life
satisfaction for people with schizophrenia were studied in a systematic
review of 41 observational studies. A decrease in QoL and social
relationships was found due to several factors:136, level II-2
• interpersonal relationship status
• employment status
• effects of stigma
• neuro-cognitive skills and functioning
• effectiveness of intervention
However, there was no quality assessment done on the primary papers
in the review.
In a cross-sectional study on people with schizophrenia in a hospital,
the overall prevalence of psychosocial disabilities was high at 98.1%.
The highest prevalence was in social disabilities, followed by vocational,
self-hygiene, educational and family-related disabilities.137, level III
A population-based study looked into the crime rates in schizophrenia.
The overall prevalence of crime in people with schizophrenia was 72.7
to 90.3 per 10,000 from 2012 through 2016, which was about one fifth
that of the general population. Further analysis showed that the rates
of most types of crimes including violence, intellectual crimes and theft
were lower in people with schizophrenia than the general population.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
However, the prevalence of murder, arson, and drug-related crimes
was about five, six and two times higher in people with schizophrenia
respectively.138, level I
QualityRights is WHO’s global initiative to increase access to good
quality mental health services and to promote the human rights of people
with psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities. It offers a new
approach to mental health care which is rights-based and recoveryoriented. A pragmatic trial over a 12-month period used QualityRights
as an intervention for public mental health services. The core elements
of the intervention comprised:139, level II-1
• WHO QualityRights toolkit for service assessment
• introduction of service-level policy and processes to protect
against inhumane/degrading treatment, violence and abuse
(including use of restraints)
• improvements in the service environment within existing service
and government resources
• training for healthcare professionals, family members and service
users
• peer support volunteers to encourage participation of family
members and service users
Compared with usual care, the intervention improved significantly the
quality of services in:
• theme 1 (right to adequate standard of living)
• theme 2 (right to enjoyment of highest attainable standards of
physical and mental health)
• theme 4 (freedom from torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment or punishment and from exploitation, violence and
abuse)
Apart from that, staff in these services showed substantially improved
attitudes towards service users (Hedges’ g of -0.50 to 0.17)
According to Section 43 of Malaysian Mental Health Regulations 2010,
it is made mandatory for every psychiatric hospital to display statements
on patient’s rights in a conspicuous part of the hospital.11
Recommendation 24
• Patient’s rights in schizophrenia should be included in the training of
healthcare providers and family members.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
8. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of schizophrenia should be guided by an evidencebased approach, in order to provide quality care to the people with
schizophrenia. Several factors may affect the implementation of
recommendations in the CPG
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to
healthcare providers
• training and updates in relation to schizophrenia to healthcare
providers
• accessibility to relevant multidisciplinary teams
• public awareness campaigns related to mental health and mental
disorders including schizophrenia
• inter-ministerial
collaboration
and
involvement
of
nongovernmental organisations to support the people with
schizophrenia and their caregivers
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited exposure and training among healthcare providers on
management of schizophrenia
• variation in availability of expertise and access to service provision
• insufficient resources in terms of budget, expertise, medications,
psychosocial intervention
• socio-cultural barriers and stigma and lack of awareness among
patients, families, community and healthcare providers
• lack of local data on schizophrenia, e.g. research, registry, etc.,
for planning on services
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
This CPG recommends early detection and referral, comprehensive
assessment and treatment of schizophrenia. These require increased
awareness among healthcare providers, the public and other
stakeholders to establish early diagnosis and uninterrupted various
forms of treatment as well as support to the patients and their caregivers.
Patient-centred care and shared decision making are key elements in
successful management in schizophrenia.
However, treatment non-adherence is a widely recognised problem
in schizophrenia. This includes failure to start treatment programmes,
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
default in outpatient clinic appointments and failure to medicate with
prescribed APs. The outcome of this discouraging situation is increase
in relapse of psychotic symptoms, hospitalisation, aggression, poor
QoL, stigmatisation and premature death.
Accordingly, a Key Performance Index for psychiatric service i.e.
outpatient defaulter rate is being monitored in both primary and
secondary/tertiary care under MoH. By doing so, effective psychosocial
interventions e.g. psychoeducation can be targeted to people with
schizophrenia. This CPG also recommends that depot APs be prescribed
to patients with a history of non-adherence in order to improve their
outcomes. Simultaneously, data on depot prescriptions can be captured
easily along with the KPI of defaulted patients as a surrogate maker of
CPG utilisation based on the recommendation of depot. Moreover, the
slightly expensive SGA depots with few intolerance issues and longer
injection intervals should be used more widely in the country.
Based on the key recommendations, the following are proposed as
clinical audit indicators for quality management of schizophrenia:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage of
defaulters* among
patients with
schizophrenia in
outpatient clinic
at primary or
secondary/
tertiary care
(Target of ≤10%)
*patients who
default one month
follow-up
=
X 100%
Number of patients with schizophrenia
in outpatient clinic at primary or
secondary/tertiary care
in the same period
Number of defaulters among patients
with schizophrenia in outpatient clinic
at primary or secondary/tertiary care
in a period
Percentage of
patients with
schizophrenia
having treatment
non-adherence
prescribed with
depot AP
(Target of ≥30%)
=
X 100%
Number of patients with schizophrenia
having treatment non-adherence in
the same period
Number of patients with schizophrenia
having treatment non-adherence
prescribed with
depot AP in a period
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with
disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries,
1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013.
Lancet. 2015;386(9995):743-800.
2.
Aziz AA, Salina AA, Abdul Kadir AB, et al. The National Mental Health Registry
(NMHR). Med J Malaysia. 2008;63 Suppl C:15-17.
3.
Saha S, Chant D, Welham J, et al. A systematic review of the prevalence of
schizophrenia. PLoS Med. 2005;2(5):e141.
4.
Teoh SL, Chong HY, Abdul Aziz S, et al. The economic burden of schizophrenia
in Malaysia. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2017;13:1979-1987.
5.
Better Mental Health Care. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2009.
6.
Thornicroft G, Bebbington P. Deinstitutionalisation--from hospital closure to
service development. Br J Psychiatry. 1989;155:739-753.
7.
Russo G, Carelli F, Barnet V, et al. Dismantling asylums: The Italian job. Lond J
Prim Care. 2009(2).
8.
Abdul Kadir AB. Community Psychiatric Services in Malaysia: Where do we go
from here? Malaysian Journal of Psychiatry. 2011;20(1):1-3.
9.
Haque A. Mental health concepts and program development in Malaysia.
Journal of Mental Health. 2005;14(2):183-195.
10.
Jamaiyah H. Community mental health in Malaysia: marriage of psychiatry and
public health Jurnal Kesihatan Masyarakat. 2000;6:155-166.
11.
Khan NN, Yahya B, Abu Bakar AK, et al. Malaysian mental health law. BJPsych
Int. 2015;12(2):40-42.
12.
Murrie B, Lappin J, Large M, et al. Transition of Substance-Induced, Brief, and
Atypical Psychoses to Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
Schizophr Bull. 2020;46(3):505-516.
13.
Miller B, Messias E, Miettunen J, et al. Meta-analysis of paternal age
and schizophrenia risk in male versus female offspring. Schizophr Bull.
2011;37(5):1039-1047.
14.
Vassos E, Pedersen CB, Murray RM, et al. Meta-analysis of the association of
urbanicity with schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2012;38(6):1118-1123.
15.
Khandaker GM, Zimbron J, Lewis G, et al. Prenatal maternal infection,
neurodevelopment and adult schizophrenia: a systematic review of populationbased studies. Psychol Med. 2013;43(2):239-257.
16.
Cheslack-Postava K, Brown AS. Prenatal infection and schizophrenia: A decade
of further progress. Schizophr Res. 2021.
17.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. CPG Management of Schizophrenia Putrajaya:
MoH; 2009.
18.
Hollander AC, Dal H, Lewis G, et al. Refugee migration and risk of schizophrenia
and other non-affective psychoses: cohort study of 1.3 million people in Sweden.
BMJ. 2016;352:i1030.
19.
Müller M, Vetter S, Buchli-Kammermann J, et al. The Self-screen-Prodrome
as a short screening tool for pre-psychotic states. Schizophr Res. 2010;123(23):217-224.
20.
Loewy RL, Pearson R, Vinogradov S, et al. Psychosis risk screening with the
Prodromal Questionnaire--brief version (PQ-B). Schizophr Res. 2011;129(1):4246.
21.
Razali SM, Abidin ZZ, Othman Z, et al. Screening for schizophrenia in initial
prodromal phase: Detecting the sub-threshold psychosis. Asian J Psychiatr.
2015;16:26-31.
22.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Psychosis and schizophrenia
in adults: prevention and management. London: NICE; 2014.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
23.
Shabani A, Masoumian S, Zamirinejad S, et al. Psychometric properties of
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders-Clinician Version (SCID-5CV). Brain Behav. 2021;11(5):e01894.
24.
Osório FL, Loureiro SR, Hallak JEC, et al. Clinical validity and intrarater and
test-retest reliability of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 - Clinician
Version (SCID-5-CV). Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2019;73(12):754-760.
25.
Dollfus S, Mach C, Morello R. Self-Evaluation of Negative Symptoms: A Novel
Tool to Assess Negative Symptoms. Schizophr Bull. 2016;42(3):571-578.
26.
Alphs L, Morlock R, Coon C, et al. The 4-Item Negative Symptom Assessment
(NSA-4) Instrument: A Simple Tool for Evaluating Negative Symptoms in
Schizophrenia Following Brief Training. Psychiatry (Edgmont). 2010;7(7):26-32.
27.
Nafees B, van Hanswijck de Jonge P, Stull D, et al. Reliability and validity of
the Personal and Social Performance scale in patients with schizophrenia.
Schizophr Res. 2012;140(1-3):71-76.
28.
Patrick DL, Burns T, Morosini P, et al. Reliability, validity and ability to detect
change of the clinician-rated Personal and Social Performance scale in patients
with acute symptoms of schizophrenia. Curr Med Res Opin. 2009;25(2):325338.
29.
Hurford IM, Ventura J, Marder SR, et al. A 10-minute measure of global
cognition: Validation of the Brief Cognitive Assessment Tool for Schizophrenia
(B-CATS). Schizophr Res. 2018;195:327-333.
30.
Mucci A, Vignapiano A, Bitter I, et al. A large European, multicenter,
multinational validation study of the Brief Negative Symptom Scale. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2019;29(8):947-959.
31.
Wada R, Fujiwara M, Yamada Y, et al. Validity and Reliability of the Japanese
Version of the 12-item Self-administered World Health Organization Disability
Assessment Schedule (WHODAS) 2.0 in Patients with Schizophrenia. Acta Med
Okayama. 2021;75(3):315-322.
32.
Mattila T, Koeter M, Wohlfarth T, et al. Impact of DSM-5 changes on the diagnosis
and acute treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2015;41(3):637-643.
33.
Tandon R, Bruijnzeel D, Rankupalli B. Does change in definition of psychotic
symptoms in diagnosis of schizophrenia in DSM-5 affect caseness? Asian J
Psychiatr. 2013;6(4):330-332.
34.
Fusar-Poli P, Cappucciati M, Rutigliano G, et al. Diagnostic Stability of ICD/
DSM First Episode Psychosis Diagnoses: Meta-analysis. Schizophr Bull.
2016;42(6):1395-1406.
35.
Soares-Weiser K, Maayan N, Bergman H, et al. First rank symptoms for
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1(1):Cd010653.
36.
The American Psychiatric Association. Practice Guideline for the Treatment of
Patients with Schizophrenia (Third Edition) Washington: APA; 2021.
37.
Takeuchi H, MacKenzie NE, Samaroo D, et al. Antipsychotic Dose in Acute
Schizophrenia: A Meta-analysis. Schizophr Bull. 2020;46(6):1439-1458.
38.
Gardner KN, Bostwick JR. Antipsychotic treatment response in schizophrenia.
Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2012;69(21):1872-1879.
39.
Vermeulen J, van Rooijen G, Doedens P, et al. Antipsychotic medication and
long-term mortality risk in patients with schizophrenia; a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Psychol Med. 2017;47(13):2217-2228.
40.
Huhn M, Nikolakopoulou A, Schneider-Thoma J, et al. Comparative efficacy and
tolerability of 32 oral antipsychotics for the acute treatment of adults with multiepisode schizophrenia: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet.
2019;394(10202):939-951.
41.
Ortiz-Orendain J, Castiello-de Obeso S, Colunga-Lozano LE, et al.
Antipsychotic combinations for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;6(6):CD009005.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
42.
Zhu Y, Krause M, Huhn M, et al. Antipsychotic drugs for the acute treatment of
patients with a first episode of schizophrenia: a systematic review with pairwise
and network meta-analyses. Lancet Psychiatry. 2017;4(9):694-705.
43.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guidelines on Management of Aggressive Patients
in Ministry of Health Facilities. Putrajaya: MoH; 2016.
44.
Leucht S, Leucht C, Huhn M, et al. Sixty Years of Placebo-Controlled
Antipsychotic Drug Trials in Acute Schizophrenia: Systematic Review, Bayesian
Meta-Analysis, and Meta-Regression of Efficacy Predictors. Am J Psychiatry.
2017;174(10):927-942.
45.
Ostinelli EG, Jajawi S, Spyridi S, et al. Aripiprazole (intramuscular) for psychosisinduced aggression or agitation (rapid tranquillisation). Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2018;1(1):CD008074.
46.
Ostinelli EG, Brooke-Powney MJ, Li X, et al. Haloperidol for psychosis-induced
aggression or agitation (rapid tranquillisation). Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;7(7):CD009377.
47.
Walther S, Moggi F, Horn H, et al. Rapid tranquilization of severely agitated
patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders: a naturalistic, rater-blinded,
randomized, controlled study with oral haloperidol, risperidone, and olanzapine.
J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2014;34(1):124-128.
48.
Killaspy H, Banerjee S, King M, et al. Prospective controlled study of psychiatric
out-patient non-attendance. Characteristics and outcome. Br J Psychiatry.
2000;176:160-165.
49.
Scottish
Intercollegiate
Guidelines
Network
(SIGN).
Management
of
Schizophrenia. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2013.
50.
Park SC, Choi MY, Choi J, et al. Comparative Efficacy and Safety of Long-acting
Injectable and Oral Second-generation Antipsychotics for the Treatment of
Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Clin Psychopharmacol
Neurosci. 2018;16(4):361-375.
51.
West JC, Marcus SC, Wilk J, et al. Use of depot antipsychotic medications for
medication nonadherence in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2008;34(5):9951001.
52.
Ceraso A, Lin JJ, Schneider-Thoma J, et al. Maintenance treatment with
antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2020;8:CD008016.
53.
Kishimoto T, Agarwal V, Kishi T, et al. Relapse prevention in schizophrenia:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of second-generation antipsychotics
versus first-generation antipsychotics. Mol Psychiatry. 2013;18(1):53-66.
54.
Zhao YJ, Lin L, Teng M, et al. Long-term antipsychotic treatment in schizophrenia:
systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
BJPsych Open. 2016;2(1):59-66.
55.
Kishimoto T, Robenzadeh A, Leucht C, et al. Long-acting injectable vs oral
antipsychotics for relapse prevention in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of
randomized trials. Schizophr Bull. 2014;40(1):192-213.
56.
Højlund M, Kemp AF, Haddad PM, et al. Standard versus reduced dose
of antipsychotics for relapse prevention in multi-episode schizophrenia: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet
Psychiatry. 2021;8(6):471-486.
57.
Sampson S, Mansour M, Maayan N, et al. Intermittent drug techniques for
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013(7):CD006196.
58.
De Hert M, Sermon J, Geerts P, et al. The Use of Continuous Treatment
Versus Placebo or Intermittent Treatment Strategies in Stabilized Patients
with Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized
Controlled Trials with First- and Second-Generation Antipsychotics. CNS Drugs.
2015;29(8):637-658.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
59.
Galletly C, Castle D, Dark F, et al. Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists clinical practice guidelines for the management of schizophrenia
and related disorders. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2016;50(5):410-472.
60.
Dougall N, Maayan N, Soares-Weiser K, et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(8):CD006081.
61.
Kim J, Iwata Y, Plitman E, et al. A meta-analysis of transcranial direct current
stimulation for schizophrenia:“Is more better?”. 2019;110:117-126.
62.
Zhao S, Sampson S, Xia J, et al. Psychoeducation (brief) for people with serious
mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(4):CD010823.
63.
Sin J, Jordan CD, Barley EA, et al. Psychoeducation for siblings of people with
severe mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(5):CD010540.
64.
Li J, Huang YG, Ran MS, et al. Community-based comprehensive intervention
for people with schizophrenia in Guangzhou, China: Effects on clinical
symptoms, social functioning, internalized stigma and discrimination. Asian J
Psychiatr. 2018;34:21-30.
65.
Morriss R, Vinjamuri I, Faizal MA, et al. Training to recognize the early signs of
recurrence in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2013;39(2):255-256.
66.
Family Link Education Program. Janssen-Cilag; 2003.
67.
Kinoshita Y, Furukawa TA, Kinoshita K, et al. Supported employment for adults with
severe mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2013(9):CD008297.
68.
Reeder C, Smedley N, Butt K, et al. Cognitive predictors of social functioning
improvements following cognitive remediation for schizophrenia. Schizophr
Bull. 2006;32 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S123-131.
69.
Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, et al. A meta-analysis of cognitive remediation for
schizophrenia: methodology and effect sizes. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(5):472485.
70.
Almerie MQ, Okba Al Marhi M, Jawoosh M, et al. Social skills programmes for
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(6):CD009006.
71.
Chien WT, Clifton AV, Zhao S, et al. Peer support for people with
schizophrenia or other serious mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2019;4(4):CD010880.
72.
Pharoah F, Mari J, Rathbone J, et al. Family intervention for schizophrenia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010(12):CD000088.
73.
Jones C, Hacker D, Xia J, et al. Cognitive behavioural therapy plus standard
care versus standard care for people with schizophrenia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2018;12(12):CD007964.
74.
Jones C, Hacker D, Meaden A, et al. Cognitive behavioural therapy plus standard
care versus standard care plus other psychosocial treatments for people with
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;11(11):CD008712.
75.
Laws KR, Darlington N, Kondel TK, et al. Cognitive Behavioural Therapy for
schizophrenia - outcomes for functioning, distress and quality of life: a metaanalysis. BMC Psychol. 2018;6(1):32.
76.
Grant PM, Bredemeier K, Beck AT. Six-Month Follow-Up of Recovery-Oriented
Cognitive Therapy for Low-Functioning Individuals With Schizophrenia.
Psychiatr Serv. 2017;68(10):997-1002.
77.
Buckley LA, Maayan N, Soares-Weiser K, et al. Supportive therapy for
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(4):CD004716.
78.
Tungpunkom P, Maayan N, Soares-Weiser K. Life skills programmes for chronic
mental illnesses. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;1(1):CD000381.
79.
Gorczynski P, Faulkner G. Exercise therapy for schizophrenia. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2010(5):CD004412.
80.
Ren J, Xia J. Dance therapy for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev.
2013(10): CD006868.
81.
Geretsegger M, Mössler KA, Bieleninik Ł, et al. Music therapy for people with
schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;5(5):CD004025.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
82.
Nolan JA, McEvoy JP, Koenig HG, et al. Religious coping and quality of life
among individuals living with schizophrenia. Psychiatr Serv. 2012;63(10):10511054.
83.
Murphy SM, Irving CB, Adams CE, et al. Crisis intervention for people with severe
mental illnesses. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(12):CD001087.
84.
Schöttle D, Schimmelmann BG, Ruppelt F, et al. Effectiveness of integrated care
including therapeutic assertive community treatment in severe schizophreniaspectrum and bipolar I disorders: Four-year follow-up of the ACCESS II study.
PLoS One. 2018;13(2):e0192929.
85.
Dieterich M, Irving CB, Park B, et al. Intensive case management for severe
mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010(10):CD007906.
86.
Chen WY, Hung YN, Huang SJ, et al. Nationwide analysis of medical utilization
in people with severe mental illness receiving home care case management.
Schizophr Res. 2019;208:60-66.
87.
Díaz-Fernández S, Frías-Ortiz DF, Fernández-Miranda JJ. Suicide attempts
in people with schizophrenia before and after participating in an intensive
case managed community program: A 20-year follow-up. Psychiatry Res.
2020;287:112479.
88.
Chatterjee S, Naik S, John S, et al. Effectiveness of a community-based
intervention for people with schizophrenia and their caregivers in India (COPSI):
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9926):1385-1394.
89.
Shek E, Stein AT, Shansis FM, et al. Day hospital versus outpatient care for people
with schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;2009(4):CD003240.
90.
Gilmer TP, Stefancic A, Ettner SL, et al. Effect of full-service partnerships on
homelessness, use and costs of mental health services, and quality of life
among adults with serious mental illness. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67(6):645-652.
91.
Tinland A, Loubière S, Boucekine M, et al. Effectiveness of a housing support
team intervention with a recovery-oriented approach on hospital and emergency
department use by homeless people with severe mental illness: a randomised
controlled trial. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. 2020;29:e169.
92.
McGorry PD. Early intervention in psychosis: obvious, effective, overdue. J Nerv
Ment Dis. 2015;203(5):310-318.
93.
Early Psychosis Guidelines Writing Group and EPPIC, National Support
Program. Australian Clinical Guidelines for Early Psychosis Second Edition.
Melbourne: Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health;
2016.
94.
Marshall M, Rathbone J. Early intervention for psychosis. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2011(6):CD004718.
95.
Fusar-Poli P, Díaz-Caneja CM, Patel R, et al. Services for people at high risk
improve outcomes in patients with first episode psychosis. Acta Psychiatr
Scand. 2016;133(1):76-85.
96.
Puntis S, Minichino A, De Crescenzo F, et al. Specialised early intervention
teams (extended time) for recent-onset psychosis. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2020;11(11):CD013287.
97.
Shen X, Xia J, Adams CE. Acupuncture for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2014(10):CD005475.
98.
Broderick J, Vancampfort D. Yoga as part of a package of care versus standard
care for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;9(9):CD012145.
99.
Chen X, Hong Y, Zheng P. Efficacy and safety of extract of Ginkgo biloba as an
adjunct therapy in chronic schizophrenia: A systematic review of randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled studies with meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res.
2015;228(1):121-127.
100. Howes OD, McCutcheon R, Agid O, et al. Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia:
Treatment Response and Resistance in Psychosis (TRRIP) Working Group
Consensus Guidelines on Diagnosis and Terminology. Am J Psychiatry.
2017;174(3):216-229
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
101. Demjaha A, Lappin JM, Stahl D, et al. Antipsychotic treatment resistance in
first-episode psychosis: prevalence, subtypes and predictors. Psychol Med.
2017;47(11):1981-1989.
102. Wimberley T, Gasse C, Meier SM, et al. Polygenic Risk Score for Schizophrenia
and Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2017;43(5):10641069.
103. Bozzatello P, Bellino S, Rocca P. Predictive Factors of Treatment Resistance in
First Episode of Psychosis: A Systematic Review. Front Psychiatry. 2019;10:67.
104. Essali A, Al-Haj Haasan N, Li C, et al. Clozapine versus typical
neuroleptic medication for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2009;2009(1):CD000059.
105. Asenjo Lobos C, Komossa K, Rummel-Kluge C, et al. Clozapine versus other
atypical antipsychotics for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2010(11):CD006633.
106. Subramanian S, Völlm BA, Huband N. Clozapine dose for schizophrenia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;6(6):CD009555.
107. Barber S, Olotu U, Corsi M, et al. Clozapine combined with different antipsychotic
drugs for treatment-resistant schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;3(3):CD006324.
108. Sinclair DJ, Zhao S, Qi F, et al. Electroconvulsive therapy for treatment-resistant
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;3(3):CD011847.
109. Zheng W, Cao XL, Ungvari GS, et al. Electroconvulsive Therapy Added
to
Non-Clozapine
Antipsychotic
Medication
for
Treatment
Resistant
Schizophrenia: Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. PLoS One.
2016;11(6):e0156510.
110. Wang W, Pu C, Jiang J, et al. Efficacy and safety of treating patients with
refractory schizophrenia with antipsychotic medication and adjunctive
electroconvulsive therapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Shanghai
Arch Psychiatry. 2015;27(4):206-219.
111. Morrison AP, Pyle M, Gumley A, et al. Cognitive-behavioural therapy for
clozapine-resistant schizophrenia: the FOCUS RCT. Health Technol Assess.
2019;23(7):1-144.
112. Hunt GE, Large MM, Cleary M, et al. Prevalence of comorbid substance
use in schizophrenia spectrum disorders in community and clinical settings,
1990-2017: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Drug Alcohol Depend.
2018;191:234-258.
113. Temmingh HS, Williams T, Siegfried N, et al. Risperidone versus other
antipsychotics for people with severe mental illness and co-occurring substance
misuse. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;1(1):CD011057.
114. Arranz B, Garriga M, García-Rizo C, et al. Clozapine use in patients with
schizophrenia and a comorbid substance use disorder: A systematic review.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2018;28(2):227-242.
115. Krause M, Huhn M, Schneider-Thoma J, et al. Efficacy, acceptability
and tolerability of antipsychotics in patients with schizophrenia and
comorbid substance use. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2019;29(1):32-45.
116. Hunt GE, Siegfried N, Morley K, et al. Psychosocial interventions for people
with both severe mental illness and substance misuse. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2019(12).
117. de Leon J, Diaz FJ. A meta-analysis of worldwide studies demonstrates an
association between schizophrenia and tobacco smoking behaviors. Schizophr
Res. 2005;76(2-3):135-157.
118. Yee A, Bt Nek Mohamed NN, Binti Hashim AH, et al. The effect of nicotine
dependence on psychopathology in patients with schizophrenia. Biomed Res
Int. 2015;2015:730291.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
119. National Institute of Health Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Health and
Morbidity Survey 2019. Non-communicable Diseases, Healthcare Demand and
Health Literacy Shah Alam NIH; 2019
120. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Treatment of
Tobacco Use Disorder. Putrajaya: MoH 2016
121. Tobacco [Available at:https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco].
122. Simoila L, Isometsä E, Gissler M, et al. Schizophrenia and pregnancy: a national
register-based follow-up study among Finnish women born between 1965 and
1980. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2020;23(1):91-100.
123. Vigod SN, Kurdyak PA, Dennis CL, et al. Maternal and newborn outcomes
among women with schizophrenia: a retrospective population-based cohort
study. Bjog. 2014;121(5):566-574.
124. Munk-Olsen T, Laursen TM, Mendelson T, et al. Risks and predictors of
readmission for a mental disorder during the postpartum period. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2009;66(2):189-195.
125. Bahagian Pembangunan Kesihatan Keluarga. Garis Panduan Perkhidmatan
Prakehamilan di Penjagaan Kesihatan Primer. Putrajaya: BPKK; 2019.
126. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley prescribing guidelines in
psychiatry, 14th Edition. London Wiley-Blackwell; 2021.
127. Lin HC, Chen IJ, Chen YH, et al. Maternal schizophrenia and pregnancy
outcome: does the use of antipsychotics make a difference? Schizophr Res.
2010;116(1):55-60.
128. American Academy of Pediatric and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Guidelines for Perinatal Care Eight Edition Washington AAP &
ACOG; 2017.
129. FDA Drug Safety Communication: Antipsychotic drug labels updated on use
during pregnancy and risk of abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal
symptoms in newborns: U. S. Food and Drug Administration; [Available
at: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drug-safetycommunication-antipsychotic-drug-labels-updated-use-during-pregnancy-and-risk].
130. One in 100 deaths is by suicide: World Health Organization [Available at: https://
www.who.int/news/item/17-06-2021-one-in-100-deaths-is-by-suicide].
131. Hor K, Taylor M. Suicide and schizophrenia: a systematic review of rates and
risk factors. J Psychopharmacol. 2010;24(4 Suppl):81-90.
132. Zaheer J, Jacob B, de Oliveira C, et al. Service utilization and suicide among
people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Schizophr Res. 2018;202:347-353.
133. Cassidy RM, Yang F, Kapczinski F, et al. Risk Factors for Suicidality in Patients
With Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and Meta-regression
of 96 Studies. Schizophr Bull. 2018;44(4):787-797.
134. Bifftu BB, Dachew BA. Perceived Stigma and Associated Factors among
People with Schizophrenia at Amanuel Mental Specialized Hospital, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia: A Cross-Sectional Institution Based Study. Psychiatry J.
2014;2014:694565.
135. Ngoc TN, Weiss B, Trung LT. Effects of the family schizophrenia psychoeducation
program for individuals with recent onset schizophrenia in Viet Nam. Asian J
Psychiatr. 2016;22:162-166.
136. Kingston Stevens A, McNichol J, Magalhaes L. Social relationships in
schizophrenia: A review. Personality and Mental Health. 2009;3(3):203-216.
137. Goreishizadeh M, Mohagheghi A, Farhang S, et al. Psychosocial disabilities in
patients with schizophrenia. Iran J Public Health. 2012;41(5):116-121.
138. Kim AM. Crimes by people with schizophrenia in Korea: comparison with the
general population. BMC Psychiatry. 2019;19(1):377.
139. Pathare S, Funk M, Drew Bold N, et al. Systematic evaluation of the QualityRights
programme in public mental health facilities in Gujarat, India. The British Journal
of Psychiatry. 2021;218(4):196-203.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: Is intermittent treatment safe and effective compared
with continuous treatment for relapse prevention in schizophrenia?
1. SCHIZOPHRENIA/
2. (schizophrenic adj1 disorder*).tw.
3. schizophrenia*.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS/
6. (antipsychotic adj1 (agent* or drug* or effect*)).tw.
7. (major tranquili* adj2 agent*).tw.
8. (neuroleptic adj1 (agent* or drug*)).tw.
9. (major adj1 tranquili*).tw.
10. antipsychotic*.tw.
11. neuroleptic*.tw.
12. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11
13. intermittent.tw.
14. continuous.tw.
15. 13 or 14
16. 12 and 15
17. 4 and 16
18. limit 17 to (english language and humans and yr=”2009 -Current”
and “all adult (19 plus years)”)
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the risk factors for schizophrenia?
2. What are the accurate screening tools for schizophrenia?
3. What are the cost-effective screening tools for schizophrenia?
4. Is early referral to psychiatric service more effective and safer
compared with treatment in primary care?
5. What are the accurate bio-psychosocial assessments in
schizophrenia?
6. What are criteria of diagnostic classification of schizophrenia?
7. Is the current diagnostic classification sufficient for therapeutic and
prognostic management of schizophrenia?
8. Are the following service level interventions effective and safe in
schizophrenia?
• crisis and emergency service
• intensive care management
• assertive outreach team
• early intervention service
• community mental health teams
• day hospitalisation/day care
• residential care
• integrating mental health to primary care
• services in primary care
9. Are the following pharmacological agents safe and effective in
schizophrenia?
• single atypical antipsychotic (AP)
• single conventional AP
• combined AP
10. Is rapid escalation of AP/other agents safe and effective in acute
exacerbation of schizophrenia?
11. Is depot AP/AAP safe and effective in achieving remission in
schizophrenia?
12. Is depot AP/AAP safe and effective in first episode in schizophrenia?
13. Are AAPs more effective and safe compared with conventional APs
to prevent relapse in schizophrenia?
14. Is early initiation of AP safe and effective for first episode or early
schizophrenia?
15. Is intermittent treatment safe and effective compared with
continuous treatment for relapse prevention in schizophrenia?
16. What is the safe and effective treatment for extrapyramidal signs,
sedation and weight gain associated with AP?
17. What are the safe and effective physical therapies in schizophrenia?
18. Are the following psychosocial interventions safe and effective
(improving function or quality of life) in schizophrenia?
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
• family therapy
• psychoeducation
• problem solving skill
• counseling and psychotherapy
• Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
• Cognitive Remediation Therapy
• social skills training
• supported employment
• social enterprise
• physical exercise
• peer support services
• life skills training (social and academic)
• creative and expressive art therapy
• religion and spiritual
19. Is traditional and complementary medicine safe and effective in
schizophrenia?
20. What is the predictor for treatment-resistant schizophrenia (TRS)?
21. What is the safe and effective AP in TRS?
22. Is augmentation of clozapine with other medication safe and
effective in patients who do not respond to clozapine monotherapy?
23. Does pregnancy increase the risk of psychosis development or
relapse of schizophrenia?
24. Is AP safe and effective in pregnancy, post-partum and breastfeeding
in schizophrenia?
25. Is psychosocial treatment safe and effective in pregnancy, postpartum and breastfeeding in schizophrenia?
26. What is the prevalence of substance-related disorder in
schizophrenia?
27. Are the following safe and effective in schizophrenia with substancerelated disorder (dual diagnosis):
• dual diagnosis service vs usual care
• AP
• psychosocial treatment
28. What is the prevalence of suicide in schizophrenia?
29. What is the risk factor of suicide in schizophrenia?
30. What is the safe and effective suicide prevention strategy in
schizophrenia?
31. What is the prevalence of stigma against schizophrenia?
32. What are the safe and effective strategies to combat stigma in
schizophrenia?
33. What is the mental health literacy of schizophrenia among service
users?
34. What are the common social problems in schizophrenia?
35. What are the safe and effective interventions for social problems in
schizophrenia?
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 3
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA (DSM-5)
The following criteria, as outlined by the DSM-5, must be met in order
for schizophrenia to be accurately diagnosed:
A. The individual experiences two or more of the following for a
significant portion of time during a 1-month period. And at least one
of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions
2. Hallucinations
3. Disorganized speech (incoherence or derailment)
4. Completely disorganized or catatonic behavior
5. Negative symptoms, such as diminished emotional expression
B. For a significant amount of time since the disturbance began, level
of functioning in one or more major areas (e.g., work, interpersonal
relations, or self-care) is clearly below the level achieved prior to
onset.
• In children or adolescents, there is a failure to achieve the expected
level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning.
C. Signs of the disturbance continue for 6 months or longer. This period
must include at least 1 full month of symptoms that meet the first
criteria and may include periods of residual symptoms. During these
residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested
only by negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms outlined in
the first criteria, only in a lesser form.
D. The disturbance cannot be better explained by schizoaffective
disorder, depressive or bipolar disorder because either:
• No major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently
with the active-phase symptoms or if mood episodes have occurred
during active phase symptoms, it’s been for a minor amount of time.
E. The disturbance cannot be attributed to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or medication) or another medical
condition.
F. If the individual has a history of autism spectrum disorder or a
communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis
of schizophrenia is only made if delusions or hallucinations as well
as the other required symptoms of schizophrenia are present for a
month or more.
G. There are a few specifications that should be made when it comes
to diagnosing schizophrenia. This includes specifying the severity, if
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
it is with catatonia, as well as categorizing it episodically:
• First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission
refers to a period of time in which the individual has improved
after a previous episode is maintained and the criteria are only
partially met.
• First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission refers to a
period of time after a previous episode during which no symptoms
are present.
• Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Several episodes
may be determined after a minimum of two.
• Multiple episodes currently in partial remission
• Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
• Continuous: Symptoms of the disorder remain for the majority of
the illness.
• Unspecified
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 4
INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
AND
RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS, 10TH REVISION (ICD 10)
Schizophrenia is coded under F20.
General
criteria
for
Paranoid,
Hebephrenic,
Catatonic
and
Undifferentiated type of Schizophrenia:
G1. Either at least one of the syndromes, symptoms and signs listed
below under (1), or at least two of the symptoms and signs listed
under (2), should be present for most of the time during an episode
of psychotic illness lasting for at least one month (or at some time
during most of the days).
1. At least one of the following:
a. Thought echo, thought insertion or withdrawal, or thought
broadcasting.
b. Delusions of control, influence or passivity, clearly referred
to body or limb movements or specific thoughts, actions,
sensations or delusional perception.
c. Hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on the
patient's behaviour, or discussing him between themselves,
or other types of hallucinatory voices coming from some part
of the body.
d. Persistent delusions of other kinds that are culturally
inappropriate and completely impossible (e.g. being able to
control the weather or being in communication with aliens
from another world).
2. or at least two of the following:
e. Persistent hallucinations in any modality, when occurring
every day for at least one month, when accompanied by
delusions (which may be fleeting or half-formed) without
clear affective content, or when accompanied by persistent
over-valued ideas.
f. Neologisms, breaks or interpolations in the train of thought,
resulting in incoherence or irrelevant speech.
g. Catatonic behaviour, such as excitement, posturing or waxy
flexibility, negativism, mutism and stupor.
h. "Negative" symptoms such as marked apathy, paucity of
speech, and blunting or incongruity of emotional responses
(it must be clear that these are not due to depression or to
neuroleptic medication).
G2. Most commonly used exclusion criteria: If the patient also meets
criteria for manic episode (F30) or depressive episode (F32), the
criteria listed under G1.1 and G1.2 above must have been met
before the disturbance of mood developed.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
G3. The disorder is not attributable to organic brain disease (in
the sense of F0), or to alcohol- or drug-related intoxication,
dependence or withdrawal.
Pattern of course
F20.x0 Continuous (no remission of psychotic symptoms throughout
the period of observation).
F20.x1 Episodic, with a progressive development of 'negative'
symptoms in the intervals between psychotic episodes;
F20.x2 Episodic, with persistent but non-progressive 'negative'
symptoms in the intervals between psychotic episodes;
F20.x3 Episodic (remittent) with complete or virtually complete
remissions between psychotic episodes;
F20.x4 Incomplete remission;
F20.x5 Complete or virtually complete remission;
F20.x8 Other pattern of course.
F20.x9 Course uncertain, period of observation too short.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 5
DOSING REGIMEN FOR ORAL ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Chlorpromazine
Haloperidol
Perphenazine
Sulpiride
Trifluoperazine
Amisulpride
Aripiprazole
Asenapine
First-generation APs
Second-generation APs
50 - 100
2 - 5
4 - 8
200 - 400
5 - 10
10 - 15
10
50
200
2
16
400
10
10
10
300
TDS
OD/BD
TDS
BD
BD
OD
BD
BD
C
C
C
NA
C
C
C
NA
L3
L2
NA
NA
NA
L3
NA
NA
1000
20
24 (64 mg -
hospitalised
patients)
2400
30
30
30
1200
50 - 200/day
2 - 5 every
1 - 7 days
4 - 8/day
200 every
3 - 7 days
5 every
3 - 7 days
10 - 15 after
2 weeks
5 - 10 after
1 week
50 - 100 every
2 - 3 days
2 mg/day
10 mg/day
200 mg/day
5 mg/day
400 mg/day
15 mg/day
10 mg/day
100 mg/day
(reference)
1 for the first 4
days. Then,
increased to 2
mg on Day 5
through 7.
From Day 8,
dose can be
increased up
to 4
Brexpiprazole
1
2
OD
NA
NA
4
2 mg/day
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Cariprazine
Clozapine
Olanzapine
Paliperidone
Quetiapine
Risperidone
Ziprasidone
1.5
12.5
5 - 10
3
IR: 50
ER: 300
40 - 80
1 - 2
1.5
300 - 900
5
6 - 12
IR: 300 - 450
ER: 600 - 800
40
2 - 4
OD
OD/BD
OD
OD
IR: BD
ER: OD
BD
OD/BD
NA
B
C
C
C
C
C
NA
L3
L2
NA
L4
L4
L3
6
900
20
12
IR: 750
ER: 800
160
16
Slow
increment of
1.5
Refer
to Appendix
3 and 4
5/day for
every 1 week
3 every 5 days
IR: Refer to
footnote c
ER: Refer to
footnote d
20 every
2 - 3 days
1 every
2 - 3 days
1.5 mg/day
-
10 mg/day
-
400 mg/day
4 mg/day
80 mg/day
IR: immediate release, ER: extended release, OD: once daily, BD: twice daily, TDS: thrice daily, NA: not available
*Chlorpromazine equivalent dose represents the approximate dose equivalent to 100 mg of chlorpromazine (relative potency)
aUnited States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) categorization of risk of drug use in pregnancy:
A=Controlled studies fail to demonstrate a risk to the foetus in the first trimester, and the possibility of foetal harm remains remote
B=Either animal-reproduction studies have not demonstrated a foetal risk but there is no controlled in human
C=Either studies in animals have revealed adverse effects on the foetus (teratogenic or embryocidal or other) and there are no controlled studies in human
D=There is positive evidence of human foetal risk
X=Studies in animals or human beings have demonstrated foetal abnormalities
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
bAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists lactation risk categories: L1=Safest; L2=Safer; L3=Moderately safe; L4=Possibly hazardous;
L5=Contraindicated
cQuetiapine IR tablet: Day 1- 25 mg BD, Day 2- 50 mg BD, Day 3- 100 mg BD, Day 4- 150 mg BD. Then adjusted according to response.
dQuestiapine ER tablet: Day 1- 300 mg OD, Day 2- 600 mg OD. Then adjusted according to response.
Source:
1. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (14th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2021
2. British National Formulary (BNF) 80. London: BMJ Group and Pharmaceutical Press; 2021
3. Monthly Index of Medical Specialities – MIMS Malaysia Online (Available at: http://www.mims.com/malaysia)
4. ACOG Practice Bulletin. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obstetrician-Gynaecologist – Use of Psychiatric Medications During Pregnancy and Lactation
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 6
DOSING REGIMEN FOR DEPOT INJECTIONS OF ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Aripiprazole
Flupenthixol decanoate
Fluphenazine decanoate
400 mg/month
400 mg/week
100 mg/2
weeks
4 weeks
2 - 4 weeks
14 - 35 days
C
C
NA
10 mg/week
5 mg/week
300 mgc -
400 mgd
20 mg
(elderly -
quarter to
half adult
dose)
12.5 mg
(elderly -
6.25 mg)
300 - 400 mg
every month
50 mg every
4 weeks to
300 mg every
12.5 - 100 mg
Not required
Test dose 20 mg,
then 20 - 40 mg
after at least
7 days, then
20 - 40 mg
every 2 - 4
weeks,
adjusted
according to
response
Test dose
12.5 mg, then
12.5 - 100 mg
after 4 - 7
days, then
12.5 - 100 mg
every 14 - 35
days,
adjusted
according
to response
L3
NA
L3
400 mg/month
Paliperidone palmitate
150 mg/month
525/3 months
1 - 3 months
NA
150 mge
175 mg
f
25 - 150
every 1 month or
175 - 525 mg
every 3 months
Refer to
footnote
e and
f
NA
100 mg/month
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Risperidone microsphere
50 mg/
2 weeks
2 weeks
C
50 mg/2 weeks
25/37.5
g
25 - 50
Refer to
footnote
g
L3
Zuclopenthixol decanoate
600 mg/week
1 - 4 weeks
NA
100 mg/week
100 mg
(elderly -
quarter to
half adult
dose)
200 - 500 mg
every 1 to
4 weeks
Test dose
100 mg, then
200 - 500 mg
after at least 7
days, then
200 - 500 mg
every 1 - 4
weeks,
adjusted
according to
response
NA
NA: Not available
*Chlorpromazine equivalent dose represents the approximate dose equivalent to 100 mg of chlorpromazine (relative potency)
aUnited States Food & Drug Administration (US FDA) categorisation of risk of drug use in pregnancy:
A=Controlled studies fail to demonstrate a risk to the foetus in the first trimester, and the possibility of foetal harm remains remote
B=Either animal-reproduction studies have not demonstrated a foetal risk but there is no controlled in human
C=Either studies in animals have revealed adverse effects on the foetus (teratogenic or embryocidal or other) and there are no controlled studies in human
D=There is positive evidence of human foetal risk
X=Studies in animals or human beings have demonstrated foetal abnormalities
bAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists lactation risk categories: L1=Safest; L2=Safer; L3=Moderately safe; L4=Possibly hazardous;
L5=Contraindicated
cCPD2D6 poor metabolisers
dStarting dose can be administered following either one regimen (Abilify Maintena®):
1) One injection start: Administer 1 injection 400 mg and continue treatment with 10 mg to 20 mg oral aripiprazole/day for 14 consecutive days to maintain
therapeutic aripiprazole concentrations during initiation of therapy
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
2) Two injection start: Administer two separate injections at separate injection sites, along with one 20 mg dose of oral aripiprazole. After the injection
start, the recommended dose range (300 - 400 mg) should be administered once monthly as a single injection (no sooner than 26 days after the previous
injection).
eMaintenance in patients previously responsive to paliperidone or risperidone (Invega Sustenna®): 150 mg for 1 dose on day 1, then 100 mg for 1 dose
on day 8. The third dose subsequently adjusted at monthly intervals according to response.
fMaintenance in patients who are clinically stable on once-monthly IM paliperidone (Invega Trinza®): Initially 175 - 525 every 3 months using 3.5-fold
higher dose of the last once-monthly dose, adjusted according to response
g1) Patient tolerant to risperidone by mouth and taking oral risperidone ≤4 mg daily - Initially 25 mg every 2 weeks, adjusted in steps of 12.5 mg (maximum
per dose 50 mg every 2 weeks) at intervals of at least 4 weeks. During initiation, risperidone by mouth may need to be continued for 4 - 6 weeks.
Risperidone by mouth may also be used during dose adjustment of depot injection.
2) Patient tolerant to risperidone by mouth and taking oral risperidone >4 mg daily - Initially 37.5 mg every 2 weeks, adjusted in steps of 12.5 mg (maximum
per dose 50 mg every 2 weeks) at intervals of at least 4 weeks. During initiation, risperidone by mouth may need to be continued for 4 - 6 weeks.
Risperidone by mouth may also be used during dose adjustment of depot injection.
Source:
1. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (14th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2021
2. British National Formulary (BNF) 80. London: BMJ Group and Pharmaceutical Press; 2021
3. Monthly Index of Medical Specialities - MIMS Malaysia Online (Available at: http://www.mims.com/malaysia)
4. ACOG Practice Bulletin. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obstetrician-Gynaecologist - Use of Psychiatric Medications During Pregnancy and Lactation
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 7
CLOZAPINE INITIATION AND TITRATION REGIMEN
FOR IN-PATIENT
Target dose for: a female non-smokers (250 mg/day) b male non-smokers (350 mg/day)
c female smokers (450 mg/day)
Treatment breaks and blood monitoring for patients who have been on clozapine for
more than 18 weeks:
1. If clozapine is omitted ≥48 hours to ≤72 hours, start at 12.5 mg once or twice a day,
gradually increase to avoid the risk of serious AEs (e.g. hypotension, tachycardia,
raised temperature). Continue with the established monitoring frequency.
2. If clozapine is omitted >72 hours to <28 days, start at 12.5 mg and titrate up. If
no haematologically abnormality occurs, monitoring at intervals not exceeding 4
weeks may be resumed.
3. If clozapine is omitted ≥28 days, start as new patient, new and pre-treatment
result and monitoring same as new commencement for the next 18 weeks of
treatment. Start at 12.5 mg and titrate up.
Discontinuation of treatment and blood monitoring:
1. If a patient discontinues treatment, blood monitoring is required at their current
monitoring frequency for a period of 4 weeks after stopping.
2. If clozapine is to be stopped for non-haematological reasons or is a planned
discontinuation, then a gradual reduction in dose over a 1 to 2-week period is
recommended.
Source:
1. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in
Psychiatry (14th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2021
2. Northamptonshire Healthcare NHS. Foundation Trust. Clozapine Treatment
Operational Procedures; Oct 2017140
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
18
21
28
Day
-
12.5
25
25
25
25
50
50
75
75
100
100
125
125
150
150
200
200
Morning dose (mg)
12.5
12.5
25
25
25
50
50
75
75
100
100
125
125a
150
150
200b
200
250c
Evening dose (mg)
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
SUGGESTED TITRATION REGIMEN FOR CLOZAPINE INITIATION IN THE COMMUNITY
1
Monday
6.25
6.25
A
100
2
Tuesday
6.25
6.25
A
3
Wednesday
6.25
6.25
A
4
Thursday
6.25
12.5
A, B, full blood count (FBC)
5
Friday
12.5
12.5
A
Check results from day 4. Remind patient of
out-of-hours arrangements for weekend
6
Saturday
12.5
12.5
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
7
Sunday
12.5
12.5
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
8
Monday
12.5
25
A
75*
9
Tuesday
12.5
25
A
10
Wednesday
25
25
A
11
Thursday
25
37.5
A, B, FBC
12
Friday
25
37.5
A
Check results from day 4. Remind patient of
out-of-hours arrangements for weekend
13
Saturday
25
37.5
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
14
Sunday
25
37.5
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
15
Monday
37.5
37.5
A
50*
16
Tuesday
37.5
37.5
Not seen unless problems
17
Wednesday
37.5
50
A
18
Thursday
37.5
50
Not seen unless problems
19
Friday
50
50
A, B, FBC
20
Saturday
50
50
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
21
Sunday
50
50
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
22
Monday
50
75
A
25*
23
Tuesday
50
75
Not seen unless problems
24
Wednesday
75
75
A
25
Thursday
75
75
Not seen unless problems
26
Friday
75
100
A, B, FBC
27
Saturday
75
100
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
28
Sunday
75
100
No routine monitoring unless clinically indicated
Day Day of the week
Morning dose (mg) Evening dose (mg)
Monitoring
Percentage dose of
previous antipsychotics
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Note that much faster titrations can be undertaken in many patients where tolerability allows.
Further increments should be 25 - 50 mg/day (generally 25 mg/day) until target dose is reached.
A. Pulse, postural blood pressure, temperature should be taken before the dose and, ideally, between 30 minutes and 6 hours after the dose. Enquire
about AEs.
B. Mental state, weight, review and actively manage AEs (e.g. behavioural advice, slow clozapine titration or reduce dose of other AP, start adjunctive
treatments). Consider troponin, C-Reactive Protein, beta-natriuretic peptide.
*May need to be adjusted depending on AEs and mental state.
Source: Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (14th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2021
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 8
MONITORING PARAMETERS FOR ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Blood Pressure
Baseline, frequently during dose
titration and dose changes to
detect AP-induced changes and
generally for physical health
check
If severe hypotension or
hypertension (with clozapine)
observed, slower the rate of
titration Consider switching to
another AP if symptomatic
postural hypotension
Treat hypertension in line with
Malaysia CPG on Management
of Hypertension (5th Edition)
Clozapine, chlorpromazine
and quetiapine are most
likely to be associated with
postural hypotension
Amisulpride, aripiprazole,
sulpiride
Weight (include waist
size and BMI, if
possible)
Baseline, frequently for three
months then yearly to detect
AP-induced changes and
generally for physical health
check
Offer lifestyle advice
Consider changing AP and/or
dietary/pharmacological
intervention
Clozapine, olanzapine
-frequently for three months,
then 3-monthly for first year,
then yearly
Aripiprazole, ziprasidone are
not clearly associated with
weight gain but monitoring is
required nonetheless –
prevalence of obesity is high in
this patient group
Full blood count
Baseline and yearly as part of a
routine physical health check and
to detect chronic bone marrow
suppression (small risk
associated with some APs)
Stop suspected medication if
neutrophils <1.5x109/L
Refer to specialist medical care
if neutrophils <0.5x109/L
Note high frequency of benign
ethnic neutropenia in certain
ethnic groups
Clozapine - FBC weekly for
18 weeks, then monthly
None
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Baseline and yearly as part of a
routine physical health check
Urea and electrolytes
including creatinine or
estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR)
Investigate all abnormalities
detected
Amisulpride and sulpiride
are renally excreted -
consider reducing dose if
eGFR reduced
None
Blood lipids (cholesterol,
triglycerides) - fasting
sample if possible
Baseline, three months, then
yearly to detect AP-induced
changes and generally for
physical health check
Offer lifestyle advice
Consider changing AP and/or
initiating statin therapy
Clozapine, olanzapine -
3-monthly for first year, then
yearly
Some APs (e.g. aripiprazole)
not clearly associated with
dyslipidaemia, but as
prevalence of dyslipidaemia is
high in this patient group, so
all patients should be
monitored
Plasma glucose -
fasting sample if possible
Baseline, at 4 - 6 months, then
yearly to detect AP-induced
changes and generally for
physical health check
Offer lifestyle advice
Obtain fasting sample or
non-fasting HbA1c
Refer to medical
specialist/family physician care
Clozapine, olanzapine,
chlorpromazine - test at
baseline, one month, then
4 - 6 monthly
Some APs are not clearly
associated with impaired
fasting glycemia, but as its
prevalence is high in this
patient group, so all patients
should be monitored
Liver function test (LFT)
Baseline, then yearly as part of a
routine physical health check and
to detect chronic AP-induced
changes (rare)
Stop suspected medication if
LFT indicates hepatitis
(transaminases x3 normal) or
functional damage (prothrombin
time/albumin change)
Clozapine and chlorpromazine are associated with
hepatic failure
Amisulpride, sulpiride
Prolactin
Baseline, then at six months,
then yearly to detect AP-induced
changes
Switch drugs if hyperprolactinaemia confirmed and
symptomatic Consider tests of
bone mineral density for those
with chronically raised prolactin
Amisulpride, sulpiride,
risperidone and paliperidone
are particularly associated
with hyperprolactinaemia
Asenapine, aripiprazole,
clozapine, quetiapine,
olanzapine (<20 mg) and
ziprasidone usually do not
elevate prolactin, but worth
measuring if symptoms arise
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Baseline and when target dose is
reached (ECG changes are rare
in clinical practice) on admission
to hospital and before discharge
if medication regimen is changed
Electrocardiogram
Discuss with/refer to medical
specialist/family physician care
if abnormality detected
Haloperidol, sertindole -
ECG is mandatory
Ziprasidone - ECG is
mandatory in some situations
Risk of sudden cardiac death
increased with most APs
Ideally all patients should be
offered an ECG at least yearly
Creatinine
phosphokinase
Baseline, then if NMS is
suspected
In the psychiatric unit:
- stop suspected medication,
monitor temperature, pulse,
blood pressure
- consider benzodiazepines if
not already prescribed – IM
lorazepam
In the medical/emergency unit:
rehydration, bromocriptine +
dantrolene, sedation with
benzodiazepines, artificial
ventilation if required
NMS is more likely with
FGAs
None
Adapted:
1. Taylor DM, Barnes TRE, Young AH. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (14th Edition). London: Wiley Blackwell; 2021
2. Clinical Practice Guidelines Management of Schizophrenia in Adults. 2009. [Available at: https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/attachments/3882.pdf]
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
APPENDIX 9
CONSENSUS CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT AND DEFINITION OF
TREATMENT-RESISTANT SCHIZOPHRENIA
Interview using standardised
rating scale (e.g., PANSS,
BPRS, SANS, SAPS)
Assessment
Prospective evaluation of
treatment using a standardised
rating scale
≥12 weeks
Duration
Subjective distress
Adequate treatment
Not required
Not required
Dosage
Equivalent to >600 mg of
chlorpromazine per day
Same as for minimum criteria
≥12 weeks; specify duration of
treatment resistance
At least moderate severity
Severity
At least moderate severity and
<20% symptom reduction
during a prospective trial or
observation of ≤6 weeks
At least moderate functional
impairment measured using
a validated scale (e.g.,
SOFAS)
Functioning
Same as for minimum criteria
Information to be gathered
from patient/carer’s report,
staff and case notes, pill
counts and dispensing
charts
Assessment of past
response
Same as for minimum criteria
≥6 weeks at a therapeutic
dosage; record minimum
and mean (SD) duration for
each treatment episode
Duration
Same as for minimum criteria
≥2 past adequate treatment
episodes with different AP
Specify median number of
failed antipsychotic trials
Number of APs
≥2 past treatment episodes
with different AP and at least
one utilising a LAI AP (for at
least four months)
Specify median number of
failed AP trials
≥80% of prescribed doses
taken; adherence should be
assessed using at least two
sources (pill counts,
dispensing chart reviews and
patient/carer’s report)
AP plasma levels monitored
on at least one occasion
Specify methods used to
establish adherence
Current adherence
Same as the minimum criteria,
with addition of trough AP
serum levels measured on at
least two occasions separated
by at least two weeks (without
prior notification to patient)
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
Symptom domain
Positive, negative, cognitive
Same as for minimum criteria
Meets the above criteria for
treatment resistance plus
failure to respond to adequate
clozapine treatment
Ultra-treatment
resistant: clozapine
Same as for minimum criteria
Early onset (within one year
of treatment onset), mediumterm onset (1 - 5 years after
treatment onset), late onset
(>5 years after treatment
onset)
Time course
Same as for minimum criteria
Adapted: Howes OD, McCutcheon R, Agid O, et al. Treatment-Resistant
Schizophrenia: Treatment Response and Resistance in Psychosis (TRRIP)
Working Group Consensus Guidelines on Diagnosis and Terminology. Am
J Psychiatry. 2017;174(3):216-229
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAP(s)
atypical antipsychotic(s)
ACT
assertive community treatment
AE(s)
adverse event(s)
AGREE II
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II
AP(s)
antipsychotic(s)
APA
American Psychiatric Association
AUC
area under the curve
BPRS
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale
B-CATS
Brief Cognitive Assessment Tool for Schizophrenia
CM
case management
CBT
cognitive behaviour therapy
CBT-p
cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis
CGI-S
Clinical Global Impression Scale
CI
confidence interval
CDSS
Calgary Depression Rating Scale for Schizophrenia
CMHC
community mental health centre
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CPZ
chlorpromazine
CQ
clinical questions
CrI
credible interval
CT-R
Recovery-Oriented Cognitive Therapy
CRT
cognitive remediation therapy
DG
development group
DSM-5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th Edition
DUP
duration of untreated psychosis
ECG
electrocardiogram
ECT
electroconvulsive therapy
eGFR
estimated glomerular filtration rate
EPS
extrapyramidal side effects
EWS
early warning signs
FGA(s)
first-generation antipsychotic(s)
FSP
full service partnerships
g
gramme
GAF
Global Assessment of Functioning
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
GHQ
General Health Questionnaire
HAMD
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
HR(s)
hazard ratio(s)
ICD
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
ICM
intensive case management
IM
intramuscular
IQR
interquartile range
IV
intravenous
kg
kilogram
LAI
long-acting injection
LBW
low birth weight
LFT
liver function test
MD
mean difference
mg
milligram
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
MINI
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview
ml
millilitre
MoH
Ministry of Health
ms
millisecond
MSE
mental state examination
ng
nanogram
NICE
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NMS
neuroleptic malignant syndrome
NNT(B)
number needed to treat (to benefit)
NNTH
number needed to treat to harm
NSA-4
The 4-item Negative Symptom Assessment
OR
odds ratio
PANSS
Positive and Negative Symptom Scale for Schizophrenia
PPC
pre-pregnancy care
PSP
Personal and Social Performance
PQ-B
Prodromal Questionnaire - Brief Version
QLS
Quality of Life Scale
Q-LES-Q
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire
QoL
quality of life
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RC
review committee
RR
relative risk
SCID
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders
SCID-5-CV Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders-Clinician Version
SCL-90-R
Symptom-Checklist-90-Revised
SEI
specialised early intervention
SGA(s)
second-generation antipsychotic(s)
SMD
standardised mean difference
SPro
Self-screen-Prodrome
SST
social skills training
SUD
substance use disorder
SQ
Screening Questionnaire
TAU
treatment as usual
tDCS
transcranial direct current stimulation
TESS
Treatment Emergent Side Effect Scale
TMS
transcranial magnetic stimulation
TRRIP
Treatment Response and Resistance in Psychosis
TRS
treatment-resistant schizophrenia
US FDA
United States Food and Drug Administration
USD
United States Dollar
vs
versus
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The CPG DG members would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Dr. Junainah Sabirin, Consultant Public Health Physician on the
development of the CPG
• Ms. Rosnani Latip, Ms. Zamilah Mat Jusoh and Ms. Subhiyah Ariffin
on retrieval of evidence
• Ms. Sofea Amir on the design cover of the CPG
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Schizophrenia
(Second Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH
Malaysia while the printing of the CPG was sponsored by the Malaysian
Psychiatric Association.
Management of Schizophrenia (Second Edition)