CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
—t .: °-
MOHIPIPAKI326.16(6U)
MANAGEMENT OF
NASOPHARYNGEAL
CARCINOMA
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-73-8
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.msohns.com
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2016 and will be reviewed in 2020 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available. When it is due for updating,
the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of the related specialty
will be informed about it. A discussion will be done on the need for
a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary
team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used
by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the guidelines
Development Group as the key clinical recommendations that should
be prioritise for implementation.
Clinical Presentations and Referral
Recommendation 1
• Patients presenting with any of the following symptoms should be
referred to Otorhinolaryngologists as soon as possible to rule out
nasopharyngeal carcinoma :
 painless neck lump (unilateral/bilateral)
 blood-stained nasal discharge/saliva
 unilateral ear block or hearing loss
 headache
 facial numbness
 diplopia
Investigations
Recommendation 2
• Nasopharyngoscopy should be performed in all patients suspected
of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
• NPC should be diagnosed by histopathological examination of the
nasopharynx.
• In patients presenting with cervical lymphadenopathy, full head and
neck assessment and fine needle aspiration cytological examination
of the nodes should be done.
Staging
Recommendation 3
• All nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients should be staged using the
tumour node metastasis (TNM) system.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Treatment
Recommendation 4
• Radiotherapy alone is the main treatment in Stage I nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC).
• Concurrent chemoradiotherapy should be offered in Stage II, III, IVA
and IVB NPC.
• Intensity modulated radiotherapy is the preferred radiation technique
in NPC.
Recommendation 5
• In recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma, nasopharyngectomy or reirradiation may be offered.
Recommendation 7
• All nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients should have dental assessment
prior to radiotherapy and treated accordingly by oral/dental
specialists trained in dealing with patients receiving radiotherapy.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence & Formulation of Recommendation
i
Guidelines Development and Objectives
ii
Guidelines Development Group
iv
Review Committee
v
External Reviewers
vi
ALGORITHM A : Management of Nasopharyngeal
vii
Carcinoma (NPC)
ALGORITHM B : Management of Persistent Disease
viii
or Recurrent NPC
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS
1
2.1 Epidemiology
1
2.2 Risk Factors
2
2.3 Screening
2
3.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND REFERRAL
3
4.
INVESTIGATIONS
4
5.
STAGING
5
6.
TREATMENT
10
6.1 Primary Cancer
10
6.2 Recurrent Disease
12
6.3 Advanced Disease
13
7.
SUPPORTIVE CARE
14
7.1 Dental Care
14
7.2 Otitis Media with Effusion
14
7.3 Contraception
14
7.4 Nutrition
14
8.
MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
16
8.1 Oral Complications
16
8.2 Cranial Nerve Palsy
16
8.3 Osteoradionecrosis
17
8.4 Otitis Media with Effusion
17
9.
PROGNOSIS AND FOLLOW - UP
18
9.1 Prognosis
18
9.2 Follow-up
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
No.
Title
Page
10.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
20
REFERENCES
21
Appendix 1 Examples of Search Strategy
25
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
26
Appendix 3 Clinical Presentations
27
Appendix 4 TNM Staging Diagram
30
Appendix 5 Radiological Staging
34
Appendix 6 Chemotherapy Drugs and Side Effects
36
Appendix 7
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
37
Performance Status
Appendix 8 Toxicities of Radiotherapy on Head
38
and Neck
List of Abbreviations
39
Acknowledgement
39
Disclosure Statement
40
Source of Funding
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
•
overall quality of evidence
•
balance of benefits versus harms
•
values and preferences
•
resource implications
•
equity, feasibility and acceptability
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these CPG were
from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Higher Education
(MoHE). There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review
Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platform: Guidelines International Network
(G-I-N), Medline via Ovid, Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews
(CDSR) and Pubmed. Refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The inclusion criteria are all patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) regardless of study design. The search was limited
to literature published in the last 20 years and on humans and in
English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched and experts in the field contacted to identify
relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 22 January 2015
to 24 February 2016. Literature search was repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31 July 2016 to be included. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from
the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other CPGs namely Nasopharyngeal
Cancer Treatment by Alberta Health Services published in 2013 and
Diagnosis and Management of Head and Neck Cancer by Scottish
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network published in 2006. The CPGs
were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to it being used as reference.
A total of 10 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions.
The DG members met 23 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literatures retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was based
largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
iii
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council MoH
Malaysia for review and approval.
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) are to provide
evidence-based recommendations on the following:
i.
diagnosis and staging of NPC
ii. treatment and follow-up of NPC
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
All patients with NPC
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management of
NPC either in primary or secondary/tertiary care namely:
i.
Medical and dental officers and specialists in government and
private practice
ii. Allied health professionals
iii. Trainees and medical students
iv. Patients and their advocates
v. Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Pua Kin Choo
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Amali Ahmad
Radiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Faridah Hassan
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Head of Othorhinolaryngology
Department
Hospital Selayang
Dr. Fazlina Mohamed Yusoff
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Seksyen 7 Shah Alam
Dr. Hanin Farhana Kamaruzaman
CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Miss Kamarun Neasa Begam Mohd
Kassim
Pharmacist
National Cancer Institute, Putrajaya
Dr. Kong Min Han
Otorhinolaryngologist & Lecturer
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Medical Centre Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Dr. Mohd. Khairi Mohd. Noor
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Sekinchan
Dr. Noraida Khalid
Pathologist (Anatomic Pathology)
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Dr. Sha’ariyah Mohd. Mokhtar
Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Dr. Wong Yoke Fui
Clinical Oncologist
National Cancer Institute, Putrajaya
Dr. Yogendren Letchumanasamy
Nuclear Medicine Specialist
National Cancer Institute, Putrajaya
Dr. Zakinah Yahaya
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
v
Dr. Alan Khoo
Head of Molecular Pathology Unit, Cancer Research Centre
Institute for Medical Research
(representative from Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Society of Malaysia)
Dr. Fadzilah Hamzah
Nuclear Medicine Specialist
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Dr. Lau Fen Nee
Consultant Clinical Oncologist
National Cancer Institute, Putrajaya
Professor Dr. Primuharsa Putra Sabir Husin Athar
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist & Clinical Professor
KPJ Seremban Specialist Hospital
KPJ Healthcare University College Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Norzaini Rose Mohd Zain
Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Patimah Amin
Head of Surgical & Emergency Medicine Services Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Puan Rozita Mohamad
Senior Pharmacist & Head of Pharmacy Department
National Cancer Institute, Putrajaya
Datin Dr. Zil Falillah Hj. Mohd. Said
Consultant Family Medicine
Klinik Kesihatan Paka
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Siti Sabzah Mohd. Hashim
Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Alor Setar, Kedah
Members (alphabetical order)
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
vi
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Fauzia Abdul Majid
Consultant Family Medicine
Klinik Kesihatan Kempas, Johor
Associate Prof. Dr. Mohd Zulkiflee Abu Bakar
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist & Lecturer
Faculty of Medicine
University Malaya
Dr. Noraini Ab Rahim
Consultant Radiologist
Head of Radiology Department
National Cancer Institute
Dr. Norjehan Dato’ Haji Yahaya
Special Needs Dental Specialist
Head of Special Needs Dental Unit
Department of Oral Surgery
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Professor Sheng-Po Hao
Professor & Chairman
Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery
Director
Comprehensive Oral Cancer Center
Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital, Taiwan
Dr. Wee Tien Seng Joseph
Senior Consultant/Chairman
Division of Radiation Oncology
National Cancer Centre Singapore
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
ALGORITHM A : MANAGEMENT OF NASOPHARYNGEAL CARCINOMA
• History taking
• Complete physical examination
• Nasopharyngeal examination & biopsy
• +/- FNAC of regional lymph nodes
• Baseline investigations (FBC, renal profile, random blood sugar, liver
function test, chest X-ray and electrocardiogram)
• MRI of nasopharynx & neck (from base of skull to thoracic inlet) or CT
with contrast
• PET-CT or CT thorax/abdomen or ultrasound and bone scan, as indicated
• Pre-treatment dental assessment
• Nutritional evaluation
Determine disease stage
Stage I (T1N0M0)
Treatment with definitive
radiotherapy (RT) to nasopharynx
& elective RT to neck
• Definitive RT:-
 Primary site: total of 66-70 Gy
for 33-35 fractions, treated
one fraction/day for 6-7
weeks (1.8-2.0 Gy/fraction)
 Prophylactic neck: 54-60 Gy
for 30 fractions, treated one
fraction/day for 6 weeks
(1.8- 2.0 Gy/fraction)
• IMRT recommended to
minimise dose to critical
structure
Stage IVC (distant
metastasis)
Palliative treatment
• Consider clinical trial if
available
• Palliative chemotherapy to
be considered in patients
with good ECOG
performance status (0-2)
• RT to palliate symptoms
• Referral to palliative care/
palliative home care
Stage II, III, IVA and IVB
Concurrent chemoradiotherapy
• Cisplatin + RT
• Conventional fractionation:
 Primary site: total of 66-70 Gy
for 33-35 fractions, treated
one fraction/day for 6-7 weeks
(1.8-2.0 Gy/fraction)
 Neck: 54-70 Gy for 30-35
fractions, treated one
fraction/day for 6-7 weeks
(1.8-2.0 Gy/fraction)
• IMRT recommended to
minimise dose to critical
structures
Follow-up and Surveillance
• Multidisciplinary team involvement (ENT specialist, oncologist, speech therapist, audiologist, etc)
• Head & neck and systemic examination (including nasopharyngoscopy):
• Cross-sectional imaging in the initial 5 years
• Speech/swallowing assessment as clinically indicated
• Hearing evaluation & rehabilitation as clinically indicated
• Post-treatment dental management every 3 to 4 months by trained and experienced dental
specialist
• Weight assessment on follow-up
• Annual thyroid function test (TFT) screening
Year
Intervals
First year
Every 1 to 2 months
Second year
Every 2 to 3 months
Third year
Every 3 to 5 months
Fourth to fifth year
Every 6 months
After fifth year
Every 6 to 12 months
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
ALGORITHM B : MANAGEMENT OF PERSISTENT DISEASE OR
RECURRENT NASOPHARYNGEAL CARCINOMA
Options include:
• Nasopharyngectomy
OR
• Re-irradiation with external
beam RT or brachytherapy
• Consider clinical trial if
available
• Palliative chemotherapy to
be considered in patients
with good ECOG
performance status (0-2)
• RT to palliate symptoms
• Referral to palliative
care/ palliative home care
Options include:
• Neck dissection
• Re-irradiation
• Chemotherapy
Follow-up and Surveillance
• Multidisciplinary team involvement (ENT specialist, oncologist, speech therapist, audiologist, etc)
• Head & neck and systemic examination (including nasopharyngoscopy):
• Cross-sectional imaging in the initial 5 years
• Speech/swallowing assessment as clinically indicated
• Hearing evaluation & rehabilitation as clinically indicated
• Post-treatment dental management every 3 to 4 months by trained and experienced dental
specialist
• Weight assessment on follow-up
• Annual thyroid function test (TFT) screening
Local disease
Distant disease
Regional disease
• Restage to assess recurrent or persistent disease – MRI or CT scan and PET/CT
scan
• Biopsy of recurrent lesion(s), as clinically indicated
• Treatment should be individualised based on patient performance status and extent
of disease
Year
Intervals
First year
Every 1 to 2 months
Second year
Every 2 to 3 months
Third year
Every 3 to 5 months
Fourth to fifth year
Every 6 months
After fifth year
Every 6 to 12 months
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
1. INTRODUCTION
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an epithelial malignant tumour of
nasopharynx. It is most common among Chinese but constitutes only
0.7% of cancers worldwide.1, level I According to Global Cancer Statistic
2008, the incidence rate of NPC is 1 per 100,000 people and it was
estimated that men are two to three times more likely to develop NPC
than women.2, level III Geographically, Southeast Asia, Southern China,
and North African countries have the highest prevalence of NPC
compared with other parts of the world.
NPC is the fourth most common cancer among Malaysians (5.2%
of all cancers).3, level III There are several risk factors associated with
the disease. NPC is usually diagnosed late due to trivial presentation
of painless neck lump, blood stained saliva or nasal secretion and
unilateral mild ear block.4-6, level III In view of late presentation, its
survival outcome is poor. The optimal management of NPC involves
a multidisciplinary team. The main challenge for the team is for early
diagnosis to prompt access to treatment such as radiation therapy. For
those with intermediate or advanced disease, the aim is to minimise
treatment side effects without compromising the outcome.
In view of high disease burden of NPC in Malaysia, variation in practice,
resource implications as well as lack of local guidelines, the development
of an evidence-based CPG for NPC is timely and essential to assist the
healthcare providers in managing the disease locally.
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS
2.1 Epidemiology
The number of new cancer cases is increasing worldwide. In 2012,
there was an estimated of 86,700 new NPC cases with 50,800 deaths.
Although NPC may be considered one of the rarer forms of cancer
globally, the incidence is notably high in selected geographic and ethnic
populations, such as in South-East Asia and Southern China.7, level III
In Malaysia, NPC is the fourth (5.2%) most common cancer among
Malaysians and the third (8.4%) most common cancer among males.3, level III
The male to female ratio is 3:1 for both newly diagnosed and recurrent
cases.4-6, level III Most common age group at presentation is 40 to 60
years old.4-6, level III However, NPC may also occur in younger age group
and the youngest case of NPC detected was in a 6 year old.8, level III
NPC is predominant among Chinese (49%), followed by the natives of
Sabah and Sarawak (28%) and Malay (22%).4, level III In Sarawak, high
incidence of NPC is reported among Bidayuh (48.4%).8, level III
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
2.2 Risk Factors
Other risk factors for NPC are:
• Infection – increased risk of NPC in those tested positive for
Epstein-Barr virus antibodies (RR of 3.5 to 32.8)9, level II-2
• Family – the risk of NPC among the first-degree relatives was 3.1 to
8.0 compared to those without family history 10-11, level II-2
• Lifestyle and environment
 Tobacco smoking is one of the important risk factors for NPC
(OR=2.41, 95% CI 1.61 to 3.60).12, level II-2 The risk rise by 1 - 2%
with each pack-year of smoking.13, level II-2
 Consumption of salted fish has higher risk of getting NPC in
people who consume it since childhood (OR=2.45, 95% CI 2.03 to
2.94)10, level II-2 and those who have it for three times or more
in 1 month (OR=1.9, 95% CI 1.1 to 3.5).14, level II-2
 Exposure to domestic wood cooking fires for more than 10 years
(OR=5.8; 95%CI 2.5 to 13.6).10, level II-2
 Exposure to occupational solvents for 10 or less years (OR=2.6;
95%CI 1.4 to 4.8).10, level II-2
 Occupational exposure to wood dust (OR=1.63, 95%CI 1.02 to
2.61).12, level II-2
2.3 Screening
Screening of NPC for general population in endemic area has been
extensively studied. The methods used are Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
serology test and nasopharyngoscopy. The Health Technology
Assessment (HTA) report by the Ministry of Health (MoH) Malaysia
published in 2011 concluded that there was insufficient evidence to
recommend a population-based NPC screening programme as a public
health policy.15, level II-2 The findings of a recent Cochrane systematic
review on NPC screening published in 2015 were consistent with the
HTA report.16, level I
• Screening of NPC in general population could not be recommended
due to insufficient evidence for its effectiveness and safety.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
3. CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND REFERRAL
3.1 Clinical Presentation
Healthcare providers need to be aware that NPC patients often present
with nonspecific symptoms and signs in the head and neck region.
A proper clinical workup which begins with a detailed history of the
presenting complaints is pertinent in diagnosing NPC.
The most common presenting symptoms of NPC are:4-6, level III; 8, level III
• neck lump/mass (42 - 80.8%) - always painless, can be unilateral or
bilateral
• nasal symptoms (26 - 49.8%) - blood-stained nasal discharge or
saliva, unilateral nose block, epistaxis or bad breath
• ear symptoms (11 - 48.4%) - ear block, deafness, tinnitus or pain; the
symptoms are usually unilateral but can be bilateral as the disease
progresses
• ophthalmo-neurologic symptoms (11 - 14.6%) - unilateral headache,
facial numbness, diplopia, ptosis, trismus, dysphagia or hoarseness
of voice. The most common cranial nerve involvement is 5th followed
by 6th, 3rd, 4th and others.
The images of these symptoms can be viewed in Appendix 3.
Majority of NPC patients in Malaysia present with advanced stage
(Stages III/IV) at the time of diagnosis (75 - 85%). This is due to lack of
awareness of NPC symptoms and signs among patients and doctors.
4, level III; 6, level III; 8, level III
3.2 Referral
There is no evidence retrieved on referral criteria for patients with NPC.
In view of delayed in diagnosis of NPC, the CPG DG uses consensus
method to address the importance of referral to Otorhinolaryngology
services as soon as possible. Early referral is crucial in establishing
diagnosis of NPC so that the patients could receive definitive treatment.
Recommendation 1
• Patients presenting with any of the following symptoms should be
referred to Otorhinolaryngologists as soon as possible to rule out
nasopharyngeal carcinoma :
 painless neck lump (unilateral/bilateral)
 blood-stained nasal discharge/saliva
 unilateral ear block or hearing loss
 headache
 facial numbness
 diplopia
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
4. INVESTIGATION
4.1 Baseline Investigations
There is no retrievable evidence on baseline investigations for NPC
patients. The established baseline investigations which include full
blood count, renal profile, random blood sugar, liver function test, chest
X-ray and electrocardiogram (ECG) are required to assess patient’s
general health.
4.2 Histopathology and Cytology
Biopsy of nasopharynx is mandatory in diagnosis of NPC. It is the
preferred method for obtaining a definitive histological diagnosis as
diagnostic sensitivity of nasopharyngeal cytology is limited (70 - 90%).
Biopsies are taken via nasopharyngoscopy from the gross lesions. In
the absence of a gross lesion, multiple biopsies should be taken from
nasopharynx for patients with high suspicion of NPC.17 Fine needle
aspiration cytological (FNAC) examination of enlarged cervical lymph
nodes is useful in reaching a diagnosis of metastatic NPC, either for
initial diagnosis or staging.
Histological grading of NPC is based on World Health Organization
(WHO) Classification of Tumours, Pathology and Genetics of Head and
Neck Tumours as outlined in Table 1.17
Table 1 : Histopathological Classification of
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
WHO Classiﬁcation
2005
Keratinizing squamous
cell carcinoma
Non-keratinizing
carcinoma
• Differentiated
• Undifferentiated
Basaloid squamous
cell carcinoma
WHO Classification
1991
Squamous cell
carcinoma
Non-keratinizing
carcinoma
• Differentiated
• Undifferentiated
No synonym exists
(recently described)
WHO Classification
1978
WHO Type I
(Squamous cell
carcinoma)
WHO Type II
(Non keratinizing
carcinoma)
WHO Type III
(Undifferentiated
carcinoma)
No synonym exists
(recently described)
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
• In doubtful situation where the histological finding is unclear, ancillary
tests such as immunohistochemical staining and EBV encoded early
RNAs (EBER) in-situ hybridization will be performed.
Non-keratinizing carcinoma is the commonest histological subtype (75
- 99%) while the basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the least
common (<0.2%).17; 18, level III Keratinizing SCC is more common in low
incidence area of NPC.18, level III The histological type does not differ by
gender.19, level II-2
There is no retrievable evidence on contraindication of lymph node
biopsy in NPC. However, the CPG DG opines that full ENT assessment
and FNAC is warranted before embarking on lymph node biopsy due to
the possibility of extracapsular spread of the cancer cells.
Recommendation 2
• Nasopharyngoscopy should be performed in all patients suspected
of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
• NPC should be diagnosed by histopathological examination of the
nasopharynx.
• In patients presenting with cervical lymphadenopathy, full head and
neck assessment and fine needle aspiration cytological examination
of the nodes should be done.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
5. STAGING
Cancer staging plays an important role in determining the best treatment
approach and prognosis of the disease. In this CPG, the latest edition
of the American Joint Committee on Cancer or AJCC Cancer Staging
Manual 2010 (7th Edition) is used to stage NPC.20 The most clinically
useful staging system is the Tumour Node Metastasis (TNM) System.
TNM staging consist of clinical examination, and pathological and
radiological investigations. Clinical examination of nasopharynx,
regional lymph nodes and distant metastatic sites (especially lung,
liver and bone) is crucial for diagnosis and staging. Cranial nerves
examination is vital as cranial nerve involvement may be the first
and only presentation of NPC. Refer to Appendix 4 for TNM Staging
Diagram.
Primary Tumour (T)
TX Primary tumour cannot be assessed
T0
No evidence of primary tumour
Tis Carcinoma in situ
Nasopharynx
T1
Tumour conﬁned to the nasopharynx, or tumor extends to
oropharynx and/or nasal cavity without parapharyngeal extension*
T2
Tumour with parapharyngeal extension*
T3
Tumour involves bony structures of skull base and/or paranasal
sinuses
T4
Tumour with intracranial extension and/or involvement of cranial
nerves, hypopharynx, orbit, or with extension to the infratemporal
fossa/masticator space
*Note: Parapharyngeal extension denotes posterolateral inﬁltration of
tumour.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Regional Lymph Nodes (N) Nasopharynx
NX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis
Distant Metastasis (M)
M0 No distant metastasis
M1 Distant metastasis
Anatomic Stage/Prognostic Groups
Nasopharynx
N1
Unilateral metastasis in cervical lymph node(s), ≤6 cm in greatest
dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa, and/or unilateral or
bilateral, retropharyngeal lymph nodes, 6 cm or less, in greatest
dimension*
N2
Bilateral metastasis in cervical lymph node(s), ≤6 cm in greatest
dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa*
N3
Metastasis in a lymph node(s)* >6 cm and/or to supraclavicular
fossa*
N3a >6 cm in dimension
N3b Extension to the supraclavicular fossa**
*Note: Midline nodes are considered ipsilateral nodes.
**Note: Supraclavicular zone or fossa is deﬁned by three points:
(1) the superior margin of the sternal end of the clavicle,
(2) the superior margin of the lateral end of the clavicle,
(3) the point where the neck meets the shoulder.
All cases with lymph nodes (whole or part) in the fossa are considered
N3b.
Tis
T1
T1
T2
T2
T1
T2
T3
T3
T3
T4
T4
T4
Any T
Any T
Stage 0
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
N0
N0
N1
N0
N1
N2
N2
N0
N1
N2
N0
N1
N2
N3
Any N
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Radiological Staging
Imaging studies are essential in clinical staging of the NPC as it
identifies the deep tumour infiltration and locoregional cervical lymph
nodes involvement. It is mandatory to complete the staging process for
further management of the disease.20
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is superior to computed tomography
(CT) scan in demonstrating soft tissue involvement. It is more sensitive
than CT scan for skull base and intracranial tumour infiltration as well
as identification of retropharyngeal lymph node metastasis (69.0% vs
52.1%, p<0.001). However, there is no significant difference in detection
of the rest of the neck lymph node metastasis between MRI and CT
scan.21, level III MRI is able to depict not only primary cancers that caused
an obvious focal mass or infiltration outside the nasopharynx but also
those early cancers that produced only mild thickening of the mucosa.
It is also an accurate diagnostic test for patients with submucosal
involvement which are not detected by endoscopy (sensitivity of 100%
and specificity of 93%).22, level III
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography CT (FDG PETCT) has better sensitivity and specificity compared with other staging
modalities (MRI or CT scan of head and neck, chest radiography,
abdominal ultrasonography and skeletal scintigraphy) for N (pooled
sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 90%) and M (pooled sensitivity of
87% and specificity of 98%) classifications, but not for T classification
of newly diagnosed NPC.23, level III
In two systematic reviews, whole-body FDG PET or PET-CT demonstrated
a good diagnostic performance in M staging of NPC compared to other
conventional work-up (chest radiography, abdominal ultrasonography
and skeletal scintigraphy). The pooled sensitivity ranged from 82% to
83% and the pooled specificity was 97%.24-25, level III A diagnostic study
included in these systematic reviews showed that FDG PET-CT has
better accuracy (96.2, 95% CI 89.3 to 98.7) in detecting distant metastasis
compared with other imaging modalities which included CT scan of
thorax and abdomen in combination with skeletal scintigraphy.26, level III
FDG PET is the best modality for diagnosis of local residual or recurrent
NPC compared with CT and MRI with pooled sensitivity of 95% and
specificity of 90%.27, level III However, the combined use of MRI and
FDG PET-CT is more accurate (overall accuracy of 92.1, 95% CI
85.4 to 98.7) for tumour restaging than when either modality is used
independently.28, level II-2
In local setting, CT scan is widely used to stage the disease in view of
limited availability of MRI and FDG PET-CT. CT scan is also offered
when there is contraindication for MRI such as the use of pacemaker.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Some of the radiological images of NPC staging can be seen on
Appendix 5.
Recommendation 3
• All nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) patients should be staged
using the tumour node metastasis (TNM) system.
• The preferred imaging modality is:
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for local and locoregional
staging of NPC
 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography CT (FDG
PET-CT) for distant metastasis in NPC
• For restaging of residual and recurrence NPC, combination of MRI
and FDG PET-CT should be used.
• When MRI and FDG PET-CT are not feasible, CT scan is an
alternative imaging modality in NPC staging.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
6. TREATMENT
Multidisciplinary team approach in the management of NPC cases is
important to ensure optimum treatment planning. The main treatment
for NPC is radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy.
6.1 Primary Cancer (Newly Diagnosed NPC)
Radiation therapy (RT) is the main treatment modality for nondisseminated NPC. Chemotherapy plays a role as adjunct treatment
to RT. It can be given as concurrent, adjuvant or neoadjuvant setting.
NPC is radiosensitive and thus radiation therapy is the mainstay of
treatment. Radical radiation therapy doses usually consist of 66 to 70Gy
in 33-35 fractions, treated once daily over 6-7 weeks, usually 5 days a
week with two rest days. Conventional 2-dimensional radiation therapy
(2D-CRT) used to be the main technique. With the understanding about
benefit of conformal radiation therapy and technological advancement,
the therapy has evolved to 3-dimensional radiation therapy (3D-CRT)
and more recently intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT).
IMRT has the potential to deliver higher doses of radiation to tumour
cells near critical structures such as salivary glands, optic apparatus,
spinal cord, brain stem and pituitary gland. IMRT improves local control
and progression free survival (PFS) for both early and advanced stage
NPC.29, level II-2 A systematic review on IMRT to head and neck cancer
showed significant reduction in grade 2-4 xerostomia (HR=0.76, 95%CI
0.66 to 0.87) without compromising loco-regional control and overall
survival.30, level I
There is limited evidence on Stage II disease. In a cohort study of 362
patients on RT alone, the 5-years overall survival (OS) was significantly
lower at 73.1% in T2N1 compared with T1N0 (96.6%).31, level II-2 In a RCT
conducted in 2011, concurrent chemotherapy improved the 5-year OS
compared with RT alone (94.5% vs 85.8%) with a reduction of death
by 70% (HR of death=0.30, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.76).32, level I Guidelines by
National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2013 and European Society
for Medical Oncology 2012 recommend CCRT in Stage II disease.33-34
There are strong evidences on chemotherapy added concurrently to
RT in locoregionally advanced NPC (Stage III, IVA and IVB). Various
combinations of chemotherapy were used with platinum-based being
the commonest agent.
• In a meta-analysis of 1500 patients, pooled data showed an
approximate 20% improvement in 2- to 4-year survival with the
addition of chemotherapy to standard external beam radiation
therapy. For the 4-year OS, the OR was 0.79 (95% CI 0.65 to 0.97).
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
However, there was no report on quality assessment of the included
primary studies.35, level I
• A Cochrane systematic review of eight RCTs in 2006 found that
chemotherapy led to a small but significant benefit for 5-year OS with
HR of death of 0.82 (95% CI 0.71 to 0.95). The concomitant trials
showed a better treatment effect than induction trials or adjuvant
trials [HR of 0.60 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.76), HR of 0.99 (95% CI 0.80 to
1.21) and HR of 0.97 (95% CI 0.69 to 1.38) respectively].36, level I
• A later updated meta-analysis of 19 RCTs in 2015 supported the
findings of the above Cochrane review.37, level I
• In a 2015 network meta-analysis, both CCRT + AC and CCRT alone
benefited OS significantly when compared with RT alone [HR of
0.64 (95% CI 0.53 to 0.76) and HR of 0.66 (95% CI 0.49 to 0.88)
respectively]. The primary studies were of moderate quality.38, level I
The list of common chemotherapy drugs and the side effects is outlined
in Appendix 6.
Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy
(NACT)
is
the
administration
of
chemotherapy agents before a primary treatment. The aim is to reduce
the size or extent of cancer. Based on three meta-analyses, NACT
showed a benefit in disease free survival but not in OS and locoregional
control.37, level I; 39-40, level I Strong evidence are required to establish the
efficacy of NACT in locoregionally advanced NPC.
Adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) is chemotherapy given after primary
treatment of NPC. Two meta-analyses showed that when compared
with RT alone, AC + RT significantly lowered the risk of locoregional
failure by 29 - 39% but not in OS.37, level I; 40, level I There were no significant
differences in OS, locoregional recurrence free survival (LRFS) and
distant metastasis free survival (DMFS) between CCRT + AC and
CCRT alone. The primary studies used in these meta-analyses and
network meta-analyses were of moderate in quality.38, level I; 41, level I
Common adverse events in chemotherapy include neutropaenia,
mucositis, nausea and vomiting.37-38, level I; 40, level I
Due to limited evidence, efficacy of neoadjuvant and adjuvant
chemotherapy in NPC has yet to be established.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Recommendation 4
• Radiotherapy alone is the main treatment in Stage I nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC).
• Concurrent chemoradiotherapy should be offered in Stage II, III, IVA
and IVB NPC.
• Intensity modulated radiotherapy is the preferred radiation technique
in NPC.
6.2 Recurrent Cancer
NPC can recur at local, locoregional or distant metastatic sites. These
conditions can be difficult to manage. Treatment for primary site
recurrence depends on the T staging. Treatment for rT1 and rT2 can be
endoscopic nasopharyngectomy or brachytherapy. For rT3, selected rT4
and nodal recurrence, conventional nasopharyngectomy, radical neck
dissection or re-irradiation is the treatment option.42-43, level II-3; 44, level II-2
Five-years overall survival rate post-nasopharyngectomy ranges from
42.1% to 52%.42-43, level II-3; 44, level II-2 The survival rate is higher in
rT1 (49.1% to 73%) and rT2 (24.7% to 40%) compared with higher
T staging.42, level II-3; 44, level II-2
Transient complications of nasopharyngectomy such as palatal fistula
and submandibular necrosis may resolve spontaneously or require
further intervention.42, level II-3; 44, level II-2 Uncommon complications are:
• permanent morbidities due to nerve injury (paralysis causing
dysphagia) and severe trismus42, level II-3; 44, level II-2
• mortality caused by massive bleeding due to injury to carotid artery
43, level II-3; 44, level II-2
Significant
poor
prognostic
factors
on
survival
of
postnasopharyngectomy are: 42, level II-3
• advanced T stage of disease at treatment
• lymph node metastasis
• invasion of skull base
• invasion of parapharyngeal space
• positive surgical margin
With a carefully selected subset of patients, the potential for durable
local control and respectable survival rates with re-irradiation can be
achieved. Re-irradiation poses a therapeutic challenge as the radiation
dose that can be given is limited by previous radiation treatment dose
and normal organs tolerance.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
3D-CRT, IMRT and brachytherapy are the different RT approaches that
can be offered. A cohort study showed that these three approaches
were beneficial and feasible for rT1-T2 NPC in terms of local control,
disease-free survival and overall survival.45, level II-2 Long term toxicity for
re-irradiation are of concern. Severe adverse effects for re-irradiation
include nasopharyngeal necrosis, cranial nerve palsy, trismus, hearing
deficit and temporal lobe necrosis.45, level II-2; 46, level III
The choice of therapeutic approach depends upon local expertise and
facilities, and the extend of recurrent disease.
Recommendation 5
• In recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma, nasopharyngectomy or reirradiation may be offered.
6.3 Advanced Disease
In advanced disease with distant metastasis (M1) of NPC, options
of treatment include chemotherapy, radiotherapy and palliative care.
NPC patients with distant metastasis (Stage IVC) receiving either
chemotherapy or radiotherapy have better 1-year overall survival rate
compared with those without treatment (p=0.0015). The radiation dose
that might be given is 70.2-75.6 Gy.47, level III
Multimodality treatment which include chemotherapy, radiotherapy with
or without surgery increase survival rate significantly compared with best
supportive care or chemotherapy alone in metastatic NPC.48, level III
Palliative care is very important in order to provide comfort and support
to patients and families who are living with or dying from advanced NPC.
These patients will have complex physical and psychosocial problems.
A comprehensive approach of treatment such as surgery, radiotherapy,
chemotherapy, psychological and social supports, pain control, nutritional
and spiritual supports may alleviate some of the discomfort for a better
quality of life.49 Palliative chemotherapy may be considered in patients
with good Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance
status of 0-2 as outlined in Appendix 7.
For pain management in cancer patients, refer to CPG Management of
Cancer Pain.50
Recommendation 6
• Multimodality treatment including palliative care should be
considered in advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
7. SUPPORTIVE CARE
7.1 Dental Care
Dental assessment prior to radiotherapy should be addressed early
to allow sufficient healing time for any dental procedures.51, level III A
comprehensive dental assessment should include medical and dental
history, extra- and intra-oral examination, necessary radiographs and
any investigations required.
Dental management in NPC emphasis on the importance of oral or
denture hygiene care, and use of ultra-soft toothbrush.52, level III Referral
for dental assessment is required and treated accordingly.
7.2 Treatment of Otitis Media with Effusion
Otitis media with effusion (OME) is common in NPC patients. The
treatment options for post-irradiation OME are:53, level I
• Myringotomy plus grommet insertion
• Simple aspiration (auripuncture)
• Tympanic membrane fenestration with cauterization
Myringotomy and grommet insertion has higher cure rate at the end of
2-year follow-up compared with simple auripuncture plus aspiration (51%
vs 38%, p=0.011) despite higher incidence of complications (28.9% vs
15.6%).53, level I
7.3 Contraception
Ideally, highly effective reversible contraceptives, such as intrauterine
or implantable contraceptives, are recommended for women treated
for cancer including NPC. However, combined hormonal contraceptive
methods (containing oestrogen and progestin) should be avoided by
women with active cancer or who have been treated for cancer in the
last six months due to the increased risk of venous thromboembolism
(VTE). For women who are cancer-free for at least six months and have
no history of hormone-mediated cancers, chest wall irradiation, anaemia,
osteoporosis or VTE, the use of any method of contraception can be
recommended.54, level III
7.4 Nutritional Support
NPC patients are at risk for malnutrition due to disease process or
complications of the treatment. Adequate nutrition is important for
supportive or palliative care to ease the treatment process and improve
quality of life. Nutritional intake for NPC patients can be in the form of
oral, enteral and parenteral feed depending on patients’ ability to tolerate
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
the food and their requirements. Nutritional supplements may be used
to maintain adequate calorie and nutrient intake which includes:49
• Nutritionally complete supplements
• Energy and protein supplements
• Carbohydrate supplements
• Protein supplements
• Fat supplements
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
8. MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
Post-radiotherapy complications such as oral and aural complications,
and cranial nerve palsies are common in the treatment of NPC. Other
late toxicities post-radiotherapy are listed in Appendix 8.
8.1 Oral Complications
The common oral complications post-radiotherapy are:
• xerostomia (80% to 100%)55-57, level II-3
• mucositis (60% from third to fourth week after the beginning of
radiotherapy)55, level II-3
• candidiasis (16% to 67%)55-57, level II-3
It is essential that NPC patients receive dental assessment prior to
radiotherapy to minimise post-treatment oral complications. The oral
complications among NPC survivors causes significant negative impact
in functional, physical, social and handicap in oral health-related quality
of life (Oral Health Impact Profile-subscale).58, level II-3
At present, there is no retrievable evidence on specific dental
management in NPC patients due to lack of clinical trials for such
treatment modality. However, some of the dental management for the
head and neck cancer includes:
• fluoride therapy59, level I
• chlorhexidine rinse59, level I (preferably alcohol-free)
• dental extraction57, level II-3
Treatment for xerostomia is limited. Locally, symptomatic relief such as
frequent sipping of plain water and the use of moisturising mouth gel
or gargle has been offered to the affected patients. Although there is
limited evidence available, pilocarpine is an efficacious and safe option
of treatment.60-62, level I
8.2 Osteoradionecrosis
Dental diseases increase the risk of osteoradionecrosis (ORN).
Therefore, dental assessment prior to radiotherapy is essential to
reduce the risks of ORN.
Osteoradionecrosis of the skull base post-radiotherapy can be
controlled by sequestrectomy combined with hyperbaric oxygen in
majority of NPC patients. In extensive cases, radical sequestrectomy
with microvascular free flap reconstruction are justified.63, level III Longterm antibiotics can be used but may not be sufficient to treat an
extensive disease.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Recommendation 7
• All nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) patients should have dental
assessment prior to radiotherapy and treated accordingly by
oral/dental specialists trained in dealing with patients receiving
radiotherapy.
• Pilocarpine may be offered for treatment of post-radiotherapy
xerostomia in NPC patients, if it is available.
8.3 Cranial Nerve Palsy
There is no definite treatment for cranial nerve palsy post-radiotherapy
in NPC patients. Symptomatic treatments such as nasogastric tube or
gastrostomy tube feeding for dysphagia or aspiration may be offered.
In intractable aspiration secondary to radiation encephalopathy or
radiation damage of cranial nerve, closure of laryngotracheal cavity
and tracheostomy is an option.64, level III Strabismus as a result of sixth
cranial nerve palsy can be treated temporarily by Botulinum Toxin A
injection.65, level III
8.4 Otitis Media with Effusion
Refer to Subchapter 7.2 under Supportive Care.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
9. PROGNOSIS AND FOLLOW-UP
9.1 Prognosis
Different prognostic categories (based on the difference in failure
patterns) can be defined across different stages, as shown in Table 2.
66, level II-3; 67, level III These prognostic groupings have important
implications for the selection of appropriate treatment strategies.
Table 2 : Prognosis of Different NPC Stages
Males (p<0.05) and tumour with lymph nodes involvement (p<0.05)
have poorer prognosis as compared with females and tumour confined
to the primary site in 5-year LRFS. The 5-year LRFS for male is 33.3%
and for N1 patients is 35.0%.66, level II-3
Distant metastasis is the most common mode of failure in NPC, followed
by local recurrence. While a small percentage of locally recurrent NPC
can be salvaged, the vast majority of distant metastasis succumbs to
the disease. However, patients with non-disseminated NPC (6.88%)
survive two years or more after distant metastasis is diagnosed.68, level II-3
9.2 Follow-up
Radiotherapy acute toxicities usually take about one to two months to
resolve and tumour will regress maximally within two to three months.
Hence, the patients need to be reviewed post-radiotherapy to assess
acute toxicities and manage accordingly.
The aims of following-up patients after NPC treatment are:
• to assess the response to treatments
• to manage side effects and complications which may arise due to
the disease process or from the treatment67, level III (refer to Chapter
8 on Management of Complications)
• to provide surveillance and early detection of locoregional relapses,
which are amenable to radical salvage treatment67, level III to detect
occurrence of second primary cancer
 There is a 24% increased risk in the development of a second
cancer after NPC as compared with the general population
(standardised incidence rate=1.24, 95% CI 1.15 to 1.33).69, level III
Stage
T1-2 N0-1
T3-4 N0-1
T1-2 N2-3
T3-4 N2-3
Prognosis
Relatively good treatment outcome
Mainly local failure
Mainly regional and distant failure
Local, regional and distant failure
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
The average interval between the occurrence of the ﬁrst and the
second cancers is 5.33 years. The second primary cancers are
oral/pharyngeal cancer, head and neck sarcoma, skin cancer and
salivary gland cancer.70, level III
The CPG DG and RC suggest the following procedures to be conducted
on NPC patients during follow-up.
The follow-up procedures in NPC are:
• clinical examination of the nasopharynx including an nasoendoscopic
examination to detect superficial tumours
• examination of the neck and other systems (thorax and abdomen)
• if post-radiotherapy cross sectional imaging is required, it should be
offered no earlier than 3 months
• cross-sectional imaging, as needed, to detect deep infiltrating
tumours not associated with mucosal lesion during the initial 3 - 5
years post-treatment
There is no standard local follow-up schedule for NPC patients.
However, the CPG DG and RC suggest the following schedule on NPC.
Table 3 : Follow-up Schedule of NPC Without Recurrence
*interval of follow-up may be adjusted based on clinical judgement
Year after completion of treatment
First year
Second year
Third year
Fourth to fifth year
After fifth year
Frequency of follow-up
Every 1 to 2 months
Every 2 to 3 months
Every 3 to 5 months
Every 6 months
Every 6 to 12 months
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of CPG is important as it helps in providing quality
healthcare services based on best available evidence applied to local
scenario and expertise. Various factors and resource implications
should be considered for the success of the uptake in the CPG
recommendations.
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing the CPG are:
• availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and
softcopies)
• conferences and updates on management of NPC
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
• limited awareness in managing and referrals of NPC among
healthcare providers
• inadequate NPC training at all levels of healthcare providers
• variation in NPC treatment at different levels of care due to
administrative and financial constraints
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitments to:
• ensure widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare providers via
printed copies and online accessibility
• reinforce training of healthcare providers via regular seminars and
workshops
• involve multidisciplinary team at all levels
• improve the diagnostic and therapeutic facilities, and trained experts
• strengthen the head and neck cancer registry
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage of NPC
patients treated
with IMRT
= Number of NPC patients
x 100%
treated with IMRT
Total number of NPC patients
treated with radiotherapy
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
References
1.
Al-Sarraf M, LeBlanc, M., Giri PG, et al. Chemoradiotherapy versus radiotherapy in patients with
advanced nasopharyngeal cancer: phase III randomized intergroup study 0099. J Clin Oncol
1998; 16: 1310-1317.
2.
Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, et al. GLOBOCAN 2008, Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide:
IARC CancerBase No. 10. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; Year.
Available at: http://globocan.iarc.fr. 2010 (accessed on 28 September 2016)
3.
Zainal Ariffin O, Nor Saleha IT. National cancer registry report 2007. Malaysia: Ministry of Health.
2011.
4.
Pua KC, Khoo AS, Yap YY, et al. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma database. Med J Malaysia. 2008
Sep;63 (Suppl C):59-62.
5.
Suzina SA, Hamzah M. Clinical presentation of patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Med J
Malaysia. 2003 Oct;58(4):539-45.
6.
Prasad U, Pua KC. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a delay in diagnosis. The Medical journal of
Malaysia. 2000 Jun;55(2):230-5.
7.
Torre LA, Bray F, Siegel RL, et al. Global cancer statistics, 2012. CA: a cancer journal for
clinicians. 2015 Mar 1;65(2):87-108.
8.
Tiong TS, Selva KS. Clinical presentation of nasopharyngeal carcinoma in Sarawak Malaysia.
Med J Malaysia. 2005 Dec;60(5):624-8.
9.
Chien YC, Chen JY, Liu MY, et al. Serologic markers of Epstein-Barr virus infection and
nasopharyngeal carcinoma in Taiwanese men. N Engl J Med. 2001 Dec 27;345(26):1877-82.
10.
Guo X, Johnson RC, Deng H, et al. Evaluation of nonviral risk factors for nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in a high-risk population of Southern China. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 15;124(12):29427.
11.
Friborg J, Wohlfahrt J, Koch A, et al. Cancer susceptibility in nasopharyngeal carcinoma families-
-a population-based cohort study. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 15;65(18):8567-72.
12.
Ekburanawat W, Ekpanyaskul C, Brennan P, et al. Evaluation of non-viral risk factors for
nasopharyngeal carcinoma in Thailand: results from a case-control study. Asian Pac J Cancer
Prev. 2010;11(4):929-32.
13.
Xue WQ, Qin HD, Ruan HL, et al. Quantitative association of tobacco smoking with the risk of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a comprehensive meta-analysis of studies conducted between 1979
and 2011. Am J Epidemiol. 2013 Aug 1;178(3):325-38.
14.
Jia WH, Huang QH, Liao J, et al. Trends in incidence and mortality of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
over a 20-25 year period (1978/1983-2002) in Sihui and Cangwu counties in southern China.
BMC Cancer. 2006 Jul 6;6:178.
15.
Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) MDD, Ministry of Health Malaysia.
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Screening. 2010. MOH/P/PAK/211.10(TR).
16.
Yang S, Wu S, Zhou J, et al. Screening for nasopharyngeal cancer. The Cochrane Library. 2015
Jan 1.
17.
Barnes L, Eveson JW, Reichart P, et al. Word Health Organization Classification of Tumours:
Pathology and genetics of head and neck tumors. 2005.
18.
Wei KR, Xu Y, Liu J, et al. Histopathological classification of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Asian
Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(5):1141-7.
19.
Marks JE, Phillips JL, Menck HR. The National Cancer Data Base report on the relationship
of race and national origin to the histology of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cancer. 1998 Aug
1;83(3):582-8.
20.
Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC. American Joint Committee on Cancer, American Cancer
Society: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual (7th edition). Springer, New York. 2009.
21.
Liao XB, Mao YP, Liu LZ, et al. How does magnetic resonance imaging influence staging
according to AJCC staging system for nasopharyngeal carcinoma compared with computed
tomography? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008 Dec 1;72(5):1368-77.
22.
King AD, Vlantis AC, Bhatia KS, et al. Primary nasopharyngeal carcinoma: diagnostic accuracy of
MR imaging versus that of endoscopy and endoscopic biopsy. Radiology. 2011 Feb;258(2):5317.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
23.
Vellayappan BA, Soon YY, Earnest A, et al. Accuracy of (18)F-flurodeoxyglucose-positron
emission tomography/computed tomography in the staging of newly diagnosed nasopharyngeal
carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Radiol Oncol. 2014 Nov 5;48(4):331-8.
24.
Chang MC, Chen JH, Liang JA, et al. Accuracy of whole-body FDG-PET and FDG-PET/CT in
M staging of nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Radiol.
2013 Feb;82(2):366-73.
25.
Xu G, Li J, Zuo X, et al. Comparison of whole body positron emission tomography (PET)/PETcomputed tomography and conventional anatomic imaging for detecting distant malignancies in
patients with head and neck cancer: a meta-analysis. Laryngoscope. 2012 Sep;122(9):1974-8.
26.
Chua ML, Ong SC, Wee JT, et al. Comparison of 4 modalities for distant metastasis staging in
endemic nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Head Neck. 2009 Mar;31(3):346-54.
27.
Liu T, Xu W, Yan WL, et al. FDG-PET, CT, MRI for diagnosis of local residual or recurrent
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, which one is the best? A systematic review. Radiother Oncol. 2007
Dec;85(3):327-35.
28.
Comoretto M, Balestreri L, Borsatti E, et al. Detection and restaging of residual and/or recurrent
nasopharyngeal carcinoma after chemotherapy and radiation therapy: comparison of MR
imaging and FDG PET/CT. Radiology. 2008 Oct;249(1):203-11.
29.
Zhang MX, Li J, Shen GP, et al. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy prolongs the survival of patients
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma compared with conventional two-dimensional radiotherapy: A
10-year experience with a large cohort and long follow-up. Eur J Cancer. 2015 Nov;51(17):258795.
30.
Marta GN, Silva V, de Andrade Carvalho H, et al. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy for head
and neck cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. Radiother Oncol. 2014 Jan;110(1):9-15.
31.
Xiao WW, Han F, Lu TX, et al. Treatment outcomes after radiotherapy alone for patients with
early-stage nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009 Jul 15;74(4):1070-6.
32.
Chen QY, Wen YF, Guo L, et al. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy vs radiotherapy alone in
stage II nasopharyngeal carcinoma: phase III randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Dec
7;103(23):1761-70.
33.
Pfister DG, Ang KK, Brizel DM, et al. Head and neck cancers, version 2.2013. Journal of the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network. 2013 Aug 1;11(8):917-23. Available at: https://www.
nccn.org/store/login/login.aspx?ReturnURL=https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/
pdf/head-and-neck.pdf (accessed on 28 September 2016)
34.
Chan AT, Grégoire V, Lefebvre JL, et al: EHNS–ESMO–ESTRO Guidelines Working Group.
Nasopharyngeal cancer: EHNS–ESMO–ESTRO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis,
treatment and follow-up. Annals of Oncology. 2012 Oct 1;23(suppl 7):vii83-5.
35.
Huncharek M, Kupelnick B. Combined chemoradiation versus radiation therapy alone in locally
advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma: results of a meta-analysis of 1,528 patients from six
randomized trials. Am J Clin Oncol. 2002 Jun;25(3):219-23.
36.
Baujat B, Audry H, Bourhis J, et al; MAC-NPC Collaborative Group. Chemotherapy as an adjunct
to radiotherapy in locally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2006 Oct 18;(4):CD004329.
37.
Blanchard P, Lee A, Marguet S, et al; MAC-NPC Collaborative Group. Chemotherapy and
radiotherapy in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: an update of the MAC-NPC meta-analysis. Lancet
Oncol. 2015 Jun;16(6):645-55.
38.
Chen YP, Wang ZX, Chen L, et al. A Bayesian network meta-analysis comparing concurrent
chemoradiotherapy followed by adjuvant chemotherapy, concurrent chemoradiotherapy alone
and radiotherapy alone in patients with locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Ann
Oncol. 2015 Jan;26(1):205-11.
39.
He X, Xu K, Guo J, et al. A meta-analysis of neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus radiation in the
treatment of locally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. J Cancer Res Ther. 2015 Oct;11
Suppl 2:C205-8.
40.
OuYang PY, Xie C, Mao YP, et al. Significant efficacies of neoadjuvant and adjuvant
chemotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma by meta-analysis of published literature-based
randomized, controlled trials. Ann Oncol. 2013 Aug;24(8):2136-46.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
41.
Liang ZG, Zhu XD, Zhou ZR, et al. Comparison of concurrent chemoradiotherapy followed by
adjuvant chemotherapy versus concurrent chemoradiotherapy alone in locoregionally advanced
nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a meta-analysis of 793 patients from 5 randomized controlled trials.
Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(11):5747-52.
42.
Bian X, Chen H, Liao L. A retrospective study of salvage surgery for recurrent nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. Int J Clin Oncol. 2012 Jun;17(3):212-7.
43.
Hao SP, Tsang NM, Chang KP, et al. Nasopharyngectomy for recurrent nasopharyngeal
carcinoma: a review of 53 patients and prognostic factors. Acta Otolaryngol. 2008 Apr;128(4):47381.
44.
Fee WE Jr, Moir MS, Choi EC, et al. Nasopharyngectomy for recurrent nasopharyngeal cancer:
a 2- to 17-year follow-up. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2002 Mar;128(3):280-4.
45.
Qiu S, Lu J, Zheng W, et al. Advantages of intensity modulated radiotherapy in recurrent T1-2
nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a retrospective study. BMC cancer. 2014 Nov 3;14(1):1.
46.
Cheah SK, Lau FN, Yusof MM, et al. Treatment outcome with brachytherapy for recurrent
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013 Jan 1;14(11):6513-8.
47.
Yeh SA, Tang Y, Lui CC, et al. Treatment outcomes of patients with AJCC stage IVC
nasopharyngeal carcinoma: benefits of primary radiotherapy. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2006
Mar;36(3):132-6.
48.
Zheng W, Zong J, Huang C, et al. Multimodality Treatment May Improve the Survival Rate of
Patients with Metastatic Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma with Good Performance Status. PLoS One.
2016 Jan 12;11(1):e0146771.
49.
Booth DS, Davies A, editors. Palliative care consultations in head and neck cancer. Oxford
University Press; 2006.
50.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya: MOH; 2010.
51.
Silverman S. Oral cancer: complications of therapy. Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology,
Oral Radiology, and Endodontology. 1999 Aug 31;88(2):122-6.
52.
Kumar N, Brooke A, Burke M, et al. The oral management of oncology patients requiring
radiotherapy, chemotherapy and/or bone marrow transplantation. Faculty Dental Journal. 2013
Oct;4(4):200-3.
53.
Xu YD, Ou YK, Zheng YQ, et al. The treatment for postirradiation otitis media with effusion: a
study of three methods. Laryngoscope. 2008 Nov;118(11):2040-3.
54.
Patel A, Schwarz EB; Society of Family Planning. Cancer and contraception. Release date May
2012. SFP Guideline #20121. Contraception. 2012 Sep;86(3):191-8.
55.
Wang WC, Chen YK, Lin LM. Oral care experiences with 181 nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients
receiving radiotherapy in a Taiwanese hospital. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2008 Jun;35(2):2304.
56.
Schwarz E, Chiu GK, Leung WK. Oral health status of southern Chinese following head and neck
irradiation therapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma. J Dent. 1999 Jan;27(1):21-8.
57.
Epstein JB, Emerton S, Lunn R, et al. Pretreatment assessment and dental management of
patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Oral Oncol. 1999 Jan;35(1):33-9.
58.
McMillan AS, Pow EH, Leung WK, et al. Oral health-related quality of life in southern Chinese
following radiotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma. J Oral Rehabil. 2004 Jun;31(6):600-8.
59.
Hong CH, Napeñas JJ, Hodgson BD, et al; Dental Disease Section, Oral Care Study Group,
Multi-national Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC)/International Society of Oral
Oncology (ISOO). A systematic review of dental disease in patients undergoing cancer therapy.
Support Care Cancer. 2010 Aug;18(8):1007-21.
60.
Rieke JW, Hafermann MD, Johnson JT, et al. Oral pilocarpine for radiation-induced xerostomia:
integrated efficacy and safety results from two prospective randomized clinical trials. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 1995 Feb 1;31(3):661-9.
61.
LeVeque FG, Montgomery M, Potter D, et al. A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, dose-titration study of oral pilocarpine for treatment of radiation-induced xerostomia in
head and neck cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 1993 Jun;11(6):1124-31.
62.
Davies AN, Thompson J. Parasympathomimetic drugs for the treatment of salivary gland
dysfunction due to radiotherapy. The Cochrane Library. 2015.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
63.
Hao SP, Chen HC, Wei FC, et al. Systematic management of osteoradionecrosis in the head and
neck. Laryngoscope. 1999 Aug;109(8): 1324-7;discussion 1327-8.
64.
Qu S, Su Z, He X, et al. Closure of laryngotracheal cavity and tracheostomy for intractable
aspiration secondary to radiation encephalopathy or radiation damage of cranial nerve after
radiotherapy of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Acta Otolaryngol. 2006 Sep;126(9):962-6.
65.
Quah BL, Ling YL, Cheong PY, et al. A review of 5 years' experience in the use of botulinium
toxin A in the treatment of sixth cranial nerve palsy at the Singapore National Eye Centre.
Singapore Med J. 1999 Jun;40(6):405-9.
66.
El-Sherbieny E, Rashwan H, Lubis SH, et al. Prognostic factors in patientswith nasopharyngeal
carcinoma treated in Hospital Kuala Lumpur. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(7):1739-43.
67.
Wei WI, Sham JS. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Lancet. 2005 Jun 11-17; 365(9476):2041-54.
68.
Teo PM, Leung SF, Yu P, et al. A comparison of Ho's, International Union Against Cancer, and
American Joint Committee stage classifications for nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cancer. 1991
Jan 15;67(2):434-9.
69.
Wang CC, Chen ML, Hsu KH, et al. Second malignant tumors in patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and their association with Epstein‐Barr virus. International Journal of Cancer. 2000 Jul
15;87(2):228-31.
70.
Chen MC, Feng IJ, Lu CH, et al. The incidence and risk of second primary cancers in patients
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a population-based study in Taiwan over a 25-year period
(1979–2003). Annals of oncology. 2008 Jun 1;19(6):1180-6.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
1.
Nasopharyngeal Neoplasms/
2.
((neoplasm* or cancer* or carcinoma*) adj1 (nasopharynx or
nasopharyngeal)).tw.
3.
1 or 2
4.
RADIOTHERAPY/
5.
(radiotherap* adj1 targeted).tw.
6.
radiotherap*.tw.
7.
Chemoradiotherapy/
8.
((concomitant
or
concurrent
or
synchronous)
adj1
(chemoradiotherap* or radiochemotherap*)).tw.
9.
chemoradiotherap*.tw.
10. radiochemotherap*.tw.
11. CHEMORADIOTHERAPY, ADJUVANT/
12. (adjuvant adj1 (radiochemotherap* or chemoradiotherap*)).tw.
13. 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12
14. 3 and 13
15. limit 14 to (english language and humans and last 20 years)
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the epidemiology of nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
2.
What are the risk factors of nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
3.
What are the clinical presentations of patient with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma?
4.
What are the investigations for nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
5.
What are the staging modalities in nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
6.
What are the effective and safe treatments for various stages of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
7.
What are the effective and safe supportive cares for patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
8.
What are the effective and safe management of complications
following treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
9.
What are the effective follow-up plans for patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
10. What are the effective and safe management of advanced disease
(distant metastases) of nasopharyngeal carcinoma?
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 3
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS
Figure 1 : Painless neck lumps
Figure 2 : Recurrent NPC with
Figure 3 : NPC with neck lump
lymph node metastasis
and trismus
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS
Figure 4 : NPC with ptosis
Figure 5 : NPC with
ophthalmoplegia
Figure 6 : NPC with neck lump and cranial nerve 12 palsy
(tongue deviation)
Appendix 3
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS
Figure 7 : Normal nasopharynx on Figure 8 : Nasopharyngeal
endoscopy
carcinoma on
endoscopy
Figure 9 : Recurrent NPC pre- and post-endoscopic nasopharyngectomy.
Endoscopic pictures in white light as compared with autoflourescence pictures in green.
Appendix 3
pre-op
post-op
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 4
TNM STAGING DIAGRAM
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Source : Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC. American Joint Committee on Cancer,
American Cancer Society: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual (7th edition).
Springer, New York. 2009.
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
NASOPHARYNX STAGING FORM
Source : Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC. American Joint Committee on Cancer,
American Cancer Society: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual (7th edition).
Springer, New York. 2009.
Nasopharynx
Oropharynx
Hypopharynx
Thyroid cartilage
Post. lamina of cricoid cartilage
Ant. arch of cricoid cartilage
IIIustration
Indicate on diagram primary
tumor and regional nodes
involved.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Appendix 4
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 5
RADIOLOGICAL STAGING
Primary Tumour (T staging)
Figure 1 : T1 - Left
nasopharyngeal
mass confined
within the
nasopharyngeal
mucosal space.
Figure 2 : T2 - Extension of
the left nasopharyngeal mass into the
parapharyngeal
space. (Source :
King AD, Bhatia KS.
Magnetic resonance
imaging staging of
nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in the head
and neck. World J
Radiol. 2010 May
28;2(5):159-65.)
Figure 3 : T3 - Extension of the
mass into the floor
of the left sphenoid
sinus
Figure 4 : T4 - Left masticator
space involvement
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Figure 5 : N1 - Unilateral left
cervical lymph
nodes involvement
Figure 4 : N1 - Bilateral
retropharyngeal lymph
nodes involvement
Nodal staging (N staging)
Figure 7 : N2 - Bilateral enlarged
cervical and right
submandibular lymph
nodes (Source :
King AD, Bhatia KS.
Magnetic resonance
imaging staging of
nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in the head
and neck. World J
Radiol. 2010 May
28;2(5):159-65.)
Figure 8 : N3a - Left cervical
lymph nodes
measuring more
than 6 cm.
Figure 9 : N3b - Left
supraclavicular lymph
nodes involvement
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 6
CHEMOTHERAPY DRUGS AND SIDE EFFECTS
CHEMOTHERAPY
DRUGS
SIDE EFFECTS
REMARKS
Cisplatin
•
Gastrointestinal (nausea and vomiting).
•
Blood (anaemia, thrombocytopaenia).
•
Renal toxicity.
•
Electrolyte imbalance (hypomagnesaemia, hypocalcaemia,
hypokalaemia).
•
Auditory (tinnitus; with or without hearing loss).
•
Neurology (peripheral neuropathy, paraesthesia, seizure).
•
Hypersensitivity reaction (shortness of breath, hypotension, facial oedema,
flushing).
•
Observe for cumulative renal toxicity. It may be minimised by
adequate hydration and urinary output at least 24 hours after
administration.
•
Prophylactic anti-emetics and corticosteroids should be given.
•
Observe for anaphylactic-like reactions during infusion.
Carboplatin
•
Blood (anaemia, thrombocytopaenia, neutropaenia).
•
Gastrointestinal (nausea and vomiting).
•
Hypersensitivity reaction (rash, facial oedema).
•
Electrolyte imbalance (hypomagnesaemia, hyponatraemia, hypokalaemia).
•
Hepatotoxicity (elevated ALP, AST).
•
Obtain baseline renal function, then monitor renal function at
every cycle.
•
Prophylactic anti-emetics and corticosteroids should be given.
•
Observe for anaphylactic-like reactions during infusion; increased
risk with prior platinum therapy.
Fluorouracil
•
Gastrointestinal (diarrhoea, stomatitis, oesophagitis, heart burn).
•
Blood (anaemia, leucopenia, thrombocytopaenia).
•
Cardiovascular (angina, myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, acute
pulmonary oedema).
•
Dermatological (alopecia, dermatitis, hand-foot syndrome).
•
Prophylactic anti-emetics and corticosteroids should be given.
•
Use with caution in patients who are receiving radiation or
received high-dose pelvic radiation or previously treated with
alkylating agents. These patients may have increased risk of
toxicity.
•
Use cautiously in patients with history of heart disease.
•
Monitor for hand-foot syndrome.
Docetaxel
•
Blood (neutropaenia, anaemia, thrombocytopaenia).
•
Cardiovascular (fluid retention).
•
Dermatological (alopecia, cutaneous reaction, nail changes).
•
Gastrointestinal (stomatitis, diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting).
•
Hypersensitivity reaction (hypotension, bronchospasm, rash).
•
Pre- and post-treatment with corticosteroid is recommended to
decrease fluid retention and hypersensitivity reaction.
•
Prophylactic anti-emetics should be given.
•
Observe for anaphylactic-like reactions and extravasationduring
infusion.
*To monitor FBC, LFT, RP and serum electrolytes prior to every cycle of chemotherapy.
Source:1. Ministry of Health & Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia. Systemic Therapy of Cancer 3rd Edition. Putrajaya: MoH & MoHE; 2011
2. Micromedex Solutions, Truven Health Analytics Inc. MIMS Gateway Service Portal. Available at: http://www.mimsgateway.com/Malaysia/
Online.aspx
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Appendix 7
EASTERN COOPERATIVE ONCOLOGY GROUP (ECOG)
PERFORMANCE STATUS
Source : Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol. 1982 Dec;5(6):64955
Grade
0
1
2
3
4
5
Description
Fully active, able to carry on all pre-disease
performance without restriction
Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory
and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature,
such as light house work and office work
• Ambulatory and capable of all self-care but unable to
carry out any work activities
• Up and about more than 50% of waking hours
Capable of only limited self-care, confined to bed or
chair more than 50% of waking hours
• Completely disabled
• Cannot carry on any self-care
• Totally confined to bed or chair
Dead
EASTERN COOPERATIVE ONCOLOGY GROUP (ECOG)
PERFORMANCE STATUS
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
Source : 1. Trotti A, Byhardt R, Stetz J, et al. Common toxicity criteria: version 2.0.
an improved reference for grading the acute effects of cancer treatment:
impact on radiotherapy. International Journal of Radiation Oncology*
Biology* Physics. 2000 Apr 1;47(1):13-47.
2. Zeng L, Tian YM, Sun XM, et al. Late toxicities after intensity-modulated
radiotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma: patient and treatment-related
risk factors. Br J Cancer. 2014 Jan 7;110(1):49-54.
Appendix 8
TOXICITIES OF RADIOTHERAPY ON HEAD AND NECK
ACUTE TOXICITIES
• Lethargy
• Radiation dermatitis
• Mucositis
• Dysphagia
• Taste changes
• Nausea and vomiting
• Haematological toxicities
(neutropaenia)
LATE TOXICITIES
Neurological Complications
Temporal lobe injuries
Cranial nerve palsies
Lhermitte’s syndrome
Non-neurological Complications
Tinnitus
Hearing loss
Otorrhea
Trismus
Dysphagia
Subcutaneous fibrosis
Endocrinopathy
- primary hypothyroidism
- hypopituitarism
Xerostomia
Second cancer within
radiotherapy fields
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AC
Adjuvant chemotherapy
CCRT
Concurrent chemoradiotherapy
CI
Confidence interval
CPG
Clinical practice guidelines
CT
Computed tomography
DG
Development Group
EBV
Ebstein-Barr virus
ECG
Electrocardiogram
ECOG
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
18F-FDG
18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose
FNAC
Fine needle aspiration cytology
HR
Hazards ratio
IMRT
Intensity modulated radiotherapy
LRFS
Locoregional failure survival
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
MoH
Ministry of Health
NACT
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
NPC
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
OME
Otitis media with effusion
OR
Odds ratio
OS
Overall survival
PET
Positron emission tomography
PFS
Progression free survival
RC
Review committee
RCT
Randomised controlled trial
RR
Relative risk / risk ratio
RT
Radiotherapy
SCC
Squamuous cell carcinoma
SR
Systematic review
TFT
Thyroid function test
WHO
World Health Organization
CPG Management of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma 2016
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:-
• Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri, former Deputy Director, MaHTAS
• Dr. Mohd. Zabri Affendi Muhamad, Otorhinolaryngologist
• Matron Loong Ah Moi and Sister Rosnani Abdul Latip
• Panel of external reviewers who have reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input
and feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Nasopharyngeal
Carcinoma was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of
Health Malaysia.
Malaysia Health Technology
‘Assessment Section
(MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division,
‘Ministry Of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E, Precinct 1,
(62590 Putrajaya Malaysia