22 MoH/P/PAK/SS2Z8CUPe
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF
ANTERIOR CROSSBITE
IN MIXED DENTITION
3RD EDITION
tay MINISTRY OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
Published by:
Oral Health Technology Section
Oral Health Programme
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E10, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is Oral Health Programme
(OHP), Ministry of Health Malaysia. Content may be reproduced in any
number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright
acknowledgement to OHP is included and the content is not changed,
not sold, nor used to promote or endorse any product or service and not
used inappropriately or misleading context.
ISBN: 978-629-99918-0-9
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://hq.moh.gov.my/ohp/ms/
Also available as an app for Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These guidelines update and supplant the previous guidelines
developed in 2013 and are based on the best available contemporary
evidence. They are intended as a guide for the best clinical practice in
the management of anterior crossbite in the mixed dentition presently.
However, it must be noted that adherence to these guidelines do not
necessarily lead to the best clinical outcome in individual patient care,
as every health care provider is responsible for the management of his/
her unique patient based on the clinical presentation and management
options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
These guidelines were issued in November 2023 and will be reviewed
in 2028 or earlier if important new evidence becomes available. When
it is due for updating, the head of the related specialty will be informed
about it. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and discussion will
be done on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised
CPG. The systematic review methodology used by the Malaysia
Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) will be employed in
reviewing the guidelines.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
i
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
i
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES
ii
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
v
GENERAL OBJECTIVE, SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
vii
CLINICAL QUESTIONS, TARGET POPULATION,
TARGET GROUP / USER AND SETTINGS
MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP viii
MEMBERS OF THE INTERNAL REVIEWERS
ix
MEMBERS OF THE EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
x
ALGORITHM: Management of Anterior Crossbite
xi
In Mixed Dentition
1.0
INTRODUCTION
1
2.0
AETIOLOGY
3
2.1 Dental and Local Factors
3
2.2 Functional
3
2.3 Skeletal
3
3.0
TYPES OF ANTERIOR CROSSBITE
4
3.1 Dental Anterior Crossbite
4
3.2 Functional Anterior Crossbite (Pseudo Class III)
4
3.3 Skeletal Anterior Crossbite
4
4.0
EARLY INTERVENTION
5
4.1 Implication of delayed or no treatment
5
4.2 Consideration before embarking on early intervention
5
5.0
EXAMINATION & DIAGNOSIS
7
5.1 History Taking
7
5.2 Extra-oral & Intra-oral Examination
7
5.3 Radiographic Examination
8
5.4 Study Model
10
5.5 Clinical Photographs
10
6.0
TREATMENT
12
6.1 Treatment Modalities for Dental Anterior Crossbite
12
6.1.1 Upper Removable Appliance
13
6.1.2 Lower Inclined Bite Plane
16
6.1.3 Cemented Bite Pads
16
6.1.4 Fixed Appliance
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
6.2 Treatment Modalities for Functional Anterior
19
Crossbite (Pseudo Class III)
6.3 Treatment Modalities for Skeletal Anterior Crossbite
19
6.3.1 Protraction Facemask
19
6.3.2 Chin Cup
22
6.3.3 Skeletal Anchored Class III Elastics
23
6.3.4 Functional Appliance
24
6.3.5 Tandem Traction Bow Appliance
25
7.0
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
27
7.1 Facilitating and limiting factors
27
7.2 Potential resource implications
27
7.3 Proposed clinical audit indicators
28
APPENDIX 1: Search strategy
29
APPENDIX 2: Clinical questions
30
APPENDIX 3: Summary of treatment modalities
31
for anterior crossbite
APPENDIX 4: Appliance fabrication laboratory form
32
(Example of URA design)
APPENDIX 5: Instructions for Removable Appliance
23
APPENDIX 6: Photo of Treatment Modalities for
34
Anterior Crossbite of Skeletal Origin
List of Abbreviations
35
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS, DISCLOSURE STATEMENT,
36
SOURCE OF FUNDING
REFERENCES
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed
randomised controlled trial.
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials
without randomisation.
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or
research group.
Evidence obtained from multiple time series studies, with
or without intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled
experiments (such as the results of the introduction of
penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could also be regarded as
this type of evidence.
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical
experience; descriptive studies and case reports; or reports
of expert committees.
Source: Adapted from Harris RP, Helfand M, Woolf SH, Lohr KN, Mulrow CD, Teutsch SM, Atkins
D. Current Methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: A Review of the Process.
Am J Prev Med. 2001;20 (suppl 3):21-35.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) was adapted in its work process. The
quality of body of evidence and related effect size are carefully
assessed /reviewed by the CPG Development Group (DG).
• In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of
the recommendations which includes:
 overall quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 equity, feasibility and acceptability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s)
in the management while a blue box contains evidencebased recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
ii
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES
Key Message 1
Important signs to look for when patients present with anterior
crossbite:
• Enamel wear - attrition of the upper or lower incisors
• Periodontal problems (labial gingival recession associated with
traumatic occlusion, probing depth and bone dehiscence)
• Tooth mobility due to traumatic occlusion
• Presence of mandibular displacement that may occur when closing
in the retruded contact position (RCP) into the intercuspal position
(ICP) due to premature contact
• Patient’s ability to achieve an edge-to-edge incisor relationship
Key Message 2
• Comprehensive
history
taking,
clinical
examination,
and
radiographs are important to determine the nature of the crossbite,
whether dental, functional or skeletal in origin.
Key Message 3
• The management of anterior crossbite requires a proper diagnosis.
• Record taking is crucial for evaluation, monitoring treatment
progress and medico-legal purposes.
Key Message 4
The criteria for achieving successful treatment of anterior crossbite:
• Overall oral health
• Age and timing of treatment
• Patient’s growth potential, i.e. magnitude and direction of
mandibular growth
• Severity of malocclusion
• Adequate space in the arch to align the tooth/ to correct anterior
crossbite
• Sufficient overbite to hold the tooth in position following correction
• Incisors inclination before treatment
• Patient’s compliance
• Clinician’s skill and experience
• Cost
• Safety
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
iii
Key Message 5
• Protraction facemask (PFM) alone is sufficient to be used in the
correction of anterior crossbite in mild Class III skeletal patterns
with maxillary hypoplasia among growing patients in mixed
dentition.
• If there is a problem with maxillary constriction or if the maxillary
arch needs to be expanded, PFM can be utilised with RME.
• PFM treatment need to be carried out by an orthodontist.
• PFM bulkiness and soft tissue irritation can compromise patient’s
compliance.
• The assessment of treatment stability is usually done after the
patient has completed their growth spurt.
Key Message 6
The factors that determine good outcome of functional appliance
treatment in anterior crossbite correction:
• Growing patients with Class III skeletal pattern
• Cases with no or minimal dentoalveolar compensation
• Good patient motivation
Key Message 7
• Functional appliance may be provided by an orthodontist for
correction of skeletal anterior crossbite in mixed dentition.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
iv
LIST OF KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1
• Anterior crossbite among patients in mixed dentition should be
corrected early to prevent unwanted implications.
Recommendation 2
• An upper removable appliance, a lower inclined bite plane
and cemented bite pads may be used to correct dental anterior
crossbite in patients with mixed dentition based on the clinician’s
skill, preferences and patient’s compliance.
Recommendation 3
• Correction of anterior crossbite using fixed appliances should be
carried out by orthodontist.
Recommendation 4
• Protraction facemask therapy may be used to correct skeletal
anterior crossbite in growing patients with Class III malocclusion.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
v
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) were developed by a
multidisciplinary expert committee consisting of Orthodontists, a
Paediatric Dental Specialist, Dental Public Health Specialists and
Dental Officers from the Ministry of Health.
The previous edition of the CPG on Management of Anterior Crossbite
in the Mixed Dentition (2013) was used as the basis for the development
of these guidelines. The recommendations were formulated taking into
consideration the best available evidence and local practices. Several
improvements have been introduced in this edition. The scope has
been expanded to include new and updated information. In addition,
clinical audit indicators have also been identified for the purpose of
monitoring and evaluating outcomes.
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Medline, PubMed, Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews (CDSR) and Embase while full text journal articles were
retrieved from these databases. The literature search was limited to
human study, English language and published articles from 2012 to
April 2023. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
An example of the search strategy used can be found in Appendix 1.
Details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from the
CPG Secretariat.
There were five (5) clinical questions which were assigned to members
of the development group. The group members met a total of 13
times throughout the development of these guidelines. All retrieved
articles were appraised using the Critical Appraisal Skill Programme
(CASP) checklist by at least two (2) members, presented in the form of
evidence tables and discussed during group meetings. All statements
and recommendations formulated were agreed upon by both the
development group and reviewers. This CPG is based on the findings
of systematic reviews, randomised controlled trials, observational
studies and case reports, with local practices taken into consideration.
However, when there was lack of evidence, recommendations were
based on consensus of group members. Although ideally patients’
views and preferences need to be considered in the development of
CPGs, in this instance, it was not feasible.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US /
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the formulation of recommendation was done using the principles
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
vi
of GRADE. The writing of the CPG strictly follows the requirements of
Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation (AGREE II).
The draft was reviewed by a panel of internal and external reviewers.
Recommendations were presented to the Technical Advisory Committee
for CPGs, and finally to the HTA and CPG Council, Ministry of Health,
Malaysia for approval.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
vii
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
To provide evidence-based recommendations for the best management
practices of anterior crossbite among patients in mixed dentition.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide recommendations on the
management of anterior crossbite among patients in mixed dentition on
following aspects:
• early detection and referral
• assessment and diagnosis
• treatment modalities and stability
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by these guidelines can be found in
Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
The primary target group is mixed dentition with anterior crossbite
which affects one or more permanent teeth.
Inclusion criteria
Children with anterior crossbite in the mixed dentition
Exclusion criteria
Children with anterior crossbite who have cleft lip and palate or other
cranio-facial deformity
TARGET GROUP / USER
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of anterior crossbite at any healthcare level including:
• Dental practitioners
• Medical practitioners
• Dental and medical students
• Patients and their advocates
• Professional societies
SETTINGS
Primary and specialist healthcare settings.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
viii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Hjh Yatimah Othman
Consultant Orthodontist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Presint 18, WP Putrajaya
Members
Dr. Ong Siang Ching
(co-chairperson)
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Kota Bharu
Kelantan
Dr. Yap Kin Teen
Orthodontic Specialist
Semarak Uptown Dental Clinic
Seremban,
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Nurulnazra Mohd Areffin
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Tunku Azizah
WP Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Enny Esdayantey Abdul Manab
Dental Public Health Specialist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian
Jabatan Kesihatan
Negeri Pulau Pinang
Pulau Pinang
Dr. Nurhafizah Abdul Rahim
Dental Officer in Charge
Klinik Pergigian Seksyen 19
Shah Alam,
Selangor
Dr. Ooi Ee Fen (secretary)
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Sungai Petani
Kedah
Dr. Malathi Deva Tata
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Bandar Botanik
Klang, Selangor
Dr. Norhayati Jabar
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Alor Gajah
Melaka
Dr. Azura Abdullah
Dental Public Health Specialist
Pejabat Kesihatan Pergigian Daerah
Lembah Pantai,
WP Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Parveen Thanabalen
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Cawangan Teknologi Kesihatan
Pergigian
Program Kesihatan Pergigian
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
ix
INTERNAL REVIEWERS
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Profesor Dr. Rohaya Megat Abdul Wahab
Senior Consultant Orthodontist
Jabatan Kesihatan Pergigian Keluarga
Fakulti Pergigian,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Bahruddin Saripudin
Senior Consultant In Paediatric Dentistry
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik,
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
50300 Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Lor Yen Fang
General Practitioner
Surgeri Pergigian Toothmate Dental & Co
Lot No 2F-75, Second Floor
Paradigm Mall,
Jalan Mewah Ria 2,
Taman Bukit Mewah,
81200, Johor Bharu, Johor
Dr. Mohd Zambri Mohamed Makhbul
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria,
Kuala Lumpur
Colonel (Dr.) Nik Seridaiyana Nik
Omar Al Haded
Principal Dental Officer/ Specialist
Orthodontist
Markas Divisyen Kedua Infantri Malaysia
Kem Tun Razak, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Sofiah Mat Ripen
Dental Public Health Specialist
Deputy Director
Cawangan Teknologi Kesihatan
Pergigian
Program Kesihatan Pergigian
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Dr. Suzana Sharif
Dental Public Health Specialist
Cawangan Epidemiologi & Penyelidikan
Kesihatan Pergigian
Program Kesihatan Pergigian
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Associate Prof. Dr. Wan Nurazreena
Wan Hassan
Consultant Orthodontist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik & Ortodontik
Fakulti Pergigian, Universiti Malaya
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
x
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
Assoc Prof Dr. Annapurny Venkiteswaran
Centre For Paediatric Dentistry & Orthodontics Studies
Faculty of Dentistry
University Teknologi MARA (UiTM)
Sg Buloh Campus, Malaysia
Asst. Prof Dr. Cheong Joo Ming
Lecturer & Orthodontist
Kulliyyah of Dentistry
International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM)
Kuantan Campus, Pahang
Dr. Goh Ai Hwa
Former Consultant Orthodontist
Pusat Pakar Pergigian Seremban
Jalan Zaaba, Negeri Sembilan
Datuk Dr. Kalaiarasu M Peariasamy
Senior Consultant In Paediatric Dentistry
Former ICR NIH Director &
Adjunct Professor, Taylor’s School of Medicine, Malaysia
Colonel (Dr.) Shalene Kereshanan
Timbalan Ketua Kepakaran Pergigian
Angkatan Tentera Malaysia &
President Malaysian Association of Orthodontists
Datin Dr. Surguna Devi Muniandy
Orthodontic Specialist
Prince Court Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
ALGORITHM ON MANAGEMENT OF ANTERIOR CROSSBITE IN
THE MIXED DENTITION
xi
Referral to Orthodontist
• Fixed Appliance
• Protraction Facemask
• Chin Cup
• Skeletal Anchored
• Class III Elastics
• Functional Appliance
• Tandem Traction Bow
Appliance (TTBA) /
Modified TTBA
Yes
• Cemented bite pads
• Lower inclined bite plane
• Upper Removable
Appliance (URA)
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Anterior Crossbite in
Mixed Dentition
Skeletal
Discrepancy
Occlusal
Interference
Yes
Dental Anterior
Crossbite
Crowding
(Lack of space)
Functional Anterior
Crossbite
(Pseudo Class III)
Extraction of adjacent
deciduous tooth *
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spontaneous
correction
Compliant
Patient
Crossbite corrected
with adequate overbite
Discharge
* Need to consult orthodontist
/ paediatric dental specialist
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
1
1.0
INTRODUCTION
An anterior crossbite is defined as the misalignment of the upper and
lower front teeth, with the lower teeth overlapping the upper teeth. This
may involve one or more anterior teeth and can occur during primary or
mixed dentition phase, when the child has a combination of deciduous
and permanent teeth. It is common for children with Class III skeletal
pattern to have anterior crossbite, especially crossbite of all the incisors.(1)
Anterior crossbite in the primary dentition is rare but when it occurs,
it is an indication that the child will develop a more severe Class III
skeletal pattern as the child grows. Rarely this problem will need to be
corrected at the primary dentition stage; rather the child’s jaw growth
and anterior bite will have to be monitored during the onset of early
permanent dentition stage.
The prevalence of anterior crossbite differs among regions and
ethnicities. Between 2.2 and 11.0% of people in the European region
are experiencing anterior crossbite. A study conducted in Shanghai
found that 10.5% of children between the ages of 7 and 9 had anterior
crossbite.(2) According to a cross-sectional study in Malaysia, 7.7% of
12-year-old Malay students had an anterior crossbite.(3)
Anterior crossbite in mixed dentition can lead to several functional and
aesthetic issues that can impact a child’s oral health and overall wellbeing. It can affect the child’s ability to bite and chew food properly.
In addition to functional challenges, the abnormal tooth alignment can
cause tooth wear and enamel damage. Gingival recession and loss
of periodontal attachment may also occur due to the improper forces
exerted on the gingiva as a result of the malpositioned teeth. Furthermore,
anterior crossbite can contribute to mandibular displacement, where
the lower jaw shifts to accommodate the malalignment. An anterior
crossbite also may reveal an underlying jaw problem that is best
addressed at a young age, while the face and jaws are still developing.(4)
Therefore, anterior crossbite should be treated early in order to avoid a
more complex and complicated treatment for the patient in the future.
Early intervention can address anterior crossbite in mixed dentition.
Depending on the severity of the anterior crossbite, the child’s age, and
other factors, various orthodontic appliances may be used, including
removable appliances, fixed appliances, or protraction facemasks and
others. These appliances gradually shift the misaligned teeth into their
proper positions, promoting improved function and aesthetics.
With new developments in the management of patients with anterior
crossbite in mixed dentition, this CPG is updated to include latest
evidence on the management of anterior crossbite of dental origin
in mixed dentition using different treatment modalities such as lower
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
2
inclined bite plane and cemented bite pads. This CPG also includes
documented evidence for the treatment of anterior crossbites of skeletal
origin, including class III malocclusions using protraction masks with or
without RME and skeletal anchored Class III elastics.
This CPG aims to provide evidence-based recommendations to help
healthcare providers at all levels of care make appropriate clinical
judgments in the management of patients with anterior crossbite in the
mixed dentition. It is to provide a valuable resource for the effective
management of patients with this condition.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
3
2.0
AETIOLOGY
According to Littlewood and Mitchell (2019), an anterior crossbite
occurs when one or more of the upper incisors are in linguo-occlusion
position compared to the lower arch.(6) The aetiology of the anterior
crossbite can be divided as below:
2.1
Dental and Local Factors
Dental anterior crossbite is solely due to displacement of teeth. It could
be due to:
• crowding of teeth that can cause the maxillary incisors to be displaced
lingually(1, 5)
• presence of supernumerary teeth that interferes with the eruption of
maxillary tooth(1, 5)
• traumatic injuries to the primary dentition can cause lingual
displacement of the maxillary permanent tooth bud.(5)
• trauma to permanent teeth can cause them to be displaced, resulting
in anterior crossbite(5)
• over-retained primary incisors can cause the permanent teeth to
erupt lingually, leading to anterior crossbite(1, 5)
2.2
Functional
A change in anterior function during closure from centric relation to
centric occlusion due to habit of placing the mandible forward can lead
to an anterior crossbite. It may be the result of premature occlusal
interference that forces the lower jaw to move forward or laterally to
achieve maximum occlusion.(5)
2.3
Skeletal
Skeletal anterior crossbite usually results from retarded maxillary
growth or excessive mandibular growth or the combination of both.
Generally, the more anterior teeth in crossbite, the more severe the
underlying skeletal problem.(6)
It can be associated with the following factors:
• strong familial inheritance contributes to the development of a Class
III skeletal pattern, which can lead to anterior crossbite(5)
• scar tissue from cleft lip and palate repair can restrain the growth of
the maxilla, resulting in a narrow maxilla and anterior crossbite(5)
• overdevelopment of mandible in craniofacial dysostosis, cleidocranial
dysplasia and hormonal disturbances such as acromegaly and
gigantism(5)
• trauma or fractures to the jaws can cause skeletal abnormalities and
anterior crossbite
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
4
3.0
TYPES OF ANTERIOR CROSSBITE
According to aetiological factors, anterior crossbite can be classified
into three types;(5)
3.1
Dental Anterior Crossbite
Dental anterior crossbite are generally localised in nature, involving
lingually displaced maxillary central or lateral incisors. It does not have
underlying skeletal problems.(1, 5)
3.2
Functional Anterior Crossbite (Pseudo Class III)
This is a type of anterior crossbite caused by occlusal interferences
between upper and lower incisor(s) which leads to forward displacement
of the mandible in order to achieve maximum intercuspation.
3.3
Skeletal Anterior Crossbite
This is an anterior crossbite as a result of skeletal discrepancies due to
retrognathic maxilla or the prognathic mandible or combination of both.
The greater the number of teeth in crossbite, the greater the skeletal
component of the aetiology.(6) Early treatment may not be successful
in all patient with Class III skeletal problem due to the unpredictability
of the growth patterns, hence consultation with a specialist is required.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
5
4.0
EARLY INTERVENTION
Anterior crossbite may potentially have a detrimental effect on the
development of skeletal and dentoalveolar structures. Therefore,
early correction around 6-10 years old is important to prevent the
problem from worsening and becoming more difficult to manage. Early
intervention typically starts when the permanent incisor(s) are erupting
in a crossbite position (7-8 years old).
The rationale for early intervention are:
• a crossbite has little possibility of self-correction
• a crossbite in the primary dentition may lead to development of
crossbite in the permanent dentition(7)
• postponing treatment may result in prolonged treatment of greater
complexity(7)
• a functional crossbite can develop from cuspal interference, resulting
in a mandibular shift(7)
• to improve maxillary lip posture and facial appearance(7)
4.1
Implications of delayed or no treatment
If left untreated, anterior crossbite may lead to:(7)
• damage to the teeth in crossbite through attrition.
• mobility of the lower incisor due to labial displacement of this tooth
accompanied by loss of gingival attachment labially.
• gingival recession and loss of alveolar bone support to the opposing
lower incisor.
• the potential adverse growth influences on the mandible and anterior
portion of the maxilla.
• constant protrusion of the mandibular condyle from the fossa may
stimulate growth of the mandible.
4.2 Consideration before embarking on early intervention
(interceptive treatment) :
The following factors need to be considered before early intervention of
anterior crossbite in mixed dentition:(7)
• oral hygiene status
• the severity of the underlying skeletal discrepancy
• the amount of dentoalveolar compensation that has taken place
(proclined upper incisors and retroclined lower incisors)
• the amount of overbite present
• patient’s compliance
• patient’s overall health condition
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
6
Recommendation 1
Anterior crossbite among patients in mixed dentition should be corrected
early to prevent unwanted complications
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
7
5.0
EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Early recognition and correct diagnosis of anterior crossbite are essential
to determine suitable treatment and subsequently achieve a successful
outcome. It is crucial for the clinician to be able to differentiate between
the different types of anterior crossbite as management depends on
the aetiology and severity of the condition. For example, dental anterior
crossbite can be managed by using simple orthodontic appliances
while functional and skeletal anterior crossbite require more complex
treatment modalities. Crossbite can be diagnosed through appropriate
case history, clinical examination and cephalometric analysis to develop
an appropriate treatment plan for patients.
5.1
History Taking
Patient’s assessment starts with addressing the patient’s complaint,
thorough history taking, comprehensive physical examination and
radiographic investigations.
History taking should include:
• patient’s complaint or parents’ concern
• medical history - any relevant medical illness / syndrome
• dental history - any history of trauma to teeth / jaw, age when trauma
occur
• family history - any family member with mandibular prognathism or
Class III skeletal pattern
• social history to access patient motivation and compliance to
treatment
• habit
5.2
Extra-oral and Intra-oral Examination
Diagnosis of anterior crossbite can be done from routine clinical
examination as summarised below:
1. EXTRA-ORAL EXAMINATION
• Clicking / crepitus
• Tenderness
• Deviation and displacement upon mouth opening and
closing
• In three planes i.e. anterior-posterior (A-P), vertical
and transverse
Temporomandibular
joint (TMJ)
Skeletal pattern
• Facial profile - straight / convex / concave
• Lip competency
Soft tissue
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
8
• Oral hygiene and DMF status
• Gingival health
• Gingival recession
• Tooth mobility
• Tooth attrition
General condition
• Severity of crowding
• Spacing availability for alignment
• Upper and lower incisors inclination
Assessment of the
arches
• Number of teeth involved in crossbite
• Overjet and overbite
• Able to achieve edge-to-edge incisor relationship
• Any mandibular displacement in closure
• Centreline discrepancy
• Buccal segment relationship
In occlusion
2. INTRA-ORAL EXAMINATION
Key Message 1
Important signs to look for when patients present with anterior crossbite:
• Enamel wear - attrition of the upper or lower incisors
• Periodontal problems (labial gingival recession associate with
traumatic occlusion, probing depth and bone dehiscence)
• Tooth mobility due to traumatic occlusion
• Presence of mandibular displacement that may occur when closing
in the retruded contact position (RCP) into the intercuspal position
(ICP) due to premature contact
• Patient’s ability to achieve an edge-to-edge incisor relationship
5.3
Radiographic Examination
• to assess skeletal relationship
• to measure the inclination for the upper and lower
incisors
• Deviation and displacement upon mouth opening and
• to determine the aetiology of the malocclusion
• to confirm the presence / absence of teeth
• to assess general condition of teeth and supporting
tissues
Lateral Cephalogram
Orthopantomogram
(OPG)
• to detect any supernumerary teeth or other pathology
in the anterior region
Standard Upper
Anterior Occlusal
(if necessary)
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
9
Figure 1:
Dental Anterior Crossbite
and Functional Anterior
Crossbite
(Pseudo Class III)
Figure 2:
Skeletal Anterior
crossbite
Figure 1:
Dental Anterior Crossbite
and Functional Anterior
Crossbite
(Pseudo Class III)
Figure 2:
Skeletal Anterior
crossbite
Aetiology
• Lack of space / crowding
in the dental arches
• No size discrepancy
between maxilla and
mandible
• Genetic or hereditary in
most cases
• Size discrepancy between
maxilla and mandible
Maxillary incisors
inclination
• Upright or retroclined
• Proclined
Mandibular growth
pattern
• Normal
• Unfavourable growth
pattern
Number of teeth
in crossbite
• One or more teeth
• Segmental crossbite
Transverse
discrepancy
• Not present
• If present, may be
associated with mandibular
displacement (Functional
crossbite / Pseudo
Class III)
• Can be associated with
posterior crossbite
Mandibular incisors
inclination
• Proclined or upright
• Retroclined
Key Message 2
Comprehensive history taking, clinical examination, and radiographs
are important to determine the nature of the crossbite, whether it is
dental, functional, or skeletal in origin.
Features To Differentiate Types of Anterior Crossbite
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
10
5.4
Study Model
Study model and wax bite registration is taken for diagnosis and
treatment planning. It is also for medicolegal and research purposes.(7)
With the advance of technology, digital models are gaining acceptance
as an alternative to traditional study models. The advantages of the
digital models eliminate problems of storage, easier communication
between specialists, significant time saving in performing necessary
occlusal measurement.(8)
5.5
Clinical Photographs
Clinical photographs taken both extraorally and intraorally with
standardised settings for pre- and post-treatment records are advisable.
An example of clinical photograph is shown in Figure 4a and 4b.
Figure 4a: Extraoral photos
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
11
Figure 4b: Intraoral photos
Key Message 3
• The management of anterior crossbite requires a proper diagnosis.
• Record taking is crucial for evaluation, monitoring treatment progress
and medico-legal purposes.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
12
6.0
TREATMENT
The main aim of anterior crossbite treatment is to correct the relationship
between the affected maxillary tooth or teeth to a point of a stable
overbite relationship to prevent relapse. Simple interceptive treatment,
such as extraction of adjacent primary teeth (under specialist advice)
can sometimes help to prevent the development of a crossbite, if
treated early. A detailed examination and diagnosis should be carried
out to establish a tailored treatment plan for the patient.
Positive outcome for the correction of anterior crossbite is achieved
through the following:
• dentoalveolar compensation i.e. proclination of upper teeth alone or
combination of proclination of upper teeth and retroclination of lower
teeth
• forward maxillary protraction
• backward rotation of the mandible
Key Message 4
The criteria for achieving successful treatment of anterior crossbite:
• Overall oral health
• Age and timing of treatment
• Patient’s growth potential, i.e. magnitude and direction of mandibular
growth
• Severity of malocclusion
• Adequate space in the arch to align the tooth/ to correct anterior
crossbite
• Sufficient overbite to hold the tooth in position following correction
• Incisors inclination before treatment
• Patients’ compliance
• Clinician’s skill and experience
• Cost
• Safety
Treatment modalities should be considered carefully by taking into
account the underlying aetiology of crossbite, clinician’s skill and
preference, the availability of technical support and patient’s motivation
and compliance.
6.1
Treatment Modalities for Dental Anterior Crossbite
Dental anterior crossbite can be corrected by using simple treatment
modalities such as upper removable appliance (URA), fixed appliance,
lower inclined bite plane and cemented bite pad. (Refer Appendix 3 for
summary). Apart from achieving a correct diagnosis, it is also important
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
13
to assess the patient’s compliance and motivation before deciding the
treatment that best suits the patient.
6.1.1 Upper Removable Appliance (URA)
Removable appliance is an appliance that is not attached to the teeth
and can be removed by the patient for the purpose of cleaning. It is
usually used to move teeth and correct the problem. The appliance
is typically fitted in the upper arch and consists of an acrylic (plastic)
plate, wire components for tooth movement, as well as retention of the
appliance in the mouth (examples in Figure 5a and Figure 5b). The
fabrication of this appliance is done in a laboratory using the Appliance
Fabrication Laboratory Form (Refer Appendix 4). Advantages and
disadvantages are summarised in Table 3.
Figure 5a: Frontal view Figure 5b: Occlusal view
with URA with URA
Table 3: Advantages and disadvantages of URA in correcting
anterior crossbite
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
Simple
Can be removed for oral hygiene
purposes
Reduce chairside time
Efficient at tipping movement
Highly dependent on patient’s
compliance
Need good laboratory support
Slurring of speech
Inefficient at rotation and bodily tooth
movement
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
14
i
Designing Removable Appliance
Designing a successful removable appliance requires a simple and
functional design. It consists of four important components:
To date, there is no evidence suggesting any particular design is more
effective than the other in treating anterior crossbite in the mixed
dentition. Thus, the design of the URA should be customised according
to the patient’s malocclusion, clinicians’ preferences and technicians’
skills.
ii
Management of Removable Appliance
Removable appliance management involves monitoring and maintaining
removable appliance throughout the patient’s treatment period. This
includes all responsibilities and processes necessary to ensure proper
care and handling of the appliance.
a. Fitting of Removable Appliance
During the appliance fitting appointment, the clinician should ensure
the appliance fits properly and is comfortable for the patient to wear.
In addition, clear instructions for inserting, removing and care of the
appliance should be explained and demonstrated to the patient and
parents.
1. Before placing a removable appliance in the patient’s mouth,
ensure that it is the correct appliance for the patient and the design
is followed.
2. Explain to the patient how the appliance works.
COMPONENTS
FUNCTION
• Provide forces to move teeth. Mainly by applying
tipping force to the tooth / teeth forward.
• Eg: Z spring, recurved spring, expansion screw etc
Active
component
• A source of resistance to the reaction from the active
components
• Eg: Baseplate, retentive components
Anchorage
component
Baseplate
• Ensure the appliance is retentive and comfortable to
wear
• Facilitate the active component(s) stay in place to
function efficiently
• Eg: Adam’s clasp, Southend clasp, Ball-ended clasp etc
Retentive
component
• Hold together the other components of the appliance.
• Can be incorporated with a posterior bite plane to free
the occlusion and allow the tooth in crossbite to move
forward effectively.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
15
3. Ensure there is no roughness on the fitting surfaces.
4. Ensure free movement of the active component, i.e. no restriction
from acrylic.
5. Demonstrate to the patient how to insert and remove the appliance
and get the patient to practice doing it.
6. Give clear instructions to the patient and parents/guardian, stressing
on the importance of full-time wear. (refer Appendix 5)
7. Arrange for review appointment.
b. Review appointment
Ideally, patients with removable appliance should be seen every 4-6
weeks. During the review appointment, the most important aspect is to
assess the patient’s compliance. The signs for the lack of compliance
include:
• presence of lisping
• pooling of saliva
• absence of appliance looks very new and absence of wear and tear
marks
• no appliance imprint in the mouth
• frequent breakages
• inability to insert and remove the appliance unaided
• active component is still active
If the patient’s compliance is good, examine for:
• oral hygiene status, presence of caries or gingivitis
• overjet and overbite
• correction/ improvement of the crossbite
If the crossbite is not fully corrected, the clinician needs to continue
activation of the active components. Successful correction of
anterior crossbite should be achieved within 6-9 months. If there
is no improvement after 9 months, referral to a specialist for further
management is needed. Positive overbite is essential to maintain
stable results. No retainer is required if sufficient overbite is achieved to
maintain the correction.(7)
Figure 6: Pre-treatment
Figure 7: Post-treatment frontal
frontal photo
photo showing corrected anterior
crossbite with sufficient overbite
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
16
6.1.2 Lower Inclined Bite Plane
Lower inclined bite plane is an appliance uses natural forces which
creates a slight lingual movement in the mandibular teeth, while
generating labial movement in the maxillary teeth.(9, 10) It can be removed
or cemented to the mandibular incisors with luting glass ionomer
cement or composite [Refer Figure 8(11)]. This can be used in patients
who are unable to tolerate or have poor compliance to URA. One of the
commonly used lower inclined bite planes is Catlan’s appliance.
Figure 8: Correction of anterior crossbite using lower inclined bite plane
In a systematic review, one RCT reported that the Catlan’s appliance
had the longest treatment duration (21 days) compared with the URA (15
days) and fixed appliances (11 days).(12) Patients with Catlan’s appliances
also had communication problems during treatment.(13), level I However,
this RCT had unclear methods for generating random sequences, as
well as blinding and allocation concealment.
6.1.3 Cemented Bite Pads
Cemented bite pads, also known as bite risers which are resinreinforced glass ionomer cement that are placed on lower first molars to
disengage the occlusion. [refer Figure 9(14)] It disengages the anterior
teeth in crossbite to allow them to move freely over the bite by tongue
pressure. It is a simple treatment option that is effective in the correction
of anterior crossbite. It may be used especially for those patients who
cannot tolerate wearing a removable appliance, uncooperative when
wearing a removable appliance, have inadequate oral hygiene or are
susceptible to removable appliance-induced stomatitis.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
17
Figure 9a: Pre-treatment frontal photo
Figure 9b: Occlusal view with cemented bite pads on
mandibular 1st molars
Figure 9c: Frontal view with bite opening
In a systematic review, an RCT showed that cemented bite planes using
resin-reinforced glass ionomer cement equally effective in treating
anterior dental crossbite with and without functional shift, compared
to URA. No significant difference between the two groups in terms of
increased overjet, mandibular intercanine width, maxillary intercanine
width and upper incisor inclination. By using the Brazilian version of
the Child Perception Questionnaire (CPQ), the quality of life at the end
of treatment improved with cemented bite pad group.(13), level I However,
this RCT was of moderate quality due to the unclear risk of bias.
Recommendation 2
An upper removable appliance, a lower inclined bite plane and
cemented bite pads may be used to correct dental anterior crossbite in
patients with mixed dentition based on the clinician’s skill, preferences
and patient’s compliance.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
18
6.1.4 Fixed Appliance
Fixed appliance (refer Figure 10) are orthodontic device / braces which
are attached onto the surfaces of teeth and cannot be removed by the
patient. In treating anterior crossbite, a simple sectional fixed appliance
is preferred when three-dimensional tooth movement including bodily
movement, root torquing, derotation and movement of multiple teeth is
needed.(15)
Figure 10: Fixed appliances on anterior crossbite
In a recent systematic review, an RCT on treatment of anterior crossbite
with functional shift in mixed dentition using 8 bonded-brackets fixed
appliance and removable appliance, found that treatment time for fixed
appliance (5.5 months) was significantly shorter compared to removable
appliance (6.9 months). Furthermore, fixed appliance produces
significantly greater effectiveness in terms of increased overjet (p<0.05)
and arch length measurements (p<0.01) (arch length to incisal edge
and arch length gingival) compared to removable appliance. Both
appliances cause a low to moderate pain intensity, but generally were
well tolerated. No significant difference was found in 2-years treatment
stability with both fixed and removable appliances.(13) level I However,
included primary studies were of low to moderate quality.
A small RCT from a recent systematic review, estimating treatment
duration and comfort equation between fixed, removable and functional
appliances to correct a developing single tooth crossbite showed
shortest treatment duration with fixed appliance (11 days) compared
to functional appliance (21 days) and removable appliance (15 days).
Comfort equation (communication, mastication, oral hygiene, pain and
discomfort) was also better with fixed appliances.(13) level I
Recommendation 3
Correction of anterior crossbite using fixed appliances should be carried
out by orthodontists.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
19
6.2
Treatment Modalities for Functional Anterior Crossbite
(Pseudo Class III)
The treatment modalities for functional anterior crossbite are similar as
treatment modalities for dental anterior crossbite.
6.3
Treatment Modalities for Skeletal Anterior Crossbite
Treatment of skeletal anterior crossbite during growth period aims
to encourage maxillary growth and/or restrain or redirect mandibular
growth.(6) The treatment of anterior crossbites due to skeletal origin is
more complicated, so the treatment of these cases must be performed
by an orthodontist. The choice of treatment depends on the clinician’s
assessment and expertise. (Refer Appendix 3 for summary)
6.3.1 Protraction Facemask
Protraction facemask (PFM), also known as reverse-pull headgear
is an interceptive orthopaedic device used to treat young children in
early mixed dentition with maxillary deficiency preferably around the
age 8 to 9 years old.(16-18) Facemask can be used either as a standalone treatment or in conjunction with other maxillary arch expansion
appliances. Alternate rapid maxillary expansion and constriction
combined with protraction facemask (Alt-RAMEC/PFM) is a treatment
approach that involves using a device to gradually widen the upper jaw,
followed by a period of constriction to stabilise the expansion. [refer
Figure 11b and 11c(19)]
Figure 11a: Protraction Facemask
Figure 11b: Bonded Maxillary Expander
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
20
Figure 11c: Hyrax Maxillary Expansion Appliance
i
Skeletal effect
PFM applies extraoral force that induces skeletal modifications by
forward displacement of maxilla, backward displacement of mandible,
clockwise rotation of the mandibular plane and counter-clockwise
rotation of the maxillary plane.
A Cochrane Review of seven RCTs between PFM treatment and control
group demonstrated a significant improvement of skeletal parameters
in terms of increased ANB angle (MD= 3.93º, 95% CI 3.46 to 4.39) and
Wits (MD= -3.84mm, 95% CI -5.31 to -2.37) after one year review. The
ANB angle showed some relapse after three years follow up (MD= 1.4º,
95% CI 0.43 to 2.37).(20) level I
A later meta-analysis consisting of three good to moderate quality RCTs
showed PFM without RME group have significant improvement in ANB
(MD = 4.42º, 95% CI 3.30 to 5.94), SNA (MD = 2.57º, 95% CI 1.60 to
3.54) and SNB (MD = -1.82º, 95% CI -2.77 to -0.87) as compared to
untreated patients.(21) level I
In the same meta-analysis, when group that used PFM in conjunction
with rapid maxillary expander compared to the untreated group, similar
significant improvements were seen in both ANB (MD = 2.97º 95% CI
1.84 to 4.09) and SNB (MD = -1.28º, 95% CI -1.88 to -0.68).(21), level I
Both studies concluded that the preliminary use of RME in the facemask
therapy did not improve the effectiveness of facemask.(20), level I; (21), level I
The effect of Alt-RAMEC/PFM was compared with RME/PFM in a
meta-analysis with four RCTs. At minimum of ten months follow up,
Alt-RAMEC/PFM group showed significant improvement in SNA angle
(1.16°; 95% CI 0.65 to 1.66), SNB angle (0.67°; 95% CI 0.32 to 1.02)
and ANB angle (0.66°; 95% CI 0.08 to 1.25) when compared with RME/
PFM.(22) level I
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
21
ii
Dentoalveolar effect
PFM can facilitate the correction of the overjet (OJ) in Class III growing
patients. When compared with untreated group, the patients who have
had PFM demonstrated significant OJ improvement (MD= 4.1mm, 95%
CI 3.04 to 5.16).(20) level I Another meta-analysis also showed similar OJ
improvement of 3.94mm (95% CI 2.17 to 5.71).(23) level I
Only one RCT from a meta-analysis showed significant OJ changes
in both Alt-RAMEC/PFM and RME/PFM groups respectively. This
significance was in favor of Alt-RAMEC/PFM group (p<0.001). However,
it need to be interpreted with caution due to the high risk of bias.(22) level I
iii Psychological benefit
An RCT comparing early Class III PFM treatment with a control group
using Pier-Harris Questionnaire, measured self-esteem and Oral
Aesthetic Subjective Impact Score (OASIS) which assessed the impact
of concern on the appearance of teeth showing no significant difference
between both groups. Thus, it does not seem to confer a clinically
significant psychosocial benefit in early treatment.(24) level I
iv Temporomandibular joint
Effect of morphology changes in the temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
following short term wear (6 to 15 months) of PFM was reported in
a systematic review with 13 moderate to good quality studies. They
found that there were significant morphological changes in the condylar
growth (p<0.001), bone remodelling (p<0.05) and significant condylar
displacement in the posterior (1.13 mm ±1.46 mm, p=0.007) and
superior (−0.97 mm ± 0.96 mm, p=0.001) direction in the PFM group.
The occurrence of TMJ dysfunction was not significant between the
PFM and the control group. This could be due to the patient’s adaptive
ability to achieve centric relation (CR) and maximum intercuspation (MI)
positions.(25) level I
v
Stability and Relapse
The stability of Class III skeletal pattern correction using PFM is highly
dependent on the growth pattern, particularly the late mandibular
growth.
A systematic review of five studies assessing the mid-term stability at
six years follow-up of PFM therapy showed skeletal relapse with:(26), level I
• SNB value increased between 1.3° to 2.0°
• ANB value reduced between 2.0° to 2.6°
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
22
Another meta-analysis with four studies evaluated the stability of
treatment effects of maxillary protraction therapy in Class III children
demonstrated skeletal relapse after 2 to 3.5 years with:(23) level I
• SNA (MD= -0.75°, 95% CI -1.38 to -0.11)
• ANB (MD= -0.80°, 95% CI -1.45 to -0.15)
• SNB (MD= -0.06°, 95% CI -0.71 to 0.60)
Dentoalveolar relapse can be seen in terms of OJ (MD= -0.69mm; 95%
CI -1.28 to -0.09)(23) level I and another study showed 40% subjects in the
treatment group did not maintain a positive OJ.(26) level I
Key message 5
• Protraction facemask (PFM) alone is sufficient to be used in the
correction of anterior crossbite in mild Class III skeletal patterns
with maxillary hypoplasia among growing patients in mixed dentition.
• If there is a problem with maxillary constriction or if the maxillary arch
needs to be expanded, PFM can be utilised with RME.
• PFM treatment need to be carried out by an orthodontist.
• PFM bulkiness and soft-tissue irritation can compromise patient’s
compliance.
• The assessment of treatment stability is usually done after the patient
has completed their growth spurt.
Recommendation 4
Protraction facemask therapy may be used to correct skeletal anterior
crossbite in growing patients with Class III malocclusion.
6.3.2 Chin Cup
Orthodontic chin cup appliance is a device outside of the mouth (extra
oral appliance) that covers the chin and is attached to elastic bands that
usually fit over the head. (refer Appendix 6). It is used to help reduce
or correct mandibular prognathism in growing children. It is mainly used
to restrict the forward and downward growth of the mandible by placing
force on the lower jaw.(27)
Two meta-analyses assessing the effectiveness chin cup treatment in
pre-pubertal Class III malocclusion patients compared with no treatment
at short-term showed improvement in:
a. Skeletal:
• ANB (MD=1.96°, 95% CI 1.58 to 2.34)(20), level I
• Wits appraisal (MD=3.62 mm, 95% CI 1.32 to 5.92)(28), level II-1
(MD=4.96 mm, 95% CI 4.45 to 5.42)(20), level I
• Gonial angle (MD= -0.799°, 95% CI -1.523 to -0.075)(28),level II-1
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
23
b. Dental:
• Overjet (SMD=2.623 mm, 95% CI 1.061 to 4.185)(28), level II-1
Although chin cup therapy showed a general improvement in the facial
profile, skeletal and dentoalveolar changes but various responses
can occur depending on the facial skeletal pattern and growth of the
patients.
As for stability, not all effects from chin cup will be sustainable in the
long term until patient growth completion.
The role of chin cup therapy in the retardation of mandibular growth in
the long term is not conclusive. There are insufficient articles reported
for the long-term effect of chin cup therapy and it is difficult to obtain
long term cooperation from patients to wear chin cup until the growth is
complete. In addition, chin cup therapy is not suitable for patients with
open bite or significant reverse OJ.
6.3.3 Skeletal Anchored Class III Elastics
Skeletal anchored Class III elastics involves class III elastics applied from
infra-zygomatic mini-plates / mini-screws in the maxilla to symphyseal
mini-plates / mini-screws in the mandible.(1) (refer Appendix 6)
A meta-analysis, with 9 moderate quality studies (8 case-control studies
and 1 controlled clinical study), reported that skeletal anchorage group,
when compared to no treatment control groups showed significantly
increased in Wits values effect size (WDM= 7.8mm, 95% CI 7.19 to
8.14), overjet effect size (WDM= 6.52mm, 95% CI 6.17 to 6.88), ANB
(WDM= 6.07°, 95% CI 5.56 to 6.58) and SNA (WDM= 2.70°, 95% CI
2.16 to 3.24). The SNB was reported to decrease in skeletal anchorage
group (WDM= 3.07° , 95% CI -3.52 to -2.62).(29) level I
From another similar meta-analysis, skeletal anchorage when
compared with more traditional treatment methods, i.e. expander and
face mask, there was no significant difference between two groups in
terms of overjet, ANB or SNB effect size. However, there was a slight
increment in Wits values effect size (WDM= 1.28mm, 95% CI 0.28 to
2.28, p=0.012) and SNA (WDM=0.60°, 95% CI 0.13 to 1.07).(29) level I
A non-randomised clinical trial comparing skeletal and facemask
treatment among 7 to 12 years old patients reported that there was no
significant difference in terms of overjet, SNA, ANB and Wits values.
However, the median time of treatment was significantly shorter in the
mini-implant group (12.5 months vs 16 months, p=0.025). The failure
rate of mini-implant was reported as 16.7%. More implant failure
reported in 11-12 year old group compared to 9-10 year old group
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
24
(4.2% vs 29.2%, p= 0.048) There was no association between site of
insertion or sex with the implant failure.(30) level I
In conclusion, skeletal anchored Class III elastic can be an effective
treatment modality in improving skeletal class III malocclusion.
However, the precautions need to be taken while inserting the
miniplates especially for patients below the 10 years old considering
the developing mandibular canine germ.(1)
6.3.4 Functional Appliance
Functional appliance was a classic method of treatment used in a Class
III skeletal pattern growing patients, primarily to enhance the growth of
the maxilla and restrict the growth of the mandible. The two functional
appliances used for Class III correction are Fränkel Functional
Regulator III Appliance (FR III) and Reverse Twin Block Appliance.
(refer Appendix 6)
i
Fränkel Functional Regulator III Appliance
Fränkel Functional Regulator III appliance (FR III) (refer Appendix 6)
has been used for correction of anterior crossbite in skeletall Class III
patients. A meta-analysis with 7 moderate cohort studies showed FR
III therapy produced significant short-term (two to three years followup) skeletal effects among patients with anterior crossbite(31) level II-2.
Participants wearing the FR III demonstrated significant difference in
terms of SNA (MD = 1.02°; 95% CI, 0.53 to 1.51), SNB (MD = 1.62°;
95% CI, 2.62 to 0.62), ANB (MD =1.84° ; 95% CI, 0.96 to 2.71) and Wits
appraisal (MD = 2.70 mm; 95% CI, 1.88 to 3.52). Apart from that, FR
III also cause dentoalveolar effect as seen on the significant increase
in the overjet (MD = 3.47 mm; 95% CI, 2.93 to 4.01). However, these
changes only can be maintained long term (eight to nine years) in the
SNB value (MD = 1.50°; 95% CI, 2.12 to 0.88) and overjet (MD = 4.56
mm; 95% CI, 3.78 to 5.35). No significant changes in the overbite were
observed in both short- and long-term among the participants.
ii
Reverse Twin Block Appliance
Reverse Twin Block appliance (RTB) is also used in crossbite correction
in Class III skeletal pattern patients. An RCT with 13 patients aged
between 6 to 12 years old demonstrated that when use in conjunction
with rapid maxillary expander (RME) for 9 months, RTB with RME
patients showed significant improvement in ANB angle and Wits
appraisal compared to the control group.(32) level I
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
25
Key message 6
The factors that determine good outcome of functional appliance
treatment in anterior crossbite correction:
• growing patients with Class III skeletal pattern
• cases with no or minimal dentoalveolar compensation
• good patient motivation
Early correction of anterior crossbite in skeletal Class III patients with
functional appliance was found to be effective for short-term. However,
the long-term stability is highly dependent on favourable growth
and excellent compliance by the patients. Other factors to take in
consideration are the fabrication cost and the patient’s motivation.
Key message 7
Functional appliance may be provided by an orthodontist for correction
of skeletal anterior crossbite in mixed dentition.
6.3.5 Tandem traction bow appliance
Tandem traction bow appliance (TTBA) is an intraoral appliance with
upper splint attached to RME and lower splint with headgear tubes
connected by traction bow and elastic. The elastic wear is attached
intraorally.
A small in vivo study to support the use of intra oral TTBA in early
treatment of skeletal Class III malocclusion for patients (6 to 12 years
old) with mild maxillary deficiency found that there were significant
improvements in terms of:(33) level II-3
• Skeletal: point A moved forward (MD=2.2 mm; p=0.005), SNA
moved forward (MD=2.8°; p<0.005), SNB moved backwards (MD=
0.4°; p<0.005), ANB increased (MD=3.2°; p value <0.005)
• Dental: upper incisal angulations decreased (MD= 8.3°; p<0.005)
and lower incisal angulation decreased (MD=3.6°; p value =0.007)
However, this study was conducted in small sample size, and there is
no consideration on growth related changes in post treatment followup.
TTBA can also be used in combination with extra oral headgear and
extra oral elastic (Modified TTBA). In a Cochrane Systematic Review
published in 2013, a small RCT found that children and adolescents
with prominent lower front teeth treated with modified TTBA had shown
effective improvement in the overjet (MD=3.30 mm, 95% CI 2.46 to
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
26
4.14) and ANB (MD=1.70°, 95% CI 1.09 to 2.31) when compared to the
untreated.(20) level I
In a meta-analysis, an RCT showed that PFM (Petit-type) therapy was
significantly effective compared to modified tandem appliance (Modified
TTBA) (p=0.04) in improving OJ among patients with skeletal class III
malocclusion (7 to 10 years old).(18) level I
Furthermore, the construction and method of wearing of modified TTBA
is more complicated for operator and patient. Hence, PFM treatment is
more convenient and effective than modified TTBA.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
27
7.0
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of anterior crossbite in mixed dentition should be
guided by an evidence-based approach in order to provide quality care.
Clinicians are required to keep abreast with current knowledge through
continuing professional education as well as understanding patients’
expectations.
Therefore, it is important for these guidelines to be disseminated to
all healthcare professionals in primary and secondary healthcare
facilities. This can be facilitated through the development of appropriate
training modules and quick references. Several factors may affect the
implementation of the recommendations of the CPG.
7.1
Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare professionals and
teaching institutions via printed and electronic copies
• continuing professional education on the management of anterior
crossbite in mixed dentition for healthcare professionals
• adequate facilities at primary and secondary care level for diagnosing
and treating anterior crossbite in mixed dentition.
• Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
include:
• lack of understanding or limited knowledge on the management of
anterior crossbite in mixed dentition.
• variation in skills and treatment practices.
• constraints in equipment and facilities
7.2
Potential Resource Implications
This CPG recommends early detection and referral, comprehensive
assessment and treatment of anterior crossbite in mixed dentition. This
requires increased awareness among healthcare providers and the
public to establish early diagnosis and uninterrupted various forms of
treatment as well as support to the patients and their caregivers.
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
• ensure widespread distribution of the CPG in hard and soft copy
to healthcare professionals in primary and secondary healthcare
facilities
• strengthen training of healthcare professionals to ensure knowledge
and information is up to date
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
28
7.3
Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management of anterior crossbite
in mixed dentition.
X
= Number of referred cases in mixed dentition (6-10 years
old) with anterior crossbite
Y
= Total number of referred cases with anterior crossbite
X/Y
x 100%
Target ≥ 70%
Number of referred cases in mixed
dentition with anterior crossbite
Total number of referred cases with
anterior crossbite
X 100%
Early referral of
=
anterior crossbite
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
29
Appendix 1
SEARCH STRATEGY
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Medline, Pubmed, Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews (CDSR) and Embase while full text journal articles were
retrieved from these databases. The following Medical Subject Heading
terms of free text terms were used either singly or in combination. The
literature search was limited to human study, English language and
published articles from inception of databases from 2012 to April 2023
Clinical Question:
Is fixed appliance safe and effective in treating anterior crossbite among
mixed dentition?
Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL <1946 to July 18, 2023>
1.
(bite, cross or bites, cross or cross bite or cross bites).mp. 616
2.
(anterior adj1 crossbite).tw. 584
3.
Malocclusion, Angle Class III/ 4102
4.
1 or 2 or 3 5099
5.
Dentition, Mixed/ 2174
6.
4 and 5 190
7.
Orthodontic Appliances, Fixed/ 461
8.
(appliance, fixed or appliance, fixed functional or appliance, fixed
orthodontic or appliances, fixed or appliances, fixed functional or
appliances, fixed orthodontic or bonded retainer or bonded retainers
or fixed appliance or fixed appliances or fixed functional appliance
or fixed functional appliances or fixed orthodontic appliance or fixed
retainer or fixed retainers or functional appliance, fixed or functional
appliances, fixed or orthodontic appliance, fixed or orthodontic
appliances, fixed or permanent retainer or permanent retainers or
retainer, bonded or retainer, fixed or retainer, permanent or retainers,
bonded or retainers, fixed or retainers, permanent).mp. 3179
9.
7 or 8 3179
10. 6 and 9 18
11. limit 10 to (English language and humans and yr=”2012 - 2023”) 13
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
30
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the aetiology/predisposing factors of anterior crossbite in
mixed dentition?
2.
What are the classifications of anterior crossbite in mixed dentition?
3.
What are the accurate methods to diagnose anterior crossbite in
mixed dentition?
4.
What are the effective and safe treatment modalities for anterior
crossbite in mixed dentition?
a.
Fixed appliance
b.
Upper Removable Appliance
c.
Inclined Bite Plane (Catlan’s Appliance)
d.
Cemented Bite Pads
e.
Protraction Facemask
f.
Chin cup
g.
Mini implant / miniscrew / TAD/ miniplate
h.
Tandem traction bow appliance (TTBA)
i.
Functional appliance
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
31
Appendix 3
SUMMARY OF TREATMENT MODALITIES OF ANTERIOR CROSSBITE
An appliance that is not attached to the teeth and can be removed by the
patient. The active component can be Z spring, recurved spring or
expansion screw.
Inclined plane either removable or cemented can be placed at the lower
incisors for non-compliant patients
It is a bite riser that are placed on lower first molars to disengage the
occlusion.
Orthodontic devices / braces which are attached onto the surface of teeth
and cannot be removed by the patient. It is used for cases that need
three-dimensional tooth movement.
It is an orthopaedic device used in early mixed dentition to protract the
maxilla. It can be stand-alone treatment or in conjunction with other
maxillary arch expansion appliances.
It is a device outside of the mouth (extra oral appliance) that covers the
chin and is attached to elastic bands that usually fit over the head. It is
used to restrict the forward and downward growth of the mandible.
It is Class III elastics applied from infra-zygomatic mini-plates / mini-screws
in the maxilla to symphyseal mini-plates / mini-screws in the mandible.
Removable appliance used in a Class III skeletal pattern growing patients.
It is an intraoral appliance with upper splint attached to a RME and a lower
splint with headgear tubes connected by a traction bow and intraoral
elastics.
Similar with treatment modalities for dental anterior crossbite
Fixed Appliance
Cemented Bite Pads
Lower Inclined Bite Plane
Upper Removable Appliance
(URA)
Protraction facemask
Chin Cup
Skeletal Anchored Class III
Elastics
Functional Appliance
Tandem Traction Bow Appliance
TREATMENT MODALITIES
FOR DENTAL ANTERIOR
CROSSBITE
TREATMENT MODALITIES
FOR SKELETAL ANTERIOR
CROSSBITE
TREATMENT MODALITIES
FOR FUNCTIONAL ANTERIOR
CROSSBITE
(PSEUDO CLASS III)
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
32
Appendix 4
APPLIANCE FABRICATION LABORATORY FORM
(Example of URA design)*
* This is an example of the URA design. The design of URA needs to
be tailored according to patient’s malocclusion
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
33
Appendix 5
INSTRUCTIONS FOR REMOVABLE APPLIANCE
1.
The appliance should be worn at all times, including meals and in
bed at night.
2.
The appliance should only be removed during tooth brushing and
playing contact sports. It must then be replaced in the mouth at the
earliest opportunity.
3.
It is very common to feel discomfort, pooling of saliva and altered
speech initially, but it should pass in a few days once you get used
to the appliance.
4.
It is important to take care of oral hygiene during the treatment.
5.
Avoid hard, sticky, sweet foods and carbonated/ higher sugar
contained drinks.
6.
If there be any problem with the appliance, please contact the
Orthodontic Department as soon as possible. The contact number
is ………………….
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
34
Appendix 6
PHOTOS OF TREATMENT MODALITIES FOR ANTERIOR
CROSSBITE OF SKELETAL ORIGIN
Chip Cup(34)
Skeletal Anchored Class III Elastics(35)
Fränkel Functional Regulator III Appliance(36)
Tandem Traction Bow Appliance (TTBA)(37)
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
35
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation
Alt-RAMEC
Alternate Rapid Maxillary Expansion and Constriction
ANB
Angle between the line A point to Nasion and B point to Nasion on
a lateral cephalogram
A-P
Anteroposterior
CASP
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme
CDSR
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
CI
Confidence Interval
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CPQ
Child Perception Questionnaire
CR
Centric Relation
DMF
Decay Missing Filling
FM
Facemask
FR III
Fränkel Functional Regulator III Appliance
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
MD
Mean Difference
MI
Maximum Intercuspation
mm
millimeter
MyMAHTAS
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section
OASIS
Oral Aesthetic Subjective Impact Score
OB
Overbite
OH
Oral Hygiene
OHP
Oral Health Program
OJ
Overjet
OPG
Orthopantomogram
PFM
Protraction Face Mask
RCT(s)
Randomised Control Trial
RME
Rapid Maxillary Expander
RTB
Reverse Twin Block appliance
SMD
Standard Mean Difference
SNA
Angle between the line Sella to Nasion and A point to Nasion on a
lateral cephalogram
SNB
Angle between the line Sella to Nasion and B point to Nasion on a
lateral cephalogram
TAD(s)
Temporary Anchorage Device
TMD
Temporomandibular disorder
TMJ
Temporomandibular joint
TTBA
Tandem Traction Bow Appliance
URA
Upper Removable Appliance
WDM
Weighted Mean Difference
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
36
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the development group of these guidelines would
like to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
• Panel of internal and external reviewers
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• HTA and CPG Council for approval of the CPG
• Dr. Mohd Aminuddin bin Mohd Yusof and CPG Unit, Malaysian
Health Technology Assessment Section, Medical Development
Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
• Dr. Maryana bt Musa and Dr. Aina Najwa bt Mohd Khairuddin
• Dr. Chin Mei H’uah for the clinical photos
• Dr. Soh Yi Yong for the clinical photos
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held shares
in pharmaceutical firms or acted as consultants to such firms. (Details
are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “Management of Anterior Crossbite”
was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health Malaysia
and was developed without any involvement of the pharmaceutical
industry.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
37
REFERENCES
1.
Proffit WR, Fields H, Larson B, Sarver DM. Contemporary orthodontics-e-book.
Elsevier Health Sciences; 2018.
2.
Yu X, Zhang H, Sun L, Pan J, Liu Y, Chen L. Prevalence of malocclusion
and occlusal traits in the early mixed dentition in Shanghai, China. PeerJ.
2019;7:e6630.
3.
Elfseyie M, Mohammed Abdullah N, Abu Hassan MI. Occlusal features of 12
years old Malaysian Malay school-children in Shah Alam/Majda TM Elfseyie,
Nagham Mohammed Abdullah and Mohamed Ibrahim Abu Hassan. Compendium
of Oral Science. 2014;1:6-12.
4.
AAO. American Association of Orthodontists. Understanding crossbites: what
are they and how are they treated? Available at: https://aaoinfoorg/whatstrending/what-is-a-crossbite/ 2019.
5.
S Gowri Sankar Pvavrv. Text book of orthodontics. Hyderabad, Paras Medical
Publisher. 2016.
6.
Littlewood SJ, Mitchell L. An introduction to orthodontics. Oxford University
Press. 2019.
7.
MOH. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of anterior crossbite in
mixed dentition (second edition). Available at: https://wwwmohgovmy/moh/
attachments/CPG%202014/CPG_Management_of_Anterior_Crossbite_with_
Mixed_Dentitionpdf 2013.
8.
MOH. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Technology review of digital software for
orthodontic records keeping. . Available at: https://wwwmohgovmy/indexphp/
database_stores/store_view_page/30/265 (Accessed: July 4, 2023). 2015.
9.
Vangala R, Kumar VP, Ujwala T, Varma NS, Navya P. The use of catlan’s
appliance for rapid correction of pseudo class III malocclusion. Annals Essences
of Dentistry. 2013;5(1):35-7.
10. Yildirim C, Akgun O, Basak F. Use of catlan’s appliance to correct anterior
crossbite: two cases. Scholars Journal of Medical Case Reports. 2014;2(4):270-2.
11. Bayrak S, Tunc ES. Treatment of anterior dental crossbite using bonded resincomposite slopes: case reports. European Journal of Dentistry. 2008;2(4):303-6.
12. JoySon M, JaIganeSh I, ShaRanya R, Vignesh KC. Estimation of total time
duration and comfort equation of three different appliances used to manage
the condition of single tooth developing anterior crossbite in children. Journal of
Clinical and Diagnostic Research. 2018;12(13):ZC05-ZC9.
13. Khalaf K, Mando M. Removable appliances to correct anterior crossbites in
the mixed dentition: a systematic review. Acta Odontologica Scandinavica.
2020;78(2):118-25.
14. Cosgun A, Altan H. Treatment of anterior dental crossbite with different methods
in the early mixed dentition period: Report of two cases. Journal of Pediatric
Dentistry. 2020;6(2):61.
15. Sockalingam SNM, Khan KAM, Kuppusamy E. Interceptive correction of anterior
crossbite using short-span wire-fixed orthodontic appliance: a report of three
cases. Case Reports in Dentistry. 2018;2018(1):4323945.
16. Seehra J, Fleming P, Mandall N, Dibiase A. A comparison of two different
techniques for early correction of Class III malocclusion. The Angle Orthodontist.
2012;82(1):96-101.
17. Husson AH, Burhan AS, Salma FB, Nawaya FR. Dentoskeletal effects of the
modified tandem appliance vs the facemask appliance in the treatment of
skeletal class iii malocclusion: a single-center, randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Contemporary Dental Practice. 2016;17(7):522-9.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
38
18. Farhadian N, Soheilifar S, Abolvardi M, Miresmailei A, Mohammadi Y. Effects of
facemasks versus intraoral appliances in treating maxillary deficiency in growing
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Dental and Medical Problems.
2019;56(4):401-10.
19. Giuntini V, Camporesi M, Barone V, Marino Merlo M, Nardi C, Franceschi D, et al.
Postpubertal effects of the rapid maxillary expansion and facial mask versus the
removable mandibular retractor for the early treatment of class iii malocclusion:
a study on lateral cephalograms. Applied Sciences. 2021;11(18):8393.
20. Watkinson S, Harrison JE, Furness S, Worthington HV. Orthodontic treatment
for prominent lower front teeth (class III malocclusion) in children. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013(9):Cd003451.
21. Cordasco G, Matarese G, Rustico L, Fastuca S, Caprioglio A, Lindauer SJ, et
al. Efficacy of orthopedic treatment with protraction facemask on skeletal Class
III malocclusion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Orthodontics and
Craniofacial Research. 2014;17(3):133-43.
22. Almuzian M, McConnell E, Darendeliler MA, Alharbi F, Mohammed H. The
effectiveness of alternating rapid maxillary expansion and constriction combined
with maxillary protraction in the treatment of patients with a class III malocclusion:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Orthodontics. 2018;45(4):250-9.
23. Lin Y, Guo R, Hou L, Fu Z, Li W. Stability of maxillary protraction therapy in
children with Class III malocclusion: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Clinical Oral Investigations. 2018;22(7):2639-52.
24. Mandall N, DiBiase A, Littlewood S, Nute S, Stivaros N, McDowall R, et al. Is early
Class III protraction facemask treatment effective? A multicentre, randomized,
controlled trial: 15-month follow-up. Journal of orthodontics. 2010;37(3):149-61.
25. Huang X, Cen X, Liu J. Effect of protraction facemask on the temporomandibular
joint: a systematic review. BMC Oral Health. 2018;18(1):38.
26. Kakali L, Christopoulou I, Tsolakis IA, Sabaziotis D, Alexiou A, Sanoudos M, et al.
Mid-term follow up effectiveness of facemask treatment in class III malocclusion:
A systematic review. International Orthodontics. 2021;19(3):365-76.
27. Naidu S, Suresh A. Effects of chin cup in the management of class III
malocclusion. Journal of Indian Dental Association. 2018;12(10):39-42.
28. Chatzoudi MI, Ioannidou-Marathiotou I, Papadopoulos MA. Clinical effectiveness
of chin cup treatment for the management of Class III malocclusion in pre-pubertal
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Progress in Orthodontics.
2014;15(1):62.
29. Rodríguez de Guzmán-Barrera J, Sáez Martínez C, Boronat-Catalá M, MontielCompany JM, Paredes-Gallardo V, Gandía-Franco JL, et al. Effectiveness of
interceptive treatment of class III malocclusions with skeletal anchorage: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE. 2017;12(3):e0173875.
30. de Souza RA, Rino Neto J, de Paiva JB. Maxillary protraction with rapid
maxillary expansion and facemask versus skeletal anchorage with mini-implants
in class III patients: a non-randomized clinical trial. Progress in Orthodontics.
2019;20(1):35.
31. Yang X, Li C, Bai D, Su N, Chen T, Xu Y, et al. Treatment effectiveness of
Fränkel function regulator on the Class III malocclusion: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics :
official publication of the American Association of Orthodontists, its constituent
societies, and the American Board of Orthodontics. 2014;146(2):143-54.
32. Minase RA, Bhad WA, Doshi UH. Effectiveness of reverse twin block with
lip pads-RME and face mask with RME in the early treatment of class III
malocclusion. Progress in Orthodontics. 2019;20(1):14.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
39
33. Udeshi PS, Kuttappa M, Ravi M, US NK. Tandem Traction Bow Appliance for the
Treatment of Skeletal Class III Malocclusion. Journal of Health Allied Sciences
NU. 2018;8(01):27-34.
34. Torres FC, Almeida RR, Almeida-Pedrin RR, Pedrin F, Paranhos LR.
Dentoalveolar comparative study between removable and fixed cribs, associated
to chincup, in anterior open bite treatment. Journal of Applied Oral Science :
revista FOB. 2012;20(5):531-7.
35. Baccetti T, De Clerck HJ, Cevidanes LH, Franchi L. Morphometric analysis of
treatment effects of bone-anchored maxillary protraction in growing class III
patients. European Journal of Orthodontics. 2011;33(2):121-5.
36. Ji L-L, Sun D-X, Shi L-B, Kyung H-M, Bing L, Wu X-PJIJoM. Morphological
changes of frankel functional regulator III in mixed dentition with class III
malocclusion. International Journal of Morphology. 2020;38(4):1053-9.
37. Klempner L. Early treatment of skeletal Class III open bite with the tandem
appliance. Journal of Clinical Orthodontics : JCO. 2011;45(6):308-16; quiz 39.
Management of Anterior Crossbite (3rd Edition)
‘nt Tecnology Seton