CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Ministry of Health
Malaysia
Malaysia Endocrine
& Metabolic Society
Family Medicine Specialists
Association of Malaysia
2ND EDITION (2023)
MOH/P/PAK/504.22(GU)-e
MAY 2023
Malaysian Dietitians’
Association
Malaysian Association
for the Study of Obesity
Published by
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyrights
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be reproduced in any number of
copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is
included and the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse any product or
service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading context.
ISBN 978-967-2887-53-9
Availability
The Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) for the Management of Obesity is available at the following
websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.mems.my
http://www.fms-malaysia.org
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS.
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) is meant to provide guidance for the
evidence-based clinical practice for managing obesity. It is based on the best
available evidence at the time of the CPG development. Adherence to the
guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every
healthcare provider is responsible for the management of his/her unique patient
based on the clinical picture presented by the patients and the management
options available.
Every care has been taken to ensure that the information in this publication is
correct at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions,
corrections will be published in the web version of this document, which will serve
as the definitive version at all times.
NEXT UPDATE
The year of issue of this current CPG is 2023. It will be reviewed in 4 years (2027)
or sooner if new evidence becomes available. The Chairman of the CPG or the
National Advisor of the related specialty will be consulted to determine if there is a
need for a revision, and if so, the extent of the revision needed. A multidisciplinary
team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used by
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) will be employed for
the next update.
01
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Statement of intent
1
Next update
1
Table of contents
2
Terms of reference
5
Clinical questions
7
Target population
7
Target user
7
Healthcare settings
8
Source of funding and declaration of conflict of interest
8
Development committee
9
Review committee
11
Grades of recommendation and levels of evidence
12
Recommendations
13
Algorithms
17
Algorithm for the assessment and management of adult obesity
17
Algorithm for the assessment and management of childhood obesity
18
Foreword by the Director General of Health, Malaysia
19
Preface by the Chairperson of the Development Committee
20
1. Obesity: the disease
21
1.1 Introduction
21
1.2 Epidemiology
21
1.3 Obesity as a disease
22
1.4 Impact of weight loss on associated medical conditions
22
2. Assessment and diagnosis
23
2.1 Screening
23
2.2 Diagnosis
23
2.3 Assessment of obesity-related medical conditions
26
2.4 Targets for control
27
Table of contents
3. Psychological and behavioural therapy
29
3.1 Psychological aspect of obesity
29
3.2 Psychological and behavioural interventions for obesity and
weight management
29
4. Management of obesity in adults
34
4.1 Comprehensive lifestyle modification
34
4.1.1
Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) for adults
34
4.1.2
Physical activity
38
4.2 Pharmacotherapy
43
4.2.1
Anti-obesity drugs
44
4.3 Surgical procedures
55
4.3.1 Efficacy of the different procedures
55
4.3.2 Preoperative assessment and preparation
56
4.3.3 Indications for bariatric surgery
57
4.3.4 Patient selection criteria for bariatric surgery
58
4.3.5 Types of bariatric procedures
58
4.3.6 Intragastric balloon (special non-operative procedure)
61
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity 66
5.1 Prevalence of childhood and adolescent obesity
66
5.2 Diagnosis of childhood and adolescent obesity
66
5.3 Clinical evaluation
67
5.3.1
Assessing causes of obesity in children and adolescents
67
5.3.2 Patient history
68
5.3.3 Physical examination
69
5.3.4 Investigations
70
5.4 Management of obesity in children and adolescents
72
5.4.1 Basic principles of management
72
5.4.2 Family involvement
73
5.4.3 Structured approach to management of obesity
References
110
Acknowledgements
119
Table of contents
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults,
children and adolescents
81
6.1 Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults
81
6.1.1
Low-calorie diet and orlistat for prevention of obesity
in adults
81
6.1.2 Pharmacotherapy for prevention of obesity in adults
82
6.2 Prevention of obesity in children and adolescents
82
6.2.1 Early life interventions
83
6.2.2 Lifestyle interventions
83
6.2.3 Environment
86
7. Implementing the guidelines
88
8. Clinical indicators for quality management
90
Appendices
91
Appendix 1
91
Example of a search strategy
91
Appendix 2
92
Binge Eating Scale
92
Self-monitoring worksheet
96
Appendix 3
97
Sample menu plan
97
Food groups and exchange lists
100
Appendix 4
105
Blood pressure levels for boys by age and height percentile
105
Blood pressure levels for girls by and age and height percentile
Terms of reference
The guidelines development
The members of the Development Committee (committee) for this CPG were
comprised of experts from different specialties managing obesity from the
Ministry of Health (MoH) and the Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) sectors.
There was also an active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee
(RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out at the following electronic databases:
PUBMED, Medline, Cochrane Databases of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), and OVID.
Refer to Appendix 1 for an example of the Search Strategy used. The inclusion
criteria were all children, adolescents and adults with overweight or obesity.
The search was limited to literature published in the last 15 years, involving only
human studies and in the English language. All searches were conducted from
April 2019 to January 2022. In addition, the reference lists of relevant articles
were searched to identify further studies. Reference was also made to the latest
edition of other guidelines on the management of obesity including international
guidelines. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from the
CPG Secretariat.
Some of the international guidelines that were used as reference were:
• The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologist and American College of
Endocrinology Comprehensive Clinical Practice Guidelines for Medical Care of
Patients with Obesity
• AHA/ACC/TOS Guideline for the Management of Overweight and Obesity
in Adults: a Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society
• The American Diabetes Association’s Position Statement on Physical Activity/
Exercise and Diabetes
• The American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand on the Appropriate
Physical Activity Intervention Strategies for Weight Loss and Prevention of
Weight Regain for Adults
• The American Academy of Sleep Medicine’s Recommendations for the Amount
of Sleep for the Paediatric Population
• The National Health and Medical Research Council (Melbourne) Clinical
Practice Guidelines for the Management of Overweight and Obesity in Adults,
Adolescents and Children Australia
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
• The European Practical and Patient-Centred Guidelines for Adult Obesity
Management in Primary Care
• The European Guidelines for Obesity Management in Adults
• The World Health Orgnization’s Guidelines on Physical Activity and Sedentary
Behaviour
A total of 11 clinical questions were developed for the different sections within this
CPG. Members of the committee were assigned to a section of the CPG and tasked
to develop the contents based on the relevant clinical questions (refer to Clinical
Questions below). The committee met 12 times throughout the development of
the guidelines – the first 4 meetings were held face-to-face while the subsequent 7
were held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic; the final (12th) meeting was held
face-to-face, when movement restriction was lifted. All the retrieved articles were
critically appraised by at least 2 committee members using the Critical Appraisal
Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence tables and discussed during the
meetings. The statements and recommendations within these guidelines were
formulated after they were commented on by both the committee and RC. Where
the evidence was insufficient, the recommendations were derived by consensus
of the committee and RC. Any differences in opinion were resolved consensually.
The CPG was based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses
and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
This CPG uses the SIGN50 criteria for Grades of Recommendation and Levels of
Evidence (see Grade of Recommendation and Level of Evidence section below).
On completion, the CPG draft was reviewed by external reviewers. It was also
posted on the MoH, Malaysia official website for feedback from any interested
parties. The feedback and comments were reviewed and the draft corrected
based on the decision of the committee and RC. The final draft was presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and the Health Technology
Assessment (HTA) and CPG Council MoH Malaysia for approval. Details of the CPG
development by MaHTAS can be obtained from the Manual on Development and
Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015
at: https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634.
The guidelines objectives
The objectives of this CPG are to provide evidence-based recommendations on
the management of obesity in Malaysia.
Terms of reference
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Clinical questions
1. What are the effective screening strategies and assessments for diagnosing
obesity?
2. Which classification of BMI cut-off level is used to diagnose overweight/obesity?
3. Are behavioural and psychological interventions effective and able to sustain
lifestyle changes in people with overweight/obesity?
4. What are the effective dietary methods for the management of overweight
and obesity?
5. What types of physical activity and exercise are effective in the management
of overweight and obesity?
6. Are oral anti-obesity drugs effective and safe for short and long-term weight
reduction in people with overweight and obesity?
7. Is long-term use of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLPA-1 RAs) safe
for managing overweight and obesity?
8. Is bariatric surgery safe and effective in people with obesity and what are the
types of procedures recommended for these patients?
9. Are the following interventions — lifestyle (dietary and physical activity),
psychological, pharmacotherapy and bariatric surgery — cost effective in
preventing overweight/obesity and how much weight reduction is required to
reduce the risks associated with obesity?
10. What are the strategies to prevent overweight and obesity?
11. What are the indications for referral to tertiary centres?
Target population
Children and adults who are at risk of or who are overweight and obese.
Target user
This CPG intends to guide those involved in the management of obesity in
primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare settings in the public and private
sectors. It namely targets,
i.
Medical officers and specialists
ii. Allied health professionals
iii. Trainees and medical students
iv. Patients and their advocates
v. Professional societies
Terms of reference
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
08
Healthcare settings
The healthcare settings that this CPG is relevant to are at the outpatient, inpatient
and community settings.
Source of funding and declaration of conflict of interest
The development of this CPG was funded in its entirety by the Malaysian Endocrine
and Metabolic Society. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Terms of reference
Development committee
Professor Dr Norlaila Mustafa
Faculty of Medicine
Senior Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
CHAIRPERSON
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Dr Adlin binti Mohd Salleh
Consultation-Liaison Psychiatrist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Associate Professor Dr Aznida Firzah
Abdul Aziz
Senior Family Medicine Consultant
Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia
Associate Professor Dr Geeta
Appannah
President
Malaysian Association for the
Study of Obesity (MASO)
Professor Dato’ Dr Mafauzy
Muhamad
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
Dr Masni Mohamad
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr Mohd Nahar
Azmi Mohamed
Senior Consultant Sports Physician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Professor Dr Muhammad Yazid
Jalaludin
Senior Consultant Paediatric
Endocrinologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Dr Nalini M Selveindran
Senior Paediatric Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya
Professor Dato’Dr Nik Ritza Kosai
Nik Mahmood
Senior Consultant Surgeon and
Bariatric Surgeon
Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia
Associate Professor Dr Norasyikin
A Wahab
Senior Consultant Physician and
Endocrinologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia
Professor Dr Rohana Abdul Ghani
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
10
Dr. Salbiah Binti Mohamed Isa
Senior Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Botanic
Professor Dr Shireene Ratna
Vethakkan
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Dr. Umi Adzlin binti Silim
Consultation-Liaison Psychiatrist
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah
Associate Professor Dr Zahara
Abdul Manaf
Senior Consultant Dietitian
Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Development committee
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Review committee
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from the public and private
healthcare sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness
and accuracy of the interpretation of the evidence supporting the recommendations
in this CPG.
Associate Professor Dr Anne
Yee Hway Ann
Psychiatrist and Addiction Medicine
Specialist
Department of Psychological
Medicine, Universiti Malaya Centre of
Addiction Sciences
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr Arimi Fitri Mat Ludin
Exercise Physiologist
Centre for Healthy Ageing & Wellness
Faculty of Health Science,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr Feisul Idzwan B Mustapha
Deputy Director (Non-communicable
Diseases)
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dr Joyce Hong Soo Synn
Paediatric Endocrinologist
Hospital Pakar Kanak-kanak
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Mohd Helmy
Mokhtar
(Patient representative)
Head of PhD Programme
Department of Physiology,
Faculty of Medicine,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Dr Mohd Nizam Md Hashim
Consultant Bariatric Surgeon
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
Kubang Kerian, Kelantan
Dr Navin Kumar Loganadan
Clinical Pharmacist
Endocrine Institute, Hospital
Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr Nurain binti Mohd Noor
Consultant Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr Saidatul Norbaya Bt Buang
Principle Assistant Director,
School Health of the Family Health
Development Division,
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya
Professor Winnie Chee Siew Swee
Department of Nutrition and Dietetics
International Medical University
Bukit Jalil, Kuala Lumpur
Dr Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru,
Kuala Lumpur
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Grades of recommendation
and levels of evidence
Level of evidence
1++
High quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or
RCTs with a very low-risk of bias
1+
Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews, or RCTs with a
low-risk of bias
1Meta-analyses, systematic, or RCTs with a high-risk of bias
2++
High quality systematic reviews of case-control or cohort studies
2+
Well-conducted case-control or cohort studies with a low-risk of
confounding or bias and a moderate probability that the relationship
is causal
2Case-control or cohort studies with a high-risk of confounding or bias
and a significant risk that the relationship is not casual
3
Non-analytic studies, e.g. case reports, case series
4
Expert opinion
Grades of recommendation
Note: The grade of recommendation relates to the strength of the evidence on which the
recommendation is based. It does not reflect the clinical importance of the recommendation.
A
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review, or RCT rated as 1++,
and directly applicable to the target population; OR
A body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+,
directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating
overall consistency of results
B
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2++, directly applicable
to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of
results OR
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+
C
A body of evidence including studies rated as 2+, directly applicable
to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of
results OR
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++
D
Evidence level 3 or 4 OR
Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+

Good practice points – Recommended best practice based on the
clinical experience of the guidelines development group
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Recommendations
Screening and diagnosis
• Screening with body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC)
measurements should be done yearly
• Cut off BMI values that should be used are: pre-obesity (overweight) -23 kg/m2
and obesity - >27.5 kg/m2
• Individuals diagnosed with pre-obesity and obesity should be assessed
for associated conditions, co-occurring medical conditions and current
treatments that could cause obesity
Psychological and behavioural therapy
• Multicomponent psychological and behavioural therapy approaches should
be integrated in managing people with obesity
› Enhancing communication and avoiding stigmatisation
› Psychoeducation
› Motivational interviewing and behavioural strategies
› Psychological interventions
Formulation of recommendations
In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of MaHTAS
is in the process of adapting the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines network (SIGN
50) in its work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size
are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are considered in
determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• Overall quality of evidence
• Balance of benefits versus harm
• Values and preferences
• Resource implications
• Equity, feasibility and acceptability
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the CPG Development
Group as the key clinical recommendations that should be prioritised for
implementation.
ADULTS
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Medical Nutrition Therapy
• Dietary prescriptions should be individualised based on
› Individual’s motivation level
› Age
› Sex
› Co-morbidities
› Physical activity level
› Weight loss goals
• Calorie restriction diet should be combined with either low carbohydrate or
low fat intake
Physical activity
• Physical activity should be encouraged in all individuals with obesity
› A minimum of 150 minutes/week (30 minutes/day) progressing to 300
minutes/week (60 minutes/day) of moderate intensity, or
› At least 75-150 minutes/week of vigorous intensity is required for weight
loss.
• Combination of both moderate- and vigorous-intensity activity throughout
the week should be encouraged to maintain weight loss
• Both resistance and aerobic exercise or activities should be emphasised to
improve physical function and well-being
Pharmacotherapy
• Pharmacotherapy for obesity should be used only as an adjunct to diet,
exercise and behavioural modification and not alone
› Pharmacotherapy for obesity is indicated in patients with BMI ≥30 kg/m2
without comorbidities and BMI ≥27 kg/m2 with comorbidity
• Pharmacotherapy that may be prescribed are:
› Orlistat
› Combination of phentermine and topiramate
› Combination of naltrexone and bupropion
› High dose liraglutide
› High dose semaglutide
• Anti-obesity treatments should be used with medical supervision and careful
monitoring
Recommendations
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS (<18 years old)
Screening and diagnosis
• BMI cut-offs using the World Health Organization (WHO) BMI-for-age chart
should be used for the classification of overweight and obesity in children
• Clinical evaluation (history and physical examination) should be performed
to identify the aetiology and to rule out pathological causes
• Children and adolescents with obesity should be offered screening for
related comorbidities
• Overweight children and adolescents should be offered screening if risk factors
are present
Management
• A step or staged approach for weight management in the paediatric population
should be used
› For prepubertal children – allow a gradual decline in BMI with weight
maintenance or a slower weight gain
› For pubertal children – gradual weight loss with a maximum loss of 0.5-1.0 kg/
month
• Family-focused lifestyle intervention should be emphasised
Recommendations
Bariatric surgery
• Bariatric surgery should only be performed in individuals with morbid obesity
who fail medical therapy
• Roux-En-Y gastric bypass surgery may be considered
• A comprehensive preoperative assessment and preparation should be done
before bariatric surgery
Prevention
• Fundamental preventive measures that should be implemented against the
onset of obesity are promoting healthy eating, improving physical activity
and implementing stress management practices
• Healthcare providers should offer weight management interventions for
preventing weight gain in normal-weight or overweight adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
16
• Treatment programmes should target
› Decreasing overall dietary intake
› Increasing physical activity
› Decreasing time spent in sedentary behaviour
› Addressing sleep behaviour
• Pharmacotherapy may be considered in adolescents if formal intensive lifestyle
modification programmes fail
› Liraglutide may be considered
• Metabolic and bariatric surgery may be considered for adolescents with
extreme obesity and significant comorbidities
Prevention
• Breast feeding should be encouraged and adherence to dietary guidelines
during weaning should be advocated
• Multicomponent interventions should be used in preventing obesity
› Dietary
› Physical activity
› Behavioural aspects
• Family and parental involvement should be encouraged
• School-based programme with community engagement should be advocated
• Environmental changes should be made to support obesity prevention
Recommendations
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Algorithms
Algorithm for the assessment and management of adult
obesity
BMI, body mass index.
*For patients >65 years old or with severe comorbidities, individualised assessment is essential.
**Refer to sections on pharmacotherapy and bariatric surgery for indications and contraindications.
Adults attending a clinic/
health centre
Measure
Height
Weight
Waist circumference
Results
BMI: ≥23 kg/m2 OR
Waist circumference: ≥90 cm for men and ≥80 cm for women
1. Healthy eating and physical
activity guidance for healthy
weight maintenance
2. Consider screening for
overweight associated conditions
1. Assess for overweight/obesity
associated conditions
2. Assess for overweight/obesogenic
medication use
1. Offer lifestyle interventions and
reassess
2. Reassess weight and
comorbidities periodically
3. Consider pharmacotherapy/
bariatric surgery**
1. Counselling
2. Follow up weight and
comorbidities monitoring
Patient ready to engage in
weight loss programme*
Calculate
BMI (kg/m2)
YES
YES
NO
NO
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
18
Algorithms
Algorithm for the assessment and management of
childhood obesity
*5 servings = 400 grams. BMI, body mass index.
• Assess eating habits, physical activity and lifestyle
behaviour
Assess
• Measure child’s height and weight
• Determine BMI and plot on BMI-for-age chart
Measure
• Provide Counselling on Healthy Behaviour
• At least 5 servings of fruit and vegetables,* choose
healthy snacks and eat breakfast
• ≥60 minutes of physical activity
• Limit recreational screen time
• Get enough sleep as per age recommendation
Counsel
Provide positive
reinforcement for
healthy behaviour
Normal weight
Detailed Assessment: History/Physical Assessment
Determine health risk factors
Investigations as necessary
Overweight
Obese
1
STAGE
• Diet: Address eating behaviours
• Physical activity: Start by achieving 30-60 minutes per day
• Reduce recreational screentime to <2 hours per day
• Continue diet and physical counselling
• Multidisciplinary team approach
• Medical screening for complications
2
STAGE
• As above
• Consider medical therapy or referral for bariatric surgery
3
STAGE
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Foreword
by Director General of Health, Malaysia
The health scenario in Malaysia has undergone significant changes in recent
years, resulting in a higher prevalence of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs),
such as obesity. While socio-economic development has improved the overall
quality of life, it has also led to lifestyle changes that are not always conducive
to good health, including unhealthy diets and sedentary habits. Although the
causes of obesity are complex and multifactorial, unhealthy lifestyle choices
remain a significant risk factor.
To effectively manage obesity, it is crucial to involve various healthcare
professionals, such as public health nutritionists and policymakers, to achieve
optimal results. Patients also play a critical role, and a holistic approach that
includes health education and lifestyle changes is essential for success. Recent
evidence shows that multiple approaches can be effective in managing obesity,
including various types of calorie restriction, exercise, pharmacotherapy, and
bariatric surgery. The Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) for the Management of
Obesity (2nd Edition) comprehensively reflect these approaches and have been
eagerly awaited.
This CPG is a valuable resource for healthcare professionals at all levels, from
primary to tertiary care, to deliver the best possible care for their patients. The
guidelines also focus on preventing overweight and obesity in all age groups,
especially in children and adolescents. I would like to extend my congratulations
to the members of the development committee for their hard work, and I hope
that this document will further elevate the standard of care for managing people
with obesity.
Datuk Dr Muhammad Radzi bin Abu Hassan
Director General of Health, Malaysia
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Preface
by the Chairperson of the Development Committee
The management of overweight and obesity is evolving. These guidelines are
motivated by the recognition that the prevalence of overweight and obesity
in Malaysia is increasing, and healthcare practitioners need to be alert to the
associated health risks. Based on the National Health and Morbidity Survey
2019, one in two Malaysians is overweight or obese. The excess weight is
often accompanied by hypertension, type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease,
metabolic-associated fatty liver disease, and other health issues.
The 1st edition of the Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Obesity
was developed almost two decades ago, and it is timely to have the guidelines
revised. There have been many breakthroughs and advances in the management
of obesity; through nutrition, different types of exercise, pharmacotherapy, and
bariatric surgery.
These guidelines used the principles of evidence-based medicine, and scientific
evidence was examined thoroughly by the committee, by meticulously expoloring
various treatment strategies and their effects on weight loss. Cognitive behaviour,
which helps people with obesity sustain lifestyle changes and improve their
quality of life, is emphasised in these guidelines. In addition, recognising that
overweight and obesity among children and adolescents in Malaysia is on the rise,
a dedicated chapter has been developed to comprehensively address evaluating
and managing this population.
We hope these clinical guidelines will help healthcare practitioners understand
the importance of weight management and be able to assess and manage their
patients effectively. It is equally important for people with obesity to obtain the
optimum standard of care that they deserved.
I would like to thank all members of the commitee for their tireless efforts in
producing the 2nd edition of the Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management
of Obesity.
Professor Dr Norlaila Mustafa
Senior Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
1. Obesity: the disease
1.1 Introduction
Obesity is a complex and chronic disease that has a heterogenous presentation.
The excess and unwanted body fat accumulation or adiposity lead to many
complications and increased risk of premature morbidity and mortality. Studies
have shown that overweight and obesity increased the risk of chronic health
conditions and reduced quality of life.1,2 [Level 1++] Hence, like any other chronic
disease, early recognition, appropriate and effective individualised intervention
and long-term support are essential.
Not only are overweight and obesity associated with chronic diseases like type
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hypertension, dyslipidaemia, metabolic syndrome,
osteoarthritis and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA), it also increases the risk of
several types of cancers.3 [Level 1+]
Apart from the impact that overweight and obesity have in reducing the quality
of life and well-being, the physical, psychosocial functioning and perceptions of
health of persons with obesity are greatly affected by the disease.4 [Level 1++]
Persons with obesity experience stigma and discrimination at the workplace and
at healthcare facilities. In addition to the morbidity and mortality associated with
obesity, there are significant healthcare expenditures resulting from obesity
associated medical conditions.
The total cost of obesity related healthcare spending in Malaysia is the highest
(19.36%), compared to other ASEAN countries (<10%). The estimated productive
years lost for males and females associated with obesity in Malaysia is 6-11 years
and 7-12 years respectively, and this has a negative impact to the overall economic
status of the country.5
1.2 Epidemiology
The increasing global prevalence of obesity is alarming. Malaysia is no exception.
The National Health Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019 with a significant number of
respondents (n=16,688) determined the prevalence of overweight and obesity
were 32.3% and 33.7%, respectively (body mass index; BMI based on Asian cut-off
scales).
Generally, the prevalence of obesity increases with age.6 [Level 3] Although the
prevalence of physically inactive adults was only 25.1% (NHMS 2015), the choice
of unhealthy foods seems to be the contributing factor for obesity. Apart from
the NHMS data, smaller studies in targeted populations have also demonstrated
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
a significant prevalence of obesity. The prevalence of overweight and obesity
in 2,221 adolescents between the age of 12 to 18 years were 17.0% and 14.9%,
respectively.7 A prospective nationwide study, The Malaysian Cohort (TMC),
involving more than 100,000 multi ethnic respondents from both urban and rural
settings reported a baseline prevalence of obesity at approximately 17.7%.8
1.3 Obesity as a disease
Obesity is a disease because it meets the definition — it decreases the life
expectancy and impairs the normal functioning of the body, has characteristic
signs and symptoms, increases morbidity and can be caused by genetic factors.
Obesity is a health threat that is associated with an increased risk of other chronic
diseases including T2DM, fatty liver, cardiovascular disease, OSA, stroke, dementia
and cancer.9
The overproduction of leptin secondary to excess adipose tissue and increased
food intake lead to abnormal energy expenditure. Additionally, obesity
contributes to mechanical problems within the body, namely pain of the hip
and knee joints. Obesity is also linked to reproductive problems in both men
and women and is associated with infertility and the risk of miscarriage. Obesity
has led to an increased risk of preventable early death, i.e., 29.5% for men and
14.6% for women compared to those with a normal BMI (19% for men and 11% for
women).10 [Level 1++]
1.4 Impact of weight loss on associated medical conditions
For persons who have weight related medical conditions, reducing weight benefits
their health and reduces the risk of additional problems related to obesity-related
complications.
A modest weight loss of 5% to 10% is associated with improvement in blood
pressure and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol.11 [Level 1++] This is
even more significant in those with a higher BMI where moderate weight loss is
associated with improvement in glucose, triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) cholesterol levels.12 [Level 1++] Weight loss of between 10% to 15% is needed
to improve other clinical conditions such as OSA, osteoarthritis and steatotic
hepatitis. Real-world data on the benefits of weight loss revealed the greatest
benefit for the reduction of cardiovascular risk factors that can be translated into
reduction of morbidity and mortality.13 [Level 3]
These clinical practice guidelines intend to provide healthcare providers
comprehensive evidence-based guidance for screening and managing overweight
and obesity, i.e., how to evaluate, treat, and manage a person with obesity while
incorporating individual needs and preferences for improved clinical outcomes.
1. Obesity: the disease
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
2. Assessment and diagnosis
2.1 Screening
All adults should be screened annually using body mass index (BMI) measurement;
a cut-off point of ≥23 kg/m2 should be used to initiate further evaluation of
overweight or obesity.14 [Level 2+]
However, measurement of body fat can be used as an alternative to BMI for
screening for obesity. Truncal obesity can be an indicator of obesity-associated
conditions, especially in those with lower BMI.
2.2 Diagnosis
The BMI is an international standard for measurement of obesity as recommended
by the World Health Organization (WHO), however, it was based on Europids
and did not accurately reflect other ethnic groups,15 e.g. in the Asian population,
where morbidity and mortality occur at lower BMI and waist circumference.16,17
The BMI is still the most widely accepted measurement of obesity as it is easy to
access, affordable to measure, and can conveniently be used to monitor weight
changes.
Asians generally have higher body fat percentages compared to Caucasians at
similar BMI cut-off points.18 [Level 1++]19 [Level 2] Evidence from Asian countries
reveal that the risk of comorbidities such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM),
hypertension and other cardiovascular (CV) risks, begin to increase at lower
BMI.20-23 [Level 1+]24 [Level 2+] Hence, the lower BMI cut-off points for overweight
and obesity for the Asian population (Table 2-1).
Classification of weight by BMI
The initial assessment of people with obesity should include height, weight and
BMI (kg/m2). The classification of weight by BMI for the Asian population and its
associated CV risk are shown in Table 2-1.
Body mass index (BMI) = Weight (kg) / height2 (m2)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 2-1. BMI-based weight classification for adults (>18 years old).1,25 [Level
1+]
Classification
BMI (kg/m2)
Risk of comorbidities
Underweight
<18.5
Low, but with increased risk
of other clinical problems
Normal
18.5-22.9
Optimal
Pre-obese
(Overweight)
23.0-27.4
Increased
Obese I
27.5-32.4
High
Obese II
32.5-37.4
Very high
Obese III
≥37.5
Extremely high
Limitations of BMI
Though studies have demonstrated the utility of BMI in assessing populationbased mortality and disease specific morbidity, it has some limitations;26 [Level
3] 27 [Level 2+] BMI could not distinguish the weight between muscle and fat.
The elderly tends to have a higher body fat composition as a result of age-related
loss of lean body mass (sarcopenia), which can be misclassified as a healthy BMI.28
Therefore, in this subgroup, the use of BMI for health risk assessment may be less
accurate.28
BMI also does not distinguish body fat distribution, a known determinant of
metabolic risk. Hence, the assessment of visceral adiposity which is a predictor for
the development of T2DM, hypertension, metabolic syndrome and CV mortality
risk, is a better parameter than total body fat alone.29 [Level 3]
Classification by waist circumference
Abdominal or visceral fat is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease
(CVD).30 Waist circumference (WC) is measured in the horizontal plane, midway
between the lowest ribs and the iliac crest (see Figure 2-A). Its measurement
correlates well with abdominal fat content irrespective of the BMI.31 [Level 2+]
WC is a very practical measurement for assessing excess fat around the abdomen.
There are other ways to measure body fat but most of these methods are not
readily available or convenient in clinical settings. These include:
• skin-fold calliper measurement
• hydrodensitometry
• dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
2. Assessment and diagnosis
• magnetic resonance imaging
• bioelectrical impedance (BEI)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
2. Assessment and diagnosis
Lowest palpable ribs
Midpoint between
lowest palpable rib
and the illiac crest
Illiac crest
WC measurement is most useful in individuals who are in the normal and
overweight (pre-obesity) BMI-based categories. For those with a BMI >35 kg/m2 it
is unnecessary to measure WC as it loses its predictive value.32 [Level 2+]
Figure 2-A. Measuring the waist circumference
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
The WHO recommends WC of ≥102 cm in men and ≥88 cm in women. However,
studies from Asian countries showed high prevalence of T2DM and CVD at lower
cut-off points of 90 cm in men and 80 cm in women.25,33 [Level 2+]
2.3 Assessment of obesity-related medical conditions
Patients who are pre-obese and above, should also be assessed for the following
conditions:
• Hypertension
• T2DM and Prediabetes
• Metabolic syndrome
• Dyslipidaemia
• Obstructive Sleep Apnoea (OSA)
• Osteoarthritis/Degenerative joints/back pain
• Metabolic Associated Fatty Liver Disease (MAFLD)
• Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
• Cancer
Current medications history should also be elicited as some drugs can contribute
to weight gain (Table 2-2).
Table 2-2. Medications that may contribute to weight gain.
Classes
Name of Medications
Antidepressants
• Mirtazapine
• Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI)
• Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
Antiepileptic drugs or
mood stabilizers
• Gabapentin
• Pregabalin
• Carbamazepine
• Divalproex
• Lithium
• Valproic acid
• Vigabatrin
Antihistamines
• Cetirizine
• Cyproheptadine
2. Assessment and diagnosis
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Classes
Name of Medications
Antipsychotics
• Quetiapine
• Clozapine
• Olanzapine
• Risperidone
• Thioridazine
Alpha-blockers
• Terazosin
Beta-blockers
• Metoprolol
• Atenolol
• Propranolol
Glucocorticoids
• Prednisolone
• Methylprednisolone
• Hydrocortisone
Glucose lowering drugs
• Insulin
• Sulfonylureas
• Meglitinides
• Thiazolidinediones
Hormonal Agents
• Progestins
2.4 Targets for control
The principal goals in obesity management are to:34 [Level 1]
• Prevent complications by trying to keep the patient metabolically healthy (if
possible)
• Prevent or to treat existing comorbidities
• Fight against stigmatisation of people with obesity
• Restore the individual’s well-being, positive body image and self-esteem
The treatment goals should be tailored to the complications as listed in Table
2-335 [Level 1] that includes the predictive weight loss as an indicator of expected
reduction of cardiometabolic risks. The expected weight loss depends on the
pathology and ranges from 5%-15%.34 [Level 1]
2. Assessment and diagnosis
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
28
Table 2-3. Treatment targets based on diagnosis in the medical management
of patients with obesity
Diagnosis
Weight loss
target (%)
Expected outcome
Metabolic syndrome
10
Prevention of T2DM
T2DM
5-15
 in HbA1C and glucose
lowering drugs
Diabetes remission if short
duration
Dyslipidaemia
5-15
 TG and LDL
 HDL
Hypertension
5-15
 BP and medications
PCOS
5-15
Ovulation
 hirsutism and androgen
levels
 insulin sensitivity
Asthma
7-8
Improvement of FEV1
Sleep apnoea
7-11
 of apnoea/hypopnoea index
MAFLD
10-40
 intrahepatocellular lipids and
inflammation
Note: Weight loss is dependent on the nature of the comorbidity.
BP, blood pressure; FEV1, forced expiratory volume at 1 second; HDL, high density lipoprotein; LDL, low density
lipoprotein; MAFLD, metabolic associated fatty liver disease; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome; T2DM, type 2
diabetes mellitus; TG, triglyceride.
Adapted from Garvey WT, et al. Endocr Pract 2016.35 [Level 1+]
Recommendations 1
• Screening with BMI and WC measurements should be done yearly.
[Grade B]
• Cut off BMI values that should be used are: pre-obesity (overweight) -23 kg/m2
and obesity - >27.5 kg/m2
[Grade A]
• Individuals diagnosed with pre-obesity and obesity should be assessed for
associated conditions, co-occurring medical conditions and current treatments
that could cause obesity.
[Grade A]
2. Assessment and diagnosis
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
3. Psychological and
behavioural therapy
3.1 Psychological aspect of obesity
Persons with overweight and obesity struggle with various mental health issues
such as weight bias, stigma and discrimination. These are generally negative
attitudes, beliefs and behaviours towards individuals who are obese and include
prejudice and stereotype labelling such as being lazy, unmotivated, lacking willpower
and discipline.
Stigmatising being overweight and obese is not helpful as it is associated with
reduced motivation to engage in healthy behaviours leading to avoidance of
exercise and non-adherence to diet and medication. It also has mental health
consequences such as body image dissatisfaction, reduced quality of life, low selfesteem and poor overall wellbeing.36,37 [Level 1+]38 [Level 1-] In addition to poor
health outcomes, weight discrimination may shorten life expectancy.39 [Level 2+]
A recent systematic review found that obesity is associated with depressive
disorders, anxiety disorders (Odds ratio [OR] 1.27-1.40), personality disorders (OR
1.2-1.95), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (OR 1.44) and eating disorders
(OR 4.5). There is a bidirectional relationship between obesity and depression
where people with obesity have a higher risk of developing depression (OR 1.215.8) while people with depression have a higher risk of becoming obese (OR 1.183.76), with a stronger association observed in women.40 [Level 1-]
Healthcare providers should identify if patients with obesity or overweight
have pre-existing mental health issues. These patients should be referred to a
psychiatrist for diagnosis and to optimise their mental health status. They should
also ensure that the psychological and behavioural interventions to treat obesity
are done appropriately and effectively (refer to the relevant clinical practice
guidelines for screening of specific mental disorders). Individuals with binge
eating disorder can be identified by using the Binge Eating Scale tool (refer
Appendix 2).
3.2 Psychological and behavioural interventions for obesity
and weight management
Psychological and behavioural interventions for overweight and obesity aim to
help people with obesity to sustain lifestyle changes that improve self-esteem,
health, functioning and quality of life.41 [Level 1++] The majority of these
interventions are cognitive-based and are typically used in combination with
lifestyle interventions.42 [Level 1++] When behaviour therapy is combined with
diet and exercise, it resulted in a greater weight reduction compared to diet or
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
exercise alone. Increasing the intensity of the behavioural intervention further
increased the weight reduction (weighted mean difference [WMD] -2.3 kg, 95%
CI -1.4, -3.3).42 [Level 1++]
Behavioural interventions aid adherence to lifestyle modifications and medications
by enhancing self-efficacy (i.e. belief and confidence to overcome barriers to
desired outcomes) and providing motivation (i.e. personal meaningful reasons to
change).41 [Level 1++] These types of multicomponent approaches incorporated
by trained health providers are more effective in the long term compared to a
single component approach.41 [Level 1++] These strategies must be based on
values that matter most to the patients at each phase, from working on motivation
and goal setting, and to when the patients are facing setback.
Multicomponent approaches can include the following:
• Enhancing communication and avoiding stigmatising
• Psychoeducation
• Motivational interviewing and behavioural strategies
• Psychological interventions
Enhancing communication and avoidance of stigmatisation
Communication is vital in obesity management and it is crucial to avoid stigmatising
the individual as it produces negative consequences.
Approaches in communication may include,34 [Level 1++]
• Communicating with empathy without negative judgements and bias
• Recognising that obesity has a complex multifactorial aetiology and that it
is not fully under voluntary control
• Asking the individual first, if they are willing to speak about their weight
before introducing the discussion around obesity, especially if their primary
consult was for an unrelated cause
• Acknowledging that an individual with obesity has already been chronically
exposed to negative experiences (such as stigmatisation and discrimination)
when navigating the health system
• Avoiding the use of inappropriate or hurtful words in order to maintain a
positive therapeutic relationship
• Referring to the individual as a person with obesity rather than “an obese
person” will be less stigmatising
3. Psychological and behavioural therapy
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Psychoeducation
When educating patients, the emphasis is to work on achievable behavioural and
psychological goals to achieve improved health, function and quality of life, and
not just on the amount of weight loss.41 [Level 1++]
Motivational interviewing
Motivational interviewing is a collaborative, goal-oriented and patient-centred
guided-style counselling method depending on where they are on the Stages of
Change*.43,44 [Level 1++]
These are the basic steps of practicing motivational interviewing:
• Engagement — listen and understand the patient’s background, perspective,
concerns, past experiences, strengths, and vulnerabilities
• Focus — focus on one behaviour at a time
• Evoke — evoke the patient’s internal motivation by connecting the adoption of
healthy behavioural change to their goals, values and concerns
• Plan — once the patient is ready to change, make a joint decision to address the
specific situation(s) where behavioural change is needed
*The stages of change include, precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, maintenance
and relapse.
Behavioural strategies
Behavioural strategies improved adherence to lifestyle intervention programmes
in adults with obesity.34,41,45 [Level 1++] Healthcare providers can be trained to
effectively implement the wide range of behavioural interventions available.41
[Level 1++]
Behavioural and cognitive interventions
3. Psychological and behavioural therapy
• Goal setting and action planning: Setting specific, measurable, achievable,
relevant and time-bound (SMART) goals that can be adhered to:
> Specific — a behavioural goal is broken into small manageable specific
steps which are documented
> Measurable — the goal and the steps taken to achieve it must be
measurable to monitor progress and to know when the goal has been
achieved
> Achievable — the set goal should not be too difficult to achieve and make
the steps for accomplishing the goal achievable
> Realistic and Relevant — a goal must be realistic, relevant and be enjoyable
to the individual
> Time-based — develop deadlines for achieving key milestones and goals
to measure the progress
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
3. Psychological and behavioural therapy
• Self-monitoring: Monitoring of diet, exercise and mood to increase selfawareness, while getting feedback will enhance motivation (refer Appendix
2 for a sample format)
• Stimulus control: Uses techniques to modify the external environment to
make it conducive for supporting behavioural changes
• Problem solving: An essential technique for when a patient faces barriers
or setbacks to behavioural changes. It involves identifying and analysing
issues and providing value-based solutions/options to move forward.
The “IDEAL” approach will help a person to identify and understand the
components in the problem-solving process:46
› Identify problems and consider them as opportunities to develop
solutions. Complex problems may have to be divided into multiple
simpler components so that they can be solved easily
› Define value-based goals in problematic situations
› Explore possible strategies to achieve goals. Utilise a systematic approach
by listening and analysing each option
› Anticipate outcomes and Act on the strategies
› Look back at the effects of the strategies and Learn from experience
• Cognitive reframing: This is a technique to see a situation in a different
perspective, usually from an irrational point of view or challenging situation
to a more rational view or outlook
› E.g. — “I only lost 1 kg this month. This is hopeless” to “I successfully lost 1
kg this month. Even though the amount is small, I also lost an inch off my
waist, and I feel energised. This is still an achievement”
• Cognitive restructuring: Techniques in cognitive restructuring are used to
make a person notice their irrational thought patterns and change it. This is
done under a therapist’s guidance. Steps in cognitive restructuring are:
› Self-monitoring — noticing the cognitive error the patient is having
› Questioning assumptions and thoughts that impede adopting healthy
behaviours or affecting their mood
› Gathering evidence — listing the evidence that support or negate these
thoughts, assumptions or beliefs
› Analysing the evidence — listing the advantages or disadvantages of
maintaining these cognitive distortions
› Generating alternatives — coming up with rational alternative explanations
to replace the distortions which are inaccurate and unhelpful
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Psychological interventions
Psychological interventions such as Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) and,
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy are effective. Acceptance and Commitment
therapies focus on value-directed actions and commitment to multicomponent
behavioural interventions.41 [Level 1] CBT when combined with a diet or exercise
intervention was found to increase weight loss compared to diet or exercise
alone (WMD -4.9 kg; 95% CI -7.3, -2.4).42 [Level 1++] As both these methods are
intensive, patients may need a referral to a mental health professional.
Recommendations 2
• Multicomponent psychological and behavioural therapy approaches should
be integrated in managing people with obesity
[Grade A]
› Enhancing communication and avoiding stigmatisation
› Psychoeducation
› Motivational interviewing and behavioural strategies
› Psychological interventions
3. Psychological and behavioural therapy
• Relapse prevention and management: As relapses are common in weight
management, some strategies to prevent this are the early identification of
high-risk situations and lapses and devising a plan to overcome high-risk
situations and adapting to new coping mechanisms.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
4. Management of obesity
in adults
4.1 Comprehensive lifestyle modification
Comprehensive lifestyle modification when managing persons with overweight
and obesity includes modifying eating (dietary) and activity habits. Hence, the
goal of lifestyle interventions for obesity treatment is to achieve weight loss
through a decrease in calories consumed and an increase in energy expended.47
[Level 4]
A 6-month structured lifestyle intervention that included dietary counselling and
a physical activity programme among overweight and obese women in a low
socioeconomic community setting, produced a small percentage of weight loss
and decreased visceral fat compared to the control group. There was, however,
a significant increase in skeletal muscle mass (0.13 kg) in the intervention group
compared to the control group (-0.37 kg), p=0.033 throughout the study period.
Unfortunately, this was not sustained during the maintenance period.48 [Level 2-]
In a workplace setting, a 4-month lifestyle intervention that incorporated diet
changes, physical activity and behaviour modification education delivered through
face-to-face, online (web-based) or printed education material (control group),
the face-to-face group showed the greatest body weight reduction (-5.80 kg)
compared to the online and the control groups (-1.12 kg and -1.82 kg, respectively).
The face-to-face group also had the highest reductions in waist circumference
(WC) and energy intake and improvement in lipid profile.49 [Level 2-]
4.1.1 Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) for adults
Treating obesity requires achieving a state of negative energy balance. Hence,
dietary intervention for obesity should primarily address the reduction in energy
(calorie) intake. There are many dietary approaches that reduce calorie intake,
some more than others, and the degree of weight loss generally reflects the size of
this reduction.47 [Level 4] The goals of MNT are to facilitate weight loss, prevent
weight gain, improve cardiometabolic outcomes and optimise nutrient adequacy.
Weight management interventions by a dietitian
MNT for weight management reduced body mass index (BMI) (-1.5 kg/m2, 95%
CI -1.74,-1.26 kg/m2), improved percentage weight loss (-4.01%, 95% CI -5.26,
-2.75%), WC reduction (-3.45 cm, 95% CI -4.39, -2.51 cm), systolic blood pressure
(BP) reduction (-3.04 mmHg, 95% CI -5.10, -0.98 mmHg), diastolic BP reduction
(-1.99 mmHg, 95% CI -3.02, -0.96 mmHg) and fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
reduction among individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM; -12.47 mg/dL,
95% CI -17.50, -7.44 mg/dL).50 [Level 1++]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
4. Management of obesity in adults
Weight loss goals
MNT prescribed for <6 months reported a significant weight loss of approximately
0.5 to 1 kg per week. 6-12 months of MNT resulted in a significant mean weight
loss of up to 10% of body weight. A sustained weight loss of 3-5% is likely to result
in clinically meaningful improvement in cardiometabolic outcomes.47,51 [Level 4]
Therefore, realistic weight loss goals are,
• Up to 1 kg per week
• Up to 10% of baseline body weight
• A total of 3-5% of baseline body weight in the presence of cardiovascular (CV)
risk factors (e.g., hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and hyperglycaemia)
Energy restriction
A systematic review of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) showed that energy
restrictive diets with 300-1000 kcal/day deficit from the daily energy requirement
or usual intake, or the recommended 1200-1800 kcal/day energy intake in
metabolically healthy obese adults resulted in reduction of BMI (-2.70 kg/m2, 95%
CI -4.01, -1.39), BP (systolic BP: -4.73 mmHg; 95% CI -7.12, -2.23, and diastolic BP:
-2.75 mmHg; 95% CI -4.30, -1.21) and triglycerides (-0.11 mmol/l; 95% CI -0.16,
-0.06).52 [Level 1++]
To determine short (6 months) and long-term (12 months) weight loss based on
calorie reduction, obese women were randomly prescribed with 1,000 kcal/day or
1500 kcal/day balanced diet combined with increased walking (10,000 steps/day
or 3,000 steps above baseline) for 6 months.53 [Level 1+] In the short-term (first 6
months), weight loss was greater in the 1000 kcal/day group (p=0.045). However,
baseline caloric consumption moderated the effect of treatment on weight gain
— participants with baseline intakes of ≥2000 kcal/day who were assigned 1000
kcal/day diets were significantly more susceptible to weight regain than those
assigned 1500 kcal/day from months 7-12 (p=0.049).
In another RCT, calorie restrictive diet alone (1,500 ± 200 kcal/day) was not as
effective as combining it with physical activity (30-60 minutes/day of moderate
intensity exercise) and behavioural modification in reducing BMI, WC, body fat
and increased fat-free mass in obese women.54 [Level 1-]
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Calorie restriction diet should be individualised based on age, sex, readiness
level, physical activity level, presence of comorbidities and patient preference.
To achieve and maintain nutrient adequacy and reduce caloric intake, any one of
the following strategies can be used to achieve an initial weight loss of 0.5-1 kg/
week:51 [Level 4]
• 1,200-1,500 kcal/day for women
• 1,500-1,800 kcal/day for men
• Reduce daily energy by 500-750 kcal from the usual daily intake
Nutrient inadequacy with caloric restriction has been reported. The extent of
inadequacy and the nutrients affected are dependent on the composition of
the diet followed and the nutritional needs of the individual.55 [Level 4] The use
of very low calorie diet (VLCD), i.e. <800 kcal/day) as part of a comprehensive
treatment plan should be prescribed under the supervision of a medical team that
includes a dietitian.55 [Level 4]
Intermittent fasting
There are various types of intermittent fasting. These include time restrictive
diets (restricting the number of hours of eating per day) or alternate day fasting
(restriction of calorie consumed during fasting and non-fasting days). The degree
of weight loss depends on the cumulative caloric restriction and not the duration
of the fast. However, a conclusion on its effectiveness cannot be reached as
clinical studies, and systematic reviews and meta-analyses of clinical studies
differ in their conclusions due to wide study variability.56-60
Alternate day fasting (consumption of 25% and 125% of usual energy intake
on fast day and non-fast day, respectively with dietitian consultation) or daily
energy restriction (consumption of 75% of usual energy intake with dietitian
consultation) produced significant weight loss in a 12-month intervention among
persons with obesity.61 [Level 1-]
• The total weight loss was 6.0% (95% CI -8.5%, -3.6%) in the alternate day
fasting group and 5.3% (95% CI -7.5%, -3.0%) in the daily energy restriction
group compared to the control group (no energy restriction)
• Both diets showed no difference for weight loss, weight maintenance, diet
adherence or improvement in CV risk
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Macronutrient modification
A sample menu plan and the food groups exchange lists can be found in Appendix 3.
Low carbohydrate or balanced isocaloric diet
Both short- and long-term studies comparing low carbohydrate diet (i.e.,
carbohydrate <45% of total energy combined with high fat or high protein
diet) and balanced isocaloric diet (i.e., 40-65% carbohydrate from total energy)
in overweight and obese adults with or without T2DM showed no difference in
weight loss at 3-6 months (-0.74 kg; 95% CI -1.49, 0.01) and at 1-2 years (-0.48 kg;
95% CI -1.44, 0.49). There was also no significant difference in CV risk factors.62
[Level 1++]
Low fat or low carbohydrate diet
Reduction in weight, WC and body fat percentage were not significantly different
when healthy adults with overweight and obesity without T2DM were randomly
assigned to healthy low fat (24-29% of energy intake) or low carbohydrate (2330% of energy intake) diets for 12 months. The mean between group difference
was 0.7 kg (95% CI -0.2, 1.6).63 [Level 1+]
• Both groups produced weight loss – mean weight change in the low-fat diet
group was -5.3 kg (95% CI -5.9, -4.7) and in the low carbohydrate diet group
was -6.0 kg (95% CI -6.6, -5.4)
• Both diets improved lipid profiles and lowered BP, insulin and glucose levels
• Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) concentrations increased for
participants in the low carbohydrate diet group
• LDL-C reduction significantly favoured the low-fat diet
• High density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) concentration significantly increased
while triglyceride concentrations significantly reduced in the low carbohydrate
diet group
Isocaloric diet containing either high (53% from total energy) or low (14% from
total energy) carbohydrate, and limited in saturated fatty acids in adults with
obesity and T2DM, showed a comparable reduction of body weight and BP.64
[Level 1+] The low carbohydrate diet resulted in greater reduction in lipid profile,
FPG and requirements for glucose lowering drugs in the 2-year clinical trial.
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Glycaemic index (GI) and glycaemic load (GL)
In a meta-analysis of RCTs, low GI/GL was not superior to high GI/GL diets on body
weight reduction in adults with BMI ≥25 kg/m2. However, low GI/GL diets showed
greater body weight reductions in adults with BMI ≥30 kg/m2 (-0.93 kg, 95% CI
-1.73, -0.12). Compared to high GI/GL diets, low GI/GL diets reduced FPG (-1.97 mg/
dL, 95% CI -3.76, 0.19) and fasting insulin (-0.55 µU/mL, 95% CI -0.95, -0.15). No
differences in fat mass, fat-free mass, WC and lipid profile were observed between
low GI/GL and high GI/GL diets. 65
Meal replacement
In a meta-analysis of RCTs, meal replacement-based plans as part of a structured
calorie restriction diet that replaced ≥60% of the total daily energy intake,
replacing 3 meals/day or an intervention duration of 3-6 months resulted in
greater weight loss than conventional food-based low energy diet.66 [Level 1++]
Recommendations 3
• MNT provided by a dietitian is recommended for adults with overweight and
obesity especially those with comorbidities.
[Grade A]
• Dietary prescriptions should be individualised to the individual’s motivation
level, age, sex, comorbidities, physical activity level and weight loss goals.
[Grade C]
• Calorie restriction diets should be combined with either low carbohydrate or
low fat intake.
[Grade A]
• Meal replacement or intermittent fasting may be used as alternative methods
of calorie restrictions
[Grade A]
4.1.2 Physical activity
Exercise is an integral part of any weight loss programme. Although physical activity
and exercise are used interchangeably, their definitions are slightly different.67
[Level 1++]
• Physical activity means all movement that creates energy expenditure
• Exercise is a planned, structured, repetitive and purposeful physical activity
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Physical activity and exercise integrated with other components of lifestyle
modification such as energy restriction is significant in reducing weight and
improving health.68 [Level 1++] [Grade A] Physical activity or exercise alone
without dietary intervention or calorie reduction produces a small impact on
weight loss.69,70 [Level 1-]
Physical activity and exercise can reduce obesity level by increasing total energy
expenditure, hence promoting a negative energy balance.
• Moderate-intensity physical activity of at least 150 minutes/week has demonstrated
weight maintenance.
• A longer duration of more than 300 minutes/week was associated with weight
maintenance after weight loss.71 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
Table 4-1 shows the duration of aerobic physical activity and the associated
expected weight loss.
Table 4-1. The duration of aerobic physical activity and expected weight loss
Aerobic Physical Activity
Amount Weight Loss Amount
<150 min per week
No weight loss or minimal weight loss
150–225 min per week
Weight loss of 2 to 3 kg
225–420 min per week
Weight loss of 5 to 7.5 kg
200–300 min per week
Weight maintenance after weight loss
Adapted from Donnelly JE, et al. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009.71
Persons with obesity should get clearance on their health and physical conditions
before embarking on an exercise programme. This is essential to ensure that they
are able to perform any physical activity or exercise safely.
Types of physical activity or exercise
The physical activity or exercise utilised for weight loss include aerobic training,
resistance training and lifestyle physical activity (Table 4-2).
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 4-2. Categories of physical activity/exercises with examples
Type of physical
activity/exercise
Examples
Aerobic training
• Low impact aerobic exercise – swimming, cycling,
walking, rowing. These can be supervised
programmes
• Higher impact aerobic exercise – Running and
jumping rope
• High-intensity interval training (HIIT) –
Alternating short bursts of high-intensity exercise
and recovery periods
Moderate-intensity continuous training (MICT),
which is frequently recommended for weight
loss, compared to HIIT showed similar efficacy in
body fat mass loss, WC reduction and body fat
percentage. However, HIIT requires less time.72-74
[Level 1-]
Resistance training
• Free weights – using classic strength training
tools such as dumbbells, barbells and kettlebells
• Weight machines – devices that have adjustable
seats with handles attached either to weights or
hydraulics
• Resistance bands – provides resistance when
stretched
• Suspension equipment – uses gravity and the
body weight
• Bodyweight exercise – uses only body weight
without requiring any equipment, e.g., walking
lunges, glute bridges, push-ups and side planks
Lifestyle physical
activity
• Getting more steps using a pedometer
• Increasing activity during the day such as
climbing stairs instead of using the elevator
There was no specific weight loss benefit associated with a specific kind of
physical activity (aerobic, resistance, or lifestyle), but evidence indicates higher
intensity activity or exercise has better effects on weight loss compared to lower
intensity activity (Table 4-3).75,76 [Level 1+]
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 4-3. Expected initial weight loss and possibility of clinically significant
weight loss from different types of exercise training programmes
Exercise Type
Range of Expected
Weight Loss
Chance of Clinically
Significant
Weight Loss
Aerobic exercise training
only
0 to 3%
Possible, but only with
high exercise volumes
Resistance training only
0 to 1%
Very unlikely
Aerobic and resistance
training
0 to 3%
Possible, but only with
high volumes of aerobic
exercise training
Caloric restriction
combined with aerobic
exercise training
5 to 15%
Possible
Prescription of physical activity/exercise
For adults who have never performed exercise or not physically active, prescribe
undertaking small amounts of physical activity or exercise, and slowly increasing
the frequency, intensity and duration over time.77 [Level 3] [Grade C] For
individuals with comorbid conditions clinical assessment by a healthcare provider
to ensure the suitability and type of exercise should be performed.
For an appropriate exercise prescription, one should be considered using the
FITT formula:
F = Frequency
I = Intensity
T = Time (duration)
T = Type of exercise
Physical activity or exercise (aerobic or resistance exercise) can be done in one
session or accumulated over the day. Each level of intensity and duration should
be maintained for at least 1 to 2 weeks before increasing it further. A regimen of
physical activity or exercise should start with:
1. Increasing the number of steps (walking) or movement and daily chores
2. This is followed by a gradual progression of aerobic exercise training
3. Strength or resistance exercise is introduced
4. Flexibility exercises to attain the full range of joint motion can then be
incorporated
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Performing physical activity and exercise should not create any problems for
persons with obesity, and caution should be exercised.
• Progressing too rapidly will result in muscle soreness, fatigue, increased cardiac
risk, and decreased motivation
• Each exercise period should include warm-up and cool-down periods
• They should be encouraged to drink plenty of water before, during and after
exercise to prevent dehydration
• They should be advised to stop when there are abnormal signs during physical
activity or exercise, e.g., chest pain and excessive breathlessness
Physical activity/exercise in person with obesity >65 years old
Physical activity or exercise is also encouraged among those above 65 years of
age. This is to reduce the weight gain as well as to minimize the risk of developing
sarcopenia in this group.78 [Level3] [Grade C] Similar to individuals with
comorbidities, older individuals should also be assessed by a healthcare provider
for suitability to start an exercise programme and the type of exercise prescribed.
For older adults,
• Start with small amounts of physical activity and gradually increase the frequency,
intensity and duration over time
• Introduce muscle strengthening activities at moderate or greater intensity that
involve all major muscle groups on 2 or more days a week. Resistance training
should not be performed on consecutive days for the same muscle group
• Encourage them to limit the amount of time spent being sedentary
• Ensure that they perform varied multicomponent physical activity that
emphasize functional balance and strength training at moderate or greater
intensity, on 3 or more days a week, to enhance functional capacity and to
prevent falls
Recommendations 4
• Physical activity should be encouraged in all individuals with obesity
[Grade A]
› A minimum of 150 minutes/week (30 minutes/day) progressing to 300
minutes/week (60 minutes/day) of moderate intensity
› or at least 75-150 minutes/week of vigorous intensity is required for weight
loss.
• Combination of both moderate- and vigorous-intensity activity throughout
the week should be encouraged to maintain weight loss.
[Grade B]
• Both resistance and aerobic exercise or activities should be emphasised to
improve physical function and well-being.
[Grade B]
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
4.2 Pharmacotherapy
When used as an adjunct to lifestyle intervention (i.e., diet, exercise and behavioural
modification), pharmacotherapy is effective in reducing weight by at least 5%.79
[Level 1++]
Pharmacotherapy should be considered when weight loss goals or weight
maintenance cannot be achieved with lifestyle interventions alone.79 [Level
1++] Hence, anti-obesity treatments must only be used as an adjunct to lifestyle
interventions.
A patient may require pharmacotherapy to:
1. Aid compliance with dietary restriction
2. Augment diet-related weight loss
3. Achieve weight maintenance after satisfactory weight loss
As arbitrarily determined by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA),
pharmacotherapy is indicated in people with a BMI of ≥30 kg/m2 or ≥27 kg/m2
with weight-related medical comorbidities.35,79 [Level 1++] The indications for
initiation of anti-obesity treatments are listed in Table 4-4. When considering
initiating anti-obesity drugs, the risks to a patient from continuing obesity need
to be balanced against the risks from the drugs’ side effects.
Table 4-4. Indications for anti-obesity treatments35 [Level 1++]
Indications
Associated risk factors
BMI 27.0-29.9 kg/m2 with
associated risk factors
• Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
• Hypertension
• Dyslipidaemia
• Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
BMI ≥30 kg/m2 with or without risk
factors
BMI, body mass index.
Pharmacotherapy reinforces behavioural and lifestyle strategies to create a
negative energy balance.
• Several medications approved for weight loss such as combining phentermine
and topiramate, combining bupropion and naltrexone, liraglutide and semaglutide
reduce appetite and promote adherence to reduced dietary caloric intake80
• Orlistat reduces fat absorption and promotes avoidance of high-fat energy
dense foods80
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Additionally, pharmacotherapy clinically leads to improvement in weight-related
quality of life and physical functioning.81 [Level 1++]
As obesity is a chronic disease, pharmacotherapy should be considered longterm.35 [Level 1++] Short courses of pharmacotherapy for ≤6 months do not
result in sustained weight loss after medication discontinuation. Once treatment
ceases, there will be rebound weight gain.82 [Level 1+] 80 [Level 4]
• However, sympathomimetic amines such as phentermine alone should not
be used long-term in patients with uncontrolled hypertension or a history of
heart disease as long-term prospective studies on CV outcomes have not been
conducted80 [Level 4]
The USFDA has determined that a weight loss of ≤5% is considered a clinically
important outcome with a positive impact on CV risk factors (i.e. BP, glucose and
lipid levels).47 [Level 1++] 80 [Level 4]
• If a patient does not respond with a >5% weight loss after 3 months of initiating
anti-obesity treatment or if there are significant safety or tolerability issues,
the drug should be discontinued80 [Level 4] and alternative medications or
treatment approaches should be considered instead82 [Level 1+]
Given that anti-obesity medications have significant side effects, including CV
side-effects, they should be used with medical supervision and careful monitoring.
Efficacy and safety should be reviewed frequently in all patients in face-to-face
visits:80 [Level 4]
• Monthly for the first 3 months
• At least every 3 months thereafter
4.2.1 Anti-obesity drugs
At present, there are 5 USFDA approved medications for obesity: orlistat,
phentermine (for not more than 3 months), combining phentermine and
topiramate, combining naltrexone and buproprion, high dose liraglutide (3 mg
daily) and high dose semaglutide (2.4 mg weekly).
• In the absence of head-to head trials, the 3 most effective medications in terms
of weight loss compared to placebo are high-dose semaglutide, combination of
phentermine and topiramate and high dose liraglutide79,84 [Level 1++]
• There is only one head-to-head RCT available, i.e., comparing orlistat and
liraglutide 3 mg. The results demonstrated that liraglutide had greater efficacy
for weight loss79,83 [Level 1++]
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
In Malaysia, the anti-obesity drugs available for managing obesity are orlistat,
phentermine, high dose liraglutide and semaglutide. Phentermine, while not
USFDA-approved for the long-term management of obesity, is registered for use
in Malaysia as an anti-obesity drug. However, it should be used only for a duration
of 3 months and in a cyclical manner.
When selecting an anti-obesity drug, the decision should be made based on its
efficacy, side-effects and cost.
Types of anti-obesity drugs
Anti-obesity drugs can be classified into two groups, i.e., those acting on the
gastrointestinal (GI) system to reduce fat absorption and those acting on the
central nervous system (CNS) and have been summarised in Table 4-5.
Drugs acting on the GI system
1. Oral orlistat
Orlistat is the only non-systemically acting drug available for the long-term
treatment of obesity. It is a selective pancreatic lipase inhibitor – inhibiting the
breakdown of dietary triglycerides into absorbable free fatty acids. As a result,
~30% of ingested triglycerides are excreted, mainly in the stools, leading to a
caloric deficit.85
Efficacy of orlistat compared to placebo in weight reduction:79 [Level 1++]
• Odds Ratio (OR) 2.69 for 5% weight loss
• OR 2.41 for 10% weight loss
• Mean weight loss in excess of placebo was 2.6 kg
At 3-4 years of treatment, Orlistat together with lifestyle intervention or VLCD
significantly reduced weight and maintained weight loss with minimal side
effects.86,87 [Level 1+]
Orlistat also causes reduction in BP and glucose levels88 [Level 1++] and,
improvement in the lipid profile (total cholesterol, LDL-C, triglycerides and
HDL-C).89 [Level 1+]
Side effects of orlistat include:90,91
• Abdominal discomfort such as borbygmi and cramps
• Liquid or oily stool
• Faecal incontinence and oily spotting
• Flatulence with discharge
• Reduced absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E and K)
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
• Mildly raised liver transaminase
• Increased urinary oxalate that might cause acute oxalate nephropathy
• Affecting absorption of certain drugs such as levothyroxine and/or iodine salts,
cyclosporine, anticonvulsants and antiretroviral drugs
Orlistat is contraindicated in individuals with malabsorption syndromes and those
with cholestasis.
Drugs acting on the CNS
2. Oral phentermine
Oral
phentermine
is
a
noradrenergic
sympathomimetic
amine
agent
(dimethylphenethylamine hydrochloride) and was approved by the USFDA in
1959 for short-term use as an adjunct to lifestyle inventions for management of
obesity. It appears to act within the hypothalamus and upregulates noradrenaline.
This results in the stimulation of β2-adregenic receptors that induces appetite
suppression.92 It also inhibits monoamine oxidase, potentiating the effect of
serotonin and increasing the basal metabolic rate.92
The efficacy of phentermine compared to placebo for weight reduction:
• Mean weight loss – 4.43 kg (Standard mean difference [SMD] 1.37, 95% CI -1.55,
-1.19)93 [Level1++]
• 86.5% of patients achieved 5% weight loss94 [Level 1+]
• 48.6% of patients achieved 10% weight loss94 [Level 1+]
Phentermine also reduced total cholesterol and LDL-C (-0.49 mmol/l and -0.33
mmol/l, respectively).94 [Level 1+] However, there were no significant changes in
triglyceride, HDL-C and FPG levels, and systolic and diastolic BP.
Side effects of phentermine are related to its sympathomimetic stimulation:94
[Level 1+]
• Insomnia
• Palpitations
• Increased heart rate (SMD=0.64; 95% CI 0.35, 0.92)93 [Level 1++]
• Dry mouth
3. Oral phentermine/topiramate
Phentermine stimulates the hypothalamic release of norepinephrine without
any effect on serotonin89 whilst topiramate is a gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) receptor modulator that was first developed as an anticonvulsant.80 In
combination, phentermine and topiramate increase energy expenditure, and
reduce energy efficiency and caloric intake.89
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
The benefits of combining these drugs are:89
• It provides greater weight loss than either drug alone
• Using a lower dose of each drug hence, minimising their side effects
• Targeting multiple mechanisms to alter the energy balance
The efficacy of phentermine/topiramate compared to placebo for weight loss
are:79 [Level 1++]
• OR 9.1 for 5% weight loss
• OR 11.3 for 10% weight loss
• Mean weight loss in excess of placebo was 8.8 kg
Though phentermine alone has been associated with elevations in BP, the higher
dose of phentermine/topiramate, i.e., 15 mg/92 mg has demonstrated reduction
in BP. This combination also reduces glucose and lipid levels.89 [Level 1++]
Side effects of the combination treatment are:89 [Level 1++]
• Most common – paraesthesia, dry mouth, constipation, dysgeusia and insomnia
• Mood-related (depression, anxiety and irritability) and cognition-related
(disturbance in attention) are seen at higher doses (15 mg/92 mg) – use with
caution in patients with known depressive or anxiety disorders
• Non-significant increase in resting heart rate secondary to the sympathomimetic
action of phentermine can occur at high doses (15 mg/92 mg)
• Teratogenic effects such as cleft lip/palate – due to topiramate if taken during
pregnancy (Pregnancy category D)
4. Oral naltrexone/bupropion
Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist80 used in alcohol and opioid dependence.
It blocks opioid-mediated pro-opiomelancortin (POMC) auto-inhibition by
endogenous β-endorphins.95
The effects of bupropion are:96
• Inhibiting the reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine
• Stimulating the hypothalamic POMC neurons in the arcuate nucleus that
secrete α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) which mediates anorectic
effects and regulates energy balance. However, POMC neurons also secrete
β-endorphins that act in an auto-inhibitory manner via negative feedback by
binding to opioid receptors situated on the POMC neurons.
Bupropion is also used as an anti-depressant and smoking cessation agent.96
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Therefore, combining naltrexone with bupropion potentiates the release of α-MSH
and the anorexic effect of bupropion.96,97 The synergistic effect of both agents
suppresses appetite, controls eating behaviour and response to food craving95
and produces greater weight loss than either agent alone.98 [Level 1++]
The efficacy of combining naltrexone with bupropion compared to placebo on
weight loss:79 [Level 1++]
• OR 3.9 for 5% weight loss
• OR 4.11 for 10% weight loss
• Mean weight loss in excess of placebo was 4.95 kg
The combination also demonstrated significant difference in ability to control
eating compared to placebo.95,97 [Level 1++]
Other beneficial effects of combining naltrexone and bupropion combination
are:95-97 [Level 1++]
• Reduction in glucose levels
• Reduction in requirement for glucose lowering drugs in T2DM
• Reduction of insulin resistance
• Reduction of lipid levels
The adverse sympathomimetic properties of bupropion on BP and heart rate,
however, attenuate the benefits of weight loss on BP and pulse rate.96,97 [Level 1++]
The most common side effect of combining naltrexone and bupropion is nausea.96
[Level 1++]
Though there was no increase in depression or suicidal ideations,96,99 [Level 1++] it
is important to note that patients with serious psychiatric illnesses were excluded
from the naltrexone/bupropion phase III trials. Hence, these drugs should be used
with caution in patients with known depression.
5. Subcutaneous liraglutide 3 mg daily
Liraglutide is a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP1-RA) that improves
glycaemic control in T2DM by stimulating insulin secretion, suppressing glucagon
secretion100 and reducing caloric intake by suppressing appetite.100,101
Doses up to 1.8 mg daily have been approved for T2DM100 while doses up to 3 mg
daily are used for managing obesity.
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
The efficacy of achieving weight loss with liraglutide 3 mg daily compared to
placebo:
• OR 5.09 for 5% weight loss
• OR 4.36 for 10% weight loss
• Mean weight loss in excess of placebo was 5.24 kg79 [Level 1++]
Only liraglutide 3 mg has been compared head-to-head with an anti-obesity
agent, orlistat in a RCT. Liraglutide 3 mg demonstrated greater efficacy in terms
of weight loss.
Liraglutide 3 mg daily confers other beneficial effects such as:100,101 [Level 1++]
• Reduction in HbA1C
• Reducing use of oral glucose lowering drugs in individuals with T2DM
• BP reduction
• Reducing insulin resistance
• Reducing lipid levels
Liraglutide 1.8 mg daily has shown improvement in CV outcomes in patients with
T2DM.102 [Level 1++] It also has a beneficial impact on metabolic associated fatty
liver disease (MAFLD).103 [Level 1-]
The side effects of liraglutide 3 mg daily are:100,101 [Level 1++]
• Most common – GI side effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and constipation
• Increase in resting heart rate
6. Subcutaneous semaglutide 2.4 mg weekly
Semaglutide is a GLP1-RA that improves glycaemic control in T2DM by stimulating
insulin secretion and suppressing glucagon secretion,104 and reducing caloric
intake by suppressing appetite.84
Does of up to 1 mg weekly are indicated for the treatment of T2DM,104 [Level
1++] whilst doses up to 2.4 mg weekly are used for managing obesity in patients
without diabetes.84 [Level 1++]
The efficacy of semaglutide 2.4 mg weekly compared to placebo:84 [Level 1++]
• OR 11.2 for 5% weight loss
• OR 14.7 for 10% weight loss
• OR 19.3 for 15% weight loss
• OR 26.9 for 20% weight loss
• Mean weight loss in excess of placebo was 12.7 kg
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Other beneficial effects of semaglutide 2.4 mg are:84 [Level 1++]
• Reduction of HbA1C
• Lowering BP
• Reducing lipid levels
In patients with T2DM, semaglutide 0.5 mg and 1.0 mg weekly improved CV and
renal outcomes.104 [Level 1++] Low dose semaglutide also has a beneficial impact
on MAFLD.103 [Level 1-]
The side effects of semaglutide 2.4 mg weekly:
• Most common – GI side effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and
constipation
• Very rare – acute pancreatitis and cholelithiasis
The rapid improvement of glycaemia in T2DM patients with baseline retinopathy
resulted in early transient worsening of retinopathy when treated with semaglutide
0.5-1.0 mg weekly.104 [Level 1++] Patients with obesity and T2DM with retinopathy
treated with semaglutide should be monitored closely and co-managed with an
ophthalmologist.
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Recommendations 5
• Pharmacotherapy for obesity should be used only as an adjunct to diet,
exercise and behavioural modification and not alone.
[Grade A]
• Pharmacotherapy for obesity is indicated in patients with BMI ≥30 kg/m2
without comorbidities and BMI ≥27 kg/m2 with comorbidity.
[Grade A]
• Pharmacotherapy that may be prescribed are:
› Orlistat
› Combination of phentermine and topiramate
› Combination of naltrexone and bupropion
› High dose liraglutide
› High dose semaglutide
[Grade A]
• Anti-obesity treatments should be used with medical supervision and careful
monitoring.
[Grade B]
Key learning points:
• Pharmacotherapy for obesity is indicated and effective in those with BMI
≥30kg/m2 or BMI ≥27.5kg/m2 with comorbidities
• Pharmacotherapy for obesity should only be used as an adjunct to lifestyle/
behavioural modifications
• There are 5 USFDA approved drugs for chronic management of obesity,
i.e., orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, naltrexone/bupropion, and high dose
liraglutide and semaglutide
• Phentermine monotherapy can also be used. However, it is indicated only
for the short-term management of obesity, i.e., for periods of no longer
than 3 months and/or in a cyclical manner
• While there are no RCTs with head-to-head comparisons of the different
anti-obesity agents – phentermine/topiramate and high-dose semaglutide
2.4 mg weekly resulted in the largest magnitude of weight loss of >10%
• Careful consideration of the side effects of these drugs is required before
initiation
• GLP1-RAs such as liraglutide and semaglutide have the added benefit of
improving glycaemic control, MAFLD and cardiorenal outcomes in patients
with both T2DM and obesity
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 4-5. Pharmacotherapy for obesity
Drug
Dosage79
Class/MoA
Weight loss
vs lifestyle
intervention79,80
Common side
effects80
Warnings and
precautions35
Contraindications80
Phentermine
15 to 30 mg OD
Sympathomimetic
amine/ appetite
3.6 kg
Headache,
 BP,
palpitations,
ischaemic
events,
insomnia,
dry mouth,
constipation,
anxiety,
psychosis
Only indicated for shortterm use (3 months)
Can be used cyclically
Precautions in poorly
controlled BP and CAD
Rare cases of pulmonary
hypertension,
regurgitant valvular
disease
Risk of abuse and
dependence
Pregnancy/
breastfeeding, anxiety
disorders, uncontrolled
hypertension, seizures,
hyperthyroidism, history
of CVD (CAD, stroke,
arrhythmias, heart
failure)
Orlistat
120 mg TDS
Lipase inhibitor/
 GI fat absorption
2.63 kg*
% Weight loss
from baseline:
2.9-3.4%
Liquid or
oily stool, oil
leakage from
rectum and
flatulence
Decreased absorption
of fat-soluble vitamins
— multi-vitamin
replacements if used
>12 months.
Pregnancy/
breastfeeding,
drug interactions
(cyclosporine
thyroxine, warfarin,
anticonvulsants),
chronic malabsorption
syndrome, cholestasis
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Drug
Dosage79
Class/MoA
Weight loss
vs lifestyle
intervention79,80
Common side
effects80
Warnings and
precautions35
Contraindications80
Phentermine/
topiramate
Starting dose:
3.75/23 mg OD
Recommended
dose:
7.5/46 mg OD
High dose:
15/92 mg OD
Phentermine -NE
releasing agent
Topiramate
-GABA receptor
modulation
8.8 kg*
% Weight loss
from baseline:
8-11%
Insomnia,
dry mouth,
constipation,
paraesthesia,
dizziness,
dysgeusia
Foetal toxicity – ensure
negative UPT before
starting treatment &
monthly thereafter +
utilisation of effective
contraception
 HR – careful
monitoring if used for
patients with CVD
Monitor for depression/
suicidal thoughts
Pregnancy – Class D.
teratogenic (cleft lip/
palate)
Breastfeeding
Hyperthyroidism
Glaucoma
Concurrent use with
MAO inhibitors
Naltrexone/
bupropion
High dose:
32/360 mg
(2 tablets) QID
Bupropion –
Inhibits reuptake
of dopamine and
NE
Naltrexone –
Opioid antagonist
4.95 kg*
% Weight loss
from baseline:
5-6%
Nausea,
constipation,
headache,
vomiting,
dizziness
Use with caution in
patients with depression
Boxed Warning –
Caution in patients with
suicidal behaviour &
ideation
Warnings – There is a
risk of seizure, hence,
adhere to dosing
schedule & avoid coadministration with
high-fat meals
 BP/HR – Careful
monitoring if used for
patients with CVD
Hepatotoxicity
Pregnancy
Uncontrolled HTN
Seizure disorders
Anorexia nervosa or
bulimia
Drug/alcohol withdrawal
MAO inhibitors
Chronic opioid use
Glaucoma
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Drug
Dosage79
Class/MoA
Weight loss
vs lifestyle
intervention79,80
Common
side effects80
Warnings and
precautions35
Contraindications80
Liraglutide
(Subcutaneous)
3 mg daily
GLP1-RA
5.24 kg*
% Weight loss
from baseline:
6-7%
Nausea,
vomiting
Boxed Warning – Risk of
thyroid C-cell tumours
and contraindicated in
MTC/MEN2
Warnings – Acute
pancreatitis/gall-bladder
disease
Hypoglycaemia in
combination with
insulin/secretagogues
Caution in renal
impairment – Post
marketing reports of
acute kidney injury or
worsening of chronic
kidney impairment
Pregnancy
Personal or family
history of
MTC or MEN2
Semaglutide
(Subcutaneous)84
2.4 mg weekly
Starting dose:
0.25 mg weekly
Increase every
4 weeks over 16
weeks till 2.4 mg
GLP1-RA
12.7 kg*
% Weight loss
from baseline:
14.9 %
Nausea,
vomiting
Boxed warning: thyroid
C-cell tumours, contraindicated in MTC/MEN2
Warnings: acute
pancreatitis/gall-bladder
disease
Hypoglycaemia in
combination with
insulin/secretagogues
Transient worsening
retinopathy in
T2DM with baseline
retinopathy and
rapid improvement in
glycaemic control
eGFR <15 ml/min
Pregnancy
Personal or family
history of MTC or MEN2
*mean weight loss in excess of placebo.
BP, blood pressure; CAD, coronary artery disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GABA, gamma aminobutyric acid; GI, gastrointestinal;
GLP1-RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HR, heart rate; HTN, hypertension; MAO, mono-amine oxidase; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; MTC, medullary thyroid
carcinoma; NE, norepinephrine; OD, once daily; QID, 4 times daily; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; TDS, three times a day; UPT, urine pregnancy test.
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
4.3 Surgical procedures
Refer to the Malaysian Consensus for patient and procedure selection for bariatric and
metabolic surgery for full details.105
The basis for bariatric surgery is to accomplish weight loss in severely obese
individuals who have been unable to sustain weight loss by non-surgical means.
Weight loss induced by surgery:106 [Level 2++] [Grade B]
• Reduces CV disease risk
• Resolves or improves pulmonary diseases such as OSA and asthma
• Reduces disabilities from joint disease
• Improves MAFLD
• Improves renal function and urinary incontinence
The ultimate benefit of surgery is weight loss and control, and the remission of
obesity’s metabolic component. Its effects are dependent on the type of procedures
performed.
The procedures are:
• Roux-En-Y gastric bypass (RYGB)
• Sleeve gastrectomy (SG)
• Abdominal gastric banding (AGB)
4.3.1 Efficacy of the different procedures
The percentage weight loss at 1-year:107 [Level 1+] [Grade A]
• 31.2% (95% CI 31.1, 31.3) for RYGB
• 25.2 % (95% CI 25.1, 25.4) for SG
• 13.7 % (95% CI 13.3, 14.0) for AGB
The 5-year mean percentage weight loss:107 [Level 1+] [Grade A]
• 25.5 % (95% CI 25.1, 25.9) for RYGB
• 18.8 % (95% CI 18.0, 19.6) for SG
• 11.7 % (95% CI 10.2, 13.1) for AGB
The excess weight loss percentage at 3- and 5 years for RYGB patients was greater
(mean difference 11.93, p<0.000001 and 13.11, p=0.0004, respectively). Excess
weight loss was significantly more important after one AGB than after RYGB after
one year (mean difference -10.82, p=0.003).108 [Level 1+] [Grade A]
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
A network meta-analysis to determine the control or remission of T2DM
demonstrated:109 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
• Mini-gastric bypass (MGB) was significantly more efficacious than laparoscopic
SG (LSG) and AGB (Relative risk [RR] 1.85, 95% CI 1.15, 2.97 and RR 4.43, 95% CI
1.69, 11.15), respectively.
• MGB was marginally more efficacious than RYGB (RR 1.64, 95% CI 0.99, 2.71)
• RYGB was significantly more efficacious than AGB (RR 2.65, 95% CI 1.16, 6.07).
• RYGB was marginally more efficacious than LSG (RR 1.13, 95% CI 0.94, 1.36)
• LSG was significantly more efficacious than laparoscopic AGB (RR 2.35, 95% CI
1.02, 5.41).
In a Finnish multicentre randomised trial (SLEEVEPASS) of 240 patients with severe
obesity, patients who had undergone RYGB had slightly greater percent excess
weight loss than patients who had undergone SG at all time points, including
at seven years (47 %; 95% CI 43%, 50% after SG vs 55%; 95% CI 52%, 59 % after
RYGB).110 [Level 1++] [Grade A] However, the overall morbidity rate after SG was
24% (29 of 121 patients) and 28.6% (34 of 199 patients) after RYGB.
In a Swiss multicentre randomised trial (SM-BOSS) of 217 patients with BMI
between 35 and 61 kg/m2, there was no significant difference in weight loss at 1-,
2- and 5-years after RYGB compared with SG. At five years, patients-maintained
61.1% excess BMI loss with SG versus 68.3% excess BMI loss with RYGB. Gastric
reflux remission was observed more in RYGB (60.4%) compared to those who
underwent laparoscopic SG (25%).111 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
4.3.2 Preoperative assessment and preparation
Preoperative assessment and preparation are important for individuals
undergoing bariatric surgery. This includes psychological, appropriate surgical
risk and comorbidities assessments to ensure the success of the procedure and
expected weight loss. Psychological assessment may identify individuals with
psychopathology and predict the post-operative weight loss. Surgery is not
contraindicated in patients with mood and anxiety, or binge eating disorders
provided they receive appropriate medical treatment.112 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
It is also imperative to ensure some percentage of weight loss prior to surgery.113
[Grade 3] [Level C]
• Patients who achieved preoperative weight loss were less likely to be lost to
follow-up (p=0.023)
• Postoperative weight loss was better in patients who could lose ≥5% total
weight preoperatively (p=0.009) in patient undergoing LSG and laparoscopic
RYGB (LRYGB)
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
However, even though preoperative weight loss is important, it does not lead to
reduction in perioperative mortality and comorbidities.114 [Level 1+] [Grade A]
Patients who achieved ≥8% excess weight loss during 4 weeks of preoperative
low-calorie diet (1200 kcal/day) experienced a significantly higher average
percentage of excess weight loss at month 3 (42.3% ±13.2% vs 36.1% ± 10.9%,
p<0.001), month 6 (56.0% ± 18.1% vs 47.5% ± 14.1%, p<0.001) and month 12 (65.1%
± 23.3% vs 55.7% ± 22.2%, p=0.003), postoperatively.115 [Level 3] [Grade C]
Screening for OSA using the STOP-BANG criteria and utilisation of perioperative
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) should be considered in patients with
severe OSA who are undergoing bariatric surgery. Intensive care should also be
given to patients at risk. Perioperative CPAP has been proven to be effective in
controlling respiratory complications in bariatric surgery patients.116 [Level 2+]
[Grade B]
4.3.3 Indications for bariatric surgery
The BMI and health outcomes of obesity of the Asian and European populations
differ. Hence, the bariatric experts in the Asia-Pacific region recommend that
the surgical approach may be considered as a non-primary alternative to
treat inadequately controlled T2DM or metabolic syndrome for suitable Asian
candidates with a BMI ≥27.5kg/m2.117 [Level 2++] [Grade B]
In 2021, the Malaysian Bariatric and Metabolic Working Committee published a
consensus statement on the indications for bariatric surgery (Table 4-6).105 [Level
4] [Grade D]
Table 4-6. Indications for bariatric surgery105
Morbid obesity
without any
comorbidities
Bariatric surgery should be considered for the
treatment of obesity in suitable patients with BMI
≥37.5 kg/m2 who fulfil the selection criteria
Morbid obesity with
metabolic syndrome
The surgical approach may be considered as a
non-primary alternative to treat obesity in suitable
patients with BMI ≥32.5 kg/m2 with metabolic
syndrome or CV risk following inadequate weight
loss by virtue of medical therapy and lifestyle
modifications
Low BMI with
or without
comorbidities
Any surgery for metabolic syndrome or obesity related
comorbidity in patients with a BMI <32.5kg/m2 should
not be a routine clinical practice and should
be strictly performed only under clinical study
protocol with informed consent from the patient
and prior approval from an ethics committee
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Age restriction
Bariatric surgery is recommended for patients
between the ages of 18 and 65 years
Special
circumstances
Upon consultation with a physician, paediatrician,
orthopaedic surgeon, clinical psychologist, or a
surgeon, bariatric surgery may be performed in
morbidly obese adolescent patients provided they
have attained the physiological bone maturity
consistent with Tanner stage 4
BMI, body mass index.
The indications, patient criteria and type of procedure for bariatric and metabolic
surgery in Malaysia are based on the consensus reached by the Bariatric Metabolic
Framework Committee, Ministry of Health, Malaysia (previously known as the
Bariatric Metabolic Working Committee of Malaysia).105 [Level 4] [Grade D]
4.3.4 Patient selection criteria for bariatric surgery
Patients undergoing bariatric surgery should fulfil the following criteria:
• Weight loss history: Previous non-surgical attempts at weight reduction for at
least six months
• Demonstrated patient commitment:
› Follow-up visits with healthcare teams, voluntary participation in support
groups and other recommendations made by their healthcare team
› Compliance with instructions regarding any recommended medical
management, procedures or tests including the use of dietary supplements
and exercise routines
› Smoking cessation for a minimum of 4 weeks before surgery
4.3.5 Types of bariatric procedures
The two types of bariatric surgery are restrictive and malabsorption.
Restrictive procedures
1. Gastric banding
2. Sleeve gastrectomy
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Figure 4-A. Diagrammatic
representation of gastric banding
Figure 4-C. Diagrammatic
representation of a
biliopancreatic diversion
Figure 4-D. Diagrammatic
representation of a one
anastomosis gastric bypass
Figure 4-B. Diagrammatic
representation of SG
Gastric sleeve
Eesophagus
Pouch
Stomach
Adjustable
band
Duodenum
Access port
Malabsorption procedures
1. Biliopancreatic diversion/duodenal switch (BPD/DS)
2. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
3. Mini gastric bypass (MBG) or one anastomosis gastric bypass (ABG)
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Figure 4-E. Diagrammatic
representation of a laparoscopic
gastric bypass
Pouch
Eesophagus
Small intestine
Stomach
The complications of bariatric procedures
are:118 [Level 2++] [Grade B]
• RYGB: Complications of this procedure
can be diverse and include gastric
remnant distension, stomal stenosis,
marginal ulcer formation, cholelithiasis,
ventral hernias, internal hernias, small
bowel obstructions, hypoglycaemia,
dumping, metabolic and nutritional
derangements, gastrogastric fistulas,
and weight regain. Some complications
are seen during the early postoperative period while others may
present weeks to months following the
surgery
• LSG: Complications of LGS include
bleeding, narrowing or stenosis, leaks,
and reflux
• One ABG/MBG: Complications include bleeding, anastomotic site stenosis,
marginal ulcer formation, anastomosis leak and bile reflux119 [Level 2+] [Grade
C]
• AGB: Complications from AGB include band erosion, band slippage, port or
tubing malfunction, stomal obstruction, port infection and insufficient weight
loss120 [Level 2+] [Grade C]
The following are contraindications for bariatric surgery:105 [Grade 2+] [Grade C]
• Pregnancy
• Patients who are unable to comply to continuous medical follow-up as required
• Patients with non-stabilised psychotic disorders, severe depression or
personality, and eating disorders, unless specifically advised by a psychiatrist/
psychologist
• Patients with reversible endocrine disorders that cause obesity
• Alcohol abuse and/or drug dependencies
• Patients with short-term life-threatening diseases (ASA-4)
• Patients who are unable to care for themselves and have no long-term family or
social support to provide such care
Post-operative care includes the use of proton-pump inhibitors (PPI) to prevent
marginal ulcers, supplementation of micro and/or macronutrients, behavioural
and nutritional advice and to delay pregnancy until weight stabilises.
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
4.3.6 Intragastric balloon (special non-operative procedure)
Efficacy
Intragastric balloon (IGB) is capable of producing 6-15% of total body weight loss
(TBWL) compared with the 1-5% produced through lifestyle interventions alone.121
[Level 1++] [Grade A]
A meta-analysis of 55 studies involving 6654 Orbera balloon implantations
demonstrated pooled estimate of TBWL of:122 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
• 12.3% (95% CI 7.91, 16.73) at 3 months
• 13.16% (95% CI 12.37, 13.95) at 6 months
• 11.27% (95% CI 8.17, 14.36) at 12 months
Sustained weight loss
Although IGB is safe and effective in managing obesity for the short term, it is a
temporary measure, and weight regain is expected after removal.
In a study involving 500 patients who underwent 6 months of treatment with IGB
therapy:123 [Level 2+] [Grade C]
• Only 50% maintained a 20% excess weight loss at 1 year after balloon removal
• 25% maintained their weight loss (20% excess weight loss) at 5 years
• By 10 years, there was no difference between IGB therapy and lifestyle changes
Improvement in metabolic parameters
IGB therapy has shown improvement in metabolic parameters among patients
who successfully lose weight.124 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
In a meta-analysis of 10 trials and 30 observational studies, there was moderate
quality but mostly short-term evidence for improvement in most metabolic
parameters after IGB therapy compared with lifestyle intervention.125 [Level 1++]
[Grade A]
Safety
The safety profile for IGB therapy depend on its type (fluid or gas filled) and how
it was placed (endoscopically or swallowed).
• Gas-filled balloon systems are better tolerated than fluid-filled systems
• IGB that are swallowed cause fewer serious complications and death vs
endoscopically-placed balloons
All patients undergoing IGB should be tested and treated for Helicobacter pylori
before placement, and should receive PPI treatment while the balloon is in place
to reduce the risk of gastric ulceration.
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Fluid-filled endoscopically placed balloons
• In a retrospective analysis of over 1000 procedures performed between 2016
and 2017, 7.2% of patients required treatment for dehydration, 2.0% required
readmission, 1.1% required reoperation and 6.2% required intervention within
30 days126 [Level 3] [Grade D]
• In another study of over 145,000 patients, IGB therapy was associated with a
higher adverse event rate than laparoscopic bariatric surgery (OR 1.97, 95% CI
1.10, 3.52) due to a significantly higher non-operative reintervention rate (4.2%
vs 1.0%)127 [Level 2+] [Grade C]
Adverse events
Common adverse events: At the beginning of IGB therapy, up to 91% of patients
will develop some form of GI symptoms due to gastric accommodation to the
balloon. Typical symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, acid reflux,
burping, dyspepsia, and constipation.
Early balloon removal may be necessary if symptoms persist. 4-7% percent
continue to experience significant GI symptoms after the first week of therapy,
and even fewer events (<3%) required endoscopic reintervention or early balloon
removal.
Serious adverse events: In a meta-analysis, the incidence of balloon migration,
gastric perforation, and mortality were 1.4%, 0.1%, 0.08%, respectively. Serious
adverse events may be related to either the balloon or the procedure.122 [Level 1++]
[Grade A]
Balloon-related serious adverse events: These include balloon migration, gastric
or esophageal perforation, and gastric ulceration. Serious adverse events that are
largely unique to liquid-filled balloons include spontaneous hyperinflation and
acute pancreatitis.
• Balloon migration – IGB left in the stomach longer than the intended duration
of therapy are at risk of rupturing and migrating into the intestine. While
most migrated balloons were excreted successfully, some caused intestinal
obstructions
• Spontaneous hyperinflation – Hyperinflation involves the spontaneous filling
of intragastric balloons with additional air or liquid while inside a patient's
stomach resulting in the need for early removal
• Acute pancreatitis – Caused by direct injury from the balloon and distended
stomach exerting pressure on the pancreatic parenchyma and/or indirect
pancreatic injury through duodenal obstruction. Although acute pancreatitis
can develop with any type of balloon, clinically it has been observed mostly
with liquid-filled balloons
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Procedure-related serious adverse events: Mostly occur during balloon removal,
including esophageal tear, pneumonia, GI bleeding, and esophageal perforation.
Mortality: The FDA has issued multiple letters to alert health care providers of 18
reported deaths worldwide from 2016 to present in patients with liquid-filled IGB
systems used to treat obesity. The incidence rate of death in those who received
IGB therapy is not known. One systematic review published in 2016 showed a
mortality rate of 0.05%, but that included many of the case series from the early
2000s. A meta-analysis of RCTs published in 2015 reported a 0% mortality rate in
20 studies and almost 1200 patients, but only with a 3-month follow-up.128 [Level
1++] [Grade A]
Gas-filled or procedure-less balloons: Generally better tolerated than fluid-filled
ones. In a prospective registry of 1343 patients, symptoms of nausea, vomiting,
and abdominal pain occurred in 2.3-5.3%, and any GI symptom occurred in 13.4%
of patients. While the rate of serious adverse events with the procedure-less
balloon is similar to that of the gas-filled IGB, post-placement accommodative
symptoms may be more similar to those of other fluid-filled balloons.
Outcomes
• Overall percentage of patients successfully achieving weight loss and improvement
in hepatic transaminases129 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
› Weight loss achieved and improvement in hepatic amino transferases:
Two studies reported outcomes based on the proportion of patients who
successfully achieved >10% TBWL
› Overall, 86/141 (60.9%) patients were able to achieve this target. 112/182
(61.5%) patients achieved >20% excess weight loss
• TBWL – IGB favoured TBWL130 [Level 2++] [Grade B]
› At 6 months (9.75 vs 7.48 kg, p=0.03)
› At 12 months (6.52 vs 4.42 kg, p=0.05)
› At 18 months (5.42 vs 3.57 kg, p=0.32)
› At 24 months (4.07 vs 2.93 kg, p=0.56)
› Total weight loss was maximal at 6 months post-intervention, and differences
between groups (compared to Sibutramine) were significant at 6 months
• Bridging before bariatric surgery131 [Grade 2+] [Grade C]
› During the time period of IGB treatment (168.1 ± 43.1 days), patients experienced
a weight loss of 17.3 ± 14.1 kg (BMI 5.75 ± 4.66 kg/m2)
› Most of the patients with IGB showed a nadir of weight loss after 5 months
with slight weight regain during the further course of treatment
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 4-7. Recommendation for IGB132 [Level 1++] [Grade A]
Recommendation
Strength of
recommendation
Quality of
evidence
Use of IGB therapy with lifestyle
modification over lifestyle
modification alone in the individuals
with obesity seeking a weight loss
intervention who have failed a trial of
conventional weight loss strategies
Conditional
Moderate
Moderate to high intensity
concomitant lifestyle modification
interventions to maintain and
augment weight loss in individuals
with obesity undergoing IGB therapy
Strong
Moderate
Prophylaxis with PPIs in individuals
undergoing IGB therapy
Strong
Moderate
Intraoperative anesthetic regimens
associated with the lowest incidence
of nausea along with perioperative
antiemetics in individuals undergoing
IGB therapy
There needs a scheduled antiemetic
regimen for 2 weeks after IGB
placement
Conditional
Low
Perioperative laboratory screening for
nutritional deficiencies in individuals
undergoing IGB therapy
Conditional
Low
Daily supplementation with 1-2
adult dose multivitamins after IGB
placement
Conditional
Very Low
After IGB removal, suggest
subsequent weight-loss or
maintenance interventions that
include dietary interventions,
pharmacotherapy, repeat IGB, or
bariatric surgery. The choice of
weight-loss or maintenance method
after IGB is determined based on
patient’s context and comorbidities
following a shared decision-making
approach
Conditional
Very Low
4. Management of obesity in adults
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Recommendations 6
• Bariatric surgery should only be performed in individuals with morbid obesity
who fail medical therapy.
[Grade B]
• Roux-En-Y gastric bypass surgery may be considered
[Grade A]
• A comprehensive preoperative assessment and preparation should be done
before bariatric surgery.
[Grade B]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
5. Management of childhood
and adolescent obesity
5.1 Prevalence of childhood and adolescent obesity
Temporal trends demonstrating a rise in the prevalence of overweight and obesity
among children and adolescents have been documented worldwide.
Findings from the 2019 National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) showed that,133
• 29.8% of children from ages 5-17 years (of which 15.0% were adolescents) were
either overweight or obese
• Prevalence of obesity alone among children and adolescents has steadily risen
(3.9% in 2011 to 14.8% in 2019)
Childhood overweight and obesity is a significant public health concern given
the adverse effects on the health and quality of life in childhood, as well as the
increased risk of obesity and associated health complications in adulthood.
5.2 Diagnosis of childhood and adolescent obesity
Body mass index (BMI) is the accepted standard for determining overweight and
obesity prevalence in children and adolescents.134
• In children, as the BMI changes with age, the BMI-for-age percentiles are more
useful in the clinical setting
• BMI in children increases from birth until 1 year of age and subsequently
decreases until ages 5-9 years old
• An early BMI rebound before 5 years of age carries a risk for adult obesity and
could help identify which children are most likely to become overweight or
obese in adulthood
The diagnosis of overweight or obesity in children and adolescents should be
based on the BMI and the World Health Organization (WHO) 2007 reference
system (Table 5-1).135 In cases of extreme obesity, the United States Centres for
Disease Control (US CDC) normative BMI percentiles can also be used – the
definition of extreme obesity is BMI ≥120% of the 95th percentile of the US CDC
growth charts or a BMI ≥35 kg/m2.136
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
Table 5-1. Diagnosis of overweight and obesity in children and adolescents
Age (years)
Overweight
Obese
5-19
BMI >1 SD above the WHO
Growth Reference median
BMI >2 SD above the WHO
Growth Reference median
Under-5
BMI >2 SD above the WHO
Child Growth Standards median
BMI >3 SD above the WHO
Child Growth Standards
median
BMI, body mass index; SD, standard deviation; WHO, World Health Organization.
5.3 Clinical evaluation
The objectives of performing a clinical evaluation in children and adolescents
who are overweight or obese are to:
• Determine any pathological causes of obesity
• Assess lifestyle and eating habits, and their contribution to the aetiology of
obesity
• Ascertain the presence of obesity-related comorbidities
5.3.1 Assessing causes of obesity in children and adolescents
Primary obesity
The vast majority (>95%) of children will have primary or exogenous obesity. In
addition to the obvious environmental drivers, multiple common and rare genetic
variants contribute to substantial heritability for BMI and waist circumference
(WC).137 Children with primary obesity usually have accelerated growth. These
children are at risk for early development of secondary sexual characteristics and
may have advanced bone age.136
Secondary obesity
Pathological causes or secondary obesity are uncommon but should be carefully
considered, such as endocrinopathies (Cushing’s syndrome, hypothyroidism and
hypopituitarism), and syndromic/genetic conditions (e.g., pseudohypoparathyroidism
and Prader Willi syndrome). Children with endocrinopathies may have decreased
linear growth or short stature.138 Clinicians should refer maturing children who are
obese with short stature and decreased growth velocity despite continued weight
gain for further evaluation.
Patients with genetic obesity usually have an early onset of obesity (<5 years of
age), clinical features of genetic obesity syndromes and/or a family history of
extreme obesity.139
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
These children may also have other features that should be identified during
clinical assessment, such as:139
• Short stature
• Dysmorphic facies
• Retinitis pigmentosa
• Deafness
• Polydactyly
• Hyperphagia
Consanguinity may also be indicative of autosomal recessive obesity conditions.
Genetic obesity syndromes can be classified into those:139
• With developmental delay (e.g., Prader Willi Syndrome, Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy and Bardet-Biedl syndrome)
• Without developmental delay (e.g., Alstrom syndrome, Pro-opiomelanocortin
[POMC] deficiency and Melanocortin 4 receptor [MC4R] deficiency)
5.3.2 Patient history
A thorough medical and family history is crucial for assessing children with obesity
to identify the underlying cause, rule out pathological causes of obesity and
identify possible complications (refer to Table 5-2).136,140
Table 5-2. Assessing patient history
Developmental
• Type of delivery, birth weight and length, gestational
age at birth, maternal gestational diabetes
• Infant feeding, including duration of breastfeeding
• Growth and development (e.g., age at which the child
walked and talked)
• Schooling (e.g., academic performance)
Physical and
mental health
• Weight history – onset of obesity, precipitating
events, previous weight management interventions,
behaviours, recent weight loss or gain
• Medications that may contribute to weight gain (e.g.,
glucocorticoids and psychoactive agents)
• Polyuria/polydipsia, blurring of vision, and vaginal
discharge in girls
• Presence of frequent unexplained headaches,
habitual snoring, restless sleep, morning headaches,
generalized tiredness and/or excessive daytime
sleepiness (sleeping routine and presence of snoring)
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Physical and
mental health
• Acne, hirsutism and pattern of menstruation to screen
for the possibility of polycystic ovarian syndrome
(PCOS)
Health
behaviours
• Dietary intake especially high intake of sugarcontaining drinks and high-energy foods, and low
intake of fruits and vegetables
• Previous and current dietary behaviour, e.g., recurrent
episodes of dieting, signs of pathological hyperphagia
(such as eating large portions very quickly and
difficulty to distract from food) and signs of disordered
eating (such as binge eating)
• Dietary pattern, e.g., eating breakfast and regular
meals, snacking and eating prepared foods outside the
home
• Level of physical and sedentary (e.g., hours spent on
screen-based activities per day) activities
• Family capacity to make and sustain behavioural
changes, and support behavioural change, including
their financial capabilities
Mental health
• Social isolation or risk of bullying
5.3.3 Physical examination
Clinicians should examine the following: [Level 2+/3]
1. Weight, height and BMI
2. WC141
3. Blood pressure (BP) using height-age-sex percentile normalised BP tables
to interpret the findings (refer to Appendix 4)
4. Acanthosis nigricans and skin tags
5. Dysmorphic features especially if there is concern of syndromic obesity
(e.g., Prader-Willi, Albright Osteodystrophy and Alstrom Syndrome)
6. Fundoscopic examination
7. Thyroid examination for goitre
8. Tanner staging/extreme acne and hirsutism in pubertal girls
9. Abdominal examination for hepatomegaly
10. Musculoskeletal examination of the lower limbs – the clinician should be
aware of the skeletal problems that occur in children with obesity. Young
children with the bowed tibias of Blount’s disease are usually ambulatory
and may be “early walkers” and unaware of any problem142
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
5.3.4 Investigations
For cause of obesity
Endocrine and genetic disorders as a cause for overweight/obesity are rare
in children. If there are significant abnormalities in the history and physical
examination indicative of a pathological cause of obesity, these patients should
be referred to a tertiary centre for further evaluation and investigation.136 [Level 4]
For comorbidities
Criteria for screening for comorbidities:136,142,143 [Level 4]
1. Children and adolescents with obesity should be offered screening for related
comorbidities
2. Overweight children and adolescents should be offered screening if ≥2 of the
following risk factors is present:
• Features suggestive of insulin resistance such as hypertension and acanthosis
nigricans
• Strong family history in first- or second-degree relatives of type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM), hypertension or premature coronary heart disease
• History of maternal gestational diabetes mellitus
• Birth history of small or large for gestational age
• Signs and symptoms indicative of comorbidities, such as hyperglycaemia
(polydipsia and polyuria), obstructive sleep apnoea ([OSA]; snoring, daytime
somnolence and poor attention span), and hirsutism (PCOS)
3. Start screening for comorbidities at ages ≥10 years or at the onset of puberty,
whichever comes first. However, if there are symptoms suggestive of
comorbidities (polyuria, polydipsia, and others) or a rapid increase in BMI, it
would be reasonable to screen earlier.
Children and adolescents with obesity should be offered screening for related
comorbidities as detailed in Table 5-3.142 [Level 4]
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 5-3. Screening for comorbidities of paediatric overweight/obesity
Comorbidities
Assessment
Prehypertension/
hypertension
• Diagnosis must be based on 3 separate
measurements at least 1 week apart (refer to
Appendix 4)
Dyslipidaemia
• Fasting lipid profile
• Typically, the dyslipidaemia of obesity is a high
triglyceride and low high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C) levels
Prediabetes/diabetes
mellitus
• Fasting plasma glucose or oral glucose tolerance
test (OGTT) with glucose 1.75 g/kg (up to a
maximum of 75 g)
Microalbuminuria
• Urine microalbumin144,145
Metabolic associated
fatty liver disease
(MAFLD)
• Liver function test
• Ultrasound of the hepatobiliary system if there is
evidence of transaminitis
Sleep disorders
• Varied presentations including apnoea
associated with snoring or disrupted sleeping,
daytime sleepiness, hyperactivity, depression,
audible pauses in breathing, new onset nocturnal
enuresis, irritability and learning difficulties
• Referral for evaluation of OSA (e.g.,
polysomnography)
PCOS/menstrual
irregularities
• Testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG)
• Pelvic ultrasound, if indicated
Recommendations 7
• BMI cut-offs using the WHO BMI-for-age chart should be used for the
classification of overweight and obesity in children.
[Grade C]
• Clinical evaluation (history and physical examination) should be performed
to identify the aetiology of overweight and obesity and to rule out pathological
causes.
[Grade C]
• Children and adolescents with obesity should be offered screening for
related comorbidities.
[Grade C]
• Overweight children and adolescents should be offered screening if risk
factors are present.
[Grade C]
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
5.4 Management of obesity in children and adolescents
Obesity treatment in children and adolescents aims to reduce adiposity, improve
complications and prevent the development of chronic diseases. In general,
management principals in children and adolescents focus on changes in health
behaviours that influence weight, i.e. dietary behaviours and physical activity,
rather than on actual weight loss alone. The approach to weight management
depends on the severity of obesity, the age and the developmental stage of the
child and the preferences of the child and family.146
5.4.1 Basic principles of management
Managing a child with obesity is age dependent (refer Table 5-4).142 [Level 4]
Table 5-4. Basic management principles for children and adolescents with
obesity
Age
Basic management
Infants
• Exclusive breast feeding
• Delay complementary food until 6 months of age
• No sugar sweetened beverages
• No screen time
Toddlers
(2-4 years old)
• Parents should model healthy behaviour habits
• Three main meals with 1-2 snacks
• Encourage routine sleep pattern
Children
(5-9 years old)
• Parents are important role models, involve family in the
management
• Recreational screen time should be kept to minimum
• Activity should be done daily and as vigorously as
possible
Older children/
Adolescents
• Importance of peer group support
• Regular sleep time
• Use of technology to track exercise and meal intake
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
5.4.2 Family involvement
The involvement of family is crucial for managing obesity in children and adolescents.
• Findings from a recent meta-analysis suggest that family-based therapy is
effective for treating obesity147
• In addition, studies involving weight loss among obese children and adolescents
demonstrate the lack of parental inclusion resulted in non-significant weight
loss148
• Family involvement should start from the first consultation through to the
development of a care plan
A supportive and collaborative relationship between the healthcare professional,
the young person and their parents/carers is important for the success of any
intervention.
• When providing interventions for children and adolescents with overweight
and obesity, it is also necessary to focus on family health behaviours148 [Level 1+]
• Parents should be supported and encouraged as they make changes for the
whole family and for themselves
• The level of family involvement among adolescents will depend on their age
and maturity149
Possible approaches to implementing behavioural change in families include: [;
Level 4]
• Making small, sustainable behavioural changes at a time
• Eating together
• Developing family-based goals for behaviour changes
5.4.3 Structured approach to management of obesity
A step or staged approach for weight management in the paediatric population
consisting of 3 steps is recommended.142 [Level 4]
1. Structured weight management
2. Multidisciplinary management
3. Tertiary care management
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Table 5-5. Staged approach to obesity management in children and adolescents
Stage
Components
Implementation
Frequency
of visits
1
• Develop a structured plan with
the patient and family
• Provide a log book for monitoring
• Should be done under parental
supervision
• Diet:
› Address eating behaviours
› Should include ≥5 servings of
fruits and vegetables/day
› Eliminate sugar sweetened
beverages
• Physical activity:
› Aim for a daily average of 60
minutes or more of physical
activity
› Reduce recreational screen
time to <2 hours/day
Primary care
3-6
monthly
2
• Continue diet and physical
activity intervention
• Multidisciplinary approach
that should include a dietician,
physical activity counsellor and
psychological services
• Medical screening for
complications of obesity
Obesity clinic/
Paediatrician
3 monthly
3
• Stages 1 and 2 components
• Increase intensity of interventions
• Consider medical therapy or
referral for bariatric surgery
Tertiary weight
management
centres/Paediatric
endocrinologist
More
frequent
visits for
monitoring
Start at stage 1, 2 or 3 depending on the age, degree of obesity, health risks and
motivation of the child/adolescent. If there is failure to achieve or maintain the
goal BMI, advance to more-intensive levels of intervention. Advancement will
depend on the age, presence of comorbidities, response to current interventions
and the motivation of the patient and their family.
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Refer for specialist care if:136,141-143
• The patient is <5 years old
• There is a clinical suspicion of an underlying medical/genetic syndrome or
endocrine cause, or there are concerns about height and development
• There are comorbidities that require weight management, e.g. OSA and metabolic
complications
Lifestyle changes
There is sufficient evidence to demonstrate that intensive lifestyle modification
programmes can be effective tools for paediatric weight control.150 [Level 1++]
Lifestyle intervention strategies include a combination of addressing dietary
intake and exercise and behavioural modifications. Interventions have to
involve the family as family-based interventions with parental involvement have
improved outcomes.147,151 [Level 1++]
Following the treatment phase, a formal maintenance programme should be
continued to maintain the achieved weight loss.152 [Level 1++]
Diet
Healthy eating habits are at the core of any weight management plan. As children
are still in the phase of growth, dietary modifications should be focused on
healthy food choices rather than portion control only.
Clinicians are recommended to advocate for healthy eating habits as below:153-155
[Level 1++]136 [Level 1+]142 [Level 4]
• Consumption of 5 servings of vegetables and fruits
• Start each day with a healthy breakfast
• Decrease consumption of fast foods and processed foods
• Water as the beverage of choice
• Reduce saturated dietary fat intake
• Portion control education
• Timely regular meals to avoid constant grazing during the day
• Reduce choice of snacks which are non-nutritive
• Ensure children have regular meals
• Whenever possible, eat meals as a family
• Separate eating from other activities such as watching televisions or using the
computer
• Have healthy foods readily available
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
• Avoid using foods as treats/rewards
• Comfort children with attention, listening and affection instead of food
• Encourage children to develop healthy methods of regulating emotions (i.e.
those that do not involve food)
There has been research into the use of intensive dietary interventions in postpubertal adolescents with obesity with ongoing larger trials. A meta-analysis of
20 studies found that Very Low-Calorie Diets (VLCD) are effective at inducing
rapid short term weight loss in children and adolescents with obesity. However, it
lacks long-term data.156 [Level 1++]
Physical activity
Regular physical activity has the potential to improve weight loss and maintenance.
Physical fitness, even without weight loss, may also confer other benefits such as
improving aerobic fitness and reducing cardiovascular (CV) risk factors in children
and adolescents.157 [Level 1+]
Strategies to increase physical activity should include increasing structured
and non-structured physical activity and reducing the amount of time spent on
sedentary activities.158 [Level 1+]
Clinicians should encourage the following:
• Children/adolescents should spend on average 60 minutes/day on
moderate or vigorous physical activity.159 [Level 1+] The increase of
physical activity levels can be achieved starting from 2-3 years old by active play
and gradually increasing the intensity and duration.160 [Level 1+] As a guide,
moderate intensity exercise allows talking but not singing, while vigorous
exercise makes it difficult to talk and impossible to sing136 [Level 4]
• Children should be active and engage in a variety of light intensity
physical activity throughout the day161 [Level 1+]
• Children should engage in resistance training activities at least three
times a week.162 [Level 1+] These activities should be supervised to improve
physical literacy and reduce risk of injury. A meta-analysis of the types of
exercise intervention revealed that combined aerobic and strength training
ranked best in reducing BMI Z-scores163 [Level 1+]
• Participation in classical sports activities/programmes. Classic sports
activities have beneficial effects on overall physical activity level, body
composition and metabolic profile in children and youth164 [Level 1+]
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Sleep
Adequate sleep has numerous health benefits for the growing child. Various
studies have demonstrated a link between obesity and reduced sleep duration.165,166
[Level 1++]
• Electronic devices should be removed from the bedroom to allow for uninterrupted
sleep
Children should be encouraged to practice healthy sleep habits which are in
accordance with guidelines (refer Table 5-6).167,168 [Level 1++]
Table 5-6. Recommended hours of sleep based on age167,168
Age (years)
Hours of sleep
3-5
10-13
6-13
9-11
14-17
8-10
Screen time
The increasing prevalence of using technology and electronic devices for
recreation and education requires a balanced approach. Screen times for ≥2
hours/day had demonstrated an increased risk of overweight/obesity among
children.169 [Level 1+] Recreational screen time should be limited to no more
than 1 hour a day for 2– 5-year-olds, and no more than 2 hours a day for
children 6 years and older.170 [Level 1++]
Psychosocial aspects
Maladaptive rearing habits around diet and exercise must be evaluated and
identified. Interaction between parent and children and parenting styles
contribute to obesity in children.171 [Level 2+]
During adolescence, self-esteem becomes more closely tied to body image and
rapidly plummets, with adolescent females who have higher BMIs and body
image dissatisfaction having the lowest self-esteem.172 [Level 2+] There is also a
significant association between eating disorders and youth who are overweight/
obese.173 [Level 1+]
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
The initial assessment of the child should include evaluation of psychosocial
comorbidities.
• Clinicians should be aware of the stigma associated with obesity when managing
these children
• Clinicians should employ a sensitive manner and appropriate language during
consultations
• The patient's psychosocial comorbidities should be reviewed during each visit
• When indicated a referral to a mental health professional should be done
Clinicians should screen children for the presence of mental health issues by
asking questions about:
• School absences or refusal to attend school
• Teasing by peers regarding their weight or appearance
• Persistent symptoms of anxiety, depression or self-harm
• Eating disorders like anorexia or binge eating
• Family dynamics and attitudes about weight
Medications
There are limited number of well-controlled safety and efficacy studies
involving obese children and adolescents. The only two medications which are
approved by the United States Food and Drug Authority (USFDA) are liraglutide
and orlistat. The negative health impact of paediatric obesity may justify longterm medication.174,175 [Level 1+]
Pharmacotherapy:146 [Level 1++] 136 [Level 4]
• Can be considered in adolescents only after a formal programme of intensive
lifestyle modification has proven suboptimal or unsuccessful in reducing BMI
and improving obesity related complications
• Should be administered only with a concomitant lifestyle modification
programme in a specialised centre
• Needs to be re-evaluated if there is failure of reduction of BMI after 12 weeks
(l<4% BMI/BMI z-score reduction)
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Liraglutide is a new treatment option approved by most regulatory agencies
(including the USFDA and the European Medicines Agency [EMEA]) for chronic
obesity treatment in adolescents aged 12–18 years.176 [Level 1++]
• Liraglutide belongs to the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP1-RA)
class of drugs and is delivered subcutaneously
• It acts by reducing appetite, slowing gastric motility and enhancing satiety
• In the largest liraglutide randomised control trial (RCT), a 3 mg daily dose among
adolescents (12 to 18 years of age) with obesity, resulted in a mean placebosubtracted BMI reduction of approximately 5% at one year. Reduction in weight
parameters also persisted even after treatment cessation
Though the most reported adverse event was gastrointestinal, there were no new
safety concerns in relation to previous adult trials.
Orlistat is approved by the USFDA for obesity treatment for those above 12 years
of age.
• Orlistat inhibits gastrointestinal lipases, reducing fat absorption by about
30%177 [Level 1++]
• Though orlistat reduces the BMI significantly in adolescents, it is associated with
significant gastrointestinal side effects making long-term treatment difficult178
[Level 1++]
Metformin is not approved for use in obesity management. However, studies
demonstrate that it has some weight loss effect and it may be useful in those with
PCOS.177 [Level 1++]
Surgery
• Bariatric surgery should not be routinely offered and should only be undertaken
by a highly specialised surgical team within the framework of a multidisciplinary
team
• Metabolic and bariatric surgery can be considered in adolescents who have
severe obesity and significant comorbidity179 [Level 1+]
• Data from the Teen-LABS and AMOS studies have shown good outcomes in
reduction of BMI and cardiometabolic effects (such as remission of diabetes
and dyslipidaemia) in this group of adolescents180,181 [Level 1+]
• Prior to surgical referral the patient should demonstrate the ability to adhere
to the principles of healthy dietary and activity habits, and be compliant with a
formal programme of lifestyle modification with or without pharmacotherapy179
[Level 1+]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
80
5. Management of childhood and adolescent obesity
Recommendations 8
• A step or staged approach for weight management in the paediatric population
should be used
[Grade D]
› For prepubertal children – allow a gradual decline in BMI with weight
maintenance or a slower weight gain.
› For pubertal children – gradual weight loss with a maximum loss of 0.51.0 kg per month.
• Family-focused lifestyle intervention should be emphasised
[Grade C]
• Treatment programmes should target
[Grade B]
› Decreasing overall dietary intake
› Increasing physical activity
› Decreasing time spent in sedentary behaviour
› Addressing sleep behaviour
• Pharmacotherapy may be considered in adolescents if formal intensive
lifestyle modification programmes failed
[Grade B]
› Liraglutide may be considered.
• Metabolic and bariatric surgery may be considered for adolescents with
extreme obesity and significant comorbidities.
[Grade B]
Both Vertical Sleeve Gastrectomy (VSG) and Roux-En-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB)
are safe and effective procedures in adolescents, however there is still a lack of
significant long-term data.179,182 [Level 1+]
• There was a shift in procedure use over time, with a relative increase in patients
undergoing VSG because of the lower risk of complications
• The most common complications with both RYGB and VSG are abdominal pain,
diarrhoea, nausea or dehydration followed by stricture with RYGB and wound
infection with VSG179,180 [Level 1+]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
6. Prevention of overweight and
obesity in adults, children and
adolescents
6.1 Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults
Obesity is a chronic disorder that not only requires continuous care, support
and follow-up, but should be off-set by preventive strategies. The United States
Preventive Services Taskforce updated their recommendation in 2018 to include
intensive behavioural counselling for individuals of normal weight with abnormal
blood glucose levels or diabetes.183
Primary prevention measures are essential to halt the development of obesity as
early as possible. It generally includes:34
• Promoting healthy eating
• Improving physical activity (reducing physical inactivity)
• Managing daily stress
• Improving the sense of well-being and self-esteem
These strategies can be challenging because it involves lifestyle and behavioural
modifications that must be applied consistently. Individuals tend to have high
levels of motivation initially that can decrease over time making these changes
difficult to sustain. A systematic review of prevention of overweight and obesity
using education and financial strategies for dietary, exercise and psychological
approaches to weight management in the adult population provided moderate
quality evidence for preventing weight gain in normal-weight individuals.184
[Level 2++]
Primary prevention of further weight gain through dietary advice and increase
in physical activity in overweight patients without other comorbidities is an
appropriate target compared to weight loss.34 [Level 2++]
6.1.1 Low-calorie diet and orlistat for prevention of obesity in adults
The cost effectiveness of pharmacologic treatment of obesity in combination with
a low-calorie diet was linked with gains in length and quality of life (QoL) similar
to prevention of chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease and
osteoarthritis.
Incremental costs per quality-adjusted-life year (QALY) gained were €17,900 for
the low-calorie diet-only intervention compared to no intervention and €58,800
for the low-calorie diet and orlistat compared to the low-calorie diet only. Assuming
a direct relation between body mass index (BMI) and QoL, these ratios decreased
to €6000 per QALY gained and €24,100 per QALY gained. Costs per QALY gained
were sensitive to assumptions about long-term weight loss maintenance.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Low-calorie diet is cost effective compared to low-calorie diet and orlistat
combination. Hence, intervention using low-calorie diet should be recommended
as the first option by policy makers in combating obesity for the population.185
[Level 1++]
6.1.2 Pharmacotherapy for prevention of obesity in adults
There is no pharmacotherapy that has shown significant benefits in preventing
overweight and obesity in individuals with normal BMI at risk of obesity.
• Women with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS) who were not overweight
or obese showed no reduction in BMI following metformin therapy of between
12 weeks to 6 months. There are no recent studies to demonstrate any other
benefits186 [Level 1+]187 [Level 2+]
• Individuals with psychotic disorders who are prescribed antipsychotic
medications may experience modest weight loss and metabolic improvements
from 8-12 weeks of treatment with metformin35 [Level 1++]
• A systematic review of the effect of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
(GLP1-RA) in individuals with normal BMI identified a small number of subjects
who showed no significant difference in weight change.188 [Level 1+]
Recommendations 9
• Fundamental preventive measures that should be implemented against the
onset of obesity are promoting healthy eating, improving physical activity
and implementing stress management practices.
[Grade A]
• Healthcare providers should offer weight management interventions for
preventing weight gain in normal-weight or overweight adults. [Grade B]
6.2 Prevention of obesity in children and adolescents
The primary intervention in the management of paediatric obesity should
be prevention. Preventive interventions should be designed to modify the
environment surrounding the child. Primary prevention actions begin from the
prenatal age into adolescence with actions at individual, family and community
level.
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults, children
and adolescents
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
6.2.1 Early life interventions
Although beyond the scope of these guidelines, preconception and prenatal
interventions are also of major importance in the prevention of childhood obesity.189
[Level 1+]
• Breast feeding should be encouraged for its numerous health benefits and its
role in obesity prevention189,190 [Level 1+]
• Adherence to dietary guidelines during weaning is recommended. Solid foods
and beverages other than breast milk or infant formulas should be introduced
no earlier than 6 months as evidence suggests early introduction of weaning
diet may be linked to childhood obesity191,192 [Level 2+]
Systematic reviews demonstrate a beneficial effect using interventions focused
on individual- or family-level behaviour changes through counselling provided
through home or community visits.193 [Level 1+]
We recommend early routine counselling on obesity prevention utilizing routine
‘healthy baby’ clinic visits. This would facilitate early referral for evaluation of atrisk children.
6.2.2 Lifestyle interventions
Lifestyle interventions remain the first-line approach for the prevention of
childhood obesity. However, the combination of interventions is largely varied
due to the complexity of childhood obesity itself. As a child’s behaviour is very
much dependant on their environment, preventive measures must target the
family and school environment.
Family environment
There is evidence for an association between the development of paediatric obesity
and family dysfunction, as well as, exposure to stress.194 This requires programmes
to foster healthy family functioning and to minimise paediatric stress.
In addition, research indicates the need for parental involvement and a whole
family approach for successful prevention programmes.151 Any preventive
programme will, therefore, need to involved the whole family to advocate good
parenting practices and lifestyle choices. There should be support for home
activities that encourage children to be more active, eat nutritious foods and
spend less time on screen-based activities.
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults, children
and adolescents
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
School environment
The school environment is an important component in obesity prevention as,
most children and adolescents spend the bulk of their waking hours in schools.
A school-based programme can be standardised across multiple sites and reach
large populations of children and adolescents during the early and teenage years.
There is evidence that supports the use of school-based preventive programmes
with family and community reinforcement.195
Some measures that can be used to promote obesity prevention within schools
are: [; Level 4]
• School curriculum that includes healthy diet, importance of physical activity
and positive body image
• Increasing physical activity sessions and the development of fundamental
movement skills throughout the school week
• Improving the nutritional quality of foods in schools
• Supporting teachers and other staff to implement health promotion strategies
and activities
Diet and physical activity
Dietary interventions, ranging from brief advice or counselling to structured
management by health professionals, have been studied the most. The use
of multicomponent interventions focusing on dietary, physical activity and
behavioural aspects may be useful depending on the age-group, settings and
available resources. Also, the implementation of multidisciplinary childhood
obesity intervention programmes in the clinical setting should involve a team of
care providers including a psychologist, trained nurse, dietitian, physiotherapist
and exercise specialist.196 [Level 1-]
Lifestyle intervention would have to be comprehensive involving the whole
family and the environment the child lives in. Main findings from literature
indicate using school-based preventive programmes with family and community
reinforcement.195 Research has indicated the need for parental involvement and a
whole family approach in the success of prevention programmes.151,197
In children ≤6 years old
Data from a randomised controlled trial (RCT) involving 520 children focused
solely on dietary intervention suggested little to no difference in BMI Z-score
reductions in children ≤5 years old.198 [Level 1-]
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults, children
and adolescents
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
A Cochrane review of 153 RCTs by Brown et al. in 2019 reported that a range of
interventions focusing on both diet and physical activity components contributed
to a modest effect on obesity prevention in children aged 0 up to 12 years.199
[Level 1++] In children ≤5 years old,
• There was a pooled reduction of 0.07 units (95% CI -0.14, -0.01) in BMI Z-score
from combined diet and physical activity interventions
• There was a BMI reduction of 0.11 kg/m2 (95% CI -0.21, 0.00) from combined diet
and physical activity interventions
While being modest, diet and physical activity behaviours adopted early in life
suggests that these behaviours track to later ages in life when the health benefits
might be seen.198 [Level 1-]
In another Cochrane review of RCTs involving children aged 0-6 years old
assigned to combination of interventions focusing on diet, physical activity and
behavioural components vs usual care,200 [Level 1++] there were greater BMI
Z-score reductions on follow-up with mean difference of:
• -0.3 units (95% CI -0.4, -0.2) at 6 to 12 months
• -0.4 units (95% CI -0.6, -0.2) at 12-18 months
• -0.3 units (95% CI -0.4, -0.1) at 2 years
In children 6-12 years old
In children aged 6-12 years who received a combination of dietary and
physical activity interventions compared to those assigned to the control group
demonstrated,199 [Level 1++]
• Reduction in their BMI Z-score (mean difference -0.05 units, 95% CI -0.10, -0.01)
• Reduction in their BMI (mean difference -0.05 kg/m2, 95% CI -0.11, -0.01),
though it was not statistically significant.
Interventions that combined diet, physical activity and behavioural components
for at least 6 months in children 6-11 years compared to no interventions or usual
care were associated with reductions of,201 [Level 1++]
• BMI (mean difference -0.53 kg/m2, 95% CI -0.82, -0.24)
• BMI Z-score (mean difference -0.06 units, 95% CI -0.10, -0.22)
• Body weight (mean difference -1.45 kg, 95% CI -1.88, -1.02)
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults, children
and adolescents
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
In adolescents 13-18 years old
No significant reductions were demonstrated between interventions to change
either diet or physical activity alone, or combining both interventions on BMI
Z-score and BMI.199 [Level 1++] However, these findings were from the pooled
analysis of RCTs with low certainty (high heterogeneity and potential biased).
In another Cochrane review, children assigned to multi-component interventions
containing diet, physical activity and behavioural components vs those with no
interventions resulted in reductions of,202 [Level 1++]
• BMI (mean difference -1.18 kg/m2, 95% CI -1.67, -0.69)
• BMI Z-score (mean difference -0.13 units, 95% CI -0.21, -0.05)
• Body weight (mean difference -3.67 kg, 95% CI -5.21, -2.31)
The favourable effect of the multi-component intervention was reported up to 24
months of follow up.202 [Level 1++]
All (children and adolescents 0-18 years old)
Similarly, another review that included RCTs involving children 0-18 years found
that combined interventions of diet and physical activity were linked with
reductions in BMI and BMI Z-scores.199 [Level 1++]
While most of the Cochrane reviews discussed indicate the favourable effects of
combined diet, physical activity as well as behavioural interventions on weight
reduction in children aged between 0 and 18 years, considerable inconsistencies
in the weight management strategies used were evident. Other inconsistencies
were also observed in the settings where the RCTs were conducted as well as the
duration of the follow-up.
6.2.3 Environment
Preventive measures for obesity will need to include changes in the environment.
Availability and accessibility to greenspaces, parks, recreational facilities, and
sidewalks were found to be associated with increased physical activity levels and
reduced sedentary behaviour in children.203
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults, children
and adolescents
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Recommendations 10
• Breast feeding should be encouraged and adherence to dietary guidelines
during weaning should be advocated.
[Grade B]
• Multicomponent interventions should be used in preventing
[Grade B]
obesity
› Dietary
› Physical activity
› Behavioural aspects
• Family and parental involvement should be encouraged.
[Grade C]
• School-based programme with community engagement should be advocated.
[Grade C]
• Environmental changes should be made to support obesity prevention.
[Grade D]
6. Prevention of overweight and obesity in adults, children
and adolescents
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
7. Implementing the
guidelines
Implementation of the clinical practice guidelines (CPG) is important as it helps in
providing quality healthcare services based on best available evidence applied to
the local scenario and expertise. Various factors and resource implications should
be considered for the success of the uptake in the CPG recommendations.
Facilitating and limiting factors
The existing facilitating factors in implementing the recommendations in the CPG
are:
• Availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and softcopies)
• Regular conferences and updates on management of obesity led by the
Malaysian Endocrine and Metabolic Society
• Public awareness campaigns about obesity that can be conducted regularly
• Involvement of governmental/non-governmental organisations e.g., Bahagian
Kawalan Penyakit (Cawangan Penyakit Tidak Berjankit) and Bahagian
Pembangunan Kesihatan Keluarga of the Ministry of Health (MoH) and
Malaysian Endocrine and Metabolic Society
The existing limiting factors or barriers in implementing the recommendations in
the CPG are:
• The lack of awareness about obesity as a chronic disease among healthcare
providers and individuals living with obesity
• Lack of awareness among healthcare providers on the importance of treatment
of obesity
• Lack of awareness among the general public on the importance of recognising
obesity as a disease
• The misconception that obesity and overweight are solely attributed to lifestyle
and is the responsibility of the individual
• The lack of resources at the school level to educate children/adolescents about
obesity and access to healthy eating plans
• The lack of access to evidence-based effective and safe treatments for obesity
Potential resource implications
To implement the CPG, there must be dedicated efforts to:
• Ensure widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare providers
• Provide regular training to healthcare providers via effective seminars and
workshops
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
7. Implementing the guidelines
• Involve multidisciplinary teams at all levels of health care
• Explore opportunities to work with the school healthcare teams in addressing
paediatric overweight and obesity
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of the CPG by
MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference and Training Module.
8. Clinical indicators for
quality management
To assist in the implementation of the clinical practice guidelines (CPG), the
following are proposed as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
1.
2.
Percentage of people
with obesity (at 6 months
follow-up) who reduced
weight by 5%
Percentage of people
with obesity screened for
complications
Number of people with obesity
with weight loss ≥5%
Number of people with obesity
screened for complications
Total number of people with
obesity at 6 months follow-up
attending the facility
Total number of people with obesity
attending the facility
X 100%
X 100%
=
=
*(Proposed target: 50% for primary care and tertiary care)
*(Proposed target: 85% for primary care and tertiary care)
The targets are proposed based on existing evidence, taking into account the
practicality of the recommendations and the reality of the current available
resources and facilities.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
91
Appendices
Appendix 1
Example of a search strategy
Clinical question: What are the effective screening strategies and assessments for
diagnosis of obesity?
OBESITY
1. OBESITY/
2. Obesity*
3. Obesity/Adult/6-10
4. Obesity/Children/6-10
5. Obesity/Adolescent/6-10
6. /Screening
7. /Diagnosis
8. /Assessment
9. /Waist circumference
10. /BMI
Filter:
• Clinical trial
• Meta-analysis
• Randomised controlled trial
• Review
• Systematic review
• Custom range: 1/1/2006-1/1/2021
• Species: Humans
• Language: English
OVERWEIGHT
1. OVERWEIGHT/
2. Overweight*
3. Overweight/Adult/6-10
4. Overweight/Children/6-10
5. Overweight/Adolescent/6-10
6. /Screening
7. /Diagnosis
8. /Assessment
9. /Waist circumference
10. /BMI
Filter:
• Clinical trial
• Meta-analysis
• Randomised controlled trial
• Review
• Systematic review
• Custom range: 1/1/2006-1/1/2021
• Species: Humans
• Language: English
Appendices
92
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Appendix 2
Binge Eating Scale
The Binge Eating Scale is a 16-item questionnaire completed by the patient that
assesses the presence of certain binge eating behaviours which may be indicative
of an eating disorder. It is formatted as groups of statements about behaviour,
thought and emotional states. The patient should indicate which statement
within each group best describes how they feel.
1.
I don't feel self-conscoius about my weight or body size when I'm with
others.
I feel concerned about how I look to others, but it normally does not
make me feel disappointed with myself.
I do get self-conscious about my apprearance and weight which makes
me feel disappointed in myself.
I feel very self-conscious about my weight and frequently, I feel intense
shame and disgust for myself. I try to avoid social contacts because of
my self-consciousness.
2.
I don't have any difficulty eating slowly in the proper manner.
Although I seem to be "gobble down" foods, I don't end up feeling
stuffed because of eating too much.
At times, I tend to eat quickly and then, I feel uncomfortably full
afterwards.
I have the habit of bolting down my food, without really chewing it.
When this happens I usually feel uncomfortably stuffed because I've
eaten too much.
3.
I feel capable to control my eating urges when I want to.
I feel like I have failed to control my eating more than the average
person.
I feel utterly helpless when it comes to feeling in control of my eating
urges.
Because I feel so helpless about controlling my eating I have become
very desperate about trying to get in control.
Appendices
93
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
4.
I don't have the habit of eating when I'm bored.
I sometimes eat when I'm bored, but often I'm able to "get busy" and
get my mind off food.
I have regular habit of eating when I'm bored, but occasionally, I can
use some other activity to get my mind off eating.
I have a strong habit of eating when I'm bored. Nothing seems to help
me break the habit.
5.
I'm usually physically hungry when I eat something.
Occasionally, I eat something on impulse even though I really am not
hungry.
I have the regular habit of eating foods, that I might not really enjoy, to
satisfy a hungry feeling even though physically, I don't need the food.
Although I'm not physically hungry, I get a hungry feeling in my mouth
that only seems to be satisfied my mouth hunger, I then spit the food
out so I won't gain weight.
6.
I don't feel any guilt or self-hate after I overeat.
After I overeat, occasionally I feel guilt or self-hate.
Almost all the time I experience strong guilt or self-hate after I overeat.
7.
I don't lose total control of my eating when dieting even after periods
when I overeat.
Sometimes when I eat a "forbidden food" on a diet , I feel like I "blew it"
and eat even more.
Frequently, I have the habit of saying to myself, "I've blown it now, why
not go all the way" when I overeat on a diet. When that happens I eat
even more.
I have a regular habit of starting strict diets for myself, but I break the
diets by going on an eating binge. My life seems to be either a "feast"
or "famine".
8.
I rarely eat so much food that I feel uncomfortably stuffed afterwards.
Usually about once a month, I eat such a quantity of food, I end up
feeling very stuffed.
I have regular periods during the month when I eat large amounts of
food, either at mealtime or at snacks.
I eat so much food that I regularly feel quite uncomfortable after eating
and sometimes a bit nauseous.
Appendices
94
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
9.
My level of calorie intake does not go up very high or go down very low
on a regular basis.
Sometimes after I overeat, I will try to reduce my calorie intake to almost
nothing to compensate for the excess calories I've eaten.
I have a regular habit of overeating during the night. It seems that my
routine is not to be hungry in the morning but overeat in the evening.
In my adult years, I have had week-long periods where I practically
starve myself. This follows periods when I overeat. It seems I live a life of
either "feast or famine".
10.
I usually am able to stop eating when I want to. I know when "enough
is enough".
Every so often, I experience a compulsion to eat which I can't seem to
control.
Frequently, I experience strong urges to eat which I seem unable to
control, but at other times I can control my eating urges.
I feel incapable of controlling urges to eat. I have a fear of not being
able to stop eating voluntarily.
11.
I don't have any problem stopping eating when I feel full.
I usually can stop eating when I feel full but occasionally overeat
leaving me feeling uncomfortably stuffed.
I have a problem stoppinge eating once I start and usually I feel
uncomfotably stuffed after I eat a meal.
Because I have a problem not being able to stop eating when I want, I
sometimes have to induce vomiting to relieve my stuffed feeling.
12.
I seem to eat just as much when I'm with others (family, social
gatherings) as when I'm by myself.
Sometimes, when I'm with other persons, I don't eat as much as I want
to eat because I'm self-conscious about my eating.
Frequently, I eat only a small amount of food when others are present,
because I'm very embarrassed about my eating.
I feel so ashamed about overeating that I pick times to overeat when I
know no one will see me. I feel like a "closet eater".
Appendices
95
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
13.
I eat 3 meals a day with only an occasional between meal snack.
I eat 3 meals a day, but I also normally snack between meals.
When I am snacking heavily, I get in the habit of skipping regular meals.
There are regular periods when I seem to be continually eating, with no
planned meals.
14.
I don't think much about trying to control unwanted eating urges.
At least some of the time, I feel my thoughts are pre-occupied with
trying to control my eating urges.
I feel that frequently I spend much time thinking about how much I ate
or about trying not to eat urges.
I feel that frequently I spend much time thinking about how much I ate
or about trying not to eat anymore.
It seems to me that most of my waking hours are pre-occupied by
thoughts about eating or not eating. I feel like I'm constantly struggling
not to eat.
15.
I don't think about food a great deal.
I have strong cravings for food but they last only for brief periods of
time.
I have days when I can't seem to think about anything else but food.
Most of my days seem to be pre-occupied with thoughts about food. I
feel like I live to eat.
16.
I usually know whether or not I'm physically hungry. I take the right
portion of food to satisfy me.
Occasionally, I feel uncertain about knowing whether or not I'm
physically hungry. At these times it's hard to know how much food I
should take to satisfy me.
Even though I might know how many calories I should eat, I don't have
any idea what is a "normal" amount of food for me.
Adapted from https://psychology-tools.com/test/binge-eating-scale.
Appendices
96
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Self-monitoring worksheet
I am monitoring
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
exercise
dietary intake
sleep
mood
Appendices
97
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Appendix 3
Sample menu plan
(50% carbohydrate, 20% protein, 30% fat)
Food
Exchanges
1200 kcal
1500 kcal
No. of
Exchanges
Food Portion*
Sample Menu
No. of
Exchanges
Food Portion*
Sample Menu
BREAKFAST
Cereal/Grains
2
2 pcs whole meal
bread
2 pcs egg sandwich/
1 medium chappati/
1 thosai/1 cup cooked
mihun
2
1 cup mihun
1 bowl of mihun soto with
shredded chicken
Lean Meat/
egg
1
1 egg
1
½ palm size
Fat
1
1 tsp mayonnaise
1
1 tsp oil
Vegetable
1
½ cup (cucumber
+ lettuce +
tomatoes)
1
½ cup
Bean sprout
Low Fat Milk
½
½ cup
Coffee / tea with
Low Fat milk
½
½ cup
Coffee / tea with
Low Fat milk
LUNCH
Cereal/Grains/
Starchy
Vegetables
2
1 cup rice
1 cup rice
3
1 ½ of cup rice
1 ½ of cup rice
Fish
2
1 palm size
1 palm size fish
asam pedas
3
1 ½ palm size
1 ½ palm size ikan
kembong with
asam gravy
Appendices
98
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Food
Exchanges
1200 kcal
1500 kcal
No. of
Exchanges
Food Portion*
Sample Menu
No. of
Exchanges
Food Portion*
Sample Menu
LUNCH
Fat
1 ½
1 ½ tsp oil
½ cup stir fried
ladies’ fingers
2
2 tsp oil
½ cup stir-fried spinach
Vegetables
1 ½
¾ cup (cooked)
½ cup ulam with sambal
1 ½
¾ cup (cooked)
½ cup ulam with sambal
Fruit
1
½ guava
½ pc of guava
Plain water
1
1 banana
1 banana
Plain water
SNACK
Cereal/Grains
1
6 pcs of small
crackers
6 pcs of small crackers
1
3 pcs biscuit
3 pcs of whole meal
crackers
Low Fat Milk
½
½ cup
Coffee/tea with
low fat milk
½
½ cup
Coffee/tea with fat milk
DINNER
Cereal/Grains/
Starchy
Vegetables
2
1 cup rice
1 cup rice
3
1 ½ of cup rice
1 ½ of cup rice
Lean Meat
2
1 palm size
1 palm size chicken
tomyam
2
1 palm size
1 palm size chicken stew
Fat
1 ½
1 ½ tsp oil
2 tsp oil
3
3 tsp oil
Vegetables
1 ½
¾ cup (cooked)
¾ cup stir-fried kangkung
1 ½
¾ cup (cooked)
¾ cup stir-fried sawi
Fruit
1
1 star fruit
1 whole star fruit
Plain water
1
1 slice of papaya
1 slice of papaya
Plain water
Appendices
99
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Summary of Total Food Exchanges
Cereal/Grains/ Starchy Vegetables
7
9
Fish
2
3
Lean Meat
3
3
Skim Milk
1
1
Fat
4
6
Vegetables
4
3 ½
Fruit
2
2
Samples of Food exchanges:
• 1 cup size refers to 200 ml cup (teacup size)
• ½ cup rice can be exchanged for 1 slice of bread or ½ cup noodles or 3 pieces of crackers
• 1 fruit refers to 1 hawker-size slice of papaya/watermelon/pineapple or 1 medium size orange/apple/pear
• ½ palm size lean meat or fish can be exchanged for 1 matchbox size of lean meat or fish or 1 egg.
• Encourage mainly low-fat cooking (e.g.– steamed, grilled, baked, boiled)
• For more examples of food exchanges, refer Food Groups and Exchange List.
Appendices
100
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Food groups and exchange lists
Cereals, Grain Products and Starchy Vegetables
Each item contains 15 g carbohydrate, 2 g protein, 0.5 g fat and 75 calories.
Rice, white or unpolished (cooked)
½ cup or ⅓ Chinese rice bowl
Can be exchanged for
i. Cereals, Grain & Bread
Quantity
Rice porridge
1 cup
Kuetiau
Mihun
Tang hoon
Spaghetti
Macaroni
½ cup or ⅓ Chinese rice bowl
Mee, wet
⅓ cup
Putu mayam
1 piece (40 g)
Chapati, diameter 20 cm
⅓ piece
Bread (wholemeal, high fiber, white/brown
1 slice (30 g)
Plain roll
1 small (30 g)
Burger bun
½ piece
Pita bread, diameter 6”
½ piece
Oatmeal, cooked
¼ cup
Oats, uncooked
3 rounded tablespoons
Muesli
¼ cup
Flour (wheat, rice, atta)
3 rounded tablespoons
Biscuits (plain, unsweetened) e.g., cream
crackers, Ryvita
3 pieces
Small thin, salted biscuits (4.5 x 4.5 cm)
6 pieces
Appendices
101
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
ii. Starchy vegetables
Quantity
*Baked beans, canned
⅓ cup
*Lentils
Corn kernel (fresh/canned)
Peas (fresh/canned)
½ cup
Sweet potato
Tapioca
Yam
Breadfruit (sukun)
½ cup (45 g)
Pumpkin
1 cup (100 g)
Corn on the cob, 6 cm length
1 cob
Potato
1 small (75 g)
Potato, mashed
1 cup (94 g)
Water chestnut
4 pieces
* Contains more protein than other foods in the list i.e., 5 g/serve
1 cup is equivalent to 200 ml in volume
1 cup = ¾ Chinese rice bowl (11.2 cm in diameter x 3.7 cm deep)
Tablespoon refers to dessert spoon level (equivalent to 2 teaspoons)
Fruits
Each item contains 15 g carbohydrate and 60 calories
Fruits
Quantity
Banana
1 small (60 g)
Apple
Custard apple (buah nona)
Star fruit
Pear
Peach
Persimmon
Sapodilla (ciku)
Kiwi
1 medium
Hog plum (kedondong)
6 whole
Mangosteen
2 small
Plum
2 small
Appendices
102
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Fruits
Quantity
Duku langsat
Grapes
Langsat
Longan
Water apple (jambu air), small
8 pieces
Lychee
5 whole
Rambutan
5 whole
Pomelo
5 slices
Papaya
Pineapple
Watermelon
Soursop (durian belanda)
1 slice
Guava
½ fruit
Cempedak
4 pieces
Jack fruit (Nangka)
4 pieces
Prunes
3 pieces
Dates (kurma), dried
2 medium seeds
Durian
2 medium seeds
Mango
½ small
Lean Meat, Fish and Meat Substitute
Each serving of meat and substitutes contains 7 g protein. These foods contain
varying amounts of fat and energy, but negligible carbohydrate.
CHO
(g)
Protein
(g)
Fat
(g)
Energy
(kcal)
Lean meat / Meat substitute
0
7
4
65
Fish / Shellfish
0
7
1
35
Chicken (raw, without skin)
½ drumstick
Appendices
103
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Can be exchanged for
i. Lean meat
Quantity
Lean meat (all varieties)
1 small serve (40 g)
Poultry (young)
40 g raw/30 g cooked
Egg (hen)
1 medium
Soya bean curd (taukua)
½ piece (60 g)
Soya bean curd (soft, auhou)
¾ piece (90 g)
Fucuk
1 ½ sheets (30 g)
Tempeh
1 piece (45 g)
Cheese, cheddar
2 thin slices (30 g)
Cottage cheese
¼ small cup
ii. Fish, shellfish
Quantity
Fish (e.g., ikan kembong, selar)
½ piece (40 g)
Fish cutlet
¼ piece (40 g)
Squid
1 medium (40 g)
Crab meat
Lobster meat
Prawn meat
¼ cup
Cockles
20 small
6 medium
* Beans & lentils are good sources of protein, but they also contain carbohydrates.
Milk
These foods contain varying amount of carbohydrate, fat and protein depending
on which type of milk is chosen.
CHO
(g)
Protein
(g)
Fat
(g)
Energy
(kcal)
Skim (1% fat)
15
8
trace
90
Low fat (2% fat)
12
8
5
125
Full cream
10
8
9
Appendices
104
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Milk
Quantity
Fresh cow’s milk
1 cup (240 ml)
UHT fresh milk
1 cup (240 ml)
Powdered milk (skimmed, full cream)
4 rounded tablespoons or 1/3 cup
Yogurt (plain/low fat)
¾ cup
Evaporated (unsweetened)
½ cup
Fat
Each item contains 5 g and 45 calories. Some of the foods in the list, e.g., nuts and
seeds also contain small amount of carbohydrate and protein besides fat.
Oil (all types)
1 level teaspoon (5 g)
Can be exchanged for
Fat
Quantity
Butter, margarine
Mayonnaise
Shortening, lard
1 level teaspoon
Peanut butter
2 level teaspoons
Cream, unwhipped (heavy)
Cream cheese
Salad dressing
1 level teaspoon
Cream, unwhipped (light)
Coconut, shredded
Coconut milk (santan)
Non-dairy creamer, powder
2 level teaspoons
Almond
6 whole
Cashew nut
6 whole
Walnut
1 whole
Peanut
20 small
Sesame seed
1 level teaspoon
Watermelon seed (kuaci) with shell
¼ cup
Appendices
105
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Appendix 4
Blood pressure levels for boys by age and height percentile
Age
(Year)
BP
Percentile

Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
 Percentile of Height 
 Percentile of Height 
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
1
50th
80
81
83
85
87
88
89
34
35
36
37
38
39
39
90th
94
95
97
99
100
102
103
49
50
51
52
53
53
54
95th
98
99
101
103
104
106
106
54
54
55
56
57
58
58
99th
105
106
108
110
112
113
114
61
62
63
64
65
66
66
2
50th
84
85
87
88
90
92
92
39
40
41
42
43
44
44
90th
97
99
100
102
104
105
106
54
55
56
57
58
58
59
95th
101
102
104
106
108
109
110
59
59
60
61
62
63
63
99th
109
110
111
113
115
117
117
66
67
68
69
70
71
71
3
50th
86
87
89
91
93
94
95
44
44
45
46
47
48
48
90th
100
101
103
105
107
108
109
59
59
60
61
62
63
63
95th
104
105
107
109
110
112
113
63
63
64
65
66
67
67
99th
111
112
114
116
118
119
120
71
71
72
73
74
75
75
4
50th
88
89
91
93
95
96
97
47
48
49
50
51
51
52
90th
102
103
105
107
109
110
111
62
63
64
65
66
66
67
95th
106
107
109
111
112
114
115
66
67
68
69
70
71
71
99th
113
114
116
118
120
121
122
74
75
76
77
78
78
79
5
50th
90
91
93
95
96
98
98
50
51
52
53
54
55
55
90th
104
105
106
108
110
111
112
65
66
67
68
69
69
70
95th
108
109
110
112
114
115
116
69
70
71
72
73
74
74
99th
115
116
118
120
121
123
124
77
78
79
80
81
81
82
6
50th
91
92
94
96
98
99
100
53
53
54
55
56
57
57
90th
105
106
108
110
111
113
113
68
68
69
70
71
72
72
95th
109
110
112
114
115
117
117
72
72
73
74
75
76
76
99th
116
117
119
121
123
124
125
80
80
81
82
83
84
84
7
50th
92
94
95
97
99
100
101
55
55
56
57
58
59
59
90th
106
107
109
111
113
114
115
70
70
71
72
73
74
74
95th
110
111
113
115
117
118
119
74
74
75
76
77
78
78
99th
117
118
120
122
124
125
126
82
82
83
84
85
86
Appendices
106
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Age
(Year)
BP
Percentile

Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
 Percentile of Height 
 Percentile of Height 
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
8
50th
94
95
97
99
100
102
102
56
57
58
59
60
60
61
90th
107
109
110
112
114
115
116
71
72
72
73
74
75
76
95th
111
112
114
116
118
119
120
75
76
77
78
79
79
80
99th
119
120
122
123
125
127
127
83
84
85
86
87
87
88
9
50th
95
96
98
100
102
103
104
57
58
59
60
61
61
62
90th
109
110
112
114
115
117
118
72
73
74
75
76
76
77
95th
113
114
116
118
119
121
121
76
77
78
79
80
81
81
99th
120
121
123
125
127
128
129
84
85
86
87
88
88
89
10
50th
97
98
100
102
103
105
106
58
59
60
61
61
62
63
90th
111
112
114
115
117
119
119
73
73
74
75
76
77
78
95th
115
116
117
119
121
122
123
77
78
79
80
81
81
82
99th
122
123
125
127
128
130
130
85
86
86
88
88
89
90
11
50th
99
100
102
104
105
107
107
59
59
60
61
62
63
63
90th
113
114
115
117
119
120
121
74
74
75
76
77
78
78
95th
117
118
119
121
123
124
125
78
78
79
80
81
82
82
99th
124
125
127
129
130
132
132
86
86
87
88
89
90
90
12
50th
101
102
104
106
108
109
110
59
60
61
62
63
63
64
90th
115
116
118
120
121
123
123
74
75
75
76
77
78
79
95th
119
120
122
123
125
127
127
78
79
80
81
82
82
83
99th
126
127
129
131
133
134
135
86
87
88
89
90
90
91
13
50th
104
105
106
108
110
111
112
60
60
61
62
63
64
64
90th
117
118
120
122
124
125
126
75
75
76
77
78
79
79
95th
121
122
124
126
128
129
130
79
79
80
81
82
83
83
99th
128
130
131
133
135
136
137
87
87
88
89
90
91
91
14
50th
106
107
109
111
113
114
115
60
61
62
63
64
65
65
90th
120
121
123
125
126
128
128
75
76
77
78
79
79
80
95th
124
125
127
128
130
132
132
80
80
81
82
83
84
84
99th
131
132
134
136
138
139
140
87
88
89
90
91
92
92
15
50th
109
110
112
113
115
117
117
61
62
63
64
65
66
66
90th
122
124
125
127
129
130
131
76
77
78
79
80
80
81
95th
126
127
129
131
133
134
135
81
81
82
83
84
85
85
99th
134
135
136
138
140
142
142
88
89
90
91
92
93
Appendices
107
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Age
(Year)
BP
Percentile

Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
 Percentile of Height 
 Percentile of Height 
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
16
50th
111
112
114
116
118
119
120
63
63
64
65
66
67
67
90th
125
126
128
130
131
133
134
78
78
79
80
81
82
82
95th
129
130
132
134
135
137
137
82
83
83
84
85
86
87
99th
136
137
139
141
143
144
145
90
90
91
92
93
94
94
17
50th
114
115
116
118
120
121
122
65
66
66
67
68
69
70
90th
127
128
130
132
134
135
136
80
80
81
82
83
84
84
95th
131
132
134
136
138
139
140
84
85
86
87
87
88
89
99th
139
140
141
143
145
146
147
92
93
93
94
95
96
97
BP, blood pressure
* The 90th percentile is 1.28 SD, 95th percentile is 1.645 SD, and the 99th percentile is 2.326 SD over the mean.
Blood pressure levels for girls by and age and height percentile
Age
(Year)
BP
Percentile

Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
 Percentile of Height 
 Percentile of Height 
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
1
50th
83
84
85
86
88
89
90
38
39
39
40
41
41
42
90th
97
97
98
100
101
102
103
52
53
53
54
55
55
56
95th
100
101
102
104
105
106
107
56
57
57
58
59
59
60
99th
108
108
109
111
112
113
114
64
64
65
65
66
67
67
2
50th
85
85
87
88
89
91
91
43
44
44
45
46
46
47
90th
98
99
100
101
103
104
105
57
58
58
59
60
61
61
95th
102
103
104
105
107
108
109
61
62
62
63
64
65
65
99th
109
110
111
112
114
115
116
69
69
70
70
71
72
72
3
50th
86
87
88
89
91
92
93
47
48
48
49
50
50
51
90th
100
100
102
103
104
106
106
61
62
62
63
64
64
65
95th
104
104
105
107
108
109
110
65
66
66
67
68
68
69
99th
111
111
113
114
115
116
117
73
73
74
74
75
76
76
4
50th
88
88
90
91
92
94
94
50
50
51
52
52
53
54
90th
101
102
103
104
106
107
108
64
64
65
66
67
67
68
95th
105
106
107
108
110
111
112
68
68
69
70
71
71
72
99th
112
113
114
115
117
118
119
76
76
76
77
78
79
Appendices
108
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Age
(Year)
BP
Percentile

Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
 Percentile of Height 
 Percentile of Height 
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5
50th
89
90
91
93
94
95
96
52
53
53
54
55
55
56
90th
103
103
105
106
107
109
109
66
67
67
68
69
69
70
95th
107
107
108
110
111
112
113
70
71
71
72
73
73
74
99th
114
114
116
117
118
120
120
78
78
79
79
80
81
81
6
50th
91
92
93
94
96
97
98
54
54
55
56
56
57
58
90th
104
105
106
108
109
110
111
68
68
69
70
70
71
72
95th
108
109
110
111
113
114
115
72
72
73
74
74
75
76
99th
115
116
117
119
120
121
122
80
80
80
81
82
83
83
7
50th
93
93
95
96
97
99
99
55
56
56
57
58
58
59
90th
106
107
108
109
111
112
113
69
70
70
71
72
72
73
95th
110
111
112
113
115
116
116
73
74
74
75
76
76
77
99th
117
118
119
120
122
123
124
81
81
82
82
83
84
84
8
50th
95
95
96
98
99
100
101
57
57
57
58
59
60
60
90th
108
109
110
111
113
114
114
71
71
71
72
73
74
74
95th
112
112
114
115
116
118
118
75
75
75
76
77
78
78
99th
119
120
121
122
123
125
125
82
82
83
83
84
85
86
9
50th
96
97
98
100
101
102
103
58
58
58
59
60
61
61
90th
110
110
112
113
114
116
116
72
72
72
73
74
75
75
95th
114
114
115
117
118
119
120
76
76
76
77
78
79
79
99th
121
121
123
124
125
127
127
83
83
84
84
85
86
87
10
50th
98
99
100
102
103
104
105
59
59
59
60
61
62
62
90th
112
112
114
115
116
118
118
73
73
73
74
75
76
76
95th
116
116
117
119
120
121
122
77
77
77
78
79
80
80
99th
123
123
125
126
127
129
129
84
84
85
86
86
87
88
11
50th
100
101
102
103
105
106
107
60
60
60
61
62
63
63
90th
114
114
116
117
118
119
120
74
74
74
75
76
77
77
95th
118
118
119
121
122
123
124
78
78
78
79
80
81
81
99th
125
125
126
128
129
130
131
85
85
86
87
87
88
Appendices
109
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
Age
(Year)
BP
Percentile

Systolic BP (mmHg)
Diastolic BP (mmHg)
 Percentile of Height 
 Percentile of Height 
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
12
50th
102
103
104
105
107
108
109
61
61
61
62
63
64
64
90th
116
116
117
119
120
121
122
75
75
75
76
77
78
78
95th
119
120
121
123
124
125
126
79
79
79
80
81
82
82
99th
127
127
128
130
131
132
133
86
86
87
88
88
89
90
13
50th
104
105
106
107
109
110
110
62
62
62
63
64
65
65
90th
117
118
119
121
122
123
124
76
76
76
77
78
79
79
95th
119
120
121
123
124
125
126
79
79
79
80
81
82
82
99th
127
127
128
130
131
132
133
86
86
87
88
88
89
90
14
50th
106
106
107
109
110
111
112
63
63
63
64
65
66
66
90th
119
120
121
122
124
125
125
77
77
77
78
79
80
80
95th
123
123
125
126
127
129
129
81
81
81
82
83
84
84
99th
130
131
132
133
135
136
136
88
88
89
90
90
91
92
15
50th
107
108
109
110
111
113
113
64
64
64
65
66
67
67
90th
120
121
122
123
125
126
127
78
78
78
79
80
81
81
95th
124
125
126
127
129
130
131
82
82
82
83
84
85
85
99th
131
132
133
134
136
137
138
89
89
90
91
91
92
93
16
50th
108
108
110
111
112
114
114
64
64
65
66
66
67
68
90th
121
122
123
124
126
127
128
78
78
79
80
81
81
82
95th
125
126
127
128
130
131
132
82
82
83
84
85
85
86
99th
132
133
134
135
137
138
139
90
90
90
91
92
93
93
17
50th
108
109
110
111
113
114
115
64
65
65
66
67
67
68
90th
122
122
123
125
126
127
128
78
79
79
80
81
81
82
95th
125
126
127
129
130
131
132
82
83
83
84
85
85
86
99th
133
133
134
136
137
138
139
90
90
91
91
92
93
93
BP, blood pressure
* The 90th percentile is 1.28 SD, 95th percentile is 1.645 SD, and the 99th percentile is 2.326 SD over the mean.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
References
1.
Aune D, Sen A, Prasad M, et al. BMI and all cause mortality: systematic review and non-linear dose-response
meta-analysis of 230 cohort studies with 3.74 million deaths among 30.3 million participants. BMJ.
2016;353:i2156. doi:10.1136/bmj.i2156
2.
Flegal KM, Kit BK, Orpana H, Graubard BI. Association of all-cause mortality with overweight and obesity using
standard body mass index categories: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Jama. Jan 2 2013;309(1):71-82.
doi:10.1001/jama.2012.113905
3.
Bhaskaran K, Douglas I, Forbes H, dos-Santos-Silva I, Leon DA, Smeeth L. Body-mass index and risk of 22 specific
cancers: a population-based cohort study of 5·24 million UK adults. Lancet. Aug 30 2014;384(9945):755-65.
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(14)60892-8
4.
Ul-Haq Z, Mackay DF, Fenwick E, Pell JP. Meta-analysis of the association between body mass index and healthrelated quality of life among adults, assessed by the SF-36. Obesity (Silver Spring). Mar 2013;21(3):E322-7.
doi:10.1002/oby.20107
5.
The Economist Intelligence Unit. Tackling obesity in ASEAN - Prevalence, impact and guidance on interventions.
2017. Available at: https://www.evolveasia.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/EIU_Tackling-Obesity-in-ASEAN_FinalReport.pdf.
6.
Institute for Public Health. Non-Communicable Diseases: Risk Factors and other Health Problems. Volume 1.
National Institutes of health; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: 2019. pp. 1-392. Available online: http://www.iku.gov.my/
nhms-2019.
7.
Lai WK, Mohd Sidik S, Lekhraj R, Gan WY, Ismail SIF. Prevalence and Predictors of Overweight and Obesity
Among Adolescents in Seremban, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia. Cureus. Jan 2022;14(1):e21795. doi:10.7759/
cureus.21795
8.
Jamal R, Syed Zakaria SZ, Kamaruddin MA, et al. Cohort Profile: The Malaysian Cohort (TMC) project: a prospective
study of non-communicable diseases in a multi-ethnic population. Int J Epidemiol. Apr 2015;44(2):423-31.
doi:10.1093/ije/dyu089
9.
Blüher M. Obesity: global epidemiology and pathogenesis. Nat Rev Endocrinol. May 2019;15(5):288-298.
doi:10.1038/s41574-019-0176-8
10.
Global BMIMC, Di Angelantonio E, Bhupathiraju Sh N, et al. Body-mass index and all-cause mortality:
individual-participant-data meta-analysis of 239 prospective studies in four continents. Lancet. Aug 20
2016;388(10046):776-86. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(16)30175-1
11.
Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, et al. Benefits of modest weight loss in improving cardiovascular risk factors
in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Jul 2011;34(7):1481-6. doi:10.2337/
dc10-2415
12.
Unick JL, Beavers D, Jakicic JM, et al. Effectiveness of lifestyle interventions for individuals with severe obesity
and type 2 diabetes: results from the Look AHEAD trial. Diabetes Care. Oct 2011;34(10):2152-7. doi:10.2337/
dc11-0874
13.
Haase CL, Lopes S, Olsen AH, Satylganova A, Schnecke V, McEwan P. Weight loss and risk reduction of obesityrelated outcomes in 0.5 million people: evidence from a UK primary care database. Int J Obes (Lond). Jun
2021;45(6):1249-1258. doi:10.1038/s41366-021-00788-4
14.
WHO Expert Consultation. Appropriate body-mass index for Asian populations and its implications for policy
and intervention strategies. Lancet. Jan 10 2004;363(9403):157-63. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(03)15268-3
15.
WHO. Obesity: Preventing and managing the global epidemic. Report on a WHO Consultation on Obesity,
Geneva, 3-5 June 1997. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1998.
16.
Han TS, van Leer EM, Seidell JC, Lean ME. Waist circumference action levels in the identification of cardiovascular
risk factors: prevalence study in a random sample. Bmj. Nov 25 1995;311(7017):1401-5. doi:10.1136/bmj.311.7017.1401
17.
Ko GT, Chan JC, Cockram CS, Woo J. Prediction of hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidaemia or albuminuria using
simple anthropometric indexes in Hong Kong Chinese. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. Nov 1999;23(11):1136-42.
doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0801043
18.
He M, Tan KCB, Li ETS, Kung AWC. Body fat determination by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry and its
relation to body mass index and waist circumference in Hong Kong Chinese. International Journal of Obesity.
2001/05/01 2001;25(5):748-752. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0801612
19.
He W, Zhang S, Song A, et al. Greater abdominal fat accumulation is associated with higher metabolic
risk in Chinese than in white people: an ethnicity study. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58688. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0058688
20. Jia WP, Xiang KS, Chen L, Lu JX, Wu YM. Epidemiological study on obesity and its comorbidities in urban
Chinese older than 20 years of age in Shanghai, China. Obes Rev. Aug 2002;3(3):157-65. doi:10.1046/j.1467789x.2002.00071.x
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
References
21.
Reddy KS, Prabhakaran D, Shah P, Shah B. Differences in body mass index and waist: hip ratios in North Indian
rural and urban populations. Obes Rev. Aug 2002;3(3):197-202. doi:10.1046/j.1467-789x.2002.00075.x
22. Yoshiike N, Seino F, Tajima S, et al. Twenty-year changes in the prevalence of overweight in Japanese adults: the
National Nutrition Survey 1976-95. Obes Rev. Aug 2002;3(3):183-90. doi:10.1046/j.1467-789x.2002.00070.x
23. Zhou BF. Predictive values of body mass index and waist circumference for risk factors of certain related
diseases in Chinese adults--study on optimal cut-off points of body mass index and waist circumference in
Chinese adults. Biomed Environ Sci. Mar 2002;15(1):83-96.
24. Zhou B. Predictive values of body mass index and waist circumference to risk factors of related diseases in
Chinese adult population. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. Feb 2002;23(1):5-10.
25. Health Promotion Board, Ministry of Health. Obesity HPB-MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines 1/2016. Singapore:
Health Promotion Board, Singapore; 2016.
26. Ho-Pham LT, Lai TQ, Nguyen MT, Nguyen TV. Relationship between Body Mass Index and Percent Body Fat
in Vietnamese: Implications for the Diagnosis of Obesity. PLoS One. 2015;10(5):e0127198. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0127198
27. Wang C, Hou X-H, Zhang M-L, et al. Comparison of Body Mass Index with Body Fat Percentage in the Evaluation
of Obesity in Chinese. Biomedical and Environmental Sciences. 2010/06/01/ 2010;23(3):173-179. doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0895-3988(10)60049-9
28. Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci E, et al. Body size and fat distribution as predictors of coronary heart
disease among middle-aged and older US men. Am J Epidemiol. Jun 15 1995;141(12):1117-27. doi:10.1093/
oxfordjournals.aje.a117385
29. Sahakyan KR, Somers VK, Rodriguez-Escudero JP, et al. Normal-Weight Central Obesity: Implications for Total
and Cardiovascular Mortality. Ann Intern Med. Dec 1 2015;163(11):827-35. doi:10.7326/m14-2525
30. Rexrode KM, Carey VJ, Hennekens CH, et al. Abdominal adiposity and coronary heart disease in women. Jama.
Dec 2 1998;280(21):1843-8. doi:10.1001/jama.280.21.1843
31.
WHO. Waist Circumference and Waist–Hip Ratio: Report of a WHO Expert Consultation, Geneva, 8–11 December
2008.
32. Frankenfield DC, Rowe WA, Cooney RN, Smith JS, Becker D. Limits of body mass index to detect obesity and
predict body composition. Nutrition. Jan 2001;17(1):26-30. doi:10.1016/s0899-9007(00)00471-8
33. International Diabetes Federation. The IDF consensus worldwide definition of the metabolic syndrome. 2006.
Available in: https://www.idf.org/e-library/consensus-statements/60-idfconsensus-worldwide-definitionof-themetabolic-syndrome.html.
34. Durrer Schutz D, Busetto L, Dicker D, et al. European Practical and Patient-Centred Guidelines for Adult Obesity
Management in Primary Care. Obes Facts. 2019;12(1):40-66. doi:10.1159/000496183
35. Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologist and American
College of Endocrinology Comprehensive Clinical Practice Guidelines for medical care of patients with obesity.
Endocr Pract. Jul 2016;22 Suppl 3:1-203. doi:10.4158/ep161365.Gl
36. Emmer C, Bosnjak M, Mata J. The association between weight stigma and mental health: A meta-analysis. Obes
Rev. Jan 2020;21(1):e12935. doi:10.1111/obr.12935
37. Pearl RL, Puhl RM. Weight bias internalization and health: a systematic review. Obes Rev. Aug 2018;19(8):11411163. doi:10.1111/obr.12701
38. Papadopoulos S, Brennan L. Correlates of weight stigma in adults with overweight and obesity: A systematic
literature review. Obesity (Silver Spring). Sep 2015;23(9):1743-60. doi:10.1002/oby.21187
39. Sutin AR, Stephan Y, Terracciano A. Weight Discrimination and Risk of Mortality. Psychol Sci. Nov
2015;26(11):1803-11. doi:10.1177/0956797615601103
40. Rajan TM, Menon V. Psychiatric disorders and obesity: A review of association studies. J Postgrad Med. Jul-Sep
2017;63(3):182-190. doi:10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_712_16
41.
Wharton S, Lau DCW, Vallis M, et al. Obesity in adults: a clinical practice guideline. Canadian Medical
Association Journal. 2020;192(31):E875-E891. doi:10.1503/cmaj.191707
42. Shaw K, O'Rourke P, Del Mar C, Kenardy J. Psychological interventions for overweight or obesity. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. Apr 18 2005;(2):Cd003818. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003818.pub2
43. Barnes RD, Ivezaj V. A systematic review of motivational interviewing for weight loss among adults in primary
care. Obesity Reviews. 2015;16(4):304-318. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/obr.12264
44. Rollnick S, Miller WR, Butler CC. Motivational interviewing in health care: Helping patients change behavior.
Motivational interviewing in health care: Helping patients change behavior. Guilford Press; 2008:xiv, 210-xiv, 210.
45. Burgess E, Hassmén P, Welvaert M, Pumpa KL. Behavioural treatment strategies improve adherence to lifestyle
intervention programmes in adults with obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Obes. Apr
2017;7(2):105-114. doi:10.1111/cob.12180
References
112
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
46. Bransford JD, Stein BS. The IDEAL Problem Solver: A Guide for Improving Thinking, Learning, and Creativity.
1984. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.
47. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and
obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. Circulation. Jun 24 2014;129(25 Suppl 2):S102-38. doi:10.1161/01.
cir.0000437739.71477.ee
48. Mohd Zaki NA, Appannah G, Mohamad Nor NS, et al. Impact of community lifestyle intervention on
anthropometric parameters and body composition among overweight and obese women: findings from the
MyBFF@home study. BMC Womens Health. Jul 19 2018;18(Suppl 1):110. doi:10.1186/s12905-018-0595-z
49. Rusali R, Manaf ZA, Shahar S, et al. Comparison of the Effectiveness of Online and Face-to-Face Weight-loss
Interventions in the Workplace: Evidence from Malaysia. Sains Malaysiana 2018;47(1):2437-2445.
50. Morgan-Bathke M, Baxter SD, Halliday TM, et al. Weight Management Interventions Provided by a Dietitian for
Adults with Overweight or Obesity: An Evidence Analysis Center Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Acad
Nutr Diet. Mar 25 2022;doi:10.1016/j.jand.2022.03.014
51.
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Adult Weight Management Evidence-Based Nutrition Practice Guideline.
2014. Available at: https://www.andeal.org/.
52. Stelmach-Mardas M, Walkowiak J. Dietary Interventions and Changes in Cardio-Metabolic Parameters in
Metabolically Healthy Obese Subjects: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis. Nutrients. Jul 28 2016;8(8)
doi:10.3390/nu8080455
53. Nackers LM, Middleton KR, Dubyak PJ, Daniels MJ, Anton SD, Perri MG. Effects of prescribing 1,000 versus
1,500 kilocalories per day in the behavioral treatment of obesity: a randomized trial. Obesity (Silver Spring). Dec
2013;21(12):2481-7. doi:10.1002/oby.20439
54. Andreou E, Philippou C, Papandreou D. Effects of an intervention and maintenance weight loss diet with
and without exercise on anthropometric indices in overweight and obese healthy women. Ann Nutr Metab.
2011;59(2-4):187-92. doi:10.1159/000334755
55. Yumuk V, Tsigos C, Fried M, et al. European Guidelines for Obesity Management in Adults. Obes Facts.
2015;8(6):402-24. doi:10.1159/000442721
56. He S, Wang J, Zhang J, Xu J. Intermittent Versus Continuous Energy Restriction for Weight Loss and Metabolic
Improvement: A Meta-Analysis and Systematic Review. Obesity (Silver Spring). Jan 2021;29(1):108-115.
doi:10.1002/oby.23023
57. Kotarsky CJ, Johnson NR, Mahoney SJ, et al. Time-restricted eating and concurrent exercise training reduces
fat mass and increases lean mass in overweight and obese adults. Physiol Rep. May 2021;9(10):e14868.
doi:10.14814/phy2.14868
58. Lowe DA, Wu N, Rohdin-Bibby L, et al. Effects of Time-Restricted Eating on Weight Loss and Other Metabolic
Parameters in Women and Men With Overweight and Obesity: The TREAT Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA
Intern Med. Nov 1 2020;180(11):1491-1499. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.4153
59. Patikorn C, Roubal K, Veettil SK, et al. Intermittent Fasting and Obesity-Related Health Outcomes: An Umbrella
Review of Meta-analyses of Randomized Clinical Trials. JAMA Netw Open. Dec 1 2021;4(12):e2139558.
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.39558
60. Welton S, Minty R, O'Driscoll T, et al. Intermittent fasting and weight loss: Systematic review. Can Fam
Physician. Feb 2020;66(2):117-125.
61.
Trepanowski JF, Kroeger CM, Barnosky A, et al. Effect of Alternate-Day Fasting on Weight Loss, Weight
Maintenance, and Cardioprotection Among Metabolically Healthy Obese Adults: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
JAMA Intern Med. Jul 1 2017;177(7):930-938. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.0936
62. Naude CE, Schoonees A, Senekal M, Young T, Garner P, Volmink J. Low carbohydrate versus isoenergetic
balanced diets for reducing weight and cardiovascular risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2014;9(7):e100652. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0100652
63. Gardner CD, Trepanowski JF, Del Gobbo LC, et al. Effect of Low-Fat vs Low-Carbohydrate Diet on 12-Month
Weight Loss in Overweight Adults and the Association With Genotype Pattern or Insulin Secretion: The DIETFITS
Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama. Feb 20 2018;319(7):667-679. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.0245
64. Tay J, Thompson CH, Luscombe-Marsh ND, et al. Effects of an energy-restricted low-carbohydrate, high
unsaturated fat/low saturated fat diet versus a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet in type 2 diabetes: A 2-year
randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Obes Metab. Apr 2018;20(4):858-871. doi:10.1111/dom.13164
65. Perin L, Camboim IG, Lehnen AM. Low glycaemic index and glycaemic load diets in adults with excess weight:
Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. J Hum Nutr Diet. May 12 2022;doi:10.1111/
jhn.13029
66. Min J, Kim SY, Shin IS, Park YB, Lim YW. The Effect of Meal Replacement on Weight Loss According to CalorieRestriction Type and Proportion of Energy Intake: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized
Controlled Trials. J Acad Nutr Diet. Aug 2021;121(8):1551-1564.e3. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2021.05.001
67. Colberg SR, Sigal RJ, Yardley JE, et al. Physical Activity/Exercise and Diabetes: A Position Statement of the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. Nov 2016;39(11):2065-2079. doi:10.2337/dc16-1728
References
113
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
68. Cheng CC, Hsu CY, Liu JF. Effects of dietary and exercise intervention on weight loss and body composition in
obese postmenopausal women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Menopause. Jul 2018;25(7):772-782.
doi:10.1097/gme.0000000000001085
69. Schwingshackl L, Dias S, Hoffmann G. Impact of long-term lifestyle programmes on weight loss and
cardiovascular risk factors in overweight/obese participants: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
Syst Rev. Oct 30 2014;3:130. doi:10.1186/2046-4053-3-130
70. Creasy SA, Rogers RJ, Davis KK, Gibbs BB, Kershaw EE, Jakicic JM. Effects of supervised and unsupervised
physical activity programmes for weight loss. Obes Sci Pract. Jun 2017;3(2):143-152. doi:10.1002/osp4.107
71.
Donnelly JE, Blair SN, Jakicic JM, Manore MM, Rankin JW, Smith BK. American College of Sports Medicine
Position Stand. Appropriate physical activity intervention strategies for weight loss and prevention of weight
regain for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. Feb 2009;41(2):459-71. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181949333
72. Maillard F, Pereira B, Boisseau N. Effect of High-Intensity Interval Training on Total, Abdominal and Visceral Fat
Mass: A Meta-Analysis. Sports Med. Feb 2018;48(2):269-288. doi:10.1007/s40279-017-0807-y
73. Wewege M, van den Berg R, Ward RE, Keech A. The effects of high-intensity interval training vs. moderateintensity continuous training on body composition in overweight and obese adults: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obes Rev. Jun 2017;18(6):635-646. doi:10.1111/obr.12532
74. Andreato LV, Esteves JV, Coimbra DR, Moraes AJP, de Carvalho T. The influence of high-intensity interval
training on anthropometric variables of adults with overweight or obesity: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis. Obes Rev. Jan 2019;20(1):142-155. doi:10.1111/obr.12766
75. Dutheil F, Lac G, Lesourd B, et al. Different modalities of exercise to reduce visceral fat mass and cardiovascular
risk in metabolic syndrome: the RESOLVE randomized trial. Int J Cardiol. Oct 9 2013;168(4):3634-42.
doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.05.012
76. Fanning J, Walkup MP, Ambrosius WT, et al. Change in health-related quality of life and social cognitive
outcomes in obese, older adults in a randomized controlled weight loss trial: Does physical activity behavior
matter? J Behav Med. Jun 2018;41(3):299-308. doi:10.1007/s10865-017-9903-6
77. Sallis R, Franklin B, Joy L, Ross R, Sabgir D, Stone J. Strategies for promoting physical activity in clinical practice.
Prog Cardiovasc Dis. Jan-Feb 2015;57(4):375-86. doi:10.1016/j.pcad.2014.10.003
78. Law TD, Clark LA, Clark BC. Resistance Exercise to Prevent and Manage Sarcopenia and Dynapenia. Annu Rev
Gerontol Geriatr. 2016;36(1):205-228. doi:10.1891/0198-8794.36.205
79. Khera R, Murad MH, Chandar AK, et al. Association of Pharmacological Treatments for Obesity With Weight Loss
and Adverse Events: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Jama. Jun 14 2016;315(22):2424-34. doi:10.1001/
jama.2016.7602
80. Apovian CM, Aronne LJ, Bessesen DH, et al. Pharmacological management of obesity: an endocrine Society
clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Feb 2015;100(2):342-62. doi:10.1210/jc.2014-3415
81.
Rubino D, Abrahamsson N, Davies M, et al. Effect of Continued Weekly Subcutaneous Semaglutide vs Placebo
on Weight Loss Maintenance in Adults With Overweight or Obesity: The STEP 4 Randomized Clinical Trial.
Jama. Apr 13 2021;325(14):1414-1425. doi:10.1001/jama.2021.3224
82. Sjöström L, Rissanen A, Andersen T, et al. Randomised placebo-controlled trial of orlistat for weight loss and
prevention of weight regain in obese patients. European Multicentre Orlistat Study Group. Lancet. Jul 18
1998;352(9123):167-72. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(97)11509-4
83. Astrup A, Carraro R, Finer N, et al. Safety, tolerability and sustained weight loss over 2 years with the once-daily
human GLP-1 analog, liraglutide. Int J Obes (Lond). Jun 2012;36(6):843-54. doi:10.1038/ijo.2011.158
84. Wilding JPH, Batterham RL, Calanna S, et al. Once-Weekly Semaglutide in Adults with Overweight or Obesity.
N Engl J Med. Mar 18 2021;384(11):989-1002. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2032183
85. McNeely W, Benfield P. Orlistat. Drugs. Aug 1998;56(2):241-9; discussion 250. doi:10.2165/00003495199856020-00007
86. Richelsen B, Tonstad S, Rössner S, et al. Effect of orlistat on weight regain and cardiovascular risk factors
following a very-low-energy diet in abdominally obese patients: a 3-year randomized, placebo-controlled
study. Diabetes Care. Jan 2007;30(1):27-32. doi:10.2337/dc06-0210
87. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN, Sjöström L. XENical in the prevention of diabetes in obese subjects
(XENDOS) study: a randomized study of orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes for the prevention of type 2
diabetes in obese patients. Diabetes Care. Jan 2004;27(1):155-61. doi:10.2337/diacare.27.1.155
88. Sahebkar A, Simental-Mendía LE, Reiner Ž, et al. Effect of orlistat on plasma lipids and body weight: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of 33 randomized controlled trials. Pharmacol Res. Aug 2017;122:53-65. doi:10.1016/j.
phrs.2017.05.022
89. Allison DB, Gadde KM, Garvey WT, et al. Controlled-release phentermine/topiramate in severely obese adults: a
randomized controlled trial (EQUIP). Obesity (Silver Spring). Feb 2012;20(2):330-42. doi:10.1038/oby.2011.330
90. Rucker D, Padwal R, Li SK, Curioni C, Lau DC. Long term pharmacotherapy for obesity and overweight: updated
meta-analysis. Bmj. Dec 8 2007;335(7631):1194-9. doi:10.1136/bmj.39385.413113.25
91.
Weir MA, Beyea MM, Gomes T, et al. Orlistat and acute kidney injury: an analysis of 953 patients. Arch Intern
Med. Apr 11 2011;171(7):703-4. doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2011.103
References
114
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
92. Isidro ML, Cordido F. Drug treatment of obesity: established and emerging therapies. Mini Rev Med Chem. Jun
2009;9(6):664-73. doi:10.2174/138955709788452739
93. Woo Y, Jeong H. Meta-analysis of Change in Weight and Heart Rate for Phentermine in Obesity. Journal of
Health Informatics and Statistics. 11/30 2018;43:290-299. doi:10.21032/jhis.2018.43.4.290
94. Kang JG, Park CY, Kang JH, Park YW, Park SW. Randomized controlled trial to investigate the effects of a
newly developed formulation of phentermine diffuse-controlled release for obesity. Diabetes Obes Metab. Oct
2010;12(10):876-82. doi:10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01242.x
95. Greenway FL, Fujioka K, Plodkowski RA, et al. Effect of naltrexone plus bupropion on weight loss in overweight
and obese adults (COR-I): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet.
Aug 21 2010;376(9741):595-605. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(10)60888-4
96. Hollander P, Gupta AK, Plodkowski R, et al. Effects of naltrexone sustained-release/bupropion sustainedrelease combination therapy on body weight and glycemic parameters in overweight and obese patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Dec 2013;36(12):4022-9. doi:10.2337/dc13-0234
97. Wadden TA, Foreyt JP, Foster GD, et al. Weight loss with naltrexone SR/bupropion SR combination therapy
as an adjunct to behavior modification: the COR-BMOD trial. Obesity (Silver Spring). Jan 2011;19(1):110-20.
doi:10.1038/oby.2010.147
98. Greenway FL, Dunayevich E, Tollefson G, et al. Comparison of combined bupropion and naltrexone therapy
for obesity with monotherapy and placebo. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Dec 2009;94(12):4898-906. doi:10.1210/
jc.2009-1350
99. Apovian CM, Aronne L, Rubino D, et al. A randomized, phase 3 trial of naltrexone SR/bupropion SR on weight
and obesity-related risk factors (COR-II). Obesity (Silver Spring). May 2013;21(5):935-43. doi:10.1002/oby.20309
100. Davies MJ, Bergenstal R, Bode B, et al. Efficacy of Liraglutide for Weight Loss Among Patients With Type 2
Diabetes: The SCALE Diabetes Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama. Aug 18 2015;314(7):687-99. doi:10.1001/
jama.2015.9676
101. Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al. A Randomized, Controlled Trial of 3.0 mg of Liraglutide in Weight
Management. N Engl J Med. Jul 2 2015;373(1):11-22. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1411892
102. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al. Comparison of the Effects of Glucagon-Like Peptide Receptor Agonists and
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors for Prevention of Major Adverse Cardiovascular and Renal Outcomes
in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Circulation. Apr 23 2019;139(17):2022-2031. doi:10.1161/circulationaha.118.038868
103. Mantovani A, Petracca G, Beatrice G, Csermely A, Lonardo A, Targher G. Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor
Agonists for Treatment of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis: An Updated
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Metabolites. Jan 27 2021;11(2)doi:10.3390/metabo11020073
104. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al. Semaglutide and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
N Engl J Med. Nov 10 2016;375(19):1834-1844. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1607141
105. Gafoor AM, Reynu R, Kirubakaran M, et al. Patient and procedure selection for bariatric and metabolic surgery
in Malaysia- The Malaysian Consensus. Med J Malaysia. Mar 2021;76(2):229-232.
106. De Luca M, Angrisani L, Himpens J, et al. Indications for Surgery for Obesity and Weight-Related Diseases:
Position Statements from the International Federation for the Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Disorders
(IFSO). Obes Surg. Aug 2016;26(8):1659-96. doi:10.1007/s11695-016-2271-4
107. Arterburn D, Wellman R, Emiliano A, et al. Comparative Effectiveness and Safety of Bariatric Procedures for
Weight Loss: A PCORnet Cohort Study. Ann Intern Med. Dec 4 2018;169(11):741-750. doi:10.7326/m17-2786
108. Uhe I, Douissard J, Podetta M, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, or one-anastomosis gastric
bypass? A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized-controlled trials. Obesity (Silver Spring). Mar
2022;30(3):614-627. doi:10.1002/oby.23338
109. Kodama S, Fujihara K, Horikawa C, et al. Network meta-analysis of the relative efficacy of bariatric surgeries for
diabetes remission. Obes Rev. Dec 2018;19(12):1621-1629. doi:10.1111/obr.12751
110. Grönroos S, Helmiö M, Juuti A, et al. Effect of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy vs Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass
on Weight Loss and Quality of Life at 7 Years in Patients With Morbid Obesity: The SLEEVEPASS Randomized
Clinical Trial. JAMA Surg. Feb 1 2021;156(2):137-146. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2020.5666
111. Peterli R, Wölnerhanssen BK, Peters T, et al. Effect of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy vs Laparoscopic Rouxen-Y Gastric Bypass on Weight Loss in Patients With Morbid Obesity: The SM-BOSS Randomized Clinical Trial.
Jama. Jan 16 2018;319(3):255-265. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.20897
112. Bianciardi E, Raimondi G, Samela T, et al. Neurocognitive and Psychopathological Predictors of Weight Loss
After Bariatric Surgery: A 4-Year Follow-Up Study. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021;12:662252. doi:10.3389/
fendo.2021.662252
113. Stefura T, Droś J, Kacprzyk A, et al. Influence of Preoperative Weight Loss on Outcomes of Bariatric Surgery for
Patients Under the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Protocol. Obes Surg. Apr 2019;29(4):1134-1141. doi:10.1007/
s11695-018-03660-z
114. Roman M, Monaghan A, Serraino GF, et al. Meta-analysis of the influence of lifestyle changes for preoperative
weight loss on surgical outcomes. Br J Surg. Feb 2019;106(3):181-189. doi:10.1002/bjs.11001
References
115
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
115. Hutcheon DA, Hale AL, Ewing JA, et al. Short-Term Preoperative Weight Loss and Postoperative Outcomes in
Bariatric Surgery. J Am Coll Surg. Apr 2018;226(4):514-524. doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2017.12.032
116. Meurgey JH, Brown R, Woroszyl-Chrusciel A, Steier J. Peri-operative treatment of sleep-disordered breathing
and outcomes in bariatric patients. J Thorac Dis. Jan 2018;10(Suppl 1):S144-s152. doi:10.21037/jtd.2017.10.11
117. Kasama K, Mui W, Lee WJ, et al. IFSO-APC consensus statements 2011. Obes Surg. May 2012;22(5):677-84.
doi:10.1007/s11695-012-0610-7
118. Flum DR, Belle SH, King WC, et al. Perioperative safety in the longitudinal assessment of bariatric surgery. N
Engl J Med. Jul 30 2009;361(5):445-54. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0901836
119. Deitel M, Rutledge R. Mini-gastric bypass: Prevention and management of complications in performance and
follow-up. Int J Surg. Nov 2019;71:119-123. doi:10.1016/j.ijsu.2019.09.003
120. Kodner C, Hartman DR. Complications of adjustable gastric banding surgery for obesity. Am Fam Physician.
May 15 2014;89(10):813-8.
121. Bazerbachi F, Vargas EJ, Abu Dayyeh BK. Endoscopic Bariatric Therapy: A Guide to the Intragastric Balloon. Am
J Gastroenterol. Sep 2019;114(9):1421-1431. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000000239
122. Abu Dayyeh BK, Kumar N, Edmundowicz SA, et al. ASGE Bariatric Endoscopy Task Force systematic review and
meta-analysis assessing the ASGE PIVI thresholds for adopting endoscopic bariatric therapies. Gastrointest
Endosc. Sep 2015;82(3):425-38.e5. doi:10.1016/j.gie.2015.03.1964
123. Kotzampassi K, Grosomanidis V, Papakostas P, Penna S, Eleftheriadis E. 500 intragastric balloons: what
happens 5 years thereafter? Obes Surg. Jun 2012;22(6):896-903. doi:10.1007/s11695-012-0607-2
124. Gregg EW, Jakicic JM, Blackburn G, et al. Association of the magnitude of weight loss and changes in physical
fitness with long-term cardiovascular disease outcomes in overweight or obese people with type 2 diabetes: a
post-hoc analysis of the Look AHEAD randomised clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. Nov 2016;4(11):913921. doi:10.1016/s2213-8587(16)30162-0
125. Wing RR, Espeland MA, Clark JM, et al. Association of Weight Loss Maintenance and Weight Regain on 4-Year
Changes in CVD Risk Factors: the Action for Health in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) Clinical Trial. Diabetes Care. Aug
2016;39(8):1345-55. doi:10.2337/dc16-0509
126. Armijo PR, Pokala B, Flores L, Leon MA, Oleynikov D, Kothari V. Patients undergoing intragastric balloon achieve
approximately 50% of their target weight loss in the first month postoperatively: an MBSAQIP analysis. Surg
Obes Relat Dis. Dec 2019;15(12):2060-2065. doi:10.1016/j.soard.2019.05.024
127. Dang JT, Switzer NJ, Sun WYL, Raghavji F, Birch DW, Karmali S. Evaluating the safety of intragastric balloon: An
analysis of the Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program. Surg Obes
Relat Dis. Sep 2018;14(9):1340-1347. doi:10.1016/j.soard.2018.05.003
128. Saber AA, Shoar S, Almadani MW, et al. Efficacy of First-Time Intragastric Balloon in Weight Loss: a Systematic
Review and Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Obes Surg. Feb 2017;27(2):277-287. doi:10.1007/
s11695-016-2296-8
129. Chandan S, Mohan BP, Khan SR, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Intragastric Balloon (IGB) in Non-alcoholic Fatty
Liver Disease (NAFLD): a Comprehensive Review and Meta-analysis. Obes Surg. Mar 2021;31(3):1271-1279.
doi:10.1007/s11695-020-05084-0
130. Chan DL, Cruz JR, Mui WL, Wong SKH, Ng EKW. Outcomes with Intra-gastric Balloon Therapy in BMI < 35 Nonmorbid Obesity: 10-Year Follow-Up Study of an RCT. Obes Surg. Feb 2021;31(2):781-786. doi:10.1007/s11695020-04986-3
131. Hering I, Dörries L, Flemming S, et al. Impact of preoperative weight loss achieved by gastric balloon on
peri- and postoperative outcomes of bariatric surgery in super-obese patients: a retrospective matched-pair
analysis. Langenbecks Arch Surg. Aug 2022;407(5):1873-1879. doi:10.1007/s00423-022-02472-1
132. Muniraj T, Day LW, Teigen LM, et al. AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on Intragastric Balloons in the Management
of Obesity. Gastroenterology. Apr 2021;160(5):1799-1808. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2021.03.003
133. Ministry of Health Malaysia, National Institute of Health. Key findings from the National Health and Morbidity
Survey 2019. Available at: https://iptk.moh.gov.my/images/technical_report/2020/4_Infographic_Booklet_
NHMS_2019_-_English.pdf.
134. Krebs NF, Himes JH, Jacobson D, Nicklas TA, Guilday P, Styne D. Assessment of child and adolescent overweight
and obesity. Pediatrics. Dec 2007;120 Suppl 4:S193-228. doi:10.1542/peds.2007-2329D
135. de Onis M, Onyango AW, Borghi E, Siyam A, Nishida C, Siekmann J. Development of a WHO growth reference
for school-aged children and adolescents. Bull World Health Organ. Sep 2007;85(9):660-7. doi:10.2471/
blt.07.043497
136. Styne DM, Arslanian SA, Connor EL, et al. Pediatric Obesity-Assessment, Treatment, and Prevention: An Endocrine
Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Mar 1 2017;102(3):709-757. doi:10.1210/jc.2016-2573
137. Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, et al. Genetic studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology.
Nature. Feb 12 2015;518(7538):197-206. doi:10.1038/nature14177
138. Reinehr T, Hinney A, de Sousa G, Austrup F, Hebebrand J, Andler W. Definable somatic disorders in overweight
children and adolescents. J Pediatr. Jun 2007;150(6):618-22, 622.e1-5. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.01.042
References
116
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
139. Farooqi IS, O'Rahilly S. Mutations in ligands and receptors of the leptin-melanocortin pathway that lead to
obesity. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. Oct 2008;4(10):569-77. doi:10.1038/ncpendmet0966
140. Lee YS, Biddle S, Chan MF, et al. Health Promotion Board-Ministry of Health Clinical Practice Guidelines:
Obesity. Singapore Med J. Jun 2016;57(6):292-300. doi:10.11622/smedj.2016103
141. Poh BK, Jannah AN, Chong LK, Ruzita AT, Ismail MN, McCarthy D. Waist circumference percentile curves for
Malaysian children and adolescents aged 6.0-16.9 years. Int J Pediatr Obes. Aug 2011;6(3-4):229-35. doi:10.31
09/17477166.2011.583658
142. Cuda SE, Censani M. Pediatric Obesity Algorithm: A Practical Approach to Obesity Diagnosis and Management.
Front Pediatr. 2018;6:431. doi:10.3389/fped.2018.00431
143. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of Obesity. Quick Reference Guide. 2010. Available
at: https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/qrg115.pdf.
144. Bartz SK, Caldas MC, Tomsa A, Krishnamurthy R, Bacha F. Urine Albumin-to-Creatinine Ratio: A Marker of Early
Endothelial Dysfunction in Youth. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Sep 2015;100(9):3393-9. doi:10.1210/jc.2015-2230
145. Burgert TS, Dziura J, Yeckel C, et al. Microalbuminuria in pediatric obesity: prevalence and relation to other
cardiovascular risk factors. Int J Obes (Lond). Feb 2006;30(2):273-80. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0803136
146. Jebeile H, Kelly AS, O'Malley G, Baur LA. Obesity in children and adolescents: epidemiology, causes, assessment,
and management. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. May 2022;10(5):351-365. doi:10.1016/s2213-8587(22)00047-x
147. Sung-Chan P, Sung YW, Zhao X, Brownson RC. Family-based models for childhood-obesity intervention: a
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev. Apr 2013;14(4):265-78. doi:10.1111/obr.12000
148. McGovern L, Johnson JN, Paulo R, et al. Clinical review: treatment of pediatric obesity: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Dec 2008;93(12):4600-5. doi:10.1210/jc.20062409
149. Shrewsbury VA, Steinbeck KS, Torvaldsen S, Baur LA. The role of parents in pre-adolescent and adolescent
overweight and obesity treatment: a systematic review of clinical recommendations. Obes Rev. Oct
2011;12(10):759-69. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2011.00882.x
150. Oude Luttikhuis H, Baur L, Jansen H, et al. Interventions for treating obesity in children. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. Jan 21 2009;(1):Cd001872. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001872.pub2
151. van der Kruk JJ, Kortekaas F, Lucas C, Jager-Wittenaar H. Obesity: a systematic review on parental involvement
in long-term European childhood weight control interventions with a nutritional focus. Obes Rev. Sep
2013;14(9):745-60. doi:10.1111/obr.12046
152. Wilfley DE, Stein RI, Saelens BE, et al. Efficacy of maintenance treatment approaches for childhood overweight:
a randomized controlled trial. Jama. Oct 10 2007;298(14):1661-73. doi:10.1001/jama.298.14.1661
153. National Health and Medical Research Council (Melbourne). Clinical practice guidelines for the management
of overweight and obesity in adults, adolescents and children in Australia. Available at: www.nhmrc.gov.au/
guidelines/publications/n57.
154. National Health and Medical Research Council (Australian Government). Eat for Health – Australian Dietary
Guidelines.2013. Available at: https://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/sites/default/files/content/n55_australian_dietary_
guidelines.pdf.
155. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2015-2020 dietary
guidelines for Americans. 8th edition, 2015. Available: https://health.gov/our-work/food-nutrition/2015-2020dietary-guidelines/guidelines/.
156. Andela S, Burrows TL, Baur LA, Coyle DH, Collins CE, Gow ML. Efficacy of very low-energy diet programs for
weight loss: A systematic review with meta-analysis of intervention studies in children and adolescents with
obesity. Obesity reviews : an official journal of the International Association for the Study of Obesity. 2019/06//
2019;20(6):871-882. doi:10.1111/obr.12830
157. Lee DC, Pate RR, Lavie CJ, Sui X, Church TS, Blair SN. Leisure-time running reduces all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality risk. J Am Coll Cardiol. Aug 5 2014;64(5):472-81. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2014.04.058
158. Cesa CC, Sbruzzi G, Ribeiro RA, et al. Physical activity and cardiovascular risk factors in children: meta-analysis
of randomized clinical trials. Prev Med. 2014/12// 2014;69:54-62. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.08.014
159. WHO. Guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour. Geneva World Health Organization. 2020.
Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240015128.
160. Loo BKG, Okely AD, Pulungan A, Jalaludin MY. Asia-Pacific Consensus Statement on integrated 24-hour activity
guidelines for children and adolescents. Br J Sports Med. May 2022;56(10):539-545. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2021-104527
161. Füzéki E, Engeroff T, Banzer W. Health Benefits of Light-Intensity Physical Activity: A Systematic Review of
Accelerometer Data of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Sports Med. Sep
2017;47(9):1769-1793. doi:10.1007/s40279-017-0724-0
162. Stricker PR, Faigenbaum AD, McCambridge TM. Resistance Training for Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics.
Jun 2020;145(6)doi:10.1542/peds.2020-1011
163. Kelley GA, Kelley KS, Pate RR. Exercise and BMI z-score in Overweight and Obese Children and Adolescents: A
Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis of Randomized Trials. J Evid Based Med. May 2017;10(2):108128. doi:10.1111/jebm.12228
References
117
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
164. Ring-Dimitriou S, Krustrup P, Coelho ESMJ, et al. Could sport be part of pediatric obesity prevention and
treatment? Expert conclusions from the 28th European Childhood Obesity Group Congress. J Sport Health Sci.
Jul 2019;8(4):350-352. doi:10.1016/j.jshs.2019.01.007
165. Fatima Y, Doi SA, Mamun AA. Longitudinal impact of sleep on overweight and obesity in children and
adolescents: a systematic review and bias-adjusted meta-analysis. Obes Rev. Feb 2015;16(2):137-49. doi:10.1111/
obr.12245
166. Wu Y, Gong Q, Zou Z, Li H, Zhang X. Short sleep duration and obesity among children: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Obes Res Clin Pract. Mar-Apr 2017;11(2):140-150. doi:10.1016/j.
orcp.2016.05.005
167. Hirshkowitz M, Whiton K, Albert SM, et al. National Sleep Foundation's sleep time duration recommendations:
methodology and results summary. Sleep Health. Mar 2015;1(1):40-43. doi:10.1016/j.sleh.2014.12.010
168. Paruthi S, Brooks LJ, D'Ambrosio C, et al. Recommended Amount of Sleep for Pediatric Populations: A
Consensus Statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med. Jun 15 2016;12(6):785-6.
doi:10.5664/jcsm.5866
169. Fang K, Mu M, Liu K, He Y. Screen time and childhood overweight/obesity: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Child Care Health Dev. Sep 2019;45(5):744-753. doi:10.1111/cch.12701
170. Stiglic N, Viner RM. Effects of screentime on the health and well-being of children and adolescents: a systematic
review of reviews. BMJ Open. 2019;9(1):e023191. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023191
171. Rhee KE, Lumeng JC, Appugliese DP, Kaciroti N, Bradley RH. Parenting styles and overweight status in first
grade. Pediatrics. Jun 2006;117(6):2047-54. doi:10.1542/peds.2005-2259
172. Tiggemann M. Body dissatisfaction and adolescent self-esteem: prospective findings. Body Image. Jun
2005;2(2):129-35. doi:10.1016/j.bodyim.2005.03.006
173. Olvera N, McCarley K, Matthews-Ewald MR, Fisher F, Jones M, Flynn EG. Pathways for Disordered Eating
Behaviors in Minority Girls:The Role of Adiposity, Peer Weight-Related Teasing, and Desire to Be Thinner. The
Journal of Early Adolescence. 2017;37(3):367-386. doi:10.1177/0272431615609155
174. Peirson L, Fitzpatrick-Lewis D, Morrison K, Warren R, Usman Ali M, Raina P. Treatment of overweight and
obesity in children and youth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ Open. Jan-Mar 2015;3(1):E35-46.
doi:10.9778/cmajo.20140047
175. Viner RM, Hsia Y, Tomsic T, Wong IC. Efficacy and safety of anti-obesity drugs in children and adolescents:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev. Aug 2010;11(8):593-602. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2009.00651.x
176. Kelly AS, Auerbach P, Barrientos-Perez M, et al. A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Liraglutide for Adolescents
with Obesity. N Engl J Med. May 28 2020;382(22):2117-2128. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1916038
177. Rajjo T, Mohammed K, Alsawas M, et al. Treatment of Pediatric Obesity: An Umbrella Systematic Review. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. Mar 1 2017;102(3):763-775. doi:10.1210/jc.2016-2574
178. Sun AP, Kirby B, Black C, Helms PJ, Bennie M, McLay JS. Unplanned medication discontinuation as a potential
pharmacovigilance signal: a nested young person cohort study. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. Mar 4 2014;15:11.
doi:10.1186/2050-6511-15-11
179. Pratt JSA, Browne A, Browne NT, et al. ASMBS pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery guidelines, 2018. Surg
Obes Relat Dis. Jul 2018;14(7):882-901. doi:10.1016/j.soard.2018.03.019
180. Inge TH, Zeller MH, Jenkins TM, et al. Perioperative outcomes of adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery: the
Teen-Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (Teen-LABS) study. JAMA Pediatr. Jan 2014;168(1):47-53.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.4296
181. Olbers T, Gronowitz E, Werling M, et al. Two-year outcome of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in
adolescents with severe obesity: results from a Swedish Nationwide Study (AMOS). Int J Obes (Lond). Nov
2012;36(11):1388-95. doi:10.1038/ijo.2012.160
182. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, et al. Weight Loss and Health Status 3 Years after Bariatric Surgery in
Adolescents. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;374(2):113-123. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1506699
183. Force UPST. Behavioral Weight Loss Interventions to Prevent Obesity-Related Morbidity and Mortality in Adults:
US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2018;320(11):1163-1171. doi:10.1001/
jama.2018.13022
184. Peirson L, Douketis J, Ciliska D, Fitzpatrick-Lewis D, Ali MU, Raina P. Prevention of overweight and obesity in
adult populations: a systematic review. CMAJ Open. Oct 2014;2(4):E268-72. doi:10.9778/cmajo.20140019
185. van Baal PH, van den Berg M, Hoogenveen RT, Vijgen SM, Engelfriet PM. Cost-effectiveness of a low-calorie diet
and orlistat for obese persons: modeling long-term health gains through prevention of obesity-related chronic
diseases. Value Health. Dec 2008;11(7):1033-40. doi:10.1111/j.1524-4733.2008.00328.x
186. Trolle B, Flyvbjerg A, Kesmodel U, Lauszus FF. Efficacy of metformin in obese and non-obese women with
polycystic ovary syndrome: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled cross-over trial. Hum Reprod.
Nov 2007;22(11):2967-73. doi:10.1093/humrep/dem271
187. Kumari AS, Haq A, Jayasundaram R, Abdel-Wareth LO, al Haija SA, Alvares M. Metformin monotherapy in lean
women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Reproductive BioMedicine Online. 2005/01/01/ 2005;10(1):100-104.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S1472-6483(10)60809-7
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
References
118
188. Zhang F, Tang L, Zhang Y, Lü Q, Tong N. Glucagon-like peptide-1 mimetics, optimal for Asian type 2 diabetes
patients with and without overweight/obesity: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Scientific Reports.
2017/11/22 2017;7(1):15997. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-16018-9
189. Rito AI, Buoncristiano M, Spinelli A, et al. Association between Characteristics at Birth, Breastfeeding and
Obesity in 22 Countries: The WHO European Childhood Obesity Surveillance Initiative - COSI 2015/2017. Obes
Facts. 2019;12(2):226-243. doi:10.1159/000500425
190. Yan J, Liu L, Zhu Y, Huang G, Wang PP. The association between breastfeeding and childhood obesity: a metaanalysis. BMC Public Health. Dec 13 2014;14:1267. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-1267
191. Pearce J, Langley-Evans SC. The types of food introduced during complementary feeding and risk of childhood
obesity: a systematic review. Int J Obes (Lond). Apr 2013;37(4):477-85. doi:10.1038/ijo.2013.8
192. Pearce J, Taylor MA, Langley-Evans SC. Timing of the introduction of complementary feeding and risk of
childhood obesity: a systematic review. Int J Obes (Lond). Oct 2013;37(10):1295-306. doi:10.1038/ijo.2013.99
193. Blake-Lamb TL, Locks LM, Perkins ME, Woo Baidal JA, Cheng ER, Taveras EM. Interventions for Childhood
Obesity in the First 1,000 Days A Systematic Review. Am J Prev Med. Jun 2016;50(6):780-789. doi:10.1016/j.
amepre.2015.11.010
194. Halliday JA, Palma CL, Mellor D, Green J, Renzaho AM. The relationship between family functioning and
child and adolescent overweight and obesity: a systematic review. Int J Obes (Lond). Apr 2014;38(4):480-93.
doi:10.1038/ijo.2013.213
195. Kamath CC, Vickers KS, Ehrlich A, et al. Clinical review: behavioral interventions to prevent childhood obesity: a
systematic review and metaanalyses of randomized trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Dec 2008;93(12):4606-15.
doi:10.1210/jc.2006-2411
196. Ross MM, Kolbash S, Cohen GM, Skelton JA. Multidisciplinary treatment of pediatric obesity: nutrition
evaluation and management. Nutr Clin Pract. Aug 2010;25(4):327-34. doi:10.1177/0884533610373771
197. Wang Y, Cai L, Wu Y, et al. What childhood obesity prevention programmes work? A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obes Rev. Jul 2015;16(7):547-65. doi:10.1111/obr.12277
198. Daniels LA, Mallan KM, Battistutta D, Nicholson JM, Perry R, Magarey A. Evaluation of an intervention to
promote protective infant feeding practices to prevent childhood obesity: outcomes of the NOURISH RCT at 14
months of age and 6 months post the first of two intervention modules. Int J Obes (Lond). Oct 2012;36(10):12928. doi:10.1038/ijo.2012.96
199. Brown T, Moore TH, Hooper L, et al. Interventions for preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. Jul 23 2019;7(7):Cd001871. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001871.pub4
200. Colquitt JL, Loveman E, O'Malley C, et al. Diet, physical activity, and behavioural interventions for the treatment
of overweight or obesity in preschool children up to the age of 6 years. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Mar 10
2016;3(3):Cd012105. doi:10.1002/14651858.Cd012105
201. Mead E, Brown T, Rees K, et al. Diet, physical activity and behavioural interventions for the treatment of overweight
or obese children from the age of 6 to 11 years. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Jun 22 2017;6(6):Cd012651.
doi:10.1002/14651858.Cd012651
202. Al-Khudairy L, Loveman E, Colquitt JL, et al. Diet, physical activity and behavioural interventions for the treatment
of overweight or obese adolescents aged 12 to 17 years. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Jun 22 2017;6(6):Cd012691.
doi:10.1002/14651858.Cd012691
203. An R, Shen J, Yang Q, Yang Y. Impact of built environment on physical activity and obesity among children and
adolescents in China: A narrative systematic review. J Sport Health Sci. Mar 2019;8(2):153-169. doi:10.1016/j.
jshs.2018.11.003
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY 2ND EDITION (2023)
119
Acknowledgements
The members of the CPG committee would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• The panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• The Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and feedback
• The Health Technology Assessment and the CPG Council for the approval of
these guidelines
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development of
the CPG
ISBN 978-967-2887-53-9