CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
i
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2019 MOH/P/PAK/434.19(GU)-e
Management of
THYROID DISORDERS
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
ii
Published by:
Malaysian Endocrine And Metabolic Society (MEMS)
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be reproduced
in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright
acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and the content is not changed, not
sold, nor used to promote or endorse any product or service, and not used in an
inappropriate or misleading context.
ISBN:
Available at the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.mems.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) are meant to be guides for clinical practice,
based on the best available evidence at the time of development. Adherence to
these guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case.
Every healthcare provider is responsible for the management of his/her unique
patient, based on the clinical picture presented by the patient and the management
options available locally.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the
time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be
published in the Web version of this document, which is the definitive version at all
times. This version can be found at the websites mentioned above.
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2019 and will be reviewed in a minimum period of
four years (2023) or sooner if new evidence becomes available. When they are due
for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or National Adviser of the related speciality
will be informed about it. A discussion will be held on the need for a revision,
including on the scope of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed,
and the latest systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
iii
TABLE OF CONTENT
Key Recommendations
1
Levels of Evidence
6
Formulation of Recommendation
6
Guideline Development and Objectives
7
Development Group
9
External Reviewers
11
1.
THYROID DISORDERS: THE DISEASE
15
1.1 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF THYROID DISORDERS IN MALAYSIA
15
2.
HYPERTHYROIDISM
15
2.1 OVERT HYPERTHYROIDISM
15
2.2 SUBCLINICAL HYPERTHYROIDISM
30
3.
HYPOTHYROIDISM
38
3.1 OVERT HYPOTHYROIDISM
38
3.2 SUBCLINICAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
45
4.
THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
47
4.1 HOW COMMON ARE THYROID NODULES/GOITRE?
47
4.2 WHAT IS THE USUAL CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF
THYROID NODULES/GOITRE?
48
4.3 CLINICAL EVALUATION OF THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
48
4.4 ULTRASOUND EVALUATION OF THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
49
4.5 FINE NEEDLE ASPIRATION BIOPSY (FNAB) OF THYROID NODULES
50
4.6 LABORATORY EVALUATION FOR THYROID NODULES
52
4.7 WHAT OTHER IMAGING MODALITIES MAY BE NEEDED WHEN
EVALUATING THYROID NODULES/GOITRE?
53
4.8 MANAGEMENT OF THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
53
5.
THYROID EMERGENCIES and PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF
THYROID DISEASES
55
5.1 THYROID STORM
55
5.2 MYXOEDEMA COMA
62
5.3 PRE-/PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT: HYPERTHYROIDISM
64
5.4 PREOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT: HYPOTHYROIDISM
64
6.
THYROIDITIS – SUBACUTE & ACUTE THYROIDITIS
65
6.1 SUBACUTE THYROIDITIS (DE QUERVAIN’S THYROIDITIS)
65
6.2 ACUTE/SUPPURATIVE THYROIDITIS
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
iv
7.
SPECIAL SITUATIONS
70
7.1 HYPOTHYROIDISM AND PREGNANCY
70
7.2 HYPERTHYROIDISM AND PREGNANCY
73
7.3 POSTPARTUM THYROIDITIS (PPT)
81
7.4 ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM AND HYPERTHYROIDISM
IN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
84
7.5 THYROID DISORDERS IN THE ELDERLY
101
8.
DRUG-INDUCED THYROID DISORDERS
108
8.1 AMIODARONE-INDUCED THYROID DISEASE
108
8.2 OTHER DRUGS THAT CAUSE THYROID DISORDER
111
9.
GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY (GO)
115
9.1 WHAT IS THE INCIDENCE OF GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY IN MALAYSIA?
115
9.2 WHAT IS THE DEFINITION OF GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY?
115
9.3 HOW IS THE ASSESSMENT OF ACTIVITY AND SEVERITY?
115
9.4 WHEN TO REFER TO OPHTHALMOLOGIST AND ENDOCRINOLOGIST?
117
9.5 WHAT IS THE TREATMENT FOR GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY?
117
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
124
10.1 FACILITATING AND LIMITING FACTORS
124
10.2 POTENTIAL RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS
124
REFERENCES
125
Appendix 1: Clinical Questions
141
Appendix 2: Update Addendum
146
List of Abbreviations
151
Acknowledgement
152
Disclosure Statement
152
Source of Funding
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
1
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the guidelines Development
Group as the key clinical recommendations that should be prioritised for
implementation.
HYPERTHYROIDISM
•
In patients with suspected hyperthyroidism, serum TSH and fT4 should
be obtained at the initial evaluation. fT3 should be measured when TSH is
suppressed but fT4 is within normal range.
•
Patients with overt Graves’ hyperthyroidism should be treated with any of the
following modalities: ATDs, RAI therapy, or thyroidectomy.
•
If ATD is chosen as the primary therapy for GD, the medication should be
continued for approximately 12–18 months, and then discontinued if the TSH
levels are normal at that time.
•
If surgery is chosen as the primary therapy for GD, near total or total
thyroidectomy is the procedure of choice and should be referred to a highvolume thyroid surgeon.
•
Patients with overtly TMNG or TA should be treated with RAI therapy or
thyroidectomy. On occasion, long-term, low-dose treatment with MMI may be
appropriate.
•
A differential WBC count should be obtained during febrile illness and at the
onset of pharyngitis in all patients taking antithyroid medication.
•
Liver function and hepatocellular integrity should be assessed in patients taking
MMI or PTU who experience pruritic rash, jaundice, light-coloured stool or dark
urine, joint pain, abdominal pain or bloating, anorexia, nausea, or fatigue.
HYPOTHYROIDISM
•
Levothyroxine is the recommended preparation of choice and the mainstay of
treatment of hypothyroidism.
The three main aims of therapy are:
i)
To provide resolution of signs and symptoms, including biological and
physiological markers of hypothyroidism
ii) To achieve normalisation of serum TSH with improvement in thyroid
hormone concentrations
iii) To avoid iatrogenic thyrotoxicosis or overtreatment particularly in the
elderly
•
Levothyroxine is best taken on empty stomach (1 hour before breakfast or at
bedtime, at least 3 hours after the last meal of the day) because absorption
is impaired if taken with food. Compliance may be enhanced however, by
instructing patients to consistently take it before breakfast each day.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
2
•
Levothyroxine replacement therapy can be started as an initial full replacement
or as partial replacement with gradual dose increments titrated using serum
TSH as the goal. Dose adjustments should be made when there are significant
changes in body weight, and with pregnancy and ageing. Serum TSH should be
reassessed 4–8 weeks after any dose adjustments.
SUBCLINICAL THYROID DISORDERS
•
When TSH is persistently <0.1 mIU/L, treatment of SCHyper is recommended in
all individuals >65 years of age.
•
Antithyroid drugs should be the first line and initial treatment for subclinical
hyperthyroidism, whatever the aetiology.
•
Radioactive iodine therapy should be considered in those with persistent
and progressive subclinical hyperthyroidism due to autonomous nodule and
multinodular goitre.
•
Investigation of raised TSH requires repeated measurements to establish a firm
diagnosis of subclinical hypothyroidism.
THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
•
All patients with a suspected thyroid nodule/nodular goitre or radiographic
abnormality suggesting a thyroid nodule incidentally detected on another
imaging study should undergo a dedicated thyroid/neck US that encompasses
the thyroid as well as the central and lateral neck compartments.
•
Surgery is recommended in:
i.
symptomatic compression or large goitres (>80 g)
ii.
relatively low uptake of RAI
iii. when thyroid malignancy is documented or suspected (e.g. suspicious or
indeterminate cytology)
iv. large thyroid nodules, especially if greater than 4 cm or if nonfunctioning, or
hypofunctioning on 123I or 99mTc pertechnetate scanning
v.
coexisting hyperparathyroidism requiring surgery
vi. especially if TRAb levels are particularly high
vii. patients with moderate-to–severe active Graves’ Ophthalmopathy (GO)
•
Surgery is not recommended for patients with substantial comorbidity such as
cardiopulmonary disease, end-stage cancer, or other debilitating disorders, or
where there is lack of access to a high-volume thyroid surgeon.
•
Subacute thyroiditis should be suspected in all patients who present with painful
goitre.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
3
THYROID EMERGENCIES
Thyroid Storm
•
The diagnosis of thyroid storm is clinical. Both the BWPS and JTA diagnostic tools
could be used to aid diagnosis, but we recommend the use of BWPS as this
scoring tool is more sensitive.
•
High doses of PTU (500–1000 mg loading, then 250 mg, 4–6 hourly) should be
used in thyroid storm. In the presence of contraindications, high doses of MMI
(60–80 mg/day) can be used.
•
b-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol should be administered
in thyroid storm to control heart rate and inhibit other peripheral action of
thyroid hormone.
•
Shorter acting intravenous esmolol or diltiazem can be used to control heart rate
when there are contraindications to b-adrenergeic receptor antagonists.
•
High doses of glucocorticoids (IV hydrocortisone 100 mg, 6 hourly or
dexamethasone 2 mg, 6 hourly) should be given in thyroid storm.
•
5–10 drops of Lugols iodine 6–8 hourly for the first 10 days, should be given after
administration of antithyroid drugs for rapid improvement of thyrotoxicosis in
thyroid storm.
•
All patients with thyroid storm should have early definitive therapy with RAI.
In patients with large obstructing goitre or contraindications to RAI, early
thyroidectomy should be considered instead.
Myxoedema Coma
•
Intravenous hydrocortisone 200 mg start then 100 mg 6–8 hourly should be
administered prior to levothyroxine.
•
Initial intravenous levothyroxine of 200–400 mg followed by 1.6 mcg/kg/day
(75% if administered intravenously) should be given thereafter. If intravenous
levothyroxine is not available, oral levothyroxine can be given as 500 mcg loading
followed by maintenance dose.
•
Intravenous liothyronine (when available) may be given in addition to thyroxine.
Loading dose recommended is 5–20 mcg followed by 2.5–10 mcg every 8 hours
till patient regains consciousness.
Pre-/Perioperative Management
•
All elective surgery should be postponed until euthyroidism or near euthyroid
state is achieved.
•
In patients who are hyperthyroid and require urgent surgery, rapid control
with high dose MMI or PTU, b-blockers, Lugol’s iodine and glucocorticoids are
recommended.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
4
THYROID DISORDERS IN PREGNANCY
•
Pregnant women with OH should be treated with LT4.
•
For maternal SCHypo, LT4 treatment is recommended in the following situations
to reduce the risk of miscarriage and preterm delivery:
a)
Pregnant women with negative TPOAb:
- LT4 is recommended if TSH is >10 mIU/L
- LT4 may be considered if TSH is above the pregnancy specific reference
range or 4.0 mIU/L
b) Pregnant women with positive TPOAb:
- LT4 is recommended if TSH is above the pregnancy specific reference
range or 4.0 mIU/L
- LT4 may be considered if TSH is >2.5 mIU/L
•
For hypothyroid women already treated with LT4 before conception, we
recommend a TSH goal of not more than 2.5 mIU/L before conception and during
first trimester as the trimester specific reference range for Malaysian population
is not available.
•
During the second and third trimester, a TSH goal of 3.0 mIU/L or below can be
adopted.
•
Pregnant women who are already treated with LT4 before conception are
recommended to have their LT4 dosage increased by 30%–50% upon conception
with a higher percentage being considered for post ablative hypothyroidism and
lower percentage for autoimmune hypothyroidism.
•
When a suppressed TSH and elevated fT4 are detected in the first trimester,
clinical history and physical examination should be performed to determine
the aetiology. Graves’ disease is differentiated from gestational thyrotoxicosis
clinically. TRAb supports the diagnosis of Graves’ disease.
•
Management of gestational transient thyrotoxicosis is mainly through
supportive therapy: rehydration and hospitalisation if needed in the presence of
hyperemesis gravidarum; and b-blocker if very symptomatic. Antithyroid drug is
not recommended.
•
In pregnant women in whom ATD needs to be continued; PTU is recommended
throughout the first trimester.
•
The lowest effective dose of ATD should be used for thyrotoxicosis during
pregnancy, targeting fT4 at or moderately above the reference range.
•
In postpartum thyroiditis
-
Women in thyrotoxic phase of PPT who are symptomatic should be treated
with b-blockers; ATDs are not recommended.
-
Women in hypothyroid phase of PPT and who are symptomatic should be
treated with thyroxine. Women with mild symptoms who choose not to be
treated need to have their TFT checked every 4–8 weekly until euthyroidism
is restored.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
5
ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM AND HYPERTHYROIDISM IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS
•
Hypothyroidism secondary to Hashimoto’s thyroiditis: Levothyroxine is
recommended as the medication of choice with the recommended dose is
based on the body weight or body surface area. The recommended target range
for TSH is in the lower half of the reference range while for free T4 is in the upper
half of the reference range. Levothyroxine is effective in reducing the thyroid
gland size/goitre.
• Non-goitrous euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis: One should monitor for goitre,
antithyroid antibodies and pattern of thyroid function; treatment with thyroxine
is controversial.
• Hyperthyroidism: The first-line initial treatment is ATD, which is carbimazole
or its active metabolite MMI. Methimazole/carbimazole dose typically used is
0.2–0.5 mg/kg daily, with a range from 0.1 mg/kg to 1.0 mg/kg daily (maximal
initial dose: 30 mg daily). After 2–4 weeks, when the thyroid hormone levels have
normalised, the initial dose should gradually be reduced by 30%–50%. TSH levels
may take 2–4 months to appear in the serum and should not be used to titrate
the dose. If children develop serious adverse reactions to MMI, RAI or surgery
should be considered, because the risks of PTU are considered greater than the
risks of RAI or surgery.
•
Hyperthyroidism: Propylthiouracil (PTU) should not be used in children. If it is
used, it should be stopped immediately and liver function should be assessed in
children who develop anorexia, pruritus, rash, jaundice, light coloured stool or
dark urine, joint pain, right upper quadrant pain or abdominal bloating, nausea
or malaise due to the risk of idiosyncratic liver failure.
•
Hyperthyroidism: Definitive therapy available for GD is RAI or thyroidectomy.
Indications for definitive treatment in children include relapse after an
appropriate duration of ATD, a lack of compliance on the part of the patient/
caretakers or adverse effects of ATD. The issue of how long ATDs should be used
in children before considering either RAI or surgery is controversial.
THYROID DISORDERS IN THE ELDERLY
In subclinical hypothyroidism
•
In patients aged >70 years, if serum TSH is ≥10 mIU/L, consider L-thyroxine treatment
if patients have clear symptoms of hypothyroidism or high vascular risk.
•
In patients aged >70 years, if serum TSH is ≤10 mIU/L, observe and repeat TFTs
in 6 months.
•
In patients aged ≤70 years, if serum TSH is ≥10 mIU/L, consider L-thyroxine
treatment.
•
In patients aged ≤70 years, if serum TSH is ≤10 mIU/L and symptoms of
hypothyroidism are present, consider a 3-month trial of L-thyroxine, then assess
response to treatment.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
6
•
In patients aged ≤70 years, if serum TSH is ≤10 mIU/L and there are no symptoms
of hypothyroidism, observe and repeat TFTs in 6 months.
DRUG-INDUCED THYROID DISORDERS
•
Monitor TFTs before and 3–4 months after starting amiodarone and at 3–6 months
interval thereafter. Monitor for up to 1 year after stopping amiodarone.
GRAVES OPTHALMOPATHY
•
Assessment of GO includes assessment of activity and severity using
standardised criteria. Graves opthalmopathy is categorised as active or inactive;
mild, moderate, severe or sight threatening.
•
Euthyroidism should be restored as soon as possible in patients with GO.
•
Oral prednisolone prophylaxis of 0.4–0.5 mg/kg/day for a total of 3 months
is recommended in patients with mild-to–moderate GO who are undergoing
radioiodine therapy.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Level
Study design
I
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
II-1
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
II-2
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic
studies, preferably from more than one centre or group
II-3
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the results of
the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could also be
regarded as this type of evidence
III
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert committees
SOURCE: US/CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of MaHTAS is in
the process of adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence
and its effect size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
7
In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:
•
Overall quality of evidence
•
Balance of benefits versus harms
•
Values and preferences
•
Resource implications
•
Equity, feasibility, and acceptability
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these CPG were from the Ministry
of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE).
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases/platforms: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N), Medline via Ovid,
Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR), and Pubmed. The inclusion criteria
are all thyroid diseases/disorders regardless of study design. The search was limited
to literature published in the last 10 years and on humans and in English. In addition,
the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched and experts
in the field contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted from
1 March 2017 to 31 December 2017. Future CPG updates will consider evidence
published after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other guidelines as listed below:
•
Ministry of Health Malaysia–CPG on Management of Thyroid Dysfunction During
Pregnancy and Postpartum 2007
•
American Thyroid Association–Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management of
Hyperthyroidism and Other Causes of Thyrotoxicosis 2016
•
American Thyroid Association–Guidelines for the Treatment of Hypothyroidism
2014
•
American Thyroid Association–Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of
Thyroid Disease During Pregnancy and Postpartum 2017
•
European Thyroid Association–Guidelines on Diagnosis and Treatment of
Endogenous Subclinical Hyperthyroidism 2015
•
European
Thyroid
Association
Guideline:
Management
of
Subclinical
Hypothyroidism 2013
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used for reference.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
8
A total of 138 clinical questions were developed under different sections.
Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within these sections.
The DG members met 11 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG members using the
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence tables and
further discussed at each DG meeting. All statements and recommendations
formulated after that were agreed upon by the DG. Where evidence was
insufficient, recommendations were made by consensus of the DG. Any differences
in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was based largely on the findings
of systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and clinical trials, with local practices taken
into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines was graded using the US/Canadian Preventive
Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001). The writing of the CPG follows strictly
the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. The draft
was finally presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the
HTA and CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the
CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual on Development
and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines published in
2015 (Available at: http://www.moh.gov.my/penerbitan/mymahtas/CPG_MANUAL_
MAHTAS.pdf).
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPGs are to provide evidence-based recommendations on
thyroid diseases on these aspects:
i.
Screening and diagnosis
ii. Management (non-pregnant adults, pregnancy, adolescents, and children)
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG intends to guide those involved in the management of thyroid diseases
either in primary or secondary/tertiary care, namely:
i. Medical officers and specialists in public and private practice
ii. Allied health professionals
iii. Trainees and medical students
iv. Patients and their advocates
v. Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient, and community settings
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
9
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
CHAIRPERSON
Prof. Dato’ Dr. Mafauzy Mohamed
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kubang Kerian, Kelantan
MEMBERS (alphabetical order)
Dr. Foo Siew Hui
Consultant Physician & Endocrinologist,
Hospital Selayang,
Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Hanisah Abdul Hamid
Chemical Pathologist,
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Klang, Selangor
Dr. Ijaz Hallaj Rahmatullah
Physician & Endocrinologist,
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun,
Ipoh, Perak
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Jeyakantha Ratnasingam
Consultant Endocrinologist,
University Malaya Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kuan Yueh Chien
Endocrinologist & Physician,
Hospital Umum Sarawak,
Kuching, Sarawak
Dr. Lim Shueh Lin
General Physician & Endocrinologist,
Hospital Pulau Pinang,
George Town, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Mohammad Arif Shahar
Consultant Physician & Endocrinologist,
Avisena Specialist Hospital,
Shah Alam, Selangor
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
10
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Muhammad Yazid Jalaludin
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist,
Department of Paediatrics,
Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Noor Shafina Mohd Nor
Paediatric Endocrinologist,
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi MARA,
Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Prof. Dr. Nor Azmi Kamaruddin
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nor Faizah Ghazali
Family Physician,
Klinik Kesihatan Tanglin,
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norhaliza Mohd Ali
Consultant Physician & Endocrinologist,
Hospital Sultanah Aminah,
Johor Bahru, Johor
Dr. Siti Rohani Mohammad Alias
Family Physician,
Klinik Kesihatan Jinjang,
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Siti Sharina Anas
Chemical Pathologist,
Hospital Putrajaya,
Putrajaya, Wilayah Persekutuan Putrajaya
Dr. Suhaimi Hussain
Paediatric Endocrinologist,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kubang Kerian, Kelantan
Dr. Tong Chin Voon
General Physician & Endocrinologist,
Hospital Melaka,
Melaka
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
11
Dr. Yong Sy Liang
Endocrinologist,
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Klang, Selangor
Dr. Wong Sze Lyn Jeanne
Paediatric Endocrinologist,
Hospital Putrajaya,
Putrajaya, Wilayah Persekutuan Putrajaya
Dr. Zanariah Hussein
Consultant Physician & Endocrinologist,
Hospital Putrajaya,
Putrajaya, Wilayah Persekutuan Putrajaya
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Azriyanti Anuar Zaini
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist,
University of Malaya Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Florence Tan
Consultant Endocrinologist,
Sarawak General Hospital,
Kuching
Dr. Janet Hong Yeow Hua
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist,
Hospital Putrajaya,
Putrajaya
Professor Dr. Khoo Ee Ming
Primary Care Physician,
University of Malaya Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Khor Hui Min
Consultant Geriatrician,
University of Malaya Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
12
Dr. Leslie Charles Lai Chin Loy
Consultant in Chemical Pathology and Metabolic Medicine,
Gleneagles Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Liza Sharmini Ahmad Tajudin
Professor and Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kota Bharu
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mohd Pazudin Ismail
Head of Department/Consultant,
Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kota Bharu
Dr. Muniswaran Ganeshan,
Maternal Fetal Medicine Specialist,
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist,
Women & Children’s Hospital,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nani Draman
Family Medicine Specialist,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kota Bharu
Dr Nazrila Hairiana Nasir
Consultant Radiologist,
Radiology Department,
Hospital Putrajaya,
Putrajaya
Dr. Nik Nor Izah Nik Ibrahim
Medical Lecturer in Pharmacology,
Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kota Bharu
Puan Noraini Mohamad
Head of Pharmacy,
National Cancer Institute,
Putrajaya
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
13
Dr. Norasyikin A. Wahab
Consultant Endocrinologist,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Norlela Sukor
Professor and Consultant Endocrinologist,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nor Aina Emran
Consultant Breast & Endocrine Surgeon,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Nor Azlin Mohamed Ismail
Maternal Fetal Medicine Unit,
Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Rohaizak Muhammad
Consultant Breast and Endocrine Surgeon,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Rosediani Muhamad
Head, Family Medicine Department,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kota Bharu
Dr. Rozita Zakaria
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Putrajaya Presint 18,
Putrajaya
Dr. Wan Fatihah Wan Sohaimi
Nuclear Medicine Physician,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kota Bharu
Dr. Wan Mariny W Md Kasim,
Consultant Ophthalmologist
Ophthalmology Department,
Hospital Serdang
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
14
Dr. Yahya Mohd Aripin
Consultant General, Breast and Endocrine Surgeon,
Universiti Teknologi MARA Specialist Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yau Weng Keong
Consultant Physician & Geriatrician,
Head of Department of Medicine and
Head of Geriatric Service, Ministry of Health Malaysia,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Zarina Abdul Latiff
Senior Consultant Paediatrician and Clinical Geneticist,
Head, Thalassaemia Centre,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre,
Kuala Lumpur
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
15
1. THYROID DISORDERS: THE DISEASE
1.1 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF THYROID DISORDERS IN MALAYSIA
A large cross-sectional multicentre study done recently demonstrated that the
prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in Malaysia is 3.4%: 0.6% had overt hyperthyroidism and 2.8% subclinical hyperthyroidism. On the other hand, the prevalence of
hypothyroidism is 2.1% (0.5% overt and 1.6% subclinical hypothyroidism). Except
for overt hyperthyroidism, the majority of subjects with thyroid dysfunction were
newly diagnosed. The proportion of those who were newly diagnosed with thyroid
dysfunction was as high as 68%. Females were found to have a higher prevalence
of thyroid dysfunction compared to their male counterparts (female: 4.1% vs. male:
1.9% for hyperthyroidism and 2.6% vs. 1.2% for hypothyroidism).1 (Level III)
The same study looked at the prevalence of goitre and thyroid nodule. The
prevalence of goitre and thyroid nodule in the Malaysian population is 9.3% and
3.6%, respectively. Despite having an abnormality at the anterior neck, as high as
62% of those with grade 2 goitre and 68% of those with thyroid nodule were newly
diagnosed. In the Malaysian population, there was a higher prevalence of goitre in
the Indian population and those aged less than 45 years. There was also a higher
prevalence of goitre with positive thyroid antibodies in coastal and urban areas,
indicating increased iodine exposure. On the other hand, there may also be pockets
of iodine-deficient areas in rural regions, where a high prevalence of goitre was not
associated with positive thyroid antibodies.2 (Level III)
The prevalence of thyroid antibodies in the Malaysian population was 12.2% for
anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) and 12.1% for anti-thyroglobulin (anti-TG).
Females have a higher prevalence of positive thyroid antibodies compared to
males (female: 15.2% vs. male: 3.0% for anti-TPO and 15.7% vs. 6.0% for anti-TG).
Surprisingly, those with Indian ethnicity had a significantly higher prevalence of antiTPO compared from other ethnic groups. Coastal and urban regions reported a
higher prevalence of thyroid antibodies (as high as 16.1% for anti-TPO and 17.8% for
anti-TG), supporting the possibility of higher iodine exposure in these areas.3 (Level III)
2. HYPERTHYROIDISM
2.1 OVERT HYPERTHYROIDISM
2.1.1 Causes Of Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis occurs due to inappropriately high thyroid hormone action in tissues
secondary to elevated thyroid hormone levels, as opposed to hyperthyroidism,
which is a subset of thyrotoxicosis due to inappropriately high thyroid hormone
synthesis and secretion by the thyroid gland.4 (Level I)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
16
Thyrotoxicosis can be broadly divided into four main causes:4(LevelI)
A. Activation Of Thyroid Hormone Synthesis And Secretion, Which Leads To
Autonomous Release Of Excessive Thyroid Hormone
Graves’ disease remained the most common cause of primary hyperthyroidism.
Its prevalence can be as high as 70%–84% in different countries.5,6 (Level III, II) Graves’
disease occurs due to the presence of anti-TSH receptor antibodies. Yersinia
enterocolitica infection has been associated with Graves’ disease.7 (Level II) Other causes
of primary hyperthyroidism include toxic adenoma and toxic multinodular goitre.
Genetic analysis of resected nodules revealed a mutation in the TSH receptor gene,
which leads to basal activation of the protein kinase A pathway and increased
T4 production and increased cellular proliferation. In addition, the mutation
leads to increased TSH receptor affinity to TSH, thus increasing thyroid hormone
synthesis.8  (Level II) Not all of these hot nodules are actually benign. Some may be
malignant, and further workout is necessary. The risk of malignancy in hot nodules
may be underestimated, and a literature review reported that a weighted rate of
3.1% (0–12.5%) of hot nodules are graded as thyroid cancer.9(Level I) Thyroid papillary
carcinoma can cause hyperthyroidism.10 (Level III) Graves’ disease can co-exist with toxic
adenoma and is termed as Marine–Lenhart syndrome.11 (Level III) And, finally, there is
a small group of patients with diffuse non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism due to a
genetic mutation leading to the production of thyroid hormone without any TSH
ligand.12 (Level III)
B. Thyroid Stores Of Preformed Hormone Are Passively Released In Excessive
Amounts Due To Autoimmune, Infective, Chemical, Or Physical Insults
Destruction of the thyroid follicle cells can result in the hyperthyroid stage of any
thyroiditis. It could be due to autoimmune processes such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis;
infective like subacute thyroiditis (viral) or even Mycobacterium tuberculosis,13,14 (Level
III) cellulitis of the skin anterior to the neck or due to physical insult from a rapidly
growing anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid gland or primary thyroid lymphoma.15,
16 (Level III)
C. Exposure To Extrathyroidal Sources Of Thyroid Hormone Either
Endogenous Or Exogenous
Endogenous sources of thyroid hormones include struma ovarii, which is actually
teratoma of the ovaries composed mainly of thyroid tissue17 (Level III) and metastatic
thyroid carcinoma secreting thyroid hormones. These are actually rare, with
fewer than 100 cases reported since 1946.18 (Level III) Exogenous sources of thyroid
hormones are becoming commoner nowadays. Over-the–counter supplements
containing thyroid support/thyroid supplements/thyroid health actually contain
various amounts of T3 and/or T4 that are readily available over the Internet – via
online purchases.19, 20 (Level III,II) They are cheap, there is no need for a prescription,
and people have more privacy in managing their own health. People purchase it
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
17
based on testimonials. These supplements may not mention the actual ingredients
used.20,21 (Level II,III) In addition, exogenous sources of thyroid hormones can come from
cooked animals’ thyroid gland, as reported in an epidemic of thyrotoxicosis after
ingesting thyroid hormone-containing beef hamburger.22 (Level III)
D. The Thyroid Gland Is Excessively Stimulated By Trophic Factors Such As
Thyrotropin-Stimulating Hormone (TSH) And Other Factors.
TSHoma, which is pituitary gland thyrotrophs adenoma secreting excessive
amounts of TSH leading to secondary hyperthyroidism is rare. Besides, gestational
trophoblastic disease, which secretes b-HCG (which has partial molecular similarity
with TSH) can lead to thyrotoxicosis. It is also rare, as only 2.0 per 1000 pregnancies
have gestational trophoblastic disease, of which only 7% have biochemical
thyrotoxicosis.23 (Level III) Iodinated contrast materials are increasingly being used
during CT scans and angiographic procedures. Amiodarones are used frequently
for various types of tachyarrhythmia. The iodine content in radiographic contrast
materials and amiodarone is much higher than the amount human beings actually
require. This excess iodine will lead to Jod–Basedow thyrotoxicosis.24, 25 (Level III)
The prevalence of contrast iodine-induced subclinical hyperthyroidism can reach
up to 2.66%26, 27 (Level II) and contrast iodine-induced hyperthyroidism up to 1.7%.28,29
(Level II,III) Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis is more prevalent, and is in the range
of 3.0%–20.8%.30, 31, 32, 33 (Level III) There are other rare case reports of thyrotoxicosis
such as due to L-asparaginase chemotherapy, which leads to transient
thyrotoxicosis.34 (Level III)
2.1.2 How To Diagnose Hyperthyroidism?
2.1.2.1 Biochemical Evaluation For Diagnosis Of Hyperthyroidism
Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) measurement has the highest sensitivity
and specificity of any single blood test and is used as an initial screening test for
hyperthyroidism.35 (Level III) However, diagnostic accuracy is improved when serum
TSH and free T4 (fT4) are assessed at initial evaluation. If fT4 is within the normal
range and TSH is suppressed, then free T3 (fT3) should be measured. In overt
hyperthyroidism, serum fT4, fT3, or both are elevated and serum TSH is suppressed
(usually <0.01 mIU/L).4(Level III)
2.1.2.2 Diagnostic Testing For Aetiology Of Hyperthyroidism
Thyroid Ultrasound
When expertise is available and there is no stigmata of Graves’ disease and the
aetiology not clear by history, thyroid ultrasound comprising both conventional
greyscale and colour flow Doppler examination is recommended as the imaging
procedure for hyperthyroidism work-up. Thyroid vascularity (Table 1) and peak
systolic velocity (PSV) of the inferior thyroid artery are useful markers to distinguish
between Graves’ disease and thyroiditis, especially in the setting of pregnancy or
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
18
lactation, where nuclear imaging is contraindicated.36 (Level II) Peak systolic velocity of
inferior thyroid artery >40 cm/s is suggestive of Graves’ disease.36 (Level II) According
to Hari Kumar et al., colour flow Doppler and ultrasound parameters correlated
significantly with pertechnetate scan results, demonstrating a comparable sensitivity
of 96% and specificity of 95%.36 (Level II) However, thyroid ultrasound has its limitation,
as it may miss early Graves’ disease and resolving thyroiditis.37 (Level III), 38 (Level III)
Figure 1: Algorithm for the investigations of suspected hyperthyroidism.4 (Level III)
Measure TSH
and fT4
Table 1: Thyroid vascularity grading and pattern by ultrasound (Adapted from
Ref: 36 [Level II])
Grading
Vascular pattern
Grade 1
Absent intraparenchymal vascularity or
minimal spots
Low or normal vascularity
Grade 2
Presence of parenchymal blood flow with
patchy uneven distribution
Grade 3
Mild increase of colour flow Doppler
signal with patchy distribution
Increased vascularity
Grade 4
Markedly increased colour flow Doppler
signal with diffuse homogenous
distribution
Overt
hyperthyroidism
Measure fT3
↑fT3
Normal fT3
Overt
hyperthyroidism
Subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Suspected
hyperthyroidism
↑fT4
↓TSH
Normal fT4
↓TSH
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
19
TSH Receptor Antibodies (TRAbs)
TRAbs are specific biomarkers for the diagnosis of Graves’ disease.39(Level III); 40(Level III)
They are also useful for predicting the risk of relapse and guide definitive treatment
for Graves’ disease.41(Level III) There are two methods for measuring TRAbs:competitive
binding assay (TSH binding inhibiting immunoglobulin, TBII) and cell-based bioassay
(Thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin, TSI). Most immunoassays today use a
competitive binding assay (TBII). TBII only reports the presence or absence of TRAbs
and their concentrations, but does not indicate their functional activity.42  (Level  III);
43  (Level  III) The third generation TBII has 99% sensitivity and 99% specificity for the
diagnosis of Graves’ disease in hyperthyroidism.44 (Level III) In contrast, highly sensitive
cell–based bioassays (TSI) exclusively differentiate between the TSH-R-stimulating
Ab (TSAb) and TSH-R-blocking Ab (TBAb).45 (Level III); 46 (Level III)
Figure 2: Categories of TRAbs. (Adapted from Ref: 47 [Level III])
TRAb
TBII: TSH-binding inhibiting immunoglobulin; TSI: Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin; TSAb: TSH-R-stimulating Ab;
TRAb: TSH receptor Ab; TBAb: TSH-R-blocking Ab.
TSI
TBII
TSAb
TBAb
Neutral
Thyroid Scintigraphy
Thyroid scintigraphy is the only technique that allows the assessment of thyroid
regional function and detection of areas of autonomously functioning thyroid
nodules. Scintigraphy of the thyroid is suggested when thyroid nodularity coexists
with hyperthyroidism. However, thyroid scintigraphy is significantly less sensitive
for diagnosing thyroid nodules measuring less than 1–1.5 cm.48 (Level III) The most
used radionuclides in scintigraphy according to the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists/European Thyroid Association (AACE/ETA) guideline are 123I or
99mTc. The advantages of 99mTc include the high availability in the nuclear medicine
department, low energy of gamma photons, and the relatively short half-life
(six hours). These characteristics make 99mTc a more preferred option compared to
123I.49 (Level III)
Recommendations
• In patients with suspected hyperthyroidism, serum TSH and fT4 should
be obtained at the initial evaluation. fT3 should be measured when TSH is
suppressed but fT4 is within the normal range
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
20
Figure 3: Algorithm for diagnostic testing for aetiology of hyperthyroidism.36 (Level II);39(Level III);
49 (Level III)
Overt hyperthyroidism
Positive
Negative
Graves’
disease
’
Other causes of
hyperthyroidism
• Toxic adenoma
• Toxic multinodular
goitre (MNG)
• Thyroiditis
Diﬀuse
uptake
Focal
uptake
Toxic
adenoma/
Toxic MNG
Graves’
disease
Assess vascularity
and peak systolic
velocity (PSV) of
inferior thyroid
artery
↑Vascularity
and PSV
>40 cm/s
↓Vascularity
and PSV
<40 cm/s
Subacute
thyroiditis
Low or
undetectable
serum
thyroglobulin
• Postpartum
thyroiditis
• Hashimoto
thyroiditis
Factitious
thyrotoxicosis
Painful thyroid
Painless
thyroid
TRAb
Thyroid
scintigraphy
Thyroid US
and Doppler
Nodules
Graves’
disease
Thyroiditis
Thyroid
scintigraphy
Increase
uptake
Normal
or
reduce
uptake
Normal or
elevated serum
thyroglobulin
Stigmata of
Graves’ disease
No stigmata of Graves’
disease and aetiology
not clear by history
Graves’ disease
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
21
• Thyroid ultrasonography with colour flow Doppler has reasonable sensitivity
and specificity to distinguish between Graves’ disease and thyroiditis and is
recommended in situations wherein scintigraphy is not available or feasible
(e.g. pregnancy or lactation)
• In overt hyperthyroidism without stigmata of Grave’s disease, TSH receptor
antibody (TRAb) is useful to distinguish between Graves’ disease and other
causes of hyperthyroidism
• Thyroid scintigraphy should be obtained if the clinical presentation suggests
a toxic adenoma or toxic multinodular goitre or whenever the diagnosis is
in doubt
2.1.3 How To Treat Hyperthyroidism?
In patients in whom the diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis is strongly suspected or
confirmed, treatment with propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol, or other beta-blockers
leads to a decrease in heart rate, systolic blood pressure, muscle weakness, and
tremors, as well as improvement in the degree of irritability, emotional lability, and
exercise intolerance.50 (Level II) Oral administration of calcium-channel blockers, both
verapamil and diltiazem, has been shown to affect heart rate control in patients who
do not tolerate or are not candidates for b-adrenergic blocking agents.4 (Level II)
Recommendation
• Beta-adrenergic blockade is recommended in all patients with symptomatic
thyrotoxicosis, especially elderly patients and thyrotoxic patients with resting
heart rates in excess of 90 beats per minute or coexistent cardiovascular disease
2.1.3.1 How To Treat Graves’ Hyperthyroidism (GD)?
Once it has been established that the patient is hyperthyroid and the cause is GD,
the patient and physician must choose between three effective and relatively safe
initial treatment options: 131I therapy (radioactive iodine), antithyroid drugs (ATD),
or thyroidectomy.50 (Level II) The long-term quality of life (QoL) following treatment for
GD was found to be the same in patients randomly allocated to one of the three
treatment options.4 (Level II)
Radioactive Iodine (RAI)
RAI has been used to treat hyperthyroidism and is well tolerated; complications
are rare, except for those related to orbitopathy. Thyroid storm occurs only rarely
following the administration of RAI. However, RAI can induce a short-term increase
of thyroid hormone levels. To prevent a clinical exacerbation of hyperthyroidism, the
use of methimazole (MMI) or carbimazole, before and after RAI treatment may be
considered in patients with severe hyperthyroidism, the elderly, and individuals with
substantial comorbidity that puts them at greater risk for complications of worsening
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
22
Table 2: Clinical situations that favour a particular modality as treatment for
Graves’ hyperthyroidism4 (Level II)
Modality
Favour
Contraindication
RAI
• Women not planning a
pregnancy in the future (in
less than six months, provided
thyroid hormone levels are
normal)
• Individuals with comorbidities
increasing surgical risk
• Patients with previously operated
or externally irradiated necks
• Lack of access to a high-volume
thyroid surgeon
• Patients with contraindications
to ATD use or failure to achieve
euthyroidism during treatment
with ATDs
• Patients with periodic thyrotoxic
hypokalaemic paralysis, right
heart failure, pulmonary
hypertension or congestive heart
failure
• Pregnancy
• Lactation
• Coexisting thyroid cancer, or
suspicion of thyroid cancer
• Individuals unable to comply
with radiation safety guidelines
• Used with informed caution in
women planning a pregnancy
within 4–6 months
ATDs
• Patients with a high likelihood
of remission (especially women,
with mild disease, small goitres
and negative or low-titre TRAb)
• Pregnancy
• Elderly or others with
comorbidities increasing
surgical risk or with limited life
expectancy
• Individuals in nursing homes
or other care facilities who may
have limited longevity and are
unable to follow radiation safety
regulations
• Patients with previously operated
or irradiated necks
• Patients with lack of access to a
high-volume thyroid surgeon
• Patients with moderateto–severe active Graves’
ophthalmopathy (GO)
• Patients who need more rapid
biochemical disease control
• Previous known major adverse
reactions to ATDs
Continued next page
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
23
thyrotoxicosis. The latter includes patients with cardiovascular complications such
as atrial fibrillation, heart failure, or pulmonary hypertension and those with renal
failure, infection, trauma, poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, and cerebrovascular or
pulmonary disease. These comorbid conditions should be addressed with standard
medical care and the patient rendered medically stable before the administration
of RAI if possible. If possible, iodinated radiocontrast should be avoided at least
4–6 weeks prior to RAI therapy. In addition, beta-adrenergic blocking drugs should be
used judiciously in these patients in preparation for RAI therapy. Methimazole and
carbimazole have been shown to reduce thyroid hormone levels after RAI treatment
Surgery
• Women planning a pregnancy
in <6 months provided thyroid
hormone levels are normal
• Symptomatic compression or
large goitres (>80 g)
• Relatively low uptake of RAI
• Thyroid malignancy is
documented or suspected
(e.g. suspicious or indeterminate
cytology)
• Large thyroid nodules,
especially if greater than
4 cm or if nonfunctioning, or
hypofunctioning on 99mTc
pertechnetate scanning
• Coexisting hyperparathyroidism
requiring surgery
• If TRAb levels are particularly
high
• Patients with moderate-to–
severe active GO
• Substantial comorbidities such
as cardiopulmonary disease,
end-stage cancer, or other
debilitating disorders
• Lack of access to a high-volume
thyroid surgeon
• (Pregnancy is a relative
contraindication, and surgery
should only be used in
circumstances wherein rapid
control of hyperthyroidism
is required and antithyroid
medications cannot be used.
Thyroidectomy is best avoided
in the first and third trimesters
of pregnancy because of
teratogenic effects associated
with an aesthetic agents and
the increased risk of foetal
loss in the first trimester and
the increased risk of preterm
labour in the third. Optimally,
thyroidectomy is performed in
the second trimester; however,
although it is the safest time, it
is not without risk (4.5%–5.5%
risk of preterm labour). Thyroid
surgery in pregnancy is also
associated with a higher rate
of complications, including
hypoparathyroidism and
recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN)
injury.
Table 2: Clinical situations that favour a particular modality as treatment for
Graves’ hyperthyroidism4 (Level II) Continued from previous page
Modality
Favour
Contraindication
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
24
in randomised controlled trials. A special diet is not required before RAI therapy,
but nutritional supplements that may contain excess iodine and seaweeds should
be avoided for at least seven days. A low-iodine diet may be useful for those with
relatively low RAIU to increase the proportion of RAI trapped. Patients who might
benefit from adjunctive MMI or carbimazole may be those who tolerate hyperthyroid
symptoms poorly. Such patients frequently have free T4 at 2–3 times the upper
limit of normal. Young and middle-aged patients who are otherwise healthy and
clinically well compensated despite significant biochemical hyperthyroidism can
generally receive RAI without pretreatment. If given as pretreatment, MMI and
carbimazole should be discontinued before the administration of RAI. Continuation
of ATDs up to 2–3 days prior to RAI can prevent a short-term increase of thyroid
hormone levels, which is found after six days. In elderly patients or in those with
underlying cardiovascular disease, resuming MMI or carbimazole 3–7 days after
RAI administration should be considered and generally tapered as thyroid function
normalises. In selected patients with Graves’ hyperthyroidism who would have
been candidates for pretreatment with ATDs because of comorbidities or excessive
symptoms, but who are allergic to ATDs, the duration of hyperthyroidism may be
shortened by administering iodine (e.g. saturated solution of potassium iodide
[SSKI]) beginning a week after RAI administration.4 (Level II)
The goal of RAI therapy in GD is to control hyperthyroidism by rendering the patient
hypothyroid; this treatment is very effective, provided a sufficient radiation dose
is deposited in the thyroid. This outcome can be accomplished equally well by
either administering a fixed dose or by calculating the activity based on the size of
the thyroid and its ability to trap RAI. The first method is simple, while the second
method requires two unknowns to be determined: the uptake of RAI and the size of
the thyroid.4 (Level II)
Anti-Thyroid Drugs (ATDs)
The goal of the therapy is to render the patient euthyroid as quickly and safely as
possible. These medications do not cure Graves’ hyperthyroidism; however, when
given in adequate doses, they are very effective in controlling hyperthyroidism. When
they fail to achieve euthyroidism, the usual cause is nonadherence. The treatment
itself might have a beneficial immunosuppressive role, either to primarily decrease
thyroid-specific autoimmunity, or secondarily, by ameliorating the hyperthyroid
state, which may restore the dysregulated immune system back to normal.
Carbimazole is rapidly converted to MMI in the serum (10 mg of carbimazole is
metabolised to approximately 6 mg of MMI). They work in an identical fashion, and
both are effective as a single daily dose. At the start of MMI therapy, initial doses of
10–30 mg daily are used to restore euthyroidism, and the dose can then be titrated
down to a maintenance level (generally 5–10 mg daily). The dose of MMI should be
targeted to the degree of thyroid dysfunction because too low dose will not restore
a euthyroid state in patients with severe disease and an excessive dose can cause
iatrogenic hypothyroidism in patients with mild disease. In addition, adverse drug
reactions are more frequent with higher MMI doses. Thus, it is important to use
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
25
an MMI dose that will achieve the clinical goal of normalisation of thyroid function
reasonably rapidly while minimising adverse drug effects. It is important to monitor
serum T3 levels initially because some patients normalise their free T4 levels with
MMI, but have persistently elevated serum T3, indicating continuing thyrotoxicosis.
Methimazole has the benefit of once-a–day administration and a reduced risk
of major side effects compared to propylthiouracil (PTU). Propylthiouracil has a
shorter duration of action and is usually administered two or three times daily,
starting with 50–150 mg three times daily, depending on the severity of the
hyperthyroidism. As clinical findings and thyroid function tests results return to
normal, a reduction to a maintenance PTU dose of 50 mg two or three times daily
is usually possible. When more rapid biochemical control is needed in patients with
severe thyrotoxicosis, an initial split dose of MMI (e.g. 15 or 20 mg twice a day)
maybe more effective than a single daily dose because the duration of action of MMI
may be less than 24 hours.4 (Level II)
The adverse effects of ATDs can be divided into common, minor allergic side effects
and rare but serious allergic/toxic events such as agranulocytosis, vasculitis, or
hepatic damage. The minor allergic reactions included pruritus or a limited, minor
rash. Cutaneous reactions were more common with PTU or higher dose MMI
(30 mg/day) compared with lower dose MMI (15 mg/day). Hepatotoxicity was more
common with PTU.4 (Level II)
A patient is considered to be in remission if they have had a normal serum TSH,
free T4, and free T3 for a year after discontinuation of ATD therapy. The remission
rate varies considerably between geographical areas. A meta-analysis shows
the remission rate in adults is not improved by a course of ATDs longer than 18
months. A lower remission rate has been described in men, smokers (especially
men), and those with large goitres (>80 g). Higher initial doses of MMI (60–80 mg/
day) do not improve remission rates; they increase the risk of side effects and are
not recommended. If a patient experiences a relapse at follow-up, RAI therapy or
surgery can be considered.4 (Level II)
Surgery
Thyroidectomy has a high cure rate for the hyperthyroidism of GD. Total thyroidectomy has a nearly 0% risk of recurrence, whereas subtotal thyroidectomy may
have an 8% chance of persistence or recurrence of hyperthyroidism at five years.
The most common complications following near-total or total thyroidectomy are
hypocalcaemia due to hypoparathyroidism (which can be transient or permanent),
recurrent or superior laryngeal nerve injury (which can be temporary or permanent),
postoperative bleeding, and complications related to general anaesthesia.4 (Level II)
Recommendations
• Patients with overt Graves’ hyperthyroidism should be treated with any of the
following modalities: ATDs, RAI therapy, or thyroidectomy
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
26
• Medical therapy of any comorbid conditions should be optimised prior to RAI
therapy
• Pretreatment with ATDs prior to RAI therapy for GD should be considered
in patients who are at increased risk for complications due to worsening of
hyperthyroidism. MMI should be discontinued 2–3 days prior to RAI
• Sufficient activity of RAI should be administered in a single application, typically
a mean dose of 10–15 mCi (370–555 MBq), to render the patient with GD
hypothyroid
• In patients who are at increased risk for complications due to worsening of
hyperthyroidism, resuming ATDs 3–7 days after RAI administration should be
considered
• MMI/CMZ is the preferred agent in all patients who choose ATD therapy for GD
• Patients should be informed about the side effects of ATDs and the necessity of
informing the physician promptly if they develop pruritic rash, jaundice, acholic
stools, or dark urine, arthralgias, abdominal pain, nausea, fatigue, fever, or
pharyngitis
• If ATD is chosen as the primary therapy for GD, the medication should be
continued for approximately 12–18 months, and then discontinued if TSH levels
are normal at that time
• If a patient with GD becomes hyperthyroid after completing a course of
MMI, consideration should be given to treatment with RAI or thyroidectomy.
Continued low-dose ATD treatment for longer than 12–18 months may be
considered in patients not in remission who prefer this approach
• If surgery is chosen as treatment for GD, patients should be rendered euthyroid
prior to the procedure with ATD pretreatment, with or without beta-adrenergic
blockade
• If surgery is chosen as the primary therapy for GD, near-total or total
thyroidectomy is the procedure of choice and should be referred to a highvolume thyroid surgeon
2.1.3.2. How Should Overt Hyperthyroidism Due To Toxic Multinodular Goitre
(TMNG) Or Toxic Adenoma (TA) Be Managed?
Two effective and relatively safe definitive treatment options exist for TMNG and TA:
RAI therapy and thyroid surgery. The decision regarding treatment should take into
consideration several clinical and demographic factors as well as patient preference.
The goal of therapy is the rapid and durable elimination of the hyperthyroid state.
For patients with TMNG, the risk of treatment failure or need for repeat treatment
is <1% following near-total and/total thyroidectomy, compared with a 20% risk for
retreatment following RAI therapy.
Euthyroidism is achieved within days after surgery. However, the risk of
hypothyroidism and the requirement for exogenous thyroid hormone therapy is
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
27
100% after near-total/total thyroidectomy. For patients with TMNG who receive RAI
therapy, the response is 50%–60% by three months and 80% by six months. In a large
study of patients with TMNG treated with RAI, the prevalence of hypothyroidism
was 3% at one year and 64% at 24 years. Hypothyroidism was more common among
patients under 50 years of age.4 (Level II)
For patients with TA, the risk of treatment failure is <1% after surgical resection
(ipsilateral thyroid lobectomy or isthmusectomy). Typically, euthyroidism is achieved
within days after surgery. The prevalence of hypothyroidism varies from 2% to 3%
following lobectomy for TA. For patients with TA who receive RAI therapy, there
is a 6%–18% risk of persistent hyperthyroidism and a 3%–5.5% risk of recurrent
hyperthyroidism. There is a 75% response rate by three months and 89% rate by
one year following RAI therapy for TA. The prevalence of hypothyroidism after
RAI is progressive and hastened by the presence of antithyroid antibodies or a
nonsuppressed TSH at the time of treatment.4 (Level II)
Table 3: Factors that favour a particular modality as treatment for TMNG
or TA4 (Level II)
Modality
Favour
Contraindication
RAI
• Advanced patient age
• Significant comorbidity
• Prior surgery or scarring in the
anterior neck
• Small goitre size
• RAIU sufficient to allow therapy
• Lack of access to a high-volume
thyroid surgeon
• Pregnancy
• Lactation
• Coexisting thyroid cancer
• Unable to comply with radiation
safety guidelines
• Used with caution in women
planning a pregnancy within
4–6 months
Surgery
• Presence of symptoms or signs of
compression within the neck
• Concern for coexisting thyroid
cancer
• Coexisting hyperparathyroidism
requiring surgery
• Large goitre size (>80 g)
• Substernal or retrosternal extension
• RAIU insufficient for therapy
• Need for rapid correction of the
thyrotoxic state
• Significant comorbidities, such as
cardiopulmonary disease,
end-stage cancer, or other
debilitating disorders
• Lack of access to a high-volume
thyroid surgeon
• Pregnancy is a relative
contraindication, and surgery
should only be used in this
circumstance when rapid control
of hyperthyroidism is required
and ATDs cannot be used
ATD
• Advanced age
• Comorbidities with increased
surgical risk
• Associated with decreased life
expectancy
• Poor candidates for ablative therapy
• Previous known major adverse
reactions to ATDs
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
28
Recommendations
• Patients with overtly TMNG or TA should be treated with RAI therapy or
thyroidectomy. On occasion, long-term, low-dose treatment with MMI may be
appropriate
• Because RAI treatment of TMNG or TA can cause a transient exacerbation
of hyperthyroidism, beta-adrenergic blockade should be considered even
in asymptomatic patients who are at increased risk for complications due
to worsening of hyperthyroidism (i.e. elderly patients and patients with
comorbidities)
• In addition to beta-adrenergic blockade, pretreatment with MMI prior to RAI
therapy for TMNG or TA should be considered in patients who are at increased
risk for complications due to worsening of hyperthyroidism, including the
elderly and those with cardiovascular disease or severe hyperthyroidism
• In patients who are at increased risk for complications due to worsening
of hyperthyroidism, resuming ATDs 3–7 days after RAI administration should
be considered
• If surgery is chosen as treatment for TMNG or TA, patients with overt
hyperthyroidism should be rendered euthyroid prior to the procedure with
MMI pretreatment, with or without b-adrenergic blockade
• MMI should be stopped at the time of surgery for TMNG or TA. Beta-adrenergic
blockade should be slowly discontinued following surgery
• Persistent or recurrent hyperthyroidism following surgery for TMNG or TA
should be investigated for other possible causes
• RAI therapy should be used for retreatment of persistent or recurrent
hyperthyroidism following inadequate surgery for TMNG or TA
• Long-term MMI treatment of TMNG or TA might be indicated in some elderly
or otherwise ill patients with limited life expectancy, in patients who are not
good candidates for surgery or ablative therapy, and in patients who prefer
this option
2.1.4 How To Monitor Treatment Of Hyperthyroidism?
Patients Post RAI
Most patients respond to RAI therapy with a normalisation of thyroid function
tests and improvement of clinical symptoms within 4–8 weeks. Hypothyroidism
may occur from four weeks onwards. This transition can occur rapidly, but
more commonly occurs between two and six months, and the timing of thyroid
hormone replacement therapy should be determined by results of thyroid function
tests, clinical symptoms, and physical examination. Transient hypothyroidism
following RAI therapy can rarely occur, with subsequent complete recovery of
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
29
thyroid function or recurrent hyperthyroidism. In such patients, the thyroid gland
often remains palpable.
Beta-blockers that were instituted prior to RAI treatment should be tapered when
free T4 and free T3 have returned to the reference range. As free T4 and free T3
improve, ATDs can usually be tapered, which allows an assessment of the response
to RAI. Most patients eventually develop hypothyroidism, which is indicated by a
free T4 below the normal range. At this point, levothyroxine should be instituted.
TSH levels may not rise immediately with the development of hypothyroidism
and should not be used initially to determine the need for levothyroxine. When
thyroid hormone replacement is initiated, the dose should be adjusted based on
an assessment of free T4. Overt hypothyroidism should be avoided, especially in
patients with active GO.
Once euthyroidism is achieved, lifelong annual thyroid function testing is
recommended at least annually, or if the patient experiences symptoms of
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Since TSH levels may remain suppressed for
a month or longer after hyperthyroidism resolves, the levels should be interpreted
cautiously and only in concert with free T4 and free T3.4 (Level II)
Response to RAI therapy can be assessed by monitoring the size of the gland,
thyroid function, and clinical signs and symptoms. The goal of re-treatment is to
control hyperthyroidism with certainty by rendering the patient hypothyroid.
Patients who have persistent, suppressed TSH with normal free T3 and free T4
may not require immediate retreatment but should be monitored closely for either
relapse or development of hypothyroidism. In the small percentage of patients
with hyperthyroidism refractory to several applications of RAI, surgery should be
considered.4 (Level II)
Patients Treated With ATD
Periodic clinical and biochemical evaluation of thyroid status in patients taking
ATDs is necessary, and it is essential that patients understand its importance. An
assessment of serum free T4 and free T3 should be obtained about 2–6 weeks
after initiation of therapy, depending on the severity of the thyrotoxicosis, and the
dose of medication should be adjusted accordingly. Serum T3 should be monitored
because the serum free T4 levels may normalise despite persistent elevation of
serum free T3. Serum TSH may remain suppressed for several months after starting
therapy, and it is therefore not a good parameter for monitoring therapy early in
the course. Once the patient is euthyroid, the dose of MMI can usually be decreased
by 30%–50% and biochemical testing repeated in 4–6 weeks. Once euthyroid levels
are achieved with the minimal dose of medication, clinical and laboratory evaluation
can be undertaken at intervals of 2–3 months. If a patient is receiving long-term MMI
(>18 months), this interval can be increased to 6 months.4 (Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
30
Recommendations
• Follow-up within the first 1–2 months after RAI therapy for GD/TMNG/TA should
include an assessment of free T4 (and free T3 if indicated), and TSH. Biochemical
monitoring should be continued at four- to six-week intervals for six months,
or until the patient becomes hypothyroid and is stable on thyroid hormone
replacement
• When hyperthyroidism due to GD/TMNG/TA persists after six months following
RAI therapy, re-treatment with RAI is suggested. In selected patients with
minimal response three months after therapy, additional RAI may be considered
• A differential WBC count should be obtained during febrile illness and at the
onset of pharyngitis in all patients taking antithyroid medication
• Liver function and hepatocellular integrity should be assessed in patients taking
MMI or PTU who experience pruritic rash, jaundice, light-coloured stool or dark
urine, joint pain, abdominal pain or bloating, anorexia, nausea, or fatigue
2.1.5 When To Refer Patients
Recommendations
• Hyperthyroidism due to TMNG or TA should be referred to centres with
radioiodine facility or surgical expertise
• Hyperthyroidism due to GD treated with ATDs but remaining hyperthyroid
despite adequate treatment should be referred to centres with radioiodine
facility or surgical expertise
• Hyperthyroidism due to GD treated with ATDs but relapsing after an initial
course of ATDs should be referred to centres with radioiodine facility or surgical
expertise
• Hyperthyroid patients with other comorbidities or who develop comorbidities
should be referred to a tertiary centre
2.2 SUBCLINICAL HYPERTHYROIDISM
Subclinical hyperthyroidism is defined as suppressed serum TSH with normal fT4
and fT3 concentrations.51(Level II) It is exclusively based on laboratory findings.
2.2.1 What Is The Prevalence Of Subclinical Hyperthyroidism?
The prevalence of subclinical hyperthyroidism varies between 0.7% in United
States52(Level II) and 2.91% in Europe53(Level II), and it depends on diagnostic criteria, age,
sex, TSH assay used, and the iodine intake of the population being studied.54(Level II) A
local cross-sectional study showed that the prevalence of subclinical hyperthyroidism
is 2.8%.1(Level III) In other studies, the prevalence of subclinical hyperthyroidism
ranges up to 1.3% in moderately iodine-deficient areas amongst Orang Asli in
Hulu Selangor55(Level  II) and 1.9% amongst men in urban areas.56(Level II) Subclinical
hyperthyroidism occurs more frequently among older females.57(Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
31
Table 4: Causes of a low serum TSH level [Adapted from (54 Level II); (19 Level III)]
Causes of a low serum TSH level
True subclinical hyperthyroidism
Endogenous
Graves’ disease
Multinodular goitre
Autonomous nodule
• Exogenous
 Intentional
Thyroxine suppressive dose for thyroid cancer
 Unintentional
Thyroxine replacement dose for hypothyroidism
Others
Medications
Glucocorticoids
Dopamine
Dobutamine
Octreotide
Amiodarone
Transient
First trimester of pregnancy
Destructive thyroiditis
Post-radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism
Severe non-thyroidal illness
Ethnicity
Black (American)
Pituitary or hypothalamic insufficiency
Smoking
2.2.2 What Is The Aetiology Of Subclinical Hyperthyroidism?
The aetiology of subclinical hyperthyroidism would be similar to that of overt
hyperthyroidism.
2.2.3 What Is The Natural History Of Disease (NHOD) For Subclinical
Hyperthyroidism?
Subclinical hyperthyroidism normalises in 17%–36% of patients58(Level II); however,
there is a 0.5%–5.0% chance of progression to overt hyperthyroidism.4(Level II) There
is no local data on NHOD for subclinical hyperthyroidism, but in Singapore, 5.3%
progress to overt hyperthyroidism and 13.3% revert to normal after a mean
follow-up of 18 months.59 (Level II) NHOD for subclinical hyperthyroidism may be
influenced by the TSH level and its aetiology. In a large retrospective study
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
32
Table 5: Association of subclinical hyperthyroidism and events
[Adapted from 58 (Level II); 62 - 82 (Level II)]
Prospective studies
Meta-analysis
TSH severity
level
relationship
With
association
No
association
With
association
No
association
Mortality
Probable
√
√
√
√ (CHD)
Cardiovascular events
Atrial fibrillation
Probable
√
√
√
Chronic heart
failure
Possible
√
√
√
√
Non-fatal
cardiovascular
events
Possible
√
√
√
√
Bone
Bone mass
density
Possible
√
Postmenopausal
√
Premenopausal
√
Femoral
neck only
√
Total hip and
lumbar spine
√
Fractures
Probable
√
√
√
√
Others
Stroke
Unclear
√
√
√
Cognition
Unclear
√
√
√
Symptoms
Possible
√
conducted among 323 patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism from 2003 to 2010,
progression to overt hyperthyroidism was 20.3% for those with TSH <0.1 mIU/L and
only 6.8% for those with TSH 0.1–0.39 mIU/L60 (Level II), and in another retrospective
study of 96 patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism, 9% subclinical Graves’ will
require treatment by five years as opposed to 21% for multinodular goitre and 61%
for autonomous nodule.61 (Level II) However, NHOD of subclinical hyperthyroidism was
found not to be associated with aetiology and the level of low TSH in a retrospective
study in Singapore.59 (Level II)
2.2.4 What is the Significance of Subclinical Hyperthyroidism?
Mortality
A few prospective studies suggest an association62 (Level II) between subclinical
hyperthyroidism and mortality, but others do not.63 (Level II) A meta-analysis by Collet
showed that subclinical hyperthyroidism is associated with increased total mortality
(hazard ratio [HR], 1.24 95% CI,1.06–1.46) with higher mortality due to coronary
heart disease with TSH <0.10 mIU/L compared with TSH level 0.10–0.44 mIU/L,
p<0.03.64 (Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
33
Atrial Fibrillation
Prospective studies suggest subclinical hyperthyroidism is associated with atrial
fibrillation.65 (Level II), 66 (Level II) Both prospective studies and meta-analyses show the TSH
severity level relationship.64 (Level II), 66 (Level II)
Chronic Heart Failure
A few prospective studies suggest an association of subclinical hyperthyroidism with
heart failure67(Level II), but some do not.68(Level II) A meta-analysis by Gencer et al. show an
HR of 1.46 (95% CI, 0.94–2.27) (p>0.05), even though the TSH severity relationship
suggested lower TSH <0.1 mIU/L is associated with heart failure.69(Level II)
Non-fatal Cardiovascular Events
Most prospective studies show an increased hazard ratio for non-fatal
cardiovascular events with subclinical hyperthyroidism, but do not reach statistical
significance,68  (Level  II) with the exception of a study in Scotland.58 (Level II) Individual
participant meta-analysis by Collet showed the HR for coronary heart disease events
was 1.21 (95% CI 0.99–1.46) and the TSH severity relationship did not suggest the
lower TSH <0.1 mIU/L is associated with a greater risk of events.64 (Level II) But another
meta-analysis by Li-bo Yang showed an HR of 1.19 (95% CI, 1.10–1.28), p<0.05.70(Level II)
Fractures
A prospective Busselton Health Study71(Level II) showed no association between
subclinical hyperthyroidism and fractures, but the Health, Aging and Body
Composition Study by Rodondi68 (Level II) showed there is an association with fractures.
An individual-participant data meta-analysis by Blum72(Level II) revealed an HR for hip
fracture of 1.36 (95% CI, 1.13–1.64); any fracture HR 1.28 (95% CI, 1.06–1.53); nonspine fracture HR 1.16 (95% CI, 0.95–1.41); spine fracture HR 1.51 (95% CI, 0.93–
2.45). Also, the lower the TSH, the higher the risk of fractures. A recent study further
supports the association between subclinical hyperthyroidism and fractures.73(Level II)
Bone Mineral Density (BMD)
The Rotterdam study74(Level II) showed decreased BMD in subclinical hyperthyroid
patients, but the Cardiovascular Health Study75(Level II) did not. An individual-participant
data meta-analysis by Segna et al. showed more BMD loss at the femoral neck only
versus euthyroidism, more so amongst those with TSH <0.10 mIU/L. Ruifei Yang
et al.73(Level II) showed that the BMD decrement at the femoral neck and total hip BMD
occurred mainly among women.
Stroke
A prospective study by Parle76(Level II) suggested an increased risk of stroke. However,
another study by Cappola77(Level II) suggested otherwise. A meta-analysis by
Chaker78(Level II) did not reveal any association between subclinical hyperthyroidism
and stroke.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
34
Table 6: Benefits of treatment of subclinical hyperthyroidism
(Adapted from 83(Level II); 84(Level II); 85(Level II); 86(Level II); 87(Level II); 88(Level II))
Outcome measures
Treatment modality
Benefits
Yes
No
Symptoms
Methimazole (83)
√ (83)
Propylthiouracil, RAI (84)
√ (84)
Cardiac function, rates, structure
Methimazole (83)
√ (83)
Propylthiouracil, RAI (84)
√ (84)
Methimazole (86)
√ (86)
Propylthiouracil (88)
√ (88)
Bone mass density
Propylthiouracil, RAI (84)
√ (84)
RAI (85)
√ (85)
Methimazole (86)
√ (86)
RAI, thyroidectomy (87)
√ (87)
Body composition
RAI, thyroidectomy (87)
√ (87)
Cognition
Kalmijn79(Level II) suggested an increased risk of dementia. However, no association was
noted by Formiga.80(Level II) A meta-analysis by Rieben81(Level II) showed an association
between subclinical hyperthyroidism and dementia (HR 1.67 [95% CI, 1.04–2.69]).
Symptoms
A prospective study by Stott82(Level II) showed subclinical hyperthyroidism is associated
with higher mean Wayne scores as compared with euthyroid subjects.
Recommendation
• ECG, echo and bone mineral density assessments are recommended especially
for patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism
2.2.5 What Are the Benefits of Treatment of Subclinical Hyperthyroidism?
So far, no large randomised controlled trials have looked into the effects of
treatment outcomes on mortality, cardiovascular events, fractures, stroke, and
cognition. However, there have been several much smaller studies looking at the
effects of treatment on symptoms, cardiac structure and function, heart rate, body
composition, and bone mineral density.83(Level II); 84(Level II); 85(Level II); 86(Level II); 87(Level II); 88(Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
35
Beta-blocker bisoprolol had been used for patients on thyroxine suppressive
therapy and found to reduce symptoms, heart rate, and left ventricular
hypertrophy.89(Level II)
2.2.6 What Is The Approach To Patients With Low TSH Level?
Figure 4: Algorithm for determining aetiology of low TSH level. (Adapted from4(Level II))
↓ TSH and
n fT4, n fT3
Elderly/risk
factors/TSH
<0.1 mIU/L
Repeat within a
few weeks
Normalised
Persistent
Subclinical hyperthyroidism
True subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Exogenous
subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Endogenous
subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Doppler USS thyroid/
TSH receptor Ab/
thyroid scintigraphy
Thyroiditis
Graves' disease
Autonomous
nodule
Multinodular
goitre
Others
Repeat within
3–4 months
Persistent
Normalised
Young/no risk
factors/TSH
0.1–0.5 mIU/L
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
36
2.2.7 What Is The Treatment Of Subclinical Hyperthyroidism?
According to currently available evidence, subclinical hyperthyroidism is likely to
cause atrial fibrillation; may probably increase the risk of mortality and fractures;
and possibly cause heart failure and cardiovascular events. However, it is unclear
whether subclinical hyperthyroidism causes stroke and dementia. Current studies
on treatment outcomes measure only surrogate markers such as symptoms,
cardiac structure, function and rate, bone mineral density, and body composition.
Therefore, the American Thyroid Association in 2016 suggested when to treat
subclinical hyperthyroidism.4(Level II)
Table 7: Factors influencing consideration for treatment of subclinical
hyperthyroidism [Adapted from 4(Level II)]
Factor
TSH (<0.1 mIU/L)
TSH (0.1–0.4 mIU/L)
Age >65 years
Yes
Consider treating
Age <65 years with comorbidities
Yes
Consider treating
Heart disease
Yes
Consider treating
Osteoporosis
Yes
Consider treating
Menopausal, not on oestrogens or
bisphosphonates
Yes
Consider treating
Hyperthyroid symptoms
Yes
Consider treating
Age <65 years, asymptomatic
Consider treating
Observe
Recommendations
• Treatment should be considered in patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism
who are either elderly (age >65 years old) OR with comorbidities (cardiac
disease or osteoporosis) OR TSH level less than 0.1 mIU/L
• Patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism at a younger age (age <65 years)
AND those without comorbidities (cardiac disease or osteoporosis) AND TSH
between 0.1 and 0.5 mIU/L AND asymptomatic should be observed
• b-blockers should be instituted in patients with symptomatic sublinical
hyperthyroidism
• Treatment if decided, should be based on aetiology and follow the same
outlined principles for overt hyperthyroidism
• Anti-thyroid drugs should be the first-line of treatment and initial treatment for
subclinical hyperthyroidism, whatever the aetiology
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
37
• Radioactive iodine therapy should be considered in those with persistent
and progressive subclinical hyperthyroidism due to autonomous nodule and
multinodular goitre
• Surgery should be reserved for those with compressive symptoms (dysphagia
and shortness of breath) or suspicious of malignancy
Figure 5: Algorithm for treatment of subclinical hyperthyroidism. [Adapted from 4(Level II)]
True subclinical
hyperthyroidism
(GD, MNG, AN)*
Elderly/
comorbidities/
TSH <0.1 mIU/L
Treat
GD
ATD
AN/MNG
ATD/RAI/surgery
Young and no
comorbidities
and TSH
0.1–0.5 mIU/L
Symptomatic
Beta-blockers
Asymptomatic
Observe
*GD (Graves’ Disease); MNG (multinodular goitre); AN (autonomous nodule).
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
38
3. HYPOTHYROIDISM
3.1 OVERT HYPOTHYROIDISM
3.1.1  What Are The Clinical And Biochemical Goals For Levothyroxine
Replacement In Primary Hypothyroidism?
The goals of levothyroxine replacement in primary hypothyroidism are to achieve
a state of euthyroidism and normalisation of circulating levels of TSH and thyroid
hormones.91 (Level I)
Recommendations
• Levothyroxine is the recommended preparation of choice and the mainstay of
treatment of hypothyroidism
The three main aims of therapy are:
i) To provide resolution of signs and symptoms, including biological and
physiological markers of hypothyroidism
ii) To achieve normalisation of serum TSH with improvement in thyroid hormone
concentrations
iii) To avoid iatrogenic thyrotoxicosis or overtreatment, particularly in the elderly
3.1.2 Are Clinical Parameters Such As Cold Sensitivity And Dry Skin Useful
By Themselves For Assessing Adequacy Of Levothyroxine Replacement In
Primary Hypothyroidism?
The signs and symptoms associated with hypothyroidism such as dry skin, cold
intolerance, constipation, and psychomotor retardation are neither sensitive nor
specific and overlap significantly between patients with and without thyroid disease.
Therefore, symptoms alone without biochemical assessment lack sensitivity
and specificity and should, therefore, not be used for judgeing the adequacy of
replacement. However, changes in clinical symptoms should be followed
longitudinally and taken into consideration together with serum TSH and thyroid
hormones levels, comorbidities, and other potential causes.91 (Level I)
3.1.3 How Should Levothyroxine Administration Be Timed With
Respect To Meals And Beverages In Order To Maintain Maximum,
Consistent Absorption?
When levothyroxine is co-administered with food, absorption is reduced compared
with absorption in the fasting state.92 (level II) Taking levothyroxine at bedtime has been
shown to be just as efficacious as taking it in the morning, with no significant changes
in the TSH levels.93–94 (Level II) It is important to consider not only when the absorption
of levothyroxine would be optimal, but also what timing promotes adherence.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
39
Table 8: Medications and supplements interfering with absorption of
levothyroxine [Adapted from 98 (Level II)]
Interference with absorption
Bile acid sequestrants
(cholestyramine, colestipol,
colesevelam)
Sucralfate
Cation exchange resins
(Kayexelate)
Oral bisphosphonates
Proton pump inhibitors
Raloxifene
Multivitamins (containing
ferrous sulfate or calcium
carbonate)
Ferrous sulphate
Phosphate binders
(sevelamer, aluminum
hydroxide)
Calcium salts (carbonate,
citrate, acetate)
Chromium picolinate
Charcoal
Orlistat
Ciprofloxacin
H2 receptor antagonists
Malabsorption syndromes
• Celiac disease
• Jejunoileal bypass surgery
• Cirrhosis (biliary)
• Achlorhydria
Diet
• Ingestion with a meal
• Grapefruit juice
• Espresso coffee
• High fibre diet
• Soybean formula (infants)
• Soy
Recommendation
• Levothyroxine is best taken on empty stomach (1 hour before breakfast or at
bedtime, at least 3 hours after the last meal of the day) because absorption
is impaired if taken with food. Compliance may be enhanced however, by
instructing patients to consistently take it before breakfast each day
3.1.4 Are There Medications And Supplements That Should Not Be
Co-administered With Levothyroxine In Order To Avoid Impaired Absorption?
Multiple studies have shown that administration of levothyroxine with
various medications or beverage such as coffee can impair the absorption of
levothyroxine.95–101 (Level II)
Recommendation
• Administration of levothyroxine should be separated from other potentially
interfering medications and supplements (Table 8). A four-hour separation is
advised, but untested
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
40
3.1.5 Are There Gastrointestinal Conditions That Should Be Considered When
A Patient’s Levothyroxine Dose Is Much Higher Than Expected?
Several gastrointestinal disorders seem to affect levothyroxine absorption or
serum TSH levels possibly mediated through an impact on gastric acidity.
Reduction of levothyroxine requirement after eradication of H. pylori infection and
institution of a gluten-free diet for coeliac disease has been shown in prospective
studies.102-104 (Level II) Levothyroxine absorption, however, appeared to be preserved in
Roux-en-Y surgery and various other gastric bypass procedures. This is consistent
with the ileum being the main site of levothyroxine absorption.105-106 (Level II) It should
also be noted that autoimmune atrophic gastritis is particularly prevalent in older
patients with hypothyroidism and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.107 (Level II)
Recommendation
• Evaluation for gastrointestinal disorders (H. pylori, atrophic gastritis, and
coeliac’s disease) should be considered in patients requiring a much higherthan-expected dose of levothyroxine. If indeed such disorders are detected and
treated successfully, re-assessment of thyroid function is necessary, and the
levothyroxine dose adjusted accordingly
3.1.6 What Medications May Alter A Patient’s Levothyroxine Requirement By
Affecting Either Metabolism Or Binding To Transport Proteins?
Adjustment of levothyroxine dose may be necessary for the use of medications
that alter T4 metabolism or change the concentration of thyroxine-binding
globulin.91 (Level I) The need to increase the levothyroxine dose substantially has
been reported in athyreotic patients prescribed tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as
imatinib and sunitinib.90 (Level II)
Recommendation
• Serum TSH should be reassessed at initiation or discontinuation of oestrogen and
androgens (may alter levothyroxine requirement), and at the commencement
of agents (such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors) that can affect thyroxine
metabolism and thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine deiodination. Monitoring of
serum TSH is also advisable when patients are started on drugs that have been
shown to increase hepatic metabolism of T4 and T3, i.e. antiepileptics such as
phenobarbital, phenytoin, and carbamazepine, or other medications such as
rifampicin and sertraline
3.1.7 What Factors Determine The Levothyroxine Dose Required By A
Hypothyroid Patient For Reaching The Appropriate Serum TSH Goal?
Many factors can affect the levothyroxine requirement to achieve normalisation
of serum TSH levels. The initial dose of levothyroxine should be decided based
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
41
on the patient’s body weight, lean body mass, pregnancy status, aetiology of
hypothyroidism, degree of TSH elevation (in the case of primary hypothyroidism),
age, general medical condition – especially the presence of cardiac disease, and the
serum TSH goal appropriate for the clinical situation.91(Level II)
3.1.8 What Is The Best Approach To Initiating And Adjusting Levothyroxine
Therapy?
Multiple factors need to be considered when initiating levothyroxine based on
serum TSH levels and weight (full replacement of 1.6 µg/kg when serum TSH
levels are markedly elevated and lower doses of 25–50 µg/day in milder degrees
of hypothyroidism).91 (Level I) Medications taken concurrently may affect the dose
required as well.108 (Level I)
Recommendation
• Levothyroxine replacement therapy can be started as an initial full replacement
or as a partial replacement with gradual dose increments titrated using serum
TSH as the goal. Dose adjustments should be made when there are significant
changes in body weight, and with pregnancy and ageing. Serum TSH should be
reassessed 4–8 weeks after any dose adjustments
3.1.9 What Are The Potentially Deleterious Effects Of Excessive
Levothyroxine?
Overtreatment or iatrogenic thyrotoxicosis can result in atrial fibrillation and
accelerated bone loss or osteoporosis. Therefore, thyroid hormone excess and
subnormal serum TSH level (especially values less than 0.1 mIU/L) should be
avoided, particularly in older people and postmenopausal women.
(Refer to the section on subclinical hyperthyroidism and hyperthyroidism in the elderly.)
3.1.10 What Are The Potentially Deleterious Effects Of Inadequate
Levothyroxine?
Thyroid hormone deficiency can have detrimental effects on the serum lipid profile
and result in the progression of cardiovascular disease. Therefore, adequate doses
of levothyroxine should be given to normalise serum TSH levels, to minimise or
eliminate these effects.
(Refer to the section on effects of subclinical hypothyroidism.)
3.1.11 What Is The Appropriate Management Of Perceived Allergy To The
Constituents Of Levothyroxine Or Intolerance To Levothyroxine?
Allergy to the dye in the tablet has been reported, but rarely occurs.109 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
42
Recommendation
• If a patient is perceived to be allergic or intolerant to levothyroxine, change in
dose or product, including the use of gel capsules and treating concomitant
iron-deficiency anaemia, can be tried. Referral to an allergist may be helpful
in a few cases, to rule out other allergens, reactions to which may have been
attributed to levothyroxine
3.1.12 How Should Levothyroxine Therapy Be Managed In Individuals Who
Have Elevated TSH Values Due To Nonadherence?
There are various reports in which patients with raised serum TSH levels while
being prescribed levothyroxine were shown to be able to absorb levothyroxine
normally and therefore thought to be nonadherent. In such cases, once
weekly dosing has been shown to be effective and safe in reducing TSH
levels.110–111 (Level II)
Recommendation
• Weekly oral administration of the full week’s dose of levothyroxine should be
considered in patients in whom adherence cannot otherwise be sustained
3.1.13 What Biochemical Goals Should Be Employed For Levothyroxine
Replacement In Patients With Secondary Hypothyroidism?
A randomised controlled trial showed that patients given a dose of 1.6 mg/kg/
day produced fT4 that reached the upper part of the reference range, and it was
associated with lower body weight, lower BMI, lower cholesterol, and fewer clinical
signs of hypothyroidism, based on the Zulewski score. However, no differences
in well-being and cognitive function were observed.112 (Level I) Growth hormone
replacement may result in the need to either initiate or increase the dose of
levothyroxine in patients with hypopituitarism.113 (Level II)
Recommendation
• The primary biochemical goal in patients with secondary hypothyroidism is to
maintain serum free thyroxine levels in the upper half of the reference range,
but the level may be reduced in older patients or those with comorbidities and
those at a higher risk of complications of thyroid hormone excess
3.1.14 What Approach Should Be Taken In Patients Treated For
Hypothyroidism Who Have Normal Serum TSH Values But Still Have
Unresolved Symptoms?
A prospective case-control study showed that women with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
suffer from a high symptom load and that hypothyroidism is only a contributory
factor.114 (Level II) In addition, it has been shown that individuals referred for thyroid
testing by their primary care physicians had rates of psychological distress twice as
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
43
high as the general population despite the fact that the rate of hypothyroidism was
not higher.115 (Level II)
Recommendation
• Acknowledgement of the patients’ symptoms and evaluation for alternative
causes is recommended
3.1.15 Is There An Unmet Need In L-T4–Treated Patients With
Hypothyroidism?
A community-based study from the UK showed that patients taking levothyroxine
despite normal serum TSH levels display significant psychological well-being
impairment, as measured using the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12),
compared to controls of similar age and sex. Higher serum fT4 (but not fT3) was
associated with lower GHQ-12 scores, implying improved well-being.116 (Level II) Another
community-based study from Norway suggested a higher prevalence of depression
and anxiety, as measured by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)
scores in hypothyroid women aged 40 years and older taking levothyroxine.117 (Level II)
In a third study from the USA, levothyroxine-treated women were shown to have
decrements in health status, psychological function, working memory, and motor
learning compared to euthyroid controls. However, correlations between TSH
levels and outcomes were not found.118 (Level II) The evidence suggests that despite
normal serum TSH levels, psychological distress, impaired well-being, and cognitive
disturbances occur more often in patients with hypothyroidism treated with
levothyroxine monotherapy than controls and that 5%–10% of patients treated with
levothyroxine monotherapy with normal serum TSH can have persistent symptoms
related to the disease and therapy.
3.1.16 Is There A Biological Rationale For Persistent Complaints In
L-T4–Treated Hypothyroid Patients?
Two most common causes of hypothyroidism are Hashimoto’s disease and
thyroid ablation in Graves’ disease, and therefore most hypothyroid patients have
autoimmune thyroid disease. Autoimmune thyroid disease is associated with
other autoimmune disorders, with rheumatoid arthritis being the most common
coexisting autoimmune disorder. Also, there are significantly increased relative risks
for almost all other autoimmune diseases (RR >10 for systemic lupus erythematosus,
Addison’s disease, pernicious anaemia, coeliac disease, and vitiligo). Due to the
nonspecific nature of associated symptoms, many of these conditions may go
unnoticed for a long time. Therefore, screening for other autoimmune diseases has
been recommended for patients with autoimmune thyroid disease who present
with new or unresolving non-specific symptoms.119–121 (Level II)
Persistent symptoms despite normal serum TSH levels in patients with
hypothyroidism treated with levothyroxine monotherapy have been suggested
to be due to the patients’ awareness of a chronic disease, thyroid autoimmunity
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
44
independent of thyroid function, and inadequacy of levothyroxine treatment to
restore physiological T4 and T3 concentrations in serum and tissues.122 (Level 1)
3.1.17 When Should Endocrinologists Be Involved In The Care Of Patients
With Hypothyroidism?
Consultation with an endocrinologist is recommended in the following situations/
for the following population groups:
•
Children and infants
•
Patients in whom it is difficult to render and maintain a euthyroid state
•
Pregnancy
•
Women planning conception
•
Cardiac disease
•
Presence of goitre, nodule, or other structural changes in the thyroid gland
•
Presence of other endocrine diseases, such as adrenal and pituitary disorders
•
Unusual constellation of thyroid function test results
•
Unusual causes of hypothyroidism, e.g. drug-induced hypothyroidism or by
agents such as tyrosine kinase inhibitor123 (Level I)
3.1.18 In Hospitalised But Not Critically Ill Patients With Known Pre-existing
Hypothyroidism, Should Levothyroxine Therapy Be Re-evaluated Based On
An Elevated Serum TSH Measurement?
There is a lack of RCTs and other evidence in the literature regarding the use and
monitoring of levothyroxine in hospitalised patients. However, the ATA has provided
recommendations for this population of patients in its 2014 guidelines.91 (Level III)
Recommendation
• Factors that should be taken into consideration for institution and adjustment
of levothyroxine replacement include the degree of clinical and biochemical
hypothyroidism, active comorbidities, and details of administration of
levothyroxine (e.g., dosage, timing, and other factors affecting absorption).
3.1.19  In Hospitalised But Not Critically Ill Patients Treated With
Levothyroxine Replacement, What Formulation And Route Of
Administration Are Recommended?
Recommendation
• Oral administration of levothyroxine is recommended, but if this is not
feasible, other enteral routes can be used. However, if enteral administration
is contraindicated (e.g. perforated viscus) or there are concerns of significant
malabsorption, then intravenous levothyroxine (at approximately 75% of oral
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
45
dose, assuming enteral levothyroxine dose achieved euthyroidism) may be
used till enteral absorption improves.
3.1.20 In Hospitalised But Not Critically Ill Patients About To Be Treated With
Levothyroxine, Should The Possibility Of Adrenal Insufficiency Be Excluded?
Recommendation
• The possibility of adrenal insufficiency should be considered and if there is
sufficient clinical or biochemical evidence to consider this diagnosis, empiric
treatment should be provided.
3.2 SUBCLINICAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
3.2.1 What Are The Causes Of Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
The most common cause of subclinical hypothyroidism is chronic autoimmune
thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s disease).124-126 (Level III) Less common causes include treated
Graves’ disease, TMNG and TA – radioactive iodine therapy, subtotal thyroidectomy,
and antithyroid drugs (intermittent non-compliance); head and neck surgery;
radiation therapy to the head, neck or chest area; iodine deficiency; untreated
primary adrenal insufficiency; medications: lithium, iodine, amiodarone; secondary
hypothyroidism (hypopituitarism); idiopathic and congenital.124–127 (Level III) Transient
elevations of TSH may occur in subacute or painless thyroiditis, following the
withdrawal of L-thyroxine and during recovery from a significant non-thyroidal
illness. Repeat measurements of TSH at two-to-three–month intervals from the
initial finding of a raised TSH are reasonable.125 (Level III)
3.2.2 How To Diagnose Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
Subclinical thyroid disease is a laboratory diagnosis. It is defined as a serum TSH
concentration above the statistically defined upper limit of the reference range
when serum fT4 and T3 concentrations are within their reference ranges.126 (Level I);
127 (Level I; 128 (Level I) However, since an array of factors has been shown to lead to
transient abnormalities of serum TSH, investigation for raised TSH requires repeat
measurements within two to three months to establish a firm diagnosis.128 (Level 1)
Transient elevations of TSH may occur in numerous circumstances, such as subacute
or painless thyroiditis, following withdrawal of L-thyroxine, during recovery from
a significant non-thyroidal illness, and during treatment with various drugs (e.g.
lithium, amiodarone).128 (Level I) Patients with subclinical disease may have few or no
definitive clinical signs or symptoms of thyroid dysfunction.128 (Level I) Serum TSH has
a log-linear relationship with circulating thyroid hormone levels (a two-fold change
in free thyroxine will produce a 100-fold change in TSH).125 (Level I) The generally
accepted reference range for serum TSH is 0.40–4.2 mIU/L.125 (Level I); 129 (Level IV)
Determination of anti-TPO antibodies may be helpful in defining the risk of
progression (2.6% each year if thyroid peroxidase [TPO] antibodies are absent and
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
46
4.3% if they are present).129 (Level IV); 130 (Level I); 131 (Level IV) Spontaneous recovery has been
described in subjects with subclinical hypothyroidism, and is (more likely in those
with negative antithyroid antibodies and serum TSH levels less than 10 mIU/L and
within the ﬁrst two years after diagnosis.132(Level I)
Recommendations
• Subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as a serum TSH concentration above
the statistically defined upper limit of the reference range when serum fT4 is
within its reference range
• Investigation of raised TSH requires repeat measurements, to establish a firm
diagnosis
• Determination of anti-TPO antibodies may be helpful in defining the risk of
progression
3.2.3 What Are The Complications of Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
Despite the clear biochemical pattern suggestive of mild hypothyroidism, few
patients with SCHypo have typical hypothyroid symptoms. The only large study to
systematically investigate symptoms in patients with overt and SCHypo as compared
to euthyroid controls is the Colorado Thyroid Disease Prevalence study. This large
questionnaire-based study conducted among 25,862 subjects reported a small but
significant difference in symptoms between euthyroid and subclinical hypothyroid
patients. The main problems reported were drier skin, poorer memory, slower
thinking, weaker muscles, greater tiredness, more muscle cramps, more feeling cold,
deeper and hoarser voice, puffier eyes, and more constipation in SCHypo.133 (Level IV)
The Tromsö study compared symptoms in 154 controls and 89 SCHypo subjects with
a TSH between 3.5 and 10.0 mIU/L using a similar panel of questions. Tiredness, but
none of the other symptoms, was significantly different between the groups.134 (Level IV)
These studies suggest that some patients with subclinical hypothyroidism do indeed
develop clinical manifestations of mild thyroid failure.
Patients with SCHypo have a high rate of progression to clinically overt
hypothyroidism. In a prospective cohort study by Gerold Huber, Jean-Jacques
Staub et al., 82 women with subclinical hypothyroidism underwent a follow-up
for a mean of 9.2 years. Patients were classified into three groups on the basis of
their initial TSH values: ≥4 to 6, 6 to 12, and greater than 12 µIU/mL. The 10-year
incidence of hypothyroidism was 0%, 42.8%, and 76.9%, respectively, in these three
groups.135 (Level IV) The rate of progression to overt hypothyroidism was significantly
higher in women with a higher baseline serum TSH concentration.133 (Level IV) The
presence of anti-TPO antibodies was also correlated with a significantly increased
incidence of progression to overt hypothyroidism.135 (Level IV); 136 (Level IV); 137 (Level IV) However,
some people do not show progression and some experience normalisation.135 (Level IV);
136 (Level IV); 137 (Level IV); 138 (Level IV)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
47
A TSH level greater than 10 mIU/L predicts a higher rate of progression, and a level
of less than 6 mIU/L predicts a lower likelihood of progression.139 (Level IV) In a study in
men and women older than 55 years with a mean follow-up of 32 months, the TSH
level normalised in 52% of those with a serum TSH of less than 10 mIU/L.139 (Level IV)
Subclinical hypothyroidism is associated with elevated TC, LDL-C,and TG levels, and
these lipid levels decrease with treatment.140 (Level IV); 141 (Level IV); 133 (Level IV); 142 (Level I) Higher
serum TC, LDL-C, and TG levels increased the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD);
therefore, the cardiovascular status of SCHypo patients should be monitored
carefully. A meta-analysis involving a total of 40,516 participants showed weak
evidence of an association between HDL-C and subclinical hypothyroidism.142 (Level I)
A systematic review of 7 prospective studies and a meta-analysis of 11 prospective
cohort studies showed the risk of CHD events increased significantly with higher
levels of TSH, particularly in those with TSH levels ≥10.0 mIU/L (HR 1.89, 95% CI,
1.28–2.80).140 (Level I); 141 (Level I) Minimal TSH disturbances between 4.5 and 6.9 mIU/L were
not associated with CHD events.140 (Level I); 141 (Level I) A meta-analysis of 13 prospective
cohort studies found no association between subclinical hypothyroidism and
fracture risk.143 (Level I) Multiple studies showed no association with anxiety, depression,
or cognitive dysfunction.144 (Level IV)
4. THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
A thyroid nodule is defined as a discrete lesion within the thyroid gland that is due
to an abnormal focal growth of thyroid cells. Thyroid nodules are generally benign
hyperplastic (or colloid) nodules or benign follicular adenomas and, uncommonly,
carcinoma occurs in 5%–10% of nodules. A nontoxic goitre is defined as any thyroid
enlargement characterised by uniform or selective growth of thyroid tissue that is
not associated with overt hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism and that does not
result from inflammation or neoplasia.
4.1 HOW COMMON ARE THYROID NODULES/GOITRE?
The prevalence of goitre, diffuse or nodular, differs widely depending on iodine
intake by the population. Goitre may occur endemically, due mainly to iodine
deficiency, or sporadically. By using ultrasonography as the screening method, a
prevalence of up to 30%–50% of an unselected adult population has been described
as having goitre, with a higher prevalence noted in iodine-deficient areas and in
older people.
Thyroid nodules are a common clinical finding. In large population-based
studies, the estimated prevalence of thyroid nodules detected by palpation is
4%–7%.145–146 (Level II) Imaging studies identify up to 10 times more nodules, mostly
benign. On ultrasonography, detection rates of clinically in-apparent thyroid
nodules of 20%–75% have been reported in the general population. Thyroid nodules
are more common in elderly individuals, females, subjects from iodine-deficient
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
48
geographic areas, and those with a history of radiation exposure.147 (Level III) In autopsy
studies, thyroid nodules may be present in up to 50%–60% of all adults.148 (Level II)
4.2 WHAT IS THE USUAL CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF THYROID NODULES/
GOITRE?
In general, thyroid nodules are usually not associated with abnormal thyroid
hormone secretion. Therefore, affected patients do not have any symptoms or
signs of thyroid dysfunction and present with neck lump or swelling. About 70% of
patients with sporadic nontoxic goitre complains of neck discomfort. Some patients
have concerns about cosmetic appearance and fear of possible malignancy.
Large goitres may displace or compress the trachea, oesophagus, and neck vessels.
There may be compressive symptoms and signs such as inspiratory stridor,
dysphagia, or a choking sensation. Compression of the recurrent laryngeal nerve
can result in hoarseness of voice due to vocal cord paralysis, usually associated with
thyroid malignancy.
4.3 CLINICAL EVALUATION OF THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
The main objective of the evaluation of a thyroid nodule is to differentiate malignant
lesions from benign conditions. Most nodules are asymptomatic and benign. The
initial evaluation of a patient with a thyroid nodule should include a complete history
and physical examination.149 (Level III)
Historical features that favour benign disease are a family history of Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis, benign thyroid nodule/goitre, and symptoms of hypothyroidism/
hyperthyroidism. A sudden increase in the size of the nodule with pain and
tenderness suggests a cyst or localised thyroiditis.149 (Level III)
Historical features that suggest malignancy:
•
Young age (<20 years) or old age (>60 years)
•
Male gender
•
History of external neck radiation during childhood/adolescence
•
Rapid growth
•
Recent changes in speaking, breathing, or swallowing
•
Family history of thyroid cancer or MEN type 2
Physical manifestations of thyroid malignancy:
•
Firm to hard consistency of nodule
•
Irregular shape
•
Fixation to underlying or overlying tissues
•
Vocal cord paralysis
•
Suspicious regional lymphadenopathy
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
49
The presence of multiple nodules does not decrease the likelihood of thyroid cancer.
In patients with multiple nodules, the decrease in malignancy rate is approximately
proportional to the number of nodules. Thyroid cancers are often in the dominant
nodule, but in approximately one-third of cases, the cancer is in a non-dominant
nodule.150 (Level III)
Recommendations
• A complete history should include:
- Personal or family history of thyroid disease or cancer
- Previous head and neck or whole-body irradiation
- Previous surgery, particularly head and neck or upper oesophageal/thoracic
surgery
- Rate of neck mass growth
- Use of iodine-containing drugs or supplements
- Symptoms of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism
- Symptoms of dysphagia, dysphonia, and dyspnoea (at rest, positional,
or nocturnal) may be due to compression or invasion of surrounding
structures
• Physical examination should include a thorough neck examination focusing on:
- Thyroid dimensions and consistency
- Thyroid nodule location, consistency, size, and number
- Neck tenderness or pain
- Cervical central and lateral lymph node enlargement
4.4 ULTRASOUND EVALUATION OF THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
When a nodular goitre is clinically present, ultrasound (US) assessment is the
preferred and most useful imaging technique to guide disease management and
treatment. The pattern of US features associated with nodule confers a risk of
malignancy and, combined with nodule size, guides the decision to proceed for Fine
Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAB).151 (Level III)
Recommendation
• All patients with a suspected thyroid nodule/nodular goitre or radiographic
abnormality suggesting a thyroid nodule incidentally detected on another
imaging study should undergo a dedicated thyroid/neck US that encompasses
the thyroid as well as the central and lateral neck compartments
Ultrasound is the gold standard for assessing nodule/gland size and thyroid
parenchyma (homogeneous or heterogeneous), location and characteristics of
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
50
any nodule(s), and the presence or absence of suspicious cervical lymph nodes in
the central and lateral compartments. Nodule characteristics include composition
(solid/cystic proportion), echogenicity, shape if taller than wide, margins, and
presence of echogenic profile.151 (Level III)
4.4.1 How To Describe Ultrasound Findings For Thyroid Nodules?
A structured assessment followed by a practical and standardised reporting
format with details of specific sonographic characteristics of thyroid nodules
is necessary to standardise diagnosis, risk stratification and the subsequent
management decision.
The American College of Radiology ACR TI-RADS 2017 structured reporting system is
best recommended as it is easy-to–use, robust and reproducible and widely accepted
by radiologists. This reporting system enables assessment of thyroid malignancy
risk and helps select patients for FNA and/or surgery, and may substantially reduce
the number of unnecessary invasive procedures. The structured reporting greatly
facilitates communication between radiologists and physicians, as well as between
practitioners and patients.
For patients with multiple nodules (≥4) present, only the four highest scoring
nodules, should be scored, reported, and followed up. Follow up shall be according
to the highest grade TI-RADS nodule available. Other nodules are also reassessed
with ultrasound. Interval enlargement on follow up is significant if there is an
increase of 20% and 2 mm in two dimensions, or a 50% increase in volume. If the
ACR TI‑RADS level increases between scans, an interval scan the following year
is again recommended. Ultrasound follow up of a thyroid nodule can be ceased
after 5 years if there is no increment in TI- RADS grade and size. Thus stability of
the nodule over that time span reliabily indicates that the nodule has a benign
characteristic.
4.5 FINE NEEDLE ASPIRATION BIOPSY (FNAB) OF THYROID NODULES
Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of thyroid nodules is the main technique for
diagnosing thyroid cancer; it has high sensitivity and specificity rates. The technique
is easy to perform and safe. It requires an adequate specimen, which should contain
at least five or six groups of 10–15 well-preserved cells. Ultrasound-guided FNAB
reduces the possibility of non-diagnostic specimens and is preferred in nodules with
a higher likelihood of either non-diagnostic cytology (>25–50% cystic) or sampling
error (non-palpable or posterior location).151 (Level III)
FNAB is recommended for suspicious lesions (TR3–TR5) with the specific size criteria,
according to the ACR Ti-RADS 2017 management algorithm (Refer Figure 6)
•
TR1: no FNA required
•
TR2: no FNA required
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
51
•
TR3: ≥1.5 cm follow up, ≥2.5 cm FNAB
- follow up: 1, 3, and 5 years
•
TR4: ≥1.0 cm follow up, ≥1.5 cm FNAB
- follow up: 1, 2, 3 and 5 years
•
TR5: ≥0.5 cm follow up, ≥1.0 cm FNAB
- annual follow up for up to 5 years
If there are multiple nodules, the two with the highest ACR TI-RADS grades should
be biopsied plus if there are any associated suspicious neck nodes (level II, III, IV
and VI). If metastatic lymph nodes are suspected, FNA may be indicated for subcentimetric nodules with a TI-RADS grade 5 or 4 or nodule with the highest TIRADS
grade, independent of the size of the nodule.
Figure 6: ACR-TI RADS 2017 structured reporting system for ultrasound of thyroid
nodules.
COMPOSITION
(Choose 1)
Cystic or almost
0 points
completely cystic
Spongiform
0 points
Mixed cystic
1 point
and solid
Solid or almost
2 points
completely solid
ECHOGENICITY
(Choose 1)
Anechoic
0 points
Hyperechoic or
1 point
isoechoic
Hypoechoic
2 points
Very hypoechoic
3 points
4 to 6 Points
7 Points or More
3 Points
TR1
Benign
No FNA
TR2
Not Suspicious
No FNA
TR3
Mildly Suspicious
FNA if ≥2.5 cm
Follow if ≥1.5 cm
TR4
Moderately Suspicious
FNA if ≥1.5 cm
Follow if ≥1 cm
TR5
Highly Suspicious
FNA if ≥1 cm
Follow if ≥0.5 cm*
ACR TI-RADS
*Refer to discussion of papillary microcarcinomas for 5–9 mm TR5 nodules.
SHAPE
(Choose 1)
Wider-than–tall
0 points
Taller-than–wide
3 points
MARGIN
(Choose 1)
Smooth
0 points
Ill-deﬁned
0 points
Lobulated or
2 points
irregular
Extra-thyroidal
3 points
extension
ECHOGENIC FOCI
(Choose All That Apply)
Macrocalciﬁcations
1 point
Peripheral (rim)
2 points
calciﬁcations
Punctate echogenic 3 points
foci
None or large
0 points
comet-tail artifacts
2 Points
0 Points
Add Points From All Categories to Determine TI-RADS Level
ECHOGENIC FOCI
MARGIN
SHAPE
COMPOSITION
COMPOSITION
Spongiform: Composed
predominantly (>50%) of small
cystic spaces. Do not add further
points for other categories.
Mixed cystic and solid: Assign
points for predominant solid
component.
Assign 2 points if composition
cannot be determined because of
calciﬁcation.
Anechoic: Applies to cystic or
almost completely cystic nodules.
Hyperechoic/isoechoic/hypoechoic:
Compared to adjacent
parenchyma.
Very hypoechoic: More
hypoechoic than strap muscles.
Assign 1 point if echogenicity
cannot be determined.
Taller-than-wide: Should be
assessed on a transverse image
with measurements parallel to
sound beam for height and
perpendicular to sound beam for
width.
This can usually be assessed by
visual inspection.
Lobulated: Protrusions into
adjacent tissue.
Irregular: Jagged, spiculated, or
sharp angles.
Extrathyroidal extension: Obvious
invasion = malignancy.
Assign 0 points if margin cannot
be determined.
Large comet-tail artifacts: V-shaped,
>1 mm, in cystic components.
Macrocalciﬁcations: Cause acoustic
shadowing.
Peripheral: Complete or
incomplete along margin.
Punctate echogenic foci: May have
small comet-tail artifacts.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
52
4.5.1 Cytology Reports Of FNAB Samples From Thyroid Nodules
Standardised reporting of FNA cytology interpretation is necessary and currently
utilises the Bethesda system that recognises six diagnostic categories, each having
an estimated cancer risk.
•
Non-diagnostic
•
Benign
•
Atypia/follicular lesion of undetermined significance (AUS/FLUS)
•
Follicular neoplasm
•
Suspicious of malignancy
•
Malignant
4.5.2 Molecular Testing Of FNAB Samples
Molecular testing of FNAB specimens for thyroid-related genes might be useful as
an adjunct in the assessment of thyroid nodules. Several molecular panels aimed at
increasing the accuracy of preoperative cytological diagnosis of thyroid nodules are
commercially available. After consideration of clinical and US features, mutational
testing for BRAF or the seven-gene mutation marker panel (BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC,
PAX8/PPAR-Gamma) may be considered in nodules with cytological interpretation
reporting suspicious of malignancy and guide surgical decision-making.151 (Level III)
4.6 LABORATORY EVALUATION FOR THYROID NODULES
A. Serum Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone/Thyrotropin (TSH)
Serum TSH levels, measured in a highly sensitive immunometric assay, should
always be performed and, if abnormal, fT4 levels should be measured during
the initial evaluation of a patient with a thyroid nodule or nontoxic goitre.151(Level III)
An undetectable TSH should suggest the possibility of toxic, autonomously
functioning nodular areas in the goitre. Proceeding with thyroid scintigraphy is
recommended.151(Level III) Patients with thyroid cancer rarely have abnormalities
in serum TSH. Elevated serum TSH in patients with nontoxic goitre suggests the
possibility of thyroiditis and hypothyroidism.
B. Serum Thyroid Autoantibodies
Measurement of serum antithyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody or antithyroglobulin
antibody levels may be helpful in the diagnosis of chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.
Routine measurement of serum thyroglobulin for initial evaluation of thyroid
nodules is not recommended.151 (Level III)
C. Serum Calcitonin
Serum calcitonin levels should be measured for patients with a family history or
clinical suspicion of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) or multiple endocrine
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
53
neoplasia type 2 (MEN2).152 (Level III) It is not cost-effective or necessary to measure
calcitonin levels in patients with nodular thyroid disease in the absence of clinical
suspicion of MTC or abnormal cytologic findings.151(Level III)
4.7 WHAT OTHER IMAGING MODALITIES MAY BE NEEDED WHEN EVALUATING
THYROID NODULES/GOITRE?
A. Radionuclide Scanning
Thyroid scintigraphy with technetium should be performed in patients with solitary
thyroid nodule or multi-nodular goitre with low TSH levels.152 (Level III)
B. CT and MRI
In patients with large goitres, conventional radiography of the neck and upper
mediastinum should be used to determine tracheal compression. CT and MRI are
useful for evaluating invasion into surrounding structures or retrosternal extension
or intrathoracic goitre.
It is also recommended in evaluation of occult metastases in mediastinal and
retropharyngeal regions in follow up cases of post thyroidectomy with elevation of
serum thyroglobulin (Tg) level and negative sonographic finding. Other additional
functions of CT and MR is to access other nodal sites that should not be neglected in
cases of thyroid carcinoma .These are the lower paratracheal nodes in the superior
mediastinum (level VII), and the retropharyngeal and retroesophageal groups which
are difficult to access on ultrasound.
4.8 MANAGEMENT OF THYROID NODULES/GOITRE
1. Observation and Monitoring
Patients with small, asymptomatic goitres can be monitored by clinical examination
and evaluated periodically with ultrasound measurements. Goitre growth can be
variable, and some patients have stable goitres for many years.
2. Thyroid Hormone Suppression Therapy
Regression of sporadic nontoxic diffuse goitre following thyroxine suppression
therapy has been established in earlier studies.153–154 (Level III) Nodular goitre and thyroid
nodules are less responsive to thyroxine suppression therapy for size regression. A
subset of patients with younger age, smaller and recently diagnosed nodules are
more likely to respond to thyroid hormone suppression therapy.155 (Level III) With the
discontinuation of therapy, thyroid nodules return to their pretreatment size, and
therefore size reduction may require continuous treatment.151 (Level III) Long-term
thyroid hormone suppression therapy increases the risk of bone loss and cardiac
tachyarrhythmia, especially in the elderly.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
54
3. Surgery
Surgery for nontoxic goitre may be necessary if progressive obstructive symptoms
develop with a near-total or total thyroidectomy as the operative procedure of
choice. Recurrence may be seen in 10%–20% of patients within 10 years if subtotal
thyroidectomy is performed.155 (Level II)
4. Radioiodine 131-I therapy
131-I therapy for nontoxic diffuse and multinodular goitre is safe and effective with
a gradual reduction in goitre size noted in the majority of patients. Initial side
effects may present as mild pain and tenderness with transient mild thyrotoxicosis.
Hypothyroidism may be a long-term consequence in up to 40% of patients.156 (Level II)
5. Alcohol Injection
Percutaneous ethanol injection may be used for recurrent symptomatic cystic
nodules.157 (Level II)
Figure 7: Algorithm for management of patients with thyroid nodules.
(Adapted from 151 (Level III))
Cytology
Bethesda System
Nondiagnostic
Repeat FNA
No surgery
See
recommendations
Surgery
Benign
AUS/FLUS
FN/FSN
Suspicious
Malignant
For nondiagnostic nodule
•
FNA should be repeated with US guidance and, if available, on-site cytologic
evaluation
•
Repeatedly nondiagnostic nodules without a high suspicion sonographic pattern
require close observation or surgical excision for histopathologic diagnosis
•
Surgery should be considered for histopathologic diagnosis if the cytologically
nondiagnostic nodule has a high suspicion sonographic pattern, growth of the
nodule (>20% in two dimensions) is detected during US surveillance, or clinical
risk factors for malignancy are present
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
55
For AUS/FLUS, FN/FSN, Suspicious nodule
•
For nodules with AUS/FLUS cytology, investigations such as repeat FNA or
molecular testing may be used to supplement malignancy risk assessment in
lieu of proceeding directly with a strategy of either surveillance or diagnostic
surgery. Informed patient preference and feasibility should be considered in
clinical decision-making
•
Diagnostic surgical excision may be considered for FN/SFN cytology nodules.
However, molecular testing may be used to supplement malignancy risk
assessment data in lieu of proceeding directly with surgery. Informed patient
preference and feasibility should be considered in clinical decision-making
•
If the cytology is reported as suspicious for papillary carcinoma (SUSP), surgical
management should be similar to that of malignant cytology, depending on
clinical risk factors, sonographic features, patient preference, and possibly
results of mutational testing (if performed).
5. THYROID EMERGENCIES AND PERIOPERATIVE
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISEASES
5.1 THYROID STORM
Life-threatening thyrotoxicosis or thyroid storm is a rare disorder (prevalence:
0.2/100,000/year)158 (Level III) characterised by a multisystem disorder with mortality
rates in the range of 11%–25%.158 (Level III); 159 (Level III) Most thyroid storms result from a
triggering event in conjunction with underlying hyperthyroid conditions. The major
precipitant for thyroid storm is non-compliance or discontinuation of anti-thyroid
drugs, followed by severe infection, cardiac event, thyroidal and non-thyroidal
surgery, trauma, administration of iodinated contrast and radioactive iodine,
pregnancy and delivery, adrenal insufficiency, and diabetic ketoacidosis.158(Level III);
159 (Level III); 160 (Level III)
Multiorgan and acute heart failure are the main cause of mortality.163 (Level III)
Early recognition and intensive treatment will improve survival in patients with
thyroid storm. In view of the high mortality rates, intensive care unit admission
and multidisciplinary expertise encompassing endocrinologists, intensivists,
cardiologists, hepatologists, and neurologists are required with multiorgan
decompensation.
5.1.1 How is Thyroid Storm Diagnosed?
The diagnosis of thyroid storm is made clinically in a thyrotoxic patient with
evidence of decompensation. The diagnosis may be challenging, as often there is
an overlap with clinical features of other critical medical conditions. To overcome
this, more objective diagnostic methods, including the Burch–Wartofsky Point
Scale (BWPS)161 (Level III) and the newer Japan Thyroid Association (JTA)158 (Level III) scoring,
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
56
Thermoregulatory dysfunction
Temperature
37.2–37.7 (99–99.9)
5
37.8–38.2 (100–100.9)
10
38.3–38.8 (101–101.9)
15
38.9–39.4 (102–102.9)
20
39.5–39.9 (103–103.9)
25
Central nervous system effects
Absent
0
Mild
10
Agitation
Moderate
20
Delirium
Psychosis
Extreme lethargy
Severe
30
Seizure
Coma
Gastrointestinal-hepatic dysfunction
Absent
0
Moderate
10
Diarrhoea
Nausea/vomiting
Abdominal pain
Severe
20
Unexplained jaundice
Table 9: Burch–Wartofsky Diagnostic criteria for thyroid storm*
(Adapted from161 (Level III))
Cardiovascular dysfunction
Tachycardia
90–109
5
110–119
10
120–129
15
130–139
20
≥140
25
Congestive heart failure
Absent
0
Mild
5
Pedal oedema
Moderate
10
Bibasilar rales
Severe
15
Pulmonary oedema
Atrial fibrillation
Absent
0
Present
10
Precipitant history
Negative
0
Positive
10
*In patients with severe thyrotoxicosis, points are assigned to
the highest weighted description applicable in each category
and scores totaled. When it is not possible to distinguish the
effects or an intercurrent illness from those of the severe
thyrotoxicosis per se, points are awarded such as to favour the
diagnosis of storm and hence, empiric therapy. A score of 45 or
greater is highly suggestive of thyroid storm; a score of 25–44 is
suggestive of impending storm, and a score, below 25 is unlikely
to represent thyroid storm.
are used. The BWPS quantitatively scores patients based on thermoregulatory,
tachycardia/atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, central nervous system,
gastrointestinal-hepatic, and the presence of a precipitating event (Table 9). A BWPS
score ≥45 indicates thyroid storm, 25–44 indicates impending thyroid storm, and
<25 indicates that thyroid storm is unlikely.161 (Level III) The JTA qualitatively categorises
patients into thyroid storm 1 (TS1) and thyroid storm 2 (TS2) with the presence of
thyrotoxicosis as a pre-requisite (Table 10).158 (Level III) Patients with a BWPS ≥45 or
JTA TS1 or TS2 with evidence of decompensation require aggressive multimodal
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
57
Table 10: Diagnostic criteria for thyroid storm of Japan Thyroid Association
(Adapted from158 (Level III))
Prerequisite for diagnosis
Presence of thyrotoxicosis with elevated levels of free tri-iodothyronine (FT3) or free
thyroxine (FT4)
Symptoms
1. Central nervous system (CNS) manifestations: Restlessness, delirium, mental
aberration/psychosis, somnolence/lethargy, coma (≥1 on the Japan Coma Scale or
≤14 on the Glasgow Coma Scale)
2. Fever: ≥38˚C
3. Tachycardia: ≥130 beats per minute or heart rate ≥130 in atrial fibrillation
4.  Congestive heart failure (CHF): Pulmonary oedema, moist rales over more than half
of the lung field, cardiogenic shock, or Class IV by the New York Heart Association or
≥Class III in the Killip classification
5. Gastrointestinal (GI)/hepatic manifestations: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, or a total
bilirubin level ≥3.0 mg/dL
Diagnosis
Grade of TS
Combinations of features
Requirements for diagnosis
TS1
First combination
Thyrotoxicosis and at least one CNS
manifestation and fever, tachycardia, CHF, or
GI/hepatic manifestations
TS1
Alternate combination
Thyrotoxicosis and at least three
combinations of fever, tachycardia, CHF, or
GI/hepatic manifestations
TS2
First combination
Thyrotoxicosis and a combination of two of
the following: fever, tachycardia, CHF, or
GI/hepatic manifestations
TS2
Alternate combination
Patients who met the diagnosis of TS1 except
that serum FT3 or FT4 level are not available
Exclusion and provisions
Cases are excluded if other underlying diseases clearly causing any of the following
symptoms: fever (e.g., pneumonia and malignant hyperthermia), impaired consciousness
(e.g., psychiatric disorders and cerebrovascular disease), heart failure (e.g., acute
myocardial infarction), and liver disorders (e.g., viral hepatitis and acute liver failure).
Therefore, it is difficult to determine whether the symptom is caused by TS or is simply a
manifestation of an underlying disease; the symptom should be regarded as being due
to a TS that is caused by these precipitating factors. Clinical judgement in this matter is
required.
TS1, “Definite” TS; TS2, “Suspected” TS.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
58
treatment. The decision to use aggressive treatment for patients with BWPS
25–44 would depend on clinical judgement, weighing against the risk of adverse
events from therapy.4 (Level III) Retrospective audits comparing the BWPS versus JTA
generally show agreement between the two methods, but there was a tendency for
underdiagnosis with the JTA.159(Level III); 162 (Level III) If the clinician is unsure whether the
symptoms are due to thyroid storm or an underlying disease, symptoms should be
regarded as due to thyroid storm. Although measurement of fT4, fT3, and TSH are
required, these values may not correlate with the severity of clinical presentation.
Recommendations
• The diagnosis of thyroid storm is clinical. Both the BWPS and JTA diagnostic
tools could be used to aid diagnosis, but we recommend the use of BWPS, as
this scoring tool is more sensitive
• BWPS score ≥45 or TS1 is definitive of thyroid storm
• BWPS score of 25–44 or TS2, clinical judgement to look for decompensation
should be used to diagnose thyroid storm
5.1.2 What Is The Anti-thyroid Drug Of Choice In Thyroid Storm?
Early and aggressive multimodal therapy is required for resolution of thyroid storm.
The treatment strategies for thyroid storm are aimed at:
a) Inhibiting synthesis and release of thyroid hormone
b) Inhibiting peripheral action of thyroid hormone
c) Reversing systemic decompensation
d) Treating precipitating event
e) Addressing definitive therapy
High doses of propylthiouracil (PTU) or methimazole (MMI) are mainly targeted at
inhibiting the synthesis and release of thyroid hormones. The recommended dosing
for PTU is a loading of 500–1000 mg, then 250 mg four-hourly and, for MMI 60–80
mg/day, a single dose or divided into two equal doses.4 (Level III) PTU is preferentially
used in comparison to MMI in thyroid storm, as the latter has the added benefit of
inhibiting type I deiodinase activity in the thyroid gland and other peripheral organs,
therefore reducing the conversion of T4 to T3.4 (Level III); 163 (Level III); 164 (Level III) T3 levels drop
by 45% within one hour of PTU administration, but only about 10%–15% after
starting MMI.163 (Level III) However, the Japan nationwide survey indicated that there was
no difference in outcomes between those treated with PTU vs. MMI.165 (Level III); 166 (Level III)
MMI has the added benefit of less frequent dosing and less hepatotoxicity.167 (Level III)
With such large doses of ATD administered, monitoring for adverse events such as
liver dysfunction, rash, and agranulocytosis should be carried out.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
59
Recommendations
• High doses of PTU (500–1000 mg loading, then 250 mg, 4–6-hourly) should be
used in thyroid storm. In the presence of contraindications, high doses of MMI
(60–80 mg/day) can be used.
• Upon improvement of thyroid storm, patients should be transitioned to MMI.
5.1.3 Are Rectal Anti-thyroid Drugs Useful?
In conditions where the absorption of oral PTU or MMI is compromised, such as in
ventilated patients or in those with conditions that impair absorption, rectal PTU or
MMI can be used. The dose and frequency are similar to those for the oral route.
(See guide to prepare rectal PTU in Table 11). The pharmacological levels of rectal
and oral preparations are similar, and rectal antithyroids have been reported to
resolve thyroid storm.168 (Level III); 169 (Level III); 170 (Level III); 171 (Level III)
Table 11: Preparation of rectal PTU
PTU enema: 400 mg of PTU in 90 mL of sterile water170 (Level II)
PTU suppository: Polyethylene glycol base (200 mg of PTU in each)171 (Level III)
Recommendation
• In circumstances in which absorption is impaired, rectal preparations of PTU or
MMI can be used
5.1.4 What Is The Role Of Beta-adrenergic Receptor Antagonists?
Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists are key to control heart rate and inhibit
other peripheral actions of thyroid hormones in thyroid storm. Preferentially
b-blockers with the ability to inhibit type 1 deiodinase such as propranolol
(60–80 mg/four-hourly) are used.4 (Level III) Caution should be exercised with patients
in decompensated heart failure. Beta-blockers with selective b-1 blockade such as
bisoprolol, landiolol, and esmolol infusion have more favourable cardiovascular
benefits in thyroid storm with significant cardiac compromise.166(Level III) If there
are contraindications to b-blockers, such as in patients with bronchial asthma or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cardioselective calcium-channel
blockers such as diltiazem160(Level III) or intravenous esmolol with shorter halflives and easier reversibility can be used in the intensive care setting to control
heart rate.172(Level  III) Intravenous esmolol infusions are given at a loading dose
of 250–500 mcg/kg, and thereafter at 50–100 mcg/kg/min of infusion, which is
titrated to heart rate and blood pressure. In patients with atrial fibrillation,
cardioversion should be considered after ruling out cardiac thrombosis if
haemodynamics are impaired. A CHADS2 (congestive heart failure, hypertension,
age ≥75 years, diabetes mellitus, stroke [double weight]) score ≥2 will require
anticoagulation.166 (Level III); 173 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
60
Recommendations
• Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol should be
administered in thyroid storm to control heart rate and inhibit other peripheral
action of thyroid hormone
• Shorter-acting intravenous esmolol or diltiazem can be used to control heart
rate when there are contraindications to b-adrenergic receptor antagonists
5.1.5 What Is The Role Of Corticosteroids?
Corticosteroids should be administered in thyroid storm to inhibit both thyroid
hormone synthesis and peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.174 (level III); 175 (level III)
Corticosteroids are also given as prophylaxis for relative adrenal insufficiency
caused by a hypermetabolic state in thyroid storm.166 (level III) Large doses need to be
used; dexamethasone (median dose – 6 mg/day), hydrocortisone (300 mg/day), or
prednisolone (25 mg/day) are recommended.4 (level III); 165 (level III) Intravenous forms are
preferred when rapid action is desired or when there are concerns of gut absorption
of glucocorticoids. With the improvement in clinical condition, doses should be
reduced and tapered off to prevent adverse effects.
Recommendation
• High doses of glucocorticoids (IV hydrocortisone 100 mg, 6 hourly or
dexamethasone 2 mg, 6 hourly) should be given in thyroid storm
5.1.6 What Is The Role Of Inorganic Iodide?
Inorganic iodide (Lugol’s iodine/saturated solution of potassium iodide, SSKI) can be
used in thyroid storm to rapidly decrease T4 levels by inhibition of iodide oxidation
and organification and inhibits release of thyroid hormone.161 (Level III); 176 (Level III); 177 (Level III);
178 (Level III) These agents must be used in combination with antithyroid drugs for rapid
clinical improvement. Inorganic iodide can reduce thyroid hormone faster than
steroids or antithyroid drugs.161 (Level III) Recommended dose is 5 drops of Lugol’s
iodine 6 hourly (6.25 mg iodine/drop) or 10 drops of Lugol’s iodine 8 hourly.161 (Level III);
4 (Level III) It is important to note that these agents should only be given at least after one
hour of antithyroid drug administration, to prevent the use of iodine as a substrate
for thyroid hormone synthesis.178(Level III) After clinical improvement, the Lugol’s iodine
should be tapered and stopped before the antithyroid. Lugol’s iodine should not
be given beyond 10 days or else this would lead to escape from the Wolff-Chaikoff
phenomenon. Patients known to be allergic to inorganic iodide containing drugs
should not be given these agents. Inorganic iodide may also be administered via
rectal or nasogastric routes in critically ill patients. The solution should be diluted in
water or taken with bread to avoid mucosal irritation.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
61
Recommendation
• 5–10 drops of Lugols iodine 6–8 hourly for the first 10 days, should be given
after administration of antithyroid for rapid improvement of thyrotoxicosis in
thyroid storm
5.1.7 What Is The Role Of Lithium/Cholecystographic Agents?
Lithium can be used as an alternative for patients who cannot tolerate MMI
or PTU and works by inhibiting release of thyroid hormone by thyroid gland
through unknown mechanisms.179 (Level III); 180 (Level III) Recommended doses are lithium
300 mg up to thrice daily. Adverse effects that need to be considered are lithium
toxicity and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Therefore, lithium levels should be
monitored to avoid toxicity. Cholestyramine has been used as an option to improve
thyrotoxic state in thyroid storm by reducing enterohepatic recycling of thyroid
hormones.181 (Level III); 182 (Level III); 183 (Level III) Recommended dose of cholestyramine is
1–4 g/every 6 hourly.
Recommendation
• Lithium and cholestyramine can be used as adjunct treatment for thyroid
storm
5.1.8 What Is The Role Of Plasma Exchange?
Total plasma exchange (TPE) is used in patients with severe thyroid storm,
rapid clinical worsening or failure or contraindications to standard multimodal
therapy.4  (Level III) Failure to standard therapy is considered when thyroid storm
shows no improvement within 24–48 hours of standard multimodal therapy.
Total plasma exchange removes thyroid hormones, antibodies, and circulating
cytokines. Total plasma exchange with 40–50 mL/kg of replacement fluid has
demonstrated improved outcomes and resolution of thyroid storm and should
be continued until clinical improvements are noted.184 (Level III); 185 (Level III) fT4 and fT3
should be sampled before and after each session. Two types of replacement
therapy: fresh frozen plasma (FFP) or albumin have been used in TPE for
thyroid storm. Although there is no randomised study to compare between
the two, fresh frozen plasma (FFP) has been preferentially used because it contains
thyroid binding globulin (TBG) that will better enhance removal of TBG bound
thyroid hormones.166 (Level III) Continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) is sometimes used
in parallel with TPE in haemodynamically compromised patients.166 (Level III)
Recommendation
• TPE (with FFP as fluid replacement) should be considered in severe/rapidly
deteriorating thyroid storm or with contraindications to standard multimodal
therapy
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
62
5.1.9 What Is The Role Of Other Supportive Therapy?
Other supportive treatment would also be required in thyroid storm. These include
intravenous fluids, respiratory support, and nutritional support. Cooling measures
using cooling blankets and with the use of acetaminophen is recommended. The use
of salicylates should be avoided as these drugs displace bound thyroxine leading
to further elevations of free thyroid hormone.4 (Level III); 166 (Level III) Infection should be
treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, tailored to source of infection. In patients
with respiratory failure or severe CNS depression, respiratory support with invasive
or non-invasive ventilation may be required.
Recommendation
• The use of salicylates should be avoided as these drugs displace bound
thyroxine leading to further elevations of free thyroid hormone
5.1.10 What Is The Role Of Early Definitive Therapy And Prevention?
Definitive therapy needs to be considered in all patients presenting with thyroid
storm. Urgent or early thyroidectomy is an option in patients who have a
contraindication to antithyroid drugs, have a large goitre.186 (Level III); 187 (Level III) However,
these patients should be rendered close to euthyroid prior to surgery with methods
such as TPE in order to minimise risk of thyroid storm. If radioactive iodine is
considered and Lugol’s iodine has been administered during thyroid storm, the RAI
should be deferred until about 3–4 months after.161 (Level III) Commonest precipitating
factor is non-compliance and patients therefore should be educated on this
aspect. Patients undergoing surgery or RAI should be rendered near euthyroid as
possible prior to procedure or the procedures should be postponed to prevent
thyroid storm.
Recommendation
• All patients with thyroid storm should have early definitive therapy with
RAI. In patients with large obstructing goitre, early thyroidectomy should be
considered instead
5.2  MYXOEDEMA COMA
5.2.1 How Is Myxoedema Coma Diagnosed?
Myxoedema coma is a rare condition which is diagnosed clinically in patients
presenting with hallmarks of reduced conscious level and hypothermia. Thyroid
function test will be consistent with hypothyroidism. Other clinical features
are hyponatremia and/or hypercapnia. It should be suspected especially in
patients with history of hypothyroidism or with any cause for hypothyroidism.
Other causes of reduced consciousness should also be excluded.188–191 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
63
Diagnostic scoring systems have been designed but are not well validated as the
incidence is low.189 (Level III)
5.2.2 What Are The Complications Of Myxoedema Coma?
Myxoedema coma is a systemic condition that can affect every organ and
system.188,192 (Level III) Known complications include metabolic decompensation
(hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia), cardiovascular193 (Level III) (bradycardia, hypotension,
pericardial effusion and heart failure), neurological (psychosis, seizures194 (Level III),
altered consciousness), respiratory 195–196 (Level III) (hypoventilation, hypercapnia, sleep
apnoea), renal failure and anaemia.197 (Level III)
5.2.3 What Are The Best Treatment Modalities For Myxoedema Coma?
Patients who have been diagnosed with myxoedema coma are critically ill and
should be nursed in intensive care wards. Absorption of oral medications may
be impaired and reduced in these patients due to multiple factors. Therefore,
intravenous thyroxine is recommended by most authors.192 (Level II)-, 188, 198,
190,  91 (Level  III) These patients may also have concurrent hypoadrenalism, thus
intravenous hydrocortisone is recommended prior to commencement of thyroid
hormones.188  (Level III) Ideally a serum cortisol is taken prior to administration of
intravenous hydrocortisone.
Recommendations
• Intravenous hydrocortisone 200 mg stat then 100 mg 6–8 hourly should be
administered prior to levothyroxine
• Initial intravenous levothyroxine of 200–400 mcg followed by 1.6 mcg/kg/day
(75% if administered intravenously) should be given thereafter. If intravenous
levothyroxine is not available, oral levothyroxine can be given as 500 mcg
loading followed by maintenance dose
• Intravenous liothyronine (when available) may be given in addition to thyroxine.
Loading dose recommended is 5–20 mcg followed by 2.5–10 mcg every 8 hours
till patient regains consciousness
5.2.4 How Should Patients With Myxoedema Coma Be Monitored?
Improvements can be seen within one week of treatment. As with all critically ill
patients, multiorgan parameters should be monitored including mental status
cardiovascular parameters, respiratory parameters, renal function, metabolic
parameters (e.g. electrolytes). Thyroid function test can be monitored every 2 days.
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score is an example of assessment tool
that has been used and was found to be more predictive of outcome compared to
other tools.192 (Level II); 190 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
64
5.3 PRE-/PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT: HYPERTHYROIDISM
Surgical stress and anaesthesia can precipitate thyroid storm, cardiac failure or
tachyarrhythmias in patients with uncontrolled pre-existing hyperthyroid disorders.
Overall morbidity and mortality in well prepared patients are low.199 (Level III)
5.3.1 How Is This Best Treated/Risk Minimised?
Combination of antithyroid drugs, beta-blockers, iodine, and glucocorticoids
have been shown to rapidly reverse hyperthyroidism in patients planned for
surgery.199(Level III); 200 (Level III); 201 (Level II);202 (Level II) Beta blockade alone in comparison to
anti-thyroids, has been shown to have better peri-operative outcomes in patients
with hyperthyroidism.203 (Level II)
Recommendations
• All elective surgery should be postponed until euthyroid or near euthyroid state
is achieved
• For urgent surgeries, clinical and biochemical assessment of patient’s thyroid
state should be ascertained
• In patients who are hyperthyroid and require urgent surgery, rapid control
with high dose MMI or PTU, b-blockers, Lugol’s iodine and glucocorticoids are
recommended
5.3.2 Is There A Need To Treat Subclinical Hyperthyroid Disease
Pre-operatively?
Recommendations
• Only in elderly patients and those with pre-existing cardiac disease/atrial
fibrillation, with subclinical hyperthyroidism should be considered to require
treatment pre-operatively
• Beta-blockers are recommended to minimise risk of tachyarrhythmias perioperatively in the elderly and patients with pre-existing cardiac disease and
subclinical hyperthyroidism
5.4 PRE-OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT: HYPOTHYROIDISM
5.4.1 Is There A Role For Universal Screening For Hypothyroidism
Preoperatively?
There is insufficient evidence for or against universal screening for hypothyroidism.
Different panels of experts differ in their opinions of subpopulation to screen.127 (Level II),
123 (Level II), 91 (Level II), 204 (Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
65
Recommendations
• There is no role for universal screening for hypothyroidism preoperatively
• Only patients with risk factors for hypothyroidism or those who exhibit
symptoms of hypothyroidism should be screened
5.4.2 What Are The Potential Intra, And Postoperative Complications Of
Untreated Hypothyroidism?
Untreated hypothyroidism causes systemic hypometabolism. Potential complications of hypothyroidism include hypotension, cardiovascular collapse, hypoventilation, sensitivity to opioids, sedatives and anaesthesia, and myxoedema coma.
Cardiovascular complications are increased in patients with overt hypothyroidism
and similar risks have been reported in those with mild hypothyroidism.205 (Level II);
206 (Level II) Subclinical hypothyroidism has also been found to be more common among
patients with obstructive sleep apnoea; presence of which affects intubation and
ventilation.207 (Level II)
5.4.3 How Should Perioperative Hypothyroidism Be Managed?
In observational studies, postoperative outcomes vary according to the degree
of hypothyroidism. Patients with mild (subclinical hypothyroidism) and moderate
(overt) hypothyroidism generally have few adverse effects.208 (Level II-2); 209 (Level II-3) Although
there is lack of data among these patients, those with severe hypothyroidism
(myxoedema coma) should be considered high risk for surgery.
Recommendations
• In mild hypothyroidism i.e., those with subclinical hypothyroidism, surgery
should not be postponed
• In moderate hypothyroidism i.e., overt hypothyroidism, urgent surgeries
should be undertaken without delays. In elective surgeries, it is recommended
that euthyroid state is restored before surgery
• In severe hypothyroidism i.e., myxoedema coma, treatment with both T3 and
T4 should be given prior to surgeries
6. THYROIDITIS – SUBACUTE AND ACUTE THYROIDITIS
6.1 SUBACUTE THYROIDITIS (DE QUERVAIN’S THYROIDITIS)
6.1.1 How is Subacute Thyroiditis Diagnosed?
Subacute thyroiditis is one of the causes of painful thyroid gland. Presentation is
usually between the age of 40 and 50 years.210 (Level III); 211 (Level III); 212 (Level III); 213 (Level III); 214 (Level III)
Most series reported higher preponderance for female gender with a ratio as high
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
66
as 6:1.210 (Level III); 212 (Level III); 213 (Level III); 215 (Level III) The presence of prodromal symptoms
associated with upper respiratory tract symptoms is variable. Some studies reported
the presence of prodromal symptoms between 20% and 38.5%.211 (Level III); 212 (Level III) Only
between 12.5% and 46.2% of patients with subacute thyroiditis reported fever.210 (Level III);
213 (Level III); 214 (Level III) For the diagnosis of subacute thyroiditis, painful thyroid swelling
remained a prominent symptom and is taken as an important diagnostic criterion.210
(Level III); 211 (Level III); 212 (Level III); 213 (Level III); 214 (Level III); 215 (Level III); 216 (Level III); 217 (Level III); 218 (Level III)
Patients with subacute thyroiditis usually present during the thyrotoxic phase.
The onset of disease is between one and two weeks. Typically, the hyperthyroid
state lasts for 2–3 weeks, peaks at 1 week after the onset, followed by a period
of hypothyroidism which lasts for 6–12 weeks. Subsequently, euthyroid state
ensues.211 (Level III); 219 (Level III) Most of studies recorded moderate increase in thyroxine level
with suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone, while thyroid storm is rare. 210 (Level III);
211 (Level III); 212 (Level III); 213 (Level III); 215 (Level III); 216 (Level III) A cross-sectional study comparing the
thyroid function of patients with subacute thyroiditis and Graves’ disease
demonstrates that the free tri-iodothyronine (fT3) to free thyroxine (fT4) was
significantly lower in the former. An fT3/fT4 ratio of less than 0.3 has a sensitivity
of 52.4% and specificity of 91.3% for destructive thyroiditis.220 (Level II) Apart from
thyroxine and triiodothyronine, thyroglobulin levels are also elevated.213 (Level III);
216 (Level III); 219 (Level III) The presence of thyroid antibodies in subacute thyroiditis varies
from study to study (between 4% and 20%).214 (Level III); 215 (Level III); 217 (Level III) However,
overall, the thyroid antibody titre in destructive thyroiditis is much lower compared
from Graves’ disease.219 (Level III);220 (Level II)
Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is one of the important diagnostic
criteria. Several studies reported an average ESR of 60 mm in the 1st hour.210 (Level III);
212 (Level III); 214 (Level III); 215 (Level III); 216 (Level III) Frates et al. reported ESR as high as 100 mm in
the 1st hour.218 (Level III) Because of the wide range reported, it is difficult to determine
what level of ESR is predictive of subacute thyroiditis. Several studies also measured
C-reactive protein (CRP). In general, the level of C-reactive protein is also elevated in
this condition.211 (Level III); 214 (Level III); 219 (Level III)
In terms of imaging, destructive thyroiditis displays low uptake on radio-iodine
scan.217 (Level III); 219 (Level III) In centres without radio-iodine scan facility, ultrasound of the
neck and thyroid may not be helpful as common findings include ill-defined hypoechoic
lesion within the thyroid gland.211 (Level III);219 (Level III) However, Doppler ultrasound which
shows suppressed vascularity may be of value. A study reported that 77.8% of
patients with subacute thyroiditis had ill-defined hypoechoic lesions while 95% had
reduce Doppler Colour flow.218 (Level II) Another study described “lava flow” appearance
on grey scale ultrasound in 100% of their case series (n=22).221 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Subacute thyroiditis should be suspected in all patients who present with
painful goitre
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
67
• All patients with painful thyroid swelling should have thyroid function test done
which includes free thyroxine and thyroid stimulating hormone
• An fT3/fT4 ratio of less than 0.3 may be used to help differentiate between
subacute thyroiditis and Graves’ disease
• An ESR or CRP should be measured in patients with painful thyroid swelling.
Elevated ESR and CRP is suggestive of subacute thyroiditis
• Ultrasound should be performed in all patients with painful thyroid swelling
to rule out acute/suppurative thyroiditis. A non-suggestive ultrasound within
1 week of onset of illness should be repeated later
6.1.2 How Should Subacute Thyroiditis Be Managed?
Management of subacute thyroiditis is limited by the rarity of the condition and
availability of high-quality evidence. Most of the studies were observational
retrospective.212 (Level III); 213 (Level III); 214 (Level III); 215 (Level III); 216 (Level III) Patients either receive nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), steroids or expectant management.
The American Thyroid Association recommends that NSAIDs are used for mild
cases and prednisolone for severe ones.4 (Level III) Beta-blocker is used to alleviate
significant thyroid symptoms.210 (Level III); 217 (Level III); 219 (Level III) In majority of cases, 90% of
patients go into remission without any sequelae and only 10% went into permanent
hypothyroidism requiring thyroxine replacement.210 (Level III), 219 (Level III)
A non-randomised retrospective review of prednisolone vs. loxoprofen (NSAID) for
the treatment of subacute thyroiditis was done by Sato et al. (2016). The average
dose of prednisolone given was 15 mg/day (range: 14–16 mg/day) vs. loxoprofen
180 mg/day. They demonstrated that the time to normalisation of thyroid function
was quicker in the prednisolone group (22 vs. 32 days).213 (Level III) Similarly, Benbassat
et al. reported that those who received steroid had faster remission compared with
NSAIDs.215 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Beta-blocker can be used in patients with symptoms of thyrotoxicosis
• Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the first-line therapy and should be
used for patients with mild symptoms
• Prednisolone should be used in patients who present with severe symptoms or
for those who do not respond to initial NSAID therapy
6.1.3 What Is The Dosage Of Steroid Used To Treat Subacute Thyroiditis?
In a prospective non-randomised clinical trial, Kubota et al. demonstrated that
15 mg/day of starting dose for prednisolone is an acceptable option for treatment of
subacute thyroiditis. The prednisolone dose was tapered 5 mg/day every 2 weeks.
In cases with persistent pain or high C-reactive protein, the dose is extended or
increased up to 40 weeks of total treatment. Fifty percent of cases go into remission
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
68
within 6 weeks and do not recur. Thirty percent require between 7 and 8 weeks,
while 20% require more than 8 weeks to recover.222 (Level II) A retrospective study
comparing recurrent and non-recurrent subacute thyroiditis revealed that tapering
prednisolone from 30 mg per day to 5 mg per day over a longer period (up to
44 days) is associated with no recurrence.212 (Level III)
An experimental approach to the treatment of subacute thyroiditis is administration
of a mixture of lidocaine and dexamethasone using insulin pen into the thyroid
gland.223 (Level III) Although the study design is prospective with seemingly favourable
outcome, due to its small number (n=36), further study would be needed to clarify
its benefits and risks.
Recommendation
• A starting dose of 15 mg/day tapered to 5 mg/day every 2 weeks is
recommended. The duration of prednisolone may be prolonged in cases with
persistent symptoms or raised ESR or CRP
6.1.4 How Long Should Patients With Subacute Thyroiditis Be Followed-up?
Overall, from retrospective studies, the recurrent rate of subacute thyroiditis is
extremely low over the longterm. In a retrospective cohort, the recurrence rate is
only 1.6% over a total of 13 years.211 (Level III) However, the recurrence rates are higher
within the 1st year and tend to reduce over the years. In a retrospective review, the
recurrence rate was about 10% over a 5-year period of follow-up.214 (Level III) Another
study reported a recurrence rate of 10% within 1 year, and 4% after more than a
year. The rate of hypothyroidism is as high as 34% in the first year and 15% after
1 year.216 (Level III) Therefore, it would be sensible to have frequent follow-up within
the first 12 months, with reducing frequency over the next 5 years. Follow-up after
5 years may not be necessary.
Recommendation
• Patients should be monitored for recurrence 6 monthly for the first 1 year and
yearly for the next 5 years
6.2 ACUTE/SUPPURATIVE THYROIDITIS
6.2.1 How Is Acute Thyroiditis Diagnosed?
Acute thyroiditis is a rare but life-threatening disorder. The clinical features of
acute thyroiditis are quite similar to subacute thyroiditis but are of more severe
intensity. Pain is a very prominent feature. Patients may also present with fever and
lymphadenopathy. Local inflammation caused by the condition may contribute to
upper airway obstruction. Patients may assume a posture to limit neck extension
and fluctuance suggest the presence of abscess.217 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
69
In general, patients with acute thyroiditis are euthyroid. However, there are case
reports of patient with hyperthyroidism and thyroid storm.4 (Level III), 224 (Level III)
During the acute inflammatory stage, ultrasound may not show a well demarcated
hypoechoic lesion, but rather a diffuse hypoechoic area spread throughout the
thyroid lobe which may cause erroneous diagnosis of subacute thyroiditis.217 (Level III);
224(Level III) Only later, approximately 1 week, the abscess or well demarcated hypoechoic
lesion would be obvious. Other modalities that can be used to demonstrate the
presence of an abscess are CT scans and MRIs.217 (Level III); 4 (Level III); 224 (Level III); 225 (Level III)
Apart from demonstrating thyroid abscess, several authors emphasize the need to
identify pyriform sinus fistula which may contribute to recurrence.225 (Level III); 226 (Level III);
227 (Level III) The pyriform sinus fistula may be identified using direct endoscopy, barium
oesophagography or CT scan.226(Level III)
Recommendations
• Acute thyroiditis should be suspected in all patients who present with painful
goitre
• All patients with painful thyroid swelling should have thyroid function test done
which includes free thyroxine and thyroid stimulating hormone
• Ultrasound should be done in all patients with painful thyroid swelling to rule
out acute/suppurative thyroiditis. A non-suggestive ultrasound within 1 week of
onset of illness should be repeated later
• In patients who had ultrasound findings suggestive of abscess or acute/
suppurative thyroiditis, aspiration should be done; and sample sent for Gram
stain, culture, and sensitivity
• In immunocompromised patients with unusual presentation of thyroid abscess;
other rare causative organisms such as tuberculosis should be suspected
6.2.2 How Should Acute Thyroiditis Be Managed?
Thyroid fine needle aspiration with Gram staining, culture and sensitivity should
be done to identify the causative organism. Among common reported isolates
are Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptrococcus pneumoniae.
217 (Level III) Other Gram-negative organisms such as Haemophilus influenzae, Escherichia
coli, and Klebsiella spp. have also been reported.224 (Level III) Therefore the use of
empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics is appropriate. Tuberculosis has also been
reported in less than 1% of cases.224 (Level III)
The mainstay of therapy for acute thyroiditis is surgical excision.217 (Level III), 4 (Level III)
To prevent recurrence, the piriform sinus fistula can be surgically excised or
obliterated using chemocauterisation with favourable outcome based on case
series.226 (Level III); 227 (Level III) With effective antibiotic therapy and elimination of formed
abscesses, patients typically have an excellent prognosis if they survive the acute
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
70
episode. However, it is difficult to determine the exact morbidity and mortality of
this condition due to its low incidence.
Recommendations
• Beta-blocker can be used in patients with symptoms of thyrotoxicosis
• Acute/suppurative thyroiditis should be treated with antibiotics and surgical
drainage determined by clinical judgement
7. SPECIAL SITUATIONS
7.1 HYPOTHYROIDISM AND PREGNANCY
7.1.1 What Is The Definition Of Maternal Overt/Subclinical Hypothyroidism
(OH/SCHypo)?
Maternal Hypothyroidism is generally defined as the presence of an elevated
serum TSH during pregnancy beyond the upper limit of the pregnancy-specific
reference range. Overt maternal hypothyroidism is also characterised by a
decreased serum fT4 below the lower limit of the pregnancy specific reference
range while SCHypo is characterised by an isolated high TSH with fT4 within the
pregnancy-specific reference range. At present, serum TSH remains the main
determinant used to guide treatment decisions and target. The difficulties lie in
the presence of substantial differences in the upper reference limits of pregnancy
specific reference range for TSH between populations which varies from 2.15 to
4.68 mIU/L.228 (Level II) It is therefore recommended that each institution should establish
their own pregnancy-specific reference intervals for each trimester of pregnancy
using the local population. If this is not available, an arbitrary level of 4 mIU/L can be
used as the TSH upper reference limit. This level represents a reduction of 0.5 mIU/L
of the non-pregnant TSH upper reference limit for most assays.229 (Level II)
Recommendations
• Each institution should establish their own pregnancy specific reference
intervals for each trimester of pregnancy using the local population
• As there is no published data on the pregnancy specific reference range
representative of the Malaysian pregnant population, we recommend a TSH
upper reference limit of 4 mIU/L
7.1.2 What Are the Prevalence And Common Causes of Maternal
Hypothyroidism?
The prevalence of hypothyroidism in pregnancy ranges from 0.3% to 4.8%.230, 231 (Level III);
232 (Level II); 233 (Level III); 234,235,236 (Level II) The onset of the disease in pregnancy is rare.235 (Level II)
The most common cause of hypothyroidism in pregnancy is chronic autoimmune
thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis).230, 231, 233 (Level III) Other causes include previous
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
71
surgery, radioiodine ablation, congenital hypothyroidism and rarely, lymphocytic
hypophysitis.230, 233 (Level III) High pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) is a significant
risk factor for hypothyroidism in pregnancy.
7.1.3 Is Maternal OH/SCHypo Associated With Adverse Maternal/
Foetal Outcomes?
See ‘ Appendix 2’.
7.1.4 What Is The Impact Of TPO Ab Positivity on Euthyroid Women Or
Women With Subclinical Hypothyroidism In Pregnancy?
See ‘ Appendix 2’.
7.1.5 Does Treatment With Levothyroxine (LT4) Improve Adverse Outcomes
Associated With Maternal Overt/Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
See ‘ Appendix 2’..
7.1.6 Does Treatment With LT4 Improve Adverse Outcomes Associated With
TPO Ab Positivity?
See ‘ Appendix 2’.
7.1.7 What Is The TSH Goal If Levothyroxine Is Given At Preconception,
During Pregnancy And Postpartum?
A retrospective cohort study demonstrated an increased risk of miscarriage
with TSH above 2.5 mIU/L at first trimester among pregnant women initiated on
LT4 before conception.266 (Level II) There was no clinical study to date specifically
looking at an optimal TSH goal in second or third trimester. Parallel to the
treatment of hypothyroidism in the general population, it is reasonable to target
the serum TSH in the lower half of the trimester specific pregnancy reference
range for the local population.229 (Level II) If this is not available, a TSH goal of not
more than 2.5 mIU/L should be achieved before conception and during the first
trimester. The TSH goal can be relaxed to 3.0 mIU/L in the second and third
trimester.230 (Level III) The TSH goal can be reverted to the normal reference range
for non-pregnant women after delivery, provided the patient is not immediately
planning for another conception.
Recommendations
• For hypothyroid women already treated with LT4 before conception, we
recommend a TSH goal of no more than 2.5 mIU/L before conception and
during the first trimester as the trimester specific reference range for Malaysian
population is not available
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
72
• During the second and third trimester, a TSH goal of 3.0 mIU/L or below can be
adopted
• The TSH goal can be reverted to the normal reference range for non-pregnant
women after delivery
7.1.8 What Is The Levothyroxine Requirement During Pregnancy And
Postpartum? How Should It Be Monitored?
An increase in LT4 requirement occurs soon after conception at four to six weeks of
gestation. The LT4 requirement gradually increases through mid-gestation between
16–20 weeks and plateaus thereafter in the third trimester until delivery.267 (Level II)
A retrospective observational study demonstrated a 45%–70% increment in LT4
dosing at the end pregnancy for women who received LT4 before conception.268 (Level II)
Another retrospective study demonstrated an increment of 13%–27% during the
first trimester which further increased to 26%–51% by the second trimester with no
significant further increase in the third trimester.269 (Level II) The percentage increment
in LT4 requirement was generally higher for hypothyroidism post thyroidectomy or
radioactive iodine compared to autoimmune thyroiditis.268 (Level II); 269 (Level II) A prospective
RCT comparing two LT4 dosage increment strategies with increment of LT4 tablets
by two tablets per week versus three tablets per week, i.e. 29% versus 43% in early
pregnancy showed that both strategies are equally effective in keeping the serum
TSH within target, with the first strategy associated with a lower risk of overtreatment
resulting in TSH suppression.270 (Level I) However, the target TSH in this study was up
to 4.9 mIU/L, which is significantly higher than the pregnancy-specific TSH upper
reference limit for most populations.228 (Level II) This study also showed that a thyroid
function testing interval of four-weekly was able to detect more than 90% of all the
abnormal values throughout pregnancy.270 (Level I) As the increased LT4 requirement
during gestation is due to the physiological requirement of an increased total body
thyroxine pool during pregnancy, the LT4 dosing should be reduced to pre-pregnant
dose upon delivery. However, an observational study on patients with Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis revealed an increased LT4 requirement postpartum compared to before
conception with no reduction versus during pregnancy was possibly related to
postpartum exacerbation of autoimmune thyroiditis.271 (Level II)
Recommendations
• Pregnant women who are already treated with LT4 before conception are
recommended to have their LT4 dosage increased by 30%–50% upon conception
with a higher percentage being considered for post ablative hypothyroidism
and lower percentage for autoimmune hypothyroidism
• Thyroid function testing should be performed every four weeks from conception
until mid-gestation and at least once during the middle of the third trimester
• After delivery, the LT4 dosage can be generally re-adjusted to the prepregnancy
requirement
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
73
7.1.9 Who Should Be Screened For Maternal Hypothyroidism?
While untreated maternal hypothyroidism has been associated with adverse
pregnancy outcomes, the evidence for universal screening for maternal
hypothyroidism is yet to be established. A prospective RCT comparing the universal
screening versus case-finding approach for detection and treatment of thyroid
dysfunction in pregnancy showed no difference in adverse outcomes.272 (Level I) Casefinding approach is thus recommended over universal approach for screening of
maternal hypothyroidism. The test of choice is TSH as it is the most sensitive test in
detection of hypothyroidism. Risk factors that have been shown to be associated with
increased risk of maternal hypothyroidism include history of thyroid dysfunction;
goitre; known thyroid antibody positivity; age at or above 30 years; type 1 diabetes
or other autoimmune disorders; history of pregnancy loss or preterm delivery;
infertility; history of thyroid surgery or head and neck radiation; morbid obesity; use
of lithium or amiodarone; recent administration of iodinated radiologic contrast;
residing in area of moderate-to–severe iodine deficiency; family history of thyroid
disorders and two or more prior pregnancies.273 (Level II); 274 (Level II); 275 (Level II); 276 (Level II); 277 (Level II)
Recommendations
See ‘Appendix 2’
7.2 HYPERTHYROIDISM AND PREGNANCY
7.2.1 What Is the Prevalence Of Hyperthyroidism In Pregnancy?
The prevalence of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy ranges from 0.1% to 1.6%
worldwide.278, 279 (Level II); 230, 280 (Level III); 281 (Level II); 282 (Level III) In the United States of America,
two studies reported the incidence of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy: 5.9 per 1000
women and 3.77 per 1000 women, respectively.283 (Level II); 284 (Level III); 285 (Level II) In Malaysia,
studies have shown that the incidence of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy is 0.9 per
1000 deliveries.286 (Level II) The onset of the disease in pregnancy was rare.279 Grave’s
disease was the most common cause.230, 283, 285 (Level III); 286 (Level II) Previous history of
thyroid disorder and family history of thyroid disorder were associated with thyroid
dysfunction.283 (Level II)
7.2.2 What Is The Definition Of Maternal Hyperthyroidism?
Maternal hyperthyroidism is defined as suppressed serum TSH level with elevated
free tri-iodothyronine (fT3) and/or free thyroxine (fT4). Subclinical hyperthyroidism
is defined as suppressed serum TSH with normal fT4 and/or fT3 levels. Subclinical
maternal hyperthyroidism has not been associated with adverse maternal or foetal
outcomes, and treatment for this condition is not recommended.287 (Level III) Serum TSH
levels fall in the first trimester of normal pregnancies as a physiological response to
the stimulating effect of hCG on the TSH receptor with a peak hCG level between
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
74
7 and 11 weeks gestation. The reference ranges for TSH and fT4 also vary between
different populations of pregnant women due to assay variations, as well as
population-specific factors, such as ethnicity and body mass index. The TSH lower
reference limit of the pregnancy-specific reference range between populations
varied between 0.02 and 0.41 mIU/L.228 (Level II) Thus, any subnormal serum TSH
should be evaluated in conjunction with serum fT4 value. It is recommended that
population-based, trimester-specific reference ranges for serum TSH and fT4 should
be defined through the assessment of the local population data.229 (Level II); 4 (level II)
Recommendations
• Each institution should establish its own pregnancy-specific reference intervals
for each trimester of pregnancy using local population data
• When a suppressed serum TSH is detected in the ﬁrst trimester, a medical
history should be gathered, and physical examination, and measurement of
maternal serum fT4 concentrations should be performed
7.2.3 What Are The Common Causes Of Hyperthyroidism In Pregnancy?
The two most common causes of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy are gestational
transient thyrotoxicosis (GTT) and Graves’ disease.229,4, 288 (Level III) Other causes include
toxic multinodular goitre, toxic adenoma and thyroiditis.229,4 (Level III) Rare causes
in pregnancy include hyperthyroidism induced by beta-HCG in pregnancy such
as multiple gestation, molar pregnancy and choriocarcinoma; which are often
subclinical.229,4 (Level III)
7.2.4 How To Differentiate Gestational Transient Thyrotoxicosis (GTT) From
Graves’ Disease (GD)?
Gestational transient thyrotoxicosis is a non-autoimmune transient disorder that
occurs in the first trimester of pregnancy and is caused by the peak in hCG levels
during early pregnancy, leading to biochemical hyperthyroidism.289(LevelIII) It is generally
asymptomatic, mild and self-limiting.4(Level III) However, more severe degrees of GTT are
associated with hyperemesis; whereby patients may develop signs and symptoms
of hyperthyroidism.4(Level III) In the presence of an elevated T4 and suppressed TSH in
early pregnancy, GTT needs to be differentiated from Graves’ disease, since these
are the two most common causes of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.4, 289(Level III) As they
may have similar clinical manifestations such as palpitations, anxiety, tremor and
heat intolerance, a careful history and physical examination is very important in
establishing the aetiology.4, 229 (Level III)
The most likely aetiology in patients without a prior history of thyroid disease and
stigmata of Graves’ disease (goitre and ophthalmopathy) and in the absence of
TSH-receptor antibody (TRAb) is GTT.289,4,229 (Level III) The presence of TRAb is highly
suggestive of Graves’ disease. Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPO) can
be present in both conditions.230 (Level III) No study has shown usefulness of thyroid
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
75
ultrasound in differentiating between GTT and GD.230 (Level III) The clinical usefulness
of beta-HCG to differentiate between these two conditions is also limited.290 (Level II)
Recommendation
• When a suppressed TSH and elevated fT4 are detected in the first trimester,
clinical history and physical examination should be performed to determine
the aetiology. Graves’ disease is differentiated from gestational thyrotoxicosis
clinically. TRAb supports the diagnosis of Graves’ disease
7.2.5 How To Manage Gestational Transient Thyrotoxicosis (GTT)?
Gestational transient thyrotoxicosis is not associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes.291, 292 (Level II) Management of GTT is mainly symptomatic, depending on
the severity of symptoms.4,229 (Level III) In the presence of hyperemesis gravidarum,
antiemetics and intravenous fluids are appropriate treatment. Hospitalisation
might be necessary in some cases. Antithyroid drugs (ATDs) are not indicated as no
improvement of obstetrical outcome was observed in treated cases, and due to the
possibility of increased risk of birth defects with ATD use in early pregnancy.291; 294
(Level II) However, there are no studies comparing ATD to supportive therapy.229 (Level III)
Low dose beta-blockers for a short period may be considered in very symptomatic
patients.4,229,230 (Level III) Serum T4 returns to normal by 14–18 weeks of gestation.
Recommendation
• Management of gestational transient thyrotoxicosis is mainly supportive
therapy: rehydration and hospitalisation if needed in the presence of
hyperemesis gravidarum; and beta-blocker if very symptomatic. Antithyroid
drugs are not recommended
7.2.6 What Are The Complications Of Hyperthyroidism In Pregnancy?
Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy can lead to poor maternal and foetal outcomes,
especially when it is uncontrolled.291 (Level II) Maternal complications include
miscarriages,
preterm
delivery,
hypertension,
heart
failure,
and
thyroid
storm.291 (Level III) Foetal transfer of TRAb that stimulate the thyroid gland can cause
foetal hyperthyroidism which can lead to intrauterine growth retardation, stillbirth,
low birth weight.291,229,295 (Level II) On the contrary, foetal hypothyroidism can occur as
a result of transfer of ATD used to treat the mother, especially when the mother is
made euthyroid.295 (Level III)
7.2.7 How to Manage Graves’ Disease Prior to Conception?
In pregnancy, both hyperthyroidism and its treatment may result in complications.
Therefore, all women with hyperthyroidism who are in their reproductive age
should be given pre-conception counselling, which includes the importance of
stable euthyroid state before attempting pregnancy and the association of birth
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
76
defects with ATD during pregnancy.229,4 (Level III) A stable euthyroid state can be
indicated by two sets of normal thyroid function tests, at least one month apart
with no change of therapy within the tests.229,4 (Level III) The pre-conception counselling
should also include discussion on the therapeutic options for the management of
hyperthyroidism in patients desiring pregnancy, whether to be treated with ATD or
with definitive therapy, i.e. radioactive iodine therapy or thyroidectomy.229,296 (Level III)
Each treatment option has its own advantages and disadvantages (Table 12).
In patients who prefer ATD, the increased risk of teratogenicity with both PTU
and CMZ should be informed. Patients who are well-controlled on CMZ and plan
to conceive could switch to PTU before trying to conceive.4 (Level III) See ‘Appendix 2’.
Women with thyrotoxicosis who require high dose of ATD to achieve a euthyroid
state should be considered for definitive therapy before pregnancy.4 (Level III) Definitive
therapy with radioactive iodine or surgery has the advantage of allowing patients to
become pregnant without the concern of teratogenicity risk of ATD. After radioactive
iodine therapy, conception should be delayed for at least 6 months and until a stable
Table 12: Therapeutic options for Graves’ disease patients planning for
pregnancy (Adapted from229[Level III])
Therapy
Advantages
Disadvantages
Antithyroid
drugs
Effective treatment to euthyroid
state within 1–2 months
Birth defects associated with use during
pregnancy
Often induces gradual remission of
autoimmunity (decreasing antibody
titres)
Medication adverse effects
Easily discontinued or modified.
Ease of treatment; cheap
Relapse after drug withdrawal likely in
50%–70% of the cases
Radioactive
iodine (RAI)
Future relapse of hyperthyroidism
very rare
Rising antibody titres following
treatment may contribute to worsening
ophthalmopathy or foetal risk
Need to defer pregnancy until at least
6 months post RAI
Some may not be in stable euthyroid
state within the first year after RAI
(might be hypothyroid or may remain
hyperthyroid)
Lifelong need of levothyroxine therapy
following ablation
Thyroidectomy
Definitive therapy of
hyperthyroidism. Stable
euthyroid state easily achieved on
replacement levothyroxine therapy
Life-long need for levothyroxine
supplementation
Risks of thyroidectomy such as
hypoparathyroidism, recurrent laryngeal
nerve injury
Gradual remission of autoimmunity
occurs after surgery
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
77
euthyroid state is achieved. TSH-receptor antibody (TRAb) level may remain elevated
for months following radioactive iodine therapy.229, 4,297 (Level III) Therefore surgery may
be a better option for definitive therapy in patients with high TRAb levels.229,4 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Women with hyperthyroidism should be counselled on the importance
of euthyroid state before attempting pregnancy. The risks and benefits of
all treatment options to achieve a euthyroid state (radioactive treatment,
thyroidectomy and ATD therapy) should also be discussed
• Women with hyperthyroidism who require high doses of ATD to achieve a
euthyroid state should be considered for definitive therapy before becoming
pregnant
• Women who are well-controlled on carbimazole and who desire pregnancy
could switch to PTU before trying to conceive
7.2.8 How To Manage Graves’ Disease During Pregnancy?
Anti-thyroid drugs are the mainstay of treatment for hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
The greatest risk with the usage of ATD in pregnancy is the teratogenicity
potential. Besides, aplasia cutis, a syndrome of carbimazole embryopathy that
includes dysmorphic facies has also been described. Recent large studies
from Japan294 (Level II-2) and Denmark298,300 (Level ll-2) have shown that CMZ-associated
birth defects are more common than anticipated, affecting 1/30 children
exposed to the drug in the weeks 6–10 of pregnancy. The risk observed included
various types of abdominal wall defects, aplasia cutis, atresias of digestive tract,
urinary tract, respiratory (choanal atresia) and circulatory (ventricular septum)
defects.298,300 (Level ll-2)
The Danish study also noted an almost similar incidence rate of teratogenicity
after exposure to PTU298 (Level ll-2), which was previously considered non-teratogenic.
However, these defects were less severe and consisted of face and neck
malformations (preauricular sinus and cysts) and urinary tract malformations
(only in boys). As the majority of PTU-associated defects had been detected when
the children developed complications and received surgery for the defect later in
childhood,293,298 (Level ll-2) studies relying solely on birth defects at birth will not find this
association.299 (Level III)
The major period of teratogenicity due to ATD was gestational weeks 6–10, the period
of organ formation. Therefore, consideration on treatment strategy is appropriate.
A woman who is on ATD should test for pregnancy and immediately contact her
caregiver to make a plan, once pregnancy is confirmed.300,228 (Level III)
Many patients on ATD therapy gradually enter remission when made euthyroid.
Although half of the hyperthyroid patients eventually relapse when the medication
is withdrawn after 1–2 years of therapy, only a few patients who have become TRAb
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
78
negative during therapy will relapse within the first months.229 (Level III) Therefore, ATD
withdrawal is an option if the GD is considered to be in remission based on (i) recent
thyroid function results and TRAb measurement, (ii) the need of only a low dose of
ATD, and (iii) the clinical condition. After stopping ATD, thyroid function testing needs
to be closely monitored during the remaining first trimester. However, ATD should
not be stopped in some pregnant women who are at high risk of hyperthyroidism
relapse if ATD is withdrawn.304 (Level III) This will include: women who were started on
ATD therapy recently (<6 months), still have suppressed TSH, have a relatively high
serum T3, high levels of TRAb, large goitre, active ophthalmopathy or other signs of
active disease.
If ATD has to be continued or started in early pregnancy to treat overt
hyperthyroidism, the drug of choice is PTU. There is a risk of liver failure with the
use of PTU, but the risk of liver failure or agranulocytosis in pregnancy is much lower
than the risk of birth defects.293 (Level II) Patients on CMZ should be replaced with PTU
in early pregnancy, using a dose ratio of 1:10301 (Level III) e.g. 200 mg PTU per day to
replace 20 mg CMZ. Because the half-life of PTU is considerably shorter, it should be
used twice or thrice daily.
Recommendations
• Women taking ATD should be instructed to perform a pregnancy test as soon
as possible, after a missed period. If the pregnancy test is positive, pregnant
women should contact their caregiver immediately
• During early pregnancy, consider discontinuation of antithyroid drugs in a
patient who is euthyroid on low dose of CMZ (≤10 mg daily) or PTU (≤100 mg
daily), due to the potential teratogenic effects. Other factors to be considered
before discontinuation of ATD include disease history, goitre size, duration of
treatment, recent thyroid function tests results, TRAb measurement and other
clinical factors
• If antithyroid medication is stopped, thyroid function testing and clinical
examination should be performed monthly to ensure the pregnant woman
remains clinically and biochemically euthyroid
• In pregnant women in whom ATD needs to be continued, PTU is recommended
throughout the first trimester
• After first trimester, no recommendation can be made whether PTU should be
continued or changed to CMZ
7.2.9 How To Monitor Patients With Graves’ Disease On ATD In Pregnancy?
All ATD cross the placenta.229,4,230,302 (Level III) Therefore, foetal thyroid function might be
affected. When patient is made euthyroid, the foetus is often overtreated, leading
to foetal hypothyroidism and goitre.302 (Level III) Therefore, ATD dosage should be
adjusted with the aim of maternal fT4 at or just above the pregnancy-specific
upper limit of normal.229,4,230,302,303 (Level III) The smallest dose of ATD should be used
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
79
to avoid foetal overtreatment. Antithyroid drug discontinuation is possible in the
last trimester as the incidence of GD becomes very low due to decrease in thyroid
autoimmunity.304 (Level II-2)
When the trimester-specific fT4 is not available, the use of the non-pregnant
reference range is recommended.229,4 (Level III) fT4 should be monitored every 4–6 weeks
after initiation of therapy and after achieving target value.229,4,230,303 (Level III)
Recommendation
• The lowest effective dose of ATD should be used during pregnancy, targeting
fT4 at or just above the reference range
7.2.10 What Is The Role Of Thyrotropin Receptor Antibody (TRAb)
Assays In Pregnancy?
The measurement of TRAb is helpful in clarifying the aetiology of thyrotoxicosis
and a positive result strongly supports the diagnosis of Graves’ disease (GD).
In pregnancy, as in the non-pregnant state, TRAb are a hallmark of GD.305 (Level  II)
GD occurs before pregnancy in 0.4%–1% of women and in 0.2%–0.4% during
pregnancy, representing the most common cause (85%) of either overt or
subclinical hyperthyroidism in women of reproductive age.306,307 (Level III) Regarding the
behaviour of the TRAb, it is remarkable to note that due to the pregnancy-induced
immunosuppression, autoantibody levels tend to decrease throughout pregnancy.
The most typical scenario is that the TRAb are detectable in the first trimester,
but their levels decrease after 20 weeks of gestation becoming undetectable
towards full term.
Table 13: Indications and timing for TSH receptor antibody (TRAb) assays in
pregnancy 232,312 (Level III)
Indication for TRAb
Timing
TRAb level at the risk for
foetal hyperthyroidism
Past history of Graves’ disease treated
with ablation (radioiodine or surgery)
Early in pregnancy,
repeat test at
weeks 18–22
>3 times upper limit of
normal
Patient on antithyroid drugs (ATDs) for
treatment of Graves’ hyperthyroidism
when pregnancy is confirmed
Early in pregnancy
Patient requires treatment with
ATDs for Graves’ disease through
midpregnancy
Repeat test at
weeks 18–22
Elevated TRAb at weeks 18–22 or
the mother is taking ATD in the
third trimester
Repeat test at
weeks 30–34
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
80
TRAb should be checked in a pregnant woman with a past history of GD or active GD.
If TRAb levels are low or undetectable in early pregnancy, no further TRAb testing is
recommended.229 If maternal TRAb is elevated or patient is being treated with ATDs,
TRAb should be measured again between weeks 18 and 22. In those with levels
near 3–4 times above upper limit of normal (ULN), TRAb should be checked again
during weeks 30–34. Maternal TRAb serum concentration greater than 3 times the
upper limit of the reference range in the third trimester is a risk factor for neonatal
hyperthyroidism.306,229,308 (Level III)
Recommendations
• If the patient has a past history of GD treated with ablation (radioiodine or
surgery), a maternal serum determination of TRAb is recommended at initial
thyroid function testing during early pregnancy
• If TRAb levels are low or undetectable in early pregnancy, no further TRAb
testing is recommended
• If maternal TRAb is elevated or patient is being treated with ATDs, TRAb should
be measured again between weeks 18 and 22
• If elevated TRAb is detected at weeks 18–22 or the mother is taking ATD in
the third trimester, a TRAb measurement should again be performed in late
pregnancy (weeks 30–34) to evaluate the need for neonatal and postnatal
monitoring
7.2.11 Should Additional Foetal Ultrasound Monitoring For Growth,
Heart Rate And Goitre Be Performed?
Foetal well-being may be affected in the presence of uncontrolled hyperthyroidism
and elevated TRAb.229,307 (Level III) The diagnosis of foetal hyperthyroidism should be
made on clinical grounds based on maternal history, serum TRAb levels and foetal
ultrasonography.
Foetal goitre is the earliest sonographic sign of foetal thyroid dysfunction.4 (Level III)
Other signs of potential foetal hyperthyroidism that may be detected by
ultrasonography include foetal tachycardia (heart rate >170 bpm, intrauterine
growth restriction, accelerated bone maturation, signs of congestive heart failure
and foetal hydrops.229 (Level III)
Recommendation
• Foetal surveillance should be performed in women who have uncontrolled
hyperthyroidism in the second half of pregnancy and elevated TRAb levels at
any time during pregnancy (more than 3x upper limit of normal). Monitoring
may include ultrasound to assess heart rate, growth, amniotic fluid volume, and
the presence of foetal goitre
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
81
7.2.12 How To Manage Thyrotoxicosis Patients Who Are Breastfeeding?
Antithyroid drugs are the mainstay of treatment for thyrotoxicosis during the
post-partum period.229,303,296,310,311 (Level III) Both PTU and MMI can be detected
in the breast milk of treated hyperthyroid women, but only in a very small
amount.229,309 (Level III) Neither of the two ATDs cause any alterations in thyroid
function, physical and mental development of infants breastfed by lactating
mothers with thyrotoxicosis. The largest study investigating the effects of
ATD consumption during lactation measured neonatal thyroid function in the
breastfed offspring, showed no difference in the IQ or physical development of the
breastfed children of mothers on ATD compared to the control children.229 (Level III)
Continuation of breastfeeding is safe and should be encouraged in hyperthyroid
mothers taking ATD.310 (Level III)
Recommendation
• When antithyroid drug is indicated, both CMZ and PTU can be administered
to breastfeeding women with thyrotoxicosis. However, the lowest effective
dose should always be used since a small amount of these medications are
transferred into the breast milk
7.3 POSTPARTUM THYROIDITIS (PPT)
7.3.1 What Is Postpartum Thyroiditis (PPT) And What Is Its Natural History?
Postpartum thyroiditis (PPT) is the occurrence of thyroid dysfunction, excluding
GD, in the first postpartum year in women who were euthyroid prior to pregnancy.
Transient thyrotoxicosis is followed by transient hypothyroidism with a return to the
euthyroid state by the end of the initial postpartum year (classical form). Incidence in
the general population is 5.4%. About 22% of patients present with the classical form,
30% with isolated thyrotoxicosis, and 48% with isolated hypothyroidism.312 (Level  III)
The thyrotoxic phase of PPT typically occurs between 2 and 6 months postpartum.
All episodes of thyrotoxicosis resolve spontaneously. The hypothyroid phase of PPT
occurs from 3 to 12 months postpartum with about 20%–40% of cases resulting in
permanent hypothyroidism in the ensuing 3–12 years.313 (Level III) A prospective study
reported that 50% of women with PPT remained hypothyroid at the end of the first
postpartum year.314 (Level III)
7.3.2 What Is The Aetiology?
It is an autoimmune disorder associated with the presence of thyroid antibodies
(TPOAb and TgAb), lymphocyte abnormalities, complement activation, increased
levels of IgG1, increased Natural Killer (NK) cell activity, and specific Human
Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) haplotypes.313 (Level III) Women who are thyroid Ab positive
in the first trimester have a high risk of developing PPT, ranging from 33% to
50%.313 (Level III) Women with the highest Ab titres also have the highest risk of PPT. A
histological study of fine-needle aspirates of PPT reveals a lymphocytic thyroiditis,
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
82
similar to that seen in individuals with silent thyroiditis. The incidence of PPT is
3- to 4-fold higher in women with type 1 DM.312 (Level III) It is also associated with other
autoimmune diseases such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) and chronic
viral hepatitis.312 (Level III); 315 (Level III) Antipituitary antibodies have been found in 25% of
women with previous history of PPT.316 (Level II)
7.3.3 How To Differentiate From Graves’ Disease (GD) And What Are The
Investigations?
TSH receptor antibodies are positive in GD in nearly all cases and are typically
negative in PPT, although some mixed-type disease is seen. An elevated T4:T3 ratio
suggests the presence of PPT. Physical stigmata of GD, such as goitre with a bruit or
ophthalmopathy, are diagnostic when present. The radioiodine uptake is elevated
or normal in GD and low in the thyrotoxic phase of PPT.313 (Level II)
7.3.4 What Is The Management?
During the thyrotoxic phase of PPT, symptomatic women may be treated with
beta-blockers.313 (Level III); 312 (Level III); 230 (Level III) A beta-blocker that is safe for lactating
women, such as propranolol or metoprolol, at the lowest possible dose to alleviate
symptoms is the treatment of choice. Therapy is typically required for a few weeks.
Antithyroid drugs are not recommended for the treatment of the thyrotoxic phase of
PPT.313 (Level III); 312 (Level III); 228 (Level III) LT4 treatment should be started during the hypothyroid
phase of PPT if the patient is symptomatic, lactating or if the patient is considering
another conception. Asymptomatic women or women with mild symptoms who
choose not to be treated need to have their TFT checked every 4- to 8-weekly until a
euthyroid state is restored.313 (Level III); 312 (Level III); 228 (Level III) Length of time that LT4 should
be continued has not been systematically evaluated. Maintain a euthyroid state in
women who are attempting pregnancy or are pregnant. Tapering LT4 doses in order
to determine whether the hypothyroid phase of PPT was transitory or permanent
can begin by 12 months postpartum. Tapering should be gradual and TSH should be
monitored every 6–8 weeks.313 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Women in thyrotoxic phase of PPT who are symptomatic should be treated
with beta blockers. Antithyroid drugs are not recommended
• Women in hypothyroid phase of PPT and who are symptomatic should be
treated with LT4. Women who are not treated need to have their TFT checked
every 4- to 8-weekly until a euthyroid state is restored
• Women who choose to get pregnant again while in hypothyroid phase of PPT or
who are breastfeeding should be treated with LT4
• Women in hypothyroid phase of PPT who have been initiated on LT4 should
start tapering down LT4 after 12 months postpartum and TFT monitored 6- to
8-weekly
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
83
7.3.5 When To Monitor?
Following the resolution of the thyrotoxic phase of PPT, serum TSH should be
measured in approximately 4–8 weeks (or if new symptoms develop) to screen
for the hypothyroid phase. Nearly 10%–50% of women in whom the hypothyroid
phase of PPT initially resolves will ultimately go on to develop permanent
hypothyroidism.313 (Level III); 314 (Level III) Factors associated with an increased risk of
developing permanent hypothyroidism are multiparity, thyroid hypoechogenicity
on ultrasound, greater severity of the initial hypothyroidism, higher TPOAb titre,
greater maternal age, and a history of pregnancy loss.313 (Level III) Women with a prior
history of PPT should have TSH testing annually to evaluate for the development
of permanent hypothyroidism.313 (Level III) Women who have had a prior history of
PPT, who have another autoimmune disease, or are known to be TPO-Ab-positive
should be screened at 3 months for PPT with a TSH and fT4. If they are euthyroid
and TPO-Ab-negative, no further screening is indicated. However, if they are
TPO-Ab-positive and euthyroid, TSH levels should be obtained at 6 and 9 months
after delivery.312 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Women with a history of autoimmune disease (T1DM, SLE etc.) should be
screened for postpartum thyroiditis
• Women with a history of postpartum thyroiditis in previous pregnancies or with
positive thyroid antibody titres should be screened for PPT
• Women with a prior history of PPT with TPO-Ab negative should have their
TFT checked at 3 months postpartum. If TFT is normal, no further screening is
indicated. If they are TPO-Ab positive and euthyroid, TSH should be checked at
6 months and 9 months after delivery
• Women with resolution of PPT and high risk of permanent hypothyroidism
should have TFT screened annually to monitor for development of permanent
hypothyroidism
• Resolution of thyrotoxic phase should be followed by TFT monitoring in
4–8 weeks to screen for the hypothyroid phase
7.3.6 Is PPT Associated With Postpartum Depression?
There is no clear relationship between PPT and depression. Studies evaluating
the relationship of PPT to postpartum depression have been inconsistent.313 (Level III);
313 (Level III) Two studies have reported a significant association between the presence
of thyroid antibodies and depression, irrespective of thyroid function, whereas
another study showed no association between the presence of microsomal
antibodies and postpartum depression.313 (Level III) However, since hypothyroidism is
an easily treatable cause of depression, all patients with postpartum depression
should be screened for thyroid dysfunction.312 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
84
Recommendation
• Women with postpartum depression should be screened for hypothyroidism
by having TFT measured
7.4 ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM AND HYPERTHYROIDISM IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS
7.4.1. Acquired Hypothyroidism In Children And Adolescents
7.4.1.1 What Is The Prevalence Of Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis In Children And
Adolescents?
Hypothyroidism is the most common disturbance of thyroid function in children.
The overall prevalence of hypothyroidism in young people less than 22 years of
age is 0.135%; and in the group aged 11–18 years, it is 0.113%.317 (Level II-2) Acquired
hypothyroidism is most often caused by autoimmune thyroiditis. In the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) from 1988 to 1994, 6.3%
of adolescents (12–19 years of age) had positive antithyroglobulin antibodies and
4.8% had positive antithyroid peroxidase antibodies. The incidence of antithyroid
antibodies was highest in Hispanic-American adolescents and lowest in black nonHispanic adolescents. Non-Hispanic whites had an incidence rate between these
two groups.52 (level II-2)
7.4.1.2 What Are The Clinical Features Of Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis In Children
And Adolescents?
The most common manifestation of hypothyroidism in children is declining
height velocity that results in short stature which tends to be insidious in onset
and may present for several years before other symptoms occur. Other common
symptoms are altered school performance, sluggishness, lethargy, cold intolerance,
constipation, dry skin, brittle hair, facial puffiness and muscle pain.318 (Level II-2)
The commonest physical finding at presentation is a diffusely enlarged thyroid
gland/goitre in 39.5% in one series. Other physical findings are short stature;
apparent overweight; puffy facies with dull, placid expression; bradycardia;
pseudohypertrophy of the muscles and delayed deep tendon reflexes.319 (Level II-2)
Pubertal development is delayed in most patients; however, some children have
precocious puberty characterised by breast development and vaginal bleeding in
girls and macro-orchidism in boys.320 (Level II-2)
Recommendation
• The clinical features of hypothyroidism in children and adolescents are similar
to adults; however, in children, evaluations of height and puberty are essential
since growth retardation and abnormal puberty are common
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
85
7.4.1.3 What Is The Natural History Of Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis In Children
And Adolescents?
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is more common in girls than boys (2.8:1) and in
whites than blacks. Among all children, euthyroid goitre is more common than
hypothyroidism.52 (Level II-2) Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with thyrotoxicosis (Hashitoxicosis)
in general has a definitive resolution of hyperthyroidism in an average of eight
months.318 (Level II-2) In patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with euthyroidism, 64.8%
remains euthyroid after 5 years. Predictive factors for future development of
hypothyroidism are presence of goitre, elevated TPO antibodies, ATG antibodies,
and progressive increase in TSH.318 (Level II-2)
An unusual outcome of Hashimoto’s is the conversion to Graves’ disease in 7%
of children and adolescents, which is due to alteration in the biological activity of
the TSH receptor antibody from predominantly a TSH receptor-blocking antibody
during the hypothyroid phase to a thyroid-stimulating antibody when Graves’
disease manifests.318 (Level II-2)
In Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with subclinical hypothyroidism at the end of five-year
follow-up, 89.6% had thyroid dysfunction. Those associated with Turner (without
Turner 63.6% vs. with Turner 100%) or Down syndrome (without Down 63.6% vs.
with Down 97.6%) had increased likelihood of having thyroid dysfunctions.319 (Level II-2)
In contrast, idiopathic subclinical hypothyroidism frequently is a benign condition,
in which 61.9% became euthyroid at the end of five-year follow-up.319 (Level II-2)
Recommendation
• It is recommended to examine for goitre, measure antithyroid antibodies, and
evaluate TSH pattern, as these are the predictive factors for future development
of hypothyroidism
7.4.1.4 How To Diagnose And Investigate Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis In Children
And Adolescents?
With compatible history, diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring antithyroid
antibodies, in which case approximately 85%–90% of children and adolescents have
high serum TPO antibody, and 30%–50% have positive ATG antibody levels.
In one study, eight out of 83 children (9.2%) with autoimmune thyroiditis had positive
TSH receptor-blocking antibodies.321 (Level II-2)
Thyroid ultrasonography and radionuclide scanning are rarely indicated in children.
In a study of 105 children with antibody-positive Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, only onethird showed typical ultrasound changes at diagnosis.322 (Level II-2)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
86
If the patient has a markedly asymmetric goitre or a prominent nodule, or a smaller
nodule that enlarges during follow-up, fine needle aspiration biopsy is indicated.
Bone age is performed to assess skeletal maturation and in hypothyroidism
during childhood and adolescence the height age is less than the chronological
age.323 (Level 11-2)
Recommendations
• The diagnosis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in children and adolescents is based
on the compatible history and confirmed with measurement of antithyroid
antibodies
• Ultrasound and isotope scans are not routinely performed unless other issues,
such as markedly asymmetrical goitre, thyroid nodule or malignancy, are
suspected
7.4.1.5 What Is The Pattern Of Thyroid Function In Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis In
Children And Adolescents?
In a retrospective, multicentre study involving a total of 608 subjects, 69% were
pubertal, 58% were asymptomatic, 9% associated with chromosomal disorders
(Turner syndrome, Down syndrome), and 17.6% had other autoimmune conditions.
With regard to thyroid functions, 52.1% were euthyroid and 47.9% had thyroid
dysfunction. In those with thyroid dysfunction, 41.4% were overt and subclinical
hypothyroid, and 6.5% were overt and subclinical hyperthyroid. Significant factors
associated with an increase in the likelihood of thyroid dysfunction were age
<10 years, prepubertal status, and chromosomal disorders.324 (Level II-2)
7.4.1.6 What Is The Treatment Of Hypothyroidism Secondary To Hashimoto’s
Thyroiditis In Children And Adolescents?
Levothyroxine (L-T4) is the treatment of choice in children with hypothyroidism.
The goals of the treatment are to restore normal growth, development, and normal
pubertal progression. The rate of clearance of L-T4 is higher in children than adults
and as a result, the daily replacement on a weight basis is higher.
Age 1–3 years: 4–6 mcg/kg body weight
Age 3–10 years: 3–5 mcg/kg body weight
Age 10–16 years: 2–4 mcg/kg body weight
Alternatively, the dose can be calculated based on the body surface area as
approximately 100 mcg/m2/day. The recommended target range for TSH is in the
lower half of the reference range, optimally 0.5–2.0 mIU/L; and for free T4, it is in the
upper half of the reference range.325 (Level II-1) Once growth and pubertal development
are complete, thyroid hormone treatment can be discontinued and thyroid function
re-evaluated a month later. Treatment with thyroxine, in hypothyroid patients with
goitre, results in reduced thyroid volume.326 (Level 1)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
87
Recommendations
• Levothyroxine is recommended as the medication of choice for treating
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
• The recommended dose of levothyroxine is based on the body weight or body
surface area
• The recommended target range for TSH is in the lower half of the reference
range
• The recommended target range for free T4 is in the upper half of the reference
range
• Levothyroxine is effective in reducing the thyroid gland size/goitre
7.4.1.7 What Is The Treatment Of Non-goitrous Euthyroid Hashimoto’s
Thyroiditis?
Treatment of non-goitrous euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with thyroxine at
a dose of 1.44±0.5 mcg/kg body weight results in lower thyroid volume compared
to control. Within the control group, thyroid volume and TSH levels increased after
two years of follow-up.327 (Level 1) However, in another trial, treatment of non-goitrous
euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis had no effect on the thyroid volume at the end of
three years of treatment.326 (Level 1)
Recommendations
• Monitor for goitre, antithyroid antibodies, and pattern of thyroid function in
non-goitrous euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
• Treatment of non-goitrous euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with thyroxine is
controversial
7.4.1.8 What Is The Treatment Of Euthyroid Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis
With Goitre?
Treatment of euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with goitre results in a reduction
of thyroid volume.326 (Level 1) In another trial, treatment of euthyroid Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis at a dose of 1.6±0.8 mcg/kg adjusted to keep TSH within the normal
range of 0.4–4.0 mlU/L resulted in a decline in the thyroid volume in the treated
group.328 (Level 1)
Recommendation
• Levothyroxine is effective for the treatment of euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
with goitre
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
88
7.4.1.9 What Is The Risk Of Hypothyroidism In Turner Syndrome (TS)?
Turner syndrome (TS) has been linked to increased risk of autoimmunity, especially
in case of the thyroid gland. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) is the commonest reported
autoimmune disease in girls with TS. A study involving 41 TS girls aged 6–18 years
confirmed a high incidence of thyroid autoimmunity (26.8%).329 (Level II) Another
long-term follow-up study reported a higher incidence, whereby 42% of TS girls
had elevated thyroid autoantibodies.330 (Level II) Amongst the positive autoantibodies
group,  65% had hypothyroidism compared to only 24% out of the total TS
population, irrespective of the autoantibodies level. Hyperthyroidism was detected
in only 2.5% of the total TS girls. The same study reported that thyroid dysfunction
was first noted from the age of eight years.
Among Asians, more than half of the Japanese women with TS in adulthood had
thyroid autoantibodies. Of the 37 women with thyroid autoantibodies (57%), three
had Graves’ disease and 20 were hypothyroid and diagnosed with Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis.331 (Level II)
The spontaneous evolution of thyroid function in TS girls with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
seems to be characterised by a significant worsening of the thyroid status, both in
children presenting with euthyroidism as well as those presenting with subclinical
hypothyroidism (SCHypo).332 (Level II) An association with TS is shown to worsen the
long-term prognosis of thyroid function in girls with HT.
7.4.1.10 When To Screen For Hypothyroidism In Turner Syndrome?
The International Turner Syndrome Consensus Group recommends screening for
hypothyroidism at diagnosis and then annually with fT4 and TSH measurements
beginning in early childhood and throughout the lifespan.333 (Level III)
The TS Study Group suggested that all individuals with TS should require continued
annual monitoring of thyroid function throughout the lifespan, starting as young
as four years of age. This is in line with the reported case of autoimmune thyroid
disease in a four-year–old TS patient.334 (Level III)
An observational study, on the other hand, suggested that thyroid function
should be evaluated yearly in girls with TS, past the age of eight years, and more
frequently in those with positive thyroid autoantibodies.330 (Level II) Some other studies
acknowledged the importance of monitoring the thyroid function in view of the risk
of developing hypothyroidism.329 (Level II); 331 (Level II); 335 (Level II)
Massa et al. indicated that some TS women had goitre or biochemical hypothyroidism
even without detectable antibodies. Therefore, they concluded that the absence
of thyroid autoantibody did not exclude a disturbance of thyroid function.336 (Level II)
Screening of the thyroid function of these women with TS regularly, even if they
were negative for thyroid autoantibody, is recommended.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
89
Recommendations
• All individuals with TS should need continued annual monitoring of thyroid
function throughout their lifespan starting at diagnosis
• Screening of TS patients for hypothyroidism even in the absence of positive
autoantibodies is recommended
7.4.1.11 What Is The Risk Of Hypothyroidism In Down Syndrome (DS)?
Down syndrome (DS) or trisomy 21 children are at an increased risk of primary
thyroid dysfunction. The prevalence of hypothyroidism in DS increases with age
and is projected as no less than 5.7% among children and adolescents in
Scotland.337 (Level  II) Lughetti et al. reported that the probability of hypothyroidism
increased from 7% to 24% at ten years.338 (Level II)
Subclinical hypothyroidism (SCHypo) is also a known thyroid dysfunction linked to
DS. Subclinical hypothyroidism is diagnosed in asymptomatic patients with serum
TSH concentration between 5 mIU/L and 10 mIU/L and normal free or total T4. The
prevalence of SCHypo is even more frequently reported in children with trisomy 21,
with prevalence between 19.6% and 60%.339 (Level II); 340 (Level III) However, in a majority of
them, the thyroid function tends to normalise overtime. In a cohort of 53 children
with DS between six months and five years of age, the SCHypo normalised in >70%,
with a higher remission rate in patients without goitre and autoimmunity.341 (Level III)
7.4.1.12 When To Screen For Hypothyroidism In Down Syndrome?
Regular monitoring of thyroid function in patients with trisomy 21 is recommended.342(Level III) Many children with DS have mildly elevated TSH and normal free T4
levels. Verification of the results of newborn thyroid function screening is important
in view of increased risk of acquired thyroid disease. Repeat thyroid function test
at 6 and 12 months and then annually is recommended by the guidelines.342(Level III);
343 (Level III) Lughetti et al. suggested that DS children should be carefully monitored
annually to allow early identification of thyroid dysfunction.338 (Level II)
Recommendations
• Regular monitoring of thyroid function in patients with trisomy 21 is
recommended
• Repeat thyroid function test at 6 and 12 months of age and then annually is
recommended
7.4.1.13 How To Treat Hypothyroidism In Down Syndrome?
The decision on whether or not to treat should be taken after careful discussion
with the parents on the risks and potential benefits of treatment. To date, there
is insufficient data to recommend treatment in the majority of children with
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
90
SCHypo, in whom the serum TSH concentration is <10 mIU/L and in whom the TT4/
fT4 concentration is normal. Management of children with abnormal TSH or T4
concentrations should be discussed with a paediatric endocrinologist.342 (Level III)
Recommendation
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend treatment in the majority of
children with SCHypo, in whom the serum TSH concentration is <10 mIU/L and
in whom the TT4/fT4 concentration is normal
7.4.1.14 What Is The Risk Of Hypothyroidism In Klinefelter Syndrome (KS)?
To the best of our knowledge, there had been mainly reports on the association of
Klinefelter syndrome (KS) with autoimmune conditions, including hypothyroidism.
A study in adult men found significantly higher rates of several autoimmune
diseases in men with KS, including rheumatoid arthritis (rate ratio [RR 3.3]),
lupus (RR 18.1), multiple sclerosis (RR 4.3), Addison’s disease (RR 11.7), Sjogren’s
syndrome (RR 19.3), autoimmune hypothyroidism (RR 2.7), and type 1 diabetes
mellitus (RR 6.1).344 (Level II)
Although the autoimmune diseases are all significantly higher in adult men with KS
compared to men in the general population, most of these conditions are known to
have a higher female predominance, and the risk of these autoimmune diseases is
similar to women in the general population.345 (Level II) However, there are no studies
evaluating the autoimmune diseases in children with KS to date.
7.4.1.15 When To Screen For Hypothyroidism In Klinefelter Syndrome?
An interdisciplinary expert panel of specialists under the auspices of the Italian
Society of Andrology and Sexual Medicine recommended screening for primary
hypothyroidism in adolescents and adults with KS.346 (Level III) However, evidence is
lacking to recommend this in paediatrics.
A review of KS in children recommended thyroid function screening every
1–2 years starting at age ten years, or sooner or more frequently, if symptoms are
present.347 (Level III) It is important to be aware of the increased prevalence of
autoimmune diseases in KS. Therefore, evaluation of thyroid function is required if
suggestive symptoms are present.
Recommendations
• It is important to be aware of the increased prevalence of autoimmune diseases
in KS. Therefore, evaluation of thyroid function is required if suggestive
symptoms are present
• Thyroid function screening should be performed at diagnosis or at every
1–2 years after the age of ten years
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
91
7.4.1.16 What Is The Risk Of Hypothyroidism In Prader–Willi Syndrome (PWS)?
Hypothalamic dysfunction may increase the risk of central hypothyroidism in
Prader–Willi Syndrome (PWS) patients. There are varying studies reporting the
prevalence of hypothyroidism in PWS that range from 4.8%348 (Level III) to as high as
20%–30%.349 (Level IV) However, a small study looking at thyroid status in PWS patients
up until two years of life reported that in 72.2% patients, serum TT4 and/or fT4 levels
were below the 2.5th percentile of the reference population.350 (Level III) This study
suggests that transient or definitive TSH-releasing hormone (TRH)–TSH thyroid
axis dysfunction may frequently be present in young PWS patients. Awareness of
this dysfunction in this critical period of thyroid hormone action on neurological
development is important among paediatricians.
Evaluation of thyroid function in children with PWS, before and during GH treatment,
was carried out in a study of 75 PWS children. It was found that during GH treatment,
fT4 decreased significantly to low-normal levels, while TSH levels remained
normal. T3 levels were relatively high or normal, both before and during GH
treatment, which may indicate that PWS children have increased conversion of
T4 to T3.351 (Level III)
7.4.1.17 When To Screen For Hypothyroidism In Prader–Willi Syndrome?
An open international multidisciplinary expert meeting held in October 2006 in
Toulouse, France, represented by 37 invited speakers had outlined recommendations for the screening of thyroid status in PWS population. They recommended
that PWS patients required screening with TSH, fT4, and fT3 measurements, especially
before and while on GH treatment.352 (Level III)
A review suggested screening for hypothyroidism to be performed within the first
three months of life, and then yearly, especially if on GH therapy.353 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Screening for hypothyroidism is recommended at diagnosis
• Hypothyroidism in PWS may be of central or peripheral origin. Therefore, PWS
patients require screening with TSH, fT4, and fT3 measurements before and
while on GH treatment
7.4.1.18 How To Treat And Monitor Hypothyroidism In Prader–Willi Syndrome?
Treatment with levothyroxine at typical replacement doses based on age and
weight should be done if the thyroid function is indicative of hypothyroidism.352 (Level III),
353 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
92
7.4.2 Hyperthyroidism in Children And Adolescents
7.4.2.1 How Is Graves’ Disease Diagnosed In Children And Adolescents?
Symptoms of hyperthyroidism may be subtle and present for months or years before
the diagnosis is made. School-aged children and adolescents could present with poor
concentration, deterioration in school performance, irritability, fatigue, palpitations,
heat intolerance, fine tremor, and goitre. Younger prepubertal children more
commonly present with poor weight gain and frequent bowel movements and tend
to be diagnosed later.353 (Level III); 354 (Level III) In the paediatric age group, hyperthyroidism
can also affect growth, puberty, and bone density.353 (Level III) Increase in height velocity
with advanced bone age, is related to the duration of hyperthyroidism. As in adults,
children with GD may have a lower than normal bone mass; however, bone mass is
often restored to normal levels after two years of an euthyroid state.
The size of the thyroid gland is variable. It is usually symmetrically enlarged, firm,
uniformly smooth, and not tender. Ophthalmic abnormalities are usually less severe
in children than in adults.355 (Level III) Thyrotoxicosis crisis and pretibial myxoedema are
rare in childhood.
A suppressed serum TSH and an elevated free T4 or T3 or both confirms the diagnosis
of hyperthyroidism. With paediatric patients, it is important that free T4 levels are
interpreted according to the reference range for age. There also exists a variation in
the reference levels with different manufacturer assays. Some patients, especially
prepubertal children, may have elevated serum T3, but normal free T4 levels (isolated
T3 toxicosis).4 (Level III) In a patient with a symmetrically enlarged thyroid, recent onset
of orbitopathy, and moderate-to–severe hyperthyroidism, the diagnosis of GD is
likely and further evaluation of the aetiology is often unnecessary.4 (Level III) If the
diagnosis is not apparent, further diagnostic tests depending on available resources
include measurement of TSH-receptor antibody, determination of radioactive
iodine uptake (RAIU), or measurement of thyroid blood flow on ultrasonography
is needed.4 (Level III) If the diagnosis of GD is unclear, TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb)
should be measured.4 (Level III); 356 (Level III) They are sensitive and specific biomarkers for
the diagnosis of GD in childhood and reflect disease severity and activity.356 (Level III)
There is a positive correlation reported between serum TRAb and fT4 levels and
significantly higher levels in young children ≤5 years of age.357 (Level II)
Measurement of TSH receptor antibodies may be useful in differentiating GD from
the toxic phase of chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis and subacute thyroiditis.358 (Level III)
However, TSH-receptor antibodies can be negative in mild or initial presentation
of GD. A negative result may also be due to assay insensitivity. Other thyroid
antibodies, antithyroglobulin and antithyroid peroxidases, are also often present
but are not specific in the diagnosis of GD.
Thyroid ultrasonography in GD usually shows a diffusely enlarged thyroid gland,
often homogeneous. Ultrasound is recommended for any GD patient with thyroid
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
93
gland asymmetry or a palpable nodule. If a significant nodule is confirmed, fineneedle aspiration biopsy and a thyroid scan should be considered.4 (Level III); 358 (Level III);
359 (Level III) Although uncommon, patients with GD or an autonomous nodule, may
have concurrent differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC). Adolescents with GD have been
reported to present with DTC.359 (Level III) Given the debate on whether nodules found
in the setting of autoimmune thyroid disease have an increased risk of malignancy,
a thorough evaluation of the nodule(s) is recommended.
Imaging with radioisotopes is not required for the diagnosis of GD. A thyroid scan
should be considered for patients with unclear aetiology and negative TSH-receptor
antibody, or if the clinical presentation suggests a thyroid adenoma or multinodular
goitre.4 (Level III), 359 (Level III)
Recommendations
• The diagnosis is based on the clinical suspicion and confirmed by elevated free
T4 and/or T3 levels with suppressed TSH
• Free T4 levels must be interpreted according to reference range for different
ages and after consideration of the variation with different manufacturer
assays
• In a patient with a symmetrically enlarged thyroid, recent onset of ophthalmopathy and moderate-to–severe hyperthyroidism, the diagnosis of GD is likely and
further evaluation of the aetiology is often unnecessary
• However, if the aetiology of hyperthyroidism is unclear, TSH receptor antibodies,
which are specific to GD, should be measured
• Ultrasound is recommended for any patient with thyroid gland asymmetry or a
palpable nodule
7.4.2.2 How Should Graves’ Disease Be Managed In Children
And Adolescents?
Three treatment options available for GD are antithyroid drugs (ATD), radioiodine
therapy (RAI) and thyroidectomy. First-line initial treatment is ATD, which is
carbimazole or its active metabolite methimazole (MMI). Propylthiouracil should
be avoided in children, except in selected circumstances, because of the risk
of idiosyncratic liver failure. Methimazole/carbimazole dose typically used is
0.2–0.5 mg/kg daily, with a range from 0.1 mg/kg to 1.0 mg/kg daily.4 (Level III);359 (Level III);
360 (Level III) The initial starting dose is usually 0.5–1 mg/kg/day, with a maximal dose
of 30 mg/day.361; 362 (Level III) Because most side effects of MMI are dose-related and
occur within the first three months of treatment, high doses of MMI (>30 mg for
an adolescent or adult) should rarely be used initially.4 (Level III); 361 (Level III); 362 (Level III)
Methimazole/carbimazole could be administered once daily, which provides better
compliance.4 (Level III) Administration in divided doses has not been proven to be superior,
compared to once-daily dosing. However, when a more rapid biochemical control is
needed in patients with severe thyrotoxicosis, an initial split dose of MMI/carbimazole
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
94
(e.g. 15 mg twice a day) may be more effective than a single daily dose because the
duration of action of MMI/carbimazole may be less than 24 hours.4 (Level III)
Treatment with b-blocker such as atenolol, propranolol, or metoprolol is
recommended for children experiencing significant symptoms of hyperthyroidism,
e.g. tachycardia, muscle weakness, tremor, or neuropsychological changes. In
patients with asthma or reactive airway disease, cardio-selective b-blockers, such
as atenolol or metoprolol, should be used cautiously.4 (Level III); 360 (Level III); 361 (Level III); 362 (Level III)
Meta-analyses suggest a higher prevalence of adverse events using block-and–
replace regimen than dose titration.4 (Level III) This is likely due to higher doses of MMI/
carbimazole and the dose-related complications associated with MMI/carbimazole,
hence this practice should not be routinely used.
Propylthiouracil should only be used for a short course in patients with adverse
reaction to MMI who are not candidates for radioiodine therapy or surgery.361 (Level II)
This is because PTU has a higher risk of liver failure in one in 2000–4000 children
taking the medication.363, 364, 365 (Level II)
Recommendations
• The first-line initial treatment is ATD, which is carbimazole or its active metabolite
MMI
• Methimazole/carbimazole dose typically used is 0.2–0.5 mg/kg daily, with a
range from 0.1 mg/kg to 1.0 mg/kg daily (maximal initial dose: 30 mg daily)
• After 2–4 weeks, when the thyroid hormone levels have normalised, the initial
dose should gradually be reduced by 30%–50%
• TSH levels may take 2–4 months to appear in the serum and should not be used
to titrate the dose
• Propylthiouracil (PTU) should be avoided in children, except in selected
circumstances because of the risk of idiosyncratic liver failure
• The block-and–replace regimen should not be routinely used
• Beta-adrenergic blockade should be considered for children with significant
symptoms of hyperthyroidism at diagnosis or relapse, especially if there is
tachycardia. In patients with asthma or reactive airway disease, cardioselective
b-blockers, such as atenolol or metoprolol, should be used cautiously
7.4.2.3 How Should Children With Graves’ Disease On Antithyroid Drugs Be
Monitored?
After 2–4 weeks, when thyroid hormone levels have normalised, the initial dose is
gradually reduced by 30%–50%. Hypothyroidism may occur if the ATD dose is not
reduced as serum fT4 levels normalise. TSH levels may take 2–4 months to appear
in the serum and should not be used to titrate the dose. After initiation of ATD,
thyroid function should initially be monitored 2–6 weeks once, and then every
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
95
2–3 months, once the dose is stabilised.4 (Level III); 359 (Level III); 361 (Level III) Carbimazole dose
could be adjusted based on one tablet (5 mg), half tablet (2.5 mg) or even a quarter
tablet (1.25 mg) in infants.361 (Level III)
Propylthiouracil-induced liver injury can be of rapid onset and rapidly progressive;
routine monitoring of liver function tests and transaminase levels has not been
shown to be useful in surveillance for PTU-related liver injury.4 (Level III) Adverse effects of
MMI are more often reported in the first 3–6 months of treatment and associated with
a higher dose. Methimazole/carbimazole is associated with minor reactions (rash,
urticaria, arthralgia, and gastrointestinal problems) in about 5%–25% of cases. The
frequency of agranulocytosis, the most severe side effect, is between 0.2% and 0.5%.
Other major side effects are rare and are observed mostly with PTU, which should
be avoided in children; they include drug-induced hepatitis, liver failure, and the
production of cytoplasmic antineutrophil antibody. Ab-positive vasculitis is rare.4 (Level III);
359 (Level III); 361 (Level III) (see Table 14 for the side effects of antithyroid medications).
Table 14: Side effects of antithyroid medications (MMI and carbimazole)359 (Level III)
Minor
Severe
Rash
Agranulocytosis
Pruritus
Neutropaenia
Hives
Thrombocytopaenia
Hair loss
Steven-Johnson syndrome
Nausea
Cholestatic jaundice
Decreased taste
Hepatitis
Joint paint
Arthralgia
The frequency of side effects may be dose related and is very low in patients
receiving MMI at a dose <10 mg/day. In one centre, Steven-Johnson syndrome
had been reported in three out of 100 patients on MMI, but with large doses
>30 mg/day.366 (Level III) Side effects of ATD should be informed to caretakers/patients
preferably in writing, and to seek medical attention if they develop pruritic rash,
jaundice, acolic stools or dark urine, arthralgias, abdominal pain, nausea, fatigue,
fever, or pharyngitis.
Prior to initiating ATD therapy, a baseline complete blood cell count, including WBC
count with differential, and a liver profile including bilirubin, transaminases, and
alkaline phosphatase should be done.4 (Level III) While routine monitoring of WBC counts
may occasionally detect early agranulocytosis, it is not recommended because of
the rarity of the condition and its sudden onset, which is generally symptomatic.
For this reason, measuring WBC counts during febrile illnesses and at the onset of
pharyngitis has become the standard approach for monitoring.4 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
96
In general, PTU should not be used in children. However, if used, it should be
stopped immediately, and liver function assessed in children who experience
anorexia, pruritus, rash, jaundice, light-coloured stool or dark urine, joint pain,
right upper quadrant pain, abdominal bloating, nausea or malaise.4 (Level III)
Propylthiouracil should be discontinued if transaminase levels reach 2–3 times the
upper limit of normal. After discontinuing the drug, liver function tests (i.e. bilirubin,
alkaline phosphatase, and transaminases) should be monitored weekly.4 (Level III)
If there is no evidence of resolution, referral to a hepatologist is warranted.4 (Level III)
Practitioners should also monitor the weight of children treated with ATDs. Excessive
weight gain within six months of treatment is seen in children treated for GD, and
the gain in weight can persist.366 (Level II) Persistent minor cutaneous reactions to MMI
therapy in children should be managed by antihistamine treatment or cessation of
the medication and changing to therapy with RAI or surgery.4 (Level III) In the case of a
serious adverse reaction to an ATD, prescribing the other ATD is not recommended.
If children develop serious adverse reactions to MMI, RAI or surgery should be
considered, because the risks of PTU are considered greater than the risks of RAI or
surgery.4 (Level III)
In special circumstances, in which the patient appears to be at risk for thyroid storm
and ATD therapy is needed in a child with a serious adverse reaction to MMI, PTU
may be considered for short-term therapy to control hyperthyroidism.4 (Level III) In this
setting, families should be informed of the risks of PTU.
Recommendations
• After initiation of ATD, thyroid function should initially be monitored once in
2–6 weeks, and then every 2–3 months, once the dose is stabilised
• Since most of the side effects of MMI are dose-related and occur within the first
three months of treatment, high doses of MMI (>30 mg/day for an adolescent
or adult) should rarely be used initially
• A baseline full blood count (FBC), including WBC count with differential and liver
function test (LFT) should be obtained before initiating ATD. Routine monitoring
of FBC and LFT is not recommended because of the unpredictable development
of adverse effects
• White blood cell counts should be measured in children who develop fever,
arthralgias, mouth sores, pharyngitis, or malaise with consideration of
withholding ATDs
• Patients and caretakers should be counselled on the potential adverse effects
of ATD, preferably in writing
• Persistent minor cutaneous reactions to MMI therapy in children should be
managed by concurrent antihistamine therapy or cessation of the medication
and changing the therapy to RAI or surgery. In the case of a serious adverse
reaction to an ATD, prescribing another ATD is not recommended
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
97
• In general, PTU should not be used in children. But if it is used, it should be
stopped immediately, and liver function assessed in children who develop
anorexia, pruritus, rash, jaundice, light-coloured stool or dark urine, joint pain,
right upper quadrant pain or abdominal bloating, nausea or malaise
7.4.2.4 When Is Definitive Therapy Indicated?
Definitive therapy available for GD is RAI or thyroidectomy. Indications for definitive
treatment in children include relapse after an appropriate duration of ATD, a lack
of compliance on the part of the patient/caretakers or adverse effects of ATD. The
issue of how long ATDs should be used in children before considering either RAI or
surgery is controversial.
The American Thyroid Association 2016 guideline recommends paediatric patients
with GD, who are not in remission following at least 1–2 years of MMI/carbimazole,
be considered for definitive treatment. Alternatively, MMI/carbimazole may also be
used for longer duration if there are no adverse effects.4 (Level III) Patients and caretakers
should be counselled of the therapeutic options to make a best-informed decision.
In children, when ATDs are used for 1–2 years, remission rates reported are
generally not high, that is, at around 20%–30% with remission defined as being
euthyroid for one year after cessation of therapy.4 (Level I); 367 (Level II) However, a
study from France had reported remission rates of 20%, 37%, 45%, and 49%
after 4, 6, 8, and 10 years follow-up, respectively, of 154 children treated with
ATD.368 (Level II) Thus, while definitive therapy should be considered after 1–2 years
of MMI, treatment for longer periods is also reasonable if ATD is tolerated.
Retrospective studies have suggested that the chance of remission after two
years of ATDs is low if; the thyroid gland is large (more than 2.5 times the normal
size for age), the child is young (<12 years), prepubertal, or not Caucasian, has
high serum TRAb levels on therapy and substantially elevated free T4 levels
(>4 ng/dL, 50 pmol/L) at diagnosis (Table 15).359 (Level III)
Table 15: Predictors of poor remission (Adapted from 359 [Level III])
Predictors of poor remission for children and adolescents with Graves’ disease
Large thyroid gland (>2.5x the normal size for age)
Young age <12 years
Prepubertal
Non-Caucasian
High serum TRAb levels
Significantly elevated free T4 level (>50 pmol/L) at diagnosis
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
98
Persistence of GD in children is reported to correlate with the persistence of
TRAb.369 (Level III) However, a low TRAb level does not necessarily predict successful
remission, whereas monitoring of TRAb levels while on ATD has been shown
to be useful in adult patients for predicting the likelihood of remission or relapse
of GD after stopping the medication. This approach is yet to be validated in
children.
Recommendations
• Definitive therapy available for GD is RAI or thyroidectomy
• Indications for definitive therapy in children include relapse after an appropriate
duration of ATD, compliance issues, or adverse effects of ATD
• Paediatric patients who are not in remission following two years of MMI/
carbimazole could be considered for definitive treatment with RAI or
thyroidectomy
• Alternatively, MMI/carbimazole may be used for longer duration (>2 years) if
the hyperthyroid state is controlled with no medication side effects
• Patients on prolonged ATD therapy should be re-evaluated every 6–12 months
and when transitioning to adulthood
7.4.2.5 What Are The Clinical Considerations For RAI Therapy?
The ATA 2016 guideline recommends avoiding RAI in very young children aged
<5 years because of concerns of increased susceptibility of the thyroid gland to the
proliferative effects of ionising radiation.4 (Level III) It may be considered in children
between five and ten years of age if the calculated RAI administered activity is
<10 mCi (<473 MBq).4 (Level III) If RAI therapy is chosen as the treatment for GD in
children, sufficient RAI should be administered in a single dose to render the patient
hypothyroid.4 (Level III); 359 (Level III); 370 (Level III) This is due to concerns that lower administered
activities of RAI result in residual, partially irradiated thyroid tissue that is at an
increased risk for thyroid neoplasm development.
Children with GD having total T4 levels of >20 ng/dL (260 nmol/L) or free T4
>5  ng/dL (60 pmol/L) who are to receive RAI therapy should be pretreated with
MMI/carbimazole and b-blocker, until total T4 and/or free T4 normalise before
proceeding with the RAI treatment.4 (Level III) Although the frequency of short-term
worsening of hyperthyroidism following pre-treatment with ATD therapy is not
known, there are rare reports of paediatric patients with severe hyperthyroidism
who have developed thyroid storm after receiving RAI.4 (Level III); 371 (Level III) When children
receiving MMI/carbimazole are to be treated with RAI, the medication should be
stopped 2–3 days before treatment.4 (Level III) At that time, patients should be placed
on beta-blockers, until total T4 and/or free T4 levels normalise following RAI
therapy.371 (Level III) Thyroid hormone levels in children begin to fall within the first
week, following RAI therapy, and usually take 2–4 months to normalise. Although
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
99
some physicians restart ATDs after treatment with RAI, this practice is seldom
required in children.371 (Level III)
The activity of RAI administered should be based on thyroid size and uptake and not
reduced because of age in young individuals. Attempts to minimise the RAI activity
will result in undertreatment and the possible need for additional RAI therapy and
radiation exposure. The administered activity of RAI to patients with large goitres
is high. The size of the gland may be underestimated, resulting in insufficient
administration of RAI activities. Therefore, surgery may be preferable to RAI in
children with goitres larger than 80 g.4 (Level III)
Physicians at some centres administer a fixed dose to all children, whereas others
calculate the activity from estimation or direct measurement of gland size. To
assess thyroid size, especially of a large gland, ultrasonography is recommended.
There is a lack of data comparing outcomes of fixed versus calculated activities
in children.
Advantage of calculated versus fixed dosing is that it may be possible
to use lower administered activities of RAI and, at the same time, assure that an
adequate administered activity is given. Radioactive iodine is excreted in saliva,
urine, perspiration, tears, and stool. Significant radioactivity is retained within the
thyroid for several days. It is therefore important that patients and families be
informed of local radiation safety recommendations.
After RAI therapy, T3, T4, and/or free T4 levels should be obtained every month.
Because TSH levels may remain suppressed for several months after correction
of the hyperthyroid state, TSH determinations may not be useful. Hypothyroidism
usually develops 2–3 months following successful RAI and should be treated with
levothyroxine.
Side effects of RAI therapy in children are uncommon apart from the lifelong
hypothyroidism which is the goal of therapy. Less than 10% of children complain
of tenderness over the thyroid in the first week after therapy, which can be
treated with acetaminophen or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents for
24–48 hours.4(Level III)
If residual thyroid tissue remains in young children after RAI treatment, a theoretical
risk of development of thyroid cancer exists. Increased rates of thyroid cancer
and thyroid nodules were observed in young children exposed to radiation after
Hiroshima and the Chernobyl nuclear reactor explosion.4  (Level III); 359  (level  III) The risk
appeared to be age-dependent, greatest for children younger than 5–6 years of age
and decreasing progressively through 12 years of age.359 (Level III) However, these data
do not apply directly when assessing the risks of RAI therapy. It is also important
to note that iodine deficiency and exposure to radionuclides other than RAI may
have contributed to the increased risk of thyroid cancer in young children after
the Chernobyl reactor explosion.359 (Level III) Thyroid cancer rates were not increased
among 3000 children exposed to RAI from the Hanford nuclear reactor site in an
iodine-replete region.4 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
100
To date, long-term studies of children treated with RAI for GD have not revealed
an increased risk of non-thyroid malignancies.4 (Level III) If a small risk exists,
a sample size of more than 10,000 children who were treated at <10 years
of age would be needed to identify the risk, likely exceeding the number of
such treated children.4 (Level III) Based on cancer risk projections from estimated
whole-body, low-level radiation exposure as related to age, it is theoretically
possible that there may be a low risk of malignancies in very young children treated
with RAI.4 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Radioactive iodine therapy should be avoided in very young children (<5 years)
• Radioactive iodine therapy can be considered in children between 5 and
10 years of age when the required activity for treatment is <10 mCi (<370 MBq)
• If RAI therapy is chosen as treatment for GD in children, sufficient RAI should be
administered in a single dose to render the patient hypothyroid
• There may be circumstances in which RAI therapy is indicated in young children,
such as when a child has developed a reaction to ATD, proper surgical expertise
is not available, or the patient is not a suitable surgical candidate
• Children with GD having total T4 levels of >260 nmol/L or fT4 >60 pmol/L who
are to receive RAI therapy should be pretreated with MMI and b-adrenergic
blockade, until levels normalise before proceeding with RAI treatment
7.4.2.6 What Are The Clinical Considerations For Thyroidectomy?
Thyroidectomy is the preferred treatment for GD in young children (<5 years) when
definitive therapy is required, and a high-volume thyroid surgeon can perform the
surgery. In individuals with large thyroid glands (>80 g), the response to RAI may be
poor and thus surgery may be preferable for these patients. When performed, a total
or near-total thyroidectomy is the recommended procedure.4 (Level III) MMI is typically
given for 1–2 months in preparation for thyroidectomy. Iodides block the release
of thyroid hormones and reduce the vascularity of the thyroid gland. Potassium
iodine (50 mg iodide/drop) can be given as 1–2 drops (i.e. 0.05–0.1 mL) three times
daily for ten days before surgery. It can be mixed in juice or milk.4 (Level III)
Surgical complication rates are higher in children than in adults. Younger children
are at a higher risk for transient hypoparathyroidism post-thyroidectomy than
adolescents or adults.372 (Level III); 373 (Level III); 374 (Level III) Calcium levels should be monitored
postoperatively and treatment with calcitriol and calcium supplements may be
needed. Postoperative hypocalcaemia requiring intravenous calcium infusions had
been reported to occur more frequently in children than in adults. Complication
rates are reported to be two-fold higher with surgeons without extensive
experience.372(Level III) Further support that thyroidectomy for GD in children should
be performed by experienced thyroid surgeons comes from reports of institutional
experience showing low complication rates at high-volume centres.374 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
101
Recommendations
• Thyroidectomy is the preferred treatment for GD in young children (<5 years)
when definitive therapy is required
• Thyroidectomy should also be considered in individuals with large thyroid
glands (>80 g), where the response to RAI may be poor
• If surgery is chosen, total or near-total thyroidectomy should be performed
• Referral of a child with GD who requires thyroidectomy to a high-volume
thyroid surgery centre with paediatric experience is recommended, especially
for young children
• Children with GD undergoing thyroidectomy should be rendered euthyroid
with the use of MMI/carbimazole. Potassium iodine drops preparation should
be given in the preoperative period
• Postoperatively, younger children are at higher risk of hypoparathyroidism.
Calcium levels should be monitored, and treatment with calcitriol and calcium
may be needed perioperatively
• Management involving a multidisciplinary team that includes experienced
thyroid surgeons, paediatric endocrinologists, and anaesthesiologists is
recommended
7.5 THYROID DISORDERS IN THE ELDERLY
7.5.1 What Are The Features Of Overt Hyperthyroidism In The Elderly?
The classical signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism in the younger age group, like
tremor, weight loss, palpitation, diarrhoea and heat intolerance, may be absent in
the elderly. The term “apathetic thyrotoxicosis” is used to describe the symptoms
of elderly hyperthyroidism patients who present with depression, lethargy, and
weight loss. Some elderly patients present with “thyrotoxic encephalopathy” with
agitation and confusion. Most thyrotoxic patients have decreased appetite and
weight loss. Elderly patients with hyperthyroidism may present with angina pectoris
or cardiac failure. Fatigue, weakness, agitation, confusion, dementia, and myopathy
are nonspecific signs of hyperthyroidism and are often mistaken as age-related
changes.375 (Level II) Though the classical symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism are
significantly less prevalent in older patients, they are more prevalent in smokers
and subjects with higher free T4 concentrations.376 (Level II)
7.5.2 How Should Overt Hyperthyroidism In The Elderly Be Treated?
In a randomised controlled trial of MMI alone versus MMI and a b-adrenergic
blocking agent, after 4 weeks, patients taking b-adrenergic blockers had lower heart
rates, less shortness of breath and fatigue, and improved ‘‘physical functioning’’
on the SF-36 health questionnaire.377 (Level I) Once it has been established that
the patient is hyperthyroid and the cause is GD, the patient and physician must
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
102
choose between three effective and relatively safe initial treatment options:
RAI therapy, ATDs, or thyroidectomy.4 (Level I) The long-term quality of life (QoL)
following treatment for GD was found to be the same in patients randomly allocated
to one of the three treatment options.4 (Level I) Currently, no scientific evidence exists
to support the recommendation of alternative therapies for the treatment of
hyperthyroidism.4 (Level I)
Recommendations
• Beta-adrenergic blockade is recommended in all patients with symptomatic
thyrotoxicosis, especially in the elderly patients and thyrotoxic patients with
resting heart rates in excess of 90 beats per minute or coexistent cardiovascular
disease
• Patients with overt Graves’ hyperthyroidism should be treated with any of the
following modalities: RAI therapy, ATDs, or surgery
• Surgery is recommended in:
i.
Symptomatic compression or large goitres (>80 g)
ii.
Relatively low uptake of RAI
iii. When thyroid malignancy is documented or suspected (e.g. suspicious or
indeterminate cytology)
iv. Large thyroid nodules, especially if greater than 4 cm or if nonfunctioning,
or hypofunctioning on 123I or 99mTc pertechnetate scanning
v.
Coexisting hyperparathyroidism requiring surgery
vi. Especially if TRAb levels are particularly high
vii. Patients with moderate-to–severe active Graves’ Ophthalmopathy (GO)
• Surgery is not recommended for patients with substantial comorbidity such as
cardiopulmonary disease, end-stage cancer, or other debilitating disorders, or
where there is lack of access to a high-volume thyroid surgeon
• Because RAI treatment of GD can cause a transient exacerbation of
hyperthyroidism, beta-adrenergic blockade should be considered even in
asymptomatic patients who are at an increased risk for complications due to
worsening of hyperthyroidism
• Long-term MMI treatment of TMNG or TA might be indicated in some elderly
or otherwise ill patients with limited life expectancy, in patients who are not
good candidates for surgery or ablative therapy, and in patients who prefer this
option
7.5.3 What Are The Risks of Subclinical Hyperthyroidism In The Elderly?
The association between subclinical hyperthyroidism and clinical outcomes remains
unclear and controversial. The risks of untreated subclinical hyperthyroidism
are progression to overt hyperthyroidism and increase in overall mortality,
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
103
cardiovascular disease, arrhythmias, osteoporosis, and fractures. There is an
association between subclinical hyperthyroidism and cognitive impairment,378 (Level II)
increased likelihood of greater frailty status,379 (Level II) association with the risk of
cognitive impairment including mild cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly
subjects.380 (Level II) Evena modest thyroid hormone excess is associated with a reduced
physical function in elderly men.381 (Level II) Older people at high cardiovascular risk
with low or very high TSH along with normal free T4 appear at an increased risk
of incident heart failure.382 (Level II) In elderly patients with endogenous subclinical
hyperthyroidism and TSH between 0.1 mIU/L and 0.4 mIU/L, progression to clinical
hyperthyroidism is uncommon (approximately 1% per year); spontaneous TSH
normalisation may occur, and it is most likely that SCHyper persists for many
years.383 (Level II) Older men with subclinical hyperthyroidism are at an increased risk
for hip fracture;384 (Level II) lower serum TSH may be associated with an increased
risk of hip fractures in older men;385 (Level II) lower TSH levels in the euthyroid range
are related to lower BMD and weaker femoral structure in elderly women386 (Level II)
and low TSH was independently related to decreased bone mineral densities at
femoral neck in elderly women without overt thyroid dysfunction.387 (Level II) Subclinical
hyperthyroidism is an independent risk factor for all-cause mortality in older
adults.388 (Level II);389 (Level II)
However, among well-functioning community-dwelling elderly, a study found
no evidence that subclinical thyroid dysfunction contributes to decreased
functional capacity.390 (Level II) There is no consistent evidence that subclinical
hyper- or hypothyroidism contributes to cognitive impairment or decline in old
age.391 (Level II) There is neither a beneficial nor a detrimental effect of subclinical thyroid
dysfunction in older men392 (Level II) and individuals aged 85 years with subclinical
hyperthyroidism did not have a significantly worse survival over 9 years compared
to their euthyroid peers.393 (Level II) There was no association between subclinical
hypothyroidism or subclinical hyperthyroidism and hip fracture risk or BMD in
older men and women.394 (Level II) In one study, it did not support the disadvantageous
effects of subclinical thyroid disorders on physical or cognitive function, depression,
or mortality in an older population.395 (Level II) Subclinical hyperthyroidism also had
no impact on progression of the left ventricular mass and development of left
ventricular hypertrophy during the five-year follow-up in subjects aged 45 years
or older.396 (Level II)
7.5.4 Should Subclinical Hyperthyroidism In The Elderly Be Treated?
Subclinical hyperthyroidism may progress to overt hyperthyroidism and may be
associated with increased cardiovascular and skeletal risks. Differences in the
degree of TSH suppression, causes of subclinical hyperthyroidism, patient age, and
duration of TSH suppression may influence the adverse consequences.54 (Level II)
Recent meta-analysis, including those based on large prospective cohort studies,
indicate that subclinical hyperthyroidism is associated with an increased risk of
coronary heart disease mortality, incident atrial fibrillation, heart failure, fractures,
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
104
and excess mortality in patients with serum TSH levels <0.1 mIU/L. Therefore,
despite the absence of randomised prospective trials, there is evidence that
treatment is indicated in patients older than 65 years with serum TSH levels
<0.1 mIU/L to potentially avoid these serious cardiovascular events, fractures
and the risk of progression to overt hyperthyroidism.54 (Level II) Given the risk of
worsening potential cardiovascular events, patients older than 65 years with TSH
levels 0.1–0.39 mIU/L should also be treated in the presence of symptoms of
hyperthyroidism, heart disease, diabetes, renal failure, previous stroke or transient
ischaemic attack, left atrial dilatation, increased risk factors for stroke, heart failure,
coronary artery disease, valvular heart disease, and coronary or peripheral arterial
disease.54 (Level II);4 (Level II)
Recommendations
• When TSH is persistently <0.1 mIU/L, treatment of SCHyper is recommended in
all individuals ≥65 years of age
• When TSH is persistently below the lower limit of normal but ≥0.1 mIU/L,
treatment of SCHyper should be considered in individuals ≥65 years of age with
cardiac disease, osteoporosis, or symptoms of hyperthyroidism
7.5.5 How Should Subclinical Hyperthyroidism In The Elderly Be Treated?
The treatment of SCHyper is similar to the treatment of overt hyperthyroidism.
The treatment should be based on the aetiology of the thyroid dysfunction
and follow the same principles as for the treatment of overt hyperthyroidism.
Radioactive iodine is appropriate for most patients, especially in older patients
when TMNG is a frequent cause of SCHyper.397 (Level II) There are no data to inform
whether elderly patients with SCHyper would benefit from pretreatment with ATDs
to normalise thyroid function before RAI therapy. Given the low risk of exacerbation,
the risks of ATD therapy may outweigh any potential small benefit.4 (Level II);54(Level II)
A course of ATD therapy is a reasonable alternative to RAI in patients with GD and
SCHyper, especially in younger patients, since remission rates are highest in persons
with mild disease.4 (Level II);54(Level II)
Recommendations
• Antithyroid drugs should be the first choice in patients older than 65 years
with GD and TSH 0.1–0.4 mIU/L because remission of GD has been observed
after ATD treatment in 40%–50% of patients with overt hyperthyroidism
12–18 months after therapy
• Radioactive iodine therapy should be considered if ATDs are not tolerated, in
case of relapse and in patients with cardiac disease
• Treatment with ATDs or RAI is recommended in patients with GD and TSH
<0.1 mIU/L, older than 65 years and when cardiac disease is present, because
these patients are at high risk of adverse cardiac events
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
105
Figure 8: Algorithm for the management of SHyper. (Adapted from 54 (Level II))
aTSHR-Antibody = TSH-receptor antibodies. bGrade 1 SHyper (TSH levels: 0.1–0.39 mIU/L). cGrade 2 SHyper (TSH levels <0.1 mIU/L). dRAI in patients with recurrences or if ATDs are not tolerated. eSurgery in
patients with large goitre, symptoms of compression, or thyroid malignancies.
β-Blocking
TT3 or FT3
FT4, TSH
every
6–12 months
Clinical history and physical examination
TT3 or FT3 and FT4
Ultrasonography
Low serum TSH
Withdrawal of drug
if possible
Exclude causes of low serum
TSH that are not SHyper
TSH
<0.1 mIU/l
No treatment
TSH
0.1–0.39 mIU/l
3–6 months
follow-up
Transient TSH
suppression
Drug related
Persistent
grade 1 SHyperb
Scintigraphy and possibly
RAI uptake + TSHR-Absa
Persistent
grade 2 SHyperc
TA-TMNG
GD
Patients older
than 65 years
of age
Patients younger
than 65 years
of age
Patients older
than 65 years
of age
ATDs, RAId
or surgerye
Patients younger
than 65 years
of age
RAI
or surgerye
With heart
disease
or comorbidity
TA-TMNG
GD
Patients older
than 65 years
of age
drugs
Patients younger
than 65 years
of age
RAI
Symptomatic
patients
With heart
disease,
cardiovascular
risk factors, AF
or co-morbidity
Patients older
than 65 years
of age with
cardiovascular
risk factors or
co-morbidity
β-Blocking
drugs
Patients younger
than 65 years
of age
ATDs
Observation
Asymptomatic
patients
Symptomatic
patients
ATDs or
β-blocking
drugs in
persistent
disease and
symptoms
ATDs, RAId
or surgerye
RAI
or surgerye
Asymptomatic
patients
Observation
TT3 or FT3
FT4, TSH
after
3–6 months
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
106
• Radioactive iodine therapy or surgery should be the preferred option in patients
older than 65 years with SCHyper due to MNG or TA, because these patients are
likely to have persistent SCHyper
• In cases where RAI is not feasible (e.g. elderly nursing home patients who may
be incontinent and patients with severe comorbidity growing goitre or even
pressure symptoms), lifelong low-dose ATDs is a possibility
• Surgery is recommended in patients with SCHyper with a large goitre, symptoms
of compression, concomitant hyperparathyroidism, or suspicion of thyroid
malignancy. Total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice in the absence of
associated conditions or factors
7.5.6 How Should Overt Hypothyroidism In The Elderly Be Treated?
The elderly are more susceptible to the adverse effects of thyroid hormone excess,
especially atrial fibrillation and osteoporotic fractures, so that careful titration of
the LT4 dose to avoid iatrogenic thyrotoxicosis is essential in this population.91 (Level II);
398 (Level II) Among adults aged 70 years or more, current levothyroxine treatment was
associated with a significantly increased risk of fracture, with a strong dose–response
relation.399 (LeveI l) In general, levothyroxine should be initiated with low doses, and the
dose titrated slowly based on serum TSH measurements. It should be recognised
that normal serum TSH ranges are higher in older populations (such as those over
65 years) and that higher serum TSH targets may be appropriate.91 (Level II);399 (Level II)
Recommendations
• Small dose of levothyroxine should be started, 25 or 50 μg daily. The dose of
levothyroxine should be increased by 25 μg/day every 14–21 days until a full
replacement dose is reached
• For older patients (aged >70–75 years), a higher treatment target for serum TSH
(around 1–5 mIU/L) is acceptable
7.5.7 What Are The Risks Of Subclinical Hypothyroidism In The Elderly?
The risk of subclinical hypothyroidism includes progression to overt hypothyroidism,
mood disturbance/mental health, heart failure, dyslipidaemia, CVD, and mortality.
Older people with SCHypo appear at an increased risk of incident heart failure400 (Level II)
and SCHypo persists for four years in just over half of older individuals, with high
rates of reversion to euthyroidism in individuals with lower TSH concentrations
and TPO Ab negativity.401 (Level II) Both SCHypo and subclinical hyperthyroidism are
associated with increased mortality in the elderly. A threshold thyroid-stimulating
hormone value (>6.35 mIU/L) exists for increased mortality in subclinical
hypothyroidism.402 (Level II) Deleterious effect of SCHypo on CV events is less evident in
moderately older people (<70–75 years) and could vanish in the oldest old people
(>80–85 years).399 (Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
107
However, a few studies did not show adverse effect of SCHypo. There was no
increased risk of CHD, HF, or CV death in older adults with persistent SCHypo.403 (Level II)
TSH levels increase with age and increase in CHD events, which is less evident in
elderly – mainly TSH >10 mIU/L with a lower mortality in oldest olds (>85 years) has
been reported.404 (Level II) Subclinical hypothyroidism does not appear to be associated
with an increased risk of metabolic or neuropsychological derangement in elderly
subjects405 (Level II) and persons with moderate SCHypo had similar mobility and
mobility decline as the euthyroid group.406 (Level II) There was no association between
subclinical hypothyroidism or subclinical hyperthyroidism and hip fracture risk or
BMD in older men and women394 (Level II), neither a beneficial nor a detrimental effect
of subclinical thyroid dysfunction on mortality in older men.392 (Level II) One study did
not support disadvantageous effects of subclinical thyroid disorders on physical or
cognitive function, depression, or mortality in an older population.395 (Level II) A higher
TSH and lower fT4 concentrations within the euthyroid range are associated with
lower risk of multiple adverse events in older people, including mortality. This
suggests tolerance for lower thyroid hormone levels in this age group.407 (Level II) It is
also unclear whether SCHypo leads to significant mood and cognitive impairments in
most older patients,408 (Level II) and individuals aged 85 years with both SCHypo and
SCHyper do not have a significantly worse survival over nine years than their
euthyroid peers.390 (Level II)
7.5.8 Should Subclinical Hypothyroidism In The Elderly Be Treated?
There is no evidence for treating elderly subjects with SCHypo with T4 replacement therapy to improve cognitive function,409 (Level I) and levothyroxine provided
no apparent benefits in Hypothyroid Symptom score in older persons with
SCHypo.410 (Level I)
Figure 9: Suggested management algorithm for SHypo. (Adapted from 398[Level II])
Age ≤70
Age >70
Serum
TSH <10
Serum
TSH <10
Serum
TSH ≥10
Serum
TSH ≥10
Hypothyroid
symptoms?*
No
Yes
Observed and
repeat TFT in
6 months
Observed and
repeat TFT in
6 months
3-month trial of
LT4, then assess
response to
treatment
Treat
with LT4
Consider LT4 if
clear symptoms of
hypothyroidism or
high vascular risk
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
108
The deleterious effect of SCHypo on CV events and mortality appears well
established in young adults but is less evident in moderately older people
(70–75 years) and could vanish in the oldest old (>80–85 years). Appropriately
powered RCT of levothyroxine in SCHypo patients, examining for hard CV endpoints
in various classes of age is clearly warranted.398 (Level II)
Recommendations
• In patients aged >70 years, if serum TSH is ≥10 mIU/L, consider levothyroxine
treatment if clear symptoms of hypothyroidism or high vascular risk are noted
• In patients aged >70 years, if serum TSH is ≤10 mIU/L, observe and repeat TFTs
in 6 months
• In patients aged ≤70 years, if serum TSH is ≥10 mIU/L, consider levothyroxine
treatment
• In patients aged ≤70 years, if serum TSH is ≤10 mIU/L and have symptoms of
hypothyroidism, consider a three-month trial of levothyroxine, and then assess
the response to treatment
• In patients aged ≤70 years, if serum TSH is ≤10 mIU/L and there are no symptoms
of hypothyroidism, observe and repeat TFT in six months
7.5.9 How Should Subclinical Hypothyroidism In The Elderly Be Treated?
The treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism is similar to the treatment of overt
hypothyroidism. Any treatment for this should be individualised, gradual and closely
monitored. For older patients (>70–75 years), a higher treatment target of serum
TSH (around 1–5 mIU/L) is acceptable.398 (Level III)
8. DRUG-INDUCED THYROID DISORDERS
8.1 AMIODARONE INDUCED THYROID DISEASE
8.1.1 What Are The Thyroid Abnormalities Caused By Amiodarone?
Amiodarone is a benzofuranic derivative whose structural formula closely resembles
that of T4. It contains approximately 37% iodine by weight. Because approximately
10% of the molecule is deiodinated daily, and the maintenance daily dose of the drug
ranges from 200 to 600 mg, approximately 7–21 mg iodide is made available each
day, resulting in a marked increase in urinary iodide excretion. Thus, amiodarone
treatment releases 50- to 100-fold excess iodine daily.411 (Level III) In an euthyroid
person receiving amiodarone, serum thyroxine (T4) and free T4 concentrations
rise by 20%–40% during the first month of therapy. Serum triiodothyronine (T3)
concentrations decrease by up to 30% within the first few weeks of therapy. Serum
reverse T3 concentrations increase by 20% soon after the initiation of therapy.
The serum TSH concentration usually rises slightly after the initiation of treatment
and may exceed the upper limit of normal. After three to six months of therapy, a
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
109
steady state is reached in most patients who were euthyroid at baseline:serum TSH
concentration normalises, serum total T4, free T4 and reverse T3 concentrations
remain slightly elevated or in the upper normal range and serum T3 concentrations
remain in the low normal range.412 (Level I) Approximately 15%–20% of amiodaronetreated patients develop either thyrotoxicosis (amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis,
AIT) or hypothyroidism (amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism, AIH).413 (Level III); 414 (Level III)
Thyroid dysfunction may occur at any time during amiodarone therapy, although
AIH is frequently an early phenomenon when chronic autoimmune thyroiditis
preexists. Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis may develop early, late during
amiodarone treatment, or even many months after drug withdrawal, due to the
slow release of amiodarone and its metabolites from the body stores. Occurrence
of AIT between 5 and 16 months after stopping amiodarone has been reported.
Thus, periodical monitoring of thyroid function is warranted even after amiodarone
discontinuation.415 (Level III); 4 (Level III); 416 (Level III)
Recommendation
• Monitor TFT before and 3–4 months after starting amiodarone and at
3–6 months interval thereafter. Monitor for up to 1 year after stopping
amiodarone.
8.1.2. What Are The Mechanisms Of Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis
(AIT) and How To Diagnose Them?
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT) may develop in patients with underlying
thyroid abnormalities (type 1) or in patients with apparently normal thyroid
glands (type 2).411 (Level III) This disease (AIT) is characterised by suppressed TSH
and elevated fT4 and/or fT3 levels. Type 1 AIT (AIT 1) is a form of iodine-induced
hyperthyroidism caused by excessive, uncontrolled biosynthesis of thyroid hormone
by autonomously functioning thyroid tissue in response to iodine load that typically
develops in persons with underlying nodular goitre or latent Graves’ disease. Type
2 AIT (AIT 2) is a destructive thyroiditis occurring in an otherwise substantially
normal thyroid gland. A mixed/indefinite type is also recognised where patients
acquire an overlapping condition of both AIT 1 and AIT 2. Out of the two, AIT 2
is more prevalent in iodine-sufficient areas and, in general, is the most frequent
form of AIT.414 (Level III) Identification of the different subtypes of AIT is crucial because
this affects the therapeutic approach. Thyroid ultrasonography may be useful as it
shows the presence or absence of a diffuse or a nodular goitre. Colour flow Doppler
ultrasound study of the thyroid is perhaps more reliable. In AIT 2, most cases are
characterised by absent hypervascularity, whereas in AIT 1 they usually show
an increased vascularity and blood flow velocity.414 (Level III) Nuclear imaging using
thyroidal 131I uptake (RAIU) is another useful diagnostic tool. The results of RAIU
are usually very low (<3%) in AIT 2 and low–normal, normal, or even increased in AIT
1. Other tracers such as 99m pertechnetate (99mTcO4) and 99mTcO4 2-methoxyisobutyl-isonitrile (MIBI) have also been used.414 (Level III); 413 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
110
8.1.3 How Should Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis (AIT) Be Managed?
Type 1 AIT: It is a form of true hyperthyroidism triggered by the iodine load and
is best treated by antithyroid drugs.413 (Level III) Since an iodine-replete thyroid gland
is less responsive to the inhibitory action of thionamides, higher drug dosages
(40–60 mg/day methimazole or equivalent doses of carbimazole or propylthiouracil)
and longer periods of therapy (4 weeks to 3–6 months) are required before
euthyroidism is restored.414 (Level III); 4 (Level III) In countries where potassium perchlorate
or sodium perchlorate is available (Europe), it is added in doses not exceeding 1 g
per day for 4–6 weeks to accelerate control of hyperthyroidism.414 (Level III); 4 (Level III)
Type 2 AIT: Type 2 AIT is best treated with prednisolone, with improvement
occasionally seen as early as one week, and usually within a few weeks. In a
randomised controlled study that compared treatment groups in AIT 2 with
prednisolone alone, perchlorate alone and combination prednisolone and
perchlorate, prednisolone treatment resulted in euthyroidism in all patients, while
30% of the patients treated with sodium perchlorate alone needed additional
prednisolone treatment to become euthyroid.417 (Level I) An earlier retrospective
observation showed that a six-week treatment of 42 AIT 2 patients with methimazole
alone resulted in euthyroidism in 15% of patients compared to 76% of the
patients treated with prednisolone alone.414 (Level III); 418 (Level III) The suggested dose of
corticosteroids in this setting is equivalent to 40 mg prednisolone given once daily
for 2–4 weeks, followed by a gradual taper over 2–3 months, based on the patient’s
clinical response.4 (Level III)
Mixed or indefinite form of AIT: If a precise diagnosis cannot be made, two possible
approaches can be proposed. The first one is to start with thionamides (± sodium
perchlorate) as for AIT 1 and, in the absence of a biochemical improvement within a
relatively short period of time (4–6 weeks), to add glucocorticoids with the assumption
that a destructive component is also present superimposed on an underlying
thyroid disorder. An alternative approach is represented by a combined treatment
(thionamides and glucocorticoids) from the very beginning.414 (Level III)) Evidence is
lacking on the best therapeutic strategy for mixed/indefinite AIT, and randomised
clinical trials are warranted. One study had looked at the use of lithium in AIT but the
effectiveness is limited and has not been confirmed.414 (Level III) Radioiodine treatment
is usually not feasible due to the low thyroidal iodine uptake.415 (Level III) Patients
with AIT who fail to respond to medical therapy should be offered thyroidectomy
before they become excessively debilitated from inadequately controlled
thyrotoxicosis.4 (Level III) A retrospective study on 24 patients who failed medical
therapy for AIT underwent total thyroidectomy and the outcome was improved
cardiac function in AIT patients with severe LV dysfunction with no mortality.419 (Level III)
There is neither consensus nor sufficient evidence concerning the decision to either
continue or stop amiodarone in AIT patients. Continuing amiodarone may increase
the recurrence rate of thyrotoxicosis, causing a delay in the stable restoration of
euthyroidism and a longer exposure of the heart to thyroid hormone excess.420 (Level III)
The decision to continue or stop amiodarone should be individualised and taken
jointly by specialist cardiologists and endocrinologists. Amiodarone should be
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
111
continued in critically ill patients with life-threatening cardiac disorders responsive
to the drug and in AIT 2, as this form is often self-limiting.414 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Type 1 AIT should be treated with high-dose carbimazole 40 mg/day or its
equivalent
• Type 2 AIT should be treated with corticosteroids: prednisolone 40 mg given
once daily for 2–4 weeks, followed by a gradual taper over 2–3 months
• Combined carbimazole and corticosteroids should be used if the patient fails
on monotherapy or if the distinction between Type 1 and Type 2 is not clear
• Patients with AIT who are unresponsive to aggressive medical therapy with
thionamides and corticosteroids should undergo thyroidectomy
• The decision to stop or continue amiodarone in AIT should be individualised
and done in consultation with the treating cardiologist
8.1.4 How Should Amiodarone-Induced Hypothyroidism (AIH) Be Managed?
Clinical features of AIH do not differ from those of patients with hypothyroidism of
different causes, although goitre is rare. Underlying chronic autoimmune thyroiditis
and female gender are predisposing risk factors for developing AIH.414 (Level III) It may
be subclinical hypothyroidism or overt hypothyroidism and AIH is easily treated
with LT4, and there is no need to discontinue amiodarone, if considered essential
for the underlying cardiac disease.415 (Level III) Treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism
may be unnecessary in some cases, particularly in the elderly, in view of the
potential increase in risk of cardiovascular events.415 (Level III) Thyroid function should
be tested every 4–6 months as there is a risk of progression to overt hypothyroidism.
If amiodarone is withdrawn, the LT4 dose may need to be reduced to prevent
overtreatment, and in others LT4 may be discontinued, because AIH subsides in
about 50% of cases within 2–3 months.415 (Level III)
Recommendation
• LT4 treatment is recommended in all cases of overt AIH
8.2 OTHER DRUGS THAT CAUSE THYROID DISORDER
Interferon-alfa, interleukin-2, lithium, tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and checkpoint
inhibitor immunotherapy may cause thyroid dysfunction.
a) Interferon alpha (IFN-α): IFN-a is mainly used in the treatment of hepatitis C.
The prevalence of thyroid disease during IFN-a treatment is extremely
variable, ranging between 1% and 35%.421 (Level III) The risk of developing thyroid
dysfunction during IFN-a therapy is closely correlated with pre-existing thyroid
antibodies.421 (Level III) A meta-analysis of the literature by Koh et al. showed that
about 50% of patients with positive thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO Antibody)
before IFN-a treatment developed thyroid dysfunction in comparison with 5.4%
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
112
in antibody-negative patients.421 (Level III) Positive thyroid antibodies with normal
thyroid function tests is the most common finding in patients treated with IFN-a.
Antibodies that develop during treatment with IFN-a include antithyroglobulin
antibodies (Anti Tg) and TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb).421 (Level III) Clinical
thyroid disease include painless thyroiditis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, or Graves’
disease. The changes in thyroid function test (TFT) usually appear after
three months of therapy but can occur as long as IFN-a is given.422 (Level III)
Hwang et al. reported that the mean time to develop thyroid dysfunction was
18 weeks after treatment.423 (Level III) A recent study which included 1233 patients
who were euthyroid at baseline found that 16.7% developed abnormal TSH
values during therapy: 57 had suppressed TSH (4.6%), 70 had hypothyroidism
(5.7%), and 79 (6.4%) patients developed biphasic thyroiditis.424 (Level II) The
average time to develop thyroid dysfunction was 17.5, 18.9, and 22.7 weeks for
thyrotoxicosis, biphasic thyroiditis, and hypothyroidism, respectively.425 (Level  II)
The treatment of thyroid dysfunction during IFN-a therapy depends on the
aetiology: Graves’ disease is treated with antithyroid drugs, thyrotoxic phase of
thyroiditis is managed with b-blockers if symptomatic, and hypothyroid phase
if symptomatic is treated with levothyroxine.4 (Level III) Discontinuation of IFN-a is
usually not necessary; however, in some cases of severe thyrotoxicosis where it
may be warranted, the hepatologist should be consulted.430 (Level III)
b) Interleukin-2 (IL-2): Patients with metastatic cancer and leukaemia who are
treated with interleukin 2 have been reported to develop thyroid dysfunction
ranging from thyroiditis, hypothyroidism, and hyperthyroidism. Studies showed
a significant incidence of hypothyroidism after treatment, in the range of
20%–50% with IL-2.428 (Level III) Most patients who developed hypothyroidism had
positive thyroglobulin or thyroid peroxidase antibodies.428 (Level III) Liu et al. had
reported a case of thyroid storm after initiation of IL-2 with the development of
TRAb.429 (Level III) The treatment of IL-2-induced thyroid dysfunction is similar to that
of IFN-induced thyroid dysfunction.4 (Level III); 428 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Monitoring of TFT should be done before treatment and at least 3–4 months
after initiating treatment
•
Check thyroid antibodies to exclude Graves’ Disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis,
if available
• Treatment of IFN-a and IL-2-induced thyroid disorder depends on the aetiology
(refer to management of thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, and hypothyroidism)
• Discontinuation of IFN-a and IL-2 is usually not necessary
c) Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs): TKIs such as sunitinib, sorafenib, and
nilotinib are used to treat malignancies, such as metastatic renal cell carcinoma,
hepatoma, thyroid cancers, and GIST. Sunitinib has been reported to induce
hypothyroidism in 36%–85% of patients433 (Level III) while the figure for sorafenib is
23.1%–67.7%.431 (Level III) The mechanism of thyroid dysfunction includes primary
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
113
hypothyroidism and destructive thyroiditis.428 (Level III); 432 (Level III) Miyake et al.432 (Level III)
reported that out of 69 patients treated with sorafenib for metastatic
renal cell carcinoma, 46 patients (66.7%) developed hypothyroidism, either
hypothyroidism alone from the outset or following destructive thyroiditis. The
median time to develop abnormal TFTs with sorafenib was 1.7 months.432 (Level III)
Another study found that 6 of 31 patients (19.3%) receiving sunitinib therapy
for metastatic renal cell carcinoma developed thyrotoxicosis, including one case
of thyroid storm4 (Level III) with time to develop thyrotoxicosis between 4 weeks to
15 weeks after starting sunitinib. Thyroid antibodies were not associated with
the development of thyroiditis.431 (Level III) Management of TKI-induced thyroiditis
includes beta-blockers with or without NSAIDs for mild thyrotoxicosis and
glucocorticoids in severe cases of thyrotoxicosis phase4 (Level III); 435 (Level III) while
symptomatic hypothyroidism is treated with levothyroxine.4 (Level III); 431 (Level III)
There are no clear guidelines or RCTs to recommend discontinuation of TKIs in
cases of thyrotoxicosis. Discontinuation of TKIs is usually not necessary;428 (Level III)
however, in a case series, TKIs has been discontinued in 2 out of 5 patients who
developed severe thyrotoxicosis.431 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Thyroid function may be evaluated at baseline and monitored every 4–12 weeks
thereafter and earlier if symptomatic
• For treatment of TKI-induced thyroiditis and hypothyroidism – refer to
management of thyroiditis and hypothyroidism
• Discontinuation of TKI is usually not necessary
d) Lithium: Patients taking lithium for bipolar disorder are at a high risk of
developing thyroid dysfunction, including both hypothyroidism and to a lesser
extent thyrotoxicosis. Two published series have identified the development of
thyrotoxicosis in 0.6% and 3.0% of patients, respectively.4 (Level III) The aetiology
of hyperthyroidism is predominantly destructive thyroiditis, although Graves’
disease and toxic nodular goitre have been described.426 (Level III) Destructive
thyrotoxicosis is treated conservatively, with beta-blockers. Corticosteroids are
not recommended as it is feared that it may trigger a manic episode.428 (lLevel III)
Thyrotoxicosis of other aetiology is treated according to existing guidelines.4 (Level III)
Lithium inhibits thyroid hormone release, and this may result in the development
of goitre and hypothyroidism. A study calculated the incidence of goitre to be 4%
per year per 100 patients on continuous lithium therapy.426 (Level III) The prevalence
of hypothyroidism in lithium-treated patients ranges from 6% to 52%. The
risk was higher in older women and women with thyroid antibodies.426  (Level  III)
The management of lithium-induced hypothyroidism is levothyroxine.
Lithium-associated goitre is managed in the same manner as any patient with
goitre.426 (Level III) Discontinuation of lithium is not necessary.426 (Level III); 428 (Level III)
Monitoring of TFTs should be done before and annually in all patients on lithium
therapy or 6 monthly in older women with thyroid antibodies.4 (Level II); 426 (Level III),
(Level III); 427 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
114
Recommendations
• Monitor TFT before and every 6–12 months after initiating lithium
• Goitre is managed as per the guidelines for the management of goitre
• Hypothyroidism is managed with L-thyroxine (see section on Management of
Hypothyroidism)
• Hyperthyroidism is managed according to aetiology: thyroiditis, Graves’ Disease,
toxic MNG
• There is no need to discontinue lithium if thyroid dysfunction develops
e) Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI): Drugs in this class are used to treat
advanced solid tumours and include cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein-4 (CTLA-4) inhibitor ipilimumab; programmed cell death protein 1
(2 PD-1) inhibitors: nivolumab and pembrolizumab; and programmed cell
death 1 ligand 1 (3 PD‑L1) inhibitors: atezolizumab, avelumab, and durvalumab.
Combination therapy of ipilimumab plus nivolumab has been approved to
treat advanced melanoma. Immune checkpoint inhibitor has been associated
with endocrinopathies, such as destructive thyroiditis, adrenal insufficiency,
and hypophysitis (leading to secondary hypothyroidism and other associated
hormonal deficiencies).427 (Level III); 434 (Level III) Thyroid disorder is the most common
adverse event associated with ICI. In a meta-analysis involving 38 randomised
controlled trials which included over 7500 patients,434 (Level I) the overall incidence
of hypothyroidism was estimated to be 6.6% and the overall incidence of
hyperthyroidism was estimated to be 2.9%. Both thyroid dysfunctions were
higher with combination therapy. The American Society of Clinical Oncology
recommends monitoring of TFTs at start of therapy and every 4–6 weeks while
on therapy. Management of the thyroid disorder is based on the aetiology: for
mild asymptomatic hypothyroidism, patients are followed up with close TFTs
monitoring.435 (Level III) For moderate-to–severe hypothyroidism, treatment with
levothyroxine is recommended.439 (Level III) For mild asymptomatic hyperthyroidism,
patients are followed up with close monitoring of TFTs.435 (Level III) For moderate
symptoms, beta-blockers for symptomatic relief are recommended and
if duration of symptoms exceeds 6 weeks, work up for Graves’ disease is
required.435 (Level III) If severe symptoms or in storm, treatment is as for thyroid
storm.435 (Level III) In severe cases of both hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, it is
recommended to withhold ICI.439 (Level III)
Recommendations
• Monitor TFT at start of ICI therapy and every 4–6 weeks while on therapy
• Management of ICI-induced thyroid dysfunction depends on the aetiology
(see section on Thyroiditis, Graves’ Disease, Hypothyroidism)
• Discontinuation of ICI is usually not necessary unless thyroid dysfunction is
severe
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
115
9. GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY
9.1 WHAT IS THE INCIDENCE OF GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY IN MALAYSIA?
Graves’ ophthalmopathy (GO) is also known as thyroid-associated orbitopathy,
thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, and thyroid eye disease. The prevalence of GO
in Malaysia was 34.7%.436 (Level II) This is very similar to the rate quoted in the literature
among the Caucasians, which was 25%–50%.437 (Level II) The natural history of GO is
one with rapid deterioration followed by gradual improvement towards baseline
or with residual stigmata. The commonest presenting features found locally
are exophthalmos followed by upper lids retraction and restrictive extraocular
myopathy.436 (Level II) The risk factors are smoking status at the time of diagnosis of GD;
the odd ratio of smokers developing GO is 2.754.436 (Level II) Other risk factors are male
gender and unstable thyroid function test, especially hypothyroidism.436 (Level II)
9.2 WHAT IS THE DEFINITION OF GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY?
Graves’ ophthalmopathy is considered present if there is eyelid retraction
with either thyroid dysfunction or exophthalmos or optic nerve dysfunction or
extraocular muscle involvement. If eyelid retraction is absent, GO is defined as
thyroid dysfunction in association with exophthalmos or optic nerve dysfunction or
extraocular muscle involvement.438 (Level II)
Early symptoms of GO are as follows:
a. Redness in the eyes or lids
b. Swelling or feeling of fullness in one or both upper eyelids
c. Eyelid oedema
d. Eyes seem to be too wide open (thyroid stare)
e. Pain in or behind the eyes439 (Level II)
Discriminating points in favour of the diagnosis of GO:
a. Presence of thyroid dysfunction, particularly recent onset (within 18 months)
b. Symptoms not relieved by topical antibiotic
c. Eyelids abnormally wide (upper or lower lid retraction)
d. New bags in upper or lower eyelid or both
e. Change in the appearance of the eyes and eyelids especially eyeball protrusion
f. Presence of other signs such as diplopia and lagophthalmos439 (Level II)
9.3 HOW IS THE ASSESSMENT OF ACTIVITY AND SEVERITY?
Assessment of GO activity is best-done using clinical activity score (CAS):440-443 (Level II)
1. Spontaneous retrobulbar pain
2. Pain on attempting upward and downward gaze
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
116
3. Redness of eyelids
4. Redness of conjunctiva
5. Swelling of caruncle or plica
6. Swelling of eyelids
7. Swelling of conjunctiva (chemosis)
Inactive GO=CAS <3
Active GO=CAS ≥3
There are a few approaches to the assessment of GO severity:441–443 (Level II)
1. Graves’ ophthalmopathy severity assessment according to NOSPECS
No signs or symptoms
Only signs, no symptoms: lid aperture (distance between lid margins in mm with
patients looking in primary position, sitting relaxed with distance fixed)
Soft tissue involvement: swelling/redness of the eyes
Proptosis: exophthalmos (in mm: using the same Hertel exophthalmometer and
same intercanthal distance for an individual patient)
Extraocular muscle involvement: eye muscle ductions in degree; subjective
diplopia score – intermittent (diplopia when tired or when first awakening),
inconstant (diplopia at extreme of gaze), constant (continuous diplopia in primary
and reading position)
Corneal involvement: absent/punctate keratopathy, ulcer
Sight loss (due to optic nerve involvement): best corrected visual acuity, colour
vision, optic disc, relative afferent pupillary defect, visual fields (if optic nerve
compression is suspected)
2. Graves’ ophthalmopathy severity assessment according to EUGOGO.441–443
(Level II)
Mild Graves’ ophthalmopathy
Patients whose features of GO have only a minor impact on daily life insufficient
to justify immunosuppressive or surgical treatment. They usually have one or
more of the following: minor lid retraction <2 mm, mild soft tissue involvement,
exophthalmos <3 mm above normal for race and gender, no or intermittent
diplopia and corneal exposure responsive to lubricants.
Moderate-to–severe Graves’ ophthalmopathy
Patients without sight threatening GO whose eye disease has sufficient impact
on daily life to justify the risks of immunosuppression (if active) or surgical
intervention (if inactive). They usually have two or more of the following: lid
retraction ≥2 mm, moderate-to–severe soft tissue involvement, exophthalmos
≥3 mm above normal for race and gender, inconstant or constant diplopia.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
117
Sight-threatening Graves’ ophthalmopathy
Patients with dysthyroid optic neuropathy (DON) and/or corneal breakdown
The clinician needs to decide whether GO is active or inactive and mild, moderateto–severe or sight-threatening in the assessment of GO.
Recommendation
• Assessment of GO includes assessment of activity and severity using standardised criteria. It is categorised as active or inactive; mild, moderate, severe,
or sight threatening
9.4 WHEN TO REFER TO OPHTHALMOLOGIST AND ENDOCRINOLOGIST?
All cases of GO except those with mild GO should be referred to specialised care.
Cases where diagnosis of GO is doubtful should be referred too.439, 442 (Level II)
Urgent referral should be made if GO is sight threatening, e.g. unexplained
deterioration of vision, awareness of change in quality, or intensity of colour vision
in one or both eyes, globe subluxation, corneal opacity, significant lagophthalmos,
and disc swelling.439, 442 (Level II)
9.5 WHAT IS THE TREATMENT FOR GRAVES’ OPHTHALMOPATHY?
9.5.1 Non-Specific Treatment/Risk Factors Modification
General treatment includes avoidance of cigarette smoke (active/passive
smoking), restoration of euthyroidism as soon as possible, especially avoidance
of hypothyroidism.444-448 (Level I) Antithyroid drugs and thyroidectomy do not appear
to affect the natural course of GO.449-450 (Level I) Radioactive iodine confers a small
but definite risk of worsening of GO or de novo development of new onset
GO especially in smokers, in severe hyperthyroidism and in recent onset
hyperthyroidism.449,451-452 (Level I)
Ocular surface inflammation and dry eyes are common in patients with
GO.453 (Level II) Use of preservative-free artificial tears with osmoprotective properties,
such as sodium hyaluronate or use of eye lubricant gels/ointments to moisture the
ocular surface is important.454 (Level I)
Recommendations
• All patients with Graves’ disease should be urged to quit smoking
• Euthyroidism should be restored as soon as possible in patients with GO
• Ocular surface disease is common and should be treated with topical therapy
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
118
9.5.2 Mild Graves’ Ophthalmopathy
Watchful strategy is sufficient in most patients with mild GO. Attention should be
paid to non-specific treatment strategies and risk factors modification as mentioned
above.
Sodium selenite 100 mcg bd (corresponding to 93.6 mcg of elemental selenium per
day) for 6 months has been shown to improve eye symptoms and quality of life (QoL)
as well as prevent the progression of GO. The effect was maintained even at 12 months
after selenium was ceased at 6 months. No selenium-related side effects were
observed in this large multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. However, the subjects in the study came from a marginally selenium-deficient
area.455-456 (Level I) In long-standing, inactive mild GO, there is no evidence that selenium
is effective.
In cases where objectively mild GO has a profound impact on QoL, these cases may
be considered as moderate-to–severe GO and offered immunosuppressive treatment or rehabilitative surgery (refer to moderate-to–severe GO section).442 (Level III)
Recommendation
• Topical treatment and measures to control the risk factors are the mainstay of
treatment. A 6-month selenium supplement at a dose of 100 mcg bd can be
considered
9.5.3 Moderate-to–Severe and Active Graves’ Ophthalmopathy
First-Line Treatment
High dose IV glucocorticoids (GC) are currently the first line treatment for moderateto–severe active GO.441-442, 457-458, 462-463 (Level I) The cumulative dose of GCs should not
exceed 8 g. Single dose should not exceed 0.75 g and consecutive-day therapy
should be avoided. Intravenous GCs are better tolerated and more effective than
oral GCs; rate of adverse events are 39% versus 81% with p<0.001.441-442,458-459 (Level I)
The response rate for intravenous GCs versus oral GCs is 70%–80% versus 50%.457‑459
(Level I) The contraindications for systemic GCs are recent viral hepatitis, significant
hepatic dysfunction, severe cardiovascular morbidity, uncontrolled hypertension
or psychiatric disorders.457-459 (Level II) Caution should be exercised in diabetic and
hypertensive patients. During treatment, proton pump inhibitors to prevent peptic
ulcer and bone protection therapy for patients at risk of osteoporosis should be
considered.
The recommended schedule for intravenous GCs is a cumulative dose of 4.5 g with IV
methylprednisolone 0.5 g weekly for 6 weeks followed by 0.25 g weekly for another
6 weeks.458 (Level I) Higher doses with accumulative dose of 7.5 g methylprednisolone
given 0.75 g weekly for 6 weeks followed by 0.5 g weekly for 6 weeks can be
considered in worst cases within the moderate-to–severe spectrum.460-461 (Level I)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
119
In a randomised, single-blind–controlled trial, 35 untreated, active, moderately
severe GO patients received IV methylprednisolone 0.5 g weekly for 6 weeks followed
by 0.25 g weekly for 6 weeks. Another 35 patients received oral prednisolone at
0.1 g/day then tapering by 0.01 g/week with cumulative dose of 4 g in 12 weeks.
At 3 months, 77% in IV group vs. 51% at the oral group showed improvement, p<0.01.
Side effects were seen in 17% IV group versus 51% oral group, p=0.005.458 (Level I) In
another study, 159 subjects with active, moderate-to–severe GO were randomised to
cumulative dose of 2.25 g (Low Dose), 4.98 g (Medium Dose) and 7.47 g (High Dose)
of intravenous methylprednisolone in 12 weekly infusions. Overall, ophthalmic
improvement at 12 weeks were as follows: HD 52% vs. MD 35% p=0.03, and HD
52% vs. LD 28% p=0.01. CAS improvement was 83% (HD), 81% (MD), 58% (LD). Major
adverse reaction was seen more commonly in the high-dose group. The authors
concluded that high dose IV methylprednisolone provides a short-term benefit over
low dose but with more side effects. Hence, the intermediate dose regimen should
be used in most cases and the high-dose regimen should be reserved for most
severe cases of GO.461 (Level I)
Recommendations
• We recommend an intermediate dose of IV methylprednisolone at 0.5 g weekly
for 6 weeks followed by 0.25 g weekly for 6 weeks (cumulative dose 4.5 g) in
most cases of moderate-to–severe GO
• High-dose regimens of IV methylprednisolone at 0.75 g weekly for 6 weeks
followed by 0.5 g weekly for 6 weeks (cumulative dose of 7.5 g) should be
reserved for the worst cases with moderate-to–severe GO
• We recommend that a cumulative dose of IV methylprednisolone should not
exceed 8 g
• We recommend assessment for viral hepatitis, liver function, cardiovascular
dysfunction, blood glucose, and blood pressure to be undertaken before the
commencement of IV methylprednisolone
Second-Line Treatment
A second course of IV GC if accumulative dose of 8 g methylprednisolone is not
exceeded and patient tolerates GC well.441-442; 461-462 (Level I)
Orbital radiotherapy can be considered, especially to improve diplopia and range
of ductions in patients with moderate-to–severe GO.463-464 (Level I) Randomised clinical
trials have shown that orbital radiotherapy could potentiate the effect of systemic
GC.465-466 (Level I) Cumulative dose of 20 Greys per orbit fractionated in 10 daily doses
given over 2 weeks period is commonly used.441-442(Level II)
Cyclosporine and oral GCs: Two randomised controlled studies have shown that
the combination of cyclosporine and GC was more effective than either agent alone
in patients with active, moderate-to–severe GO.467-468 (Level I) In one study, 2 groups
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
120
of patients were treated with 100 mg per day of prednisolone with tapering down
of dose and stopped in 3 months, alone or with combination of cyclosporine at 5
mg/kg body weight per day for 12 months. Combination therapy was associated
with significantly better ocular outcome and lower rate of recurrences of GO.467 (Level I)
In another trial, prednisolone alone was better that cyclosporine alone, but the
combination therapy had the best response.468 (Level I) The most common adverse
events related to cyclosporine are dose-dependent liver and renal toxicities as well
as gingival hyperplasia.467 (Level I)
Rituximab: There are conflicting data with rituximab, which works by its effect in
modulating and depleting B cell action, on GO. One small randomised controlled
trial in patients with active, moderate-to–severe GO showed that rituximab (2000 mg
and 500 mg) compared to IV GC (7.5g) significantly inactivated GO (100% versus
69%, p<0.04). There was no disease reactivation with rituximab compared with
31% with IV GC group (p=0.043).469 (Level I) In another small prospective, randomised,
double-masked, placebo-controlled study, rituximab offered no additional benefits
over placebo in patients with active, moderate-to–severe GO.470 (Level I)
Watchful monitoring may be indicated in some patients after GC treatment or
withdrawal. Orbital vascular congestion can mimic active GO with eyelid and
conjunctival redness and oedema. For patients with orbital vascular congestion,
orbital decompression can be considered.471 (Level II)
Recommendation
• We recommend shared decision-making when selecting a second-line therapy
in patients with moderate-to–severe GO
9.5.4 Sight-Threatening Active Graves’ Ophthalmopathy
Sight-threatening GO includes dysthyroid optic neuropathy (DON), severe corneal
exposure (large epithelial and/or stromal defect), corneal breakdown, and eyeball
subluxation. Recent development of choroidal folds can cause metamorphopsia
and should be addressed urgently too.441, 443 (Level I)
Very high doses of intravenous GCs (500–1000 mg of methylprednisolone) for
3 consecutive days or on alternate days during the first week are recommended
for DON. This can be repeated after a week. If the response to very high doses of
GC is poor, then urgent decompression surgery should be considered.472-473 (Level II)
The predictors of poor response are presence of disc swelling at diagnosis and
persistent active disease at 2 weeks post very high dose of IV GCs.473 (Level II)
Severe corneal exposure should be treated aggressively with medical therapy or
with more invasive surgical treatment in order to prevent corneal breakdown.441 (Level I)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
121
Recommendation
• Dysthyroid optic neuropathy should be treated immediately with very high
doses of intravenous GCs (500–1000 mg methylprednisolone) for 3 consecutive
days or on alternate days during the first week. The doses should be
repeated in the second week. If the response is absent or poor, urgent orbital
decompression should be done
9.5.5 Moderate-to–Severe And Inactive Graves’ Ophthalmopathy
Assessment to confirm inactivity of GO is important and at times can be challenging.
If in doubt, watchful monitoring over a period of time is needed. Rehabilitative
surgery should be done after the disease has been inactive for 6 months.443 (Level II)
Different degrees and types or surgical intervention may be needed depending
on the amount of disfigurement and/or dysfunction that persists in the postinflammatory phase.
There are multiple options for rehabilitative surgeries.
1. Decompression surgery: Minimally invasive approach is preferred. Decompressing
surgery aims to reduce intraocular pressure by enlarging the bony orbit with
different degrees of extension of medial/lateral orbital walls or removal of
the orbital floor. Fat excision via the inferolateral or inferomedial extraconal
compartments is another alternative. Orbital decompression can reduce
exophthalmos, periorbital puffiness, and lid retraction as well as reduce the
intraocular pressure and thereby relieve retro-orbital pain. This procedure can
also improve strabismus and cure postural visual obscuration in patients with
orbital and optic nerve microvasculopathy. Potential complications of orbital
decompression are new onset/worsening strabismus and globe dystopia.474(Level II)
2. Strabismus/squint surgery: It aims to restore fusion in primary position avoiding
diplopia in downward gaze and to correct residual incomitances.475(Level II)
3. Eyelid surgery: Medical therapies such as alpha-blocker eye drops or postganglia adrenergic blockers are not very effective or limited by side effects.
Botulinum injection is effective but transient. There are many approaches to
lid retraction surgeries (from mild to severe degree of upper lid retraction),
such as sutureless mullerectomy, transconjuctival free en block recession of
the levator palpebrae superioris muscle and conjunctiva, or transcutaneous
blepharotomy.474,476(Level II)
4. Cosmetic periorbital surgeries in GO are not different from those used for the
ageing-related face.474(Level II)
If more than one surgical procedure is needed, the sequence should be orbital
decompression followed by squint surgery, and lastly lid surgery.474 (Level II)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
122
Table 16: Recommendation for RAI with or without glucocorticoids
(Adapted from 4 [Level III])
RAI without
glucocorticoids
RAI with oral
glucocorticoids
No GO, nonsmoker
Recommend
Recommend against
No GO, smoker
Insufficient data to
recommend for and against
Insufficient data to
recommend for and against
GO present, active, and
mild, risk factorsa absent
Acceptableb
Acceptableb
GO present, active, and
mild, risk factorsa present
Recommend against
Recommend
GO present, active, and
moderate-to–severe or
sight threatening
Recommend against
Recommend against
GO present, inactive
Recommend
Recommend against
aRisk factors are high TRab, smoking, active and progressive GO over the preceding 3 months.
bThe decision to use concurrent glucocorticoids should be made after considering the risk–benefit ratio for each
patient. Glucocorticoids reduce the risk of GO deterioration in the presence of risk factors. However, glucocorticoid can
potentially worsen diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis and psychiatric illness as well as increase the risk of infection.
Recommendation
• Elective rehabilitative surgery should be offered to patients with GO after the
disease has been inactive for at least 6 months and when GO is associated
with significant impact on visual function or quality of life. Patients should be
referred to specialised centres with specialised surgeons able to tailor to the
specific need of the individual patient
9.5.6 Radioactive Iodine Therapy and Graves’ Ophthalmopathy
Radioactive iodine confers a small but definite risk of worsening pre-existing GO
or development of new GO.449, 477-479 (Level I) Studies have shown that glucocorticoids
given concurrently may prevent worsening of GO in patients with mild active eye
disease.449 (Level I) There is insufficient evidence for prophylaxis glucocorticoids in
nonsmokers with no clinical evidence of GO who are going for RAI therapy.449 (Level I)
Antithyroid drugs and thyroidectomy are the preferred treatment options for
hyperthyroidism in patients with active, moderate-to–severe or sight-threatening
GO as compared to RAI therapy.449, 478, 4 (Level II) In patients with significant but inactive
GO, RAI therapy can be given without glucocorticoids prophylaxis (Table 16).4 (Level III)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
123
The dose of prednisolone for GO prophylaxis is 0.4–0.5 mg/kg per day, starting
1–3  days after RAI therapy in patients with mild-to–moderate GO, continued
for 1 month then tapered over the next 2 months.442, 449, 478 (Level I) In a prospective
randomised study, 15% of radioiodine group developed or had worsening of GO
2–6 months after radioiodine therapy; no patient in the radioiodine and prednisolone
group had progression of GO.449 (Level I) A retrospective study has shown that a lower
dose of 0.2–0.3 mg/kg per day of prednisolone for a total of 6 weeks can be used in
patients with milder GO or in those who have no GO prior to RAI therapy but have
significant risk factors for GO.479-480 (Level II)
Recommendations
• In patients with active, moderate-to–severe GO or sight-threatening GO, surgery
or antithyroid drugs are preferred treatment options
• Oral prednisolone prophylaxis of 0.4–0.5 mg/kg per day for a total of 3 months
is recommended in patients with mild-to–moderate GO who are undergoing
radioiodine therapy
• Lower dose of oral prednisolone prophylaxis of 0.2–0.3 mg/kg per day can be
used in patients with milder GO or who have risk factors for GO
Figure 10: Management of Graves’ Ophthalmopathy (GO).443 (Level II)
All patients with GO
• Restore euthyroidism
• Urge smoking cessation
• Local measures
• Refer to specialists except for mildest cases
Mild
Moderate-to–severe
Sight-threatening (DON)
Poor response
(2 weeks)
Prompt
decompression
Still active
i.v. GCs
i.v. GCs
Rehabilitative surgery
(if needed)
Stable and
inactive
Stable and
inactive
Inactive
Inactive
Active
i.v.GCs
(ﬁrst choice)
Progression
i.v. GCs if QoL is
severely impaired
Wait and see
Selenium
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
124
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of CPG is important as it helps in providing quality healthcare
services based on best available evidence applied to local scenario and expertise.
Various factors and resource implications should be considered for the success of
the uptake in the CPG recommendations.
10.1 FACILITATING AND LIMITING FACTORS
The existing facilitating factors in implementing the recommendations in the CPG
are:
•
Availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hard copies and soft copies)
•
Regular conferences and updates on management of thyroid disorders
involving professional societies or bodies (Malaysian Endocrine and Metabolic
Society, Family Medicine Specialist Association, Academy of Family Physician
Malaysia, etc.)
•
Public awareness on thyroid disease during World Thyroid Day, etc.
The existing limiting factors in implementing the recommendations in the CPG are:
•
Different levels of care and wide variation in practice due to expertise, facilities,
and financial constraints
•
Lack of awareness among people with high risk of developing thyroid disease
10.2 POTENTIAL RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS
To implement the CPG, there must be dedicated efforts to:
•
Ensure widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare providers
•
Provide regular training to healthcare providers via effective seminars and
workshops
•
Involve multidisciplinary team at all levels of healthcare
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed as clinical
audit indicators for quality management:
No. of patients with euthyroid hyper/hypothyroidism
Euthyroid hyper/hypothyroidism (target > 80%) =
x 100%
Total no. of patients with hyper/hypothyroidism
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
125
REFERENCES
1.
Shahar MA, Omar AM, Ab Wahab N, et al. (on behalf of MyENDO Study Group). The prevalence of overt and subclinical
thyroid disorders in the adult population of Malaysia. Int J Thyroidol. 2017;10(Suppl 1):S177.
2.
Shahar MA, Omar AM, Ab Wahab N, et al. (on behalf of MyENDO Study Group). Higher prevalence of goitre but not
thyroid nodules among the younger age groups in Malaysia. Proc 12th Asia Ocean Thyroid AssocCongr. Int J Thyroidol.
2017;10(Suppl. 1):S128.
3.
Shahar MA, Omar AM, Ab Wahab N, et al. (on behalf of MyENDO Study Group). Higher titres of thyroid antibodies
among the urban & coastal populations of Malaysia. Proc 12th Asia Ocean Thyroid Assoc Congr. Int J Thyroidol.
2017;10(Suppl. 1):S209.
4.
Ross DS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. 2016 American thyroid association guidelines for diagnosis and management of
hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid. 2016;26(10):1343–1421.
5.
Williams I, Ankrett VO, Lazarus JH, et al. Aetiology of hyperthyroidism in Canada and Wales. J of Epidemiol Community
Health. 1983;37(3):245–248.
6.
Ahsan T, Banu Z, Jabeen R, et al. Clinical spectrum and various forms of thyrotoxicosis in endocrine clinic of Jinnah
Postgraduate Medical Centre. J Pak Med Assoc. 2013;63(3):354–357.
7.
Brix TH, Hansen PS, Hegedus L, et al. Too early to dismiss Yersinia enterocolitica infection in the aetiology of Graves’
disease: Evidence from a twin case-control study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) .2008;69(3):491–496.
8.
Nanba K, Usui T, Minamiguchi S, et al. Two rare TSH receptor amino acid substitutions in toxic thyroid adenomas. Endocr
J. 2012;59(1):13–19.
9.
Mirfakhraee S, Mathews D, Peng L, et al. A solitary hyperfunctioning thyroid nodule harbouring thyroid carcinoma:
review of the literature. Thyroid Res. 2013;6(1):7.
10.
Kuan YC, Sieng Tan FH. Thyroid papillary carcinoma in hot thyroid nodule. Q J Med. 2014;107:475–476.
11.
Avci E, Narci H. Coexistence of Graves’ disease and toxic adenoma: A rare presentation of Marine-Lenhart syndrome.
J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2015;27(1):248–250.
12.
Jaeschke H, Schaarschmidt J, Eszlinger M, et al. A newly discovered TSHR variant (L665F) associated with nonautoimmune hyperthyroidism in an Austrian family induces constitutive TSHR activation by steric repulsion between
TM1 and TM7. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(10):E2051–E2059.
13.
Raman L, Murray J, Banka R. Primary tuberculosis of the thyroid gland: an unexpected cause of thyrotoxicosis. BMJ Case
Rep. 2014. Doi:10.1136/bcr-2013-202792.
14.
Puri MM, Dougall P, Arora VK. A case of tuberculosis of the thyroid gland. Med J Malaysia. 2002;57(2):237–239.
15.
Daroszewski J, Paczkowska K, Jawiarczyk-Przybylowska A, et al. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma with rapid thyrotoxicosis –
a case report and the literature review. Endokrynol Pol. 2018;69(1):28–31.
16.
Yahaya N, Din SW, Ghazali MZ, et al. Primary thyroid lymphoma with elevated free thyroxine level. Singapore Med J.
2011;52(9):e173–6.
17.
Merza Z, White D, Khanem N. Struma ovarii in pregnancy. An uncommon cause of hyperthyroidism. Clin Nucl Medi. 2015;
40(8):687–8.
18.
Gardner D, Ho SC. A rare cause of hyperthyroidism: Functioning thyroid metastases. BMJ Case Rep. 2014. Doi:10.1136/
bcr-2014-206468
19.
Hoang TD, Mai VQ, Clyde PW, et al. Over-the-counter-drug-induced thyroid disorders. Endocr Pract. 2013;19(2):268–274.
20.
Kang GY, Parks JR, Fileta B, et al. Thyroxine and triiodothyronine content in commercially available thyroid health
supplements. Thyroid. 2013;23(10):1233–1237.
21.
Dimeski G, Lampe G, Brown NN. Chinese herbal supplements the cause of thyrotoxicosis. Pathology. 2013;45(2):
185–186.
22.
Wartique L, Pothen L, Pirson N, et al. An unusual cause of epidemic thyrotoxicosis. Acta Clin Belg. 2017;72(6):451–453.
23.
Marchand L, Chabert P, Chaudesaygues E, et al. An unusual cause of cardiothyreosis. Gynaecol Endocrinol.
2016;32(2):107–109.
24.
Foppiani L, Cascio C, Lo Pinto G. Iodine-induced hyperthyroidism as combination of different etiologies: an overlooked
entity in the elderly. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2016;28(5):1023–7.
25.
Dave A, Ludlow J, Malaty J. Thyrotoxicosis: An under-recognised aetiology. BMJ Case Rep. 2015; Doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014208119.
26.
Jarvis C, Simcox K, Tamatea JA, et al. A low incidence of iodine-induced hyperthyroidism following administration of
iodinated contrast in an iodine-deficient region. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2016;84(4):558–563.
27.
Fricke E, Fricke H, Esdom E, et al. Scintigraphy for risk stratification of iodine-induced thyrotoxicosis in patients receiving
contrast agent for coronary angiography: A prospective study of patients with low thyrotropin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2004;89(12):6092–6096.
28.
Hintze G,Blombach O, Fink H, et al. Risk of iodine-induced thyrotoxicosis after coronary angiography: An investigation in
788 unselected subjects. Euro J Endocrinol.1999;140(3):264–267.
29.
Van der Molen AJ, Thomsen HS, Morcos SK. Effect of iodinated contrast media on thyroid function in adults. Eur Radiol.
2004;14(5):902–907.
30.
Tsang W, Houlden RL. Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis: A review. Can J Cardiol. 2009;25(7):421–424.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
126
31.
Takeuchi D, Honda K, Shinohara T, et al. Incidence, clinical course, and risk factors of amiodarone-induced thyroid
dysfunction in Japanese adults with congenital heart disease. Circ J. 2015;79(8):1828–1834.
32.
KF Lee, Lee KM, Fung TT. Amiodarone-induced thyroid dysfunction in the Hong Kong Chinese population. Hong Kong
Med J. 2010;16(6):434–439.
33.
Zosin I, Balas M, et al. Amiodarone-induced thyroid dysfunction in an iodine-replete area: Epidemiological and clinical
data. Polish J Endocrinol. 2012;63(1):2–9.
34.
Fadilah SA, Faridah I, Cheong SK. Transient hyperthyroidism following L-asparaginase therapy for acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Med J Malaysia. 2000;55(4):5135.
35.
de los Santos ET, Starich GH, Mazzaferri EL. Sensitivity, specificity, and cost-effectiveness of the sensitive thyrotropin
assay in the diagnosis of thyroid disease in ambulatory patients. Arch Intern Med. 1989;149(3):526–532.
36.
Hari KK, Pasupuleti V, Jayaraman M, et al. Role of thyroid doppler in differential diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis. Endocr Pract.
2009;15(1):6–9.
37.
AVS AK, Mohan A, Kumar PG, et al. Scintigraphic profile of thyrotoxicosis patients and correlation with biochemical and
sonological findings. J Clin Diagn Res. 2017;11(5):OC01–OC03.
38.
Alzahrani AS, Ceresini G, Aldasouqi SA. Role of ultrasonography in the differential diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis: A
noninvasive, cost effective and widely available but underutilized diagnostic tool. Endocr Pract. 2012;18(4):567–578.
39.
Bartalena L. Diagnosis and management of Graves’ disease: a global overview. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013;9:724–734.
40.
Bartalena L, Burch HB, Burman KD, et al. A 2013 European survey of clinical practice patterns in the management of
Graves’ disease. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2016;84(1):115–20.
41.
Hesarghatta SA, Abraham P. Measuring TSH receptor antibody to influence treatment choices in Graves’ Disease. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2017:86(5):652–657.
42.
Kahaly GJ, Olivo PD: Graves’ disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:184.
43.
Kahaly GJ, Diana T. TSH receptor antibody functionality and nomenclature. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2017;8:28.
44.
Schott M, Hermsen D, Broecker-Preuss M, et al. Clinical value of the first automated TSH receptor auto antibodies assay
for the diagnosis of Grave Disease: an international multicenter trial. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009;71(4):566–573.
45.
Diana T, Wuster C, Kanitz M, et al. Highly variable sensitivity of five binding and two bio-assays for TSH-receptor
antibodies. J Endocrinol Invest. 2016;39(10):1159–1165.
46.
Diana T, Wüster C, Olivo PD, et al. Performance and specificity of six immunoassays for TSH receptor antibodies: A
multicenter study. Eur Thyroid J. 2017;6(5):243–249.
47.
Kotwal A, Stan M. Thyrotropin receptor antibodies-an overview. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2018;34(4S Suppl 1):
S20–S27.
48.
Sipos JA, Kahaly GJ. Imaging of thyrotoxicosis. Am J Med. 2012;125(9):S1–2.
49.
Meller J, Becker W. The continuing importance of thyroid scintigraphy in the era of high resolution ultrasound. Eur J Necl
Med. 2002;Suppl 2:S425–38.
50.
Bahn Chair RS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. Hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: Management guidelines
of the American Thyroid Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Thyroid. 2011;21(6):593–646.
51.
Biondi B, Cooper DS. The clinical significance of subclinical thyroid dysfunction. Endocr Rev. 2008;29(1):76–131.
52.
Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, et al. Serum TSH, T4 and Thyroid Antibodies in the United States Population
(1988 to 1994): National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87(2):
489–499.
53.
Madariaga GA, Palacios SS, Guillen-Grima F, et al. The incidence and prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in europe:
A meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(3):923–31.
54.
Biondi B, Batalena L, Cooper DS, et al. The 2015 European Thyroid Association Guidelines on Diagnosis and Treatment
of Endogenous Subclinical Hyperthyroidism. Eur Thyroid J. 2015;4(3):149–63.
55.
Lim KK, Wong M, Mohamud WN, et al. Iodized salt supplementation and its effects on thyroid status amongst Orang Asli
in Hulu Selangor. Malaysia. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2013;22(1):41–47.
56.
Chin KY, Ima-Nirwana S, Mohamed IN, et al. Thyroid-stimulating hormone is significantly associated with bone health
status in men. Int J Med Sci. 2013;10(7):857–863.
57.
Mai VQ, Burch HB. A stepwise approach to the evaluation and treatment of subclinical hyperthyroidism. Endocr Pract.
2012;18(5):772–780.
58.
Vadiveloo T, Donnan PT, Cochrane L, et al. The Thyroid Epidemiology, Audit, and Research Study (TEARS): Morbidity in
Patients with Endogenous Subclinical Hyperthyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96(5):1344–1351.
59.
Abdul Shakoor SA, Hawkins R, Kua SY, et al. Natural history and comorbidities of subjects with subclinical hyperthyroidism:
Analysis at a tertiary hospital setting. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2014;43:506–10.
60.
Das G, Ojewuyi TA, Baglioni P, et al. Serum thyrotrophin at baseline predicts the natural course of subclinical
hyperthyroidism. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012;77(1):146–151.
61.
Schouten BJ, Brownlie BE, Frampton CM, et al. Subclinical thyrotoxicosis in an outpatient population – predictors of
outcome. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011;74(2):257–261.
62.
Asvold BO, Bjoro T, Nilsen TI, et al. Thyrotropin levels and risk of fatal coronary heart disease: The HUNT study. Arch
Intern Med. 2008;168(8):855–860.
63.
Boekholdt SM, Titan SM, Wiersinga WM, et al. Initial thyroid status and cardiovascular risk factors: The EPIC-Norfolk
prospective population Study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010;72(3):404–410.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
127
64.
Collet TH, Gussekloo J, Bauer DC, et al. Subclinical hyperthyroidism and the risk of coronary heart disease and mortality.
Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(10):799–809.
65.
Sawin CT, Geller A, Wolf PA, et al. Low serum thyrotropin concentrations as a risk factor for atrial fibrillation in older
persons. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:1249–1252.
66.
Selmer C, Olesen JB, Hansen ML, et al. The spectrum of thyroid disease and risk of new onset atrial fibrillation: A large
population cohort study. BMJ. 2012;345:e7895
67.
Nanchen D, Gussekloo J, Westendorp RG, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of heart failure in older
persons at high cardiovascular risk. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(3):852–861.
68.
Rodondi N, Newman AB, Vittinghoff E, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism and the risk of heart failure, other cardiovascular
events, and death. Arch Intern Med. 2005;65(21):2460–2466.
69.
Gencer B, Collet TH, Virgini V, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of heart failure events. An individual
participant data analysis from 6 prospective cohorts. Circulation. 2012;126(9):1040–1049.
70.
Yang LB, Jiang DQ, Qi WB, et al. Subclinical hyperthyroidism and the risk of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality:
An updated meta-analysis of cohort studies. Euro J Endocrinol. 2012;167(1):75–84.
71.
Walsh JP, Bremner AP, Bulsara AK, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Arch
Intern Med. 2005;165(21):2467–2472.
72.
Blum MR, Bauer DC, Collet TH, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and fracture risk: A meta-analysis. JAMA. 2015;313(20):
2055–2065.
73.
Yang R, Yao L, Fang Y, et al. The relationship between subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of fracture of low bone
mineral density: A systemic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Bone Miner Metab. 2018;36(2):209–220.
74.
van der Deure WM, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, et al. Effects of serum TSH and fT4 levels and the TSHR-Asp727Glu
polymorphism on bone: The Rotterdam study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008;68(2):175-181.
75.
Garin MC, Arnold AM, Lee JS, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and hip fracture and bone mineral density in older
adults: The cardiovascular health study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(8):2657–2664.
76.
Parle JV, Maisonneuve P, Sheppard MC, et al. Prediction of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in elderly people from
one low serum thyrotropin result: A 10-year cohort study. Lancet. 2001;358(9285):861–865.
77.
Cappola AR, Fried LP, Arnold AM, et al. Thyroid status, cardiovascular risk, and mortality in older adults. JAMA.
2006;295(9):1033–1041.
78.
Chaker L, Baumgartner C, Ikram MA, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of stroke: A systemic review and
meta-analysis. Eur J Epidemiol. 2014;29(11):791–800.
79.
Kalmijn S, Mehta KM, Pols HA, et al. Subclinical hyperthyroidism and the risk of dementia. The Rotterdam study.
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2000;53(6):733–737.
80.
Formiga F, Ferrar A, Padros G, et al. Thyroid status and functional and cognitive status at baseline and survival after 3
years of follow-up: The OCTABAIX study. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;170(1):69–75.
81.
Rieben C, Segna D, da Costa BR, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of cognitive decline: A meta-analysis
of prospective cohort studies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101(12):4945–4954.
82.
Stott DJ, McLellan AR, Finlayson J, et al. Elderly patients with suppressed serum TSH but normal free thyroid hormone
levels usually have mild thyroid overactivity and are at increased risk of developing overt hyperthyroidism. QJ M.
1991;78(285):77–84.
83.
Sgarbi JA, Villaca FG, Garbeline B, et al. The effects of early antithyroid therapy for endogenous subclinical
hyperthyroidism in clinical and heart abnormalities. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88(4):1672–1677.
84.
Yonem O, Dokmetas HS, Aslan SM, et al. Is antithyroid treatment really relevant for young patients with subclinical
hyperthyroidism? Endocr J. 2002;49(3):307–314.
85.
Faber J, Jensen IW, Petersen L, et al. Normalization of serum thyrotrophin by means of radioiodine treatment in
subclinical hyperthyroidism: Effect on bone loss in postmenopausal women. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1998;48(3):285–290.
86.
Buscemi S, Verga S, Cottons S, et al. Favorable clinical heart and bone effects of anti-thyroid drug therapy in endogenous
subclinical hyperthyroidism. J Endocrinol Invest. 2007;30(3):230–235.
87.
Greenlund LJ, Nair KS, Brennan MD, et al. Changes in body composition in women following treatment of overt and
subclinical hyperthyroidism. Endocr Pract. 2008;14(8):973–978.
88.
Nacar AB, Acar G, Yorgun H, et al. The effect of antithyroid treatment on atrial conduction times in patients with
subclinical hyperthyroidism. Echocardiography. 2012;29(8):950–955.
89.
Biondi B, Fazio S, Carella C, et al. Control of adrenergic overactivity by beta blockade improves the quality of life in
patients receiving long term suppressive therapy with levothyroxine. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994;78(5):1028–1033.
90.
Torino F, Barnabei A, Paragliola R, et al.Thyroid dysfunction as an unintended side effect of anticancer drugs. Thyroid.
2013;23(11):1345–1366.
91.
Jonklaas J, Bianco AC, Bauer AJ, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of hypothyroidism: prepared by the american thyroid
association task force on thyroid hormone replacement. Thyroid. 2014;24(12):1670–1751.
92.
Perez CL, Araki FS, Graf H et al. Serum thyrotropin levels following levothyroxine administration at breakfast. Thyroid.
2013;23(7):779–84.
93.
Bolk N, Visser TJ, Nijman J, et al. Effects of evening vs morning levothyroxine intake: a randomized double-blind
crossover trial. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(22):1996–2003.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
128
94.
Rajput R, Chatterjee S, Rajput M. Can levothyroxine be taken as evening dose? Comparative evaluation of morning
versus evening dose of levothyroxine in treatment of hypothyroidism. J Thyroid Res. 2011;505239.
95.
Zamfirescu I, Carlson HE. Absorption of levothyroxine when coadministered with various calcium formulations. Thyroid.
2011;21(5):483–486.
96.
Sachmechi I, Reich DM, Aninyei M, et al. Effect of proton pump inhibitors on serum thyroid-stimulating hormone level
in euthyroid patients treated with levothyroxine for hypothyroidism. Endocr Pract. 2007;13(4):345–349.
97.
Weitzman SP, Ginsburg KC, Carlson HE. Colesevelam hydrochloride and lanthanum carbonate interfere with the
absorption of levothyroxine. Thyroid. 2009;19(1):77–79.
98.
John-Kalarickal J, Pearlman G, Carlson HE. New medications which decrease levothyroxine absorption. Thyroid. 2007;
17(8):763–765.
99.
Diskin CJ, Stokes TJ, Dansby LM, et al. Effect of phosphate binders upon TSH and Lthyroxine dose in patients on thyroid
replacement. Int Urol Nephrol. 39(2):599–602.
100. Dietrich JW, Gieselbrecht K, Holl RW, et al. Absorption kinetics of levothyroxine is not altered by proton-pump inhibitor
therapy. Horm Metab Res. 2006;38(1):57–9.
101. Ananthakrishnan S, Braverman LE, Levin RM, et al. The effect of famotidine, esomeprazole, and ezetimibe on
levothyroxine absorption. Thyroid. 2008;18(5):493–498.
102. Bugdaci MS, Zuhur SS, Sokmen M, et al. The role of Helicobacter pylori in patients with hypothyroidism in whom
could not be achieved normal thyrotropin levels despite treatment with high doses of thyroxine. Helicobacter.
2011;16(2):124–130.
103. Centanni M, Gargano L, Canattieri G, et al. Thyroxine in goiter, Helicobacter pylori infection, and chronic gastritis. N Engl
J Med. 2006;354:1787–1795.
104. Virili C, Bassotti G, Santaguida MG, et al. Atypical celiac disease as cause of increased need for thyroxine: A systematic
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(3):E419–422.
105. Rubio IGS, Galrao AL, Santo MA, et al. Levothyroxine absorption in morbidly obese patients before and after Roux-En-Y
gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery. Obes Surg. 2012;22(2):253–258.
106. Gkotsina Met, Michalaki M, Mamali I, et al. Improved levothyroxine pharmacokinetics after bariatric surgery. Thyroid.
2013;23(4):414–419.
107. Centanni M, Marignani M, Gargano L, et al. Atrophic body gastritis in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease: An
underdiagnosed association. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159(15):1726–1730.
108. Kundra P, Burman KD. The effect of medications on thyroid function tests. Med Clin North Am. 2012;96(2):283–295.
109. Choi YH, Choi WY, Kang HC, et al. Drug rash induced by levothyroxine tablets. Thyroid. 2012;22(10):1090.
110. Walker JN, Shillo P, Ibbotson V, et al. A thyroxine absorption test followed by weekly thyroxine administration: A method
to assess non-adherence to treatment. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;168(6):913–7.
111. Bornschein A, Paz-Filho G, Graf H, et al. Treating primary hypothyroidism with weekly doses of levothyroxine: A
randomized, single-blind, crossover study. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2012;56(4):250–258.
112. Slawik M, Klawitter B, Meiser E, et al. Thyroid hormone replacement for central hypothyroidism: A randomized
controlled trial comparing two doses of thyroxine (T4) with a combination of T4 and triiodothyronine. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2007;92(11):4115–4122.
113. Agha A, Walker D, Perry L, et al. Unmasking of central hypothyroidism following growth hormone replacement in adult
hypopituitary patients. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007;66(1):72–77.
114. Ott J, Promberger R, Kober F, et al. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis affects symptom load and quality of life unrelated to
hypothyroidism: A prospective case-control study in women undergoing thyroidectomy for benign goiter. Thyroid.
2011;21(2):161–167.
115. Bould H, Panicker V, Kessler D, et al. Investigation of thyroid dysfunction is more likely in patients with high psychological
morbidity. Fam Pract. 2012;29(2):163–167.
116. Saravanan P, Visser TJ Dayan CM. Psychological well-being correlates with free thyroxine but not free 3,5,3-triiodothyronine
levels in patients on thyroid hormone replacement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91(9):3389–3393.
117. Panicker V, Evan J, Bjoro T, et al. A paradoxical difference in relationship between anxiety, depression and thyroid
function in subjects on and not on T4: findings from the HUNT study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009;71(4):574–580.
118. Samuels MH, Schuff KG, Carlson NE, et al. Health status, psychological symptoms, mood, and cognition in L - thyroxine
treated hypothyroid subjects. Thyroid. 2007;17(3):249–258
119. Somers EC, Thomas SL, Smeeth L, et al. Are individuals with an autoimmune disease at higher risk of a second
autoimmune disorder? Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169(6):749–755.
120. Boelaert K, Newby PR, Simmonds MJ, et al. Prevalence and relative risk of other autoimmune diseases in subjects with
autoimmune thyroid disease. Am J Med. 2010;123(2):183.e1–9.
121. Weetman AP. Diseases associated with thyroid autoimmunity: Explanations for the expanding spectrum. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf). 2011;74(4):411–418.
122. Wiersinga WM, Duntas L, Fadeyev V, et al. 2012 ETA guidelines: The use of L-T4+ L-T3 in the treatment of hypothyroidism.
Eur thyroid J. 2012;1:55–71.
123. Garber JR, Cobin RH, Gharib H, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for hypothyroidism in adults: cosponsored by the
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association. Endocr Pract. 2012;18(6):
988–1028.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
129
124. Pearce SH, Brabant G, Duntas LH, et al. 2013 ETA guideline: Management of subclinical hypothyroidism. Eur Thyroid J.
2013;2(4):215–228.
125. Fatourechi V. Subclinical hypothyroidism: An update for primary care physicians. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009;84(1):65–71.
126. Adlin V. Subclinical hypothyroidism: Deciding when to treat. Am Fam Physician. 1998;57(4):776–780.
127. Surks MI, Ortiz E, Daniels GH, et al. Subclinical thyroid disease- Scientific review & guidelines for diagnosis & management.
JAMA. 2004;291(2):228–238.
128. Simon HSP, Brabant G, et al. 2013 ETA guideline: Management of subclinical hypothyroidism. Eur Thyroid J. 2013;2:
215–228.
129. Surks MI, Goswami G, Daniels GH, et al. The thyrotropin reference range should remain unchanged. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2005;90(9):5489–5496.
130. Rugge B,Balshem H, Sehgal R, et al. Screening and treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Agency
for healthcare research and quality (US). 2011; AHRQ Publication No. 11(12)-EHC033-EF.
131. Vanderpump MP, Tunbridge WM, French JM, et al. The incidence of thyroid disorders in the community: A twenty-year
follow-up of the Whickham Survey. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1995;43(1):55–68.
132. Okosieme O,Gilbert J, Abraham P, et al. Management of primary hypothyroidism: statement by the British Thyroid
Association Executive Committee. Clin Endocrinol. 2016.84(6):799–808. doi:10.1111/cen.12824.
133. Canaris GJ, Manowitz NR, Mayor G, et al. The colorado thyroid disease prevalence study. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(4):
526–534.
134. Jorde R, Waterloo K, Storhaug H, et al. Neuropsychological function and symptoms in subjects with subclinical
hypothyroidism and the effect of thyroxine treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91(1):145–53.
135. Huber G, Staub JJ, Meier C, et al. Prospective study of the spontaneous course of subclinical hypothyroidism: Prognostic
value of thyrotropin, thyroid reserve, and thyroid antibodies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87(7):3221–3226.
136. Li X, Zhen D, Zhao M, et al. Natural history of mild subclinical hypothyroidism in a middle-aged and elderly Chinese
population: A prospective study. Endocr J. 2017;64(4):437–47. Doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ16-0549.
137. Delshad H,Mehran L, Tohidi M, et al. The incidence of thyroid function abnormalities and natural course of subclinical
thyroid disorders, Tehran. Iran J Endocrinol Invest. 2012;35(5):516–21.
138. Imaizumi M, Sera N, Ueki I, et al. Risk for progression to overt hypothyroidism in an elderly Japanese population with
subclinical hypothyroidism. Thyroid. 2011;21(11):1177–1182.
139. Di´ez JJ, Iglesias P. Spontaneous subclinical hypothyroidism in patients older than 55 years: An analysis of natural
course and risk factors for the development of overt thyroid failure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89(10):4890–4897.
140. James SR, Ray L, Ravichandran K, et al. High atherogenic index of plasma in subclinical hypothyroidism: Implications in
assessment of cardiovascular disease risk. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2016;20(5):656–661.
141. Laway BA, War WA, Shah S, et al. Alterations in lipid parameters in patient with subclinical hypothyroidism. Int J
Endocrinol Metab. 2014;12(3):e17496.
142. Liu XL, He S, Zhang SF, et al. Alteration of lipid profile in subclinical hypothyroidism: A meta-analysis. Med Sci Monit. 2014;
20:1432–1441.
143. Blum MR, Bauer DC, Collet TH, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and fracture risk: A meta-analysis. JAMA. 2015;
313(20):2055–2065. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.5161.
144. Blum MR,Wijsman LW, Virgini VS, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and depressive symptoms among the elderly: A
prospective cohort study. Neuroendocrinology. 2016;103(3-4):291–299.
145. Mazzaferri EL. Management of a solitary thyroid nodule. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:553–559.
146. Wilhelm S. Evaluation of thyroid incidentaloma. Surg Clin North Am. 2014;94(3):485–497.
147. Tan GH, Gharib H. Thyroid incidentalomas: Management approaches to nonpalpable nodules discovered incidentally
on thyroid imaging. Ann Intern Med. 1997:126(3):226–231.
148. Mortensen JD, Woolner LB, Bennet WA. Gross and microscopic findings in clinically normal thyroid gland. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 1955;15(10):1270–1280.
149. Hegedus L, Bonnema SJ, Bennedbaek FN. Management of simple nodular goitre: Current status and future perspectives.
Endocr Rev. 2003;24(1):102–132.
150. Alexander EK, Hurwitz S, Heering JP, et al. Natural history of benign solid and cystic thyroid nodules. Ann Intern Med.
2003;138(4):315–318.
151. Hugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al. 2015 American Thyroid Association Management Guidelines for adult patients
with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer: The American Thyroid Association Guidelines task force on
thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2016;26(1):1–133.
152. AACE/AME/ACE 2016 Guidelines for clinical practice for the diagnosis and management of thyroid nodules. Endocrine
Practice. 2016;22(Suppl 1);1–60.
153. Berghout A, Wiersinga WM, Drexhage HA, et al. Comparison of placebo with L-thyroxine alone or with carbimazole for
treatment of sporadic non-toxic goiter. Lancet. 1990;336(8709):193–197.
154. Castro MR, Caraballo PJ, Morris JC. Effectiveness of thyroid hormone suppressive therapy in benign solitary thyroid
nodules: A metaanalysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87(9):4154–4159.
155. Berghout A, Wiersinga WM, Drexhage HA, et al. The long-term outcome of thyroidectomy for sporadic nontoxic goitre.
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1989;31(2):193–199.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
130
156. Bonnema SJ, Nielsen VE, Hegedus L. Long-term effects of radioiodine on thyroid function, size and patient satisfaction
in non-toxic diffuse goitre. Eur J Endocrinol. 2004;150(4):439–445.
157. Zingrillo M, Torlontano M, Chiarella R, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection may be a definitive treatment for
symptomatic thyroid cystic nodules not treatable by surgery: Five year follow-up study. Thyroid. 1999;9(8):763–767.
158. Akamizu T, Satoh T, Isozaki O, et al. Diagnostic criteria, clinical features, and incidence of thyroid storm based on
nationwide surveys. Thyroid. 2012;22(7):661–679.
159. Swee du S, Chng CL, Lim. A Clinical characteristics and outcome of thyroid storm: A case series and review of
neuropsychiatric derangements in thyrotoxicosis. Endocr Pract. 2015;21(2):182–189.
160. Nayak B, Burman K. Thyrotoxicosis and thyroid storm. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2006;35(4):663–686.
161. Burch HB, Wartofsky L. Life-threatening thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid storm. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1993;22(2):
263–277.
162. Angell TE, Lechner MG, Nguyen CT. Clinical features and hospital outcomes in thyroid storm: a retrospective cohort
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2):451–459.
163. Abuid J, Larsen PR. Triiodothyronine and thyroxine in hyperthyroidism. Comparison of the acute changes during
therapy with antithyroid agents. J Clin Invest. 1974;54(1):201–208.
164. Cooper DS, Saxe VC, Meskell M, et al. Acute effects of propylthiouracil (PTU) on thyroidal iodide organification and
peripheral iodothyronine deiodination: Correlation with serum PTU levels measured by radioimmunoassay. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 1982;54(1):101–107.
165. Isozaki O, Satoh T, Wakino S, et al. Treatment and management of thyroid storm: Analysis of the nationwide surveys. The
taskforce committee of the Japan Thyroid Association and Japan Endocrine Society for the establishment of diagnostic
criteria and nationwide surveys for thyroid storm. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2016;84(6):912–918.
166. Satoh T, Isozaki O, Suzuki A, et al. 2016 Guidelines for the management of thyroid storm from The Japan Thyroid
Association and Japan Endocrine Society (First edition). Endocr J. 2016;63(12):1025–1064.
167. Nakamura H, Noh JY, Itoh K, et al. Comparison of methimazole and propylthiouracil in patients with hyperthyroidism
caused by Graves’ disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(6):2157–2162.
168. Nabil N, Miner DJ, Amatruda JM. Methimazole: An alternative route of administration. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1982;54(1):180–181.
169. Yeung SC, Go R, Balasubramanyam A, et al. Rectal administration of iodide and propylthiouracil in the treatment of
thyroid storm. Thyroid. 1995;5(5):403–405.
170. Jongjaroenprasert W, Akarawut W, Chantasart D, et al. Rectal administrationof propylthiouracil in hyperthyroid patients:
comparison of suspension enema and suppository form. Thyroid. 2002;12(7):627–631.
171. Zweig SB, Schlosser JR, Thomas SA, et al. Rectal administration of propylthiouracil in suppository form in patients with
thyrotoxicosis and critical illness: Case report and review of literature. Endocr Pract. 2006;12(1):43–47.
172. Reilly CS, Wood M, Koshakji RP, et al. Ultra-short-acting beta-blockade: a comparison with conventional beta-blockade.
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1985;38(5):579–585.
173. Squizzato A, Romualdi E, Büller HR, et al.Clinical review: Thyroid dysfunction and effects on coagulation and fibrinolysis:
A systematic review. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(7):2415–2420.
174. Chopra IJ, Williams DE, Orgiazzi J, et al. Opposite effects of dexamethasone on serum concentrations of
3,3’,5’-triiodothyronine (reverse T3) and 3,3’ 5-triiodothyronine (T3). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1975;41(5):911–920.
175. Bianco AC, Nunes MT, Hell NS, et al. The role of glucocorticoids in the stress-induced reduction of extrathyroidal
3,5,3’-triiodothyronine generation in rats. Endocrinology. 1987;120(3):1033–1038.
176. Takata K, Amino N, Kubota S, et al. Benefit of short-term iodide supplementation to antihyroid drug treatment of
thyrotoxicosis due to Graves’ disease. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010;72(6):845–850.
177. Sato S, Noh JY NJ, Sato S, et al. Comparison of efficacy and adverse events between methimazole 15 mg + inorganic
iodine 38 mg/day and methimazole 30 mg/day as initial therapy for Graves’ disease patients with moderate tosevere
hyperthyroidism. Thyroid. 2015;25(1):43-50.
178. Wolff J, Chaikoff IL. Plasma inorganic iodide as a homeostatic regulator of thyroid function. J Biol Chem. 1948;174:
555–564.
179. Goldberg PA, Inzucchi SE. Critical issues in endocrinology. Clin Chest Med. 2003;24(4):583–606.
180. Kristensen O, Andersen HH, Pallisgaard G. Lithium carbonate in the treatment of thyrotoxicosis. A controlled trial.
Lancet. 1976;1(7960):603–605.
181. Tyer NM, Kim TY, Martinez DS. Review of oral cholecystographic agents for the management of hyperthyroidism. Endocr
Pract. 2014;20(10):1084–1092.
182. Tsai WC, Pei D, Wang T, et al. The effect of combination therapy with propylthiouracil and cholestyramine in the
treatment of Graves’ hyperthyroidism. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2005;62(5):521–524.
183. Kaykhaei MA, Shams M, Sadegholvad A, et al. Low doses of cholestyramine in the treatment of hyperthyroidism.
Endocrine. 2008;34(1-3):52–55.
184. Muller C, Perrin P, Faller B, et al. Role of plasma exchange in the thyroid storm. Ther Apher Dial. 2011;1596):522–531.
185. Carhill A, Gutierrez A, Lakhia R, et al. Surviving the storm: two cases of thyroid storm successfully treated with
plasmapheresis. BMJ Case Rep. 2012.doi: 10.1136/bcr-2012-006696.
186. Scholz GH, Hagenmann E, Arkenau C, et al. Is there a place for thyroidectomy in older patients with thyrotoxic storm and
cardiorespiratory failure? Thyroid. 2003;13(10):933–940.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
131
187. Schaaf L, Greschner M, Paschke R, et al. Thyrotoxic crisis in Graves’ disease: indication for immediate surgery. Klin
Wochenschr. 1990;68(21):1037–1041.
188. Kwaku MP, Burman KD. Myxedema coma. J Intensive Care Med. 2007;22(4):224–231.
189. Popoveniuc G, Chandra T, Sud A, et al. A diagnostic scoring system for myxedema coma. Endocr Pract. 2014;20(8):
808–817.
190. Mathew V, Misgar RA, Ghosh S, et al. Myxedema coma: A new Look into an old crisis. J Thyroid Res. 2011;2011:493462.
191. Wartofsky L. Myxoedema coma. Endocrinol Metabol Clin North Am. 2006;35(4):687–698.
192. Dutta P, Bhansali A, Masoodi SR, et al. Predictors of outcome in myxoedema coma: a study from a tertiary care centre.
Crit Care. 2008;12(1):R1.
193. Ono Y, Ono S, Yasunaga H, et al.Clinical characteristics and outcomes of myxedema coma: Analysis of a national
inpatient database in Japan. J Epidemiology. 2017;27(3):117–122.
194. Jansen HJ, DoebéSR, Louwerse ES et al. Status epilepticus caused by a myxedema coma. Neth J Med. 2006;64(6):202–205.
195. Lee CH, Wira CR. Severe angioedema in myxedema coma: a difficult airway in a rare endocrine Emergency. Am J Emerg
Med. 2009;27(8):1021.e1-2.
196. Chu M, Seltzer TF. Myxedema Coma Induced by Ingestion of Raw Bok Choy. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(20):1945–1946.
197. Takamura A, Sangen R, Furumura Y, et al. Diagnosis of myxedema coma complicated by renal failure: A case report.
Clin Case Rep. 2017;5(4):399–402. doi:10.1002/ccr3.850.
198. Klubo-Gwiezdzinska J, Wartofsky L. Thyroid emergencies. Med Clin North Am. 2012;96(2):385–403.
199. Palace MR. Perioperative management of thyroid dysfunction. Health Services Insights. 2017;10:10.1177/
1178632916689677.
200. Langley RW, Burch HB. Perioperative management of the thyrotoxic patient. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2003;
32(2):519–534.
201. Feek CM, Sawers SA, Irvine WJ, et al. Combination of potassium iodide and propranolol in preparation of patients with
Graves’ disease for thyroid surgery. N Engl J Med. 1980;302:883–885.
202. Vickers P, Garg KM, Arya R, et al. The role of selective beta 1-blocker in the preoperative preparation of thyrotoxicosis:
A comparative study with propranolol. Int Surg.1990;75(3):179–183.
203. Adlerberth A, Stenström G, Hasselgren PO. The selective beta 1-blocking agent metoprolol compared with antithyroid
drug and thyroxine as preoperative treatment of patients with hyperthyroidism. Results from a prospective, randomized
study. Ann Surg. 1987;205(2):182–188.
204. Guide to clinical and preventive services: report of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 2 nd ed. Baltimore: Williams
& Wilkins, 1996:209–218.
205. Biondi B. Cardiovascular effects of mild hypothyroidism. Thyroid. 2007;17(7):625–630.
206. Bahammam SA, Sharif MM, Jammah AA, et al. Prevalence of thyroid disease in patients with obstructive sleep apnea.
Respir Med. 2011;105(11):1755–1760.
207. Deegan RJ, Furman WR. Cardiovascular manifestations of endocrine dysfunction. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2011;
25(4):705–720.
208. Park YJ, Yoon JW, Kim KI, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism might increase the risk of transient atrial fibrillation after
coronary artery bypass grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87(6):1846–1852.
209. Weinberg AD, Brennan MD, Gorman CA, et al. Outcome of anaesthesia and surgery in hypothyroid patients. Arch Intern
Med. 1983;143(5):893–897.
210. Alfadda AA, Sallam RM, Elawad GE, et al. Subacute thyroiditis: Clinical presentation and long term outcome. Int J
Endocrinol. 2014;2014: 794943. doi:10.1155/2014/794943.
211. Nishihara E, Ohye H, Amino N, et al. Clinical characteristics of 852 patients with subacute thyroiditis before treatment.
Intern Med. 2008;47(8):725–729. doi:10.2169/internalmedicine.47.0740.
212. Arao T, Okada Y, Torimoto K, et al. Prednisolone dosing regimen for treatment of subacute thyroiditis. J UOEH.
2015;37(2):103–110. doi:10.7888/juoeh.37.103.
213. Sato J, Uchida T, Komiya K, et al. Comparison of the therapeutic effects of prednisolone and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs in patients with subacute thyroiditis. Endocrine. 2017;55(1):209–214. doi:10.1007/s12020-0161122-3.
214. Erdem N, Erdogan M, Ozbek M, et al. Demographic and clinical features of patients with subacute thyroiditis: Results of
169 patients from a single University Center in Turkey. J Endocrinol Invest. 2007;30(7):546–550.
215. Benbassat CA, Olchovsky D, Tsvetov G, et al. Subacute thyroiditis: Clinical characteristics and treatment outcome in
fifty-six consecutive patients diagnosed between 1999 and 2005. J Endocrinol Invest. 2007;30(8):631–635. doi:10.1007/
BF03347442.
216. Fatourechi V, Aniszewski JP, Fatourechi GZ, et al. Clinical features and outcome of subacute thyroiditis in an incidence
cohort: Olmsted County, Minnesota, study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88(5):2100–2105. doi:10.1210/jc.2002-021799.
217. Sweeney LB, Stewart C, Gaitonde DY. Thyroiditis: An integrated approach. Am Fam Physician. 2014;90(6):389–96.
218. Frates MC, Ellen M, Benson CB, et al. Subacute granulomatous (de Quervain) thyroiditis: Grayscale and color doppler
sonographic characteristics. J Ultrasound Med. 2013;32(3):505–511.
219. Hennessey Jv. Subacute Thyroiditis. 2018 Jun 12. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, et al., editors. Endotext [Internet].
South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279084/
220. Izumi Y, Hidaka Y, Tada H, et al. Simple and practical parameters for differentiation between destruction-induced
thyrotoxicosis and Graves’ thyrotoxicosis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2002;57(1):51–58. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2265.2002.01558.x.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
132
221. Cappelli C, Pirola I, Gandossi E, et al. Ultrasound findings of subacute thyroiditis: a single institution retrospective review.
Acta Radiol. 2014;55(4):429–433. doi:10.1177/0284185113498721.
222. Kubota S, Nishihara E, Kudo T, et al. Initial treatment with 15 mg of prednisolone daily is sufficient for most patients with
subacute thyroiditis in Japan. Thyroid. 2013;23(3):269–272. doi:10.1089/thy.2012.0459.
223. Ma SG, Bai F, Cheng L. A novel treatment for subacute thyroiditis: Administration of a mixture of lidocaine and
dexamethasone using an insulin pen. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89(6):861–862. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.03.013.
224. Paes JE, Burman KD, Cohen J, et al. Acute bacterial suppurative thyroiditis: A clinical review and expert opinion. Thyroid.
2010;20(3):247–255. doi:10.1089/thy.2008.0146.
225. Masuoka H, Miyauchi A, Tomoda C, et al. Imaging studies in sixty patients with acute suppurative thyroiditis. Thyroid.
2011;21(10):1075–1080. doi:10.1089/thy.2010.0366.
226. Kim KH, Sung MW, Koh TY, et al. Piriform sinus fistula management with chemocauterization of the internal opening.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2015;452–456.
227. Miyauchi A, Inoue H, Tomoda C, et al. Evaluation of chemocauterization treatment for obliteration of pyriform
sinus fistula as a route of infection causing acute suppurative thyroiditis. Thyroid. 2009;19(7):789–793. doi:10.1089/
thy.2009.0015.
228. Medici M, Korevaar TI, Visser WE, et al. Thyroid function in pregnancy: What is normal? Clin Chem. 2015;61(5):704–713.
229. Alexander EK, Pearce EN, Brent GA, et al. Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and
management of thyroid disease during pregnancy postpartum. Thyroid. 2017;27(3):315–389.
230. Groot LD, Abalovich M, Alexander EK et al. Management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy and postpartum: An
endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metabol. 2012;97(8):2543–2565.
231. Krassas G, Karras SN, Pontikides N. Thyroid diseases during pregnancy: A number of important issues. Hormones
(Athens). 2015;14(1):59–69.
232. Nazarpour S, Tehrani FR, Simbar M, et al. Comparison of universal screening with targeted high-risk case finding for
diagnosis of thyroid disorders. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016;174(1):77–83.
233. Tingi E, Syed AA, Kyriacou A, et al. Benign thyroid disease in pregnancy: A state of the art review. Journal of Clin Transl
Endocrinol. 2016;6:37–49.
234. Han C,Li C, Mao J, et al. High body mass index is an indicator of maternal hypothyroidism, hypothyroxinaemia and
thyroid-peroxidase antibody positivity during early pregnancy. Biomed Research International. 2015; doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1155/2015/351831.
235. Andersen ON, Olsen J, Laurberg P. Maternal thyroid disease in the danish national birth cohort: Prevalence and risk
factors. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016;174(2):203–212a.
236. Nambiar V, Jagtap VS, Sarathi V, et al. Prevalence and impact of thyroid disorders on maternal outcome in Asian-Indian
pregnant women. J Thyroid Res. 2011;2011:429097
237. Sahu MT, Das V, Mittal S, et al. Overt and subclinical thyroid dysfunction among Indian pregnant women and its effect
on maternal and fetal outcome. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2010;281(2):215–220.
238. Su PY, Huang K, Hao JH, et al. Thyroid function in the first twenty weeks of pregnancy and subsequent fetal and infant
development: a prospective population-based cohort study in China. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:3234–3241.
239. Haddow JE, Palomaki GE, Allan WC, et al. Maternal thyroid deficiency during pregnancy and subsequent
neuropsychological development of the child. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:549–555.
240. Cleary-Goldman J, Malone FD, Lambert-Messerlian G, et al. Maternal thyroid hypofunction and pregnancy outcome.
Obstet Gynecol. 2008;112:85–92.
241. Mannisto T, Vaarasmaki M, Pouta A, et al. Perinatal outcome of children born to mothers with thyroid dysfunction or
antibodies: a prospective population-based cohort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94:772–779.
242. Mannisto T, Vaarasmaki M, Pouta A, et al. Thyroid dysfunction and autoantibodies during pregnancy as predictive
factors of pregnancy complications and maternal morbidity in later life. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:1084–1094.
243. Van den Boogaard E, Vissenberg R, Land JA, et al. Significance of (sub) clinical thyroid dysfunction and thyroid
autoimmunity before conception and in early pregnancy: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update. 2011;17(5):605–619.
244. Chan S, Boelaert K. Optimal management of hypothyroidism, hypothyroxinaemia and euthyroid TPO antibody positivity
preconception and in pregnancy. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015;82(3):313–326.
245. Maraka S, Ospina NMS, O’Keffe DT, et al. Subclinical Hypothyrodism in Pregnancy: A systematic review and MetaAnalysis. Thyroid. 2016;26(4):580–590.
246. Zhang Y, Wang H, Pan X, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism before 20 weeks of pregnancy have a higher risk of miscarriage.
A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2017;12(4):e0175708.
247. Li Y, Shan Z, Teng W, Yu X, et al. Abnormalities of maternal thyroid function during pregnancy affect neuropsychological
development of their children at 25-30 months. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010;72(6):825–829.
248. Julvez J, Alvarez-Pedrerol M, Rebagliato M, et al. Thyroxine levels during pregnancy in healthy women and early child
neurodevelopment. Epidemiology. 2013;24:150–157.
249. Karakosta P, Alegakis D, Georgiou V, et al. Thyroid dysfunction and autoantibodies in early pregnancy are associated
with increased risk of gestational diabetes and adverse birth outcomes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(12):4464–4472.
250. Korevaar TI, Schalekamp-Timmermans S, de Rijke YB, et al. Hypothyroxinemia and TPO-antibody positivity are risk
factors for premature delivery: the generation R study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(11):4382–4390.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
133
251. Liu H, Shan Z, Li C, et al. Maternal subclinical hypothyroidism, thyroid autoimmunity, and the risk of miscarriage: A
prospective cohort study. Thyroid. 2014;4(11):1642–1649.
252. Kumru P, Erdogdu E, Arisoy R, et al. Effect of thyroid dysfunction and autoimmunity on pregnancy outcomes in low risk
population. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015;291(5):1047–1054.
253. Negro R. Thyroid autoimmunity and pre-term delivery: brief review and meta-analysis. J Endocrinol Invest. 2011;34(2):
155–158.
254. Thangaratinam S, Tan A, Knox E, et al. Association between thyroid autoantibodies and miscarriage and preterm birth:
Meta-analysis of evidence. Bri Med J. 2011;342:d2616.
255. Iravani AT, Saeedi MM, Pakravesh J, et al. Thyroid autoimmunity and recurrent spontaneous abortion in Iran: A casecontrol study. Endocr Pract. 2008;14:458–464.
256. Wasserman EE, Pillion JP, Duggan A, et al. Childhood IQ, hearing loss, and maternal thyroid autoimmunity in the
Baltimore Collaborative Perinatal Project. Pediatr Res. 2012;72(5):525–530.
257. Wang S, Teng W P, Li JX, et al. Effects of maternal subclinical hypothyroidism on obstetrical outcomes during early
pregnancy. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012;35:322–325.
258. Maraka S, Mwangi R, McCoy RG, et al. Thyroid hormone treatment among pregnant women with subclinical
hypothyroidism: US national assessment. BMJ. 2017;356:i6865
259. Nazarpour S, Ramezani Tehrani F, Simbar M, et al. Effects of Levothyroxine on pregnant women with subclinical
hypothyroidism, negative for thyroid peroxidase antibodies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018;103(3):926–935
260. Lazarus JH, Bestwick JP, Channon S, et al. Antenatal thyroid screening and childhood cognitive function (Controlled
Antenatal Thyroid Screening study). N Engl J Med. 2012;366(6):493–501.
261. Casey BM, Thom EA, Peaceman AM, et al. Treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism or hypothyroxinemia in pregnancy.
N Eng J Med. 2017;376;815–825.
262. Negro R, Formoso G, Mangieri T, et al. Levothyroxine treatment in euthyroid pregnant women with autoimmune thyroid
disease: effects on obstetrical complications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:2587–2591.
263. Debiève F, Dulière S, Bernard P, et al. To treat or not to treat euthyroid autoimmune disorder during pregnancy. Gynecol
Obstet Invest. 2009;67:178–182.
264. Lepoutre T, Debiève F, Gruson D, et al. Reduction of miscarriages through universal screening and treatment of thyroid
autoimmune diseases. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2012;4(4):265–273.
265. Nazarpour S, Ramezani Tehrani F, Simbar M, et al. Effects of levothyroxine treatment on pregnancy outcomes in
pregnant women with autoimmune thyroid disease. Eur J Endocrinol. 2017;176(2):253–265.
266. Taylor PN, Minassian C, Rehman A, et al. TSH levels and risk of miscarriage in women on long-term levothyroxine: A
community-based study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:3895–3902.
267. Alexander EK, Marqusee E, Lawrence J, et al. Timing and magnitude of increases in levothyroxine requirements during
pregnancy in women with hypothyroidism. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:241–249.
268. Verga U, Berganmaschi S, Cortelazzi D, et al. Adjustment of L-T4 substitute therapy in pregnant women with subclinical,
overt or post-ablative hypothyroidism. Clin Endocrinol (Oxford).2009;70:798–802.
269. Loh JA, Wartofsky L, Jonklaas J, et al. The magnitude of increased levothyroxine requirements in hypothyroid pregnant
women depends upon the etiology of the hypothyroidism. Thyroid. 2009;19:269–275.
270. Yassa L, Marqusee E, Fawcett R, et al. Thyroid hormone early adjustment in pregnancy (the THERAPY) trial. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:3234–3241.
271. Galofre JC, Haber RS, Mitchell AA, et al. Increased postpartum thyroxine replacement in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Thyroid.
2010;20:901–908.
272. Negro R, Schwartz A, Gismondi R, et al. Universal screening versus case finding for detection and treatment of thyroid
hormonal dysfunction during pregnancy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:1699–1707.
273. De Carlucci DJr, Tavares MR, Obara MT, et al. Thyroid function after unilateral total lobectomy: Risk factors for
postoperative hypothyroidism. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;134:1076–1079.
274. Rotondi M, Leporati P, La Manna A, et al. Raised serum TSH levels in patients with morbid obesity: Is it enough to
diagnose subclinical hypothyroidism? Eur J Endocrinol. 2009;160:403–408.
275. Potlukova E, Potluka O, Jiskra J, et al. Is age a risk factor for hypothyroidism in pregnancy? An analysis of 5223 pregnant
women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:1945–1952.
276. Verloop H, Louwerens M, Schoones JW, et al. Risk of hypothyroidism following hemithyroidectomy: Systematic review
and meta-analysis of prognostic studies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(7):2243–2255.
277. Carle A, Pedersen IB, Knudsen N, et al. Development of autoimmune overt hypothyroidism is highly associated with live
births and induced abortions but only in premenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:2241–2249.
278. Nambiar V, Jagtap VS, Sarathi V, et al. Prevalence and impact of thyroid disorders on maternal outcome in Asian-Indian
pregnant women. J Thyroid Res. 2011;2011:429097.
279. Andersen SL, Olsen J, Laurberg P. Maternal thyroid disease in the Danish national birth cohort: prevalence and risk
factors. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016;174(2):203–212.
280. Krassas G, Karras SN, Pontikides N. Thyroid diseases during pregnancy: A number of important issues. Hormones
(Athens). 2015;14(1):59–69.
281. Nazarpour S, Tehrani FR, Simbar M, et al. Comparison of universal screening with targeted high-risk case finding for
diagnosis of thyroid disorder. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016;174(1):77–83.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
134
282. Tingi E, Syed AA, Kyriacou A, et al. Benign thyroid disease in pregnancy: A state of the art review. J Clin Transl Endocrinol.
2016;6:37–49.
283. Korelitz JJ, McNally DL, Masters MN, et al. Prevalence of Thyrotoxicosis, Antithyroid Medication Use, and Complications
Among Pregnant Women in the United States. Thyroid. 2013;23(6):758–765.
284. De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–918.
285. Lo JC, Rivkees SA, Chandra M, et al. Gestational thyrotoxicosis, antithyroid drug use and neonatal outcomes within an
integrated healthcare delivery system. Thyroid. 2015;25(6):698–705.
286. Lim BH, Raman S, Sivanesaratnam V, et al. Thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy: A six year review. Singapore Med J. 1989;30(6):
539–541.
287. Casey BM, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al. Subclinical hyperthyroidism and pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;
107(2 Pt 1):337–341.
288. Labadzhyan A, Brent GA, Hershman JM, et al. Thyrotoxicosis of pregnancy. J Clin Transl Endocrinol. 2014;1(4):140–144.
289. Andersen SL, Laurberg P. Managing hyperthyroidism in pregnancy: Current perspectives. Int J of Womens Health.
2016;8:497–504.
290. Yoshihara A, Noh JY, Mukasa K, et al. Serum human chorionic gonadotropin levels and thyroid hormone levels in
gestational transient thyrotoxicosis: Is the serum hCG level useful for differentiating between active Graves’ disease
and GTT? Endocr J. 2015;62(6):557–560.
291. Kinomoto-Kondo S, Umehara N, Sato S, et al. The effects of gestational transient thyrotoxicosis on the perinatal
outcomes: a case-control study. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2017;295(1):87–93.
292. Sun S, Qiu X, Zhou J. Clinical analysis of 65 cases of hyperemesis gravidarum with gestational transient thyrotoxicosis.
J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2014;40(6):1567–1572.
293. Andersen SL, Olsen J, Wu CS, et al. Birth defects after early pregnancy use of antithyroid drugs: A Danish nationwide
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(11):4373–4381.
294. Yoshihara A, Noh J, Yamaguchi T, et al. Treatment of Graves’ disease with antithyroid drugs in the first trimester of
pregnancy and the prevalence of congenital malformation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(7):2396–2403.
295. Aggarawal N, Suri V, Singla R, et al. Pregnancy outcome in hyperthyroidism: A case control study. GynecolObstet Invest.
2014;77(2):94–99.
296. Lazarus JH. Pre-conception counselling in Graves’ disease. Eur Thyroid J. 2012;1(1):24–29.
297. Laurberg P, Wallin G, Tallstedt L, et al. TSH-receptor autoimmunity in Graves’ disease after therapy with anti-thyroid
drugs, surgery, or radioiodine: A 5-year prospective randomized study. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008;158:69–75.
298. Andersen SL, Olsen J, Wu CS, et al. Severity of birth defects after propylthiouracil exposure in early pregnancy. Thyroid.
2014;24:1533–1540.
299. Laurberg P, Andersen SL. Antithyroid drug use in pregnancy and birth defects: Why some studies find clear associations,
and some studies report none. Thyroid. 2015;25:1185–1190.
300. Laurberg P, Andersen SL. Antithyroid drug use in early pregnancy and birth defects: Time windows of relative safety and
high risk? Eur J of Endocrinology. 2014;171;R13–R20.
301. British National Formulary (https://bnfc.nice.org.uk/drug/propylthiouracil.html)
302. Bliddal S, Rasmussen AK, Sundberg K, et al. Antithyroid drug-induced fetal goitrous hypothyroidism. Nat Rev Endocrinol.
2011;7(7):396–406.
303. Azizi F and Amouzegar A. Management of hyperthyroidism during pregnancy and lactation. Eur J Endocrinol.
2011;164(6):871–876.
304. Andersen SL, Olsen J, Carlé A, et al. Hyperthyroidism incidence fluctuates widely in and around pregnancy and
is at variance with some other autoimmune diseases: a Danish population-based study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2015;100(3):1164–1171.
305. Kamath C, Adlanand MA, Premawardhana LD. Review article: The role of thyrotrophin receptor antibody assays in
Graves’ disease. Journal of Thyroid. 2012;525936:1–8.
306. Negro R, Mestman JH. Thyroid disease in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;25(6):927–943.
307. Bucci I, Giuliani C, Napolitano G. Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies in pregnancy: clinical relevance.
Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2017;8:13.
308. Nguyen CT, Sasso EB, Barton L, et al. Graves’ hyperthyroidism in pregnancy: a clinical review. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol.
2018;1;4:4.
309. Azizi F and Amouzegar A. Management of hyperthyroidism during pregnancy and lactation. Eur J Endocrinol.
2011;164(6):871–876.
310. Hudzik B, Zubelewicz-Szkodzinska B. Antithyroid drugs during breastfeeding. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2016;85(6):827–830.
311. Karras S, Krassas GE. Breastfeeding and antithyroid drugs: a view from within. Eur Thyroid J. 2012;1(1):30–33.
312. Stagnaro-Green A. Approach to the patient with postpartum thyroiditis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:334–342.
313. Anagnostis P, Lefkou E, Goulis DG. Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and management
of thyroid disease during pregnancy and the postpartum. Thyroid. 2017;27(3):315–389.
314. Stagnaro-Green A, Schwartz A, Gismondi R, et al. High rate of persistent hypothyroidism in a large-scale prospective
study of postpartum thyroiditis in southern Italy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:652–657.
315. Stagnaro-Green A, Akhter E, Yim C, et al. Thyroid disease in pregnant women with systemic lupus erythematosus:
increased preterm delivery. Lupus. 2011;20:690–699.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
135
316. Manetti L, Parkes AB, Lupi I, et al. Serum pituitary antibodies in normal pregnancy and in patients with postpartum
thyroiditis: a nested case-controlstudy. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008;159:805–809.
317. Hunter I, Greene SA, MacDonald TM, et al. Prevalence and aetiology of hypothyroidism inthe young. Arch Dis Child.
2000;83(3):207–210.
318. De Vries L, Bulvik S, Phillip M. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis in children and adolescents at presentation and during
long term follow-up. Arch Dis Child.2009;94:33–37.
319. Ozer G, Yuksel B, Kozanoglu M, et al. Growth and development of 280 hypothyroid patients at diagnosis. Acta Paediatric
Jpn. 1995;37;145–149.
320. Purandare A, Co Ng L, Godzilla M, et al. Effect of hypothyroidism and its treatment on the IGF system in infants and
children. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2003;16(1):35–42.
321. Rose SR. Improved diagnosis of mild hypothyroidism using time of day normal ranges for thyrotropin. J Pediatr.
2010;157(4):662–667.
322. Vlachopapadopoulou E,Thomas D, Karachaliou F, et al. Evolution of sonography appearance of the thyroid gland in
children with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2009;22(4):339–344.
323. Rivkees SA, Bode HH, Crawford JD. Long term growth in juvenile acquired hypothyroidism: the failure to achieve normal
adult stature. N Engl J Med. 1988;318(10):599–602.
324. Wasniewska M, Corrias A, Salerno M, et al. Thyroid function patterns at Hashimoto’s thyroiditis presentation in
childhood and adolescence are mainly conditioned by patients’ age. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;78(4):232–236.
325. Baluch Z, Carayon P, Conte-Devolx B, et al. Laboratory medicine practice guidelines. Laboratory support for the
diagnosis and monitoring of thyroid disease. Thyroid. 2003;13:3–126.
326. Svensson J, Ericsson UB, Nilsson P, et al. Levothyroxine treatment reduces thyroid size in children and adolescents with
chronic autoimmune thyroiditis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91(5):1729–1734.
327. Scarpa V, Kousta E, Tertipi A, et al. Treatment with thyroxine reduces thyroid volume in euthyroid children and
adolescents with chronic autoimmune thyroiditis. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;73(1):61–67.
328. Dörr HG, Bettendorf M, Binder G, et al. Levothyroxine treatment of euthyroid children with autoimmune Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis: results of a multicenter, randomised controlled trials. Horm Res Paediatr. 2015;84(4):266–274.
329. Witkowska-Sędek E, Borowiec A, Kucharska A, et al. Thyroid autoimmunity in girls with Turner Syndrome. Adv Exp Med
Biol. 2017;1022:71–76.
330. Livadas S, Xekouki P, Fouka F, et al. Prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in Turner’s syndrome: A long-term follow-up study
and brief literature review. Thyroid. 2005;15(9):1061–1066.
331. Fukuda I, Hizuka N, Kurimoto M, et al. Autoimmune thyroid diseases in 65 Japanese women with Turner syndrome.
Endocr J. 2009;56(8):983–986.
332. Wasniewska M, Salerno M, Corrias A, et al. The Evolution of thyroid function after presenting with hashimoto
thyroiditis is different between initially euthyroid girls with and those without Turner Syndrome. Horm Res Paediatr.
2016;86(6):403–409.
333. Gravholt CH, Andersen NH, Conway GS, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the care of girls and women with
Turner syndrome: Proceedings from the 2016 Cincinnati International Turner Syndrome Meeting. Eur J Endocrinol.
2017;177(3):G1–G70.
334. Bondy CA, Turner Syndrome Study Group. Care of girls and women with Turner Syndrome: A guideline of the turner
syndrome study group. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(1):10–25.
335. Chang P, Tsai WY, Hou JW, et al. Autoimmune thyroiditis in children with Turner Syndrome. J Formos Med Assoc.
2000;99(11):823–826.
336. Massa G, de Zegher F, Vanderschueren-Lodeweyckx M. Thyroid function in Turner Syndrome. In: Hibi I, Takano K (eds.)
Basic and Clinical Approach to Turner Syndrome. Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam. 1993;129–135.
337. S. McGowan, J. Jones, A. Brown, et al. Capillary TSH screening program for Down syndrome in Scotland 1997-2009. Arch
Dis Child. 2011;96(12):1113–1117.
338. Lughetti L, Predieri B, Bruzzi P, et al. Ten-year longitudinal study of thyroid function in children with Down’s syndrome.
Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;82(2):113–121.
339. King K, O’Gorman C, Gallagher S. Thyroid dysfunction in children with Down syndrome: a literature review. Ir J Med Sci.
2014;107:118–119.
340. Niegawa T, Takitani K, Takaya R, et al. Evaluation of uric acid levels, thyroid function, and anthropometric parameters in
Japanese children with Down syndrome. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2017;61(2):146–152.
341. Claret C, Goday A, Benaiges D, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism in the first years of life in patients with Down syndrome.
Pediatr Res. 2013;73:674–678.
342. Lazarus J, Brown RS, Daumerie C, et al. European Thyroid Association guidelines for the management of subclinical
hypothyroidismin in pregnancy and in children. Eur Thyroid J. 2014;3(2):76-94.
343. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on genetics. American Academy of Pediatrics: Health supervision for
children with Down syndrome. Pediatrics. 2011;107(2):442-449.
344. Seminog OO, Seminog AB, Yeates D, et al. Associations between Klinefelter’s syndrome and autoimmune diseases:
English national record linkage studies. Autoimmunity. 2015;48(2):125–128.
345. Sawalha AH, Harley JB, Scofield RH. Autoimmunity and Klinefelter’s syndrome: when men have two X chromosomes.
J Autoimmun. 2009;33(1):31–34.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
136
346. Radicioni AF, Ferlin A, Balercia G, et al. Consensus statement on diagnosis and clinical management of Klinefelter
syndrome. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010;33(11):839–850.
347. Davis S, Howell S, Wilson R, et al. Advances in the interdisciplinary care of children with Klinefelter syndrome. Adv
Pediatr. 2016;63(1):15–46.
348. Sharkia M, Michaud S, Berthier MT, et al. Thyroid function from birth to adolescence in Prader-Willi syndrome. J Pediatr.
2013;163:800–805.
349. Tauber M, Barbeau C, Jouret B, et al. Auxological and endocrine evolution of 28 children with Prader-Willi syndrome:
effect of GH therapy in 14 children. Horm Res. 2000;53:279–287.
350. Vaiani E, Herzovich V, Chaler E, et al. Thyroid axis dysfunction in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome during the first
2 years of life. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010;73:546–550.
351. Festen DA, Visser TJ, Otten BJ, et al. Thyroid hormone levels in children with Prader-Willi syndrome before and during
growth hormone treatment. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007;67:449–456.
352. Goldstone AP, Holland AJ, Hauffa BP, et al. Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of Prader-Willi
syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:4183–4197.
353. Heksch R, Kamboj M, Anglin K, et al. Review of Prader-Willi syndrome: the endocrine approach. Transl Pediatr.
2017;6(4):274–285.
354. Poyrazoðlu S, Saka N, Bas F, et al. Evaluation of diagnosis and treatment results in children with Graves’ disease with
emphasis on the pubertal status of patients. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008:21:745–751.
355. Gogakos AI, Boboridis K, Krassas GE. Pediatric aspects in Graves’ orbitopathy. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2010;7:234–244.
356. Diana T, Brown RS, BossowskiA, et al. Clinical relevance of thyroid-stimulating autoantibodies in pediatric Graves’
disease—A multicenter study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(5):1648–1655.
357. Kaguelidou F, Alberti C, Castanet M, et al. Predictors of autoimmune hyperthyroidism relapse in children after
discontinuation of antithyroid drug treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93(10):3817–3826.
358. Brooke CGD. Dattani MT Handbook of clinical Pediatric Endocrinology. 2nd Edition. 2012.
359. Bauer AJ. Approach to the Pediatric Patient with Graves’ Disease: When is definitive therapy warranted? J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2011:96:580–588.
360. Sato H, Harada S, Yokoya S, et al. Treatment for childhood-onset Graves’ disease in Japan: results of a nationwide
questionnaire survey of pediatric endocrinologists and thyroidologists. Thyroid. 2007:17:67–72.
361. Léger J, Oliver I, Rodrigue D, et al. Graves’ Disease in Children. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2018;79(6):647–655.
362. Nakamura H, Miyauchi A, Miyawaki N, et al. Analysis of 754 cases of antithyroid drug-induced agranulocytosis over 30
years in Japan. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 :98:4776–4783.
363. Rivkees SA, MattisonDR. Propylthiouracil (PTU) hepatoxicity in children and recommendations for discontinuation of
use. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol. 2009:132041.
364. Rivkees SA. Pediatric Graves’ disease: management in the post-propylthiouracil era. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol.
2014;2014(1):10.
365. Rivkees SA. 63 Years and 715 days to the ‘‘boxed warning’’: Unmasking of the propylthiouracil problem. Int J Pediatr
Endocrinol. 2010;658267.
366. vanVeenendaal NR, Rivkees SA. Treatment of pediatric Graves’ disease is associated with excessive weight gain. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2011:96:3257–3263.
367. Glaser NS, Styne DM, Organization of Pediatric Endocrinologists of Northern California Collaborative Graves’ Disease
Study Group 2008. Predicting the likelihood of remission in children with Graves’ disease: A prospective, multicenter
study. Pediatrics. 2008:121:e481–488.
368. Leger J, Gelwane G, Kaguelidou F, et al. Positive impact of long-term antithyroid drug treatment on the outcome of
children with Graves’ disease: national long- term cohort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012:97:110–119.
369. Smith J, Brown RS. Persistence of thyrotropin (TSH) receptor antibodies in children and adolescents with Graves’ disease
treated using antithyroid medication. Thyroid. 2007:17:1103–1107.
370. Léger J. Graves’ Disease in Children. Paediatric Thyroidology. Endocr Dev. Basel. Karger. 2014;26:171–182.
371. Rohrs HJ 3rd, Silverstein JH, Weinstein DA, et al. Thyroid storm following radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy for pediatric
Graves disease. Am J Case Rep. 2014:15:212–215.
372. Sosa JA, Tuggle CT, Wang TS, et al. Clinical and economic outcomes of thyroid and parathyroid surgery in children. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2008:93:3058–3065.
373. Tuggle CT, Roman SA, Wang TS, et al. Pediatric endocrine surgery: who is operating on our children? Surgery.
2008;144(6):869–877.
374. Breuer CK, Solomon D, Donovan P, et al. Effect of patient age on surgical outcomes for Graves’ disease: a case-control
study of 100 consecutive patients at a high volume thyroid surgical center. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013;2013(1):1.
375. Ajish TP and Jayakumar RV. Geriatric thyroidology: An update. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012;16(4):542–547.
376. Boelaert K, Torlinska B, Holder RL, et al. Older subjects with hyperthyroidism present with a paucity of symptoms and
signs: a large cross-sectional study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:2715–2726.
377. Tagami T, Yambe Y, Tanaka T, et al. Short-term effects of beta-adrenergic antagonists and methimazole in new-onset
thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves’ disease. Intern Med. 2012;51(17):2285–2290.
378. Gan EH, Pearce SH. The thyroid in mind: cognitive function and low thyrotropin in older people. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2012;97(10):3438–3449.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
137
379. Virgini VS, Rodondi N, Cawthon PM, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and frailty among older men. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2015;100(12):4524–4532.
380. Moon JH, Park YJ, Kim TH, et al. Lower-but normal serum TSH level is associated with the development or progression
of cognitive impairment including mild cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly: Korean Longitudinal Study on
Health and Aging (KLoSHA). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(2):424–432.
381. Ceresini G, Ceda GP, Lauretani F, et al. Mild thyroid hormone excess is associated with a decreased physical function in
elderly men. Aging Male. 2011;14:213–219.
382. Nanchen D, Gussekloo J, Westendorp RG, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of heart failure in older
persons at high cardiovascular risk. J Clin Endo Metab. 2012;97(3):852–861.
383. Rosario PW. Natural history of subclinical hyperthyroidism in elderly patients with TSH between 0.1 and 0.4 mIU/l: A
prospective study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010;72(5):685–688.
384. Lee JS, BuzkováP, Fink HA, et al.Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and incident hip fracture in older adults. Arch Intern Med.
2010;170(21):1876–1883.
385. Lee SJ, Kim KM, Lee EY, et al. Low normal TSH levels are associated with impaired BMD and hip geometry in the elderly.
Aging Dis. 2016;7(6):734–743.
386. Waring AC, Harrison S, Fink HA, et al. A prospective studyof thyroid function, bone loss, and fractures in older men: the
MrOS study. J Bone Miner Res. 2013;28:472–479.
387. Ding B, Zhang Y, Li Q1, et al. Low thyroid stimulating hormone levels are associated with low bone mineral density in
femoral neck in elderly women. Arch Med Res. 2016;47(4):310–314.
388. Ceresini G, Ceda GP, Lauretani F, et al. Thyroid status and 6-year mortality in elderly people living in a mildly iodinedeficient area: the aging in the Chianti Area Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013;61:868–874.
389. Grossman A, Weiss A, Koren-Morag N, et al. Subclinical thyroid disease and mortality in the elderly: A retrospective
cohort study. Am J Med. 2016;129(4):423–430.
390. Pearce SH, Razvi S, Yadegarfar ME, et al. Serum thyroid function, mortality and disability in advanced old age: The
newcastle 85+ study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101(11):4385–4394.
391. Virgini VS, Wijsman LW, Rodondi N, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and functional capacity among elderly. Thyroid.
2014;24(2):208–214.
392. Wijsman LW, de Craen AJ, Trompet S, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and cognitive decline in old age. PLoS One.
2013;8:e59199.
393. Waring AC, Harrison S, Samuels MH, et al. Thyroid function and mortality in older men: a prospective study. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(3):862–870.
394. Garin MC, Arnold AM, Lee JS, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and hip fracture and bone mineral density in older
adults: the cardiovascular health study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:2657–2664.
395. de Jongh RT, Lips P, van Schoor NM, et al. Endogenous subclinical thyroid disorders, physical and cognitive function,
depression, and mortality in older individuals. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011;165:545–554.
396. Dörr M, Ittermann T, Aumann N, et al. Subclinical hyperthyroidism is not associated with progression of cardiac mass
and development of left ventricular hypertrophy in middle-aged and older subjects: results from a 5-year follow-up. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010;73(6):821–826.
397. Rosario PW. Radioiodine therapy in elderly patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism due to non-voluminous nodular
goiter and its effect on bone metabolism. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2013;57:144–147.
398. Pearce SH, Brabant G, Duntas LH, et al. 2013 ETA Guideline: Management of Subclinical Hypothyroidism. Eur Thyroid J.
2013;2:215–228.
399. Turner MR, Camacho X, Fischer HD, et al. Levothyroxine dose and risk of fractures in older adults: Nested case-control
study. BMJ. 2011;342:d2238.
400. Nanchen D, Gussekloo J, Westendorp RG, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of heart failure in older
persons at high cardiovascular risk. J Clin Endo Metab. 2012;97(3):852–861.
401. Somwaru LL, Rariy CM, Arnold AM, et al. The natural history of subclinical hypothyroidism in the elderly: the
cardiovascular health study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:1962–1969.
402. Grossman A, Weiss A, Koren-Morag N, et al. Subclinical Thyroid Disease and Mortality in the Elderly: A Retrospective
Cohort Study. Am J Med. 2016;129(4):423–430.
403. . Hyland KA, Arnold AM, Lee JS, et al. Persistent subclinical hypothyroidism and cardiovascular risk in the elderly: The
Cardiovascular Health Study. J Clin Endo Metab. 2013;98(2):533–540.
404. Pasqualetti G, Tognini S, Polini A, et al. Is subclinical hypothyroidism a cardiovascular risk factor in the elderly? J Clin Endo
Metab. 2013;98(6):2256–2266.
405. Park YJ, Lee EJ, Lee YJ, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) is not associated with metabolic derangement, cognitive
impairment, depression or poor quality of life (QoL) in elderly subjects. ArchGerontolGeriatr. 2010;50(3):e68–73.
406. Simonsick EM, Newman AB, Ferrucci L, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism and functional mobility in older adults.
ArchIntern Med. 2009;169:2011–2017.
407. Cappola AR, Arnold AM, Wulczyn K, et al. Thyroid function in the euthyroid range and adverse outcomes in older adults.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100:1088–1096.
408. Joffe RT, Pearce EN, Hennessey JV, et al. Subclinical hypothyroidism, mood, and cognitionin older adults: a review. Int J
Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;28:111–118.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
138
409. Parle J, Roberts L, Wilson S, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the effect of thyroxine replacement on cognitive
function in community-living elderly subjects with subclinical hypothyroidism: the Birmingham Elderly Thyroid Study. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(8):3623–3632.
410. Stott DJ, Rodondi N, Bauer DC, et al. Thyroid hormone therapy for older adults with subclinical hypothyroidism. N Engl J
Med. 2017;376:2534–2544.
411. Martino E, Bartalena L, Bogazzi F, et al. The effects of amiodarone on the thyroid. Endocr Rev. 2001;22(2):240–254.
412. Diederichsen SZ, Darkner S, Chen X, et al. Short-term amiodarone treatment for atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation
induces a transient thyroid dysfunction: Results from the placebo-controlled, randomized AMIO-CAT trial. Eur J Intern
Med. 2016;33:36–41.
413. Bogazzi F, Bartalena L, Martino E. Approach to the patient with Amidarone induced thyrotoxicosis. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2010;95(6):2529–2535.
414. Bartalena L, Bogazzi F, Chiovato L, et al. 2018 European Thyroid Association (ETA) Guidelines for the Management of
Amiodarone-Associated Thyroid Dysfunction. Eur Thyroid J. 2018;7(2):55–66.
415. Bogazzi F, Tomisti L, Bartalena L, et al. Amiodarone and the thyroid: A 2012 Update. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012;35:340–348.
416. Yagishita A, Hachiya H, Kawabata M, et al. Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis late after amiodarone withdrawal. Circ J.
2013;77(12):2898–903.
417. Eskes SA, Endert E, Fliers E, et al. Treatment of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis type 2: A randomized clinical trial. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:499–506.
418. Bogazzi F, Tomisti L, Rossi G, et al. Glucocorticoids are preferable to thionamides as first-line treatment for amiodaroneinduced thyrotoxicosis due to destructive thyroiditis: A matched retrospective cohort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2009;94:3757–3762.
419. Tomisti L, Materazzi G, Bartalena L, et al. Total thyroidectomy in patients with amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis and
severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(10):3515–3521.
420. Bogazzi F, Bartalena L, Tomisti L, et al. Continuation of amiodarone delays restoration of euthyroidism in patients
with type 2 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis treated with prednisone: A pilot study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab,
2011;96(11):3374–3380.
421. Carella C, Mazziotti G, Amato G, et al. Interferon-alfa related thyroid disease: Pathophysiological, epidemiological, and
clinical aspects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89(8):3656–3661.
422. Ulrich Spengler. Principles of interferon therapy in liver disease and the induction of autoimmunity. Uptodate 2018.
Available at https://www.uptodate.com/contents/principles-of-interferon-therapy-in-liver-disease-and-the-inductionof-autoimmunity.
423. Hwang Y, Kim W, Kwon SY, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for thyroid dysfunction during peginterferon α and
ribavirin treatment in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Korean J Intern Med. 2015;30(6):792–800.
424. Mammen JS, Ghazarian SR, Pulkstenis E, et al. Phenotypes of interferon-alfa induced thyroid dysfunction among
patients treated for hepatitis C are associated with pretreatment serum TSH and female sex. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2012;97(9):3270–3276.
425. Burman KD. Overview of thyroiditis. Uptodate 2018. Available at: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/overview-ofthyroiditis
426. Lazarus JH. Lithium and Thyroid. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;23(6):723–733.
427. Kirov G, Tredget J, John R, et al. A cross-sectional and a prospective study of thyroid disorders in lithium-treated patients.
J Affect Disord. 2005;87(2-3):313–317.
428. Barbesino G. Drugs affecting thyroid function. Thyroid. 2010;20(7):763–770.
429. Liu YC, Hu MH, Yang YH et al. Thyroid storm provoked by interleukin-2 therapy for metastatic melanoma. J Cancer Res
Pract. 2014;1(1):75–81.
430. Mandac JC, Chaudhry S, Sherman KE, et al. The clinical and physiological spectrum of interferon-alpha induced
thyroiditis: Toward a new classification. Hepatology. 2006;43(4):661–672.
431. Grossmann M, Premaratne E, Desai, J, et al. Thyrotoxicosis during sunitinib treatment for renal cell carcinoma. Clin
Endocrinol. 2008;69(4):669–672.
432. Miyake H, Kurahashi T, Yamanaka K, et al. Abnormalities of thyroid function in Japanese patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma treated with sorafenib: A prospective evaluation. Miyake Urol Oncol. 2010;28(5):515–519.
433. van Doorn L, Eskens FA, Visser TJ, et al. Sorafenib Induced Thyroiditis in Two Patients with Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
Thyroid. 2011;21(2):197–202.
434. Barroso-Sousa R, Barry WT, Garrido-Castro AC, et al. Incidence of endocrine dysfunction following the use of different
immune checkpoint inhibitor regimens - a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol. 2018;4(2):173–182.
435. Brahmer JR, Lacchetti C, Thompson JA. Management of immune-related adverse events in patients treated with
immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: american society of clinical oncology clinical practice guideline. J Oncol Pract.
2018;14(4):247–249.
436. Lim SL, Lim AK, Mumtaz Met al. Prevalence, risk factors and clinical features of thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy in
multi-ethnic Malaysian Patients with Graves’ Disease. Thyroid. 2008;18(12):1297–1301.
437. Larsen PR, et al. The thyroid gland. William Textbook of Endocrinology. 9th ed. Philadelphia; W.B. Saunders Company;
1998;389–515.
438. Bartley GB, Gorman CA. Diagnostic criteria for Graves’ Ophthalmopathy. Am J Ophthalmol. 1995;119(6):792–795.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
139
439. Perros P, Dayan CM, Dickinson AJ, et al. Management of patients with Graves’ orbitopathy: initial assessment,
management outside specialized centres and referral pathway. Clin Med. 2015;15(2):173–178.
440. Mourits MP, Prummel MF, Wiersinga WM, et al. Clinical activity score as a guide in the management of patients with
Graves’ Ophthalmopathy. Clin Endocrinol. 1997;47(1):9–14.
441. Bartalena L1, Baldeschi L, Dickinson A, et al. Consensus statement of the European Group on Graves’ Orbitopathy
(EUGOGO) on management of GO. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008;158(3):273–285.
442. Bartalena L, Baldeschi L, Dickinson A, et al. Consensus statement of the European Group on Graves’ Orbitopathy
(EUGOGO) on management of GO. Thyroid. 2008;18(3):333–346.
443. Bartalena L, Baldeschi L, Boboridis K, et al. European Group of Graves’ Orbitopathy (EUGOGO), The 2016. European
Thyroid Association/European Group of Graves’ Orbitopathy Guidelines for the Management of Graves’ Orbitopathy.
Eur Thyroid J. 2016;5(1):9–26.
444. Wiersinga WM. Smoking and thyroid. Clin Endocrinol. 2013;79(2):145–151.
445. Bartalena L, Martino E, Marcocci C, et al. More on smoking habits and Graves’ Ophthalmopathy. J Endocrinol Invest. 1989;
12(10):733–737.
446. Pfeilschifter J, Ziegler R. Smoking and endocrine ophthalmopathy: impact of smoking severity and current vs lifetime
cigarette consumption. Clin Endocrinol. 1996;45(4):477–481.
447. Karlsson FA, Dahlberg PA, Jansson R, et al. Importance of TSH receptor activation in the development of severe
endocrine ophthalmopathy. Acta Endocrinologica Supplementum. 1989;121(2):132–141.
448. Prummel MF, WiersingaWM, Mourits MP, et al. Amelioration of eye changes of Graves’ ophthalmopathy by achieving
euthyroidism. Acta Andocrinol. 1989;121(suppl 2):185–189.
449. Bartalena L, Marcocci C, Bogazzi F, et al. Relation between therapy for hyperthyroidism and the course of Graves’
Opthalmopathy. N Eng J Med. 1998;338:73–78.
450. Marcocci C, Bruno-Bossio G, Manetti L, et al. The course of Graves’ Opthalmopathy is not influenced by near total
thyroidectomy: a case control study. Clin Endocrinol. 1999;51(4):503–508.
451. Vannucchi G, Campi I, Covelli D, et al. Graves orbitopathy activation after radioactive iodine therapy with and without
steroid prophylaxis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94(9):3381–3386.
452. Acharya SH, Avenell A, Philip S, et al. Radioactive Iodine therapy (RAI) for Graves’ disease (GD) and the effect on
ophthalmopathy: a systemic review. Clin Endocrinol. 2008;69(6):943–950.
453. Gürdal C, Saraç O, Genç I, et al. Ocular surface and dry eye in Graves’ disease. Curr Eye Res. 2011;36(1):8–13.
454. Vogel R, Crockett RS, Oden N, et al. Demonstration of efficacy in the treatment of dry eye disease with 0.18% sodium
hyaluronate ophthalmic solution. Am J Ophthalmol. 2010;149(4):594–601.
455. Marcocci C, Kahaly GJ, Krassas GE, et al. Selenium and the course of mild Graves’ orbitopathy. N Eng J Med. 2011;
364:1920–1931.
456. Marcocci C, Bartalena L. Role of oxidative stress and selenium in Graves’ hyperthyroidism and orbitopathy. J Endocrinol
Invest. 2013;36(10 suppl):15–20.
457. Zang S, Ponto KA, Kahaly GJ. Clinical review: intravenous glucocorticoids for Graves’ orbitopathy: efficacy and morbidity.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96(2):320–332.
458. Kahaly GJ, Pitz S, Hommel G, et al. Randomised, single blind trial of intravenous versus oral glucocorticoid monotherapy
in Graves’ orbitopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90(9):5234–5240.
459. Stiebel-Kalish H, Robenshtok E, Hasanreisoglu M, et al. Treatment modalities for Graves’ ophthalmopathy: Systemic
review and metaanalysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94(8):2708–2716.
460. Zhu W, Ye L, Shen L, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of intravenous glucocorticoids therapy with different protocols
for patients with Graves’ ophthalmopathy. J Clin endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(6):1999–2007.
461. Bartalena L, Krassas GE, Wiersinga W, et al. Efficacy and safety of three different cumulative doses of intravenous
methylprednisolone for moderate to severe and active Graves’ orbitopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(12):
4454–4463.
462. Zang S, Ponto KA, Pitz S, et al. Dose of intravenous steroids and therapy outcome in Graves’ orbitopathy. J Endocrinol
Invest. 2011;34(11):876–880.
463. Mourits MP, van Kempen-Harteveld ML, García MB, et al. Radiotherapy for Graves’ orbitopathy: randomized placebo-
controlled study. Lancet. 2000;355(9214):1505–1509.
464. Prummel MF, Terwee CB, Gerding MN, et al. A randomized controlled trial of orbital radiotherapy versus sham
irradiation in patients with mild Graves’ ophthalmopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89(1):15–20.
465. Marcocci C, Bartalena L, Bogazzi F, et al. A orbital radiotherapy combined with high dose systemic glucocorticoids
for Graves’ ophthalmopathy is more effective than radiotherapy alone: results of a perspective randomized study.
J Endocrinol Invest. 1991;14(10):853–860.
466. Bartalena L, Marcocci C, Chiovato L, et al. Orbital cobalt irradiation combined with systemic glucocorticoids for Graves’
opthalmopathy: comparison with systemic corticosteroids alone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1983;56(6):1139–1144.
467. Kahaly G, Schrezenmeir J, Krause U, et al. Ciclosporin and prednisolone vs. prednisolone in treatment of Graves’
ophthalmopathy: a controlled, randomized and prospective study. Eur J Clin Invest. 1986;16(5):415–422.
468. Prummel MF, Mourits MP, Berghout A, et al. Prednisolone and cyclosporine in the treatment of severe Graves’
ophthalmopathy. N Eng J Med. 1989;321(20):1353–1359.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
140
469. Salvi M, Vannucchi G, Currò N, et al. Efficacy of B-cell targeted therapy with rituximab in patients with active moderate
to severe Graves’ orbitopathy: a randomized controlled study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2):422–431.
470. Stan MN, Garrity JA, Carranza Leon BG, et al. Randomised controlled trial of rituximab in patients with Graves’
orbitopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2):432–441.
471. Onaran Z, Konuk O, Oktar SÖ, et al. Intraocular pressure lowering effect of orbital decompression is related to increased
venous outflow in Graves’ orbitopathy. Curr Eye Res. 2014;39(7):666–672.
472. Currò N, Covelli D, Vannucchi G, et al. Therapeutic outcomes of high-dose intravenous steroids in the treatment of
dysthyroid optic neuropathy. Thyroid. 2014;24(5):897–905.
473. Wakelkamp IM1, Baldeschi L, Saeed P, et al. Surgical or medical decompression as a firstline treatment of optic
neuropathy in Graves’ ophthalmopathy? A randomized controlled trial. Clin Endocrinol. 2005;63(3):323–328.
474. Baldeschi, L. Rehabilitative Surgery in Wiersinga WM and Kahaly GJ (eds). Graves’ Orbitopathy. A multidisciplinary
approach-questions and answers, ed 2. Basel, Karger, 2010, pp. 167–170.
475. Baldeschi L. Functional and rehabilitative surgery of Graves’ orbitopathy; in Spaeth GL (ed): Ophthalmic Surgery:
Principles and practice, atlas and textbook, ed4. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 424–440.
476. Neoh C. Eyelid Surgery In Wiersinga WM and Kahaly GJ (eds). Graves’ Orbitopathy. A multidisciplinary approachquestions and answers, ed 2. Basel, Karger, 2010, pp. 200–210.
477. Tallstedt L, Lundell G, TørringO, et al. Occurrence of ophthalmopathy after treatment for Graves’ hyperthyroidism. The
Thyroid Study Group. N Eng J Med. 1992;326:1733–1738.
478. De Bellis A, Conzo G, Cennamo G, et al. Time course of Graves’ Ophthalmopathy after total thyroidectomy alone or
followed by radioiodine therapy: A 2-year longituitidal study. Endocrine. 2012;41(2):320–326.
479. Shiber S, Stiebel-Kalish H, et al. Glucocorticoid regimens for prevention of Graves’ ophthalmopathy progression
following radioiodine treatment: systemic review and meta-analysis. Thyroid. 2014;24(10):1515–1523.
480. Lai A, Sassi L, Compri E, et al. Lower dose prednisone prevents radioiodine-associated exacerbation of initially mild or
absent Graves’ orbitopathy: a retrospective cohort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(3):1333–1337.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
141
Appendix 1
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the epidemiology of thyroid disorders in Malaysia?
2.
What are the causes of hyperthyroidism?
3.
How to diagnose hyperthyroidism?
4.
How to treat hyperthyroidism?
5.
How to treat Graves’ hyperthyroidism?
6.
How should overt hyperthyroidism due to TMNG or TA be managed?
7.
How to monitor treatment of hyperthyroidism?
8.
When to refer patients with hyperthyroidism?
9.
What is the prevalence of subclinical hyperthyroidism?
10.
What is the aetiology of subclinical hyperthyroidism?
11.
What is the natural history of disease for subclinical hyperthyroidism?
12.
What is the significance of subclinical hyperthyroidism?
13.
What are the benefits of treatment of subclinical hyperthyroidism?
14.
What is the treatment approach in patients with low TSH levels?
15.
What is the treatment of subclinical hyperthyroidism?
16.
What are the clinical and biochemical goals for levothyroxine replacement in
primary hypothyroidism?
17.
Are clinical parameters such as cold sensitivity and dry skin useful by
themselves for assessing the adequacy of levothyroxine replacement in
primary hypothyroidism?
18.
How should levothyroxine administration be timed with respect to meals and
beverages in order to maintain maximum, consistent absorption?
19.
Are there medications and supplements that should not be co-administered
with levothyroxine in order to avoid impaired absorption?
20.
Are there gastrointestinal conditions that should be considered when a
patient’s levothyroxine dose is much higher than expected?
21.
What medications may alter a patient’s levothyroxine requirement by affecting
either metabolism or binding to transport proteins?
22.
What factors determine the levothyroxine dose required by a hypothyroid
patient for reaching the appropriate serum TSH goal?
23.
What is the best approach to initiating and adjusting levothyroxine therapy?
24.
What are the potentially deleterious effects of excessive levothyroxine?
25.
What are the potentially deleterious effects of inadequate levothyroxine?
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
142
26.
What is the appropriate management of perceived allergy to the constituents
of levothyroxine or intolerance to levothyroxine?
27.
How should levothyroxine therapy be managed in individuals who have
elevated TSH values due to non-adherence?
28.
What biochemical goals should be employed for levothyroxine replacement in
patients with secondary hypothyroidism?
29.
What approach should be adopted in patients treated for hypothyroidism
who have normal serum TSH values but still have unresolved symptoms?
30.
Is there an unmet need in l-t4–treated patients with hypothyroidism?
31.
Is there a biological rationale for persistent complaints in l-T4–treated
hypothyroid patients?
32.
When should endocrinologists be involved in the care of patients with
hypothyroidism?
33.
In hospitalised but not critically ill patients in whom levothyroxine replacement
is instituted or increased, should the therapeutic goal be normalisation of
serum TSH?
34.
In hospitalised but not critically ill patients treated with levothyroxine
replacement, what formulation and route of administration are recommended?
35.
In hospitalised but not critically ill patients about to be treated with
levothyroxine, should the possibility of adrenal insufficiency be excluded?
36.
What are the causes of subclinical hypothyroidism?
37.
How to diagnose subclinical hypothyroidism?
38.
What are the complications of subclinical hypothyroidism?
39.
How common are thyroid nodules and nontoxic goitre?
40.
What are the clinical presentation/features of thyroid nodules and nontoxic
goitre?
41.
When to perform thyroid ultrasonography?
42.
How to describe ultrasound findings?
43.
How to select nodules for FNAB?
44.
When to do other investigations for thyroid nodules?
45.
How to manage benign nontoxic and nodular goitre?
46.
How is thyroid storm diagnosed?
47.
What is the antithyroid drug of choice in thyroid storm?
48.
Are rectal antithyroid drugs useful?
49.
What is the role of beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists?
50.
What is the role of corticosteroids?
51.
What is the role of inorganic iodide?
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
143
52.
What is the role of lithium/cholecystographic agents?
53.
What is the role of plasma exchange?
54.
What is the role of other supportive therapy?
55.
What is the role of early definitive therapy and prevention?
56.
How is myxoedema coma diagnosed?
57.
What are the complications of myxoedema coma?
58.
What are the best treatment modalities for myxoedema coma?
59.
How should patients with myxoedema coma be monitored?
60.
How is pre-/perioperative hyperthyroidism best treated/risk minimised?
61.
Is there a need to treat subclinical hyperthyroid disease preoperatively?
62.
Is there a role for universal screening for hypothyroidism preoperatively?
63.
What are the potential intra- and postoperative complications of untreated
hypothyroidism?
64.
How should perioperative hypothyroidism be managed?
65.
How is subacute thyroiditis diagnosed?
66.
How should subacute thyroiditis be managed?
67.
What is the dosage of steroid used to treat subacute thyroiditis?
68.
How long should patients with subacute thyroiditis be followed up?
69.
How is acute thyroiditis diagnosed?
70.
How should acute thyroiditis be managed?
71.
What is the definition of maternal overt/subclinical hypothyroidism (OH/
SCHypo)?
72.
What are the common causes of maternal hypothyroidism?
73.
Is maternal OH/ SCHypo associated with adverse maternal/foetal outcomes?
74.
What is the impact of TPO Ab positivity on euthyroid women or women with
SCHypo in pregnancy?
75.
Does treatment with levothyroxine (LT4) improve adverse outcomes associated
with maternal OH/ SCHypo?
76.
Does treatment with LT4 Improve adverse outcomes associated with TPO Ab
positivity?
77.
What is the TSH goal if LT4 is given at preconception, during pregnancy and
postpartum?
78.
What is the LT4 requirement during pregnancy and postpartum? How should
it be monitored?
79.
Who should be screened for maternal hypothyroidism?
80.
What is the prevalence of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy?
81.
What is the definition of maternal hyperthyroidism?
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
144
82.
What are the common causes of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy?
83.
How to differentiate gestational transient thyrotoxicosis (GTT) from Graves’
Disease?
84.
How to manage gestational transient thyrotoxicosis (GTT)?
85.
What are the complications of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy?
86.
How to manage Graves’ Disease prior to conception?
87.
How to manage Graves’ Disease during pregnancy?
88.
How to monitor patients with Graves’ Disease on ATD in pregnancy?
89.
What is the role of TSH Receptor Antibody (TRAb) assays in pregnancy?
90.
Should additional foetal ultrasound monitoring for growth, heart rate and
goitre be performed?
91.
How to manage thyrotoxicosis patients who are breastfeeding?
92.
What is postpartum thyroiditis and what is its natural history?
93.
What is the aetiology of postpartum thyroiditis?
94.
How to differentiate postpartum thyroiditis from Graves’ Disease and what
are the investigations?
95.
What is the management of postpartum thyroiditis?
96.
When to monitor patients with postpartum thyroiditis?
97.
Is postpartum thyroiditis associated with postpartum depression?
98.
What is the prevalence of Hashimoto Thyroiditis in children and adolescents?
99.
What are the clinical features of Hashimoto Thyroiditis in children and
adolescents?
100. What is the natural history of Hashimoto Thyroiditis in children and
adolescents?
101. How to diagnose and investigate Hashimoto Thyroiditis in children and
adolescents?
102. What is the pattern of thyroid function in Hashimoto Thyroiditis in children
and adolescents?
103. What is the treatment of hypothyroidism secondary to Hashimoto Thyroiditis
in children and adolescents?
104. What is the treatment of non-goitrous euthyroid Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis?
105. What is the treatment of euthyroid Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis with goitre?
106. What is the risk of hypothyroidism in Turner Syndrome?
107. When to screen for hypothyroidism in Turner Syndrome?
108. What is the risk of hypothyroidism in Down Syndrome?
109. When to screen for hypothyroidism in Down Syndrome?
110. How to treat hypothyroidism in Down Syndrome?
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
145
111. What is the risk of hypothyroidism in Klinefelter Syndrome?
112. When to screen for hypothyroidism in Klinefelter Syndrome?
113. What is the risk of hypothyroidism in Prader–Willi Syndrome?
114. When to screen for hypothyroidism in Prader–Willi Syndrome?
115. How to treat and monitor hypothyroidism in Prader–Willi Syndrome?
116. How is Graves’ Disease diagnosed in children and adolescents?
117. How should Graves’ Disease be managed in children and adolescents?
118. How should children with Graves’ Disease on ATD be monitored?
119. When is definitive therapy indicated?
120. What are the clinical considerations for RAI therapy?
121. What are the clinical considerations for thyroidectomy?
122. What are the features of overt hyperthyroidism in the elderly?
123. How should overt hyperthyroidism in the elderly be treated?
124. What are the risks of subclinical hyperthyroidism in the elderly?
125. Should subclinical hyperthyroidism in the elderly be treated?
126. How should subclinical hyperthyroidism in the elderly be treated?
127. How should overt hypothyroidism in the elderly be treated?
128. What are the risks of subclinical hypothyroidism in the elderly?
129. Should subclinical hypothyroidism in the elderly be treated?
130. How should subclinical hypothyroidism in the elderly be treated?
131. What are the thyroid abnormalities caused by amiodarone?
132. What are the mechanisms of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT) and
how to diagnose them?
133. How should amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT) be managed?
134. How should amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism (AIH) be managed?
135. What are the drugs that cause thyroid disorder and what is the management?
136. What is the incidence of GO in Malaysia?
137. What is the definition of GO?
138. How is the assessment of activity and severity?
139. When to refer to ophthalmologist and endocrinologist?
140. What is the treatment of GO?
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
146
Appendix 2
During the final editing stage before this CPG is published, the Development
Committee is made aware of 2 publications in 2019 which necessitate changes
in recommendations. The updated, revised section is as below;
7.1.3 Is Maternal OH/SCHypo Associated With Adverse Maternal/
Foetal Outcomes?
Maternal OH has consistently been shown to be associated with adverse
pregnancy outcomes, including pregnancy loss, pre-eclampsia, low birth weight
(LBW), intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and impaired foetal neurocognitive
development.237 (Level II); 238 (Level II); 239 (Level II) A prospective cohort study in India
demonstrated more than seven times increased risk of intrauterine death while
another prospective cohort study in China demonstrated more than thirteen times
increased risk of foetal loss among pregnant women with OH compared to the
euthyroid control.237 (Level II); 238 (Level II)
The associations between maternal SCHypo and adverse pregnancy outcomes have
been less robust than maternal OH. This is partly due to the variable TSH cut-offs
used in different studies and many studies did not take into account the influence
of thyroid autoimmunity (TAI) or thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO Ab) positivity
on the outcome.240 (Level II); 241 (Level II); 242 (Level II) The adverse outcomes that were most
consistently reported to be associated with maternal SCHypo included pregnancy
loss and preterm delivery.243 (Level II); 244 (Level II); 245 (Level II); 246 (Level II); Consortium on Thyroid and Pregnancy
2019 (Level II)* Van den Boogard E et al. also reported an increased risk of pre-eclampsia
among pregnant women with SCHypo while Chan et al. reported increased risk
of placental abruption and breech presentation and Maraka et al. reported
increased risk of premature ruptured of membrane (PROM) and placental abruption
in their respective meta-analyses.243 (Level II); 244 (Level II); 245 (Level II) The association between
impaired intellectual development in the offspring with maternal SCHypo has been
shown to be present in some studies but absent in others.247 (Level II); 238 (Level II); 248 (Level II)
The association between maternal SCHypo and adverse pregnancy outcomes were
often exacerbated by the presence of TPO Ab.249 (Level II); 250 (Level II); 251 (Level II); 252 (Level II); 246 (Level II)
In a prospective cohort study involving 5971 singleton pregnancies, the association
between maternal SCHypo and preterm delivery was lost after exclusion of women
with TPO Ab positivity or co-morbidities. However, those with high TSH (defined as
>4.04 mIU/L) and positive TPO Ab was found to have more than three times increased
risk of preterm delivery.250 (Level II) A prospective cohort study in China showed that the
increased risk of miscarriage occurred at a lower TSH threshold among the pregnant
women with concomitant SCHypo and TAI at 2.5 mIU/L compared to 5.2 mIU/L for
women with isolated SCHypo without TAI.251 (Level II) Similarly, a meta-analysis on nine
cohort studies comparing the prevalence of miscarriage among pregnant women
with SCHypo to the euthyroid pregnant women showed that the presence of TAI
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
147
increased the risk of miscarriage by 2.5 times among pregnant women with SCHypo
compared to isolated SCH without TAI.246 (Level II)
Summary
•
Maternal OH has been consistently shown to be associated with adverse
pregnancy outcomes, including pregnancy loss, pre-eclampsia, preterm delivery,
LBW, IUGR and impaired foetal neurocognitive development.
•
The adverse outcomes that were most consistently reported to be associated
with maternal SCHypo include pregnancy loss and preterm delivery.
•
These associations were dependent on the maternal TPO Ab status with a lower
TSH threshold (TSH at or above 2.5 mIU/L) among the TPO Ab positive women
versus a higher TSH threshold (TSH >5 mIU/L) among the TPO Ab negative
women.
7.1.4 What Is the Impact of TPO Ab Positivity on Euthyroid Women or Women
With Subclinical Hypothyroidism in Pregnancy?
The presence of TAI has been consistently shown to be associated with pregnancy
loss and preterm delivery independent of maternal thyroid function in various meta
analyses.243 (Level II); 253 (Level II); 254 (Level II); Consortium on Thyroid and Pregnancy 2019 (Level II)*
Most studies defined the presence of TAI by TPO Ab positivity while others defined
it as TPO and or thyroglobulin (Tg) Ab positivity. The risk was exacerbated in the
presence of maternal TSH of more than 2.5 mIU/L.251 (Level II) The association between
TPO Ab positivity and recurrent miscarriages was less robust with only two studies
reporting an association.255 (Level II); 243 (Level II) Lower intellectual development scores
of offspring have also been shown to be associated with TPO Ab positivity in two
retrospective cohort studies but the evidence is weak.247 (Level II); 256 (Level II) A metaanalysis of 38 studies examining clinical significance of TAI before conception and
in early pregnancy also showed an increased risk of sub-fertility and postpartum
thyroiditis.243 (Level II)
Summary
•
The presence of TAI is associated with pregnancy loss and preterm delivery
independent of maternal thyroid function. This is predominantly driven by the
presence of TPO Ab positivity.
•
The risk was exacerbated in the presence of maternal TSH of >2.5 mIU/L.
7.1.5 Does Treatment With Levothyroxine (LT4) Improve Adverse Outcomes
Associated With Maternal Overt/Subclinical Hypothyroidism?
Levothyroxine treatment for pregnant women with OH is highly recommended,
although no prospective randomised control trial (RCT) has been conducted to
prove its benefits. This is because of the numerous serious adverse maternal and
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
148
foetal outcomes associated with OH that have been demonstrated previously. It
would be unethical to withhold treatment in this population to perform an RCT.
LT4 replacement in pregnancy is particularly essential in the first 18 to 20 weeks of
gestation where foetal thyroid hormones depends largely on the placental transfer
of maternal thyroxine.
For maternal SCHypo, the benefits of LT4 treatment are not as clear-cut as OH.
While there have been many studies that demonstrated the associations of
maternal SCHypo with adverse pregnancy outcomes, especially pregnancy loss and
preterm delivery, only a small number of studies demonstrated the benefits of LT4
treatment in this population. A prospective, non-randomised open-labelled study
on maternal SCHypo demonstrated that the increased risk of spontaneous abortion
among SCHypo patients not given LT4 treatment compared to controls with normal
TSH was eliminated with LT4 treatment.257 (Level II) A retrospective study on the United
States national cohort demonstrated significant risk reduction in pregnancy loss
with LT4 treatment among pregnant women with SCHypo when the serum TSH was
improved to less than 4.0 mIU/L.258 (Level II) Similarly, a meta-analysis of nine cohort
studies showed normalisation of an increased miscarriage risk associated with
maternal SCHypo upon LT4 treatment compared to that of euthyroid women.246 (Level II)
A recent randomised controlled trial showed that LT4 treatment reduced the risk
of preterm delivery among a group of TPO Ab negative women with TSH above
4 mIU/L.259 (Level I) However, no study has specifically assessed whether the presence
of TPO Ab positivity will lower the serum TSH threshold in obtaining risk reduction
on miscarriage and preterm delivery.
Two RCTs examining the effect of LT4 replacement in maternal SCHypo or isolated
hypothyroxinaemia had failed to show any benefits in the improvement of IQ scores
in the offspring.260 (Level I); 261 (Level I)
Recommendations
• Pregnant women with OH should be treated with LT4
• For maternal SCHypo, LT4 treatment should be considered in the following
situations to reduce the risk of miscarriage and preterm delivery:
a)
pregnant women with negative TPOAb:
– LT4 is recommended if TSH is >10 mIU/L
– LT4 may be considered if TSH is above the pregnancy specific reference
range or 4.0 mIU/L
b)
pregnant women with positive TPOAb:
– LT4 is recommended if TSH is above the pregnancy specific reference
range or 4.0 mIU/L
– LT4 may be considered if TSH is >2.5 mIU/L
• LT4 treatment is not indicated to improve the IQ scores of offsprings to mothers
with SCHypo
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
149
7.1.6 Does Treatment With LT4 Improve Adverse Outcomes Associated With
TPO Ab Positivity?
While TPO Ab positivity has been shown to be associated with pregnancy loss
and preterm delivery independent of maternal thyroid status, the benefits of LT4
replacement in reducing the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes among TPO
Ab positive women has yet to be established. The first prospective randomised
controlled trial looking at the effect of LT4 treatment among euthyroid women with
TAI showed significant risk reduction in miscarriage and preterm delivery with LT4
treatment.262 (Level I) However, a relatively high TSH cut-off of 4.4 mIU/L was used to
define euthyroid in that study. Results from subsequent retrospective studies have
yielded mixed results.263 (Level II);264 (Level II) Another recent RCT demonstrated significant
risk reduction in preterm delivery but not miscarriage rate among a group of TPO
Ab positive women without overt thyroid dysfunction.265 (Level I) However, the benefits
were predominantly driven by those with TSH of 4 mIU/L and above. The TABLET
trial also failed to show any benefits in improving live birth rates among euthyroid
women with positive TPO Ab associated with history of miscarriage or infertility
despite being commenced on LT4 before conception.Dhillon-Smith 2019*
The evidence available to date is therefore insufficient to recommend routine LT4
treatment in euthyroid pregnant women with positive TPO Ab.
Recommendations
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine LT4 treatment in euthyroid
women with positive TPO Ab in pregnancy.
7.1.9 Who Should Be Screened for Maternal Hypothyroidism?
Recommendations
• The current level of evidence does not support universal screening for maternal
hypothyroidism
• TSH testing should be performed for women who are trying to conceive or as
soon as pregnancy is confirmed if the following risk factors are present:
i.
History of thyroid dysfunction
ii.
Goitre
iii.
Known thyroid antibody positivity
iv.
Age at or above 30 years
v.
Type 1 diabetes or other autoimmune disorders
vi.
History of recurrent pregnancy loss or preterm delivery
vii.
Infertility
viii. History of thyroid surgery or head and neck radiation
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
150
ix.
Morbid obesity
x.
Use of lithium or amiodarone
xi.
Recent administration of iodinated radiologic contrast
xii.
Residing in area of moderate to severe iodine deficiency
xiii. Family history of thyroid disorders
xiv. Two or more prior pregnancies
References
1.
The consortium on thyroid and pregnancy—study group on preterm birth. Association of thyroid function test
abnormalities and thyroid autoimmunity with preterm birth: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2019;322
(7):632–41.
2.
Dhillon-Smith RK, Middleton LJ, Sunner KK, et al. Levothyroxine in women with thyroid peroxidase antibodies before
conception. New Eng J Med. 2019;380:1316–25.
7.2.7 How to Manage Graves’ Disease Prior to Conception?
.... Patients who are of childbearing potential and are still on carbimazole, should
use effective contraception.Drug Safety Update.......
Reference
1.
Drug Safety Update, Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) Newsletter, volume 12, issue 7:
February 2019: 2
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
151
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Ab
Antibody
AIH
Amiodarone Induced Hypothyroidism
AIT
Amiodarone Induced Thyrotoxicosis
AITD
Autoimmune Thyroid Disease
ATA
American Thyroid Association
ATDs
Antithyroid Drugs
BWPS
Burch-Wartofsky Point Scale
CHADS2
Congestive heart failure, Hypertension, Age ≥75 years, Diabetes mellitus,
Stroke [double weight]
CMZ
Carbimazole
CRP
C-Reactive Protein
ESR
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate
ETA
European Thyroid Association
FFP
Fresh Frozen Plasma
FNAB
Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy
fT3
free T3
fT4
free T4
GD
Graves’ Disease
GO
Graves Ophthalmopathy
GTT
Gestational Transient Thyrotoxicosis
hCG
Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin
HLA
Human Leucocyte Antigen
ICI
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor
IFN
Interferon
IL-2
Interleukin-2
JTA
Japan Thyroid Association
KS
Klinefelter Syndrome
LT4
Levothyroxine
MMI
Methimazole
NK
Natural Killer
NSAID
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug
OH
Overt Hypothyroidism
PPT
Post Partum Thyroiditis
PTU
Propylthiouracil
PWS
Prader Willi Syndrome
SCHyper Subclinical Hyperthyroidism
SCHypo
Subclinical Hypothyroidism
SLE
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
TFTs
Thyroid Function Tests
TK
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor
TMNG
Toxic Multinodular Goitre
TA
Toxic Adenoma
T3
Tri-iodothyronine
T4
Thyroxine
TgAb
Thyroglobulin Antibody
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MANAGEMENT OF THYROID DISORDERS
152
TPE
Total Plasma Exchange
TPO
Thyroid Peroxidase Antibody
TRAb
Thyroid Receptor Antibody
TS
Turner Syndrome
TSH
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone
TS1
Thyroid Storm 1
TS2
Thyroid Storm 2
TT4
Total T4
RAI
Radioactive Iodine
US
Ultrasonography
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and appreciation to
the following for their contributions:
•
Dr Radhamani Rajakumar, Endocrine Fellow, Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Klang, Selangor
•
Dr Shazatul Reza Mohd Redzuan, Endocrine Fellow, Hospital Tengku Ampuan
Rahimah, Klang, Selangor
•
Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
•
Technical Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines for their valuable
input and feedback
•
Health Technology Assessment Section, Ministry of Health, Malaysia for their
valuable guidance
•
BioQuest Solutions for editorial assistance
•
Merck Sdn Bhd for financial support for editoral assistance
•
All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development of
the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The Development Group members have completed the disclosure forms. None
of them hold shares in pharmaceutical firms or act as consultants to such firms.
(Details are available upon request from the CPG secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG was supported by the Malaysian Endocrine and
Metabolic Society (MEMS) Merck Sdn Bhd, provided an unrestricted educational
grant for editorial support.