Clinical Practice Guidelines
Menagement of
Autigm Soeciunn Disorcler
ih Ghilcken ciel Aclolescentis
Soe! ‘ent
sgl
ay
ho
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. The content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided
that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included. The content is not
to be changed, sold, used to promote or endorse any product or service, nor
used in an inappropriate or misleading context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-01-1
Available on the following websites:
http//www.moh.gov.my
http//www.acadmed.org.my
http//www.psychiatry-malaysia.org
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are designed to be a guide for clinical
practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of development.
Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best
outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is responsible for the
management of his / her unique patient based on the clinical picture presented
by the patient and the management options available locally.
These guidelines were issued in July 2014 and will be reviewed in 2018 or
earlier if new evidence becomes available.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grades of Recommendation
iii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Guidelines Development Group
vii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
xi
Algorithm: Management of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
xiii
1
Introduction
1
2
Risk Factors
1
3
Screening
3
4
Assessment and Diagnosis
5
5
Comorbidities and Other Difficulties
8
6
Investigations
10
a. Audiological Evaluation
10
b. Other Investigations
10
7
Treatment
11
7.1
Non-Pharmacological Treatment
12
a
Applied Behaviour Analysis
12
b
Speech, Language and Communication Intervention
13
c
Occupational Therapy
15
d Other Interventions / Programmes
16
e
Parental Education and Support
17
f
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
17
g
Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related
Communication Handicapped Children
18
h
Diet
18
7.2
Pharmacotherapy
19
a
Atypical antipsychotics
19
b
Antidepressants
20
c
Other medications
21
No.
Title
Page
7.3
Traditional and Complementary Medicine
22
8
Social Welfare Services
23
9
Monitoring and Preparation of Transition to Adult Services
23
10
Implementing the Guidelines
23
References
26
Appendices
Appendix 1
:
Examples of Search Strategy
33
Appendix 2
:
Clinical Questions
34
Appendix 3
:
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers
(M-CHAT)
35
Appendix 4
:
Diagnostic Criteria for Autism Disorder in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IVTR)
40
Appendix 5
:
Diagnostic Criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorder
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
42
Appendix 6
:
International Classification of Disease (ICD) 10
46
Appendix 7
:
• Signs and Symptoms of Possible Autism in Preschool Children
(or Equivalent Mental Age)
49
• Signs and Symptoms of possible Autism in Primary School
Children (Aged 5–11 Years or Equivalent Mental Age)
51
• Signs and Symptoms of Possible Autism in Secondary School
Children (Older Than 11 Years or Equivalent Mental Age)
53
Appendix 8
:
Diagnostic Tools
55
List of Abbreviations
58
Acknowledgement
60
Disclosure Statement
60
Source of Funding
60
Levels of Evidence
Level
Study design
I
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
(RCT)
II-1
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
II-2
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or group
II-3
Evidence from multiple time series with or without the intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the results
of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could also
be regarded as this type of evidence
III
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Source: US / Canadian Preventive Services Task Force 2001
Grades of Recommendation
A
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review, or RCT, or evidence
rated as good and directly applicable to the target population
B
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable to
the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of
results; or evidence extrapolated from meta-analysis, systematic
review, or RCT
C
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and /or clinical
experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence of directly
applicable clinical studies of good quality
Source: Modified From The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
(SIGN)
Note: The grades of recommendation relate to the strength of the evidence on
which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect the clinical importance
of the recommendation.
Guidelines Development and Objectives
Guidelines Development
The members of the Development Group (DG) for this Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) are staff of the Ministry of Health (MOH) and Ministry of
Higher Education Malaysia. A multidisciplinary review committee (RC) was
actively involved during this CPG development process.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following databases:
Guidelines International Network (G-I-N), Medline via Ovid, PUBMED,
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR) and International Health
Technology Assessment websites. A search strategy to cover all aspects
on management of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) was developed in the
Medline database and adapted to other databases. Search strategies were a
combination of MeSH and keyword searches including abbreviations (refer to
Appendix 1 on an example of Search Strategy). The search was restricted to
human studies, literature published in the English language and the last ten
years. If the evidence was insufficient, the period of publication was extended
for another ten years. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature
and guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. All searches
were conducted from May 2012 till November 2013. Literature searches were
repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process.
The aim was to identify and include any further relevant papers published
before 28 February 2014. Future CPG updates will consider evidence
published after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be
obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other CPGs on ASD such as i) Guidelines on
Treatment, Diagnosis and Clinical Intervention for Children and Young People
with Autism Spectrum Disorder (SIGN 98-2007), ii) AMS-MOH Clinical Practice
Guidelines 1/2010 - Autism Spectrum Disorders in Pre-school Children, iii)
Autism Spectrum Disorder by the Ministry of Health New Zealand 2008, and
iv) Autism diagnosis in children and young people: Recognition, referral and
diagnosis of children and young people on the autism spectrum (NICE, 2011).
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research
and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as references.
A total of 27 clinical questions were developed under different sections.
Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within these sections.
(Refer to Appendix 2) The DG members met 23 times throughout the
development of these guidelines. All literatures retrieved were appraised by
at least two DG members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist,
presented in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by
both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. These CPGs are based largely
on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials, with
local practices taken into consideration.
The evidence used in these guidelines was graded using the US / Canadian
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001), while the grading
of recommendation was modified from grades of recommendation of the
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network.
On completion, the draft was sent for review by external reviewers. It was also
posted on the MOH Malaysia official website for feedback by any interested
parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical Advisory Committee
for CPG, the HTA and CPG Council of the MOH Malaysia for review and
approval.
Objectives
The aim of this CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations in
the management of ASD, particularly on the detection, assessment and
intervention of the condition in children and adolescents.
Clinical Questions
Refer to Appendix 2
Target Population
Children and adolescents with ASD who are less than 18 years of age
Target Group / User
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary / tertiary care of autism including:
i
Primary Care Providers (Family Medicine Specialists / Medical
Officers / General Practitioners)
ii
Psychiatrists / Child and Adolescent Psychiatrists
iii
Paediatricians
iv
Psychologists
v
Audiologists
vi
Speech-Language Therapists
vii
Occupational Therapists
viii
Social Workers
ix
Nurses
x
Pharmacists
xi
Policy Makers / Programme Managers
xii
Educators
Healthcare Settings
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Guidelines Development Group
Chairperson
Dr. Farahidah Md Dai
Head of Department and
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor Bahru
Johor
Members (Alphabetical Order)
Ms. Ang Wei Nei
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang
Selangor
Ms. Masrita Mohd Rosli
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Selayang
Selangor
Dr. Azah Abdul Samad
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Tanglin
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Medical Development Division, MOH
Putrajaya
Ms. Ee Su Im
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Nor Asmawati Mohamad Ali Abdul Rahman
Medical Social Worker
Hospital Umum Sarawak
Sarawak
Dr. Eni Rahaiza Muhd Ramli
Consultant Child &
Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Taiping
Perak
Dr. Norharlina Bahar
Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Selayang
Selangor
Dr. Juriza Ismail
Senior Lecturer and
Consultant Developmental Paediatrician
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norhayati Nordin
Hospital Director and
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Mesra, Bukit Padang
Sabah
Dr. Manveen Kaur Harbajan Singh
Senior Lecturer and Psychiatrist
University of Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nurdiana Abdullah
Senior Lecturer and
Primary Care Physician
University of Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Nurshahira Razali
Speech-Language Therapist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr. Sheila Marimuthu
Consultant Paediatrician and
Adolescent Specialist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. V. Paranthaman
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jelapang
Perak
Dr. Selvasingam Ratnasingam
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Umum Sarawak
Sarawak
Dr. Ramli Mohd Ali
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Sin Lian Thye
Nursing Officer
(Coordinator / Information Specialist)
Health Technology Assessment Section
Medical Development Division, MOH
Putrajaya
Dr. Ranjini S. Sivanesom
Consultant Developmental Paediatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Siti Suriani Che Hussin
Audiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Rozila Sumardi
Speech-Language Therapist
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Selangor
Dr. Toh Teck Hock
Paediatrician and
Head of Clinical Research Centre
Hospital Sibu
Sarawak
Ms. See Geok Lan
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Rehabilitation Cheras
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yusni Yusuff
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Sultan Abdul Halim
Kedah
Review Committee
The draft of these guidelines was reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence supporting
the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Toh Chin Lee
Head of Department and
Senior Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Department of Psychiatry & Mental Health
Hospital Selayang
Selangor
Members (Alphabetical Order)
Associate Professor Dr. Aili Hanim Hashim
Lecturer and
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Department of Psychological Medicine
Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Baizurah Mohd Hussain
Head of Department Pathology (Patient Advocate)
Department of Pathology
Hospital Ampang
Selangor
YBhg. Dato’ Dr. Amar-Singh HSS
Head of Department and
Senior Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Perak
Dr. Lecthuman Ramananthan
Head of Department and
Consultant Physician (Patient Advocate)
Department of Medicine
Hospital Taiping
Perak
Dr. Rajini Sarvanathan
Consultant Developmental Paediatrician
Sunway Medical Centre
Selangor
Dr. Rekha Balachandran
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist (Patient Advocate)
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Perak
Dr. Wong Woan Yiing
Secretary, National Early Childhood Intervention Council and
Consultant Paediatrician
KPJ Ipoh Specialist Hospital
Perak
External Reviewers
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:-
Dr. Andy Shih
Senior Vice President of Scientific Affairs
Autism Speaks
United States of America
Ms. Amelia Inbam Neelagandan
Speech-Language Therapist
Hospital Queen Elizabeth
Sabah, Malaysia
Professor Dr. Frances Page Glascoe
Professor of Paediatrics
Vanderbilt University
United States of America
Associate Professor Dr. Jill Sewell
Deputy Director
Centre for Community Child Health
Royal Children‘s Hospital
Melbourne, Australia
Professor Dr. Mohd Jamil Yaacob
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
AIMST University
Kedah, Malaysia
Clinical Associate Professor Dr. John Wray
State Child Development Centre
West Perth, Australia
Dr. Lai Fong Hwa
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Pulau Pinang, Malaysia
Ms. Masne Kadar
Occupational Therapist and Lecturer
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Dr. Nazrila Hairizan Nasir
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Pandamaran
Selangor, Malaysia
Ms. Nor Azizah Nurdin
Freelance Speech-Language Therapist
Selangor, Malaysia
Professor Dr. Wong Swee Lan
Department of Population Medicine
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
University Tunku Abdul Rahman
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Algorithm on Management of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
Growth and developmental
assessment for children
under six years of age at
Maternal & Child Health
Clinic
M-CHAT screening
(at 18 and 24 months)*
• to be completed by parents
• assisted if necessary
Referral from
school / community / parent
Verification by Medical
Practitioner
Diagnosis confirmed by
Family Medicine Specialist /
Paediatrician / Psychiatrist
Multidisciplinary Assessment
and Management***
Referral from
Practitioners / Therapists
Follow-up
Scoring**
Refer Pg 35
Speechlanguage
therapy
Occupational
therapy
Psychological
/ behavioural
therapy
Education
Social
welfare
Pharmacotherapy
for comorbidities
* M-CHAT may be used to screen children up until 30
months of age if the child misses the earlier screening
**Regardless of the screening result, children suspected
of ASD by the family or other care provider should be
referred for evaluation
***Multidisciplinary Assessment and Management Team
may include:
• Family Medicine Specialist
• Paediatrician
• Psychiatrist
• Clinical Psychologist
• Occupational Therapist
• Speech-Language Therapist
• Audiologist
• Medical Social Worker
Early intervention programme (EIP) is strongly advocated
Fail
1. Introduction
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised
by impairments in communication, behaviour and social functioning beginning
in childhood. There is no local epidemiological study on ASD prevalence in
Malaysia. However, in a feasibility study on the use of Modified Checklist for
Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) among children of 18 to 36 months of age in child
health clinics by Ministry of Health Malaysia, the prevalence of ASD in Malaysia
was approximately 1.6 in 1,000.1 In the USA, the overall prevalence of ASD is
14.7 per 1,000 (one in 68) children aged 8 years and the prevalence shows an
increasing trend over the years.2
Clinicians have been seeing an increasing number of children with speech delay
and social communication difficulties who require further assessment. Children
with speech delay and behavioural issues are frequently placed in special
education classes without an accurate diagnosis. While waiting for diagnosis to
be established, these children should be referred for the relevant interventions.
Early diagnosis and prompt intervention of children with ASD is crucial for the
best outcome. The importance of early recognising and initiation of early referral
to optimise the child’s potential must be emphasised.
This has prompted the need to produce a CPG for the wide usage of healthcare
providers in Malaysia as well as to provide assistance to parents of children with
ASD. It is hoped that this CPG can give a clear picture to primary care providers
to direct these children in an efficient manner. Referral pathways to specialists
and various interventionists have been outlined in this CPG in order to facilitate
this process.
2. Risk Factors
The aetiology of ASD is unclear. It is multi-factorial which includes both genetic
vulnerability and environmental factors. Only risk factors deemed important by
the DG and RC are discussed here.
a. Advancing Parental Age
Parental age is among the most consistently studied risk factor and the risk for
ASD increases with parental age.
●
Maternal age:
○ >35 years old vs 25 - 29 years old (OR = 1.31, 95% CI 1.19 to
1.45)3, level II-2
○ >40 years old vs <30 years old (OR = 2.1, 95% CI 1.48 to 2.86)4, level
II-2
●
Paternal age: compared to ≤ 29 years old,5, level II-2
○ 49 years old (OR = 1.42, 95% CI 1.07 to 1.87)
○ ≥ 50 years old (OR = 2.21, 95% CI 1.26 to 3.88)
○ ≥ 55 years old (OR = 4.36, 95% CI 2.09 to 9.09)
●
First born of mother aged >35 years old and father aged >40 years
old vs parents aged 25 - 29 years old, adjusted OR = 3.1, 95% CI 2.0
to 4.7.6, level II-2
b. Prematurity (<37 weeks of gestation) in particular those born <33 weeks
are at risk of developing ASD (OR = 5.4, 95% CI 1.1 to 27.7).4, level II-2
c. Neonatal encephalopathy has OR for ASD ranging from 3.06 to 5.59.
4, level II-2
d. Genetic Risk
The adjusted relative recurrence risk of ASD is increased with increasing
genetic relatedness:3, level II-2
●
Monozygotic twins
=
153.0 (95% CI 56.7 to 412.8)
●
Dizygotic twins
=
8.2 (95% CI 3.7 to 18.1)
●
Full siblings
=
10.3 (95% CI 9.4 to 11.3)
●
Maternal half-siblings
=
3.3 (95% CI 2.6 to 4.2)
●
Paternal half-siblings
=
2.9 (95% CI 2.2 to 3.7)
●
Cousins
=
2.0 (95% CI 1.8 to 2.2)
The RR of ASD for infants with multiple older affected siblings is significantly
2.2 times higher than those who had only one older affected sibling.7, level II-2
e. Peri-conceptional supplement
Use of folic acid supplement in mothers around the time of conception (four
weeks before and eight weeks after pregnancy)8, level II-2 or peri-conceptional
prenatal vitamin intake (containing more iron, vitamin B6, vitamin B12 and
800 µg of folic acid as compared to ordinary multivitamins)9, level II-2 appears
to offer some benefit especially in those who are genetically susceptible.
f. Immunisation (Vaccination)
Based on a Cochrane systematic review of 10 studies, no significant
association was found between MMR immunisation and autism.10, level II-2
In another study, increasing exposure to antibody-stimulating proteins
and polysaccharides in vaccines during the first two years of life was not
associated with risk of developing ASD.11, level II-2
Immunisation is not associated with the development of autism spectrum
disorder.
3. Screening
Screening for ASD is important as early detection enables early intervention
and better outcomes. There are limited studies on the effectiveness of
screening tools for ASD in children. Three systematic reviews (SRs) found
that Checklist for Autism in Toddler (CHAT), Modified Checklist for Autism
in Toddlers (M-CHAT) and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ)
performed better in the screening of young children for ASD. The primary
studies were inadequate with small sample sizes, lack of blinding between
screening and diagnosis, and largely did not follow up children with negative
results.12, level II-1; 13, level II-1; 14, level II-1
It is important to be aware that false positive or false negative results from
any use of screening tests may cause unnecessary parental anxiety or delay
correct diagnosis. The ultimate decision about the need for referral and further
assessment should be made on clinical grounds.
a. Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT)
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) [Appendix 3] is a 23-item
questionnaire on child behaviour and development reported by parents for
children aged 18 and 24 months of age.15, level III It has been translated into
Malay and Chinese languages for local use in healthcare facilities in Malaysia.
Training is required for interpretation of the result.
The specificity of M-CHAT was reported as 98% and follow-up of a subset of
children at age 3.5 years resulted in a sensitivity of 100%.14, level II-1 In a recent
SR, the sensitivity, specificity and PPV were found to be 70% to 92%, 27%
to 43% and 5.8% to 76% respectively. M-CHAT was also better at detecting
RECOMMENDATION 1
● Screening for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) should be emphasised
in children with the following high risk factors:-
● Increased parental age
○ Maternal age >40 years old
○ Paternal age >50 years old
○ First born of mother aged >35 years old and father aged >40
years old
● Prematurity of <33 weeks of gestation
● Neonatal encephalopathy
● Family history of ASD
(Grade C)
autism in children aged 24 months versus (vs) 18 months and those in a high
risk group in early intervention programme centres vs a low risk group in the
routine baby clinic. M-CHAT is recommended for use at 18 months to assist
with early identification of ASD, and 24 months, to identify those toddlers who
have regression.12, level II-2
b. Social Communication Questionnaire (formerly known as Autism
Screening Questionnaire)
Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) is a parent-rated questionnaire
on children aged above four years. It evaluates the social interaction,
communication, language and stereotypic behaviours for possible autism or
other ASD.16, level III
SCQ was better in detecting ASD in individuals over seven years of age
(sensitivity of 86% to 90% and specificity of 78% to 86%) compared to children
aged 2 to 3 years old (sensitivity 47% to 54% and specificity 89% to 92%).13,
level II-1
c. Other Screening Tools
Other screening tools used are:
i)
General / broadband developmental screening tools:
● Child Behaviour Checklist (CBCL)13, level II-1; 17, level III; 18, level III
● Infant-Toddler Checklist (ITC)19, level III
● Parents’ Evaluation of Developmental Status (PEDS)20, level II-2
ii)
Screening tools specific for ASD:
● Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (CHAT)12, level II-1; 14, level II-1; 21, level II-2
● Checklist for Autism in Toddlers for Chinese Children (CHAT-23)13, level
II-1; 17, level III; 18, level III
● Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised with Follow-up22,
level III
● Gilliam Autism Rating Scale / Gilliam Autism Rating Scale Second
Edition (GARS / GARS-2)13, level II-1; 17, level III; 18, level III
● Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS)13, level II-1; 17, level III; 18, level III
● Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire (ASSQ)13, level II-1; 17, level III; 18,
level III
● Asperger Syndrome Diagnostic Scale (ASDS)13, level II-1; 17, level III; 18, level III
4. Assessment and Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ASD is made either by using criteria from the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-IV-TR, 2000 (Appendix 4) and
DSM-5, 2013 (Appendix 5)] or 10th-Revision of International Classification
of Diseases [ICD-10] (Appendix 6).
4.1 Initial Assessment – History, Developmental History and Physical
Examination
Children with ASD may show early symptoms manifested by behavioural
abnormalities. These include poor eye contact, impairment in visual
tracking of an object, atypical response to name, less social smiling and
delayed expressive and receptive language. The possibility of ASD should
be considered if there are concerns about development or behaviour.23
Repetitive behaviour, restricted interests and limited ability to imitate are
also early symptoms of ASD.
Health care providers should take into consideration cultural and socioeconomic
factors that may affect assessment.24, level III
a. Signs and symptoms of ASD23 (refer to Appendix 7)
b. A complete history should include:
● Concerns by parents / carers
● Symptoms suspicious of ASD (refer to Appendix 7).
● Developmental history
● Behavioural problems and interaction with others
● Medical history including prenatal and perinatal histories
● Psychiatric history – to assess co-existing mental disorders e.g.
depression, anxiety
● Family history
● Social history including schooling, home life, physical environment, social
needs
● Medication and allergy history
RECOMMENDATION 2
● Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) may be used as
a screening tool for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) among children
of 18 months and repeat at 24 months if the child passes the earlier
M-CHAT. (Grade C)
● M-CHAT may be used to screen children up till the age of 30 months if
the child misses the earlier screening. (Grade C)
● Regardless of the screening result, children suspected of ASD at
any age by the family or other care providers should be referred for
evaluation. (Grade C)
c. Physical examination should include:
● Presence of dysmorphic features
● Presence of congenital anomalies
● Stigmata of neurofibromatosis or tuberous sclerosis
● Speech / communication skills and developmental assessment
● Hearing / visual assessment
● Signs of physical abuse / self-harm
Other differential diagnoses for ASD to be considered during assessment are
shown in Table 1:
Table 1: Differential diagnoses for autism23
● Neurodevelopmental disorders:
●
specific language delay or disorder
● intellectual disability or global developmental delay
● developmental coordination disorder (DCD)
● Mental and behavioural disorders:
●
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
●
mood disorder
●
anxiety disorder
●
attachment disorders
●
oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
●
conduct disorder
●
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
●
psychosis
● Conditions in which there is developmental regression:
●
Rett syndrome
●
epileptic encephalopathy
● Other conditions:
●
severe hearing impairment
●
severe visual impairment
●
maltreatment
●
selective mutism
4.2 Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ASD encompasses difficulties in each of the three domains:
social relatedness, communication / play, and restricted interests and
activities with onset by three years of age (DSM-IV-TR).
The ICD and DSM categorical system classifications have led to development
of the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and the Diagnostic
Interview for Social and Communication Disorders (DISCO). Clinical
experience and professional training are crucial in order to establish the
diagnosis. Observation in different settings such as school and home may
be helpful.
Besides ADI-R and DISCO, other ASD-diagnostic instruments that can be
used to facilitate assessment are Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule
(ADOS) and Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS). ADOS is a reliable
diagnostic instrument to supplement clinical history. Refer to Appendix 8
for more details.
a. Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R)
This is a structured interview conducted with parents / carers of individuals
for assessment of ASD. It is used for diagnostic purpose for anyone with
a mental age of at least 18 months. The interview measures behaviour in
the areas of reciprocal social interaction, communication and language, as
well as patterns of behaviour.
b. Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS)
This is a semi-structured assessment of communication, social interaction
and play (or imaginative use of materials) for individuals suspected of having
ASD. The ADOS consists of four modules, each of which is appropriate for
children and adults with differing developmental and language levels, ranging
from nonverbal to verbally-fluent.
c. Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication Disorders (DISCO)
This is a detailed, semi-structured interview to be used with the parents /
carers to identify the impairment of social interaction, social communication
and social imagination together with the associated repetitive behaviour,
and all other features that may be found in ASD.
d. Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS)
This is a 15-item behaviour observation rating scale to identify and
differentiate children with ASD from typically developing children or others
with developmental disablities.
RECOMMENDATION 3
● Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder should be made clinically based
on comprehensive history and observation. Diagnostic tools may be
used to assist in the clinical diagnosis. (Grade C)
4.3 Clinical Progression
Diagnosis of ASD based on clinical evaluation by trained and experienced
clinicians is relatively stable.25, level II-3 Improvement in symptoms reported by
parents do not translate into changes in diagnosis.26, level II-3 The severity levels
for ASD vary by context and fluctuate over time.
5. Comorbidities and Other Difficulties
Children with ASD can experience a wide range of difficulties with emotional,
attentional, activity, thought, behavioural and medical problems. Diagnosis
of comorbid disorders is of major importance as they may cause significant
clinical impairment in children with ASD. It is crucial that all comorbid
conditions are appropriately assessed and managed.
a. Intellectual Disability
Extreme autistic traits are significantly associated with intellectual disability
and poor academic performance (p < 0.001).27, level III Among those with ASD,
about half have intellectual disability.28, level III
b. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)29, level III
Prevalence of ADHD in children with ASD is 53%, with the following subtypes:-
● 22% - hyperactivity / impulsivity
● 46% - inattentive
● 32% - combined
Compared to children with ASD alone, those with comorbid ADHD:-
● are younger, with children between 5 and 7 years presenting more
symptoms of hyperactivity (p < 0.05)
● have a lower mean IQ (p = 0.01)
● are on medication more often (p < 0.05)
● do not show differences in gender (p = 0.59) and type of ASD
diagnosis (p = 0.11)
c. Sleep Problems
Sleep problems occur in 44% - 83% of school aged children with ASD.
Children with ASD significantly have:30, level-III; 31, level II-2
● at least one sleep problem
● sleep onset problems
● night waking
These findings are supported by polysomnography.31, level II-2 Cognitive or
adaptive development did not predict severity of sleep problems in the ASD
group.30, level III
d. Epilepsy
The prevalence of epilepsy in autism ranges from 7% - 46%. It is increased
with greater intellectual disability, symptomatic autism, age, history of
cognitive / developmental regression, use of psychotropics medications
and abnormality of electroencephalography (EEG).32, level III; 33, level III
The median age of onset for epilepsy is 14 years.33, level III Epileptiform
abnormalities on EEG occur in 6% - 60% of autistic children.32, level III The
presence of epilepsy in children with ASD is significantly associated with
psychiatric disorders.34, level III
e. Gastrointestinal Problems
Children with ASD are five times more common to have feeding problems
than those without ASD (OR 5.11, 95% CI 3.74 to 6.97).35, level II-2 Types of
feeding problems are food selectivity (54%),35, level II-2; 36, level II-2 food refusal
(21%), behavioural rigidity during meals (17%) or their combinations
(7%). Children with ASD tend to have a significantly lower consumption
of calcium and protein compared to children without ASD and a higher
level of nutritional inadequacies.35, level II-2
The overall incidence of gastrointestinal symptoms in children with ASD
does not differ from the general population, although there is an increased
incidence of constipation in those with ASD.37, level II-2
f. Motor Coordination
Substantial motor coordination deficits occur in children with ASD across
all age groups. Handwriting is very important for academic progress and
social communication development. Adolescents with ASD are known to
have poor handwriting. The main predictors are intellectual ability (p =
0.006) and motor skill (p = 0.005).38, level III
g. Other Psychiatric Disorders34, level III
Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in children with ASD is as follows:
● 70.8% have at least one current psychiatric disorder (95% CI 58.2 to
83.4) with 57% having multiple diagnosis
● 62.8% (95% CI 49.8 to 75.9) have ADHD, emotional or behavioural
disorders (oppositional defiant or conduct)
● 24.7% (95% CI 14.1 to 35.3) have Tourette syndrome, chronic tics,
trichotillomania, enuresis, or encopresis (neuropsychiatric disorders)
● 41.9% (95% CI 26.8 to 57.0) have anxiety or phobic disorder
● 1.4% (95% CI 0 to 3.0) have depressive disorders
● 30% (95% CI 14.9 to 45.0) have oppositional or conduct disorder
There is no substantial evidence on the prevalence of psychosis in children
with ASD.
6. Investigations
a. Audiological Evaluation
Most children with ASD present with speech and language delay. Therefore,
audiological evaluation is an important component of initial assessment in
order to rule out hearing impairment. Standard behavioural audiometric
procedures are difficult to apply in children with ASD. Behavioural response in
audiometric test is less reliable (≥15 dB) in younger children with ASD.39, level III
The electrophysiological tests used to evaluate hearing impairment are:
● transient evoked otoacoustic emissions (TEOAE)
● auditory brainstem evoked response (ABR)
● acoustic reflexes (AR)
b. Other Investigations
ASD is predominantly a clinical diagnosis. Children with ASD generally
do not require intensive investigation. Investigations may be carried out in
some children with ASD to establish underlying pathology, exclude treatable
conditions and identify comorbid conditions.
● Electroencephalograpy (EEG)
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of EEG in the investigation
of children with ASD without clinical seizures.40, level II-2; 41, level II-2
● Genetic and Metabolic Investigations
Genetic and metabolic studies are not routinely done in children with ASD
as the association of inherited metabolic disorders and ASD is low.42, level II-2
These tests are done usually when there is a suspicion of syndromes such as
Fragile X syndrome or when there is dysmorphism or macrocephaly and/or
association with severe intellectual disability or global developmental delay.
These children have to be referred to a paediatrician or a geneticist for further
evaluation.43, level II-2
● Neuroimaging / Brain Imaging
Brain imaging are not routinely done in patients with ASD as a meta-analysis
did not show any difference in the brains of children with ASD and controls.44,
level 1 Brain imaging is usually considered in selective cases where syndromes
or neurological conditions are suspected and is usually done at tertiary
levels.45, level III
● Food Allergy
There is no significant association between ASD and food allergies.46, level II-2;
47, level II-2
● Mineral Analysis
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of mineral analysis in ASD.48,
level II-2; 49, level II-2; 50, level II-2
7. Treatment
Ideally, children with ASD should be managed by a multidisciplinary team as
stated in the algorithm (page xiii). Early Intervention Programmes (EIP) are
advocated strongly, especially for children below the age of three to improve
outcomes. However, all children should be offered EIP upon diagnosis.
Policy makers play an important role in the implementation of services for
children with ASD.
RECOMMENDATION 4
● Audiological assessment should be performed in children with or
suspected of having autism spectrum disorder (ASD). (Grade C)
● Other investigation* should not be done routinely in children with
ASD unless indicated. (Grade C)
* Refer to preceding texts
7.1.
Non-pharmacological Treatment
a. Applied Behaviour Analysis (ABA)
Applied Behaviour Analysis (ABA) is the application of behavioural principles
to everyday situations, that will over time increases or decreases targeted
behaviours. This intervention is widely used in the management of children
with ASD, and recognised as a safe and effective intervention. Although
there are a number of ABA approaches, the Lovaas method is the most
well-known and extensively researched.51, level I
Lovaas therapy is superior to standard care or regular instruction. In
comparison to special education, Lovaas therapy significantly improves
among others, social communication skills, language and daily living skills
51, level I
There is inadequate evidence to pin-point specific behavioural intervention
approaches to be most effective for individual child with ASD. Lovaas therapy
and early intensive behavioural intervention variants, and the Early Start
Denver Model result in improvements in cognitive performance, language
skills, and adaptive behaviour skills in some children.52, level I
RECOMMENDATION 5
● Parents or carers should actively participate in any intervention offered
to children with autism spectrum disorder. (Grade C)
Children with autism spectrum disorder should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team consisting of:
● family medicine specialist
● paediatrician
● psychiatrist / child and adolescent psychiatrist
● clinical / educational psychologist or counsellor
● occupational therapist
● speech-language therapist
● medical social worker
● education officers
b. Speech, Language and Communication Interventions
Children with ASD may have limited or no speech, poor joint attention and
pragmatic skills, as well as difficulty in understanding and interacting with
others. Those who receive speech and language therapy between two to
three years of age show improvement in expressive language at four years
of age (p < 0.05).53, level II-2
It is important for family members to be active participants in speech therapy
sessions. Parents’ involvement in therapy of ASD children:-
● increases the number of communication acts and use of
communication means (p < 0.05)54, level II-2
● decreases autism behaviour and increases typical communication
(p < 0.05)55, level I
The various types of communication interventions for children with ASD are
discussed below.
● Naturalistic Approach
Responsive Education and Prelinguistic Milieu Teaching (RPMT) facilitates
intentional communication during the prelinguistic period in children with
developmental delay. Whereas Reciprocal Imitation Training (RIT) is an
imitation intervention developed for young children with ASD.
RPMT significantly improves social communication and language learning in
children with ASD compared to Picture Exchange Communication System
(PECS) in terms of:-
○ object exchange turns and requesting56, level I
○ initiating joint attention56, level I
○ increasing in object interest57, level I
RIT improves elicited and spontaneous imitation of objects, as well as
gestures in young children with autism (<5 years old) with a greater play
repertoire compared to controls (p < 0.05).58, level I
RECOMMENDATION 6
● Applied Behaviour Analysis should be considered in the management
of children with autism spectrum disorder. (Grade A)
● Augmentative and alternative Communication (AAC)
Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) is another
communication methods that can help children with ASD who have limited
speech or no speech to communicate. It is divided into aided and unaided.
Unaided AAC consists of nonverbal means of natural communication
including gestures and facial expressions. Aided AAC requires some
additional external support such as a communication board with visualgraphic symbols using pictures, line drawings or printed words.
AAC improves communication skills (IRD = 0.99, 84% CI 0.98 to 0.99), social
skills (IRD = 0.90, 84% CI 0.84 to 0.95), spelling (IRD = 0.79, 84% CI 0.76
to 0.82) and challenging behaviour (IRD = 0.80, 84% CI 0.76 to 0.84) in
individuals with ASD.59, level III
Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) is a six-phased aided
AAC. It is designed to facilitate functional and spontaneous communication
skills. Its use in children with ASD helps them to develop speech.
PECS improves communication skills in individuals with ASD in terms of:-
○ non-imitative spoken communication acts (p = 0.03)60, level I
○ number of different non-imitative words (p = 0.04)60, level I
○ functional communication (IRD = 0.65, 84% CI 0.59 to 0.73)61, level III
○ challenging behaviour (IRD = 0.45, 84% CI 0.48 to 0.73)61, level III
○ socialisation (IRD = 0.73, 84% CI 0.53 to 0.93)61, level III
PECS increases requesting skills in children with autism based on Percentage
of Non-overlapping Data (PND) score.62, level I It also increases frequency and
number of non-imitative spoken communication compared to RPMT in preschoolers with ASD (p < 0.05).56, level I PECS has larger effects than other picturebased AAC systems in targeted behaviours which include communication and
social skills (IRD = 0.99, 84% CI 0.98 to 0.99).61, level III
PECS training is effective for pre-school children (p < 0.001), those with single
ASD diagnosis (p = 0.005) and completed all six phases (p = 0.005).61, level III
A speech generating device (SGD) is an electronic device that produces
speech for the user. It is an aided AAC and often used with graphic symbols.
SGD with enhanced milieu teaching and signing increase requesting skills
in children with autism based on PND score.62, level I SGD has larger effects
than other picture-based AAC systems in targeted behaviours which include
communication and social skills, although it is not statistically significant.61, level
III
There is no retrievable evidence on unaided AAC.
● Video Modelling
Video modelling is a mode of teaching that uses video recording to provide a
visual model of the targeted skill to children with ASD. Types of video modelling
include video self-modelling and “video modelling with other as model”.
Video modelling and video self-modelling moderately improve social
communication skills, functional skills and behavioural functioning in
ASD children.63, level III “Video modelling with other as model” improves play
skills, independent living and social-communicative skills in ASD children
(p < 0.05).64, level III
c. Occupational Therapy
ASD may affect the child’s self-care ability, play, academic performance and
social activities at home, school and in the community. Sensory processing
dysfunction or sensory integration dysfunction are also affected in 50% - 90% of
children with ASD.65; 66; 67; 68 Children with ASD have motor impairment in motor
skill development when compared to their typically developing peers.69; 70; 71
Occupational therapy provides assessment and intervention to maximise
activities of daily living. The interventions provided by occupational therapists
include social skills, self-help skills, sensory integration therapy, perceptual
motor skills, sensory-motor skills, as well as behavioural and developmental
interventions.72
● Social Skills and Self-help Skills
Social skills and self-help skills interventions improve skill deficits in children
with ASD.73, level III For social skills intervention, the effectiveness was supported
by a Cochrane SR which showed improvement in overall social competence
(ES = 0.47, 95% CI 0.16 to 0.78) and friendship quality (ES = 0.41, 95% CI 0.02
to 0.81) in children with ASD.74, level I
RECOMMENDATION 7
● Children with autism spectrum disorder should receive speech,
language and communication interventions as needed. (Grade A)
Two to three years old children with autism spectrum disorder who receive
speech and language therapy show improvement in expressive language
at four years of age.
● Sensory Integration Therapy (SIT)
Sensory Integration Therapy (SIT) is often used by occupational therapists
to manage children with ASD.75 The intervention typically involves provision
of sensory input by using appropriate modalities.
SIT has shown significant improvements in sensory processing, motor
skills, social functioning and autistic mannerisms compared to fine motor
intervention,76, level I as well as reduction in stereotypic behaviours, off
task behaviours and touch aversion compared to no treatment.51, level l Yet
in a recent SR, SIT showed no consistent positive effect as a treatment
for children with ASD, with many of the studies included having serious
methodological flaws.77, level III
● Joint Attention Intervention
Joint attention refers to the child’s capacity to coordinate attention with a
social partner around an object or event.78 Joint attention intervention in
children with ASD improves joint attention in teacher-child play (p = 0.036)
and joint engagement in mother-child play (p = 0.015).79, level I
● Perceptual Motor Training
Perceptual motor training involves movement related skills such as eye
hand coordination. In a quasi-experimental study, perceptual motor training
increased the attention span of children with ASD (p < 0.05).80, level lI-1
d. Other Interventions / Programmes
● Social Stories
Social stories help children with ASD to understand the subtle differences
in interpersonal communication for effective and appropriate interaction.
It can be conducted by trained occupational therapists, speech-language
therapists, psychologists, teachers or caregivers. Social stories improve
total social skills and social isolation (p < 0.005),81, level I and appropriate
social behaviours (mean PND = 56) in children with ASD. Social stories
also reduce inappropriate behaviours (mean PND = 87).82, level III Standard
and directive social story interventions are equally effective in eliciting,
generalising and maintaining the targeted social skills in children with autism
(p < 0.001).83, level I
RECOMMENDATION 8
● Occupational therapy should be offered to children with autism
spectrum disorder. (Grade A)
● Developmental, Individual-Difference, Relationship-Based (DIR) /
Floortime
In this therapy, adults help children to develop their circles of communication
by playing with them at their developmental level and building on their
strengths. DIR / Floortime™ intervention at an average of 14.2 hours per
week for a year significantly improves developmental skills and reduces
autistic symptoms in 47% children with ASD.84, level I
● Music Therapy
In a RCT, children with autism were randomised to receive music therapy
and play in different sequences. Generally, music therapy improved joint
attention in both groups (p = 0.01). However, joint attention improved
significantly when play was conducted before music therapy while eye
contact events occurred significantly longer when music therapy was
instituted before play.85, level I
e. Parent Education and Support
Managing children with ASD can be a huge challenge to their families. Children
need parental involvement and support in acquiring social and communication
skills. Parents without proper training may contribute to the failure of children
applying learnt skills outside the classrooms. Thus, parental involvement is
important to ensure the continuity of intervention.
A SR showed that parental training improved parent-child interaction
(shared attention: SMD = 0.41, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.68 and parent synchrony:
SMD = 0.90, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.23). Besides that, improvement was also found
in child’s language comprehension (MD = 36.26, 95% CI 1.31 to 71.20) as a
result of parental training.86, level 1
Children’s functional verbal utterances increase following parental training (p <
0.05) and are maintained at follow-up (2 - 4 months). The relationship between
parent fidelity to the training and child’s communication improves from pretraining to follow-up (p < 0.05).87, level III
f. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT)
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT) is used in children with ASD who have
anxiety and mood disorders.
RECOMMENDATION 9
● Parental training should be offered to parents of children with autism
spectrum disorder. (Grade A)
The application of modified CBT is effective in reducing anxiety in children with
Asperger subtype but not in other subtypes of ASD.88, level I CBT modalities that
are effective in the treatment of anxiety in ASD include Coping Cat,89, level I; 90,
level II-3 Building Confidence CBT Program91, level I; 92, level I and modules specifically
developed for ASD children.93, level I However, most of the primary studies were
done on children with high verbal intelligence.
g. Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication
Handicapped Children (TEACCH)
This is a structured teaching system based on a close collaboration between
parents and professionals. It can be used for children with ASD of all ages
and skill levels.
There is no significant difference between TEACCH and standard care in
imitation skills and eye-hand integration,51, level I although there is moderate to
large effect sizes (ES) in social functioning (ES = 0.65, 95% CI 0.15 to 1.15)
and maladaptive behaviour (pooled ES = -0.92, 95% CI -1.51 to -0.33) 94, level I
h. Diet
Gluten and casein-free diet, and dimethylglycine are not effective in the
management of autism.95, level I; 96, level I
Omega-3 supplements have no significant effect on social interaction,
communication, stereotypy or hyperactivity.97, level I
RECOMMENDATION 10
● Cognitive Behaviour Therapy may be offered to children with autism
spectrum disorder who have high verbal intelligence and anxiety
disorder. (Grade A)
Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication
Handicapped Children (TEACCH) may be useful in the management of
children with autism spectrum disorder.
Diet-related intervention has no significant benefit in children with autism
spectrum disorder.
7.2.
Pharmacotherapy
In ASD, medications are used in the treatment of comorbid disorders.
Conventional antipsychotics such as haloperidol are used less frequently
due to its high incidence of severe adverse reactions.
a. Atypical Antipsychotics (AAP)
The use of atypical antipsychotics in ASD is preferred due to the reduced
propensity of causing extrapyramidal symptoms.
● Risperidone
Low dose risperidone (up to 2.5 mg per day in children weighing from 20
- 45 kg and up to 3.5 mg per day in those weighing over 45 kg) may be
beneficial in some features of ASD.98, level I A meta-analysis of three RCTs in
children with ASD suggested that short-term use of risperidone significantly
improved:-
●
irritability
(MD = -8.09, 95% CI -12.99 to -3.19)
●
social withdrawal / lethargy (MD = -1.00, 95% CI -5.03 to -0.97)
●
hyperactivity
(MD = -8.98, 95% CI -12.01 to -5.94)
●
stereotypy
(MD = -1.71, 95% CI -2.97 to -0.45)
●
inappropriate speech
(MD = -1.93, 95% CI -3.79 to -0.07)
However, there was a higher risk of weight gain (MD = 1.78, 95% CI 1.15 to
2.41) in the treatment group compared to those on placebo.99, level I
● Aripiprazole
A meta-analysis of two RCTs in children with ASD suggested that aripiprazole
up to 15 mg per day might be efficacious in treating:-
●
irritability
(MD = -6.17, 95% CI -9.07 to -3.26)
●
hyperactivity
(MD = -7.93, 95% CI -10.98 to -4.88)
●
stereotypy
(MD = -2.66, 95% CI -3.55 to -1.77)
●
inappropriate speech
(MD = -1.43, 95% CI -2.60 to -0.27)
Adverse effects such as weight gain (MD = 1.13, 95% CI 0.71 to 1.54),
sedation (MD = 4.28, 95% CI 1.58 to 11.60), drooling (MD = 9.64, 95% CI
1.29 to 72.10) and tremor (MD = 10.26, 95% CI 1.37 to 76.63) may occur
more often in the treatment group compared to those on placebo.100, level I
● Other AAPs
○ Olanzapine
Olanzapine up to 20 mg per day improves CGI-I score in pervasive
developmental disorder (PDD) at eight weeks (p = 0.012).
However, clinically significant weight gain is more likely to occur
in individuals treated with the medication (p = 0.028).101, level I
○ Paliperidone
Paliperidone up to 12 mg per day is efficacious for irritability in
individuals with autism (p = 0.0002). The safety profile is acceptable
except for raised prolactin level in males (p = 0.0001).102, level II-3
○ Quetiapine
Low dose quetiapine (≤150 mg per day) is efficacious in reducing
aggression (p = 0.028) and improving sleep quality (p = 0.014) in
children with ASD at eight weeks. No significant difference in body
weight was observed and the adverse effects were mild.103, level II-3
○ Ziprasidone
Ziprasidone up to 160 mg per day is efficacious in reducing
irritability (p = 0.05) and hyperactivity (p = 0.01) in autism at six
weeks. The serious side effect of QTc prolongation of ziprasidone
may offset the arguably minimal benefits associated with its use.
(p = 0.04).104, level II-3
b. Antidepressants
● Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI)
A Cochrane SR explored the efficacy of various selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in the treatment of children with ASD. There
was no evidence of SSRIs effect in children on core symptoms and
severity of the disorder. There was also emerging evidence of harm such
as seizure, poor appetite and weight loss.105, level I
● Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCA)
A Cochrane SR concluded that there was limited and conflicting
evidence of effect and the side effects of TCA as a treatment option in
children with ASD. For example, a study in 1993 favoured clomipramine
against placebo but a later study in 2001 showed non-significant
finding with substantial side effects. Further research is required
before TCAs can be recommended for treatment of children with
ASD.106, level I
c. Other Medications
● Methylphenidate
Methylphenidate was found to be more efficacious than placebo among
subjects who have PDD in a crossover RCT followed by open-label
continuation of three months duration. Parent-rated and teacher-rated
Aberrant Behaviour Checklist hyperactivity subscale scores during
crossover phase were significantly lower in different methylphenidate
dosages and the response was maintained in the continuation phase.
Reported side effects were loss of appetite, sleep difficulties and
irritability.107, level I
● Atomoxetine
A SR showed that there was limited evidence to suggest the efficacy of
atomoxetie in children with ASD and ADHD symptoms. Further research
is required before it can be strongly recommended for the treatment of
children with such condition.108, level I
● Valproate
In a RCT, divalproate sodium significantly reduced irritability compared to
the placebo. The findings were robust even after controlling for intelligence
quotient (IQ) differences.109, level I It was well tolerated. Most side effects
were mild to moderate in severity, resolved with small changes in dosing
and did not require a discontinuation of medication.
Except for risperidone and aripiprazole, the drugs listed above are
for off-label use.
● Melatonin
Melatonin is an endogenous neurohormone produced predominantly in the
pineal gland. It is commonly used for insomnia in children and has a favourable
side-effect profile.110
In a meta-analysis, melatonin was more efficacious than placebo in the
treatment of ASD in terms of:111, level I
● increased sleep duration by 44 minutes (Hedge’s g = 1.07, 95% CI
0.49 to 1.65)
● shorter sleep onset latency by 39 minutes (Hedge’s g = 2.46, 95% CI
1.96 to 2.98)
The findings above were supported by a recent RCT whereby a combination
of CBT and melatonin was statistically most efficacious in reducing insomnia
symptoms compared to either modality or placebo when used alone.112, level I
In terms of safety, mild side effects reported in the meta-analysis were
headache, diarrhoea and dizziness.111, level I
7.3
Traditional and Complementary Medicine
Any other treatment modalities not described above are grouped under
traditional and complementary medicine. The following treatment modalities
have poor evidence, no effectiveness and / or some harmful effects in children
with ASD:-
● chelation113, level II-3
● secretin114, level I
● fatty acids97, level I
● vitamin B6-magnesium115, level I
● vitamin B12116, level I
● acupuncture117, level I
● hyperbaric oxygen therapy118, level I
There is no retrievable evidence for vitamin A, vitamin C, trimethylglycine,
cupping, ayurvedic medicine or homeopathy in the treatment of children with
ASD.
RECOMMENDATION 11
● Children with autism spectrum disorder may be offered:
● atypical antipsychotics as a short-term treatment for irritability.
(Grade A)
● methylphenidate for hyperactivity. (Grade A)
● atomoxetine for hyperactivity. (Grade C)
● melatonin for sleep difficulties. (Grade A)
8. Social Welfare Service
Children with ASD should be referred to the Department of Social Welfare at
their respective local districts. This will enable the child to be registered for
benefits such as:
● placement for special needs education if warranted
● welfare support including financial allowances from the department
● free services in the public sector
The registration form should be completed by the medical practitioner /
medical officer at the point of diagnosis.
9. Monitoring and Preparation of Transition to Adult Services
Children with ASD require clinical monitoring for physical growth, behaviour
and development, associated medical problems, as well as other
comorbidities, sexuality and safety. The main goal is for children with ASD to
become independent and achieve their potential in all aspects of life, leading
to a higher quality of life when they exit the school system. However, there is
a lack of reliable and valid measures to evaluate progress and change of a
child’s behaviour and functioning over time after the diagnosis of ASD.119, level II-2
Transition for adolescents with ASD should be discussed and planned early
by all involved in their management. ASD children have varying intellectual
and functional abilities, hence the transition into adulthood has to be planned
early according to their individual abilities.120, level III
Vocational training, post-secondary education, day care activities and
supervised employment are options for these young people.121, level lI-1
Care for children and adolescents with ASD should be continued into adult
health services. There is a need for establishment of this service to support
adolescents when they enter adulthood.
10. Implementing the Guidelines
Implementation of this CPG is the responsibility of each healthcare provider.
Mechanisms should be in place to review care provided against the guidelines
recommendations. The reasons for any differences should be assessed and
addressed where appropriate. Local arrangements should then be made to
implement the national guidelines in individual hospitals and clinics.
Traditional and Complementary Medicine could not be recommended to
children with autism spectrum disorder because of insufficient evidence
and potential harmful effects.
a.
Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing these CPG are:-
i. Dissemination of CPG
● Availability and dissemination of CPG to health care providers (hard
and soft copies)
● Conferences and updates on child behaviour and development
ii. Implementation of CPG
● Developmental screening including M-CHAT
● Public awareness via World Autism Day
● Accessibility to relevant multidisciplinary teams
● Active
involvement
of
government
and
non-governmental
organisations
The limiting factors in the implementation are:
●
Limited awareness and knowledge of detection and subsequent
referral of children with ASD
●
Variation of practice and treatment at different levels of care
●
Limited financial and human resources
●
Lack of training at all levels of healthcare providers
●
Lack of networking between government and private practitioners
b. Potential Resource Implications
●
Widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare personnel via printed
copies
●
Reinforce training of healthcare providers via regular seminars and
workshops
●
Establish ASD registry in Malaysia
●
Develop a multidisciplinary team in secondary and tertiary care
levels.
To enhance the utilisation of these CPG on the Management of Autism
Spectrum Disorder in Children and Adolescents, the following clinical audit
indicators for quality management are proposed:-
*Assessment by MDT
Percentage of
children aged
18 and 24 months
screened with
M-CHAT
=
Number of children aged 18 and 24
months screened with M-CHAT in a year
X 100%
Number of children aged 18 and 24
months attended child health clinic
in the same period
Percentage of
children with
failed M-CHAT
referred for further
assessment*
=
Number of children with failed M-CHAT
referred for further assessment in a year
X 100%
Number of children failed M-CHAT
in the same period
References
1.
Family Health Division. Prosiding Mesyuarat Membincangkan Hasil Kajian Saringan
dan Pengendalian Masalah Autisme. Kuala Lumpur 2006.
2.
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Surveillance Year 2010 Principal
Investigators; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Prevalence of
autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years - autism and developmental
disabilities monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR Surveill
Summ. 2014, 63(2):1-21.
3.
Sandin S, Hultman CM, Kolevzon A, et al. Advancing maternal age is associated
with increasing risk for autism: a review and meta-analysis. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2012, 51(5):477-486.
4.
Guinchat V, Thorsen P, Laurent C, et al. Pre-, peri- and neonatal risk factors for
autism. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2012, 91(3):287-300.
5.
Hultman CM, Sandin S, Levine SZ, et al. Advancing paternal age and risk of
autism: new evidence from a population-based study and a meta-analysis of
epidemiological studies. Mol Psychiatry. 2011,16(12):1203-1212.
6.
Durkin MS, Maenner MJ, Newschaffer CJ, et al. Advanced parental age and the
risk of autism spectrum disorder. Am J Epidemiol. 2008, 168(11):1268-1276.
7.
Ozonoff S, Young GS, Carter A, et al. Recurrence risk for autism spectrum disorders:
A Baby Siblings Research Consortium Study. Pediatrics. 2011, 128:e488-495.
8.
Surén P, Roth C, Bresnahan M, et al. Association between maternal use of folic
acid supplements and risk of autism spectrum disorders in children. JAMA. 2013,
309(6):570-577.
9.
Schmidt RJ, Hansen RL, Hartiala J, et al. Prenatal vitamins, one-carbon metabolism
gene variants, and risk for autism. Epidemiology. 2011, 22(4):476-485.
10. Demicheli V, Rivetti A, Debalini MG, et al. Vaccines for measles, mumps and
rubella in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012, 2:CD004407.
11. DeStefano F, Price CS, Weintraub ES. Increasing exposure to antibody stimulating
proteins and polysaccharides in vaccines is not associated with the risk of autism.
J Paediatrics. 2013, 163(2):561-567.
12. Sunita, Bilszta JLC. Early identification of autism: A comparison of the Checklist
for Autism in Toddlers and the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers. J Paediatr
Child Health. 2013, 49(6):438-444.
13. Norris M, Lecavalier L. Screening accuracy of level 2 autism spectrum disorder
rating scales: a review of selected instruments. Autism. 2010, 14(4):263-284.
14. Mawlea E, Griffiths P. Screening for autism in pre-school children in primary care:
systematic review of English language tools. Int J Nurs Stud. 2006, 43(5):623-636
15. Robins DL, Fein D, Barton ML, et al. The Modified Checklist for Autism in
Toddlers: An initial study investigating the early detection of autism and pervasive
developmental disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2001, 31(2):131-144.
16. Berument SK, Rutter M, Lord C, et al. Autism screening questionnaire: diagnostic
validity. Br J Psychiatry. 1999, 175:444-445.
17. Wong V, Hui LH, Lee WC, et al. A modified screening tool for autism (Checklist for
Autism in Toddlers [CHAT-23]) for Chinese children. Pediatrics. 2004, 114(2):e166176.
18. Ooi YP, Rescorla L, Ang RP, et al. Identification of autism spectrum disorders
using the child behaviour checklist in Singapore. J Autism Dev Disord. 2011,
41(9):1147-1156.
19. Wetherby AM, Brosnan-Maddox S, Peace V, et al. Validation of the Infant-Toddler
Checklist as a broadband screener for autism spectrum disorders from 9 to 24
months of age. Autism. 2008, 12(5):487-511.
20. Ozonoff S, Young GS, Steinfeld MB, et al. How early do parent concerns predict
later autism diagnosis? J Dev Behav Pediatrics. 2009, 30(5):367-375.
21. Baron-Cohen S, Allen J, Gillberg C. Can autism be detected at 18 months? The
needle, the haystack and the CHAT. Br J Psychiatry. 1992, 161:839-843.
22. Robins DL, Casagrande K, Barton M, et al. Validation of the modified checklist
for autism in toddlers, revised with follow-up (M-CHATH-R/F). Pediatrics. 2014,
133(1):37-45.
23. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Autism diagnosis in children
and young people: Recognition, referral and diagnosis of children and young
people on the autism spectrum, 2011, National Clinical Guideline, Number 128
2011.
24. Volkmar F, Siegel M, Woodbury-Smith M, et al. Practice parameter for the
assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychistry. 2014, 53(2):237-257.
25. Kleinman JM, Ventola PE, Pandey J, et al. Diagnostic stability in very young
children with autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2008, 38(4):606615.
26. Soke GN, Philofsky A, Diguiseppi C, et al. Longitudinal changes in scores on the
Autism Diagnostic Interview–Revised (ADI-R) in pre-school children with autism:
Implications for diagnostic classification and symptom stability. Autism. 2011,
15(5):545-562.
27. Hoekstra RA, Happé F, Baron - Cohen S, et al. Association between extreme
autistic traits and intellectual disability: insights from a general population twin
study. Br J Psychiatry. 2009, 195(6):531-536.
28. Charman T, Pickles A, Simonoff E, et al. IQ in children with autism spectrum
disorders: data from the Special Needs and Autism Project (SNAP). Psychol
Med. 2011, 41(3):619-627.
29. Sinzig J, Walter D, Doepfner M. Attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder in children
and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder: symptom or syndrome? J Atten
Disord. 2009, 13(2):117-126.
30. Krakowiak P, Goodlin-Jones B, Hertz-Picciotto I, et al. Sleep problems in children
with autism spectrum disorders, developmental delays, and typical development: a
population-based study. J Sleep Res. 2008, 17(2):197-206.
31. Miano S, Bruni O, Elia M, et al. Sleep in children with autistic spectrum disorder: a
questionnaire and polysomnographic study. Sleep Med. 2007, 9(1):64-70.
32. Sansa G, Carlson C, Doyle W, et al. Medically refractory epilepsy in autism. Epilepsia.
2011, 52(6):1071-1075.
33. Hara H. Autism and epilepsy: a retrospective follow-up study. Brain Dev. 2007,
29(8):486-490.
34. Simonoff E, Pickles A, Charman T, et al. Psychiatric disorders in children with autism
spectrum disorders: prevalence, comorbidity, and associated factors in a populationderived sample. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008, 47(8):921-929.
35. Sharp WG, Berry RC, McCracken C, et al. Feeding problems and nutrient intake in
children with autism spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis and comprehensive review
of the literature. J Autism Dev Disord. 2013, 43(9):2159-2173.
36. Marí-Bauset S, Zazpe I, Mari-Sanchis A, et al. Food selectivity in autism spectrum
disorders: A systematic review. J Child Neurol. 2013, [Epub ahead of print].
37. Ibrahim SH, Voigt RG, Katusic SK, et al. Incidence of gastrointestinal symptoms in
children with autism: a population-based study. Pediatrics. 2009, 124(2):680-686.
38. Fuentes CT, Mostofsky SH, Bastian AJ. Perceptual reasoning predicts handwriting
impairments in adolescents with autism. Neurology. 2010, 75(20):1825-1829.
39. Tharpe AM, Bess FH, Sladen DP, et al. Auditory characteristics of children with autism.
Ear and Hearing. 2006, 27(4):430-441.
40. Fong CY, Baird G, Wraige E. Do children with autism and developmental regression
need EEG investigation in the absence of clinical seizures? Arch Dis Child. 2008,
93:998-999.
41. Kagan-KushnirT, Roberts SW, Snead OC. Screening electroencephalograms in autism
spectrum disorders: evidence-based guideline. J Child Neurol. 2005, 20(3):197-206.
42. Schiff M, Benoist JF, Aïssaoui S, et al. Should metabolic diseases be systematically
screened in nonsyndromic autism spectrum disorders? PLoS One. 2011, 6(7):e219232.
43. Battaglia A, Carey JC. Etiologic yield of autistic spectrum disorders: a prospective
study. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2006, 142C(1):3-7.
44. Via E, Radua J, Cardoner N, et al. Meta-analysis of gray matter abnormalities in
autism spectrum disorder: should Asperger disorder be subsumed under a broader
umbrella of autistic spectrum disorder? Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011, 68(4):409-418.
45. Boddaert N, Zilbovicius M, Philipe A, et al. MRI findings in 77 children with nonsyndromic autistic disorder. PLoS One. 2009, 4(2):e4415.
46. Bakkaloglu B, Anlar B, Anlar FY, et al. Atopic features in early childhood autism. Eur
J Paediatr Neurol. 2008, 12(6):476-479.
47. Jyonouchi H, Geng L, Cushing-Ruby A, et al. Impact of innate immunity in a subset of
children with autism spectrum disorders: a case control study. J Neuroinflammation.
2008, 21(5):52.
48. Fido A, Al-Saad S. Toxic trace elements in the hair of children with autism. Autism.
2005, 9(3):290-298.
49. De Palma G, Catalani S, Franco A, et al. Lack of correlation between metallic elements
analyzed in hair by ICP-MS and autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 2012, 42(3):342-353.
50. Yorbik O, Kurt I, Haşimi A, et al. Chromium, cadmium, and lead levels in urine of
children with autism and typically developing controls. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2010,
135(1-3):10-15.
51. Ospina MB, Krebs Seida J, Clark B, et al. Behavioural and developmental
interventions for autism spectrum disorder: a clinical systematic review. PLoS One.
2008, 3(11):e3755.
52. Warren Z, McPheeters ML, Sathe N. A systematic review of early intensive intervention
for autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 2011, 127(5):e1303-1301.
53. Stone WL, Yoder PJ. Predicting spoken language level in children with autism
spectrum disorders. Autism. 2001, 5(4):341-361.
54. Fernandes FD, Cardoso C, Sassi FC, et al. Language therapy and autism: results of
three different models. Pro Fono Revista de Atualizacao Cientifica. 2008, 20(4):267272.
55. Tamanaha AC, Perissinoto J. Comparison of the evolutional process of children with
autism spectrum disorders in different language therapeutic interventions. J Soc Bras
Fonoaudiol. 2011, 23(1):8-12.
56. Yoder P, Stone WL. Randomized comparison of two communication interventions
for preschoolers with autism spectrum disorders. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2006,
74(3):426-435.
57. McDuffie AS, Lieberman RG, Yoder PJ. Object interest in autism spectrum disorder:
a treatment comparison. Autism. 2012, 16(4):398-405.
58. Ingersoll B. Pilot randomized controlled trial of Reciprocal Imitation Training for
teaching elicited and spontaneous imitation to children with autism. J Autism Dev
Disord. 2010, 40(9):1154-1160.
59. Ganz JB, Earles-Vollrath TL, Heath AK, et al. A meta-analysis of single case research
studies on aided augmentative and alternative communication systems with individuals
with autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2012, 42(1):60-74.
60. Flippin M, Reszka S, Watson LR. Effectiveness of the Picture Exchange Communication
System (PECS) on communication and speech for children with autism spectrum
disorders: a meta- analysis. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2010, 19(2):178-195.
61. Ganz JB, Davis JL, Lund EM, et al. Meta-analysis of PECS with individuals with ASD:
investigation of targeted versus non-targeted outcomes, participant characteristics,
and implementation phase. Res Dev Disabil. 2012, 33(2):406-418.
62. Schlosser RW, Wendt O. Effects of augmentative and alternative communication
intervention on speech production in children with autism: a systematic review. Am
J Speech Lang Pathol. 2008, 17(3):212-230.
63. Bellini S, Akullian J. A meta-analysis of video modeling and video self-modeling
interventions for children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
Exceptional Children. 2007, 73:264-287.
64. Mason RA, Ganz JB, Parker RI, et al. Moderating factors of video-modeling with
other as model: a meta-analysis of single-case studies. Res Dev Disabil. 2012,
33(4):1076-1086.
65. Baranek GT, David FJ, Poe MD, et al. Sensory experiences questionnaire: discriminating
sensory features in young children with autism, developmental delays, and typical
development. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2006, 47(6):591-601.
66. Leekam SR, Nieto C, Libby SJ, et al. Describing the sensory abnormalities of children
and adults with autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 2007, 37(5):894-910.
67. Tomchek SD, Dunn W. Sensory processing in children with and without autism: a
comparative study using the short sensory profile. Am J Occup Ther. 2007, 61(2):190200.
68. Baker AE, Lane A, Angley MT, et al. The relationship between sensory processing
patterns and behavioural responsiveness in autistic disorder: a pilot study. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2008, 38(5):867-875.
69. Berkeley SL, Zittel II, Pitney IV, et al. Locomotor and object control skills of children
diagnose with autism. Adapt Phys Activ Q. 2001, 18(4):405-416.
70. Dziuk MA, Gidley Larson JC, Apostu A, et al. Dyspraxia in autism: association with
motor, social, and communicative deficits. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007, 49(10):734739.
71. Breslin CM, Rudisill ME. The effect of visual supports on performance of the TGMD-2
for children with autism spectrum disorder. Adapt Phys Activ Q. 2011, 28(4):342-353.
72. Case-Smith J, Arbesman M. Evidence-based review of interventions for autism used
in or of relevance to occupational therapy. Am J Occup Ther. 2008, 62(4):416-429.
73. Flynn L, Healy O. A review of treatments for deficits in social skills and self-help skills
in autism spectrum disorder. Res in Autism Spectr Disord. 2012, 6 (1):431-441.
74. Reichow B, Steiner AM, Volkmar F. Social skills groups for people aged 6 to 21 with
autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012, 7:CD008511.
75. Ayres AJ, Tickle LS. Hyper-responsivity to touch and vestibular stimuli as a predictor
of positive response to sensory integration procedures. Am J Occup Ther, 1980,
34:375-381.
76. Pfeiffer BA, Koenig K, Kinnealey M, et al. Effectiveness of sensory integration
interventions in children with autism spectrum disorders: a pilot study. Am J Occup
Ther. 2011, 65(1):76-85.
77. Lang R, O’Reilly M, Healy O, et al. Sensory integration therapy for autism spectrum
disorders: a systematic review. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2012, 6(3):1004-1018.
78. Mundy P, Sigman M. Joint attention, social competence, and developmental
psychopathology In D. Cicchetti & D. Cohen (Eds.)Developmental psychopathology,
2nd ed., Vol.1: Theory and Methods (pp. 293 - 332). 2006
79. Kaale A, Smith L, Sponheim E. A randomized controlled trial of preschool-based
joint attention intervention for children with autism. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2012,
53(1):97-105.
80. Afshari J. The effect of perceptual-motor training on attention in the children with
autism spectrum disorders. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2012, 6:1331-1336.
81. Karkhaneh M, Clark B, Ospina MB, et al. Social Stories™ to improve social skills in
children with autism spectrum disorder: a systematic review. Autism. 2010, 14(6):641662.
82. Kokina A, Kern L. Social story interventions for students with autism spectrum
disorders: a meta-analysis. J Autism Dev Disord. 2010, 40(7):812-826.
83. Quirmbach LM, Lincoln AJ, Feinberg-Gizzo MJ, et al. Social stories: mechanisms
of effectiveness in increasing game play skills in children diagnosed with autism
spectrum disorder using a pretest posttest repeated measures randomized control
group design. J Autism Dev Disord. 2009, 39(2):299-232.
84. Pajareya K, Nopmaneejumruslers K. A pilot randomized controlled trial of DIR/
Floortime™ parent training intervention for pre-school children with autistic spectrum
disorders. Autism. 2011, 15(5):563-577.
85. Kim J, Wigram T, Gold C. The effects of improvisational music therapy on joint attention
behaviors in autistic children: a randomized controlled study. J Autism Dev Disord.
2008, 38(9):1758-1766.
86. Oono IP, Honey EJ, McConachie H. Parent-mediated early intervention for young
children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013,
CD009774.pub009772.
87. Coolican J, Smith IM, Bryson SE. Brief parent training in pivotal response treatment
for preschoolers with autism. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2010, 51(12):1321-1330.
88. Lang R, Regester A, Lauderdale S, et al. Treatment of anxiety in autism spectrum
disorders using cognitive behaviour therapy: a systematic review. Dev Neurorehabil.
2010, 13(1):53-63.
89. McNally Keehn RH, Lincoln AJ, Brown MZ, et al. The Coping Cat program for children
with anxiety and autism spectrum disorder: a pilot randomized controlled trial. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2013, 43(1):57-67.
90. Viecili MA. Effects of A modified cognitive behavior therapy program to treat anxiety in
children with autism spectrum disorders. ProQuest Dissertations & Theses. Toronto,
Ontario: York University; 2011.
91. Drahota A, Wood JJ, Sze KM, et al. Effects of cognitive behavioral therapy on daily
living skills in children with high-functioning autism and concurrent anxiety disorders.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2011,41(3):257-265.
92. Wood JJ, Drahota A, Sze K, et al. Brief report: effects of cognitive behavioral therapy
on parent-reported autism symptoms in school-age children with high-functioning
autism. J Autism Dev Disord.2009, 39(11):1608-1612.
93. Sung M, Ooi YP, Goh TJ, et al. Effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy on anxiety in
children with autism spectrum disorders: a randomized controlled trial. Child Psychiatry
Hum Dev. 2011, 42(6):634-649.
94. Virues-Ortega J, Julio FM, Pastor-Barriuso R. The TEACCH program for children
and adults with autism: a meta-analysis of intervention studies. Clin Psychol Rev.
2013, 33(8):940-953.
95. Millward C, Ferriter M, Calver S, et al. Gluten- and casein-free diets for autistic
spectrum disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008, 2:CD003498.
96. Kern JK, Miller VS, Cauller PL, et al. Effectiveness of N,N-dimethylglycine in autism
and pervasive developmental disorder. J Child Neurology. 2001, 16(3):169-173.
97. James S, Montgomery P, Williams K. Omega-3 fatty acids supplementation for autism
spectrum disorders (ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(11):CD007992.
98. McCracken JT, McGough J, Shah B, et al. Risperidone in children with autism and
serious behavioral problems. N Engl J Med. 2002, 347(5):314-321.
99. Jesner OS, Aref-AdibM, Coren E. Risperidone for autism spectrum disorder. Cochrane
Database of Syst Rev. 2007, (1):CD005040.
100. Ching H, Pringsheim T. Aripiprazole for autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2012, 5:CD009043.
101. Hollander E, Wasserman S, Swanson E, et al. A bouble-blind placebo-controlled pilot
study of olanzapine in childhood/adolescent Pervasive Developmental disorder. J
Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2006, 16(5):541-548.
102. Stigler KA, Mullett JE, Erickson CA, et al. Paliperidone for irritability in adolescents
and young adults with autistic disorder. Psychopharmacology. 2012, 223(2):237-245.
103. Golubchik P, Sever J, Weizman A. Low-dose quetiapine for adolescents with autistic
spectrum disorder and aggressive behavior: open-label trial. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2011, 34(6):216-219.
104. Malone RP, Delaney MA, Hyman SB, et al. Ziprasidone in adolescents with autism:
an open-label pilot study. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2007, 17(6):779-790.
105. Williams K, Wheeler DM, Silove N, et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) for autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010
(8):CD004677.
106. Hurwitz R, Blackmore R, Hazell P, et al. Tricyclic antidepressants for autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012,
(3):CD008372.
107. Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network. Randomized,
controlled, crossover trial of methylphenidate in pervasive developmental disorders
with hyperactivity. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005, 62(11):1266-1274.
108. Ghanizadeh A. Atomoxetine for treating ADHD symptoms in autism: A systematic
review. J Atten Disord. 2013, 17(635-640).
109. Hollander E, Chaplin W, Soorya L, et al. Divalproex sodium vs placebo for the
treatment of irritability in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010, 35(4):990-998.
110. Johnson KP, Malow BA. Assessment and pharmacologic treatment of sleep disturbance
in autism. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2008, 17:773-785.
111. Rossignol D, Frye R. Melatonin in autism spectrum disorders: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011, 53(9):783-792.
112. Cortesi F, Giannotti F, Sebastiani T, et al. Controlled-release melatonin, singly
and combined with cognitive behavioural therapy, for persistent insomnia in
children with autism spectrum disorders: a randomized placebo-controlled
trial. J Sleep Res. 2012, 21(6):700-709.
113. Davisa TN, O’Reilly M, Kangb S, et al. Chelation treatment for autism spectrum
disorders: A systematic review. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2013, 7(1):49-55.
114. Williams K, Wray JA, Wheeler DM. Intravenous secretin for autism spectrum
disorders (ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012, (4):CD003495.
115. Nye C, Brice A. Combined vitamin B6-magnesium treatment in autism spectrum
disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005, (4):CD003497.
116. Bertoglio K, Jill James S, Deprey L, et al. Pilot study of the effect of methyl B12
treatment on behavioral and biomarker measures in children with autism. J Altern
Complement Med. 2010, 16(5):555-560.
117. Cheuk DKL, Wong V, Chen WX. Acupuncture for autism spectrum disorders
(ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011, (9):CD007849.
118. Ghanizadeh A. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for treatment of children with autism:
a systematic review of randomized trials. Med Gas Res. 2012, 2:13.
119. Magiati I, Moss J, Yates R, et al. Is the Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist
(ATEC) a useful tool for monitoring progress in children with Autism Spectrum
Disorders? J Intellect Disabil Res. 2011, 55(3):302-312.
120. Taylor JL, Seltzer MM. Employment and post-secondary educational activities for
young adults with autism spectrum disorders during the transition to adulthood. J
Autism Dev Disord. 2011, 4(5):566-574.
121. Taylor JL, McPheeters ML, Sathe NA, et al. A systematic review of vocational
interventions for young adults with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 2012,
130(3):531-538.
122. Le Couteur A, Haden G, Hammal D, et al. Diagnosing autism spectrum disorders
in pre-school children using two standardised assessment instruments: the
ADI-R and the ADOS. J Autism Dev Disord. 2008, 38(2):362-367.
123. Maljaars J, Noens I, Scholte E, et al. Evaluation of the criterion and convergent
validity of the Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication Disorders in
young and low-functioning children. Autism, 2012, 16(5):487-497.
124. Chlebowski C, Green JA, Barton ML, et al. Using the childhood autism rating
scale to diagnose autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2010,
40(7):787-799.
125. Molloy CA, Murray DS, Akers R, et al. Use of the Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule (ADOS) in a clinical setting. Autism. 2011, 15(2):143-162.
126. Lord C, Risi S, DiLavore PS, et al. Autism from 2 to 9 years of age. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2006, 63(6):694-701.
Appendix 1
Examples of Search Strategy
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or in
combination, search was limited to English, human, 2001 to current and
children 0 -18 years old
TCM
1. Autistic Disorder/
2. (Autistic adj1 disorder*).tw.
3. Autism*.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. Vitamin B 12/
6. (b12 adj1 vitamin).tw.
7. cyanocobalamin.tw.
8. cobalamin.tw.
9. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8
10. 4 and 9
11. Vitamin B 6/
12. Vitamin B6.tw.
13. Vitamin B 6.tw.
14. Pyridoxine.tw.
15. Pyridoxamine.tw.
16. Picolines.tw.
17. /or 11-16
18. Vitamin A/
19. vitamin a.tw.
20. vitamin a1.tw.
21. all trans retinol.tw.
22. Retinol.tw.
23. 11-cis-retinol.tw.
24. /or 18 -23
25. Fish Oils/
26. (fish adj1 oil*).tw.
27. liver oils fish.tw.
28. fish liver oils.tw.
29. oils fish liver.tw.
30. /or 25-29
31. Zinc/
32. Zinc.tw.
33. 31 or 32
34. Melatonin/
35. Melatonin.tw.
36. 34 or 35
37. 4 and 17
38. 4 and 24
39. 4 and 30
40. 4 and 33
41. 4 and 36
42. trimethylglycine.mp.
43. Trimethylglycine.tw.
44. Magnesium/
45. Magnesium.tw.
46. 42 or 43 or 44 or 45
47. 4 and 46
48. Hyperbaric Oxygenation/
49. therapies hyperbaric oxygen.tw.
50. hyperbaric oxygenation*.tw.
51. hyperbaric oxygen therap*.tw.
52. oxygen therapies hyperbaric.tw.
53. oxygenation hyperbaric.tw.
54 therap* hyperbaric oxygen.tw.
55. oxygen therap* hyperbaric.tw.
56. HBOT.tw.
57. /or 48 - 56
58. 4 and 57
59.Ascorbic Acid/
60. (acid adj1 ascorbic).tw.
61. (sodium adj1 ascorbate).tw.
62. magnorbin.tw.
63. (ferrous adj1 ascorbate).tw.
64. acid l-ascorbic.tw.
65. magnesium ascorbicum.tw.
66. l-ascorbic acid.tw.
67. vitamin c.tw.
68. l ascorbic acid.tw.
69. ascorbic acid monosodium salt.tw.
70. hybrin.tw.
71. ascorbic acid monosodium salt.tw.
72. hybrin.tw.
73. /or59 -72
74. 4 and 73
75.Chelation Therapy/
76.(Chelation adj 1 therap*).tw
77. 75 or 76
78. 4 and 77
52.Video instruct*.tw.
53. Video model*.tw.
54. Video self-model*.tw.
55. Point-of-view video*.tw.
56. /or 52- 55
57. 4 and 56
Behaviour intervention
1. Autism*.tw.
2. (Autistic adj1 disorder*).tw.
3. (Conditioning adj1 therap*).tw.
4. Behavio?r intervention*.tw.
5. (Behavio?r adj1 modification*).tw.
6. (Therap* adj1 behavio?r*).tw.
7. Behavior Therapy/
8. Autistic Disorder/
9. Applied behavior analysis.tw.
10. 1 or 2 or 8
11. 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 9
12. 10 and 11
Speech Language Therapy
1. Autistic Disorder/
2. autism*.tw.
3. (Autistic adj1 disorder*).tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. Speech Therapy/
6. Language Therapy/
7. Speech language therap*.tw.
8. (Speech adj1 therap*).tw.
9. (Language adj1 therap*).tw.
10. (Language adj1 train*).tw.
11. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10
12. 4 and 11
13. Augmentative communication*.tw.
14. Alternative communication*.tw.
15. Augmentative alternative communication.tw.
16. AAC.tw.
17./or 13-16
18. 4 and 17
19.Communication Aids for Disabled/
20. Augmentative communication*.tw.
21. Alternative communication*.tw.
22. Augmentative alternative communication.tw.
23. AAC.tw.
24. AAC intervention*.tw.
25./or 19-24
26. 4 and 25
27.Picture Exchange Communication
System*.tw.
28. PECS.tw.
29. 27 or 28
30. 4 and 29
31.naturalistic behavio?r*.tw.
32. natural language teach*.tw.
33. 31 or 32
34. 4 and 33
35. milieu therap*.tw.
36. milieu teach*.tw.
37. 35 or 36
38. 4 and 37
39. incidental teach*.tw.
40. 4 and 39
41.facilitate teach*.tw.
42. facilitate communication*.tw.
43. facilitated communication*.tw.
44. 41 or 42 or 43
45. 4 and 44
46.discrete trial train*.tw.
47. discrete trial teach*.tw.
48. discrete trial instruct*.tw.
49. discrete trial intervention*.tw.
50. 46 or 47 or 48 or 49
51. 4 and 50
Occupational therapy
1. Autistic Disorder/
2. Autism*.tw.
3. (autistic adj1 disorder*).tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. Sensory processing*.tw.
6. 4 and 5
7.Fine motor.mp.
8. Occupational Therapy/
9. (occupational adj1 therap*).tw.
10. 7 or 8 or 9
11. 4 and 10
12.Toilet training*.tw.
13.(toilet * adj1 training*).tw.
14. 12 or 13
15. 4 and 14
Diet intervention
1. Autistic Disorder/
2. Autism*.tw.
3. (Autistic adj1 disorder*).tw.
4. Diet*.tw.
5. 1 or 2 or 3
6. 4 and 5
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
1.
Risk Factors
●
What are the risk factors for ASD?
2.
Comorbidities
●
What are the common comorbidities of ASD?
3.
Screening
●
What are the effective screening tools for diagnosis or to detect ASD?
4.
Assessment and Diagnosis
●
What is the initial assessment – history, developmental history, physical
examination?
●
Is ADOS accurate in diagnosing ASD?
●
Are DISCO, CARS and ADI-R useful for diagnosing ASD?
5.
Investigation
●
What are the effective hearing tests which can be used in children with
ASD to detect deafness/ hearing loss?
●
Is mineral analysis a useful investigation tool in children with ASD?
●
Do children with ASD need to be assessed for food allergies?
●
Do children with ASD need routine EEG?
●
What is the role of neuroimaging, metabolic and genetic testing in the
diagnosis of ASD?
6.
Treatment
●
Is speech-language therapy effective in treating children with ASD?
●
Is social stories effective in treating children with ASD?
●
Is behavioural intervention effective in treating ASD?
●
Is occupational therapy effective for children with ASD?
●
Is parental education intervention effective in treating children with
ASD?
●
Is cognitive behavioural intervention effective in treating children
with ASD?
●
Is TEACCH an effective and safe intervention for children with ASD?
●
Is dietary intervention effective in children with ASD?
●
Is pharmacological therapy (antipsychotics, SSRI, TCA,
methylphenidate, divalproate sodium) effective and safe for
children with ASD?
●
Is TCM (chelation, secretin, fatty acids, melatonin, vitamin B12,
HBOT, vitamin B6- Mg) safe and efficacious treatment for ASD?
7.
Monitoring and Preparation of Transition to Adult services?
●
What are the services are available for children with ASD in the
transition into adulthood?
Appendix 3
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT)
Name:
Rated by: Mother / Father / Carer /
Nurse / Doctor
Date of Birth: Age:
Date of Evaluation:
IC/MIC:
Location (Clinic):
Notes:
● Source: Robins D, Fein D, Barton M, Green JA. The Modified Checklist for
Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT): an initial investigation in the early detection
of autism and pervasive developmental disorders. J Autism Dev Disord.
2001, 31:131–144.
● Translated into Malay by Ministry of Health for use in screening
● Valid for children aged 16 - 30 months
● Clinical use should proceed with caution, given that the current scoring
system is designed to maximize sensitivity (i.e., identify as many children
with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) as possible, which results in a
number of false positive cases).
● The M-CHAT is not designed to detect all possible developmental
disorders. Any parent who has concerns about their child should see their
child’s doctor regardless on the child’s score on the M-CHAT.
Instructions:
Sila jawab soalan berikut (item 1 - 23). Cuba menjawab semua soalan.
Sekiranya anda mengalami masalah untuk menjawab mana-mana soalan,
sila rujuk kepada jururawat.
Please fill out the following (item 1-23) about how your child usually is. Please
try to answer every question. Contact the Nurses shall you have any queries.
If the behaviour is rare (e.g., you have seen it once or twice), please answer
as if the child does not do it.
Jawab SEMUA soalan. Bulatkan jawapan yang sesuai.
Answer ALL questions. Circle the appropriate answer.
1.
Adakah anak anda seronok apabila ditimang,
dibuai atau dihenjut atas kaki / paha dan
sebagainya?
Does your child enjoy being swung, bounced on
your knee, etc?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
2.
Adakah anak anda menunjukkan minat
terhadap kanak-kanak lain? (contohnya
bergaul, bermain, berkawan)
Does your child take an interest in other
children?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
3.
Adakah anak anda suka memanjat, contohnya
tangga, kerusi, meja dan lain-lain?
Does your child like climbing on things, such as
up stairs?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
4.
Adakah anak anda seronok bermain “cak-cak”
atau main sorok-sorok?
Does your child enjoy playing peek-a-boo or hide
and seek?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
5.
Adakah anak anda pernah bermain-main olokolok / berlakon, contohnya menelefon, bermain
anak patung atau bermain masak-masak dan
sebagainya?
Does your child ever pretend for example to talk
on the phone or take care of dolls or pretend
other things?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
6.
Adakah anak anda pernah menunjuk
menggunakan jari telunjuk untuk meminta
sesuatu?
Does your child ever use his / her index finger to
point, to ask for something?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
7.
Adakah anak anda pernah menunjuk /
menggunakan jari telunjuk terhadap sesuatu
yang menarik minatnya?
Does your child ever use his / her index finger
to point, to indicate interest in something?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
8.
Bolehkah anak anda bermain dengan alat
permainan yang kecil dengan betul, selain dari
memasukkannya ke dalam mulut, membelekbelek atau menjatuhkan permainan itu?
(contohnya kiub, kereta kecil, dan lain-lain)
Can your child play properly with small toys
without just mouthing, fiddling or dropping them?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
9.
Pernahkah anak anda membawa objek /
benda dan menunjukannya kepada anda?
Does your child ever bring objects over to
you (parent) to show you something?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
10.
Adakah anak anda bertentang mata dengan
anda lebih daripada dua saat?
Does your child look you in the eye for more than
a second or two?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
11.
Pernahkah anak anda kelihatan seperti sangat
sensitif / terganggu terhadap bunyi bising
(contohnya: menutup telinga)?
Does your child ever seem oversensitive to
noise? (e.g. plugging ears)
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
12.
Adakah anak anda senyum bila melihat anda
atau membalas senyuman anda?
Does your child smile in response to your face or
your smile?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
13.
Adakah anak anda meniru perlakuan anda
(contohnya meniru mimik muka anda dan
sebagainya)?
Does your child imitate you? (e.g. if you make
a face will your child imitate it?)
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
14.
Adakah anak anda bertindak balas apabila
namanya dipanggil?
Does your child respond to his / her name
when you call?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
15.
Sekiranya anda menunjuk pada alat
permainan yang jauh dari anda, adakah anak
anda akan melihat kepada alat permainan
tersebut?
If you point at a toy across the room, does
your child look at it?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
16.
Bolehkah anak anda berjalan?
Does your child walk?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
17.
Adakah anak anda akan melihat pada benda
yang sedang anda lihat?
Does your child look at things you are looking at?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
18.
Adakah anak anda membuat pergerakan jari
yang ganjil / pelik dekat mukanya?
Does your child make unusual finger movements
near his / her face?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
19.
Adakah anak anda cuba menarik perhatian anda
terhadap aktiviti yang dilakukannya?
Does your child try to attract your attention to his
/ her own activity?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
20.
Pernahkah anda terfikir bahawa anak anda ada
masalah pendengaran?
Have you ever wondered if your child is deaf?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
21.
Adakah anak anda dapat memahami percakapan
orang?
Does your child understand what people say?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
22.
Adakah anak anda kadang-kala kelihatan
termenung atau merayau / berjalan tanpa
tujuan?
Does your child sometimes stare at nothing or
wander with no purpose?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
23.
Adakah anak anda memandang ke muka anda
untuk melihat reaksi / tindakabalas anda apabila
ia menghadapi sesuatu yang baru atau luar
biasa?
Does your child look at your face to check your
reaction when faced with something unfamiliar?
Ya / Yes
Tidak / No
Outcome of M-CHAT
Critical items failed:__________ Total items failed:___________
M-CHAT: Passed / Failed
1. Tidak / No
6. Tidak / No
11. Ya / Yes
16. Tidak / No
21. Tidak / No
2. Tidak / No
7. Tidak / No 12. Tidak / No
17. Tidak / No
22. Ya / Yes
3. Tidak / No
8. Tidak / No
13. Tidak / No
18. Ya / Yes
23. Tidak / No
4. Tidak / No
9. Tidak / No 14. Tidak / No
19. Tidak / No
5. Tidak / No
10. Tidak / No
15. Tidak / No
20. Ya / Yes
Scoring:
● The bold items are critical: i.e. 2, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15
● A child requires referral (i.e. fail M-CHAT) for further evaluation if he / she
fulfills the following:
●
2 or more of critical items
●
3 or more of any items
Not all children who fail the checklist will meet criteria for a diagnosis
on the autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However children who fail the
checklist should be evaluated in more depth by the relevent specialist.
Appendix 4
Diagnostic Criteria for Autistic Disorder in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision
(DSM-IV-TR)
The essential features of Autistic Disorder are the presence of markedly
abnormal or impaired development in social interaction and communication
and a markedly restricted repertoire of activity and interests. Manifestations
of the disorder vary greatly depending on the developmental level and
chronological age of the individual. Autistic Disorder is sometimes referred to
as early infantile autism, childhood autism, or Kanner’s autism.
A.
A total of six (or more) items from 1, 2, and 3, with at least two from 1,
and one each from 2 and 3:
1.
Qualitative impairment in social interaction, as manifested by at least
two of the following:
a.
marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviours
such as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and
gestures to regulate social interaction
b.
failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental
level
c.
a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests,
or achievements with other people (for example, by a lack of
showing, bringing, or pointing out objects of interest)
d.
lack of social or emotional reciprocity
2.
Qualitative impairments in communication as manifested by at least
one of the following:
a.
delay in or total lack of, the development of spoken language (not
accompanied by an attempt to compensate through alternative
modes of communication such as
gestures or mime)
b.
in individuals with adequate speech, marked impairment in the
ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with others
c.
stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic
language
d.
lack of varied, spontaneous make-believe play or social imitative
play appropriate to developmental level
3.
Restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behaviour, interests,
and activities, as manifested by at least one of the following:
a.
encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and
restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or
focus
b. apparently inflexible adherence to specific, non-functional
routines or rituals
c. stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (for example, hand
or finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole-body movements)
d.
persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
B.
Delays or abnormal functioning in at least one of the following areas,
with onset prior to age 3 years: (1) social interaction, (2) language as
used in social communication, or (3) symbolic or imaginative play.
C.
The disturbance is not better accounted for by Rett’s Disorder or
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder.
(Adapted from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, Fourth Edition, Text
Revision: DSM-IV-TR. Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association; 2000)
Appendix 5
Diagnostic Criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorder in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
Autism Spectrum Disorder 299.00 (F84.0)
Diagnostic Criteria
A.
Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across
multiple contexts, as manifested by the following, currently or by
history (examples are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from
abnormal social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth
conversation; to reduced sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to
failure to initiate or respond to social interactions.
2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviours used for social
interaction, ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and
nonverbal communication; to abnormalities in eye contact and body
language or deficits in understanding and use of gestures: to a total
lack of facial expressions and nonverbal communication.
3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships,
ranging, for example, from difficulties adjusting behaviour to suit
various social contexts; to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or
in making friends; to absence of interest in peers.
Specify current severity: Severity is based on social communication
impairments and restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviour (refer to table
below).
B.
Restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviour, interests, or activities,
as manifested by at least two of the following, currently or by history
(examples are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or
speech (e.g., simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping
objects, echolalia, idiosyncratic phrases).
2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or
ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behaviour (e.g., extreme
distress at small changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking
patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or eat same food
every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or
focus (e.g., strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual
objects, excessively circumscribed or perseverative interests).
4. Hyper- or hypo-reactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in
sensory aspects of the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to
pain / temperature, adverse response to specific sounds or textures,
excessive smelling or touching of objects, visual fascination with
lights or movement).
Specify current severity: Severity is based on social communication
impairments and restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviour (refer to table
below).
C.
Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but
may not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited
capacities, or may be masked by learned strategies in later life).
D.
Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of current functioning.
E.
These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual disability
(intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental delay.
Intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder frequently cooccur; to make comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum d i s o r d e r
and intellectual disability, social communication should be below that
expected for general developmental level.
Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder,
Asperger’s disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise
specified should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
Individuals who have marked deficits in social communication, but whose
symptoms do not otherwise meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should
be evaluated for social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Specify if;
With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
With or without accompanying language impairment
Associated with a known medical or genetic condition or
environmental factor (Coding note: Use additional code to identify
the associated medical or genetic condition.)
Associated with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or
behavioural disorder (Coding note: Use additional code[s] to
identify the associated neuro-developmental, mental, or behavioural
disorder[s].)
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with
another mental disorder, pp. 119-120, for definition) (Coding note:
Use additional code 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with autism
spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia).
Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder
Severity level
Social communication
Restricted,
repetitive
behaviours
Level 3
“Requiring very
substantial
support”
Severe deficits in verbal
and nonverbal social
communication skills cause
severe impairments in
functioning, very limited
initiation of social interactions,
and minimal response to
social overtures from others.
For example, a person with
few words of intelligible
speech who rarely initiates
interaction and, when he or
she does, makes unusual
approaches to meet needs
only and responds to only very
direct social approaches
Inflexibility of behaviour,
extreme difficulty coping
with change, or other
restricted/repetitive
behaviours markedly
interfere with functioning in
all spheres. Great distress/
difficulty changing focus or
action.
Level 2
“Requiring
substantial
support”
Marked deficits in verbal
and nonverbal social
communication skills; social
impairments apparent even
with supports in place; limited
initiation of social interactions;
and reduced or abnormal
responses to social overtures
from others. For example, a
person who speaks simple
sentences, whose interaction
is limited to narrow special
interests, and who has
markedly odd nonverbal
communication.
Inflexibility of behaviour,
difficulty coping with
change, or other restricted/
repetitive behaviours
appear frequently enough
to be obvious to the casual
observer and interfere with
functioning in a variety of
contexts. Distress and/or
difficulty changing focus or
action.
Level 1
“Requiring support”
Without supports in
place, deficits in social
communication cause
noticeable impairments.
Difficulty initiating social
interactions, and clear
examples of atypical or
unsuccessful responses to
social overtures of others. May
appear to have decreased
interest in social interactions.
For example, a person
who is able to speak in full
sentences and engages in
communication but whose
to-and-fro conversation
with others fails, and whose
attempts to make friends
are odd and typically
unsuccessful.
Inflexibility of behaviour
causes significant
interference with functioning
in one or more contexts.
Difficulty switching between
activities. Problems of
organization and planning
hamper independence.
(Adapted from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, Fifth Edition: DSM-5.
Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association; 2014)
Appendix 6
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 10
F84 Pervasive Developmental Disorders
F84.0 Childhood autism
A.
Presence of abnormal or impaired development before the age of three
years, in at least one out of the following areas:
1. receptive or expressive language as used in social communication;
2. the development of selective social attachments or of reciprocal
social interaction;
3. functional or symbolic play.
B
Qualitative abnormalities in reciprocal social interaction, manifest in at
least one of the following areas:
1. failure adequately to use eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body
posture and gesture to regulate social interaction;
2. failure to develop (in a manner appropriate to mental age, and
despite ample opportunities) peer relationships that involve a mutual
sharing of interests, activities and emotions;
3. A lack of socio-emotional reciprocity as shown by an impaired or
deviant response to other people’s emotions; or lack of modulation
of behaviour according to social context, or a weak integration of
social, emotional and communicative behaviours.
C.
Qualitative abnormalities in communication, manifest in at least two of
the following areas:
1. a delay in, or total lack of development of spoken language that
is not accompanied by an attempt to compensate through the use
of gesture or mime as alternative modes of communication (often
preceded by a lack of communicative babbling);
2. relative failure to initiate or sustain conversational interchange (at
whatever level of language skills are present) in which there is
reciprocal to and from responsiveness to the communications of the
other person;
3. stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic use of
words or phrases;
4. abnormalities in pitch, stress, rate, rhythm and intonation of speech.
D.
Restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behaviour, interests
and activities, manifest in at least two of the following areas:
1. an encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped
and restricted patterns of interest that are abnormal in content or
focus; or one or more interests that are abnormal in their intensity
and circumscribed nature although not abnormal in their content or
focus;
2. apparently compulsive adherence to specific, non-functional,
routines or rituals;
3. stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms that involve either hand
or finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole body movements;
4. preoccupations with part-objects or non-functional elements of play
materials (such as their odour, the feel of their surface, or the noise
or vibration that they generate);
5. distress over changes in small, non-functional, details of the
environment.
E.
The clinical picture is not attributable to the other varieties of pervasive
developmental disorder; specific developmental disorder of receptive
language (F80.2) with secondary socio-emotional problems; reactive
attachment disorder (F94.1) or disinhibited attachment disorder (F94.2);
mental retardation (F70 - F72) with some associated emotional or
behavioural disorder; schizophrenia (F20) of unusually early onset;
and Rett’s syndrome (F84.2).
F84.1 Atypical autism
A.
Presence of abnormal or impaired development at or after age three
years (criteria as for autism except for age of manifestation).
B.
Qualitative abnormalities in reciprocal social interaction or in
communication, or restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of
behaviour, interests and activities (criteria as for autism except that
it is not necessary to meet the criteria in terms of number of areas
of abnormality).
C. The disorder does not meet the diagnostic criteria for autism (F84.0).
Autism may be atypical in either age of onset (F84.11) or
phenomenology (84.12), these two types being differentiated with a
fifth character for research purposes. Syndromes that are atypical
in both respects should be coded F84.12.
F84.5 Asperger’s syndrome
A.
A lack of any clinically significant general delay in spoken or receptive
language or cognitive development.
Diagnosis requires that single words should have developed by two
years of age or earlier and that communicative phrases be used by
three years of age or earlier. Self-help skills, adaptive behaviour and
curiosity about the environment during the first three years should be
at a level consistent with normal intellectual development. However,
motor milestones may be somewhat delayed and motor clumsiness is
usual (although not a necessary diagnostic feature). Isolated special
skills, often related to abnormal preoccupations, are common, but
are not required for diagnosis.
B.
Qualitative abnormalities in reciprocal social interaction (criteria as
for autism).
C.
An unusually intense circumscribed interest or restricted, repetitive,
and stereotyped patterns of behaviour, interests and activities
(criteria as for autism; however it would be less usual for these to
include either motor mannerisms or preoccupations with part- objects
or non-functional elements of play materials).
D.
The disorder is not attributable to the other varieties of pervasive
developmental disorder; schizotypal disorder (F21); simple
schizophrenia (F20.6); reactive and disinhibited attachment disorder
of childhood (F94.1 and .2); obsessional personality disorder (F60.5);
obsessive-compulsive disorder (F42).
(Adapted from the ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria
for Research. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1993)
Appendix 7
Signs and symptoms of possible autism in preschool children
(or equivalent mental age)
Social interaction and reciprocal communication behaviours
Spoken language
● Language delay (in babble or words, for example less than ten words by the age
of 2 years)
● Regression in or loss of use of speech
● Spoken language (if present) may include unusual:
● non-speech like vocalisations
● odd or flat intonation
● frequent repetition of set words and phrases (‘echolalia’)
● reference to self by name* or “you” or “she / he” beyond 3 years
● Reduced and/or infrequent use of language for communication, for example
use of single words although able to speak in sentences
*Part of the spoken language section may not be applicable to local setting
Responding to others
● Absent or delayed response to name being called, despite normal hearing
● Reduced or absent responsive social smiling
●
Reduced or absent responsiveness to other people’s facial expressions or
feelings
●
Unusually negative response to the requests of others (demand avoidant
behaviour)
● Rejection of cuddles initiated by parent or carer, although may initiate cuddles
themselves
Interacting with others
●
Reduced or absent awareness of personal space, or unusually intolerant of
people entering their personal space
●
Reduced or absent social interest in others, including children of his/her own age
– may reject others; if interested in others, may approach others inappropriately,
seeming to be aggressive or disruptive
●
Reduced or absent imitation of others’ actions
●
Reduced or absent initiation of social play with others, plays alone
●
Reduced or absent enjoyment of situations that most children like, for example,
birthday parties
●
Reduced or absent sharing of enjoyment
Eye contact, pointing and other gestures
●
Reduced or absent use of gestures and facial expressions to communicate
(although may place adult’s hand on objects)
●
Reduced and poorly integrated gestures, facial expressions, body orientation,
eye contact (looking at people’s eyes when speaking) and speech used in social
communication
●
Reduced or absent social use of eye contact assuming adequate vision
●
Reduced or absent joint attention shown by lack of:
● gaze switching
● following a point (looking where the other person points to – may look at
hand)
● using pointing at or showing objects to share interest
Ideas and imagination
●
Reduced or absent imagination and variety of pretend play
Unusual or restricted interests and/or rigid and repetitive behaviours
● Repetitive ‘stereotypical’ movements such as hand flapping, body rocking while
standing, spinning, finger-flicking
●
Repetitive or stereotyped play, for example opening and closing doors
● Over-focused or unusual interests
● Excessive insistence on following own agenda
● Extremes of emotional reactivity to change or new situations, insistence on
things being ‘the same’
● Over or under reaction to sensory stimuli, for example textures, sounds, smells
● Excessive reaction to taste, smell, texture or appearance of food or extreme
food fads
Signs and symptoms of possible autism in primary school children
(aged 5 – 11 years or equivalent mental age)23
Social interaction and reciprocal communication behaviours
Spoken language
●
Spoken language may be unusual in several ways:
● very limited use
● monotonous tone
● repetitive speech, frequent use of stereotyped (learnt) phrases, content
dominated by excessive
● information on topics of own interest
● talking ‘at’ others rather than sharing a two-way conversation
● responses to others can seem rude or inappropriate
Responding to others
●
Reduced or absent response to other people’s facial expressions or feelings
● Reduced or delayed response to name being called, despite normal hearing
● Subtle difficulties in understanding other’s intentions; may take things literally
and misunderstand sarcasm or metaphor
● Unusually negative response to the requests of others (demand avoidant
behaviour)
Interacting with others
●
Reduced or absent awareness of personal space, or unusually intolerant of
people entering their personal space
●
Reduced or absent social interest in people, including children of his/her own age
– may reject others; if interested in others, may approach others inappropriately,
seeming to be aggressive or disruptive
●
Reduced or absent greeting and farewell behaviours
●
Reduced or absent awareness of socially expected behaviour
●
Reduced or absent ability to share in the social play or ideas of others, plays
alone
●
Unable to adapt style of communication to social situations, for example may be
overly formal or inappropriately familiar
●
Reduced or absent enjoyment of situations that most children like
Eye contact, pointing and other gestures
● Reduced and poorly integrated gestures, facial expressions and body
orientation, eye contact (looking at people’s eyes when speaking), and speech
used in social communication
● Reduced or absent social use of eye contact assuming adequate vision
● Reduced or absent joint attention shown by lack of:
● gaze switching
● following a point (looking where the other person points to – may look at
hand)
● using pointing at or showing objects to share interest
Ideas and imagination
● Reduced or absent flexible imaginative play or creativity, although scenes seen
on visual media (for example, television) may be re-enacted
● Makes comments without awareness of social niceties or hierarch
Unusual or restricted interests and/or rigid and repetitive behaviours
● Repetitive “stereotypical” movements such as hand flapping, body rocking while
standing, spinning, finger-flicking
● Play repetitive and oriented towards objects rather than people
●
Over-focused or unusual interests
● Rigid expectation that other children should adhere to rules of play
● Excessive insistence on following own agenda
● Extremes of emotional reactivity that are excessive for the circumstances
● Strong preferences for familiar routines and things being ‘just right’
● Dislike of change, which often leads to anxiety or other forms of distress
(including aggression)
● Over or under reaction to sensory stimuli, for example textures, sounds, smells
● Excessive reaction to taste, smell, texture or appearance of food or extreme
food fads
Other factors that may support a concern about autism
● Unusual profile of skills or deficits (for example, social or motor coordination skills
poorly developed, while particular areas of knowledge, reading or vocabulary
skills are advanced for chronological or mental age)
● Social and emotional development more immature than other areas of
development, excessive trusting (naivety), lack of common sense, less
independent than peers
Signs and symptoms of possible autism in secondary school children
(older than 11 years or equivalent mental age) 23
Social interaction and reciprocal communication behaviours
Spoken language
● Spoken language may be unusual in several ways:
● very limited use
● monotonous tone
● repetitive speech, frequent use of stereotyped (learnt) phrases, content
dominated by excessive
● information on topics of own interest
● talking “at” others rather than sharing a two-way conversation
● responses to others can seem rude or inappropriate
Interacting with others
● Reduced or absent awareness of personal space, or unusually intolerant of
people entering their personal space
● Long-standing difficulties in reciprocal social communication and interaction:
few close friends or reciprocal relationships
● Reduced or absent understanding of friendship; often an unsuccessful desire to
have friends (although may find it easier with adults or younger children),
● Social isolation and apparent preference for aloneness
● Reduced or absent greeting and farewell behaviours
● Lack of awareness and understanding of socially expected behaviour
● Problems losing at games, turn-taking and understanding ‘changing the “rules”
● May appear unaware or uninterested in what other young people his or her age
are interested in
● Unable to adapt style of communication to social situations, for example may be
overly formal or inappropriately familiar
● Subtle difficulties in understanding other’s intentions; may take things literally
and misunderstand sarcasm or metaphor
● Makes comments without awareness of social niceties or hierarchies
● Unusually negative response to the requests of others (demand avoidant
behaviour)
Eye contact, pointing and other gestures
● Poorly integrated gestures, facial expressions, body orientation, eye contact
(looking at people’s eyes when speaking) assuming adequate vision, and
spoken language used in social communication
Ideas and imagination
● History of a lack of flexible social imaginative play and creativity, although
scenes seen on visual media(for example, television) may be re-enacted
● Unusual or restricted interests and/or rigid and repetitive behaviours
● Repetitive “stereotypical” movements such as hand flapping, body rocking while
standing, spinning, finger-flicking
● Preference for highly specific interests or hobbies
● A strong adherence to rules or fairness that leads to argument
● Highly repetitive behaviours or rituals that negatively affect the young person’s
daily activities
● Excessive emotional distress at what seems trivial to others, for example
change in routine
● Dislike of change, which often leads to anxiety or other forms of distress
including aggression
● Over or under reaction to sensory stimuli, for example textures, sounds, smells
● Excessive reaction to taste, smell, texture or appearance of food and/or extreme
food fad
Other factors that may support a concern about autism
● Unusual profile of skills and deficits (for example, social or motor coordination
skills poorly developed, while particular areas of knowledge, reading or
vocabulary skills are advanced for chronological or mental age)
●
Social and emotional development more immature than other areas of
development, excessive trusting (naivety), lack of common sense, less
independent than peers
Appendix 8
Diagnostic Tools
Diagnostic Tool
Description
Sensitivity
Specificity
Comments
Autism Diagnostic
Interview-Revised
(ADI-R) 122, level III
● Structured
interview
conducted with
the parents/
carers of
individuals for
assessment of
ASD.
● It is used for
diagnostic
purposes for
anyone with a
mental age of at
least 18 months.
● The interview
measures
behaviour in
the areas of
reciprocal social
interaction,
communication
and language,
and patterns of
behaviour
1.0
> 0.97
● The levels of
agreement
between the
ADI-R and
ADOS is
moderate
in social
(k=0.56) and
communication
(k=0.48)
algorithm cutoffs scores.
● The level of
agreement
between the
ADI-R and
ADOS is
substantial in
diagnosing
autism (k=0.62)
and moderate
for spectrum
diagnosis
(k=0.54).
Diagnostic Interview
for Social and
Communication
Disorders (DISCO)
123, level II-3
● Semi-structured
interview used
by the parents/
carers to identify
the impairments
of social
interaction, social
communication
and social
imagination
together with
the associated
repetitive
behaviours
0.80
0.79
● DISCO
accurately
identify ASD in
young children
with an average
intelligence or
mild intellectual
disability
● The agreement
between DISCO
algorithm and
ADOS was
substantial
(k=0.69,
p < 0.001).
Diagnostic Tool
Description
Sensitivity
Specificity
Comments
Childhood Autism
Rating Scale (CARS)
124, level II-2
● Consists of
14 domains
assessing
behaviours
associated with
autism, with the
15th domain
rating general
impressions of
autism.
● Each domain
is scored on a
scale ranging
from one to four;
higher scores are
associated with
a higher level of
impairment.
● Scores below 30
indicate that the
individual is in
non-autistic
range.
2 years
old: 0.79
4 years
old: 0.86
2 years
old: 0.81
4 years
old: 0.80
● In younger
children, CARS
is useful to
distinguish ASD
from pervasive
developmental
disorder not
otherwise
specified (PDDNOS).
● Using an ASD
cut-off score
of 25.5, CARS
produced the
highest level
of agreement
among
diagnostic
instruments
and clinical
judgement:
● 2 years old:
● CARS
and
DSM-IV,
k=0.75,
p < 0.001
● CARS
and
ADOS,
k=0.70,
p < 0.001
● 4 years old:
● CARS
and
DSM IV,
k=0.74,
p < 0.001
● CARS
and
ADOS,
k=0.73,
p < 0.001
Diagnostic Tool
Description
Sensitivity
Specificity
Comments
Autism Diagnostic
Observation
Schedule (ADOS)
125, level III, 126 , level II-2
● Semi-structured
assessment of
communication,
social interaction
and play (or
imaginative use
of materials)
for individuals
suspected of
having ASD.
● Consists of
four modules,
each of which
is appropriate
for children and
adults of differing
developmental
and language
levels, ranging
from nonverbal to
verbally-fluent.
0.82
0.60
● The prevalence
of bestestimate clinical
diagnosis at
nine years is
43% for ADOS
alone, 82%
when combined
with clinical
judgement and
90% when
combined with
both clinical
judgement and
ADI-R.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
3Di
Developmental, Dimensional and Diagnostic Interview
ABA
Applied Behaviour Analysis
AAC
Augmentative and Alternative Communication
AAP
Atypical antipsychotics
ABR
Auditory Brainstem Evoked Response
ADHD
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
ADI-R
Autism Diagnostic Interview- Revised
ADOS
The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
AR
Acoustic Reflexes
ASD
Autism Spectrum Disorder
ASSQ
Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire
ASDS
Asperger Syndrome Diagnostic Scale
CARS
Childhood Autism Rating Scale
CBCL
Child Behaviour Checklist
CDSR
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
CI
Confidence Interval
CGI
Clinical Global Impression
CHAT
Checklist for Autism in Toddlers
CHAT-23
Checklist for Autism in Toddlers for Chinese Children
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Db
Decibel
DCD
Developmental Coordination Disorder
DIR
Developmental, Individual-Difference, Relationship-Based
DISCO
the Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication Disorders
DG
Development Group
DSM-IV-TR
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition,
Text Revision
DSM-5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
EEG
Electroencephalography
ES
Effect Size
GARS
Gilliam Autism Rating Scale
GARS-2
Gilliam Autism Rating Scale Second Edition
G-I-N
Guidelines International Network
ICD-10
International Classification of Diseases
IQ
Intelligence Quotient
IRD
Improvement Rate Difference
MaHTAS
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section
M-CHAT
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers
MD
Mean Difference
MDT
Multidisciplinary Team
MMR
Measles, Mumps, Rubella
MOH
Ministry of Health
OCD
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
ODD
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
OT
Occupational Therapy
OR
Odd Ratio
P
p value
PDD
Pervasive Developmental Disorder
PDD-NOS
Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
PECS
Picture Exchange Communication System
PND
Percentage of Non-overlapping Data
PPV
Positive Predictive Value
RC
Review Committee
RCT
Randomised Controlled Trial
RIT
Reciprocal Imitation Training
RPMT
Responsive Education and Prelinguistic Milieu Teaching
RR
Risk Ratio
SCI
Social Communication Intervention
SCQ
Social Communication Questionnaire
SMD
Standard Mean Difference
SIT
Sensory Integration Therapy
SR
Systematic Review
SRS
Social Responsiveness Scale
SSRI
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
SGD
Speech Generating Device
TEOAE
Transient Evoked Otoacoustic Emissions
TEACCH
Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication
Handicapped Children
TCA
Tricyclic Antidepressants
WMD
Weighted Mean Difference
Acknowledgement
The members of the Development Group of the CPG would like to express
their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
●
Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
●
Ms. Loong Ah Moi – Nursing officer / Information Specialist, MaHTAS,
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health
●
Ms. Cheoh Siew Tin – Public Health Matron, who was involved in the
early stage of development of the CPG
●
Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
●
All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
●
Mr. Wong Siew Tung for proof reading
Disclosure Statement
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee had
completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts
as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon request from the
CPG Secretariat)
Source of Funding
The development of the CPG on Management of Autism Spectrum Disorder
was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health Malaysia.