MOWIKIGIGN. 17600)
(ORAL HEALTH DIVISION
nu OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
MANAGEMENT OF
PERIODONTAL ABSCESS
‘ (Second Edition)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
‘STATEMENT OF INTENT
‘These guidelines update and supplant the orginal guidelines developed
in 2004 and are based on the best avalable contemporary evidence.
‘They are intended as a guide for the best clinical practice in the
management of periodontal abscess presently. However, I must be
‘noted that adherence to these guidelines do not necessary lead to the
‘best clinical outcome in individual patient care, as every health care
provider is responsible for the management of his/her unique patient
based on the clinical presentation and management options available
locally
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
‘These guidelines were issued in December 2016 and wil be reviewed in
202 or earierif important new evidence becomes avaliable.
Published by:
(Oral Heaith Technology Section
(Oral Heath Dision
‘Ministry of Health Malaysia
Love 8, Block E10, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
(62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
‘Tho copyright owner ofthis publication is Oral Heath Division, Ministry
‘of Health Malaysia. Content may be reproduced in any number of copies
‘and in any. format or maodum provided that a copyright
f2cknowedgement to OHO is included and the content is not changed,
‘ot Sok, nor used to promote or endorse any product or service and not
Used inappropriately or misleading context
ISBN: 978-967-0769-80-6
‘Available onthe folowing websites:
btz/waw.mah.gowmy
bnt/wenw.ohd.goumy
btv/wmw.acadmed.oro.my
‘Also avaiable as an app for Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS,
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
TABLES OF CONTENTS
Page
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE AND GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
i
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
ii
CLINICAL QUESTIONS, TARGET POPULATION, TARGET GROUP/
USER AND HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
v
REVIEW COMMITTEE
vi
ALGORITHM FOR MANAGEMENT OF PERIODONTAL ABSCESS
vii
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
viii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1 The Aetiology, Microbiology and Contributing Factors
2
1.2 Pathogenesis of Periodontal Abscess
3
2.
HISTORY TAKING
4
2.1 Signs and Symptoms
4
2.2 Medical and Dental Histories
5
3.
CLINICAL FEATURES
6
3.1 Systemic Manifestation or Involvement
6
3.2 Clinical Features
6
4.
INVESTIGATIONS
8
4.1 Radiographs
8
4.2 Pulp Sensibility Test
8
4.3 Microbial Test
8
4.4 Others
8
5.
DIAGNOSIS
8
6.
TREATMENT
16
6.1 Control of Acute Condition
16
6.2 Management of Pre-existing and/or Residual Lesions
18
7.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
18
7.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
19
7.2 Potential Resource Implications
20
7.3 Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators
20
REFERENCES
21
Appendix 1: Clinical Questions: Management of Periodontal
Abscess
25
Appendix 2: Recommended Systemic Antimicrobials
26
Appendix 3: Extraction versus Conservation
27
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
28
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
28
SOURCE OF FUNDING
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL
STUDY DESIGN
l
Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomised
controlled trial.
ll-1
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation.
ll-2
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or research
group.
ll-3
Evidence obtained from multiple time series studies, with or
without intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments
(such as the results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the
1940s) could also be regarded as this type of evidence.
lll
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees.
GRADE
STUDY DESIGN
A
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or RCT or evidence
rated as good or directly applicable to the target population.
B
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable to
the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of
results; or evidence extrapolated from meta-analysis, systematic
reviews or RCT.
C
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and/or
clinical experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence of
directly applicable clinical studies of good quality.
Source: Adapted from Harris RP, Helfand M, Woolf SH, Lohr KN, Mulrow CD, Teutsch
SM, Atkins D. Current Methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: A Review
of the Process. Am J Prev Med. 2001;20(suppl 3):21-35.
Source: Modified from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN 50). A
guideline developer’s handbook. Elliott House, 8 -10 Hillside Crescent Edinburgh EH7
5EA. Revised November 2011. ISBN 978 1 905813 25 4.
Note: The grades of recommendation relates to the strength of the
evidence on which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect
the clinical importance of the recommendation.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The Development Group for these Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG)
consisted of Periodontists, Oral Medicine and Oral Pathology Specialist,
Restorative Dental Specialist, Dental Public Health Specialists and
general dentists. The Review Committee was actively involved in the
development process of these guidelines.
The previous edition of the CPG on Management of Periodontal
Abscess (2004) was used as the basis for the development of these
guidelines.
The recommendations were adapted taking into consideration local
practices.
Several improvements have been introduced in this edition. In addition
to the general text and photographic updates, new and updated
information has been included in the management such as use of
antimicrobials, key messages and recommendations. Besides this,
clinical audit indicators have also been identified for the purpose of
monitoring and evaluating outcomes.
Evidences were retrieved from publications up to June 2016. Literature
search was carried out using the following electronic databases:
PUBMED/MEDLINE; Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR);
ISI Web of Science; Health Technology Assessment (HTA) and full text
journal articles via OVID search engine. In addition, the reference
lists of all relevant articles retrieved were searched to identify further
studies. The following free text terms or MeSH terms were used either
singly or in combination to retrieve the articles: periodontal abscess,
acute periodontal abscess, chronic periodontal abscess, multiple
periodontal abscess, gingival abscess, pericoronal abscess, perioendo lesions, periodontal probing, aetiology, microbiology, periodontal
pathogens, oral hygiene, smoking, diabetes mellitus, tooth extractions,
chemotherapeutic, antibiotics, treatment, debridement, photodynamic
therapy and supportive periodontal therapy. Only literatures in English
were retrieved.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
There were 15 clinical questions which were assigned to members
of the development group. The group members met a total of 11
times throughout the development of these guidelines. All retrieved
literature were appraised by at least two members and presented in
the form of evidence tables and discussed during group meetings.
All statements and recommendations formulated were agreed upon
by both the development group and review committee. This CPG is
based on reference to the findings of randomized controlled trials,
descriptive studies, clinical experiences, case reports and adapted
according to local practices. However, when there was lack of
evidence, recommendations were based on consensus of group
members. Although ideally patients’ views and preferences need to
be considered in the development of CPGs, in this instance, it was not
feasible.
The levels of evidence of the literature were graded using the modified
version from the United States (U.S) / Canadian Preventive Services
Task Force, while the grading of recommendations was based on the
modified version of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
(SIGN).
The draft was reviewed by a team of internal and external reviewers. It
was made available on the websites of the Ministry of Health, Malaysia
and Academy of Medicine, Malaysia for comments and feedbacks.
Recommendations were presented to the Technical Advisory
Committee for CPGs, and finally to the HTA and CPG Council, Ministry
of Health, Malaysia for approval.
Clinical significance of periodontal abscess (PA):
i. This condition is rampant but has been under-recorded in
Health Information & Management System (HIMS) data mainly
due to diagnostic confusion.
ii. If left untreated, PA may lead to:
• Tooth loss resulting in reduced oral function and impaired
quality of life (QoL)
• Financial implications in replacing missing teeth and oral
functional rehabilitation
iii. Interlink between oral-systemic health (periodontal medicine) in
periodontal conditions and systemic diseases, especially
bidirectional relationship between diabetes mellitus and
periodontitis.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Rationale for the development of the CPG:
i. To standardise the management of PA at all healthcare levels
ii. To appropriately manage PA and improve outcomes of
periodontal therapy
iii. To ensure better prognosis of affected dentition and reduce
morbidity
OBJECTIVE
To provide evidence-based guidance in the management of periodontal
abscess.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
i. To disseminate and reinforce knowledge on the management of
periodontal abscess among healthcare professionals
ii. To guide in the appropriate management of periodontal abscess
by healthcare professionals
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by these guidelines can be found in
Appendix 1.
TARGET POPULATION
These guidelines are applicable to patients diagnosed with periodontal
abscess.
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is meant for all oral healthcare providers who provide clinical
management of periodontal abscess which includes:
i. Dental students
ii. Dental officers
iii. General dental / medical practitioners
iv. Dental specialists
v. Allied health professionals
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and specialist oral healthcare settings.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Chairperson
Secretary
Dr Norhani Abd Rani
Consultant Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Pergigian Kota Bharu
Jalan Mahmood
15200 Kota Bharu, Kelantan
Dr Khamiza Zainol Abidin
Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Pergigian Gunung Rapat
Jalan Raja Dr. Nazrin Shah
31350 Ipoh, Perak
Members
Prof Dr Tara Bai Taiyeb Ali
Professor and Consultant Periodontist
Fakulti Pergigian
Universiti Malaysia
Jalan Lembah Pantai
50603 WP Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr Indra a/p Nachiappan
Consultant Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Kesihatan Jelapang
30020 Ipoh, Perak
Dr Sa’diah Yusoff
Consultant Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Kesihatan Anika
Jalan Tengku Kelana
41000 Klang, Selangor
Dr Zaharah Abdul Rahman
Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Pergigian Pokok Assam
31000 Taiping, Perak
Dr Zainab Shamdol
Dental Public Health Specialist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian KKM
Aras 5 Blok E10 Kompleks E
Presint 1 Pusat Pentadbiran
Kerajaan Persekutuan
62590 WP Putrajaya
Dr Yeo Kian Boon
General Dental Practitioner
Gleneagles Hospital
282 & 286 Jalan Ampang
50450 WP Kuala Lumpur
Dr Izrawatie Mardiana Shapeen
Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik,
Klinik Pergigian Cheras
Aras 2, Jalan Yaakob Latif
56000 Cheras, WP Kuala Lumpur
Dr Mohd Faizal Hafez Hidayat
Senior Lecturer and Periodontist
Fakulti Pergigian
Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM)
Kampus Sg. Buloh
47000 Selangor
Dr Salleh Zakaria
Dental Public Health Specialist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian KKM
Aras 5 Blok E10 Kompleks E
Presint 1 Pusat Pentadbiran
Kerajaan Persekutuan
62590 WP Putrajaya
Dr Sumairi Ismail
Oral Pathology & Oral Medicine Specialist
Unit Oral Pathology & Oral Medicine
Jabatan Pembedahan Mulut
Hospital Sultan Abdul Halim
Jalan Lencongan Timur, Bandar Aman Jaya
08000 Sungai Petani, Kedah
Dr Nor Ziana Ibrahim
Restorative Dental Specialist
Unit Pakar Pergigian Restoratif
Klinik Pergigian Pandamaran
Persiaran Raja Muda Musa
42000 Pelabuhan Klang, Selangor
Dr Norul Nurdiyana Nordin
Dental Officer
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Kesihatan Anika
Jalan Tengku Kelana
41000 Klang, Selangor
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
REVIEW COMMITTEE
These guidelines were reviewed by a panel of independent reviewers
from both public and private sectors who were asked to comment
primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy of interpretation
of the evidence supporting the recommendations in this CPG. The
following internal and external reviewers provided comments and
feedback on the proposed draft:
INTERNAL REVIEWERS
Prof Emeritus Dato’ Dr Wan Mohamad
Nasir Wan Othman
Professor & Dental Public Health Specialist
Faculty of Dentistry,
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Level 15, Tower B, Persiaran MPAJ
Jalan Pandan Utama
55100, WP Kuala Lumpur
Dr Adyani bt Md Redzuan
Coordinator of Master Programme & Clinical
Pharmacy
Pejabat Fakulti Farmasi, Tingkat 5, Block B
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz
50300 WP Kuala Lumpur
Dr Siti Lailatul Akmar Zainuddin
Lecturer and Periodontist
Pusat Pengajian Sains Pergigian (PPSG)
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Kampus Kesihatan
16150 Kubang Kerian, Kelantan
Dr Chan Yoong Kian
Consultant Periodontist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Pergigian
Klinik Kesihatan Mahmoodiah
80100 Johor Bahru, Johor
Dr Syamhanin Adnan
Senior Clinical Pharmacist
Jabatan Farmasi,
Hospital Sg Buloh Jalan Hospital
47000 Sg Buloh, Selangor
Col. Dr Zaharah Mahmud
Periodontist
Jabatan Pergigian
Hospital Angkatan Tentera Lumut
Pangkalan TLDM, 32100 Lumut, Perak
Dr Siti Mardhiah bt. Roslan
Dental Officer
Klinik Pergigan Batu Gajah
Hospital Batu Gajah
Jln Changkat, Batu Gajah
31000 Kinta, Perak
Assoc. Prof Dr Wan Himratul Aznita
Wan Harun
Oral Biologist
Fakulti Pergigian, Universiti Malaya
Jalan Lembah Pantai
50603 WP Kuala Lumpur
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Prof Dr Mark Bartold
Professor and Director
Colgate Australian Clinical Dental
Research Centre
School of Dentistry
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, South Australia
5005 Australia
Associate Prof Dr Lim Lum Peng
Director, Periodontics
Faculty of Dentistry
National University of Singapore
11 Lower Kent Ridge Road
Singapore 119083
Republic of Singapore
Dr Kelly Yong Hui Ping
Periodontist
Yong Periodontal and Dental Clinic
25-2, PJU 8/5A, Damansara Perdana
47820 Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Dr Salmah Kamin
Periodontist
KPJ Selangor Specialist Hospital
Jalan Singa J 20/J, Seksyen 20
40300 Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr Nurhamni Hamsan
Klinik Pergigian Nur
No. 7 Tkt 1 Jalan Labis Indah 1
Taman Labis Indah, 85300 Labis Johor
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
ALGORITHM FOR MANAGEMENT OF PERIODONTAL ABSCESS
Initial Assessment
and Examination
Acute Periodontal
Abscess
Chronic Periodontal
Abscess
Extraction of
‘irrational to treat’/
hopeless tooth
• Systemic involvement
• Spreading infection
• No systemic involvement
• Localized infection
Immediate
management
Systemic antibiotics
and/or refer to specialist
when necessary
Review in 24-48 hours
to evaluate resolution
of abscess
Recall in
3-5 days
Unresolved lesion
Control of condition
• Drainage and root surface debridement
• Removal of causative factors
Management of pre-existing / residual
Lesions
• Refer to Periodontist
• Tooth Extraction
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Key Message 1
• History of a traumatic event e.g. impaction of foreign body into the
periodontium is a clue to aid diagnosis of periodontal abscess.
• Current heavy smokers and poorly-controlled diabetics are more prone to
severe periodontal disease with higher prevalence of periodontal abscess.
Key Message 2
• Presence of swelling, suppuration, deep periodontal pockets and bleeding on
probing are the main clinical features of PA.
Key Message 3
• Mechanical debridement and drainage through the periodontal pocket
without antibiotics is usually effective.
• Mechanical treatment of periodontal pocket is to debride the root surface
using either a hand or ultrasonic scaler to facilitate drainage.
• Irrigation aims to remove debris and residual microorganisms.
Recommendation 4
• Diabetic patients with acute symptoms should be given prompt treatment.
25, Level III
(Grade C)
• Analgesics should be prescribed to alleviate pain.
(Grade C)
Recommendation 1
• Detailed medical and dental history should be considered in diagnosing PA.
(Grade C)
Recommendation 2
A thorough subgingival scaling and root surface debridement should be carried
out to treat abscesses in anatomically complex sites (e.g. furcation involvement
or intrabony pockets).
(Grade C)
Recommendation 3
• Periodontal abscess with systemic spread which is life-threatening
or not responding to oral antibiotics should be referred to hospital immediately.
(Grade C)
• For patients treated with antibiotics, drainage and debridement should be
carried out within 5 days.
(Grade C – Development Group’s consensus)
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
1. INTRODUCTION
Periodontal abscess (PA) is a common emergency in the dental clinic,
being the third most prevalent emergency infection, after acute dentoalveolar abscesses and pericoronitis. 1-3, Level lll
According to the 1999 Classification of Periodontal Diseases
and Conditions (AAP World workshop) 4, Level lll “Abscesses of the
Periodontium” include gingival, periodontal and pericoronal abscess
(Table 1).
Table 1: Classification of periodontal diseases and conditions 1999
Periodontal abscess, which can be acute or chronic, is defined as
a lesion associated with periodontal breakdown occurring during a
limited period of time with detectable clinical symptoms, including a
localised accumulation of pus located within the gingival wall of the
periodontal pocket. 1,2, Level lll
A gingival abscess is defined as a localised, painful, rapidly expanding
lesion involving the marginal gingiva or interdental papilla sometimes
in a previously disease-free area. 2, Level III
I:
Gingival diseases
A Dental plaque-induced gingival
diseases
B Non-plaque-induced gingival
lesions
II:
Chronic periodontitis
A Localized
B Generalized
(>30% of sites are involved)
III:
Aggressive periodontitis
A Localized
B Generalized
(>30% of sites are involved)
IV: Periodontitis as a manifestation of
systemic diseases
A Associated with
hematological disorders
B Associated with genetic disorders
C Not otherwise specified
V:
Necrotizing periodontal diseases
A Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
B Necrotizing ulcerative
periodontitis
VI: Abscesses of the periodontium
A Gingival abscess
B Periodontal abscess
C Pericoronal abscess
VII: Periodontitis associated with endodontic
lesions
A Combined periodontic–endodontic
lesions
VIII: Developmental or acquired
deformities and conditions
A Localized tooth-related factors
that modify or predispose to
plaque-induced gingival
diseases ⁄periodontitis
B Mucogingival deformities and
conditions around teeth
C Mucogingival deformities and
conditions on edentulous ridges
D Occlusal trauma
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
A pericoronal abscess is a localized accumulation of pus within the
overlying tissue surrounding the crown of an incompletely erupted
tooth. 2, Level III
Abscesses occur more often in molar sites representing more than
50% of cases, 6,49, Level III probably because of the presence of furcation,
and complex anatomy and root morphology. 2, Level III
1.1 The Aetiology, Microbiology and Contributing Factors
An understanding of the aetiology of periodontal abscess is crucial
to ensure successful outcomes. Periodontal abscess occurs mainly in
periodontitis sites with deep pockets although it can develop in nonperiodontitis sites.
Microorganisms are the cause for the periodontal abscess. The
common microorganisms involved are: 5-7, Level III
a) Fusobacterium nucleatum
b) Porphyromonas gingivalis
c) Tannerella forsythia
d) Prevotella intermedia/nigrescens
e) Peptostreptococcus micros
Lower prevalences were observed for:
a) Prevotella melaninogenica
b) Campylobacter rectus
c) Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
Similar proportions of facultative and strict anaerobes were found, of
which a higher proportion were gram-positive facultative cocci, closely
followed by gram-negative anaerobic rods. 1,7, Level III
In periodontitis–affected sites, the mechanisms that may lead to
abscess formation include: 2, Level III
a) Exacerbation of a chronic lesion as a consequence of changes
in the subgingival microbiota composition, with an increase
in bacterial virulence, or a decrease in host defence. This is
further aggravated by the existence of tortuous pockets,
presence of furcation involvements and vertical defects, which
may result in a reduced capacity to self-drain.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
b) During the course of periodontal therapy:
• post scaling and root debridement: 8, Level III
o inadequate scaling may allow calculus to remain in
deep pockets, whilst the healed marginal gingiva will
occlude pocket drainage
o dislodged calculus fragments may be embedded into the
surrounding tissues
• post periodontal surgery: 9, Level II-2
o associated with presence of foreign bodies, such as
membranes for regenerative procedures or sutures
• acute
exacerbation
during
supportive
periodontal
(maintenance) phase 2, Level III
c) Post-systemic antibiotic intake in pre-existing periodontitis
without scaling/root debridement 10, Level II-3; 11, Level III
d) Acute exacerbation of untreated periodontitis
Abscess can also occur in non-periodontitis/healthy sites, owing to:
2, Level III
a) impaction of foreign bodies including orthodontic elastics, piece
of dental floss, dislodged cemental tear, fragment of
toothpick,12,13,
Level
III piece
of
finger
nail,14,
Level
III
fish
bone and piece of popcorn kernel 11, Level III
b) anatomical variations such as invaginated tooth,15, Level III
enamel pearls / extensions and palatal groove 16, Level III
c) alteration of the root surface by different factors such as
perforation by endodontic instrument,13, Level III crack/fracture
of the root,
38, Level II-1 cervical cemental tear 16, Level III and
external root resorptions
1.2 Pathogenesis of Periodontal Abscess
Invasion of bacteria into soft tissues surrounding the periodontal
pocket will result in an inflammatory process through chemotactic
factors released by the bacteria. Both lowered tissue resistance,
and the virulence and number of bacteria will determine the course
of this infection. The formation of an acute inflammatory infiltrate and
encapsulation of bacterial mass will lead to extensive connective tissue
destruction and pus formation. 17-18, Level III
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
2. HISTORY TAKING
The diagnosis of periodontal abscess should be based on overall
evaluation and interpretation of patient’s symptom, together with the
clinical and radiological signs found during the oral examination. 2, Level III
2.1 Signs and Symptoms
Symptoms of periodontal abscess can range from moderate to severe
pain (62%) to no pain (10%). 1,5,7, Level III Periodontal abscess may be
associated with intraoral swelling. The approximate duration of
swelling in patients can be 1-4 days (40%), between 5-10 days (25%)
and unknown in 15% of patients. 1, Level III In acute lesions, swellings are
more defined and localised. Other symptoms range from tenderness
of gingiva to palpation, 7, Level III tooth mobility, 1, Level III and extrusion of
teeth (23.3%). 5, Level III
Acute periodontal abscess is a lesion that progresses dramatically in a
short period to a crisis 19, Level III with severe pain, distress, and often with
complaint of tooth elevation as well as tenderness on biting. 20, Level III A
complaint of fever and discomfort due to regional lymphadenopathy
indicates systemic spread of infection. 21, Level III
Chronic periodontal abscess is usually asymptomatic and may be
associated with sinus tract. 2, Level III
Signs and symptoms of acute and chronic periodontal abscess
1, 22, Level III are as in Table 2.
Table 2: Signs and Symptoms of Periodontal Abscess
Acute Periodontal Abscess
Chronic Periodontal Abscess
•
Mild to severe discomfort
•
Localized red ovoid swelling
•
Periodontal pocket
•
Mobility
•
Tooth elevation in socket
•
Tenderness on percussion on biting
•
Exudation
•
Elevated temperature
•
Regional lymphadenopathy
•
Tenderness of the gingiva to palpation
•
No pain or dull pain
•
Localised inflammatory lesion
•
Slight tooth elevation
•
Intermittent exudation
•
Fistulous tract often associated with a
deep pocket
•
Usually without systemic involvement
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
2.2 Medical and Dental Histories
Thorough medical and dental history including medication is important
in total patient management. 19, Level III Detailed history of periodontitis
experience and its treatment, particularly history of recent antibiotic
therapy is also important. Thus, the following points have to be
considered:
a) history of periodontitis 1, Level III
b) history of a traumatic event e.g. impaction of foreign body into the
periodontium 2, Level III
c) presence of untreated periodontitis (incidence of 62%) 7, Level III
d) current periodontal disease status 1, Level III
e) recent scaling and root planing 1,5, Level III (incidence of 14%) 7, Level III
f) recent
dental
treatment
(restorative/orthodontic/endodontic)
2, Level III
g) recent systemic antibiotic therapy 2, Level III
h) supportive periodontal (maintenance) phase (incidence of 7%)
7, Level III
i) risk factors:
• smoking status - heavy current smokers are more prone to severe
periodontal disease and do not respond predictably to treatment
23, Level lI-2
• diabetes mellitus - prevalence of periodontal abscess is higher
in diabetics especially those with poor glycaemic control
20, 22, Level III
• others – genetically predispose to severe periodontitis
(Syndromic and Non-Syndromic Periodontitis) 24, Level III
Development of periodontal abscess in periodontitis may occur as
an acute exacerbation of an untreated periodontitis, during active
periodontal therapy and supportive periodontal (maintenance) phase.
7, Level III
Key Message 1
• History of a traumatic event e.g. impaction of foreign body into
the periodontium is a clue to aid diagnosis of periodontal
abscess.
• Current heavy smokers and poorly-controlled diabetics are
more prone to severe periodontal disease with higher prevalence
of periodontal abscess.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Recommendation 1
• Detailed medical and dental history should be considered in
diagnosing PA.
(Grade C)
3. CLINICAL FEATURES
3.1 Systemic Manifestation or Involvement
Systemic involvement has been reported in some severe cases of
periodontal abscess which include:
a) fever
b) malaise
c) regional lymphadenopathy (10% of patients)
d) leucocytosis can be detected in approximately 1/3 of patients.
6,7,26,27, Level III
e) features that may indicate on-going systemic diseases, in particular
compromised immune system 28, Level III
3.2 Clinical Features
a) Extra oral
Periodontal abscess may be associated with:
• diffuse and tender extra oral swelling with 40% reporting
that the swelling had occurred 1–4 days before; 25%
between 5–10 days; 20% between 15–30 days; and 15%
did not know. 6, 26, 28, 29, Level III
• trismus 29, Level III
• large fluctuant area,
30, Level III redness and sinus
6, 7, 26, 28, 29 Level III
b) Intra oral
Most prominent signs are: 6, Level III
• ovoid elevation in the gingiva along the lateral part of the
root 2, 29, Level III
• swelling (93%), oedema (84%) and redness (75%)
29, Level III
• bleeding on probing in 100% of abscesses
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
• suppuration in 66% of cases either spontaneously or on
pressure from gingival sulcus or sinus
• deep probing depths at sites with severe periodontal
destruction (62.1% with pockets deeper than 6 mm)
• tooth mobility in 79.0% of cases 5-7, 26, 29-30, Level III
• possible tenderness to palpation 29, Level III
• tooth may be tender to percussion
Key Message 2
• Presence of swelling, suppuration, deep periodontal pockets
and bleeding on probing are the main clinical features of PA.
(Courtesy: Dr Norhani, Dr Izrawatie)
Figure 1: Clinical features of Periodontal Abscesses
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
4.
INVESTIGATIONS
4.1
Radiographs
Periapicals and OPG are commonly used for assessment.
31, 32, Level III In presence of sinus, gutta percha point can be
placed through the opening to locate the origin of the sinus tract.
The radiographic examination of periodontal abscess may
reveal a normal appearance, widening of periodontal ligament
(PDL) spaces or some degree of radiographic bone loss of the
tooth involved in cases with pre-existing periodontal pocket.
2, 5, Level III
4.2
Pulp Sensibility Test
Pulp sensibility test (formerly known as pulp vitality test) could be
used to assess the vitality of the tooth.
33, Level III Teeth
with primary periodontal infection tend to respond positively to
pulp sensibility test such as thermal test and electric pulp test.
34, Level III
4.3
Microbial Test
Samples of pus from the sinus, abscess or gingival sulcus could
be sent for culture and sensitivity test. 5, 32, Level III Culture
studies have provided a substantial body of information about
the bacterial aetiology and the species involved. 35, Level III
4.4
Others
Glycaemic level of patients can be assessed through random
blood glucose, fasting blood glucose or glycosylated
haemoglobin (HbA1c) level, if indicated to identify undetected
diabetics and to assess glycaemic control in diabetics.
32, Level III
5.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of periodontal abscess should be based on overall
evaluation which include the relevant medical and dental histories
along with clinical and radiological findings during the
examination. 2, Level III
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Possible differential considerations include:
• Gingival abscess;
• Periodontal abscess;
• Periapical abscess;
• Perio-endo lesion;
• Endo-perio lesion;
• Cracked tooth syndrome; and
• Vertical root fracture.
The characteristics and clinical / radiographic findings of the above
lesions for differential diagnosis are given in Table 3.
Table 3: Differential Diagnosis and Characteristics of Periodontal
Diseases
Differential
Diagnosis
Characteristics and Clinical / Radiographic Findings
1. Gingival
Abscess
2, level III
•
Localized purulent infection involving marginal gingiva
•
History of recent trauma
•
Localized to the gingiva
•
NO periodontal pocketing
e.g.: Case 1 (Courtesy: Dr Khamiza Zainal Abidin)
Gingival abscess on buccal aspect of 21 IOPa radiograph did not show
any significant findings.
e.g.: Case 2 (Courtesy: Dr Norhani Abd Rani)
Gingival abscess in
drug-induced gingival
enlargement case
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
2. Periodontal
Abscess
2, 5-7, 26, 29-32,
level III
Most prominent clinical signs are:
•
ovoid elevation in the gingiva along the lateral part of the root
•
swelling, oedema, redness and bleeding on probing
•
suppuration either spontaneously or on pressure from gingival
sulcus or sinus
•
deep probing depth at sites with severe periodontal destruction
•
tooth mobility
•
possible tenderness to palpation, and tooth may be tender to
percussion
The radiographic examination: may reveal a normal appearance,
widening of periodontal ligament (PDL) spaces or some degree
of radiographic bone loss of the tooth involved in cases with
pre-existing periodontal pocket.
e.g.: Case 1 (Courtesy: Dr Norhani Abd Rani )
Redness, swelling and deep periodontal pocket (9mm) on mesial of 41.
IOPa radiograph indicating horizontal bone loss
e.g.: Case 2 (Courtesy: Datin Dr Indra a/p Nachiapan)
Redness and swelling on
palatal surfaces of 25 and 26,
with mobility and deep pockets
OPG radiograph revealed
widening of PDL space of teeth
25 and 26. Bone loss >½ of root
length, with furcation involvement
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Generalized swelling of gingival
tissue with suppuration especially
on mandibular region
IOPa radiograph showed
severe bone loss to root tips
e.g.: Case 3 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
e.g.: Case 4 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
Redness, swelling and deep periodontal pocket (9mm) on mesial of 23. IOPa
radiograph revealed radiolucency at mesial of the tooth indicating bone loss
e.g.: Case 5
(Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
(Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
e.g.: Case 6
Redness at marginal margin,
swelling and suppuration at palatal
surface of 11
Swelling and redness of gingival
tissue
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
e.g.: Case 7 (Courtesy: Dr Nor Ziana Ibrahim)
e.g.: Case 8 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
Swelling, deep pockets and suppuration in drug-induced gingival
enlargement case
3. Periapical
Abscess
2, level III
• Formation of purulent exudate involving dental pulp and tissues
surrounding apex of tooth
• Located over root apex
• Non-vital tooth
• Heavily restored or large filling
• Large caries with pulpal involvement
• History of sensitivity to hot or cold food
• NO sign / symptoms of periodontal disease
• Periapical radiolucency on intraoral radiographs
e.g.: Case 1 (Courtesy: Dr Nor Ziana Ibrahim)
Presence of sinus tract on buccal aspect of 46, traced with gutta percha(GP).
Swelling of gingival tissue on
buccal aspect of 36 and 37
IOPa radiograph showed bone loss
around the teeth
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Presence of sinus tract on labial surface of 21,
traced with gutta percha (GP), without presence of
deep pocket
Presence of sinus tract on labial surface
between 16 and 17, traced by gutta percha,
without presence of deep pocket
Deep pocket, bleeding on probing (BOP),
suppuration on non-vital 33.
IOPa radiograph
revealed gp traced
to the apical
radiolucency of 22
IOPa radiograph revealed
gp traced adjacent to the
periapical radiolucency
of 16
IOPa radiograph
revealed radiolucency
at middle portion of
the root extending
towards apical
e.g.: Case 2 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
e.g.: Case 3 (Courtesy: Dr Nor Ziana Ibrahim )
4. Perio-Endo
Lesion 37,
level III / Endo
–Perio
Lesion 37,
level III
/ Combined
Lesions
Perio-Endo :
•
Severe periodontal disease with deep pocketing which may
involve the furcation
•
Severe bone loss up to the apex causing pulpal infection
•
Non-vital tooth which is sound or minimally restored
•
Presence of narrow deep pocket
Endo-Perio:
•
Pulp infection spreading via lateral canals into periodontal
pockets
•
Tooth usually non-vital with periapical radiolucency
•
Localized deep pocketing
e.g.: Case 1 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
e.g.: Case 2 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen )
e.g.: Case 3 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
5. Cracked
Tooth
Syndrome
38, Level III
•
History of pain on mastication
•
Crack line noted on the crown
•
Possibility of trauma
•
Vital tooth
•
Pain upon release after biting on cotton roll, rubber disc or
tooth slooth. Pain relief after placement of orthodontic band
•
No relief of pain after root canal treatment
e.g.: Case 1 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
Crack line on 32 only visible under UV light (arrow)
Swelling and
abscess on
distal aspect
of 36.
IOPa radiograph
revealed bone
loss involving
furcation
Presence of deep pocket, BOP, and suppuration
on distal of non-vital 43
OPG radiograph
revealed periapical
radiolucency
extending to the
whole root length
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Presence of abscess
on labial surfaces on
12 & 11
IOPa radiograph
revealed periapical
radiolucency of mesial
root 46
IOPa radiograph
revealed
radiolucencies on
apical region of
12 & 11
Deep pocket, BOP
and suppuration on
mesiolingual surface of
mesial root. Upon full
thickness flap elevation,
fracture line was visible
Vertical fracture lines
were visible on the
root surfaces
Vertical
fracture line on
mesiolingual
surface of mesial
root
6. Vertical
Root
Fracture
39, level III
•
Heavily restored tooth
•
Non-vital tooth with mobility
•
Post crown with threaded post
•
Deep osseous defect (deep probing) alongside the suspected
fracture for long-standing fracture
•
Localized narrow deep pocketing, normally one site only
•
Possible fracture line and halo radiolucency around the root in
periapical radiographs (‘J-shaped’ image)
•
Might need an open flap exploration to confirm diagnosis
e.g.: Case 1 (Courtesy: Dr Nor Ziana Ibrahim)
e.g.: Case 2 (Courtesy: Dr Izrawatie Shapeen)
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
6.
TREATMENT
Treatment of periodontal abscess does not differ substantially from
other odontogenic abscesses. It should include two distinct phases.
2, Level III
a) Control of the acute condition to arrest tissue destruction and
alleviate the symptoms.
b) Management of pre-existing and/or residual lesion, especially in
patients with periodontitis.
6.1
Control of Acute Condition:
a) Drainage and debridement with/without antimicrobials
(systemic or local)
This includes drainage (by means of scaling of the pocket
or through an incision) and root surface debridement followed
by irrigation with normal saline/antiseptics.1, Level III If the
abscess is associated with a foreign-body impaction, the
foreign body must be removed. 1, 39, Level III
Key Message 3
• Mechanical debridement and drainage through the
periodontal pocket without antibiotics is usually
effective.
• Mechanical treatment of periodontal pocket is to
debride the root surface using either a hand or ultrasonic
scaler to facilitate drainage.
• Irrigation aims to remove debris and residual
microorganisms.
Recommendation 2
A thorough subgingival scaling and root surface
debridement should be carried out to treat abscesses in
anatomically complex sites (e.g. furcation involvement or
intrabony pockets).
(Grade C)
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Recommendation 3
• Periodontal abscess with systemic spread which is life threatening
or not responding to oral antibiotics should be referred to hospital
immediately.
(Grade C)
• For patients treated with antibiotics, drainage and debridement
should be carried out within 5 days.
(Grade C – Development Group’s consensus)
b) Alleviation of pain
Analgesics should be prescribed to relieve pain. The selection of
analgesic depends on the patient’s history, allergy profile, and the
level of discomfort. Options include a non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) and/or an opioid analgesic.52, Level II
c) Antimicrobials
Drainage and debridement with an adjunctive antimicrobial should
be considered if there is systemic involvement.
2, 40, 41, 43,
Level III Use of systemic antimicrobials 2, Level III as the sole treatment
may ONLY be recommended if:
• there is a need for premedication.
• the infection is not well localised.
• adequate drainage cannot be achieved.
Indications for systemic antimicrobials are as follows: 42, 44-47,
Level III
• Patients with deep pockets, progressive or ‘active’ disease, or
specific microbiological profile.
• Situations where there is local spread.
• Systemic involvement is present such as lymphadenopathy,
fever or malaise or when the infection is not well localised.
The choice of antibiotics should be based on sound pharmacological
and microbiological principles (Appendix 2). 48, Level III This antibiotic
regime should be followed by debridement within 5 days.
Patients shall be reviewed after 24-48 hours to evaluate resolution of
abscess. The definitive treatment should be carried out once the acute
phase has resolved.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
6.2 Management of Pre-existing and/or Residual Lesions
Management of pre-existing and/or residual lesions are as
follows:
ü Refer to periodontist for appropriate non-surgical / surgical
periodontal treatment
Surgical therapy has been advocated mainly in abscesses
associated
with
deep
intrabony
defects,
furcation
involvement, residual calculus and tooth anomalies where
the resolution of the abscess can be achieved by surgical
access 1, 2, 8 ,49 Level III
ü Tooth extraction
If the tooth has a hopeless prognosis, or is irrational to treat,
as a result of severe destruction of the periodontium, the tooth
should be extracted.
2, 50 Level III Indications for tooth
extraction are:
• Tooth with grade III mobility, and
• Molars and bicuspids with Class III furcation involvement,
and
• Tooth with probing pocket depth more than 7 mm, and
• Tooth with alveolar bone loss more than 65% 51, Level III
Refer to Appendix 3 on decision making process for tooth retention
or extraction.
7. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of periodontal abscess
at all healthcare levels in Malaysia using an evidence-based CPG in
order to manage it appropriately. Recognition of periodontal health
and periodontal abscess by a clinician, the knowledge of what to
do when a problem occurs, and the appropriate responses from the
Recommendation 4
• Diabetic patients with acute symptoms should be given prompt
treatment. 25, Level III
(Grade C)
• Analgesics should be prescribed to alleviate pain.
(Grade C)
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
health professional are major factors in management of periodontal
abscess. This professional awareness is influenced by factors such as
maintaining current understanding of the nature of periodontal abscess,
the appropriate management, continuing professional education and
an understanding of patient expectations.
As the outcomes of periodontal therapy is mostly dependent on the
timely and appropriate management of the condition, it is important
to disseminate the knowledge among healthcare providers, as well
as to the public. This can be facilitated through the development of
appropriate training modules and quick references.
Cost implications on management of periodontal abscess vary
depending on several factors such as patient’s expectations,
compliance and medical conditions. Successful treatment outcomes
would require active periodontal and supportive (maintenance) therapy;
thus involving further cost. Periodontal abscess sometimes results
in loss of teeth requiring rehabilitation. Appropriate management
of periodontal abscess would ensure better prognosis of affected
dentition.
7.1
Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a) Wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare professionals
and teaching institutions via printed and electronic copies.
b) Continuing professional education on the management of
periodontal abscess for healthcare professionals.
c) Adequate facilities at primary care level for detection and
recognition of periodontal abscess.
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of
the CPG include:
a) Lack of understanding or limited knowledge of periodontal
abscess.
b) Variation in treatment practice.
c) Constraints in clinical facilities.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
7.2
Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a) ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare
professionals.
b) detect and recognise periodontal abscess by healthcare
professionals.
c) reinforce training of healthcare professionals to ensure
information is up to date.
7.3
Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
Note: The six months* period was based on Development Group Consensus
Complete resolution: healing with no further sign and symptoms.
1. Percentage of teeth
with periodontal
abscesses that
resulted in extraction
within 6 months*
2. Percentage of teeth
with periodontal
abscesses that
resulted in complete
resolution with no
recurrence after
6 months*
Standard:
a) Specialist care = less than 5%
b) Primary care = less than 20%
Note: *excluding teeth with hopeless prognosis
Standard:
Specialist care = 70%
=
=
X 100
X 100
Number of teeth with
periodontal abscesses that
resulted in extraction within
6 months*
Number of teeth with periodontal
abscesses that resulted in
complete resolution with no
recurrence after 6 months*
No. of teeth with periodontal
abscesses at baseline
No. of teeth with periodontal
abscesses at baseline
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
REFERENCES
1. Herrera D, Roldan S, Sanz M. The periodontal abscess: a review. J Clin Periodontol.
2000: 27: 377–386.
2. Herrera D, Bettina Alonso, Lorenzo De Arriba, Isabel Santa Cruz, Cristina Serrano &
Mariano Sanz. Acute periodontal lesions. Periodontology 2000. 2014: Vol. 65. 149–
177.
3. Lewis, M. A. O., Meechan, C., MacFarlane, T. W., Lamey, P-J. & Kay, E. Presentation
and antimicrobial treatment of acute orofacial infections in general dental practice.
British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. 1990: 28, 359–366.
4. Armitage GC. Development of a classification system for periodontal diseases and
conditions. Ann Periodontol. 1999: 4: 1–6.
5. Jaramillo A, Arce RM, Herrera D, Betancourth M, Botero JE, Contreras A. Clinical
and microbiological characterization of periodontal abscesses. J Clin Periodontol.
2005: 32: 1213–1218.
6. Herrera D, Roidan S, Gonza´lez I, Sanz M: The periodontal abscess (I). Clinical and
microbiological findings. J Clin Periodontol. 2000. 27(6): 387–394.
7. Monica Monea Pop, Luminita Lazar, B. Cormos-Suciu. Clinical and microbiological
aspects of the periodontal abscess. Acta Medica Transilvanica. September 2011;
2(3)468-471.
8. Dello Russo NM. The post-prophylaxis periodontal abscess: etiology and treatment.
Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent. 1985;5(1):28-37.
9. Garrett S1, Polson AM, Stoller NH, Drisko CL, Caton JG, Harrold CQ, Bogle G,
Greenwell H, Lowenguth RA, Duke SP, DeRouen TA. Comparison of a bioabsorbable
GTR barrier to a non-absorbable barrier in treating human class II furcation defects.
A multi-center parallel design randomized single-blind trial. J Periodontol. 1997
Jul;68(7):667-75.
10. Helovuo H1, Hakkarainen K, Paunio K. Changes in the prevalence of subgingival
enteric rods, staphylococci and yeasts after treatment with penicillin and
erythromycin. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 1993 Apr;8(2):75-9.
11. Punit V Patel, Sheela Kumar G, Amrita Patel. Periodontal abscess: a review. Journal
of Clinical and Diagnostic Research. 2011; Vol-5(2):404-409.
12. Gillette WB, Van House RL. Ill effects of improper oral hygiene procedure. J Am Dent
Assoc. 1980 Sep;101(3):476-80.
13. Abrams H and Kopezyk RA. Gingival sequela from a retained piece of dental floss.
Journal of the American Dental Association. 1983;10:57-78.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
14. Sousa D1, Pinto D, Araujo R, Rego RO, Moreira-Neto J. Gingival abscess due to an
unusual nail-biting habit: a case report. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2010 Mar 1;11(2):08591.
15. Chen RJ1, Yang JF, Chao TC. Invaginated tooth associated with periodontal
abscess. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1990 May;69(5):659.
16. Ishikawa I1, Oda S, Hayashi J, Arakawa S. Cervical cemental tears in older patients
with adult periodontitis. Case reports. J Periodontol. 1996 Jan;67(1):15-20.
17. Herrera D, Van Winkelhoff AJ, Sanz M. Abscesses in the periodontium. In: Lang NP &
Lindhe J.Clinical Periodontology & Implant Denstistry. John Wiley & Sons 6th; 2015
Chap 24; p463-471.
18. DeWitt GV, Cobb CM, Killoy WJ. The acute periodontal abscess: Microbial
penetration of soft tissue wall. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent. 1985: 5: 39-51.
19. Corbet EF. Diagnosis of acute periodontal lesions. Periodontology 2000. Vol.34,
2004;204-216.
20. Meng HX. Periodontal abscess. Ann Periodontol. 1999:4.79-83.
21. Newman MG, Takei HH, Klokkevold PR, Carranza FA. Carranza’s Clinical
Periodontology. Treatment of periodontal abscess. 2012. Chap 42. pg 445.
22. Philip et al .Treatment of periodontal abscess. Chapter 42 in Carranza’s Clinical
Periodontology, 11th ed. 2012 (Editors: Newman, Takei, Klokkevold and Carranza).
23. Georgia K Johnson, Margaret Hill. Cigarette smoking and the periodontal patient.
State of art review. J Periodontol. 2004;75:196-209.
24. Scott R Diehl, Chih-Hung Chou, Fengshen Kuo, Ching-Yu Huang. Genetic factors
and periodontal disease. Chapter 24 in Carranza’s Clinical Periodontology, 11th ed
2012 (editors: Newman, Takei, Klokkevold and Carranza).
25. Chapple ILC, Genco R and on behalf of working group 2 of the joint EFP/AAP
workshop. Diabetes and periodontitis diseases: consensus report of the joint
EFP/AAP Workshop on Periodontitis and Systemic diseases. J periodontal.
2013;84(4Suppl.):S112 doi:10.1902/jop.2013.1340011.
26. Dimitroulis G. A synopsis of minor oral surgery. Chapter 8: Odontogenic infection.
Reed Education & Professional Publication Lt. 1997.
27. Chan YK, Tien WS. Clinical parameters of periodontal abscess: a case series of 14
abscess. Malaysia Dental Journal. Jan-June 2010. Vol 31. No.1.
28. Carranza FA, JR; Newman MG: Clinical Periodontology 8th edition, Philadelphia
1996, WB Saunder.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
29. Krithiga Gurumoorthy, Babitha Ajjappa, Shobha Prakash, Multiple acute periodontal
abscesses due to Clenching. Journal of Interdisciplinary Dentistry. 2011; Vol-1 /
Issue-1: 37-40.
30. Nicholas M. Dello Russo, D.M.D., MSc.D. The post-prophylaxis periodontal abscess:
aetiology and treatment. The International Journal of Penodontic; and Restorative
Dentistry. I985;5(1): 28-37.
31. Gutman JL, Dumsha TC, Lovadahl PE, Hovland EJ. Problem solving in endodontics:
prevention, identification and management. Mosby Year Book.1998.
32. Wilson TG, Kornman KS, Newman MG. Advances in periodontics. Quintessence
Publishing Co, Inc 1992.
33. Jacobsen P. Restorative Dentistry. An integrated approach. Second edition.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2008.
34. Jae-Hyung, L., Ji-Hyun, L., Su-Jung, S. Diagnosis and treatment of teeth with
primary endodontic lesions mimicking periodontal disease: three cases with long term
follow ups. Restor Dent Endod. 2014 39(1). 56-62.
35. Siquera, J.F., Rôças, I.N. Microbiology and treatment of acute apical abscesses.
Clin Microbiol. 2013 Apr;26(2): 255–273.
36. Al Fouzan KS. A new classification of endodontic-periodontal lesions. International
Journal of Dentistry. 2014; Article ID 919173, 5 pages.
37. Berman LH, Kuttler S. Fracture necrosis: diagnosis, prognosis assessment, and
treatment recommendations. J Endod 2010. 36 (3).442-446.
38. Tsesis I, Rosen E, Tamse A, Taschieri S, Kfir A. Diagnosis of vertical root fractures
in endodontically treated teeth based on clinical and radiographic indices: a systematic
review. J Endod. 2010;36.1455–1458.
39. Ibbott CG, Kovach RJ, Carlson-Mann LD. Acute periodontal abscess associated
with an immediate implant site in the maintenance phase: a case report. Int J Oral
Maxillofac Implants 1993; 8:699-702.
40. Hafström CA, Wikström MB, Renvert SN, Dahlén GG. Effect of treatment on some
periodontopathogens and their antibody levels in periodontal abscesses.
J Periodontol. 1994; 65:1022-1028.
41. Herrera D, Rolda´n S, O’Connor A, Sanz M: The periodontal abscess (II). Short term
clinical and microbiological efficacy of 2 systemic antibiotic regimes. J Clin
Periodontol. 2000;27:395–404.
42. Herrera D, Sanz M, Jepsen S, Needleman I, Rolda´n S: A systematic review on the
effect of systemic antimicrobials as an adjunct to scaling and root planing in
periodontitis patients. J Clin Periodontol 2002; 29(Suppl. 3): 136–159.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
43. S. J. Ellison, The role of phenoxymethylpenicillin, amoxicillin, metronidazole and
clindamycin in the management of acute dentoalveolar abscesses – a review. British
Dental Journal. 2009; Volume 206 No. 7.
44. Bascones Martínez A, Aguirre Urízar JM, Bermejo Fenoll A, Blanco Carrión A, GayEscoda C, González Moles MA, Gutiérrez Pérez JL, Jiménez Soriano Y, Liébana
Ureña J, López-Marcos JF, Maestre Vera JR, Perea Pérez EJ, Prieto J, Vicente
Rodríguez JC. Consensus statement on antimicrobial treatment of odontogenic
bacterial infections. Oral Medicine and Pathology 2004;9:363-76.
45. Heitz-Mayfield LJA. Systemic antibiotics in periodontal therapy. Australian Dental
Journal. 2009; 54:(1 Suppl): S96–S101.
46. Haffajee AD, Socransky SS, Gunsolley JC. Systemic anti-infective periodontal
therapy. A systematic review. Ann Periodontol. 2003;8:115–181.
47. Silva GL, Soares RV, Zenóbio EG. Periodontal abscess during supportive periodontal
therapy: a review of the literature. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2008: 9(6):82-91.
48. Gunnar Dahlen, Microbiology and treatment of dental abscesses and periodontalendodontic lesions. Periodontology 2000, Vol. 28, 2002, 206–239.
49. Kareha MJ, Rosenberg Es & DeHaven H. Therapeutic considerations in the
management of a periodontal abscess with an intrabony defect. J of Clin Periodontal.
1981; 8; 357-386.
50. Smith, R. G. and R. M. Davies. Acute lateral periodontal abscesses. British Dental
Journal. 1986;161(5): 176-178.
51. Avila G, Galindo-Moreno P, Soehren S, Misch CE, Morelli T, Wang HL. A novel
decision-making process for tooth retention or extraction. J. Periodontol
2009;80:476-491.
52. Melanie SL & Thomas BD. Dental Abscess. In BMJ Best Practice. Last updated
31 May 2016, page 27 & 30. Retrieved from http://bestpractice.bmj.com
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Appendix 1
Clinical Questions: Management of Periodontal Abscess
Introduction
1. What is the definition of Periodontal Abscess (PA)?
Etiology and pathogenesis
1. What are the etiology, microbiology and contributing factors of PA?
2. What is the pathogenesis of PA?
Investigation and Diagnosis
1. What are the common complaints and symptoms of PA?
2. What are the relevant medical and dental histories of patients with
PA?
3. Are there any systemic manifestations or involvement reported in
patients with PA?
4. What are the clinical features of PA?
5. What are the investigations needed to diagnose PA?
6. What are the differential and definitive diagnoses of PA?
Treatment
1. How is the acute condition of PA controlled?
2. Is there any indication for systemic antimicrobials for patient with
PA?
3. What are the effective and safe pharmacological treatments for PA?
4. When to review the presenting symptoms of PA?
5. What are the effective and safe treatments of residual / pre-existing
lesions of PA?
6. What are the indications for tooth extraction in PA?
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Appendix 2
Recommended Oral Antimicrobials
(As indicated in section 6.1c)
No.
Antibiotics
Dose
Duration
Note
Not allergic to Penicillin
1.
Metronidazole
400mg PO
q8h
5 or 7 days
1. Contraindicated for
pregnant patients
2. Alcohol consumption is
prohibited
2.
Amoxycillin
500 mg PO
q8h
5 or 7 days
3.
Amoxycillin
and
Metronidazole
500 mg PO
q8h
200 mg PO
q8h
5 or 7 days
For Aggressive Periodontitis:
Amoxycillin 500 mg PO q8h
and Metronidazole
400 mg PO q8h, 7 days
(NAG 2015)
4.
Amoxycillin/
clavulanate
(Augmentin)
500/125
mg PO q8h
5 or 7 days
Augmentin is only
recommended for spreading
infections and infections of
fascial spaces (with/without
systemic signs) (NAG 2015)
Allergic to Penicillin
1.
Erythromycin
250 mg PO
q6h
5 or 7 days
May increase levels
of anticoagulants,
antiepileptics,
antipsychotics, anxiolytics/
hypnotics, cyclosporine,
theophylline
2.
Clindamycin
150/300
mg PO q6h
5 or 7 days
3.
Doxycycline
100 mg PO
q12h
7,10 or 14 days
Caution in pregnant
patients, breast-feeding
women, and children under
12 years old
4.
Azithromycin
500 mg PO
q24h
3 consecutive
days
Source: Herrera D et al 2002, Herrera D et al 2000, Bascones MA et al 2004; PV Patel 2011, NAG 2015
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
Appendix 3
Source: Avilla Gustavo Avila,*Pablo Galindo-Moreno, Stephan Soehren, Carl E. Misch, Thiago Morelli, and Hom-Lay Wang.
A novel decision-making process for tooth retention or extraction. J. Periodontol. 2009;80:476-491.
Management of Periodontal Abscess
2016
List of Abbreviation
1. PA
: Periodontal Abscess
2. PO
: Per Orem (Per Oral)
3. q6h
: every 6 hours
4. q8h
: every 8 hours
5. q12h : every 12 hours
6. q24h : every 24 hours
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
- Panel of internal and external reviewers
- Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input
and feedback
- Dr Noor Hasmin bt Mokhtar for process involved in the
publication
- All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held
shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms.
(Details are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “MANAGEMENT OF PERIODONTAL
ABSCESS” was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of
Health Malaysia and was developed without any involvement of the
pharmaceutical industry.
(ral Heath Technology Section
‘Sra Heath Divaion
ioatry of Heath Matoysia
vata, block E10, Precinct 1
Fedaral Goverment tens Conte
162590 Puja, Maayoe