ae. GUIDELINES
IMOH/P/PAK MERIC) ©
MA) > EMENT OF
BRE/ | CANCER
(Third Edition)
1
i
y
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service and, not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-99-1
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2019 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2023) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Key Recommendations
i
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations,
iv
Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Guidelines Development and Objectives
v
Development Group
viii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm 1. Management of Early Breast Cancer
xi
Algorithm 2. Management of Locally Advanced Breast Cancer xii
Algorithm 3. Management of Metastatic Breast Cancer
xiii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
3
2.1 Non-modifiable
3
2.2 Modifiable
4
3.
SCREENING
6
3.1 Screening of Unaffected Women
6
3.2 Surveillance of Affected Women
7
4.
REFERRAL
9
5.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
10
5.1 Triple Assessment
10
5.1.1 Clinical
10
5.1.2 Imaging
10
5.1.3 Laboratory Investigation
13
5.2 Staging
17
5.2.1 Early breast cancer
17
5.2.2 Locally Advanced Breast Cancer (Stage III)
18
5.2.3 Advanced (Metastatic) Breast Cancer (Stage IV) 18
6.
TREATMENT
20
6.1 Multi-Disciplinary Team
20
6.2 Surgery
20
6.2.1 Early breast cancer
20
6.2.2 Locally advanced breast cancer
22
6.2.3 Optimal timing for breast reconstruction
23
(with or without prosthesis) in breast cancer
requiring post-operative radiotherapy
6.2.4 Metastatic breast cancer
24
6.2.5 Loco-regional recurrence
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
6.3 Systemic Therapy
28
6.3.1 Neoadjuvant therapy
28
6.3.2 Adjuvant therapy
31
6.3.3 Systemic therapy for metastatic disease
36
6.3.4 Supportive therapy
39
6.4 Radiotherapy
40
6.4.1 Radiotherapy post-breast conserving surgery
40
6.4.2 Radiotherapy post-mastectomy
41
7.
FERTILITY PRESERVATION
43
8.
FAMILIAL BREAST CANCER
45
8.1 Cancer Genetic Risk Assessment
45
8.2 Genetic Counselling and Genetic Testing
46
8.3 Genetic Predisposition to Breast Cancer
47
8.4 Clinical Management for Carriers of
48
Pathogenic/Likely Pathogenic Variants
in BRCA1, BRCA2 and Other Genes
8.4.1 Intensive screening
48
8.4.2 Risk-reducing strategies
51
8.4.3 Role of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors
53
for BRCA carriers
9.
FOLLOW-UP
54
10. SUPPORTIVE TREATMENT
55
11. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
60
11.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
60
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
60
12. REFERENCES
62
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
72
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
73
Appendix 3 Recommended Breast Imaging Reporting System 75
Appendix 4 Breast Imaging Survey Form
81
Appendix 5 TNM Classification of Breast Cancer
83
Appendix 6 Histopathology Worksheet for Breast
88
Biopsy/Mastectomy
Appendix 7 Medications in Systemic Therapy of Breast
Cancer and Their Common Side Effects
90
Appendix 8 BRCA1/2 Testing Criteria
97
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 9 Post-Treatment Cancer Survivorship
99
(Management of Treatment Complications)
List of Abbreviations
102
Acknowledgement
104
Disclosure Statement
104
Source of Funding
104
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
i
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
A. Screening and Referral
• Screening mammography may be performed biennially in women
aged 50 - 74 years in the general population.
• For women of high risk of breast cancer, where no genetic variant
has been identified, screening mammography may be considered
from 30 - 39 years of age, performed annually from 40 - 59 and
biennial from 60 onwards.
• For carriers of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1,
BRCA2 and PALB2, annual magnetic resonance imaging should be
offered from 30 - 49 years of age, annual mammography from 40 - 69
and biennial mammography from 70 onwards.
• Patients with any of the following conditions should be referred early
(within two weeks) to breast or surgical clinic for further evaluation:
 women aged >35 years with signs and symptoms
 high risk group with signs and symptoms
 patients with clinical signs of malignancy
B. Assessment and Diagnosis
• Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS®) is the
preferred reporting method in the management of breast cancer.
• Minimally invasive biopsy technique (MIBT) with core needle is the
preferred diagnostic technique for both palpable and non-palpable
breast lesions.
• Repeat image-guided MIBT or consider surgical excision when the
initial core biopsy results are non-diagnostic or discordant with the
imaging findings.
• Estrogen and progesterone receptors status should be assessed in
all cases of breast cancer.
• Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) test using
immunohistochemistry should be performed on all invasive breast
cancer specimens.
• In-situ hybridisation test should be done only in equivocal HER2
(immunohistochemistry 2+) on invasive breast cancer specimens.
• Patients with early breast cancer and:
 asymptomatic, routine imaging screening for metastasis should
not be performed
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
 with signs and symptoms of lung, liver and bone metastases,
or abnormal related laboratory tests, the routine imaging
investigations should be performed
 with localised bone pain, elevated alkaline phosphatase or
symptoms suggestive of bone metastases, bone scintigraphy
should be used if plain radiography or computed tomography
staging is negative
• Patients with locally advanced and advanced breast cancer, imaging
modalities e.g. computed tomography, bone scintigraphy, magnetic
resonance imaging or positron emission tomography/computerised
tomography should be done to assess the extent of disease
depending on the indications.
C. Treatment
• Multidisciplinary team approach should be considered in the
management of breast cancer to improve clinical outcomes.
• In women treated with breast conserving surgery for ductal carcinoma
in situ of <2 mm margin, the benefits and risks of further treatment
(surgery or radiotherapy) should be discussed to reduce the risk of
local recurrence.
• In early breast cancer patients with clinically lymph nodes negative
who have breast conserving surgery and sentinel lymph nodes
(SLNs) biopsy, no further axillary treatment is needed in two or less
positive SLNs.
• In early breast cancer patients with clinically lymph nodes negative
who have mastectomy and SLNs biopsy with two or less positive
SLNs, axillary treatment either radiotherapy or surgery should be
offered.
• Neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be offered to patients with triple
negative or HER2-positive early breast cancer to enable breast
conserving surgery but its benefits and risks need to be discussed
with the patients.
• Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy, preferably aromatase inhibitors, may
be considered in post-menopausal women with hormone-receptor
positive breast cancer who are not suitable for chemotherapy.
• Chemotherapy and trastuzumab-based therapy should be offered to
patients with HER2-positive breast cancer who require neoadjuvant
therapy.
• Adjuvant extended endocrine therapy may be offered to hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer based on the individual’s risk of
disease recurrence and potential side effects.
• Trastuzumab should be given to women with HER2-positive breast
cancer having adjuvant chemotherapy.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Endocrine therapy should be considered as first-line treatment in
hormone-receptor positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer
unless there is evidence of visceral crisis or endocrine resistance.
• Bisphosphanates may be offered in breast cancer patients with bone
metastases to reduce skeletal-related events.
• All patients with invasive breast cancer who have breast conserving
surgery with clear margin should be offered adjuvant radiotherapy.
• Adjuvant radiotherapy should be offered to the following postmastectomy breast cancer patients with:
 one or more positive lymph nodes
 positive margin not amenable for surgery
• Adjuvant radiotherapy should be considered in node negative T3 or
T4 breast cancer.
D. Fertility Preservation
• Fertility preservation should be discussed with all breast cancer
patients in the reproductive age group and suitable patients should
be referred to fertility specialist.
E. Familial Breast Cancer
• Intensive screening of BRCA carriers and high risk individuals should
be vigilantly performed and adhered to recommended guidelines.
• Risk-reducing surgeries should be discussed and offered to women
with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
iv
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
v
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry
of Education. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary
Review Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
The CPG update was done based on the first edition of evidencebased CPG on Management of Breast Cancer (Second Edition), issued
in 2010. In the update, certain methodology was used e.g. GRADE
principles while the scope on assessment and diagnosis, treatment and
familial breast cancer was expanded. A chapter on fertility preservation
was also introduced. A literature search was carried out using the
following electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane
Database of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published in the last
four years, on humans and in English. In addition, the reference lists of
all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to further identify
relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted to identify
further studies. All searches were conducted from 23 November 2017
to 6 January 2018. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31 July 2019 to be included. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from
the CPG Secretariat.
References were made to other CPGs on Breast Cancer e.g.
• Early and locally advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and
management [National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
(NICE), 2018]
• Familial breast cancer: classification care and managing breast
cancer and related risks in people with a family history of breast
cancer (NICE, 2018)
• Treatment of primary breast cancer (Scottish Intercollegiate
Guideline Network, 2013)
• Breast Cancer Version 1.2019 [National Comprehensive Cancer
Network (NCCN), 2019]
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to being used as references.
A total of 33 clinical questions were developed under eight different
sections (risk factors, screening, referral, assessment/diagnosis,
staging, treatment, survivorship programme and familial breast
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
vi
cancer). Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within eight sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 26 times throughout the development of
these guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least
two DG members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist,
presented in evidence tables and further discussed in DG meetings.
All statements and recommendations subsequently formulated were
agreed upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient,
the recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC.
This CPG is based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, metaanalyses and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG strictly
follows the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and, the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid-634).
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
vii
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide recommendations on the
management of breast cancer on following aspects:
• screening and referral
• diagnosis and assessment
• treatment and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
a. Inclusion Criteria
• Patients with early, advanced and metastatic breast carcinoma
• Individuals with increased risk of breast carcinoma
b. Exclusion Criteria
• Non-epithelial breast malignancy
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care in the management
of breast cancer including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. policy makers
v. patients and their advocates
vi. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
viii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Anita Baghawi
Consultant Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Chan Ai Chen
Consultant Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Hospital Raja Perempuan Bainun
Perak
Dr. Eznal Izwadi Mohd. Mahidin
Clinical Oncologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Harissa Husainy Hasbullah
Clinical Oncologist
Universiti Teknologi Mara, Selangor
Dr. Jennifer Leong Siew Mooi
Clinical Oncologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Mr. Kenny Dang Chee Chean
Pharmacist
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head, Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor Safariny Ahmad
Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Noranizah Wagino
Pathologist
Hospital Pakar Sultanah Fatimah, Johor
Dr. Noor Harzana Harrun
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Pandamaran, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Nuguelis Razali
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Raflis Ruzairee Awang
Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rofiah Ali
Radiologist
Hospital Sg. Buloh, Selangor
Ms. Siti Fatimah Azura Mat Zin
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Shahrun Niza
Abdullah Suhaimi
Consultant Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sofiah Zainal Abidin
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Lenggong, Perak
Dr. Winnie Ong Peitee
Clinical Geneticist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zahurin Ismail
Head of Department &
Consultant Radiologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Dr. Nor Aina Emran
Senior Consultant Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Professor Datin Dr. Anita Zarina Bustam
Senior Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dato’ Dr. Fuad Ismail
Senior Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Gerard Lim Chin Chye
Head of Department & Senior
Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Irmi Zarina Ismail
Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Ms. Kamarun Neasa Begam
Mohd Kassim
Pharmacist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Professor Datuk Dr. Looi Lai-Meng
Senior Consultant Pathologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Nur Aishah Mohd. Taib
Senior Consultant Breast Surgeon &
Director UM Cancer Research Institute
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Rohaizak Muhammad
Senior Consultant Breast &
Endocrine Surgeon
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Datin Paduka Dr. Teo Soo Hwang
Chief Executive
Cancer Research Malaysia
Emeritus Professor Dato’ Dr. Yip Cheng Har
Senior Consultant Breast & Endocrine Surgeon
Ramsay Sime Darby Healthcare
Selangor
Dr. Yun Si Ing
Head of Department &
Senior Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Sg. Buloh, Selangor
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Aidatul Azura Abdul Rani
Patient Advocate
Dr. Andre Das
Consultant General Surgeon
Hospital Kajang, Selangor
Dr. Azah Abdul Samad
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Seksyen 7
Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr. Clement Edward a/l Thaumanavar
Consultant General Surgeon
Hospital Tuanku Fauziah, Perlis
Professor D Gareth Evans
Professor of Medical Genetics &
Cancer Epidemiology
Division of Evolution & Genomic Science
University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom
Professor Dr. Kartini Rahmat
Consultant Radiologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Kerstin Sandelin
Överläkare/Senior Consultant
PO Bröst-, Endokrina Tumörer och
Sarkom/Breast, Endocrine and
Sarcoma tumors
Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset/
Karolinska University Hospital/Karolinska
Institutet
Stockholm, Sweden
Dr. Mastura Md Yusof
Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Pantai Cancer Institute, Pantai Hospital
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mazanah Muhamad
Patient Advocate & President
Persatuan Kanser KanWork
Dr. Murizah Mohd. Zain
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
& Reproductive Medicine Specialist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Nor Saleha Ibrahim Tamin
Public Health Physician,
Senior Principal Assistant Director &
Head of Cancer Unit, Non-Communicable
Disease Section, MoH Putrajaya
Ms. Nik Nuradlina Nik Adnan
Pharmacist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Paul Cornes
Consultant Oncologist
Comparative Outcomes Group
Bristol, United Kingdom
Professor Dr. Tan Puay Hoon
Chairman & Senior Consultant
Division of Pathology
Singapore General Hospital
Singapore
Dr. Voon Pei Jye
Head of Department &
Medical Oncologist
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
xi
ALGORITHM 1. MANAGEMENT OF EARLY BREAST CANCER
Early breast cancer
Surgery
Neoadjuvant
systemic therapy
Breast
Axilla
Adjuvant therapy*
Clinical lymph
node positive
Axillary
clearance
Sentinel lymph node
biopsy positive
Clinical lymph
node negative
Surveillance (if adjuvant
therapy not indicated)
Axillary
clearance
*Indication for adjuvant radiotherapy:
i. BCS with clear margin
ii. Post-mastectomy
- ≥1 lymph node positive
- lymph node negative in T3 or T4
- positive margin not amenable for
surgery
No further
axillary surgery
but axillary
radiotherapy
may be
considered
Axillary
radiotherapy/
axillary
clearance
>2
Chemotherapy
± anti-HER2
therapy
Radiotherapy
Endocrine
therapy
If BCS
If mastectomy
Breast conserving
surgery (BCS) + whole
breast irradiation
Mastectomy ±
reconstruction
Clinical breast
examination ± imaging
≤2
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
ALGORITHM 2. MANAGEMENT OF LOCALLY ADVANCED
BREAST CANCER
Operable
Inoperable
Mastectomy &
axillary surgery
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
± anti-HER2 therapy
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
± anti-HER2 therapy
Chemotherapy
± trastuzumab
Breast conserving
surgery & axillary
surgery
Mastectomy &
axillary surgery
Operable
Inoperable
Surgery
Individualised
treatment
Radiotherapy
± hormone
therapy
Radiotherapy
± hormone therapy
± trastuzumab
Radiotherapy
± hormone therapy
± trastuzumab
Locally advanced breast cancer
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
ALGORITHM 3. MANAGEMENT OF METASTATIC
BREAST CANCER
No visceral crisis
Metastatic breast cancer
ER/PR+
ER/PRHER2-Negative
HER2-Negative
HER2-Positive
HER2-Positive
HER2-Negative
HER2-Positive
Pre-menopausal
Post-menopausal
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy
± Anti-HER2
Adjunct treatment:
Bisphosphonates
Consider local treatment
(radiotherapy/surgery) if indicated
Endocrine
therapy ±
Ovarian
ablation/
suppression
Endocrine therapy
Visceral crisis
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is the most important cancer among women worldwide
including in Malaysia. Regardless of gender, breast cancer contributed
to 19.0% of all new cancer cases diagnosed in 2012 - 2016 compared
with 17.7% in 2007 - 2011. The new cases of breast cancer had
increased from 32.1% to 34.1% of overall cancer among women in
similar period of comparison which gave a 2% increment. The AgeStandardised Incidence Rate (ASR) had increased to 34.1 per 100,000
populations in 2012 - 2016 from 31.1 per 100,000 population in 2007 -
2011. The incidence started to increase at the age of 25 and peaked at
the age of 60 to 64 years. Refer to Table 1 and Figure 1. The incidence
was highest among Chinese (40.7 per 100,000) followed by Indian
(38.1 per 100,000) and Malay (31.5 per 100.000). The overall lifetime
risk was 1 in 27, with 1 in 22 for Chinese, 1 in 23 for Indians and 1 in
30 for Malays.1, level III
Table 1. Female breast cancer incidence by year in Malaysia
Figure 1. Female breast cancer: comparison of age-specific
incidence rate by year in Malaysia
At diagnosis, 52.1% of the cases were diagnosed at early stage (stage
I and II) with mainly at stage II (34.5%). However, the percentage of late
diagnosis (stage III and IV) in the country had increased from 43.2% in
2007 - 2011 to 47.9% in 2012 - 2016 (refer to Figure 2).1, level III
Incidence per 100,000
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0-4
5-9
10-14
15-19
20-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
66-69
70-74
75+
2007-2011
2012-2016
Age group
All residents
2007 - 2011
2012 - 2016
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Number
18, 206
21, 634
4, 266
4, 076
4, 150
4, 518
4, 626
Crude rate
28.6
32.5
32.1
30.2
30.8
33.0
33.8
ASR
31.1
34.1
33.5
31.0
31.7
33.4
34.4
Cumulative
Risk
3.4
3.7
3.6
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.8
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Figure 2. Female breast cancer: comparison of staging
percentage by year in Malaysia
The overall 5-year relative survival (RS) for breast cancer is 66.8%.
Stage I and II breast cancer at diagnosis have a better relative survival,
being above 80% up to 10 years for Stage 1 and five years for Stage II.
However, it deteriorates faster for Stage III and IV. By ethnicity, Chinese
had the highest RS followed by Indians and Malays. International
comparison with selected countries in Asia, the 5-year RS in Malaysia
is higher than India and Thailand but lower than Singapore, China,
Korea and Japan.2, level II-2
Early diagnosis improves cancer outcomes by provision of effective
treatment, at lower cost and with less complex interventions. The
principles to achieve early diagnosis are relevant at all healthcare
levels. These are:3
• awareness of cancer symptoms and accessing care
• clinical evaluation, diagnosis and staging
• access to treatment
Over the years, many advancements in the management strategy are
observed including screening method, early diagnosis and treatment
modalities. Different strategies of breast cancer classification and
staging have evolved over the years. Intrinsic (molecular) subtyping is
essential in clinical trials and well understanding of the disease. Many
technologies are being developed to detect distant metastasis and
recurrent disease as well as to assess response to treatment. Advances
in molecular biology and pharmacology aids in better understanding of
breast cancer, enabling the design of effective therapy to target the
cancer and responds efficiently.
In view of the above findings, it is timely to update the CPG on
Management of Breast Cancer (Second Edition) to guide healthcare
providers in the management of the disease based on latest available
evidence.
2007-2011 (n=11,938)
2012-2016 (n=13,485)
40
35
30
25
20
10
0
15
5
Percentage
Stage l
Stage ll
Stage lll
Stage lV
19.9
17.5
23.1
25.1
20.1
22.8
37.0
34.5
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
2. RISK FACTOR
The cause of the vast majority of breast cancers remains unknown.
However, a number of risk factors has been established and can be
divided into non-modifiable and modifiable groups.
2.1 Non-modifiable
• Age
The risk of breast cancer increases with age.26 Based on latest
National Cancer Registry Report of Malaysia, the incidence started
to increase at the age of 25 and peaked at the age of 60 to 64
years.1
• Gender
Female has much higher risk of breast cancer compared with male.4
• Family history
The risk for breast cancer increases in women with family history
of breast cancer at young age and being a carrier of pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants in e.g. BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, ATM
and CHEK2.5 Refer to Chapter 8 on Familial Breast Cancer.
• Reproductive factors
Early menarche and late menopause are risk factors for breast
cancer.6, level II-2
 Young age at menarche (≤12 years old) increases risk of
luminal tumour (OR=1.39, 95%CI 1.23 to 1.57).
 Late menopause (≥50 years old) increases risk of luminal
tumour (OR=1.15, 95% CI 1.0 to 1.32) and Estrogen
Receptor Negative (ER-)/Progesterone Receptor Negative
(PR-) tumour (OR=1.19, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.43). Refer to Table 2.
• History of neoplastic disease of the breast
 Patients with previous history of breast cancer carry an
elevated risk of developing new primary breast cancer.4
 Patients with breast carcinoma in situ are at high risk to
develop invasive breast carcinoma.4
 Patients with atypical ductal hyperplasia and lobular hyperplasia
(atypical lobular hyperplasia and lobular carcinoma in-situ),
have clinically significant increased risk of developing breast
cancer.7, level III
• Breast density
The risk of breast cancer increases two times in scattered
fibroglandular density [Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System
(BI-RADS®) b] and four times in an extremely dense breast
(BI-RADS® d).4
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Absolute non-dense area (BI-RADS® a) reduces the risk of
breast cancer in pre-menopausal (OR=0.82, 95% CI 0.71 to
0.94) and post-menopausal (OR=0.85, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.96)
women.8, level II-2
Refer to Appendix 3 on Recommended Reporting System
(Breast Composition Illustrations).
2.2 Modifiable
• Reproductive factors
Nulliparity and lack of breastfeeding are risk factors for breast
cancer.6, level II-2
 Nulliparity increases risk of luminal tumour (OR=1.26, 95% CI
1.11 to 1.44).
 Lack of breastfeeding history increases the risk of all
molecular subtypes, ORluminal=1.35 (95% CI 1.05 to 1.74),
ORHER2 enriched=1.97 (95% CI 1.39 to 2.80) and ORtriplenegative=1.85 (95%CI 1.06 to 3.21).
 Older age at first live childbirth increases the risk of breast
cancer.26
• Hormonal factors
 Oral contraceptives (OC) have a small risk of breast cancer
(OR=1.521, 95% CI 1.25 to 1.85).9, level II-2
 Current OC use (HR=1.36, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.71), ≥10 years
duration of OC use (HR=1.29, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.54) and <10
years since last use (HR=1.36, 95% CI 1.15 to 1.61) are
associated with pre-menopausal breast cancer.10, level II-2
 Progestogen OC use ≥5 years is associated with Estrogen
Receptor Positive (ER+) breast cancer (HR=1.59, 95% CI
1.09 to 2.32).10, level II-2
 Combination hormone replacement therapy has a mild risk
for breast cancer.4
 Unopposed oestrogen use in hysterectomised women mildly
increases the risk of breast cancer and only after longer term
use (>15 years).4
• Lifestyle
 Being overweight or obese throughout adulthood increases
the risk of post-menopausal breast cancer.163
 Physical activity measured in metabolic equivalent of task
(MET) minutes/week shows dose-dependent effect on risk
of breast cancer. The higher the MET, the lower the risk as
shown below.11, level II-2
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• World Health Organization (WHO) recommends at least 600
MET minutes of total activity (irrespective of domains) per week
for health benefits; e.g. about 150 minutes/week of brisk walking
or 75 minutes/week of running
 Regular (≥3 cups per day) of green tea consumption is
associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer in Chinese
females (OR=0.79, 95% CI 0.65 to 0.95).12, level II-2
 Consumption of ≥2 cups of coffee per day reduces breast
cancer risk but nonsignificant (RR=0.98, 95% CI 0.97 to
1.00).13, level II-2
 A dietary folate intake has no effect on risk of breast cancer
(RR=0.98, 95% CI 0.90 to 1.05).14, level II-2
 Among pre- and post-menopausal women, soy isoflavone
intake reduces breast cancer risk with OR of 0.74 (95%
CI 0.64 to 0.85) and 0.75 (95% CI 0.63 to 0.86)
respectively.15, level II-2
 Alcohol (especially beer) consumed more than 10 g/day
especially among post-menopausal women is a risk factor for
developing invasive breast cancer.4
• Radiation exposure
 Multiple exposures of therapeutic radiation to the chest for
cancer at an early age e.g. Hodgkin’s disease pose a high
risk of developing breast cancer.4
 Radiotherapy (RT) for breast cancer treatment increases risk
of contralateral breast cancer.4
Physical activity in MET
minutes/week
Pooled RR (95% CI) of breast
cancer
<600
600 - 3999 (low active)
4000 - 7999 (moderately active)
≥8000 (highly active)
Reference
0.967 (0.937 to 0.998)
0.941 (0.904 to 0.981)
0.863 (0.829 to 0.900)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
3. SCREENING
Screening for breast cancer is performed in individuals without any
signs or symptoms of the disease for early detection and best chance
of survival.
Although breast self-examination is not a screening method, it is
advocated to raise awareness of breast cancer and empower women
to take responsibility of their own health.4 Clinical breast examination
(CBE) is an important component of clinical encounter to maximise
the earliest detection of palpable cancers.26 As the incidence of breast
cancer in Malaysia increases at the age of 35 years,1 CBE is advocated
to be initiated from this age.
In women of European descent, a number of risk assessment tools
[e.g. Breast and Ovarian Analysis of Disease Incidence and Carrier
Estimation Algorithm (BOADICEA), Gail, Tyrer Cuzick] have been
built using predominantly lifestyle factors and family history of cancers
in order to estimate an individual woman’s risk of breast cancer. For
example, NICE recommends unaffected women aged 35 years and
older and with no physical symptoms of breast cancer may be stratified
into four categories using BOADICEA risk assessment tool for the
purpose of screening recommendations:5
• average risk (<17% lifetime risk)
• moderate risk (>17% but <30% lifetime risk)
• high risk (>30% lifetime risk but no known genetic variant)
• high risk carriers of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants
Whilst the above tools are accurate for the population, they are less
useful for individual risk prediction. Notably, these tools generally
overestimate risk in the Asian population and ongoing efforts seek to
improve risk assessment for the Asian population by including genetic
factors and/or mammographic density.
In a local health technology assessment on various risk assessment
tools, the Gail model was shown to have good calibration and moderate
discriminative ability. However, it was not suitable to be introduced as one
of the strategies in the prevention of breast cancer under the Malaysian
National Cancer Control Programme yet as it needs further validation
to develop a well-fitted model that would have better predictive ability
tailored to Malaysian population. In addition, this model needs continual
validation to determine the consistency of its performance.16, level I
3.1 Screening of Unaffected Women
Digital breast tomosynthesis (DBT) + full-field digital mammography
(FFDM) yields higher detection rates of breast cancer lesion compared
with FFDM alone in asymptomatic women.17, level III
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The followings have been recommended for screening by the existing
guidelines:
• For women with average risk, screening mammography may be
performed every two years in those aged 50 - 74 years. Although
not recommended, women aged 40 - 49 years may be considered
for annual screening mammography after potential benefits and
harms of the screening have been discussed, as well as on the
their preference and breast cancer risk profile. Screening should
be continued for those women aged 70 - 74 years as long as they
are in a good health, expected to live 10 more years or longer and
do not have severe co-morbid conditions that could limit their life
expectancy.138
• For women of moderate risk, screening mammography may be
performed annually from 40 - 49 years of age, annually or biennially
from 50 - 59 and 3-yearly from 60 onwards.5
• For women of high risk, where no genetic variant has been
identified, screening mammography may be considered from
30 - 39 years of age, performed annually from 40 - 59 and 3-yearly
from 60 years onwards.5
• For carriers of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1,
BRCA2 and PALB2, annual magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
should be offered from 30 - 49 years of age, annual mammography
from 40 - 69 and 3-yearly mammography from 70 onwards.5
Ultrasound as a complementary imaging may be considered after a
mammography or breast MRI shows abnormality. It should not be used
as a screening tool.
Refer to Table 7 on Summary of recommendations on screening for
women with no personal history of breast cancer.
3.2 Surveillance of Affected Women
For women with personal history of breast cancer and increased risk
for recurrence or a second breast cancer, they should be offered yearly
mammography of the remnant breast and the contralateral breast for
five years. With regards of cost-effective strategy, NICE recommends
the following screening in women with previous history of breast
cancer:5
• For those aged 50 - 74 years and remain at high risk of breast
cancer (including BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and do not have a
TP53 mutation), annual mammographic surveillance should be
offered.
• For those aged 30 - 49 years and remain at high risk of breast
cancer including BRCA 1, BRCA2 or TP53 mutation, annual MRI
surveillance should be offered.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Consider annual MRI for women aged 20 - 69 years with a known
TP53 mutation or those untested but have a greater than 30%
probability of being TP53 carrier.
For those with personal history of breast cancer and dense breast
tissue, or diagnosed before the age 50, annual surveillance with breast
MRI is recommended.18, level III
Women who have received chest radiation before the age of 30, e.g.
in Hodgkin lymphoma, are recommended to do annual breast MRI and
mammography or digital breast tomosynthesis screening beginning at
the age of 25 or eight years after radiation, whichever is later.18, level III
Women at high risk should make decision to start screening with health
care providers, taking into accounts their personal circumstances and
preferences.
• For local setting, breast cancer screening is based on the risk of
developing the cancer:
 general population - women with:5
- no personal history of breast cancer
- no strong family history of breast cancer
 Individuals with high risk of developing breast cancer:5;18, level III
- BRCA mutation
- first-degree relatives of BRCA carrier who have not been tested
- history of chest irradiation at young age
- personal history(s) of breast cancer
- strong family history of breast or ovarian cancer
• first degree relatives: mother, father, siblings, children
• second degree relatives: grandparents, aunties, uncles,
nieces, nephews
Recommendation 1
• Screening mammography may be performed biennially in women
aged 50 - 74 years in the general population.
• For women of moderate risk, screening mammography may be
performed annually from 40 - 49 years of age, annually or biennially
from 50 - 59 and biennially from 60 onwards.
• For women of high risk of breast cancer, where no genetic variant
has been identified, screening mammography may be considered
from 30 - 39 years of age, performed annually from 40 - 59 and
biennially from 60 onwards.
• For carriers of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1,
BRCA2 and PALB2, annual MRI should be offered from 30 - 49
years of age, annual mammography from 40 - 69 and biennial
mammography from 70 onwards.
*Refer to the yellow box above
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
4. REFERRAL
There is no retrievable evidence on the referral criteria of patients with
signs and symptoms to breast clinic.
• Based on the consensus of CPG DG, the following conditions warrant
early referral as early as possible (within two weeks) to breast clinic
for further evaluation:
 women aged >35 years with signs and symptoms*
 high risk group with signs and symptoms*
 patients with clinical signs and symptoms of malignancy*
*General signs and symptoms:
• palpable mass
• breast pain
• nipple discharge
Signs of malignancy:
• hard and fixed mass
• asymmetric thickening/nodularity
• skin changes
 peau d’orange
 erythema
 nipple excoriation
 scaling or eczema
 skin ulcer
 satellite skin nodule
• blood-stained nipple discharge
• axillary mass
• image-detected suspicious lesion
Recommendation 2
• Patients with any of the following conditions should be referred early
(within two weeks) to breast or surgical clinic for further evaluation:
 women aged >35 years with signs and symptoms*
 high risk group with signs and symptoms*
 patients with clinical signs of malignancy*
*Refer to the preceding text.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
5. ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
5.1 Triple Assessment
• Triple assessment which consists of clinical assessment, imaging
[ultrasound (US) and/or mammography] and pathology (histology
and/or cytology) is an established method for the diagnosis of breast
cancer.4
5.1.1 Clinical
Adequate history taking to assess risk and thorough CBE are mandatory
in breast cancer diagnosis. The degree of suspicion of breast cancer
based on clinical breast examination is variable.
5.1.2 Imaging
a. Diagnostic
accuracy
of
mammography
combined
with
ultrasonography
Combined mammography and US assessment improve breast cancer
detection in symptomatic women above 35 years old and thus should be
offered in this group of patients. In women younger than 35 years old,
US should be used as the initial imaging modality in triple assessment.4
b. Screening and diagnostic accuracy of digital breast tomosynthesis
DBT, also known as 3D mammography, is a new screening and
diagnostic breast imaging tool to improve the early detection of breast
cancer. There was strong evidence on this modality.
In a good meta-analysis on studies in Europe and United States of
America, DBT + FFDM, compared to FFDM alone, yielded higher
detection of breast cancer lesions in asymptomatic women:17, level III
• sensitivity - 90.77% (95% CI 80.70 to 96.51) vs 60.00% (95% CI
47.10 to 71.96)
• specificity - 96.49% (95% CI 96.04 to 96.90) vs 95.55% (95% CI
95.04 to 96.01)
• reduction in recall rate: difference= -27.6 per 1000 screens (95%
CI -30.8 to -24.5)
• reduction of false positive rate: difference= -29.5 per 1000 screens
(95% CI -32.9 to -26.4)
In another meta-analysis, results of pooled diagnostic studies showed
significant incremental rate of 3.9 cancers (95% CI 2.7 to 5.1) per 1000
for DBT compared with FFDM.19, level III There was no quality assessment
reported in the meta-analysis.
A meta-analysis of seven moderate quality studies showed DBT had
a better diagnostic accuracy compared with FFDM for benign and
malignant lesions in breasts. The pooled DOR of DBT was 26.04 (95%
CI 8.70 to 77.95) compared with pooled DOR of 16.24 (95% CI 5.61 to
47.04) in DM.20, level III
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
A systematic review demonstrated the sensitivity of DBT ranging
between 69% and 100% and specificity ranging between 54% and
100%. The overall quality of the primary papers was low, with a risk of
bias and follow-up and limitations on applicability of the results.21, level II-2
Recommendation 3
• Digital breast tomosynthesis may be considered in screening and
diagnosis of breast cancer based on its availability.
c. Adequate Imaging Reporting System
Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS®) was
established by the American College of Radiology (ACR) in 1993. It
is designed to standardise breast imaging reporting and thus reduce
variations in the imaging interpretation. This enables radiologists to
communicate the findings, final assessment and recommendations on
specific management to the referring physicians clearly and consistently.
It also facilitates outcome monitoring and quality assessment.
BI-RADS® contains standardised terminology (descriptors) for
mammography, breast US and MRI for use in daily practice. The ACR
BI-RADS® Atlas 2013 is the updated version of the 2003 Atlas.22, level
III Refer to Appendix 3. ‘Borang Permohonan Pemeriksaan Radiologi’
(Breast Imaging Survey Form) has been developed by MoH to be used
in mammography reporting. Refer to Appendix 4.
Recommendation 4
• Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS®) is the
preferred reporting method in the management of breast cancer.
d. Accuracy of image-guided biopsy
All palpable masses should be imaged to see if there is discordance
in clinical and imaging size. Any discordance should lead to imageguided biopsy and free hand biopsies should be avoided to ensure
timely diagnosis.
Minimally invasive biopsy technique (MIBT) is the standard of care for
diagnosing most breast lesions. Image-guided MIBT is recommended
for both palpable and non-palpable lesions to increase accuracy of
sampling. US, if available, is recommended in patients with palpable
masses. If the lesion is non-palpable but visible sonographically, USguidance optimises patient’s comfort.23, level III
In all breast lesions, core needle biopsy or vacuum-assisted
technique is preferable to fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC)
for better characterisation of tumour type, marker analysis and
immunohistochemistry.23, level III
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Pathology and imaging concordance by MIBT shows a success rate of
90% or greater.23, level III
e. Management of discordance lesion
Repeat image-guided percutaneous core or vacuum-assisted needle
biopsy sampling is an alternative when the initial core biopsy results
are non-diagnostic or discordant with the imaging findings. Another
alternative is surgical excision.24, level III
Recommendation 5
• Minimally invasive biopsy technique (MIBT) with core needle is the
preferred diagnostic technique for both palpable and non-palpable
breast lesions.
• Repeat image-guided MIBT or consider surgical excision when the
initial core biopsy results are non-diagnostic or discordant with the
imaging findings.
f. Role of magnetic resonance imaging
MRI may be considered in the following clinical situations in breast
cancer:4; 18, level III; 25; 26
• invasive lobular cancer
• LCIS
• suspicion of multicentricity
• genetic high risk
• occult disease (T0 N+/M+ disease) - refer to Appendix 5 on TNM
Classification
• Paget’s disease without routine radiological evidence of underlying
tumour
• breast implants/foreign bodies
• diagnosis of recurrence in previous breast reconstruction
• follow-up after neo-adjuvant therapy
• dense breasts
• pre-operative planning in breast-conserving surgery (BCS)
Surgical decisions should not be based solely on the MRI findings.
Additional tissue sampling of areas of concern identified by breast MRI
is recommended.26
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
5.1.3 Laboratory Investigation
a. Histopathological examination
• Core needle biopsy has become a well-established tool for diagnosing
both palpable and non-palpable breast lesions. It is considered as
part of triple assessment of breast disease.
• If core needle biopsy is not available, FNAC may be considered
for pathological assessment of palpable breast lumps. In equivocal
FNAC, core biopsy should be performed for pathological diagnosis.
Adequate surgical pathology reporting of breast cancer using standard
proforma with minimum dataset should have:
• maximum diameter of invasive tumour
• location (side and quadrant), multifocality (presence of ≥2 foci of
cancer within the same breast quadrant)/multicentricity (presence
of ≥2 foci of cancer in different quadrants of the same breast)
• tumour type (histology according to WHO classification)
• histological grade
• lymph node involvement and total number of nodes examined
• resection margins
• lymphovascular invasion
• non-neoplastic breast changes
• hormone receptor status: ER/PR
• Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2)/c-erb B2
assessment
Refer to Appendix 6 on Histopathology Worksheet for Breast Biopsy/
Mastectomy.
• ER and PR receptor status should be assessed in all breast cancer
and cancer recurrence to determine the benefits of endocrine
therapy. Positive interpretation requires at least 1% of tumour cells
showing positive nuclear staining of any intensity. Receptor negative
is reported if <1% of tumour cells show staining of any intensity.27, level III
b. Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 Test
HER2 is a trans-membrane epidermal growth factor receptor that plays
an important role in tumour growth signalling pathway of breast cancer.
Assessment of HER2 status is essential to establish prognosis and to
determine patient eligibility for HER2 targeted therapy.
HER2 testing may be performed by various methods including
immunohistochemistry (IHC), fluorescent in-situ hybridisation (FISH),
chromogenic in-situ hybridisation (CISH) and silver-enhanced in-situ
hybridisation (SISH).4 The quality of HER2 testing encompasses tissue
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
handling process from the operating theatre to the laboratory, testing
protocols, scoring and interpretation of results.
HER2 test using immunohistochemistry should be performed on all
invasive breast cancer specimens.4 HER2 status can be accurately
assessed in core needle biopsy [sensitivity of 93% (95% CI 80.94%
to 98.5%) and specificity of 99.9% (95%CI 98.05% to 100%)].28, level III
NICE recommends that request the ER, PR and HER2 status of
all invasive breast cancers simultaneously at the time of initial
histopathological diagnosis.25
• If the IHC result is 3+, diagnosis is HER2 positive. If the result is 0 to
1+, diagnosis is HER2 negative.
In equivocal HER2 (IHC 2+, weak to moderate complete membrane
staining observed in >10% of tumour cells), American Society of
Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists recommends insitu hybridisation (ISH) reflex test using the same specimen or a new
specimen if available.29
Recommendation 6
• Estrogen and progesterone receptors status should be assessed in
all cases of breast cancer.
• Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) test using
immunohistochemistry should be performed on all invasive breast
cancer specimens.
• In-situ hybridisation test should be done only in equivocal HER2
(immunohistochemistry 2+) on invasive breast cancer specimens.
Histopathologic features suggestive of possible HER2 test discordance
and actions to be taken are shown in the table below.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Table 2. Histopathologic Features Suggestive of
Possible HER2 Test Discordance
Source: Wolff AC, Hammond MEH, Allison KH, et al. Human Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor 2 Testing in Breast Cancer: American Society of Clinical
Oncology/College of American Pathologists Clinical Practice Guideline
Focused Update. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(20):2105-2122
c. Accuracy of Ki67 as a predictor and prognostic marker
Ki67 (anti-MIB-1) has emerged as an immunohistochemistry test to
detect proliferative index of tumours.
In a cohort study on early breast cancer, high Ki67 predicted outcome
for all measures:30, level ll-2
• ipsilateral breast tumour recurrence/IBTR (HR=3.126, 95% CI
1.390 to 7.029)
• loco-regional recurrence/LRR (HR=3.759, 95% CI 1.923 to 7.340)
• distant metastasis-free survival/DMFS (HR=3.436, 95% CI 1.926
to 6.130)
Criteria to consider if there are concerns regarding discordance with
apparent histopathologic findings and possible false-negative or
false-positive HER2 test result.
A new HER2 test should not be ordered if the following histopathologic
findings occur and the initial HER2 test was negative:
• Histologic grade 1 carcinoma of the following types:
o Infiltrating ductal or lobular carcinoma, ER and PR positive
o Tubular (at least 90% pure)
o Mucinous (at least 90% pure)
o Cribriform (at least 90% pure)
o Adenoid cystic carcinoma (90% pure) and often triple negative
Similarly, a new HER2 test should be ordered if the following histopathologic
findings occur and the initial HER2 test was positive:
• Histologic grade 1 carcinoma of the following types:
o Infiltrating ductal or lobular carcinoma, ER and PR positive
o Tubular (at least 90% pure)
o Mucinous (at least 90% pure)
o Cribriform (at least 90% pure)
o Adenoid cystic carcinoma (90% pure) and often triple negative
If the initial HER2 test result in a core needle biopsy specimen of a primary
breast cancer is negative, a new HER2 test may be ordered on the excision
specimen if one of the following is observed:
• Tumour is grade 3
• Amount of invasive tumour in the core biopsy specimen is small
• Resection specimen contains high-grade carcinoma that is morphologically
distinct from that in the core
• Core biopsy result is equivocal for HER2 after testing by both ISH and IHC
• There is doubt about the handling of the core biopsy specimen (long is
chaemic time, short time in fixative, different fixative) or the test is suspected
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• breast cancer-specific survival/BCSS (HR=4.948, 95% CI 2.530 to
9.674)
Ki67 was also able to reclassify luminal subtype from Luminal A (LA) to
Luminal B (LB). The LB subtype independently predicted:
• LRR (HR=3.612, 95% CI 1.555 to 8.340)
• DMFS (HR=3.023, 95% CI 1.501 to 6.087)
• BCSS (HR=3.617, 95% CI 1.629 to 8.031)
However, it did not predict IBTR (HR=2.483, 95% CI 0.982 to 6.281).
Contradictory, in another study on early breast cancer after BCS,
Ki-67 did not predict overall survival (OS), cause-specific survival, local
relapse-free survival, DMFS, recurrence-free survival and loco-regional
recurrence-free survival (p>0.05).31, level II-2
A more recent cohort study on LB node negative breast cancer showed
that low Ki67 score (<14%) significantly predicted a lower rate of
relapse (9%) compared with high Ki67 score (≥14%) with a rate of
relapse (18%).32, level II-2
The limitation in all three studies above is that blinding was not
mentioned in the methodology.
• Lack of consistency in method and interpretation across laboratories
limits Ki67 value. Contradicting evidence warrants better studies to
address the clinical utility of Ki67. Thus, the use of Ki67 is based on
clinician’s discretion.
• Molecular
subtypes
of
breast
cancer
detected
by
immunohistochemistry
According to the 2011 St. Gallen consensus conference, there are five
breast cancer molecular subtypes based on the presence of receptors
on the tumour cells and Ki67 proliferative index. Refer to Table 3.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Table 3. St. Gallen classification (2011): Definition of
subtypes of breast cancer
*May be CK5/6 + and/or EGFR+
Source: Falck AK, Fernö M, Bendahl PO, et al. St Gallen molecular subtypes in
primary breast cancer and matched lymph node metastases--aspects on
distribution and prognosis for patients with luminal A tumours: results from a
prospective randomised trial. BMC Cancer. 2013;13:558
5.2 Staging
• The staging is based on current The American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual (8th Edition).33, level III Refer to
Appendix 5 for further details.
5.2.1 Early breast cancer
In patients with asymptomatic early breast cancer (including ductal
carcinoma in situ, stage I, stage IIA and stage IIB), imaging screening
[chest radiograph, bone scan, liver ultrasonography and computerised
tomography (CT) scan] for metastasis should not routinely be
performed.4 There is no latest update on imaging investigations in this
group of patients.
However, in patients with signs and symptoms of lung, liver and bone
diseases, or abnormal related laboratory tests, the above imaging
investigations should be performed. A bone scan is indicated in patients
presenting with localised bone pain or elevated alkaline phosphatase
if sites are not imaged or visualised by plain radiograph or CT scan.4
NCCN and NICE give similar recommendations as above.25; 26
Luminal A
Luminal B with
HER2 negative
Luminal B with
HER2 positive
HER2 enriched
Basal-like
(triple negative)*
Molecular
subtypes of breast
cancer
ER and
PR (IHC)
HER2
(IHC/ISH)
Ki67
(IHC)
ER+ and/or PR+
ER+ and/or PR+
ER+ and/or PR+
ER-, PRER-, PRHER2-
HER2HER2+
HER2+
HER2Ki67 <14%
Ki67 ≥14%
Any Ki67
Any Ki67
Any Ki67
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Recommendation 7
• Patients with early breast cancer and:
 asymptomatic, routine imaging screening* for metastasis should
not be performed
 with signs and symptoms of lung, liver and bone metastases, or
abnormal related laboratory tests, routine imaging investigations
should be performed
 with localised bone pain, elevated alkaline phosphatase or
symptoms suggestive of bone metastases, bone scintigraphy
should be used if plain radiography or computed tomography
staging is negative
*Refer to the preceding text.
5.2.2 Locally Advanced Breast Cancer (Stage III)
In locally advanced breast cancer (LABC), more imaging should be
done for staging. This includes CT scan, bone scintigraphy, MRI and
positron emission tomography/computerised tomography (PET/CT).25; 26
• LABC is cancer that has not spread beyond the breast or to other
parts of the body. This includes:34, level III
 large breast tumours (>5 cm in diameter)
 cancers that involve skin of the breast or underlying chest wall
muscles
 cancers that involve multiple ipsilateral axillary, internal mammary
or infra/supra-clavicular lymph nodes
 inflammatory breast cancer
5.2.3 Advanced (Metastatic) Breast Cancer (Stage IV)
In advanced (metastatic) breast cancer similar imaging as in Section
5.2.2 should be done for assessment of bony and visceral metastases.25; 26
Recommendation 8
• Patients with locally advanced and advanced breast cancer, imaging
modalities e.g. computed tomography, bone scintigraphy, magnetic
resonance imaging or positron emission tomography/computerised
tomography should be done to assess the extent of disease
depending on the indications.
Most malignant tumours have a higher glucose metabolism than
normal tissue and thus take up more (18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose PET
(18FDG PET). With computed tomography (CT), functional information
can be assessed anatomically.4
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The use of PET or PET/CT scanning is not indicated in the staging
of clinical stage I, II or operable III (T3N1) breast cancer. The
recommendation against the use of PET scanning is supported by:26
• high false-negative rate in the detection of lesions that are small
(<1 cm) and/or low grade
• low sensitivity for detection of axillary nodal metastases
• low prior probability of having detectable metastatic disease
• high rate of false-positive scans
18FDG PET/CT is most helpful in situations where standard staging
studies are equivocal or suspicious, especially in the setting of locally
advanced or metastatic disease.26
A good meta-analysis showed that 18FDG PET/CT had excellent
diagnostic performance compared with conventional imaging (CT
thorax, abdomen and pelvis) for diagnosis of distant metastases in
breast cancer:35, level III
• Pooled sensitivity for 18FDG-PET/CT was 0.97 (95% CI 0.84 to
0.99) and specificity 0.95 (95% CI 0.93 to 0.97)
• Pooled sensitivity for conventional imaging was 0.56 (95% CI 0.38
to 0.74) and specificity 0.91 (95% CI 0.78 to 0.97)
In another meta-analysis, 18FDG PET/CT showed better performance
compared with bone scintigraphy for the detection of bone metastases
in breast cancer:36, level III
• 18FDG PET-CT: sensitivity of 0.93 (95% CI 0.82 and 0.98) and
specificity of 0.99 (95% CI 0.95 to 1.00)
• Bone scintigraphy, sensitivity of 0.81 (95% CI 0.58 to 0.93) and
specificity 0.96 (95% CI 0.76 to 1.00)
Recommendation 9
• (18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed
tomography (18FDG PET) may be considered when standard imaging
studies are equivocal or suspicious in locally advanced or metastatic
disease.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
6. TREATMENT
6.1 Multi-Disciplinary Team
Multidisciplinary team (MDT) meetings provide an opportunity to
multiple specialties to collaboratively integrate diagnoses and treatment
decisions for breast cancer patients. Members of MDT for breast cancer
should consist of:
• breast surgeon
• radiologist
• pathologist
• oncologist
• breast care nurse
Other relevant healthcare providers (e.g. anaesthetist, plastic surgeon,
radiotherapist, geneticist, gynaecologist, social worker etc.) may be
involved when required.
The objective of MDT meetings is to improve patient care and treatment
outcomes by achieving consensus among all participating specialists
after considering all data and findings from those involved. It has been
shown to reduce mortality of breast cancer by 18% (HR=0.82, 95% CI
0.74 to 0.91).37, level II-2
Recommendation 10
• Multidisciplinary team approach should be considered in the
management of breast cancer to improve clinical outcomes.
6.2 Surgery
6.2.1 Early breast cancer
a. Adequate tumour-free margin in breast-conserving surgery
i. Invasive carcinoma
BCS with negative margin followed by adjuvant RT is an effective local
treatment in treating early breast cancer. However, the extent of the
negative margin remains controversial.
In a meta-analysis involving 33 studies on stage I and II invasive breast
carcinoma, a two-fold increase in IBTR (OR=2.44, 95% CI 1.97 to
3.03) was observed in patients with positive margins (ink on tumour)
compared with negative margins following BCS. The median followup was 79.2 months. However, margins wider than “no ink on tumour”
were not associated with lower incidence of IBTR.38, level III
The above findings were supported by another meta-analysis.39, level III
However, the quality of primary papers in both meta-analyses was not
well reported.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• No tumour at ink margin on histopathological examination is adequate
for BCS in invasive breast carcinoma.
ii. Ductal carcinoma in situ
There is a variation in the definition of adequate margin for
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) following BCS in the range of
0 - 2 mm.4; 25; 40; 41, level III; 42
In a large retrospective cohort study on women with DCIS, treated with
BCS without adjuvant RT, larger negative margins were significantly
associated with a lower LR rate compared with positive margin i.e.
tumour on ink (HR of 0.75, 0.58 and 0.31 for negative margin widths of
≤2 mm, >2 - 10 mm and >10 mm respectively). In those with negative
margins of <2 mm and received RT, the LR rate was reduced with a HR
of 0.29 (p<0.0001).43, level II-2
Similar outcome was reproduced in another study on DCIS patients
who underwent BCS with a median follow-up of 8.7 years. There was no
difference in LRR in those with a negative margin <2 mm and adjuvant
RT compared with those having ≥2 mm without RT (HR=0.77, 95% CI
0.19 to 3.23).44, level II-2
Recommendation 11
• In women treated with breast conserving surgery for ductal carcinoma
in situ of <2 mm margin, the benefits and risks of further treatment
(surgery or radiotherapy) should be discussed to reduce the risk of
local recurrence.
b. Treatment after sentinel lymph node biopsy
Axillary lymph nodes dissection (ALND) in early breast cancer with
clinically node-negative patients has largely been abandoned. This is
attributed to upper limb lymphoedema, paraesthesia, seroma and motor
nerve injury risks from this procedure. Completion of axillary surgery is
no longer standard practice for up to two positive sentinel lymph nodes
(SLNs) based on two major phase III non-inferiority randomised clinical
trials (RCTs) discussed below.
The American College of Surgeons Oncology Group Z0011 study was
on cT1-T2N0 breast cancer patients who underwent breast conserving
surgery (BCS) with up to two positive SLNs identified by frozen section,
touch preparation or haematoxylin-eosin staining on tissue sections. It
showed sentinel lymph nodes dissection (SLND) alone was not inferior
in survival and local recurrence (LR) compared with SLND followed by
ALND with the following findings:45, level I
• HR for OS=0.79 (90% CI 0.56 to 1.10)
• HR for disease free survival (DFS)=0.82 (95% CI 0.58 to 1.17)
• LR of 1.6% for SLND vs 3.1% for ALND (p=0.11)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The After Mapping of the Axilla: Radiotherapy or Surgery (AMAROS)
trial involved cT1-T2N0 breast cancer patients who underwent either
BCS or mastectomy with positive SLNs. The patients were randomised
to either axillary dissection or axillary RT. ALND and axillary RT after a
positive SLNs provided excellent and comparable axillary control [HR
for OS was 1.17 (95% CI 0.85 to 1.63) and DFS 1.18 (95% CI 0.93
to1.51).46, level I In both studies, the surgical morbidities (lymphoedema,
paraesthesia, wound infection and seromas) were higher in the ALND
group.
The above findings were supported by a meta-analysis study on similar
group of patients (which included the AMAROS trial) showing a HR of
1.09 (95% CI 0.75 to 1.43) for OS and 1.01 (95% CI 0.58 to 1.45) for
DFS. Axillary recurrence rate (p>0.05) and lymphoedema was higher
in the ALND group (23.2% vs 10.8%).47, level I The primary papers used
were of low quality.
• Clinically lymph node negative referred to:
 no evidence of axillary lymph node involvement on physical
examination and imaging studies
 negative on cyto/histopathology in case of a suspicious axillary
lymph node
Recommendation 12
• In early breast cancer patients:
 with clinically lymph nodes negative who have breast conserving
surgery and sentinel lymph nodes (SLNs) biopsy, no further
axillary surgery is needed in two or less positive SLNs but axillary
radiotherapy may be considered
 with clinically lymph nodes negative who have mastectomy and
SLNs biopsy with two or less positive SLNs, axillary treatment
either radiotherapy or surgery should be offered
6.2.2 Locally advanced breast cancer
According to NNCN guidelines, neoadjuvant systemic therapy is
indicated in women with inoperable breast cancer. It can render
inoperable cancer to resectable cancer.26
Recommendation 13
• Inoperable breast cancer should be referred for neoadjuvant systemic
therapy prior to surgical intervention.
a. Breast conserving surgery following neoadjuvant systemic
therapy
Neoadjuvant systemic therapy can increase rate of BCS and benefits in
operable breast cancer with BCS intention.26
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
A meta-analysis showed no difference in LR and regional recurrence
between BCS and mastectomy in LABC with good response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). However the DFS (OR=2.35 95%
CI 1.84 to 3.01) and OS (OR=2.12 95% CI 1.51 to 2.98) were shown to
be higher in BCS.48, level II-2
• BCS following neoadjuvant systemic therapy can be considered in
suitable patients if expertise and facilities are available.
6.2.3 Timing for breast reconstruction (with or without prosthesis)
in breast cancer requiring post-operative radiotherapy
Post-mastectomy radiation therapy (PMRT) has detrimental effect
on the aesthetic outcome and associated with a higher complication
rate following breast reconstruction (BR). In cases where PMRT
is anticipated, the optimum timing and methods of BR need to be
considered before the surgery.
When an immediate BR is intended, a two-stage implant-based
reconstruction is recommended.26; 41, level III; 49, level III The first stage
involves placement of tissue expander (TE) followed by expansion of
the expander within 1 - 6 months. In the second stage, the TE can
be exchanged with a permanent implant either prior or after radiation
therapy.26; 49, level III
A recent systematic review involving 1,565 two-stage implant-based
reconstructive surgeries showed no significant difference in implant
failure rate between TE radiation and implant radiation. The infection
rate was significantly higher in the former (21.03% vs 9.69%). In one
of the primary papers used in the review, patients with TE radiation
have the best aesthetic results compared with patients on permanent
implant radiation (75.0 vs 67.6%, p<0.01) and lower rates of grade IV
capsular contracture (1.22 vs 6.3%, p<0.01).50, level II-2 However, there
was no quality assessment of the primary papers including possible
confounding mentioned in the systematic review.
In delayed reconstruction in a previously irradiated patient, an
autologous tissue reconstruction is the preferred method.26 Due to
paucity of data, the optimum timing of autologous reconstruction in the
setting of PMRT is still unknown.
Delayed reconstruction is associated with significantly lower risks of
overall (OR=0.38, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.62) or major complications (OR=0.52,
95% CI 0.31 to 0.89) compared with immediate procedures.51, level II-2
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
6.2.4 Metastatic breast cancer
a. Surgery on primary tumour
Patients with stage IV breast cancer has poor prognosis with 5-year
survival rate of 27%.52, level III
In a RCT, no benefits were observed between surgical resection
and non-surgical intervention for primary tumour in metastatic breast
carcinoma in terms of:53, level I
• OS (HR=0.691, 95% CI 0.358 to 1.333)
• time to distant progression (HR=0.598, 95% CI 0.343 to 1.043)
• time to loco-regional progression including breast and regional
lymph nodes (HR=0.933, 95% CI 0.375 to 2.322)
The limitation of this evidence was it being under-powered.
A Cochrane systematic review showed no difference in OS between
breast surgery plus systemic therapy and systemic therapy alone
(HR=0.83, 95% CI 0.53 to 1.31) for primary tumour in metastatic breast
cancer (MBC). However, local progression free survival (PFS) was
improved (HR=0.22, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.57) but distant PFS was shorter
(HR=1.42, 95% CI 1.08 to 1.86). It was not possible to make definitive
conclusions on the benefits and risks of breast surgery for MBC in view
of only two low quality RCTs were used in the review.54, level I
Surgery after initial systemic therapy may be considered in patients
requiring palliation of symptoms or with impending complications e.g.
fungating tumour, pain, bleeding and ulceration.26
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend surgical resection for
primary tumour to improve survival in MBC. However, the decision for
surgery is individualised for palliative intent.
b. Local treatment
i. Bone
Bone metastases in MBC have a more indolent behaviour compared to
visceral metastases. Nevertheless, it may lead to debilitating skeletalrelated events (SREs) e.g. bone pain, pathological fractures, cord
compression and hypercalcemia.
Treatment options to prevent or delay SREs include RT, endocrine
treatment, molecular targeted therapy and bisphosphonates.
RT can give adequate pain control in 75 - 85 % of patients even without
analgesics. Surgical stabilisation or decompression followed by RT
are usually indicated for long bone fracture and symptomatic spinal
metastases.55, level III
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Surgery for symptomatic thoraco-lumbar spinal metastases in
breast carcinoma shows a 30-day mortality rate of 4.9%, a 3-month
survival rate of 81.5 % and, improvement of neurological function and
ambulation.56, level II-2
ii. Lung
There is limited evidence to establish a survival advantage of pulmonary
metastasectomy. However, a cohort study showed that resection of lung
metastases from breast cancer may offer survival benefit for patients
with disease free interval >36 months (p=0.0007), unilateral pulmonary
metastases (p=0.0267) and complete metastasectomy (p=0.0153).57, level II-2
iii. Liver
Treatments of liver metastasis are liver resection and local ablation
(radio-frequency, thermal and cryo-ablation, etc.).
Systemic reviews found that liver resection for breast cancer liver
metastasis offered survival advantage in carefully selected patients
with isolated liver metastases and in those with well controlled
minimal extra-hepatic disease. Liver resection carried low postoperative mortality rate if performed in large-volume hepatobiliary
centres.58 - 59, level III The primary papers included in the reviews were of
low quality.
In a study on breast cancer patients with <5 liver metastases with or
without bone metastasis but no other metastasis, there was significantly
better survival rates in those treated with liver resection compared
with matched non-surgically treated individuals (chemo- or hormonal
treatment).60, level III
A case-control study demonstrated no survival benefits in patients
underwent hepatic resection or ablation for isolated breast cancer
liver metastasis compared with patients receiving standard medical
care.61, level II-2
iv. Brain
The surgical management of breast cancer with brain metastases is
controversial as there is no strong evidence to date.
In local practice, surgery followed by brain RT is suggested in patients
with single or small number of potentially resectable, brain metastases,
having good performance status and with no or well-controlled other
metastatic disease. Whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) alone is reserved
for patients with poor performance status and multiple unresectable
metastases. However, stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) or stereotactic
fractionated radiotherapy (SRT) is becoming increasingly popular as
an adjunctive treatment to surgery. It is a minimally invasive outpatient
procedure which delivers high dose of radiation precisely to the tumour.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
A retrospective cohort study which included breast carcinoma found
that gross total resection with SRS was associated with reduced LR
(HR=0.32, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.6) and longer OS (HR=0.6, 95% CI 0.39 to
0.91) compared with SRS alone in patients with limited number of large
brain metastases (>4 cm3 or 2 cm in diameter).62, level II-2
Recommendation 14
• An individualised treatment may be offered in selected patients with
metastatic breast cancer.
6.2.5 Loco-regional recurrence
All patients with LRR should be managed by an MDT to discuss all
suitable treatment options.
As there is no retrievable evidence on treatment for LRR in breast
cancer, the treatment algorithm is based on NCCN guidelines as shown
in Figure 3.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Figure 3. Treatment of local and regional recurrence
Adapted: National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Breast Cancer Version 1.2019. NCCN; 2019
Local only
recurrence
Initial treatment with BCS +
radiotherapy
Initial treatment with mastectomy
and no prior radiation therapy
Initial treatment with mastectomy
+ level I/II axillary dissection
and prior radiation therapy
Total mastectomy + axillary lymph
node staging if level I/II axillary
dissection not previously done
Surgical resection if possible
Surgical resection if possible +
radiotherapy
Regional
only or Local
and regional
recurrence
Axillary recurrence
Supraclavicular recurrence
Internal mammary node
recurrence
Surgical resection if possible +
radiotherapy if possible
Radiotherapy if possible
Radiotherapy if possible
Consider systemic
therapy
• Adjuvant endocrine
therapy
• Pre-operative/
Adjuvant
chemotherapy
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The decision for further systemic therapy should be individualised based
on factors e.g. tumour biology, previous treatment, length of diseasefree interval and patient-related factors (co-morbidities, preferences,
etc.).63
Recommendation 15
• An individualised approach should be offered in patients with locoregional recurrent breast cancer.
6.3 Systemic Therapy
Refer to Appendix 7 on Medications in Systemic Therapy of Breast
Cancer and Their Common Side Effects
6.3.1 Neoadjuvant therapy
Neoadjuvant therapy in breast cancer refers to the administration of
treatment with the intent of downstaging the tumour and, improve
operability and surgical outcomes.
a. Chemotherapy
For NACT in LABC, refer to Section 6.2.2.a.
For most patients with early breast cancer, chemotherapy is given
following surgery. However, a meta-analysis showed that NACT can
reduce tumour size leading to higher rate of BCS compared with
adjuvant chemotherapy (64.8% vs 49.0%; RR=1.28, 95% CI 1.22 to
1.34). On the other hand, those receiving NACT had a higher rate of
LR (21.4% vs 15.9%; RR=1.37, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.61). There was no
difference in breast cancer mortality between the two groups (34.4% vs
33.7%; RR=1.06, 95% CI 0.95 to 1.18).64, level I
Not all cases will respond equally to NACT in early breast cancer. A
meta-analysis showed that highest pathological complete response
(pCR) rate to NACT was seen in triple negative tumour and HER2positive tumour.65, level I
There was no quality assessment mentioned in both meta-analyses.
• Triple negative and HER2-positive tumours have increased
frequencies of pCR response following NACT in early breast cancer.
Recommendation 16
• Neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be offered to patients with triple
negative or HER2-positive early breast cancer to enable breast
conserving surgery but its benefits and risks need to be discussed
with the patients.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
b. Endocrine therapy
The role of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy (NET) in breast cancer
remains unclear due to concern of delayed time to clinical response
compared with systemic chemotherapy. Thus, it is generally reserved
for candidates who are unsuitable for chemotherapy or surgery.
A meta-analysis showed no significant differences between NET and
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) in clinical response rate, radiological
response rate, pathological response rate and BCS rate in ER+ breast
cancer. The toxicity profile was significantly lower in the NET arm.
However, these findings are based on two phase II RCTs and one
phase III RCT which was terminated earlier due to poor accrual.66, level I
In a subgroup analysis of seven RCTs in the meta-analysis, increased
clinical response rate (OR=1.69, 95% CI 1.36 to 2.10), radiological
response rate (OR=1.49, 95% CI 1.18 to 1.89) and BCS rate (OR=1.62,
95% CI 1.24 to 2.12) were seen in aromatase inhibitors (AIs) compared
with tamoxifen.66, level I
NICE recommends to consider NET for post-menopausal women with
ER+ invasive breast cancer as an option to reduce tumour size if there
is no definite indication for chemotherapy.25
Recommendation 17
• Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy, preferably aromatase inhibitors, may
be considered in post-menopausal women with hormone-receptor
positive breast cancer who are not suitable for chemotherapy.
c. Anti-HER2 therapy
HER2 is overexpressed in 15 - 20% of breast cancer and is associated
with an aggressive clinical course of the disease.67 It is well-known that
patients diagnosed with HER2-positive breast cancer need to be treated
with a combination of anti-HER2-directed therapy and chemotherapy in
adjuvant setting. Evidence is emerging on its use in neoadjuvant setting
as discussed below.
In 2011, a pooled analysis of two RCTs in patients with pathologically
confirmed and untreated HER2-positive early breast cancer in
neoadjuvant setting showed that the probability to achieve pCR was
higher in the combined trastuzumab and chemotherapy group than in
chemotherapy alone (RR=2.07, 95% CI 1.39 to 2.46). The relapse free
rate was also in favour of the combination arm (RR=0.67, 95% CI 0.48
to 0.94). The addition of trastuzumab did not increase the incidence
of neutropenia, neutropenic fever or cardiac adverse events.68, level I
Quality assessment was not mentioned in the study.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Positive outcomes with the addition of trastuzumab to NACT prompted
further study on dual anti-HER2 blockade in this setting with the
addition of pertuzumab to trastuzumab and chemotherapy. Pertuzumab
is a humanised monoclonal antibody directed at the dimerisation
domain of HER2. Trastuzumab and pertuzumab have complementary
mechanisms of action due to their different binding sites. In the phase II
Neosphere trial on women with locally advanced, inflammatory, or early
HER2-positive breast cancer, the combination of chemotherapy plus
dual anti-HER2 therapy induced a pCR of 45.8% (95% CI 36.1 to 55.7)
compared with 29% for trastuzumab + docetaxel, 24% for pertuzumab
+ docetaxel and 16.8% for dual HER2-blockade without any systemic
chemotherapy.69, level I
In a phase II TRYPHAENA trial, a study which had cardiac safety as
its primary endpoint and a three-arm randomisation, preoperative
treatment with pertuzumab and trastuzumab given along with
anthracycline-containing (concurrent or sequential) or anthracyclinefree standard chemotherapy regimens to patients with operable, locally
advanced, or inflammatory HER2-positive breast cancer showed pCR
rates in all treatment arms ranging from 57% to 66%. The mean change
in left ventricular ejection fraction was similar in all treatment arms.70, level I
NICE mentions that under National Health Service, 75% of neoadjuvant
therapy regimens for patients with HER2-positive cancers contain
trastuzumab. NICE also recommends pertuzumab, in combination with
trastuzumab and chemotherapy, as an option for neoadjuvant therapy
of patients with locally advanced, inflammatory or early-stage breast
cancer at high risk of recurrence.25
NCCN recommends chemotherapy and trastuzumab-based treatment
for patients with HER2-positive breast cancer who are candidates
for pre-operative systemic therapy. As for dual HER-2 blockade, a
pertuzumab containing regimen may be administered pre-operatively
to high risk patients i.e. ≥T2 or ≥N1 early stage breast cancer.26
Recommendation 18
• Chemotherapy and trastuzumab-based treatment should be offered
to patients with HER2-positive breast cancer who require neoadjuvant
therapy.
• Addition of pertuzumab as dual HER2 blockade may be considered
in high risk patients*.
*Refer to the preceding text.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Subcutaneous trastuzumab
In a large multicentre RCT, the effectiveness and overall safety profile of
subcutaneous (SC) trastuzumab were non-inferior to intravenous (IV)
formulation in both neoadjuvant and adjuvant setting in patients with
HER2-positive, clinical stage I-III breast cancer. Pathological complete
response was achieved by 42.2% (95% CI 36.5 to 48.0) of patients in
SC group vs 37.4% (95% CI 31.9 to 43.1) in those of IV group with the
difference between groups of 4·7% (95% CI -4·0 to 13·4). The adverse
event of any grade was comparable between the two groups.71, level I
• SC trastuzumab is an alternative to IV trastuzumab in both neoadjuvant
and adjuvant setting in patients with HER2-positive, clinical stage I-III
breast cancer.
6.3.2 Adjuvant therapy
Adjuvant therapy is used after surgery to reduce the rate of cancer
recurrence. It may include chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, targeted
therapy or RT.
St. Gallen international consensus panel of experts developed a series
of guidelines and recommendations for selection of adjuvant systemic
therapy for breast cancer patients based on risk categories (refer to
Table 4). These are widely used by many oncologists and adapted in
various CPG worldwide, including the previous edition of Malaysian
CPG on Management of Breast Cancer.
Table 4. Risk categories of breast cancer for
adjuvant systemic therapy
Source: Persing, Monika & Grosse, Regina. (2007). Current St. Gallen Recommendations
on Primary Therapy of Early Breast Cancer*. Breast Care. 2. 137-140
Low risk
Intermediate risk
High risk
pN0 and all of the
following criteria:
• size of tumour
maximum 2 cm
• Grade 1
• no vessel invasion
• ER/PR+
• HER2-negative
• age ≥35 years old
pN0 and at least 1
further criterion:
• size of tumour >2 cm
• Grade 2/3
• vessel invasion
• HER2 overexpression
• age <35 years old
• pN+ (N1 - 3) and
HER2-negative
pN+ (N1 - 3) and HER2
overexpression or pN+
(N≥4)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
a. Chemotherapy
Adjuvant chemotherapy has an established role in eradicating
micrometastasis, thus improving survival.4 Generally, adjuvant
chemotherapy is recommended for intermediate or high risk patients.
In assessing absolute benefit of systemic adjuvant therapy, NICE
recommends the use of PREDICT tool, an online calculator, that
is available from the UK NHS website. However, in local setting, a
validation study of the tool concludes that while the tool is generally
accurate, it needs to be used with caution in patients who are <40 years
old and those who have received neoadjuvant chemotherapy.72
Taxane-based chemotherapy are incorporated into the management
of early and locally advanced breast cancer. Three meta-analyses
addressed the effectiveness and safety of taxanes.
In the first meta-analysis, taxane-based regimen improved DFS
(OR=0.82, 95% CI 0.76 to 0.88) and OS (OR=0.83, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.91)
compared with non-taxane-based regimen in non-MBC. There were no
significant differences in the indirect comparison between docetaxel
and paclitaxel. However, with nodal positive patients, docetaxel
showed greater benefit than paclitaxel in OS (OR=0.79, 95% CI 0.63 to
0.98). The best method of administering paclitaxel was weekly and for
docetaxel tri-weekly.73, level l
In another meta-analysis, sequential scheduling taxane-anthracycline
showed advantages in both DFS (RR=0.90, 95% CI 0.84 to 0.98)
and OS (RR=0.88 95% CI 0.79 to 0.98) compared with concurrent
scheduling regimen in early breast cancer.74, level I
In terms of safety, taxane-anthracycline regimen reduced the
incidence of leukaemia (RR=0.40, 95 % CI 0.18 to 0.90), venous
thrombosis (RR=0.49, 95 % CI 0.29 to 0.84) and severe cardiac toxicity
(RR=0.41, 95% CI 0.26 to 0.66) compared with anthracycline-based
regimen in early breast cancer. However, this combination showed
higher incidence of neurotoxicity (RR=5.97, 95% CI 1.72 to 20.65) and
non-recurrent death (RR=1.79, 95% CI 1.06 to 3.04).75, level I
There was no mention on quality assessment in the three metaanalyses.
Recommendation 19
• Taxane-based adjuvant chemotherapy should be offered in patients
requiring adjuvant chemotherapy especially in node positive breast
cancer.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
b. Endocrine therapy
Five years of adjuvant endocrine therapy is the standard of care for
hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. The risk of disease recurrence
extends well beyond five years after diagnosis and several trials have
been performed in recent decade to look into the benefit of extending
endocrine therapy beyond the initial five years.
In an RCT, 10 years of tamoxifen reduced the risk of recurrence
compared with the standard five years use (RR=0.84, 95% CI 0.76 to
0.94). The breast cancer mortality was also reduced (RR=0.97, 95% CI
0.79 to 1.18) and continued further after reaching 10 years of treatment
(RR=0.71, 95% CI 0.58 to 0.88). Cumulative risk of endometrial cancer
was 3.1% in extended treatment group and 1.6% in standard treatment
group (RR=1.74, 95% CI 1.30 to 2.34).76, level I
In a landmark RCT, the addition of letrozole for five years following five
years of tamoxifen treatment improved DFS (HR=0.57, 95% CI 0.43
to 0.75), but there was no OS benefit (HR=0.76, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.21).
However, hot flushes, arthralgia and arthritis were the most significant
side effects with the extended combination treatment.77, level I
Extended AI treatment for additional five years following initial five years
of AI treatment does not show better DFS (HR=0.85, 95% CI 0.73 to
0.999) or OS (HR=1.15, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.44).78, level I
• Current options for adjuvant endocrine therapy in hormone receptorpositive breast cancer include:
 tamoxifen alone for five years
 AIs alone for five years
 sequential treatment with tamoxifen and AIs for five years
 tamoxifen up to 10 years
 tamoxifen followed by extended AIs for 10 years
Recommendation 20
• Adjuvant extended endocrine therapy may be offered to hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer.
• Monitoring risk of osteoporotic fracture and management of
bone health in patients on aromatase inhibitors
AIs are commonly used in post-menopausal breast cancer patients.
However, their use is associated with risk of fracture due to bone loss.79
Risk of fracture can be predicted by measuring patient’s bone mineral
density using dual‑energy X‑ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan. NICE
and NCCN recommend all patients on AI to have DEXA scan done
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
at baseline and periodically thereafter.25; 26 NICE also recommend
bisphosphonates to be started if DEXA scan shows osteoporosis or
moderate to severe osteopenia (T score of < -2.0) or an accelerated
rate of bone loss (≥4% per year).25
An international expert group consensus suggests bisphosphonate
should also be started in those with any of the two risk factors of
osteoporosis:80, level III
• age >65 years old
• T score < -1.5 on DEXA scan
• smoking (current and previous)
• family history of hip fracture
• personal history of fragility fracture above the age of 50 years old
• oral corticosteroids use of >6 months
There are many different types of bisphosphonates or denosumab that
can be used in reducing bone loss in patients on AI. However, none of
the international guidelines state preference of one agent over the other
in term of effectiveness.
Recommendation 21
• All breast cancer patients who are on aromatase inhibitors should
have bone densitometry done at baseline and periodically thereafter.
 Bisphosphonates or denosumab should be started if T score is
< -2.0 on dual‑energy X‑ray absorptiometry or patient has two or
more risk factors of osteoporosis*.
*Refer to the preceding text.
c. Ovarian suppression/ablation
For pre-menopausal women, ovarian function can be permanently
suppressed
by
ovarian
ablation,
accomplished
by
surgical
oophorectomy or ovarian irradiation. Ovarian suppression on the other
hand induces temporary amenorrhea by utilising luteinising hormonereleasing hormone agonists. This results in suppression of luteinising
hormone and release of follicle stimulating hormone from the pituitary
leading to reduced ovarian oestrogen production.
In pre-menopausal patients with high risk early breast cancer of
luminal types (ER and/or PR positive) who also received adjuvant
chemotherapy, adding ovarian suppression with gonadotropinreleasing hormone agonists (GnRH) to tamoxifen improved DFS and
OS compared with tamoxifen alone as evident from the joint analysis of
the SOFT and TEXT trials.81, level I
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
In a meta-analysis of 29 RCTs which also included the landmark SOFT
study, subgroup analysis showed that ovarian ablation or suppression
(OAS) improved DFS and OS in pre-menopausal women aged 40
years or younger with HR of 0.84 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.97) and 0.78 (95%
CI 0.66 to 0.94) respectively.82, level I
Recommendation 22
• Ovarian ablation or suppression may be offered in premenopausal
women with high risk early or advanced stage breast cancer disease.
d. Anti-HER2 therapy
Trastuzumab is recommended in women with HER2-positive breast
cancer having adjuvant chemotherapy.4
This is supported by a Cochrane systematic review of moderate quality
primary papers which showed that adjuvant trastuzumab improved
both OS (HR=0.66, 95% CI 0.57 to 0.77) and DFS (HR=0.60, 95%
CI 0.50 to 0.71) in early and locally advanced HER2-positive breast
cancer patients.83, level I
The standard duration of trastuzumab for adjuvant therapy of HER2positive breast cancer is one year. FinHer study, which evaluated a
shorter nine weeks duration of adjuvant trastuzumab in combination
with chemotherapy vs without trastuzumab, found improvement in DFS
for patients assigned to trastuzumab (HR=0.29, 95% CI 0.13 to 0.64)
and generated interest in the de-escalation of adjuvant trastuzumab
treatment.84, level I
PERSEPHONE, a recent RCT comparing 12 months vs 6 months of
trastuzumab in 4,000 women with HER2-positive early breast cancer
showed non-inferiority of shorter duration of trastuzumab in 4-year DFS
(HR=1.07, 90% CI 0.93 to 1.24, non-inferiority of p=0.011) and 4-year
OS (HR=1.14, 90% CI 0.95 to 1.37, non-inferiority of p=0·0010).85, level I
However, a meta-analysis of five RCTs including PERSEPHONE trial,
showed that one year of trastuzumab was more effective than shorter
duration [HR for DFS of 1.31 (95% CI 1.08 to 1.59) and OS of 1.31 (95%
CI 1.08 to 1.59)] in HER2-positive breast cancer patients. However,
there was no significant difference in DFS in those with node negative
disease and hormone positive tumours.86, level I
Aphinity trial reported a small improvement in invasive DFS
(HR=0.81, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.00) with addition of pertuzumab to
trastuzumab treatment in adjuvant setting. However, there was no
significant OS benefit (HR=0.89, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.21).87, level I
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Recommendation 23
• Trastuzumab should be given to women with HER2-positive breast
cancer having adjuvant chemotherapy.
• Trastuzumab for six months in adjuvant setting may be considered
based on the discretion of the treating clinicians.
6.3.3 Systemic therapy for metastatic disease
Treatment choice in MBC is influenced by many factors:
• patient’s factors (age, co-morbidities, performance status, patient’s
preference and menopausal status)
• tumour biology (hormone receptor and HER2 status)
• previous therapies including toxicities
• disease-free interval
• tumour load/disease burden
• visceral crisis (defined as severe organ dysfunction as assessed
by signs and symptoms, laboratory studies and rapid progression
of disease)63
• resource availability
Available systemic therapy in MBC:
• endocrine therapy, with or without the addition of a novel agent e.g.
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4/6 inhibitor, mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor or selective estrogen receptor
degrader (SERD), in patients with hormone receptor-positive and
HER2 non-amplified MBC
• chemotherapy in patients with rapid clinical progression, lifethreatening visceral metastases or need for rapid symptom and/or
disease control
• anti-HER2 agent in patient with HER2-amplified disease
a. Chemotherapy
Combination chemotherapy had been shown to be effective first-line
treatment in MBC:
• A Cochrane systematic review showed that combination
chemotherapy regimens were superior in OS compared with
single agent (HR=0.82, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.89) in newly diagnosed or
recurrent MBC. The combination regimens were also associated
with better time to progression (HR=0.78, 95% CI 0.74 to 0.82)
and overall tumour response (RR=1.29, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.45).
However, there were more detrimental effect on white cell count,
increased alopecia and, nausea and vomiting.88, level I
• A later meta-analysis showed similar findings even in MBC patients
who have received anthracycline and taxane in adjuvant setting
based on OS (HR=0.90, 95% CI 0.84 to 0.96), PFS (HR=0.81,
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
95% CI 0.76 to 0.88) and overall response rate (RR=1.72, 95%
CI 1.34 to 2.21).89, level I
• In the absence of medical contraindications or patient concerns,
anthracycline or taxane-based regimens are usually considered as
first-line chemotherapy for HER2-negative MBC provided there is
no prior exposure to anthracycline.63
Recommendation 24
• Combination chemotherapy may be considered in fit metastatic
breast cancer patients with impending visceral crisis or when rapid
resolution of symptoms is required.
b. Endocrine therapy
Endocrine therapy is the preferred option for hormone receptor-positive
MBC, even in the presence of visceral disease, unless there is visceral
crisis or concern/proof of endocrine resistance.
• Primary endocrine resistance is defined as relapse while on the first
two years of adjuvant endocrine therapy or progression of disease
within first six month of first-line endocrine therapy for advanced
breast cancer while on endocrine therapy.63
• Secondary endocrine resistance is defined as relapse while on
endocrine therapy but after the first two years or relapse within 12
months of completing adjuvant endocrine therapy or progression of
disease more than six months after initiating endocrine therapy for
advanced breast cancer while on endocrine therapy.63
The choice of endocrine therapy depends on menopausal status,
denovo or relapse presentation at diagnosis of MBC, the type and
duration of the therapy in the adjuvant setting as well as the interval
between the end of adjuvant ET and the onset of metastatic disease.
Endocrine therapy can be used as monotherapy or in combination with
a novel agent. The options of monotherapy in MBC include:
• selective estrogen receptor modulator (tamoxifen)
• third generation AIs (anastrazole, letrozole, exemestane)
• SERD (fulvestrant)
The FALCON study showed an improvement in PFS in the fulvestrant
group vs anastrazole group (HR=0.797, 95% CI 0.637 to 0.999) as a
first-line treatment in hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative MBC.
Higher proportion of arthralgia was also reported in the fulvestrant
group.90, level I
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The options of combination treatment include the pairing of an endocrine
agent with:
• CDK 4/6 inhibitor
• mTOR inhibitor
A significant improvement in PFS is seen in the combination treatment
of CDK 4/6 inhibitor and an endocrine partner. This benefit is seen in
both the pre- and post-menopausal population as stated below.
The Palbociclib: Ongoing Trials in the Management of Breast Cancer-2
(PALOMA-2) study showed that the median PFS was 24.8 months in
the palbociclib-letrozole group vs 14.5 months in the placebo-letrozole
group (HR=0.58, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.72).91, level I These findings were
consistent with another Mammary Oncology Assessment of LEE011’s
55Efficacy and Safety-2 (MONALEESA-2) trial which showed median
PFS of 25.3 months in the ribociclib-letrozole group vs 16.0 months in
the placebo-letrozole group (HR=0.568, 95% CI 0.457 to 0.704).92, level I
MONALEESA-7 trial demonstrated PFS prolongation extended to premenopausal women with the combination of ribociclib and an endocrine
partner (tamoxifen, letrozole or anastrazole) and goserelin (HR=0.55,
95% CI 0.44 to 0.69).93, level I An updated analysis showed an OS benefit
in the ribociclib arm (HR for death=0.71, 95% CI 0.54 to 0.95).94, level I
The most common side effect encountered with the combination
treatment was neutropenia. Prolonged QTcF interval was also noted in
patients in the ribociclib-letrozole arm.91 - 92, level I
Another CDK4/6 inhibitor i.e. abemaciclib had been shown to be
effective and safe.95, level I
• Endocrine therapy in combination with CDK4/6 inhibitor has shown
promising results in pre- and post-menopausal, endocrine-naïve
hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative MBC.
In post-menopausal MBC patients who had failed on anastrazole or
letrozole, the Breast Cancer Trials of Oral Everolimus-2 (BOLERO-2)
study showed an improvement in PFS with the use of everolimus and
exemestance compared with exemestane alone (HR for progression or
death=0.43, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.54). Higher incidence of serious adverse
events were also observed in the combination group including stomatitis
and pneumonitis.96, level I
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Recommendation 25
• Endocrine therapy should be considered as first-line treatment in
hormone-receptor positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer
unless there is evidence of visceral crisis or endocrine resistance.
c. Anti-HER2 therapy
Therapies that target HER2 have become important agents in the
treatment of MBC. A Cochrane systematic review showed that
trastuzumab in women with HER2-positive MBC improved both OS
(HR=0.82, 95% CI 0.71 to 0.94) and PFS (HR=0.61, 95% CI 0.54 to
0.70). However, the treatment increased the risk of cardiac toxicities
e.g. congestive heart failure (RR=3.49, 90% CI 1.88 to 6.47) and left
ventricular ejection fraction decline (RR=2.65, 90% CI 1.48 to 4.74).97, level I
Clinical Evaluation of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab (CLEOPATRA), a
double-blind RCT, compared the effectiveness and safety of pertuzumab
in combination with trastuzumab and docetaxel vs trastuzumab and
docetaxel as first-line treatment for HER2-positive MBC. It showed
improvement favouring the dual HER2-blockade regimen. The median
PFS was prolonged by 6.3 months (HR for progression or death=0.68,
95% CI 0.58 to 0.80) and median OS by 15.7 months (HR=0.68, 95%
CI 0.56 to 0.84). The addition of pertuzumab did not increase cardiac
toxicity. This study also included 10% of patient who had received
trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting but with a treatment-free interval of
at least six months or longer.98, level I
In patients who relapse during adjuvant trastuzumab within six months
of completing adjuvant trastuzumab treatment, EMILIA trial showed that
trastuzumab emtansine resulted in improved PFS (HR for progression
or death=0.65, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.77) and increased median OS (30.9
months vs 25.1 months; HR=0.68, 95% CI, 0.55 to 0.85) compared
with lapatinib plus capecitabine. The safety profile was better with the
trastuzumab emtansine arm.99, level I
Recommendation 26
• Anti-HER2 blockade, may be considered in HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer.
6.3.4 Supportive Therapy
• Bone-modifying agents in adjuvant and metastatic breast
cancer
Treatment targeting osteoclast activity is important for breast cancer
with bone metastases to prevent SREs. Bisphosphonates have been
used for this purpose.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
A meta-analysis demonstrated that bisphosphonates compared with
placebo in adjuvant setting for early breast cancer showed no effect
on OS (HR=0.89, 95% CI 0.79 to 1.01) but lower rate of bone fractures
(RR=0.59, 95% CI.0.42 to 0.83). Nevertheless, there was a higher rate
of osteonecrosis of the jaw/ONJ (RR=7.53, 95% CI 2.91 to 19.50) and
pyrexia (RR=3.36, 95% CI 2.61 to 4.32).100, level I There was no mention
on quality assessment of primary papers in the meta-analysis.
In a recent Cochrane systematic review, bisphosphonates were more
effective and safer compared with placebo in adjuvant and MBC. There
was a reduction in bone metastases in early breast cancer (RR=0.86,
95% CI 0.75 to 0.99) but not in advanced breast cancer without bone
metastases (RR=0.96, 95% CI 0.65 to 1.43). There was also a reduction
in risk of SRE (RR=0.86, 95% CI 0.78 to 0.95) in breast cancer with
bone metastases. Toxicity was generally mild with rate of ONJ at less
than 0.5%.101, level I
In a local economic evaluation on different bone modifying agents in
MBC, 12-weekly IV zoledranic acid was most cost-effective compared
with both denosumab or 4-weekly IV zoledranic acid.102, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of adjuvant
bisphosphonate in early breast cancer.
Recommendation 27
• Bisphosphanates may be offered in breast cancer patients with bone
metastases to reduce skeletal-related events.
 The preferred regimen is 12-weekly intravenous zoledronic acid.
6.4 Radiotherapy
6.4.1 Radiotherapy post-breast conserving surgery
Adjuvant radiotherapy following BCS reduces risk of local recurrence
in the affected breast by half and risk of death by a sixth.103, level I All
patients with invasive breast cancer who have BCS with clear margin
should be offered adjuvant whole breast irradiation (WBI).4; 25
Partial breast irradiation (PBI) for early breast cancer is thought to result
in comparable local control and better cosmesis. However, a Cochrane
systematic review showed that PBI in early stage breast cancer gave
worse local control (HR=1.62, 95% CI 1.11 to 2.35) and cosmesis
outcome (OR=1.51, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.95) compared with WBI.104, level I
The finding is supported by another meta-analysis that showed higher
local recurrence rate at five years (HR=2.33, 95% CI 1.45 to 3.74) and
seven years (HR=1.91, 95% CI 1.30 to 2.79) in PBI compared with
WBI.105, level I
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
A later RCT however showed that PBI with intensity modulated
radiotherapy (IMRT) technique was non-inferior to those who had
WBI in early breast cancer. Late adverse events were similar except
for less change in breast appearance (p=0.007) and breast hardening
(p<0.0001) in partial breast IMRT.106, level l
Intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) is an alternative option to deliver
radiotherapy for early breast cancer. Radiotherapy is delivered during
surgery with theoretical advantage of more accurate dose delivery to
target. Furthermore, radiotherapy will be delivered only once during
surgery compared to the conventional radiotherapy that requires at
least 15 times radiation over a course of three to five weeks.107, level III
However, a meta-analysis showed that IORT yielded higher local
recurrence compared with WBI in early stage breast cancer (RR=4.11,
95% CI 0.99 to 17.13).108, level I
There is not enough evidence to recommend PBI or IORT as standard
of care.26 NICE considers PBI with IMRT technique only in breast
cancer patients who fulfill stringent criteria of low absolute risk of local
recurrence.25
• IORT may be considered in selected early breast cancer within the
scope of clinical trial.
• Partial breast irradiation using intensity modulated radiotherapy may
be considered in early stage breast cancer.
Recommendation 28
• Patients with invasive breast cancer who have breast conserving
surgery with clear margin should be offered adjuvant radiotherapy
6.4.2 Radiotherapy post-mastectomy
Adjuvant radiotherapy should be offered to the following postmastectomy patients with ≥4 lymph nodes and positive margin.4; 25
However, a recent update of EBCTCG meta-analysis showed that
radiotherapy following mastectomy also benefited those with one to
three positive lymph nodes:109, level I
• LRR (2p<0.00001)
• overall recurrence (RR=0.68, 95% CI 0.57 to 0.82)
• breast cancer mortality (RR=0.80, 95% CI 0.67 to 0.95)
NICE also recommends adjuvant radiotherapy to be considered in
node negative but T3 or T4 disease.25
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Recommendation 29
• Adjuvant radiotherapy should be offered to the following postmastectomy breast cancer patients with:
 one or more positive lymph nodes
 positive margin not amenable for surgery
• Adjuvant radiotherapy should be considered in node negative T3 or
T4 breast cancer.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
7. FERTILITY PRESERVATION
All oncologic healthcare providers should discuss infertility as a potential
risk of treatment when cancer diagnosis is made. Patients who express
an interest in fertility and those who are ambivalent or uncertain should
be referred to fertility specialist as soon as possible.110, level II-2; 111
The ‘gold standard’ for fertility preservation (FP) are embryo and
oocytes cryopreservation.111 Both techniques involve controlled ovarian
hyperstimulation (COH) with gonadotropins and will take about 2 - 4
weeks to complete. The mature oocytes retrieved will either be fertilised
or cryopreserved for utilisation later.
A large multicentre retrospective cohort study showed non-significance
difference in pregnancy outcome between FP for elective reason (EFP)
and oncology reason (onco-FP).112, level II-2
There has been concern regarding elevated oestrogen levels which may
be harmful for patients who are ER+. In a retrospective cohort study,
fertility preservation with or without hormonal stimulation had not been
shown to increase the rate of breast cancer recurrence.113, level II-2 In a recent
systematic review on safety of COH, the combination of letrozole and
gonadotropins during COH reduced oestrogen levels without significant
reduction in number of oocytes retrieved.114, level I
Ovarian stimulation is not associated with any delay in treatment for
breast cancer. It can be started at any point of the menstrual cycle
without any decrease in oocyte yield and fertilisation rate.115, level III
GnRHa during chemotherapy can be used as an option to preserve
ovarian function and fertility in pre-menopausal patients. A metaanalysis showed that premature ovarian insufficiency was lower in
patients who had GnRHa during chemotherapy compared with those
who did not (OR=0.38, 95% CI 0.26 to 0.57).116, level I
• Breast cancer patients who fulfill all the following criteria should be
referred for fertility preservation:110, level II-2; 117
 interested in fertility preservation
 aged <40 years old
 have good prognosis
 able to undergo ovarian stimulation and egg collection
 have enough time to undergo ovarian stimulation before the start
of their cancer treatment
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Recommendation 30
• Fertility preservation should be discussed with all breast cancer
patients in the reproductive age group and suitable patients should
be referred to fertility specialist.*
 Patients’ religious belief should be taken into consideration.
*Refer to yellow box above.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
8. FAMILIAL BREAST CANCER
Identifying individuals and relatives with inherited predisposition to
breast and other cancers has important clinical implications in improving
long-term health, including enabling preventive and risk reducing
strategies, early detection and increasingly, in treatment options that
are targeted towards carriers.
Over the past 10 years, advances in molecular genetics and therapeutics
have greatly influenced the practice of genetic counselling and testing
for familial breast and ovarian cancers, particularly in three key areas:
i. cost of genetic testing has markedly reduced making it more
accessible
ii. identification of other genes associated with inherited susceptibility
to breast and/or ovarian cancer has led to multi-gene panel testing,
beyond just the BRCA genes
iii. treatment-focussed genetic testing is becoming increasingly
important and this has expanded the utility of genetic testing to
more than just screening and risk-management and, expanded
genetic testing beyond germline to somatic tumour testing
8.1 Cancer Genetic Risk Assessment
For patients concerned about or suspected of having hereditary breast
and/or ovarian cancers, initial risk evaluation by the doctor responsible
for their care (surgeon or oncologist) should be performed in order to
determine if formal risk assessment in a cancer genetics clinic should be
undertaken. This initial risk evaluation includes a thorough evaluation of:
i. personal history (including medical and surgical history, patient’s
needs and concerns)
ii. family history (first- and second-degree relatives on both the
maternal and paternal sides) of breast, ovarian and other cancers
Patients should be advised that:
• risk of being a carrier increases with increasing number of affected
relatives, the closeness of the relationship and the age at which
the affected relative was diagnosed
• maternal and paternal family history should be considered
independently
• risk assessment is a dynamic process and can change if additional
relatives are diagnosed with cancer
•
Genetic Referral and Testing Guidelines
NCCN provides comprehensive guidelines on recommended criteria
for genetic testing for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (refer to
Appendix 8).118 However, if this broad criteria is applied to all breast
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
cancer patients in Malaysia, a substantial number of breast cancer
patients would need formal risk assessment and counselling, which
is neither practical nor cost-effective in today’s healthcare service. As
such, efforts to simplify and streamline criteria for identifying at-risk
individuals for testing while maintaining similar variant detection rate
may be necessary. An example that may be used has been evaluated
in a Malaysian breast cancer cohort and yielded an approximately 10%
mutation detection rate (refer to Table 5).119, level III
Table 5. Mainstreaming cancer genetics cancer-based criteria
Adapted: Kemp Z, Turnbull A, Yost S, et al. Evaluation of Cancer-Based Criteria for
Use in Mainstream BRCA1 and BRCA2 Genetic Testing in Patients with
Breast Cancer. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(5):e194428
In more well-resourced settings, a number of risk assessment tools have
been built to more accurately provide the likelihood of an individual’s risk
of developing cancer (e.g. Tyrer-Cuzick or BOADICEA risk prediction
models) and ongoing efforts to calibrate these for the Asian population
are expected to be reported by 2020. Another important upcoming focus
is the development of polygenic risk scores for Asian and South-East
Asian populations, to improve risk stratification and identify women at
higher-risk of breast cancer in these regions. Reference to the latest
literature is advised.
8.2 Genetic Counselling and Genetic Testing
For individuals meeting established criteria for one or more hereditary
cancer syndromes, genetic testing should be considered along with
appropriate pre-test counselling. Such counselling can be provided by
a genetic counsellor, medical geneticist, oncologist, surgeon, oncology
nurse or other healthcare professional with expertise and experience in
cancer genetics. Regardless of who provides the counselling, pre- and
post-test counselling should include discussion on the test indications,
limitations, potential benefits, possible outcomes and implications.
Genetic testing aims to detect variants in cancer predisposition
genes. Previously, single-gene tests were performed, but advances
in molecular genetics using parallel testing has enabled the testing
of multiple genes simultaneously (multi-gene panel testing). Testing
must be comprehensive (including full sequencing and large genomic
1. Ovarian cancer (epithelial non-mucinous ovarian cancer)
2. Breast cancer in patient diagnosed ≤45 years old
3. Two primary breast cancers, both diagnosed ≤60 years old
4. Triple-negative breast cancer, diagnosed ≤60 years old
5. Male breast cancer
6. Breast cancer plus parent, sibling or child with any of the above criteria
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
rearrangements), for clinically actionable genes and usually offered to
an affected family member first. Should a clinically relevant variant be
found, testing may then be offered to other adult at-risk relatives.
Individuals eligible for genetic testing may be referred during initial
management or at any time thereafter.5 Rapid genetic counselling and
testing (RGCT) may be offered based on individual case needs, after
discussion with the genetics team. An RCT reported that female breast
cancer patients who received RGCT and subsequently received DNA
test results before surgery were more likely to undergo direct bilateral
mastectomy compared with women who received the usual care
(OR=3.09, 95% CI 1.15 to 8.31).120, level I NICE recommends fast-track
genetic testing (within four weeks of diagnosis of breast cancer) only as
part of a clinical trial.5
8.3 Genetic Predisposition to Breast Cancer
Understanding of genetic predisposition to breast cancer has advanced
beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2, with numerous genes in which variants
confer a moderate risk (2 - 4-fold higher risk) or high risk (>4 times
higher risk) of breast cancer compared with the general population.121
Refer table below for genes and associated risk of breast cancer.
Table 6. Genes for which breast cancer risk has been established
Adapted: Easton DF, Pharoah PD, Antoniou AC, et al. Gene-panel sequencing and
the prediction of breast-cancer risk. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(23):2243-57
Gene
11.4
11.7
105 (62 to 165)
No reliable estimate
6.6 (2.2 to 19.9)
No reliable estimate
5.5 (3.0 to 9.4)
3.0 (2.6 to 3.5)
2.8 (2.2 to 3.7)
2.6 (2.1 to 3.2)
2.7 (1.9 to 3.7)
BRCA1
BRCA2
TP53
PTEN
CDH1
STK11
PALB2
CHEK2
ATM
NF1
NBN
75
76
53
45
29
27
26
23
Ovary
Ovary, prostate, pancreas
Thyroid, endometrial
cancer
Diffuse gastric cancer
Pancreas
Pancreas
Unknown
Colon, pancreas, ovarian
sex cord-stromal tumours
Childhood sarcoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma,
brain tumours
Lung, although p.Ile157Thr
is associated with reduced
risk
Malignant tumours of
peripheral nerve sheath,
brain, central nervous system
Estimated
Relative
Risk (90%CI)
Absolute Risk
by 80 Years
of Age (%)
Other
Associated Cancers
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The genes BARD1, RAD51C and RAD51D are associated with an
increased risk to breast cancer, but risk estimates remain inaccurate
because these variants are rare. With more upcoming evidence, the
increasing importance of these genes is anticipated and reference to
latest literature is encouraged to obtain more accurate risk estimates in
this rapidly evolving area.
8.4 Clinical Management for Carriers of Pathogenic/Likely
Pathogenic Variants in BRCA1, BRCA2 and Other Genes
BRCA1 and BRCA2 are highly penetrant genes and pathogenic/likely
pathogenic variants are associated with early-onset breast cancers and
increased risk of contralateral breast cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate
and pancreatic cancer (BRCA2 only).122
• Individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 have an increased risk of breast, ovarian and a number of
related cancers. Hence these individuals warrant consideration of
earlier and more intensive screening and preventive strategies.
Post-test counselling in individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic
variants in BRCA1 or BRCA2 should include screening, risk-reducing
surgeries and chemoprevention. A multidisciplinary approach and
shared decision making should be practised in all risk management
strategies.
In the last 10 years, carriers of variants in PALB2, ATM and CHEK2
genes have also been associated with increased risk to breast cancer,
but clinical evidence on screening and risk-reducing surgery remains
lacking. Other complicated, rare syndrome genes including TP53,
PTEN, CDH1 and STK11 are usually best managed in consultation with
a clinical genetics team that is outside the scope of this CPG.
Individuals with strong family history of cancer but with no pathogenic/
likely pathogenic variants or whom do not undergo genetic testing, may
benefit from further risk assessment using calibrated tools, such as
BOADICEA, and offered screening according to their estimated lifetime
risk of cancers. The CanRisk tool is a web interface to BOADICEA and
can be accessed at https://canrisk.org/about/
8.4.1 Intensive screening
Intensive screening for breast cancer in BRCA carriers and
high risk individuals starts considerably earlier than standard
recommendations.123 Breast awareness education with monthly breast
self-examination should begin at 18 years of age and biannual CBE
should begin at 25 years of age.118 Other screening strategies, based
on age and risk group are summarised in the table below.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Table 7. Summary of recommendations on screening for women with no personal history of breast cancer
1Lifetime risk of developing breast cancer is <17%.
2Lifetime risk of developing breast cancer is at least 17% but <30%. This is likely to include individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in PALB2
regardless of family history of breast cancer and, individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in ATM and CHEK2 and at least one first
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Annual mammography
Do not offer MRI
Consider annual mammography
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Consider annual mammography
Do not offer MRI
Annual mammography
Do not offer MRI
Annual mammography
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer MRI
Mammography as part of
population screening
Do not offer mammography
Do not offer MRI
Annual MRI and consider
annual mammography
Annual mammography and
annual MRI
Annual mammography
Do not offer MRI unless
dense breast
Annual mammography
Do not offer MRI unless
dense breast
Mammography as part of
population screening
20 - 29
30 - 39
40 - 49
50 - 59
60 - 69
70+
High risk of breast cancer
(but with a 30% or lower
probability of being a BRCA
or TP53 carrier)3
Known BRCA1 or BRCA2
carrier
Moderate risk of breast
cancer2
Average risk of breast
cancer1
Age
(years)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
degree relative affected by breast cancer. Individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in ATM or CHEK2 and no close family history
of breast cancer is considered to be of low/moderate risk of breast cancer (i.e. <17% lifetime risk).
3Lifetime risk of developing breast cancer is at least 30%. This is likely to include individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in PALB2 and
strong family history of breast cancer, or individuals where BOADICEA or other risk prediction tools suggest a high risk based on family history
of breast cancer.
Adapted: National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Familial breast cancer: classification, care and managing breast cancer and related risks
in people with a family history of breast cancer. London: NICE; 2018
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Recommendation 31
• Intensive screening of BRCA carriers and high risk individuals should
be vigilantly performed and adhered to recommended guidelines.
• Screening of women with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 should be conducted from age 30 to 49 years
with both magnetic resonance imaging and mammography. Those
50 years and above, screening with mammography should be done.
8.4.2 Risk-reducing strategies
i) Risk-reducing surgery
• Bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy
Risk-reducing mastectomy (RRM) remains the most effective strategy
for reducing breast cancer risk. A meta-analysis showed that prophylactic
bilateral mastectomy reduced the risk for breast cancer (RR=0.11, 95%
CI 0.04 to 0.32) but not all-cause mortality.124, level II-2 Another systematic
review also showed 90 - 95% risk reduction.125, level II-2
Multidisciplinary consultations are recommended prior to surgery and
should include discussions of the risks and benefits of surgery and
option of breast reconstruction. Psychosocial effects of RRM should
also be addressed.
For carriers of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants of PALB2, ATM
and CHEK2, there is currently insufficient evidence for RRM and these
individuals are managed based on family history.25
• Contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy
Carriers of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants of BRCA1 and
BRCA2 have increased risk of developing contralateral breast cancer.
A prospective study showed average cumulative risks by age 70 years
of 83% (95% CI 69 to 94) for BRCA1 and 62% (95% CI 44 to 79.5) for
BRCA 2.126, level II-2 BRCA 1 particularly has higher risks as the majority
of tumours would not receive endocrine therapy.127, level III Further risk
factors for contralateral breast cancer within BRCA carriers include
early age of first breast cancer diagnosis (<50 years) with increasing
numbers of first-degree relatives with breast cancer at a young
age.127, level III; 128, level II-2
Contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy reduces risk of contralateral
breast cancer by over 90% in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers129, level II-2
and is associated with 48 - 63% survival advantage.129 - 130, level II-2
For carriers of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants of PALB2, ATM
and CHEK2, there is currently insufficient evidence for increased risk to
contralateral breast cancer.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) remains the
most effective risk reduction strategy for the prevention of BRCA1-
and BRCA2-associated ovarian, fallopian tube and peritonial cancers.
A Cochrane systematic review of moderate quality primary papers
showed RRSO reduced risk of gynaecological cancers in both BRCA1
and BRCA2.131, level II-2
Pre-menopausal high risk women are most likely to benefit from RRSO,
but also most likely to experience side effects from surgery, including
loss of fertility, loss of sexual function and increased osteoporosis.
Thus, RRSO is advised after completion of childbearing and from the
age of 35 - 40 years old.
Notably, whereas earlier meta-analyses suggested that RRSO
may reduce the risk of breast cancer, two recent studies presented
strong evidence suggesting that the previous reports may have been
subject to ascertainment bias. Correction for this bias suggested that
RRSO provided no or minimal protective effect on breast cancer
risk.132 - 133, level II-2
Recommendation 32
• Risk-reducing surgeries should be discussed and offered to women
with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes.
ii) Chemoprevention
• Selective estrogen receptor modulators
A long-term RCT on tamoxifen as chemoprevention (20 mg for five
years) for moderate and high risk women (as determined using the
Tyrer Cuzick Model) found a reduction in the occurrence of all breast
cancers in the tamoxifen group compared with placebo group (HR=0.71,
95% CI 0.60 to 0.83). After 20 years of follow-up, the estimated risk of
developing all types of breast cancer was 12.3% (95% CI 10.1 to 14.5)
in the placebo group compared with 7.8% (95% CI 6.9 to 9.0) in the
tamoxifen group; hence the NNT for five years to prevent one breast
cancer in the next 20 years was 22 (95% CI 19 to 26).134, level I
A higher incidence of deep vein thrombosis in women receiving
tamoxifen compared with placebo was seen in the first 10 years of
follow-up (OR=1.87, 95% CI 1.11 to 3.18). Although not significant,
there were more endometrial cancers in the tamoxifen group, but only
for the first five years of active treatment.134, level I
Women on tamoxifen should stop tamoxifen two months before trying
to conceive or six weeks before elective surgery.5
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Aromatase inhibitors
In an RCT of anastrozole as chemoprevention in post-menopausal
high risk women (as determined using the Tyrer Cuzick Model), after a
median follow-up of five years, fewer women in the anastrozole group
developed breast cancer compared with placebo group (HR=0.47,
95% CI 0.32 to 0.68). The predicted cumulative incidence of all breast
cancers after seven years was 5.6% in the placebo group and 2.8% in
the anastrozole group, suggesting that 36 women (95% CI 33 to 44)
would need to be treated with anastrozole to prevent one cancer in
seven years of follow-up.135, level I
Anastrozole was not associated with an increased risk of other
cancers particularly gynaecological cancers, nor any thromboembolic
or vascular events. A contraindication for anastrozole use was severe
osteoporosis.135, level I
• Oral contraceptives
For female carriers of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1
or BRCA2, use of oral contraceptive could reduce the risk of ovarian
cancer, with no significant increase in risk to breast cancer.118
• In high risk women, evidence has shown that risk-reducing surgeries
and chemoprevention are effective in reducing the risk of developing
breast cancers.
8.4.3 Role of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors for BRCA
carriers
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (olaparib or
talazaparib) can be considered as a treatment option for patients with
BRCA-associated advanced triple negative breast cancer or luminal
metastatic breast cancer, after failure of chemotherapy and endocrine
therapy. Its use is associated with a PFS benefit, improvement in quality
of life and a favourable toxicity profile.63
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
9. FOLLOW-UP
Regular follow-up visits are recommended every 3 - 4 months in the first
two years, every 6 - 8 months from subsequent years 3 - 5 and annually
thereafter. The interval of visits should be adapted to the risk of relapse
and patients’ needs. The recommended surveillance are.136
• annual ipsilateral (after BCS) and/or a contralateral mammography
(after mastectomy), with US and breast MRI when needed
• regular bone density evaluation for patients on AIs or undergoing
ovarian function suppression
• encouragement towards adopting a healthy lifestyle, including diet
modification and exercise
Approximately 5% of breast cancer patients will have a risk to develop
a new ipsilateral or contralateral cancer and it persists over time. There
is limited evidence on surveillance strategies in older breast cancer
survivors. The American Cancer Society has recommended screening
mammography should be continued beyond 75 years old as long as
a woman is in good health and is expected to live 10 more years or
longer.137 Nevertheless, current evidence is insufficient to assess the
balance of benefits and harms of screening mammography in women
aged 75 years or older.138
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
10. SUPPORTIVE TREATMENT
• This chapter is written mainly based mainly on the previous
edition of CPG Management of Breast Cancer (Second Edition)
and not on new clinical questions. The CPG DG opines that for
complete management of breast cancer, the supportive treatment
is summarised and mentioned here. Some updates are done on
Psychosocial Assessment and Intervention Section.
a. Psychosocial assessment and intervention
Most breast cancer patients experience at least some psychosocial
distress during the course of their diagnosis and treatment. A local study
revealed that up to 47.1% of women with breast cancer experience
psychological distress, depression (25.3%), anxiety (18.8%)139 and
post-traumatic stress disorder (19.6%).140
Other common psychosocial concerns reported by women with breast
cancer include:141
• fear of recurrence
• physical symptoms e.g. fatigue, sleep disturbance or pain
• body image disruption
• sexual dysfunction
• treatment-related anxieties
• intrusive thoughts about illness/persistent anxiety
• marital/partner communication
• feelings of vulnerability
• existential concerns regarding mortality
Local studies showed that psychosocial issues impact patients’
overall well-being. In the currently challenging global economic state,
almost half of Malaysian families with cancer survivors experienced
financial constraints.142 Other related issues include lack of constant
psychosocial support and proclivity of undesirable consequences
e.g. delaying treatment and/or not turning up for treatment at
all.143; 144; 145; 146; 147; 148; 149; 150
Women with breast cancer should be screened for emotional distress
using validated self-assessment psychological tests by trained
healthcare providers.4 Psychological distress for them should be
assessed at key time points throughout the cancer trajectory. This
should be done at diagnosis, during and after completion of treatment
throughout the survivorship period. Recommended screening tools for
this purpose include Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) and Emotion
Thermometer (ET). While the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
was previously widely used, it is now copyrighted and requires payment
to use.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The aim of a psychological intervention is to reduce emotional and
mental burden as well as to equip patients with accurate information
and psychological skills to manage their distress. The following
psychosocial interventions should be offered by trained healthcare
providers particularly for women with emotionally vulnerability following
a diagnosis of breast cancer:4
• cognitive behaviour therapy
• psychosocial support
• psycho-education programmes (e.g. printed materials, audiovisual materials, telephone support and counselling)
Others include Managing Cancer and Living Meaningfully,151; 152
Mindfulness Therapy,153 and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy.154
b. Breast care nurse
Breast care nurse (BCN) improves the continuity of care and provide
important information, support and referral for a wide range of needs
experienced by breast cancer patients. All patients should have access
to a BCN for treatment of breast cancer. Improving BCN accessibility
includes:155
• clarification on the role focusing on psychosocial assessment and
support of the patients
• appropriate training, accreditation and ongoing professional
development
• inclusion in MDT
• availability in rural and remote areas through telephone and video
conferencing calls
• funding for positions should be ongoing and sustainable
A breast care nurse (BCN) should be assigned to all patients to provide
information on management and psychosocial support throughout the
diagnosis, treatment and follow-up.4
c. Lifestyle modifications
Lifestyle changes can be recommended to patients as an adjunct to
standard breast cancer treatment.156
The Malaysian breast cancer cohort study showed that there was a high
proportion of breast cancer survivors being obese and overweight.148;
157 Breast cancer survivors should have balance diet and maintain lean
body mass. There is still no particular style of diet that has been found to
be more beneficial for reducing the risk of breast cancer recurrence.156
Healthy lifestyle is associated with a lower risk of recurrence and this
should include:
• achieving and maintaining a healthy weight through regular
physical activity and dietary modification; regular physical activity
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
(at least 150 minutes/week) has the most robust effect of all
lifestyle factors on reducing breast cancer recurrence156
• limiting alcohol intake to below five units per week (3 or 4 alcoholic
drinks per week or 6 g of alcohol per day)25
• smoking cessation25
d. Palliative care
Palliative care aims to improve quality of life of patients and their families
in facing the life-threatening illness by effective pain management and
other distressing symptoms. It also incorporates psychosocial and
spiritual care according to patient/family needs, values, beliefs and
cultures.158 Palliative care is the main focus of care when cure is not
achievable.26
Palliative care begins at diagnosis of advanced breast cancer. It should
be delivered concurrently with disease-directed therapies and facilitate
patient’s autonomy on the further management based on the medical
information.
• Palliative care should be initiated by the primary care team and then
augmented by a palliative care physician.
Essential components of palliative care include the following:26
• establishment of rapport and relationships with patients and family/
caregivers
• management of symptoms, psychosocial/spiritual distress and
functional status
• exploration of patients’ understanding and education about illness
and prognosis
• clarification of treatment goals
• assessment and support of coping needs
• assistance with medical decision making
• coordination with other care providers
• provision of referrals to other care providers as indicated
e. Patient Navigation Programme
Patient navigation programme (PNP) is a community-based service
delivery intervention designed to promote access to timely diagnosis
and treatment of cancer and other chronic diseases by eliminating
barriers to care.159, level III
Principles of PNP are:
1. Navigation is a patient-centric healthcare service delivery model.
2. The core function of navigation is the elimination of barriers to
timely care across all levels of healthcare which is most effectively
carried out through a one-on-one relationship between the
navigator and the patient.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
3. Patient navigation should be defined to distinguish the role and
responsibilities of the navigator from that of all other providers.
Navigators should be integrated into the healthcare team in order
to achieve maximum benefit for the individual patient.
4. Delivery of navigation services should be cost-effective and
commensurate with the training and skills necessary to navigate
an individual through a particular phase of the care.
5. The determination of whom should navigate should be primarily
decided by the level of skills required at a given phase of navigation
ranging from trained lay investigators to professional providers.
6. There is a need to define the point where navigation begins and
ends; the need is not over until the cancer is resolved.
7. There is a need to navigate patients across disconnected level of
care i.e. from primary to tertiary care.
8. Navigation systems require coordination. In larger systems of
patient care, the coordination is best carried out by assigning
a navigation coordinator or champion who is responsible for
overseeing all phases of navigation activity within a given
healthcare level.
PNP has the potential to reduce cancer-related disparities and improve
outcomes by eliminating barriers to obtain quality cancer care. PNP
in cancer care is effective in improving screening rates, adherence to
follow-up following an abnormal results and timeliness of diagnosis.159, level III
Minimal research has indicated that PNP is effective for post-treatment
surveillance.160, level I
Malaysia is one of the countries with lower relative survival rate in the
Asia-Pacific, with only 66.8% of patients having 5-year survival rate,
mainly due to late presentation and poor adherence to evidence-based
treatment.2, level II-2
Studies in psychosocial factors show that fear, poor health education
and lack of empowerment among Malaysians are major reasons
causing delay and defaulting treatment. In order to address these
challenges, Cancer Research Malaysia identifies the PNP as a potential
community-based solution to improve the Malaysian survivorship of
breast cancer.161
f. Breast cancer patient support groups
Breast cancer patient support groups are invaluable resources for
support, services and information which include:
• provision of emotional, social and material support for individuals
with breast cancer
• empowering breast cancer patients to self-care during and after
treatment
• public education on breast cancer awareness
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Breast cancer patient support groups play a crucial role in making
patients adapted with their disease. A case-control study showed
that patients supported by a peer group enjoyed a higher quality of
life compared with others.162, level II-2 Locally, the breast cancer support
groups are such as:
• Breast Cancer Welfare Association Malaysia
• Pink Unity (National Cancer Society Malaysia)
• Breast Cancer Foundation (formerly known as Pride Foundation)
• Pink Ribbon
• KanWork
• The following additional management is important and should be
considered for breast cancer patients when indicated:
 psychosocial assessment and intervention
 breast care nurse
 lifestyle modifications
 palliative care
 patient navigation programme
 breast cancer patient support groups
Refer to Appendix 9 on Post-Treatment Cancer Survivorship
(Management of Treatment Complications)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
11. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of breast cancer should be guided by evidencebased approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several
factors may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
11.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a. wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hard- and
soft-copies)
b. regular topic update for healthcare providers via continuous
medical education (seminar/conference/course)
c. National Cancer Registry
d. National Key Performance Indicator i.e. margin on BCS
e. involvement of non-governmental organisations e.g. breast cancer
support groups in Breast Cancer Awareness Month
Existing barriers for application are:
a. lack of understanding/limited knowledge on breast cancer
b. insufficient resources including expertise, diagnostic tools,
medications, equipment
c. variation in clinical management and preferences
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a. ensure widespread distribution of CPG & its implementation
strategies
b. strengthen training to ensure up-to-date information being shared
c. provide adequate resources in the management of breast cancer
d. provide multidisciplinary team at different levels of care
e. strengthen the cancer registry
f. empower community with active involvement in disease-related
activities
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of breast cancer:
*Women aged >35 years with signs and symptoms, high risk group with
signs and symptoms and patients with clinical signs of malignancy
**Target of 80%
***Target of 85%
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
=
X 100%
Percentage of
patients with
suspected breast
cancer* referred
within two weeks to
the breast clinic**
Number of patients with suspected breast
cancer in the same period
Number of patients with suspected breast
cancer referred within two weeks
to the breast clinic in a period
=
X 100%
Percentage of
breast cancer
patients with clear
surgical margins in
BCS***
Number of breast cancer patients
with BCS in a period
Number of breast cancer patients with
clear surgical margins in BCS in a period
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
National Cancer Institute, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysia National Cancer
Registry Report (MNCR) 2012-2016. Putrajaya: MoH; 2019.
2.
National Cancer Institute, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysian Study on
Cancer Survival (MySCan). Putrajaya: MoH; 2018.
3.
World Health Organization. Guide to cancer early diagnosis. Geneva: WHO;
2017.
4.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Breast Cancer (Second Edition).
Putrajaya: MoH; 2010.
5.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Familial breast cancer:
classification, care and managing breast cancer and related risks in people with
a family history of breast cancer. London: NICE; 2018.
6.
Li H, Sun X, Miller E, et al. BMI, reproductive factors, and breast cancer molecular
subtypes: A case-control study and meta-analysis. J Epidemiol. 2017;27(4):143-51.
7.
World Health Organization. WHO Classification of Tumours of the Breast. Lyon:
IARC; 2012.
8.
Pettersson A, Graff RE, Ursin G, et al. Mammographic density phenotypes
and risk of breast cancer: a meta-analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(5):pii:
dju078.
9.
Soroush A, Farshchian N, Komasi S, et al. The Role of Oral Contraceptive Pills
on Increased Risk of Breast Cancer in Iranian Populations: A Meta-analysis. J
Cancer Prev. 2016;21(4):294-301.
10. Busund M, Bugge NS, Braaten T, et al. Progestin-only and combined oral
contraceptives and receptor-defined premenopausal breast cancer risk: The
Norwegian Women and Cancer Study. Int J Cancer. 2018;142(11):2293-302.
11. Kyu HH, Bachman VF, Alexander LT, et al. Physical activity and risk of breast
cancer, colon cancer, diabetes, ischemic heart disease, and ischemic stroke
events: systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2013. BMJ. 2016;354:i3857.
12. Gao Y, Huang YB, Liu XO, et al. Tea consumption, alcohol drinking and physical
activity associations with breast cancer risk among Chinese females: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(12):7543-50.
13. Li XJ, Ren ZJ, Qin JW, et al. Coffee consumption and risk of breast cancer: an
up-to-date meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52681.
14. Liu M, Cui LH, Ma AG, et al. Lack of effects of dietary folate intake on risk of
breast cancer: an updated meta-analysis of prospective studies. Asian Pac J
Cancer Prev. 2014;15(5):2323-8.
15. Chen M, Rao Y, Zheng Y, et al. Association between soy isoflavone intake and
breast cancer risk for pre- and post-menopausal women: a meta-analysis of
epidemiological studies. PLoS One. 2014;9(2):e89288.
16. Roza S, Izzuna MMG, Khadijah AR, et al. Breast cancer risk prediction model
for Health Risk Assessment Module. Health Technology Assessment (HTA).
Ministry of Health Malaysia. 2015. Report No. MOH/P/PAK/258.12(TR).
17. Hodgson R, Köbrunner SH, Harvey SC, et al. Systematic review of 3D
mammography for breast cancer screening Breast. 2016;27:52-61.
18. Monticciolo DL, Newell MS, Moy L, et al. Breast Cancer Screening in Women at
Higher-Than-Average Risk: Recommendations From the ACR. J Am Coll Radiol.
2018;15(3 Pt A):408-14.
19. Houssami N, Turner RM. Rapid review: Estimates of incremental breast cancer
detection from tomosynthesis (3D-mammography) screening in women with
dense breasts. Breast. 2016;30:141-5.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
20. Lei J, Yang P, Zhang L, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of digital breast tomosynthesis
versus digital mammography for benign and malignant lesions in breasts: a
meta-analysis. Eur Radiol. 2014;24(3):595-602.
21. García-León FJ, Llanos-Méndez A, Isabel-Gómez R. Digital tomosynthesis in
breast cancer: A systematic review. Radiologia. 2015;57(4):333-43.
22. Sickles EA, D’Orsi CJ, Bassett LW, et al. ACR BI-RADS® Mammography. In:
ACR BI-RADS® Atlas, Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System. Reston:
American College of Radiology; 2013.
23. The American Society of Breast Surgeons. Consensus Guideline on ImageGuided Percutaneous Biopsy of Palpable and Nonpalpable Breast Lesions
(Available
at:
https://www.breastsurgeons.org/docs/statements/ConsensusGuideline-on-Image-Guided-Percutaneous-Biopsy-of-Palpable-andNonpalpable-Breast-Lesions.pdf).
24. The American Society of Breast Surgeons. Consensus Guideline on
Concordance Assessment of Image-Guided Breast Biopsies and Management
of Borderline or High-Risk Lesions. (Available at: https://www.breastsurgeons.
org/docs/statements/Consensus-Guideline-on-Concordance-Assessment-ofImage-Guided-Breast-Biopsies.pdf).
25. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Early and locally advanced
breast cancer: diagnosis and management. London: NICE; 2018.
26. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Breast Cancer Version 1.2019:
NCCN; 2019.
27. Hammond ME, Hayes DF, Wolff AC, et al. American society of clinical
oncology/college of American pathologists guideline recommendations for
immunohistochemical testing of estrogen and progesterone receptors in breast
cancer. J Oncol Pract. 2010;6(4):195-7.
28. Arnedos M, Nerurkar A, Osin P, et al. Discordance between core needle biopsy
(CNB) and excisional biopsy (EB) for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PgR) and HER2 status in early breast cancer (EBC). Ann Oncol.
2009;20(12):1948-52.
29. Wolff AC, Hammond MEH, Allison KH, et al. Human Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor 2 Testing in Breast Cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology/
College of American Pathologists Clinical Practice Guideline Focused Update. J
Clin Oncol. 2018;36(20):2105-22.
30. Millar EK, Graham PH, McNeil CM, et al. Prediction of outcome of early ER+
breast cancer is improved using a biomarker panel, which includes Ki-67 and
p53. Br J Cancer. 2011;105(2):272-80.
31. Hafeez F, Neboori HJ, Harigopal M, et al. Is Ki-67 expression prognostic for local
relapse in early-stage breast cancer patients treated with breast conservation
therapy (BCT)? . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;87(2):344-8.
32. Pérez-López ME, García-Gómez J, Alves MT, et al. Ki-67 is a prognostic marker
for hormone receptor positive tumors Clin Transl Oncol. 2016;18(10):996-1002.
33. American Joint Committee on Cancer. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Eighth
Edition. : Springer; 2017.
34. Patient education: Locally advanced and inflammatory breast cancer (Beyond
the Basics) (Available at: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/locally-advancedand-inflammatory-breast-cancer-beyond-the-basics).
35. Hong S, Li J, Wang S. 18FDG PET-CT for diagnosis of distant metastases in
breast cancer patients. A meta-analysis. Surg Oncol. 2013;22(2):139-43.
36. Rong J, Wang S, Ding Q, et al. Comparison of 18 FDG PET-CT and bone
scintigraphy for detection of bone metastases in breast cancer patients. A metaanalysis. Surg Oncol. 2013;22(2):86-91.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
37. Kesson EM, Allardice GM, George WD, et al. Effects of multidisciplinary team
working on breast cancer survival: retrospective, comparative, interventional
cohort study of 13 722 women. BMJ. 2012;344:e2718.
38. Houssami N, Macaskill P, Marinovich ML, et al. The association of surgical
margins and local recurrence in women with early-stage invasive breast cancer
treated with breast-conserving therapy: a meta-analysis. Ann Surg Oncol.
2014;21(3):717-30.
39. Moran MS, Schnitt SJ, Giuliano AE, et al. Society of Surgical Oncology-American
Society for Radiation Oncology consensus guideline on margins for breastconserving surgery with whole-breast irradiation in stages I and II invasive breast
cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;21(3):704-16.
40. Morrow M, Van Zee KJ, Solin LJ, et al. Society of Surgical Oncology-American
Society for Radiation Oncology-American Society of Clinical Oncology
Consensus Guideline on Margins for Breast-Conserving Surgery with WholeBreast Irradiation in Ductal Carcinoma in Situ. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2016;6(5):28795.
41. Senkus E, Kyriakides S, Ohno S, et al. Primary breast cancer: ESMO Clinical
Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2015;26
Suppl 5:v8-30.
42. Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network. Treatment of primary breast cancer.
Edinburgh: SIGN; 2013.
43. Van Zee KJ, Subhedar P, Olcese C, et al. Relationship Between Margin Width
and Recurrence of Ductal Carcinoma in Situ: Analysis of 2996 Women Treated
with Breast-conserving Surgery for 30 Years. Ann Surg. 2015;262(4):623-31.
44. Tadros AB, Smith BD, Shen Y, et al. Ductal Carcinoma in Situ and Margins <2 mm:
Contemporary Outcomes with Breast Conservation. Ann Surg. 2019;269(1):1507.
45. Giuliano AE, Hunt KK, Ballman KV, et al. Axillary dissection vs no axillary
dissection in women with invasive breast cancer and sentinel node metastasis:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2011;305(6):569-75.
46. Donker M, van Tienhoven G, Straver ME, et al. Radiotherapy or surgery of the
axilla after a positive sentinel node in breast cancer (EORTC 10981-22023
AMAROS): a randomised, multicentre, open-label, phase 3 non-inferiority trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(12):1303-10.
47. Zhao M, Liu WG, Zhang L, et al. Can axillary radiotherapy replace axillary
dissection for patients with positive sentinel nodes? A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Chronic Dis Transl Med. 2017;3(1):41-50.
48. Sun Y, Liao M, He L, et al. Comparison of breast-conserving surgery with
mastectomy in locally advanced breast cancer after good response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy: A PRISMA-compliant systematic review and metaanalysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017;96(43):e8367.
49. Kuerer HM, Cordeiro PG, Mutter RW. Optimizing Breast Cancer Adjuvant
Radiation and Integration of Breast and Reconstructive Surgery. Am Soc Clin
Oncol Educ Book. 2017;37:93-105.
50. Oliver JD, Boczar D, Huayllani MT, at al. Postmastectomy Radiation Therapy
(PMRT) before and after 2-Stage Expander-Implant Breast Reconstruction: A
Systematic Review. Medicina (Kaunas). 2019;55(6):pii: E226.
51. Yoon AP, Qi J, Brown DL, et al. Outcomes of immediate versus delayed breast
reconstruction: Results of a multicenter prospective study Breast. 2018;37:72-9.
52. Cancer Facts & Figures 2019 (Available at: https://www.cancer.org/research/
cancer-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer-facts-figures-2019.html).
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
53. Fitzal F, Bjelic-Radisic V, Knauer M, et al. Impact of Breast Surgery in Primary
Metastasized Breast Cancer: Outcomes of the Prospective Randomized Phase
III ABCSG-28 POSYTIVE Trial. Ann Surg. 2019;269(6):1163-9.
54. Tosello G, Torloni MR, Mota BS, et al. Breast surgery for metastatic breast
cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018, Issue 3. Art. No.:
CD011276.
55. Fontanella C, Fanotto V, Rihawi K, et al. Skeletal metastases from breast cancer:
pathogenesis of bone tropism and treatment strategy. Clin Exp Metastasis.
2015;32(8):819-33.
56. Nemelc RM, Stadhouder A, van Royen BJ, et al. The outcome and survival
of palliative surgery in thoraco-lumbar spinal metastases: contemporary
retrospective cohort study. Eur Spine J. 2014;23(11):2272-8.
57. Kycler W, Laski P. Surgical approach to pulmonary metastases from breast
cancer. Breast J. 2012;18(1):52-7.
58. Charalampoudis P, Mantas D, Sotiropoulos GC, et al. Surgery for liver
metastases from breast cancer. Future Oncol. 2015;11(10):1519-30.
59. Chua TC, Saxena A, Liauw W, et al. Hepatic resection for metastatic breast
cancer: a systematic review. Eur J Cancer. 2011;47(15):2282-90.
60. Mariani P, Servois V, De Rycke Y, et al. Liver metastases from breast cancer:
Surgical resection or not? A case-matched control study in highly selected
patients. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2013;39(12):1377-83.
61. Sadot E, Lee SY, Sofocleous CT, et al. Hepatic Resection or Ablation for Isolated
Breast Cancer Liver Metastasis: A Case-control Study with Comparison to
Medically Treated Patients. Ann Surg. 2016;264(1):147-54.
62. Prabhu RS, Press RH, Patel KR, et al. Single-Fraction Stereotactic Radiosurgery
(SRS) Alone Versus Surgical Resection and SRS for Large Brain Metastases: A
Multi-institutional Analysis. . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017;99(2):459-67.
63. Cardoso F, Senkus E, Costa A, et al. 4th ESO-ESMO International Consensus
Guidelines for Advanced Breast Cancer (ABC 4)†. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(8):163457.
64. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG). Long-term
outcomes for neoadjuvant versus adjuvant chemotherapy in early breast cancer:
meta-analysis of individual patient data from ten randomised trials. Lancet
Oncol. 2018;19(1):27-39.
65. Cortazar P, Zhang L, Untch M, et al. Pathological complete response and longterm clinical benefit in breast cancer: the CTNeoBC pooled analysis. Lancet.
2014;384(9938):164-72.
66. Spring LM, Gupta A, Reynolds KL, et al. Neoadjuvant Endocrine Therapy for
Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2(11):1477-86.
67. Gusterson BA, Gelber RD, Goldhirsch A, et al. Prognostic importance of c-erbB-2
expression in breast cancer. International (Ludwig) Breast Cancer Study Group.
J Clin Oncol. 1992;10(7):1049-56.
68. Petrelli F, Borgonovo K, Cabiddu M, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
concomitant trastuzumab in breast cancer: a pooled analysis of two randomized
trials. Anticancer Drugs. 2011;22(2):128-35.
69. Gianni L, Pienkowski T, Im YH, et al. Efficacy and safety of neoadjuvant
pertuzumab and trastuzumab in women with locally advanced, inflammatory,
or early HER2-positive breast cancer (NeoSphere): a randomised multicentre,
open-label, phase 2 trial Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(1):25-32.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
70. Schneeweiss A, Chia S, Hickish T, et al. Pertuzumab plus trastuzumab
in combination with standard neoadjuvant anthracycline-containing and
anthracycline-free chemotherapy regimens in patients with HER2-positive early
breast cancer: a randomized phase II cardiac safety study (TRYPHAENA). Ann
Oncol. 2013;24(9):2278-84.
71. Ismael G, Hegg R, Muehlbauer S, et al. Subcutaneous versus intravenous
administration of (neo)adjuvant trastuzumab in patients with HER2-positive,
clinical stage I-III breast cancer (HannaH study): a phase 3, open-label,
multicentre, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(9):869-78.
72. Wong HS, Subramaniam S, Alias Z, et al. The predictive accuracy of PREDICT:
a personalized decision-making tool for Southeast Asian women with breast
cancer. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94(8):e593.
73. Ginés J, Sabater E, Martorell C, et al. Efficacy of taxanes as adjuvant treatment
of breast cancer: a review and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. Clin
Transl Oncol. 2011;13(7):485-98.
74. Shao N, Wang S, Yao C, et al. Sequential versus concurrent anthracyclines and
taxanes as adjuvant chemotherapy of early breast cancer: a meta-analysis of
phase III randomized control trials Breast. 2012;21(3):389-93.
75. Feng QJ, Zhang F, Huang XY, et al. Effectiveness and complications of
anthracycline and taxane in the therapy of breast cancer: a meta-analysis.
Pathol Oncol Res. 2014;20(1):179-84.
76. Davies C, Pan H, Godwin J, et al. Long-term effects of continuing adjuvant
tamoxifen to 10 years versus stopping at 5 years after diagnosis of oestrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer: ATLAS, a randomised trial. Lancet.
2013;381(9869):805-16. Erratum in: Lancet. 2013;381(9869):804. Erratum in:
Lancet. 2017;389(10082):1884.
77. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. A randomized trial of letrozole in
postmenopausal women after five years of tamoxifen therapy for early-stage
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(19):1793-802.
78. Mamounas EP, Bandos H, Lembersky BC, et al. Use of letrozole after aromatase
inhibitor-based therapy in postmenopausal breast cancer (NRG Oncology/
NSABP B-42): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2019;20(1):88-99.
79. Amir E, Seruga B, Niraula S, et al. Toxicity of adjuvant endocrine therapy in
postmenopausal breast cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;103(17):1299-309.
80. Hadji P, Aapro MS, Body JJ, et al. Management of aromatase inhibitor-associated
bone loss in postmenopausal women with breast cancer: practical guidance for
prevention and treatment. Ann Oncol. 2011;22(12):2546-55.
81. Francis PA, Pagani O, Fleming GF, et al. Tailoring Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy
for Premenopausal Breast Cancer N Engl J Med. 2018;379(2):122-37.
82. Zhang P, Li CZ, Jiao GM, et al. Effects of ovarian ablation or suppression in
premenopausal breast cancer: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Eur J Surg Oncol. 2017;43(7):1161-72.
83. Moja L, Tagliabue L, Balduzzi S, et al. Trastuzumab containing regimens for
early breast cancer Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012, Issue 4.
Art.No.:CD006243.
84. Joensuu H, Bono P, Kataja V, et al. Fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide
with either docetaxel or vinorelbine, with or without trastuzumab, as adjuvant
treatments of breast cancer: final results of the FinHer Trial. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(34):5685-92.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
85. Earl HM, Hiller L, Vallier AL, et al. 6 versus 12 months of adjuvant trastuzumab
for HER2-positive early breast cancer (PERSEPHONE): 4-year diseasefree survival results of a randomised phase 3 non-inferiority trial. Lancet.
2019;393(10191):2599-612.
86. Niraula S, Gyawali B. Optimal duration of adjuvant trastuzumab in treatment
of early breast cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 2019;173(1):103-9.
87. von Minckwitz G, Procter M, de Azambuja E, et al. Adjuvant Pertuzumab
and Trastuzumab in Early HER2-Positive Breast Cancer. N Engl J Med.
2017;37(2):122-31. Erratum in: N Engl J Med. 2017;377(7):702. N Engl J Med.
8;379(16):1585.
88. Carrick S, Parker S, Thornton CE, et al. Single agent versus combination
chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2009, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003372.
89. Xu L, Wu X, Hu C, et al. A meta-analysis of combination therapy versus singleagent therapy in anthracycline- and taxane-pretreated metastatic breast cancer:
results from nine randomized Phase III trials. Onco Targets Ther. 2016;9:4061-74.
90. Robertson JFR, Bondarenko IM, Trishkina E, et al. Fulvestrant 500 mg versus
anastrozole 1 mg for hormone receptor-positive advanced breast cancer
(FALCON): an international, randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2016;388(10063):2997-3005.
91. Finn RS, Martin M, Rugo HS, et al. Palbociclib and Letrozole in Advanced Breast
Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(20):1925-36.
92. Hortobagyi GN, Stemmer SM, Burris HA, et al. Updated results from
MONALEESA-2, a phase III trial of first-line ribociclib plus letrozole versus
placebo plus letrozole in hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced
breast cancer. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(7):1541-7.
93. Tripathy D, Im SA, Colleoni M, et al. Ribociclib plus endocrine therapy for
premenopausal women with hormone-receptor-positive, advanced breast cancer
(MONALEESA-7): a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(7):904-15.
94. Im SA, Lu YS, Bardia A, et al. Overall Survival with Ribociclib plus Endocrine
Therapy in Breast Cancer N Engl J Med. 2019;381(4):307-16.
95. Johnston S, Martin M, Di Leo A, et al. MONARCH 3 final PFS: a randomized
study of abemaciclib as initial therapy for advanced breast cancer. NPJ Breast
Cancer. 2019;5:5.
96. Baselga J, Campone M, Piccart M, et al. Everolimus in postmenopausal hormonereceptor-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(6):520-9.
97. Balduzzi S, Mantarro S, Guarneri V, et al. Trastuzumab-containing regimens for
metastatic breast cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2014,
Issue 6. Art. No.: CD006242.
98. Swain SM, Baselga J, Kim SB, et al. Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel in
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(8):724-34.
99. Verma S, Miles D, Gianni L, et al. Trastuzumab emtansine for HER2-positive
advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(19):1783-91. Erratum in: N
Engl J Med. 2013;368(25):442.
100. Ben-Aharon I, Vidal L, Rizel S, et al. Bisphosphonates in the adjuvant setting
of breast cancer therapy--effect on survival: a systematic review and metaanalysis. PLoS One. 2013;8(8):e70044.
101. O’Carrigan B, Wong MHF, Willson ML, et al. Bisphosphonates and other bone
agents for breast cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017,
Issue 10. Art. No.: CD003474.
102. Atikah S, Hanin FK, Syful Azlie MF, et al. Bone targeting agents in preventing
skeletal related events in metastatic cancers of solid tumours and economic
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
evaluation. Health Technology Assessment (HTA). Ministry of Health Malaysia.
2018. Report No.: MOH/P/PAK/413.18(RR)-e.
103. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG), Darby S, McGale
P, et al. Effect of radiotherapy after breast-conserving surgery on 10-year
recurrence and 15-year breast cancer death: meta-analysis of individual patient
data for 10,801 women in 17 randomised trials. Lancet. 2011;378(9804):1707-16.
104. Hickey BE, LehmanM, Francis DP, et al. Partial breast irradiation for early breast
cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016, Issue 7. Art. No.:
CD007077.
105. Liu G, Dong Z, Huang B, et al. Efficacy and safety of accelerated partial breast
irradiation: a meta-analysis of published randomized studies. Oncotarget.
2017;8(35):59581-91.
106. Coles CE, Griffin CL, Kirby AM, et al. Partial-breast radiotherapy after breast
conservation surgery for patients with early breast cancer (UK IMPORT LOW
trial): 5-year results from a multicentre, randomised, controlled, phase 3, noninferiority trial. Lancet. 2017;390(10099):1048-60.
107. Sedlmayer F, Reitsamer R, Wenz F, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) as
boost in breast cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2017;12(1):23.
108. Zhang L, Zhou Z, Mei X, et al. Intraoperative Radiotherapy Versus WholeBreast External Beam Radiotherapy in Early-Stage Breast Cancer: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94(27):e1143.
109. EBCTCG (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group), McGale P,
Taylor C, et al. Effect of radiotherapy after mastectomy and axillary surgery
on 10-year recurrence and 20-year breast cancer mortality: meta-analysis
of individual patient data for 8135 women in 22 randomised trials. Lancet.
2014;383(9935):2127-35.
110. Dolmans MM, Lambertini M, Macklon KT, et al. EUropean REcommendations
for female FERtility preservation (EU-REFER): A joint collaboration between
oncologists and fertility specialists. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2019;138:233-40.
111. Oktay K, Harvey BE, Partridge AH, et al. Fertility Preservation in Patients
with Cancer: ASCO Clinical Practice Guideline Update. J Clin Oncol.
2018;36(19):1994-2001.
112. Cobo A, García-Velasco J, Domingo J, et al. Elective and Onco-fertility
preservation: factors related to IVF outcomes. Hum Reprod 2018;33(12):2222-31.
113. Rodriguez-Wallberg KA, Eloranta S, Krawiec K, et al. A. Safety of fertility
preservation in breast cancer patients in a register-based matched cohort study.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2018;167(3):761-9.
114. Rodgers RJ, Reid GD, Koch J, et al. The safety and efficacy of controlled ovarian
hyperstimulation for fertility preservation in women with early breast cancer: a
systematic review. Hum Reprod. 2017;32(5):1033-45.
115. Letourneau JM, Sinha N, Wald K, et al. Random start ovarian stimulation
for fertility preservation appears unlikely to delay initiation of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer. Hum Reprod. 2017;32(10):2123-9.
116. Lambertini M, Moore HCF, Leonard RCF, et al. Gonadotropin-Releasing
Hormone Agonists During Chemotherapy for Preservation of Ovarian Function
and Fertility in Premenopausal Patients with Early Breast Cancer: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis of Individual Patient-Level Data. J Clin Oncol.
2018;36(19):1981-90.
117. National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health. Fertility:
assessment and treatment for people with fertility problems. London: Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists; 2013.
118. National
Comprehensive
Cancer
Network.
Genetic/Familial
High-Risk
Assessment: Breast and Ovarian: NCCN; 2019.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
119. Kemp Z, Turnbull A, Yost S, et al. Evaluation of Cancer-Based Criteria for Use in
Mainstream BRCA1 and BRCA2 Genetic Testing in Patients with Breast Cancer.
JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(5):e194428.
120. Wevers MR, Aaronson NK, Verhoef S, et al. Impact of rapid genetic counselling
and testing on the decision to undergo immediate or delayed prophylactic
mastectomy in newly diagnosed breast cancer patients: findings from a
randomised controlled trial. Br J Cancer. 2014;110(4):1081-7.
121. Easton DF, Pharoah PD, Antoniou AC, et al. Gene-panel sequencing and the
prediction of breast-cancer risk. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(23):2243-57.
122. Kast K, Rhiem K, Wappenschmidt B, et al. Prevalence of BRCA1/2 germline
mutations in 21 401 families with breast and ovarian cancer. J Med Genet.
2016;53(7):465-71.
123. Warner E, Plewes DB, Hill KA, et al. Surveillance of BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutation carriers with magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound, mammography,
and clinical breast examination JAMA. 2004;292(11):1317-25.
124. Li X, You R, Wang X, et al. Effectiveness of Prophylactic Surgeries in BRCA1 or
BRCA2 Mutation Carriers: A Meta-analysis and Systematic Review. Clin Cancer
Res. 2016;22(15):3971-81.
125. Ludwig KK, Neuner J, Butler A, et al. Risk reduction and survival benefit of
prophylactic surgery in BRCA mutation carriers, a systematic review. Am J Surg.
2016;212(4):660-9.
126. Mavaddat N, Peock S, Frost D, et al. Cancer risks for BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutation carriers: results from prospective analysis of EMBRACE. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2013;105(11):812-22.
127. Basu NN, Barr L, Ross GL, et al. Contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy: review
of risk factors and risk-reducing strategies. Int J Surg Oncol. 2015;2015:901046.
128. Metcalfe K, Gershman S, Lynch HT, et al. Predictors of contralateral breast
cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Br J Cancer. 2011;104(9):1384-92.
129. Evans DG, Ingham SL, Baildam A, et al. Contralateral mastectomy improves
survival in women with BRCA1/2-associated breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2013;140(1):135-42.
130. Metcalfe K, Gershman S, Ghadirian P, et al. Contralateral mastectomy and
survival after breast cancer in carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations:
retrospective analysis. BMJ. 2014;348:g226.
131. Eleje GU, Eke AC, Ezebialu IU, et al. Risk-reducing bilateral salpingooophorectomy in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews. 2018, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD012464.
132. Terry MB, Daly MB, Phillips KA, et al. Risk-Reducing Oophorectomy and
Breast Cancer Risk Across the Spectrum of Familial Risk. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2019;111(3):331-4.
133. Heemskerk-Gerritsen BA, Seynaeve C, van Asperen CJ, et al. Breast cancer risk
after salpingo-oophorectomy in healthy BRCA1/2 mutation carriers: revisiting the
evidence for risk reduction. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015;107(5):pii: djv033.
134. Cuzick J, Sestak I, Cawthorn S, et al. Tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer:
extended long-term follow-up of the IBIS-I breast cancer prevention trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2015;16(1):67-75.
135. Cuzick J, Sestak I, Forbes JF, et al. Anastrozole for prevention of breast cancer
in high-risk postmenopausal women (IBIS-II): an international, double-blind,
randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9922):1041-8.
136. Cardoso F, Kyriakides S, Ohno S, et al. Early breast cancer: ESMO Clinical
Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up†. Ann Oncol.
2019;30(8):1194-220. Erratum in: Ann Oncol. 2019;30(10):1674. Erratum in: Ann
Oncol. 2019;30(10):1674.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
137. Oeffinger KC, Fontham ET, Etzioni R, et al. Breast Cancer Screening for Women
at Average Risk: 2015 Guideline Update from the American Cancer Society.
JAMA. 2015;314(15):1599-614.
138. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Breast Cancer: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med.
2016;164(4):279-96. Erratum in: Ann Intern Med. 2016;164(6):448.
139. Chan CM, Wan Ahmad WA, Yusof MM, et al. Effects of depression and anxiety
on mortality in a mixed cancer group: a longitudinal approach using standardised
diagnostic interviews. Psychooncology. 2015;24(6):718-25.
140. Chan CMH, Ng CG, Taib NA, et al. Course and predictors of post-traumatic
stress disorder in a cohort of psychologically distressed patients with cancer: A
4-year follow-up study. Cancer. 2018;124(2):406-16.
141. Hewitt M, Herdman R, Holland J, editors. Meeting psychosocial needs of women
with breast cancer. Washington: The National Academies Press; 2004.
142. Bhoo-Pathy N, Ng CW, Lim GC, et al. Financial Toxicity After Cancer in a
Setting with Universal Health Coverage: A Call for Urgent Action. J Oncol Pract.
2019;15(6):e537-e46.
143. Zulkipli AF, Islam T, Mohd Taib NA, et al. Use of Complementary and Alternative
Medicine Among Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer Patients in Malaysia: An Early
Report From the MyBCC Study. Integr Cancer Ther. 2018;17(2):312-21.
144. Chui PL, Abdullah KL, Wong LP, et al. Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Use and Symptom Burden in Women Undergoing Chemotherapy for Breast
Cancer in Malaysia. Cancer Nurs. 2018;41(3):189-99.
145. Mohd Mujar NM, Dahlui M, Emran NA, et al. Complementary and alternative
medicine (CAM) use and delays in presentation and diagnosis of breast cancer
patients in public hospitals in Malaysia. PLoS One. 2017;12(4):e0176394.
146. Chan CM, Wan Ahmad WA, Yusof M, et al. Prevalence and characteristics
associated with default of treatment and follow-up in patients with cancer. Eur J
Cancer Care (Engl). 2015;24(6):938-44.
147. Yu FQ, Murugiah MK, Khan AH, et al. Meta-synthesis exploring barriers to health
seeking behaviour among Malaysian breast cancer patients. Asian Pac J Cancer
Prev. 2015;16(1):145-52.
148. Yip CH, Bhoo Pathy N, Teo SH. A review of breast cancer research in Malaysia.
Med J Malaysia. 2014;69 Suppl A:8-22.
149. Norsa’adah B, Rahmah MA, Rampal KG, et al. Understanding barriers to
Malaysian women with breast cancer seeking help Asian Pac J Cancer Prev.
2012;13(8):3723-30.
150. Taib NA, Yip CH, Low WY. Recognising symptoms of breast cancer as a reason
for delayed presentation in Asian women--the psycho-socio-cultural model for
breast symptom appraisal: opportunities for intervention. Asian Pac J Cancer
Prev. 2011;12(6):1601-8.
151. Lo C, Hales S, Chiu A, et al. Managing Cancer and Living Meaningfully (CALM):
randomised feasibility trial in patients with advanced cancer. BMJ Support Palliat
Care. 2019;9(2):209-18.
152. Rodin G, Lo C, Rydall A, et al. Managing Cancer and Living Meaningfully (CALM):
A Randomized Controlled Trial of a Psychological Intervention for Patients with
Advanced Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(23):2422-32.
153. Khoury B, Lecomte T, Fortin G, et al. Mindfulness-based therapy: a
comprehensive meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2013;33(6):763-71.
154. González-Fernández S, Fernández-Rodríguez C. Acceptance and Commitment
Therapy in Cancer: Review of Applications and Findings. Behav Med.
2019;45(3):255-69.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
155. Breast Cancer Australia Network – Breast Care Nurses (Available at: https://
www.bcna.org.au/about-us/advocacy/position-statements/breast-care-nurses/).
156. Hamer J, Warner E. Lifestyle modifications for patients with breast cancer to
improve prognosis and optimize overall health CMAJ. 2017;189(7):E268-E74.
157. Majid HA, Keow LP, Islam T, et al. Nutritional Status of Breast Cancer Survivors
1 Year after Diagnosis: A Preliminary Analysis from the Malaysian Breast Cancer
Survivorship Cohort Study. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2018;118(4):705-13.
158. World Health Organization. Cancer Control, Knowledge into Action, WHO Guide
for Effective Programmes. Palliative Care. Geneva: WHO; 2007.
159. Freeman HP, Rodriguez RL. History and principles of patient navigation. Cancer.
2011;117(15 Suppl):3539-42.
160. Baik SH, Gallo LC, Wells KJ. Patient Navigation in Breast Cancer Treatment and
Survivorship: A Systematic Review. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(30):3686-96.
161. Cancer Research Malaysia (Available at: https://www.cancerresearch.my/).
162. Taleghani F, Babazadeh S, Mosavi S, et al. The effects of peer support group on
promoting quality of life in patients with breast cancer. Iran J Nurs Midwifery Res.
2012;17(2 Suppl 1):S125-30.
163. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Diet,
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer: a Global Perspective. Continuous
Update Project Expert Report 2018.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What is the adequate tumour free margin in breast
conserving surgery in breast cancer?
1.
BREAST NEOPLASMS/
2.
(breast adj1 (cancer or carcinoma* or neoplasm* or tumo*)).tw.
3.
(breast malignant adj2 (neoplasm* or tumo*)).tw.
4.
(human mammary adj2 (cancer or carcinoma* or neoplasm* or
tumo*)).tw.
5.
cancer of breast.tw.
6.
cancer of the breast.tw.
7.
malignant neoplasm of breast.tw.
8.
malignant tumo?r of breast.tw.
9.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8
10. MASTECTOMY, SEGMENTAL/
11. breast quadrantectom*.tw.
12. breast conserv* adj2 therap*.tw.
13. ((breast conserv* or breast-conserv* or breast sparing or breast-
sparing) adj2 surger*).tw.
14. lumpectom*.tw.
15. ((partial or segmental) adj1 mastectom*).tw.
16. segmentectom*.tw.
17. wide local excision.tw.
18. 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17
19. 9 and 18
20. tum?r margin.tw.
21. 19 and 20
22. limit 21 to (english language and humans and yr=”2010 -Current”)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
A. Risk factors
• What are the risk factors for breast cancer?
B. Screening
• What are the effective screening methods of breast cancer in:
 general population?  high risk group?
C. Referral
• What are the criteria for referral to surgical or breast clinic?
D. Assessment/Diagnosis
• What are the effective approaches for imaging-histopathology
discordance in breast lesions?
• What is the accuracy of tomosynthesis in the diagnosis of breast
cancer?
• What is the accuracy of imaging-guided biopsy in breast lesions?
• What are the elements of adequate imaging report for breast
cancer?
• What is the accuracy of Ki-67 as a predictor and prognostic
marker in breast cancer?
• What is the accuracy of HER2 test in core biopsy specimen of
breast cancer?
E. Staging
• Is positron emission tomography (PET) or PET/computed
tomography accurate and effective in the staging of breast
cancer?
F. Treatment (based on stage)
• What is the role of multidisciplinary team in breast cancer?
• What is the adequate tumour free margin in breast conserving
surgery in breast cancer?
• Is neoadjuvant systemic therapy effective and safe for breast
conserving surgery in breast cancer?
• What is the effective and safe subsequent treatment after sentinel
lymph node biopsy in early breast cancer?
• Is surgery of primary tumour effective and safe in metastatic
breast cancer?
• When is the optimal timing for breast reconstruction (with or
without prosthesis) in breast cancer requiring post-operative
radiotherapy?
• What is the most effective and safe taxane-based regimen in
early breast cancer?
• Is anti-HER2 treatment effective and safe in neoadjuvant,
adjuvant and metastatic breast cancer?
• Is subcutaneous transtuzumab effective and safe in breast
cancer?
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Is ovarian suppression/ovarian ablation effective and safe in premenopausal breast cancer?
• Is endocrine therapy effective and safe in breast cancer?
• Is intraoperative radiotherapy/partial breast irradiation effective
and safe in breast cancer?
• What is the effective and safe first-line systemic therapy in
metastatic breast cancer?
• How to monitor the risk of osteoporotic fractures in patients with
breast cancer on aromatase inhibitors?
• Are bone-modifying agents effective and safe in adjuvant and
metastatic breast cancer?
• Which group of breast cancer patients need to be referred for
fertility preservation?
• What are the effective and safe interventions for fertility
preservation in breast cancer?
• What is the effective and safe local treatment of metastatic breast
cancer?
• What is the effective and safe treatment in loco-regional recurrent
breast cancer?
G. Survivorship Programme
• When to stop surveillance mammography in breast cancer?
H. Familial Breast Cancer
• Who should be offered genetic counselling and testing for
inherited risk to hereditary breast and ovarian cancer? When is
the optimal timing to do it?
• What are the effective clinical management strategies for those
with inherited risk of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer?
• What are the effective clinical management strategies in BRCA
carriers?
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 3
RECOMMENDED REPORTING SYSTEM
INTRODUCTION
The ACR BI-RADS Atlas 2013 (4) is the updated version of the 2003
Atlas. BI-RADS® is designed to standardise breast imaging reporting
and to reduce confusion in breast imaging interpretations. It also
facilitates outcome monitoring and quality assessment.
It contains a lexicon for standardised terminology (descriptors) for
mammography, breast US and MRI, as well as chapters on Report
Organisation and Guidance for use in daily practice.
A. REPORT ORGANISATION
A good reporting system should be concise and organised using the
following structure.
THE STANDARD REPORTING SYSTEM:
A statement indicating that the current examination has been compared
to previous examination(s) should be included (specify date[s]). If this is
not included, it should be assumed that no comparison has been made,
although it is preferable to indicate that no comparison was made.
Below are the components of standard reporting system:
1. Describe the indication for the study.
2. Describe the breast composition.
3. Describe any significant finding using standardised terminology.
4. Compare to previous studies.
5. Conclude to a final assessment category.
Use BI-RADS categories 0 - 6 and the phrase associated with them.
If mammography and US are performed: overall assessment should
be based on the most abnormal of the two breasts, based on the
highest likelihood of malignancy.
6. Give management recommendations.
7. Communicate unexpected findings with the referring clinician.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Standard Reporting
6. Give recommendations on management
7. Communicate unsuspected findings with the referring clinician
1. Describe the indication for the study
The examination is for screening, diagnostic or follow-up. Mention
patient’s history.
If US is performed, mention if it is targeted to a specific location or
supplementary screening. If an implant is present, both standard and
implant-displaced views should be performed and, this should be stated
in the mammography report.
2. Describe the breast composition
In the BI-RADS 2003 edition, the assignment of the breast composition
was based on the overall density resulting in ACR category 1 (<25%
fibroglandular tissue), category 2 (25 - 50%), category 3 (50 - 75%) and
category 4 (>75%).
In BI-RADS 2013, the use of percentages is discouraged because in
individual cases, it is more important to take into account the chance that
a mass can be obscured by fibroglandular tissue than the percentage of
breast density as an indicator for breast cancer risk.
1. Indication
2. Breast
composition
3. Important
findings
4. Comparison
to previous
studies
Composition: a-b-c-d
Mass Asymmetry
Architectural distortion
Calcifications
Associated features
5. Final assessment category
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
In the BI-RADS edition 2013, the assignment of
the breast composition is changed into a, b, c and
d-categories followed by a description:
a- The breasts are almost entirely fatty.
Mammography is highly sensitive in this setting.
b- There are scattered areas of fibroglandular
density.
The term density describes the degree of x-ray
attenuation of breast tissue but not discrete
mammographic findings.
c- The breasts are heterogeneously dense, which
may obscure small masses.
Some areas in the breasts are sufficiently dense
to obscure small masses.
d- The breasts are extremely dense, which lowers
the sensitivity of mammography.
Notice in the left example, the composition is c -
heterogeneously dense, although the volume of
fibroglandular tissue is less than 50%.
The fibroglandular tissue in the upper part is
sufficiently dense to obscure small masses.
So, it is called c, because small masses can be
obscured.
Historically this would have been called an ACR 2:
25 - 50% density.
The example on the right has more than 50%
glandular tissue and is also called composition c.
3. Describe any significant finding using standardized terminology
Use the morphological descriptors: mass, asymmetry, architectural
distortion and calcifications.
These findings may have associated features, like for instance a
mass can be accompanied with skin thickening, nipple retraction,
calcifications, etc.
Correlate these findings with the clinical information, mammography,
US or MRI.
Integrate mammography and US findings in a single report.
a. Mass:
Size
Morphology (shape, margin)
Density
Associated calcifications
Associated features
Location
b. Calcifications:
Morphology - describe typically benign or malignant type by describing
the shape of particles
Distribution
Associated features
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
c. Architectural Distortion:
Associated calcifications
Associated features
Location
d. Asymmetries (asymmetry, global asymmetry, focal asymmetry,
developing asymmetry):
Associated calcifications
Associated features
Location
e. Intramammary lymph node (rarely important):
Location
f. Skin lesion (rarely important):
Location
g. Solitary dilated duct (rarely present):
Location
Mammography and US Lexicon
The table below shows a summary of the mammography and US
lexicon.
Enlarge the table by clicking on the image.
First describe the breast composition.
When there is a significant finding, use the descriptors in the table.
The US lexicon has many similarities to the mammography lexicon,
but there are some descriptors that are specific for US.
Mammography Lexicon
Ultrasound Lexicon
Breast
composition
A. entirely fatty
B. scattered areas of fibroglandular
density
C. heterogeneously dense, which may
obscure masses
D. extremely dense, which lowers
sensitivity
Breast
composition
a. homogenous - fat
b. homogenous - fibroglandular
c. heterogenous
Mass
shape
oval - round - irregular
Mass
shape
oval - round - irregular
margin
circumscribed - onscured -
microlobulated - indistinct -
spiculated
margin
circumscribed or not
circumscribed:
indistinct, angular,
microlobulated, spiculated
density
fat - low - equal - high
orientation
parallel - not parallel
Asymmetry
asymmetry - global - focal - developing
echo
pattern
anechoic - hyperechoic -
complex cyctic/solid
hypoechoic - isoechoic -
heterogenous
Architectural
distortion
distorted parenchyma with no visible
mass
posterior
features
no features - enhancement -
shadowing - combined
pattern
Calcifications
morphology
typically benign
Calcifications
in mass - outside mass - intraductal
suspicious
1. amorphous
2. coarse
heterogenous
3. fine
pleiomorphic
4. fine linear or
fine linear
branching
Associated
features
architectural distortion - duct changes -
skin thickening - skin retraction - edema -
vascularity (absent, internal, rim) -
elasticity
distribution
diffuse - regional - grouped -
linear - segmental
Special
cases (cases
with a unique
diagnosis)
simple cyst - clustered microcysts -
complicated cyst - mass in or on skin -
foreign body (including implants) -
intramammary lymph node - AVM -
Mondor disease - postsurgical fluid
collection - fat necrosis
Associated
features
skin retraction - nipple retraction - skin
thickening - trabecular thickening -
axillary adenopathy - architectural
distortion - calcifications
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
US-Breast Imaging Lexicon
Many descriptors for US are the same as for mammography. For
instance when describe the shape or margin of a mass.
Below are findings that are specific for US:
Breast composition:
• Homogeneous echotexture-fat
• Homogeneous echotexture-fibroglandular
• Heterogeneous echotexture
Mass:
• Orientation: unique to US-imaging, and defined as parallel (benign)
or not parallel (suspicious finding) to the skin.
• Echo pattern: anechoic, hypoechoic, complex cystic and solid,
isoechoic, hyperechoic, heterogeneous.
Echogenicity can contribute to the assessment of a lesion, together
with other feature categories. Alone it has little specificity.
• Posterior features: enhancement, shadowing.
Posterior features represent the attenuation characteristics of a
mass with respect to its acoustic transmission, also of additional
value. Alone it has little specificity.
Calcifications:
• On US poorly characterised compared with mammography, but can
be recognised as echogenic foci, particularly when in a mass.
Special cases - cases with a unique diagnosis or pathognomonic
US appearance:
• Simple cyst
• Complicated cyst
• Clustered microcysts
• Mass in or on skin
• Foreign body including implants
• Lymp nodes - intramammary
• Lymph nodes- axillary
• Vascular abnormalities
• Post-surgical fluid collection
• Fat necrosis
Correlate these findings with clinical information or findings of
mammography, US or MRI. Intregrate the mammography and US
findings in a single report.
4.
Comparison to previous examination(s), if deemed appropriate
by the interpreting physician
Awaiting to compare with previous examination may assume importance
if the finding of concern requires an evaluation of change or stability.
Comparison is not important when a finding has unequivocally benign
features. Comparison may be irrelevant when the finding is inherently
suspicious for malignancy.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
5.
Conclude to final assessment category
The BI-RADS® assessment categories are designed to be concordant
with specific management recommendations. The linking of assessment
categories with concordant management recommendations further
enhances sound medical practice.
If mammography and US are performed; the overall assessment
should be based on the most abnormal of the two breasts, based on
the highest likelihood of a malignancy.
An incomplete (category 0) assessment is usually given for screening
examinations when additional imaging evaluation is recommended
before it is appropriate to render a final assessment.
In category 0 assessment should include specific suggestions for the
next course of action (spot-compression magnification views, US etc)
6. Give management recommendations.
7. Communicate unexpected findings with referring clinician.
The verbal discussions between radiologist, patient and referring
clinician should be documented in the clinical notes/report.
Adapted: Radiology Assistant (Available at: https://radiologyassistant.nl/breast/birads-for-mammography-and-ultrasound-2013)
Final Assessment Categories
Category
Management
Likelihood of
Cancer
0
Need additional imaging
or prior examinations
Recall for additional imaging
and/or await prior
examinations
Not applicable
1
Negative
Routine screening
Essentially 0%
2
Benign
Routine screening
Essentially 0%
6
Known biopsy-proven
Surgical excision when
clinical appropriate
Not applicable
3
Probably benign
Short interval follow-up
(six months) or continued
surveillance
>0% but ≤2%
5
Highly suggestive of
malignancy
Tissue diagnosis
≥95%
4
Suspicious
Tissue diagnosis
4a. low suspicion
of malignancy
(>2% to ≤10%)
4b. moderate
suspicion of
malignancy
(>10% to ≤50%)
4c. high suspicion
of malignancy
(>50% to <95%)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 4
BREAST IMAGING SURVEY FORM
JABATAN RADIOLOGI
Hospital
Tel:
Ext:
or NGCS
/
BREAST IMAGING SURVEY FORM (Please fill in into two copies)
RN:
IC/Passport No:
Name:
Request:
Screening
Diagnostic
Additional Views
Previous imaging & date:
Menarche
y/o
Menarche
Parity
Number of children
Breastfed (in months)
y/o
LMP
/
Day
Month
Year
Family History of Cancer (Relationship & age of onset)
Personal History of Cancer (Breast, Ovarian and others)
Hormonal history (HRT/OCP and others)
Genetic testing (BRCA 1, BRCA 2 and others)
Breast pain/tenderness
Lump in breast
Nipple discharge
Skin & nipple charges
Nipple retraction/Inversion
Axillary nodes swelling
Biopsy history & HPE
Previous surgical intervention
(Surgery/Implant/RT/ChemoTx)
Right
Left
Yes
No
Yes
No
Impression:
Right
Left
Signature & stamp of the Medical Officer/Specialist
UOQ
UIQ
LOQ
LIQ
12
6
9
3
UOQ
UIQ
LOQ
LIQ
12
6
9
3
Risk Factors
Remarks
Remarks
Clinical Data
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Makluman Penggunaan Borang Permohonan
Pemeriksaan Radiologi bagi Perkhidmatan Radiologi Yang Baharu Di Fasiliti
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia. Putrajaya 6 November 2018
Right
Left
UOQ
UIQ
LOQ
LIQ
12
6
9
3
UOQ
UIQ
LOQ
LIQ
12
6
9
3
RADIOGRAPHER FINDINGS:-
Please note any:
Scar
Mole
Lump
Nipple changes
Skin Folds
Projection
kVp
mAs
Thickness
Dose
No. of images
PGMI score
Right
Left
CC
MILO
CC
MILO
Additional views
Repeat projections
BIRADS Breast composition:
RADIOLOGIST REPORT:-
a
b
c
d
e
Signature of Radiographer)
Please tick () where appropriate
Findings
RT
LT
Mass
Architectural
Asymmetrical
distortion
density
Axillary
nodes
Others
Calcification :
(i) Macro
(ii) Macro
Impression:
BIRADS Category:-
Recommendation:-
Signature & stamp of the Medical Officer/Specialist
0
1
2
3
4
5
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 5
TNM CLASSIFICATION OF BREAST CANCER
Definition of Primary Tumor (T) – Clinical and Pathological
*Note: Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a benign entity and is removed from TNM
staging in the AJCC Cáncer Staging Manual, 8lh Edition.
Primary tumor cannot be assessed
No evidence of primary tumor
Ductal carcinoma in situ
Paget disease of the nipple NOT associated with invasive
carcinoma and/or carcinoma in situ (DCIS) in the underlying breast parenchyma. Carcinomas in the breast
parenchyma associated with Paget disease are categorized based on the size and characteristics of the
parenchymal disease, although the presence of Paget
disease should still be noted.
Tumor ≤20 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor ≤1 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >1 mm but ≤5 mm in greatest dimension (round
any measurement 1.0-1.9 mm to 2 mm).
Tumor >5 mm but ≤10 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >10 mm but ≤20 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >20 mm but ≤50 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >50 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor of any size with direct extension to the chest wall
and/or to the skin (ulceration or macroscopic nodules);
invasion of the dermis alone does not qualify as T4
Extension to the chest wall; invasion or adherence to
pectoralis muscle in the absence of invasion of chest wall
structures does not qualify as T4
Ulceration and/or ipsilateral macroscopic satellite nodules
and/or edema (including peau d’orange) of the skin that
does not meet the criteria for
inflammatory carcinoma
Both T4a and T4b are present
Inflammatory carcinoma (see “Rules for Classification”)
T Category
T Criteria
TX
T0
Tis (DCIS)*
Tis (Paget)
T1
T1mi
T1a
T1b
T1c
T2
T3
T4
T4a
T4b
T4c
T4d
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Definition of Regional Lymph Nodes - Clinical (cN)
Note: (sn) and (f) suffixes should be added to the N category to denote confirmation
of metastasis by sentinel node biopsy or fine needle aspiration/core needle
biopsy respectively.
*The cNX category is used sparingly in cases where regional lymph nodes
have previously been surgically removed or where there is no documentation
of physical examination of the axilla.
“cN 1mi is rarely used but may be appropriate in cases where sentinel node
biopsy is performed before tumor resection, most likely to occur in cases
treated with neoadjuvant therapy.
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
(e.g., previously removed)
No regional lymph node metastases (by imaging or clinical
examination)
Metastases to movable ipsilateral Level I, II axillary lymph
node(s)
Micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than 0.2
mm, but none larger than 2.0 mm)
Metastases in ipsilateral Level I, II axillary lymph nodes
that are clinically fixed or matted;
or in ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in the absence of
axillary lymph node metastases
Metastases in ipsilateral Level I, II axillary lymph nodes
fixed to one another (matted) or to other structures
Metastases only in ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in
the absence of axillary lymph node metastases
Metastases in ipsilateral infraclavicular (Level III axillary)
lymph node(s) with or without Level 1, II axillary lymph
node involvement;
or in ipsilateral internal mammary lymph node(s) with Level
I, II axillary lymph node metastases;
or metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s)
with or without axillary or internal mammary lymph node
involvement
Metastases in ipsilateral infraclavicular lymph node(s)
Metastases in ipsilateral internal mammary lymph node(s)
and axillary lymph node(s)
Metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s)
cN Category
cN Criteria
cNX*
cN0
cN1
cN1mi"
cN2
cN2a
cN2b
cN3
cN3a
cN3b
cN3c
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (e.g., not
removed for pathological study or previously removed)
No regional lymph node metastasis identified or ITCs only
ITCs only (malignant cell clusters no larger than 0.2 mm)
in regional lymph node(s)
Positive molecular findings by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); no ITCs detected
Micrometastases; or metastases in 1 - 3 axillary lymph
nodes;
and/or clinically negative internal mammary nodes with
micrometastases or macrometastases by sentinel lymph
node biopsy
Micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than 0.2
mm, but none larger than 2.0 mm)
Metastases in 1 - 3 axillary lymph nodes, at least one
metastasis larger than 2.0 mm
Metastases in ipsilateral internal mammary sentinel nodes,
excluding ITCs
pN1a and pN1b combined
Metastases in 4 - 9 axillary lymph nodes; or positive
ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes by imaging in
the absence of axillary lymph node metastases
Metastases in 4 - 9 axillary lymph nodes (at least one
tumor deposit larger than 2 .0 mm)
Metastases in clinically detected internal mammary lymph
nodes with or without microscopic confirmation; with
pathologically negative axillary nodes
Metastases in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes; or in
infraclavicular (Level III axillary) lymph nodes;
or positive ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes by
imaging in the presence of one or more positive Level I, II
axillary lymph nodes;
or in more than three axillary lymph nodes and micrometastases or macrometastases by sentinel lymph node
biopsy in clinically negative ipsilateral internal mammary
lymph nodes;
or in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes
Metastases in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes (at least
one tumor deposit larger than 2.0 mm);
or metastases to the infraclavicular (Level III axillary
lymph) nodes
pN1a or pN2a in the presence of cN2b (positive internal
mammary nodes by imaging);
or pN2a in the presence of pN1b
Metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes
pN Category
pN Criteria
pNX
pN0
pN0(i+)
pN0(mol+)
pN1
pN1mi
pN1a
pN1b
pN1c
pN2
pN2a
pN2b
pN3
pN3a
pN3b
pN3c
Definition of Regional Lymph Nodes - Pathological (pN)
Note: (sn) and (f) suffixes should be added to the N category to denote confirmation
of metastasis by sentinel node biopsy or FNA/core needle biopsy respectively,
with NO further resection of nodes.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Definition of Distant Metastasis (M)
*Note that imaging studies are not required to assign the cMO category
No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases*
No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases
in the presence of tumor cells or deposits no larger than
0.2 mm detected microscopically or by molecular
techniques in circulating blood, bone marrow, or other
nonregional nodal tissue in a patient without symptoms or
signs of metastases
Distant metastases detected by clinical and radiographic
means (cM) and/or histologically proven metastases larger
than 0.2 mm (pM)
M Category
M Criteria
M0
cM0(i+)
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
AJCC Anatomic Stage Groups
The Anatomic Stage Group table should only be used in global regions
where biomarker tests are not routinely available. Cancer registries in
the U.S. must use the Prognostic Stage Group table for case reporting.
Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Eighth
Edition. Springer; 2017
When T is...
And N is...
And M is...
Then the stage
group is...
Tis
N0
M0
0
T1
N0
M0
IA
T0
N1mi
M0
IB
T1
N1mi
M0
IB
T0
N1
M0
IIA
T1
N1
M0
IIA
T2
N0
M0
IIA
T2
N1
M0
IIB
T3
N0
M0
IIB
T0
N2
M0
IIIA
T1
N2
M0
IIIA
T2
N2
M0
IIIA
T3
N1
M0
IIIA
T3
N2
M0
IIIA
T4
N0
M0
IIIB
T4
N1
M0
IIIB
T4
N2
M0
IIIB
Any T
N3
M0
IIIC
Any T
Any N
M1
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 6
HISTOPATHOLOGY WORKSHEET FOR BREAST BIOPSY/
MASTECTOMY
HSB/PAT/HIS/BOR/01
(Breast Cancer Pin 1/2015)
KEMENTERIAN KESIHATAN MALAYSIA
PERKHIDMATAN PATOLOGI
HOSPITAL …………………..
HISTOPATHOLOGY WORKSHEET FOR BREAST BIOPSY/MASTECTOMY
Name:
HPE No:
IC No:
PATHOLOGIST & MO IN-CHARGE:
GROSSING DATE:
NOTES:
SLIDES READY ON:
Received by:
*Blocking:
No of blocks:
*Slides to MO:
Grossed by:
*Sectioning:
No of slides:
*Slides to Pathologist:
Assisted by:
*Staining:
*QC check:
* Please write date and
name/initials
SPECIMEN CONTAINER LABELED AS:
1. GROSS DESCRIPTION
1.1. Type of specimen:
Mastectomy -
Right
Left
Mastectomy with axillary resection -
Right
Left
Re-excision (completion mastectomy) -
Right
Left
Lumpectomy/excision biopsy (weight: …………… grams)
Hookwire Localization biopsy (weight: …………… grams)
Wide excision (weight: …………… grams)
1.2. Size:
Breast tissue:
Axillary tissue:
Skin tissue:
1.3. Appearance of skin & nipple:
1.4. Description of lesion(s)
Focality:
Single
Multiple
Site:
UOQ
UIQ
LOQ
LIQ
Central
__________________________
Size:
Appearance:
Additional comments:
1.5. Distance from tumour to resection margins:
Superior -
Medial -
Inferior -
Lateral -
Deep -
Superficial -
1.6. Number of lymph nodes retrieved: ……… (………. mm to ………. mm in diameter)
1.7. Sampling (see below)
Grossed by:
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. Jemputan Menghadiri Bengkel ‘Standardization
of Reporting’ Anatomik Patologi, 2015. Kota Bharu 28 Julai 201
2. HISTOLOGY
2.1.
Microscopic description:
Histological type:
Invasive carcinoma (NST)
Invasive lobular carcinoma
Mucinous carcinoma
Tubular carcinoma
Papillary carcinoma
Medullary
Other:
Tubular score:
1
2
3
Nuclear score:
1
2
3
Mitoses:
1
2
3
Comment:
2.2.
Modified Bloom & Richardson grade:
1 (score: ……/9)
2 (score: ……/9)
3 (score: ……/9)
2.3.
Tumour size:
- Whole tumour (invasive & DCIS) size: ……………. mm
- Invasive tumour size: ……………… mm
2.4.
Tumour extent:
Localised
Multiple invasive foci
2.5.
Vascular/lymphatic invasion:
Not seen
Present
Possible
2.6.
Pathologic response to neoadjuvant therapy (RCPA Australasia 2012):
Not applicable
No definite response
Partial pathologic response
Complete pathologic response
(Refer explanatory notes):
2.7. Associated lesion(s):
- DCIS:
No
Yes:
- Histologic type: __________________________
- Nuclear grade:
High
Intermediate
Low
- Necrosis
Absent
Present
- Microcalcification:
No
Yes
- Extensive intraductal component ( 25%):
No
Yes
- LCIS/Lobular neoplasia:
No
Yes
- Other abnormalities:
No
Yes (specify):
2.8. Skin and nipple:
- Paget’s disease
No
Yes
- Other comments:
2.9. Resection margins (in relation to both invasive and in-situ components):
2.10. Axillary lymph nodes:
Total retrieved - …………….
Number positive - …………….
Extranodal extension:
No
Yes (? no lymph nodes)
If single node positive:
Macrometastasis (>2 mm)
Micrometastasis (0.2 mm to 2 mm)
Isolated tumour cells (<0.2 mm)
Comment on sentinel lymph node (if applicable):
2.11. Immunohistochemical study:
-
Oestrogen receptor*:
+ve
-ve
(……… % of tumour cells)
-
Progesterone receptor*:
+ve
-ve
(……… % of tumour cells)
-
c-erb B2:
+ve
-ve
Equivocal/weakly positive (2+)
*Staining of 1% of cells of any intensity is considered positive (ASCO/CAP Guidelines).
*For microinvasive tumour, please comment on ER/PR status in DCIS component.
Done on previous biopsy: Please refer to HPE report ________________
3. FINAL INTERPRETATION
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 7
MEDICATIONS IN SYSTEMIC THERAPY OF BREAST CANCER AND THEIR COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
CHEMOTHERAPY
Capecitabine
• Cardiotoxicity: uncommon but can be fatal
• Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, mucositis,
abdominal pain
• Hand-foot syndrome
• Liver: Hyperbilirubinemia
• General: fatigue/weakness
• Use with caution in patients with history of heart
disease
• Dose reduction is a must in patients with
moderate renal dysfunction
• Monitor for hand-foot syndrome
Cyclophosphamide
• Cardiotoxicity: uncommon but can be fatal
• Urotoxicity (bladder ulceration, necrosis, fibrosis,
contracture): seldom but can be fatal
• Haematological: myelosuppression (leukopenia,
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anaemia)
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort,
anorexia, diarrhoea
• Dermatological: alopecia, rashes, pigmentation, changes
in nails
• Use with caution in patients with history of heart
disease
• Monitoring of complete blood counts is essential
• Used with caution in patients with active urinary
tract infection
• Advise patient to report urinary symptoms
Docetaxel
• Haematological: neutropenia, anaemia, febrile
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, infections
• Dermatological: hypersensitivity, neuropathy, skin
reactions, alopecia, nail disorders
• Gastrointestinal: dysgeusia (taste disturbance),
constipation, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
mucositis
• Respiratory: dyspnoea
• General: myalgia, asthenia, pain, fluid retention
• Prophylactic anti-emetic and corticosteroids
should be given
• Use with caution in patients with history of liver
impairment and heart disease
• Should not be given to patients with neutrophil
counts of <1500 cells/mm3
• Monitor blood count
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
Doxorubicin
• Cardiovascular: cardiotoxicity, i.e. cardiomyopathy,
congestive heart failure (seldom, irreversible and can be
fatal)
• Dermatological: extravasation, skin necrosis, cellulitis,
• Use with caution in patients with history of heart
disease
• Cardiac function should be assessed before
undergoing treatment and has to be carefully
vesication, local phlebitis, thrombophlebitis, reversible
alopecia, erythematous streaking along vein proximal to
site of injection, phlebosclerosis
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, mucositis (stomatitis,
oesophagitis), diarrhoea, abdominal pain
• Haematological: myelosuppression, leucopenia,
haemorrhage
• General: dehydration, facial flushing (if an injection has
been given too rapidly)
monitored throughout therapy
• Contraindicated in patients with marked liver
impairment
• Initial treatment requires close observation and
extensive laboratory monitoring
Epirubicin
• Cardiac toxicity: seldom, irreversible and can be fatal
• Haematological: leukopenia, neutropenia, anaemia,
thrombocytopenia
• Gynaecological: amenorrhea
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, mucositis, diarrhoea
• Dermatological: keratitis, alopecia, local skin toxicity,
rash/itch
• Opthalmological: conjunctivitis
• General: lethargy, infection
• Use with caution in patients with history of heart
disease
• Use with caution in patients with hepatic
impairment
• Cardiac function should be assessed before
undergoing treatment and has to be carefully
monitored throughout therapy
Eribulin
• Haematological: neutropenia, anaemia
• Dermatological: alopecia
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, constipation
• General: asthenia/fatigue
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Monitor complete blood counts prior to each
dose; increase frequency of monitoring in
patients who develop Grade 3 or 4 cytopenias
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
Fluorouracil (5-FU)
• Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea, stomatitis, oesophagitis, heart
burn
• Haematological: anaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia
• Hand-foot syndrome
• Cardiovascular: angina pectoris, myocardial infarction,
arrhythmia, acute pulmonary oedema
• Dermatological: alopecia, dermatitis
• Prophylactic anti-emetic and corticosteroids
should be given
• Use with caution in patients with history of heart
disease
• Monitor hand-foot syndrome
Gemcitabine
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting
• Haematological: neutropenia, anaemia,
thrombocytopenia
• Hepatological: increased liver enzymes
• Monitor for myelosuppression prior to each
cycle
• Monitor renal function and hepatic function prior
to initiation and during treatment
• Nephrological: proteinuria, haematuria
• Respiratory: dyspnoea
• Dermatological: rash
• General; fever, oedema
Paclitaxel
• Haematological: anaemia, infections
• Dermatological: hypersensitivity reaction, irritation at
injection site, alopecia
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, mucositis
• Neuropathy
• General: myalgia, oedema, hypotension
• Patients should be pretreated with
corticosteroids, diphenhydramine and
H2 antagonists
• Should not be given to patients with neutrophil
counts of <1500 cells/mm3
• Monitor blood count
Vinorelbine
• Haematological: neutropenia, anaemia
• Liver enzyme elevation
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, constipation
• Dermatological: injection site reaction
• Peripheral neuropathy
• General: asthenia
• Monitor complete blood counts prior to each
dose; do not administer to patients with
neutrophil counts <1000 cells/mm3
• Monitor liver function during treatment
• Consider routine stool softener during
treatment
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Abemaciclib
• Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, decreased appetite
• Haematological: neutropenia, leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia, anaemia, infections
• General: fatigue, headache
• Monitor complete blood counts prior to the start
of therapy, every 2 weeks for first 2 months,
monthly for the next 2 months and as clinically
indicated
Ado-trastuzumab
emtansine
• Infusion-related reactions: flushing, chills, pyrexia,
dyspnoea, hypotension, wheezing, bronchospasm,
tachycardia
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, constipation
• Haematological: thrombocytopenia
• Hepatological: increased liver enzymes
• Vascular: haemorrhage, epistaxis
• Musculoskeletal pain, peripheral neuropathy
• General: headache, fatigue, arthralgia
• Hepatotoxicity and cardiac toxicity: uncommon
but can be fatal
• Use with caution in patient with history of
hepatic impairment and heart disease
• Evaluate cardiac function prior to and during
treatment
Everolimus
• Gastrointestinal: stomatitis, diarrhoea, abdominal pain,
nausea, decreased appetite
• Monitor complete blood count prior to starting
and every 6 months for the first year of
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
TARGETED THERAPY
• Haematological: infections, fever, rash
• Respiratory: cough
• General: fatigue, asthenia, oedema, headache
treatment
Lapatinib
• Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting
• Hand-foot syndrome
• Dermatological: rash
• General: fatigue
• Monitor hand-foot syndrome
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
Olaparib
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain,
diarrhoea, dysgeusia, dyspepsia, decreased appetite,
constipation, stomatitis
• Haematological: neutropenia, leukopenia, infections
• General: fatigue, asthenia, dizziness
• Monitor hematological toxicity at baseline and
monthly thereafter
Palbociclib
• Haematological: neutropenia, leukopenia, anaemia,
thrombocytopenia, infections
• General: fatigue, asthenia, pyrexia
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, diarrhoea, vomiting, stomatitis,
decreased appetite
• Dermatological: alopecia, rash
• Monitor complete blood count prior to start
therapy and at the beginning of each cycle, on
day 15 of the first 2 cycles and as clinically
indicated
Pertuzumab
• Left ventricular dysfunction: seldom but can be fatal
• Infusion reactions: pyrexia, chills, fatigue, headache,
asthenia, hypersensitivity, nausea, vomiting, rash
• Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea
• Haematological: neutropenia
• General: fatigue
• Evaluate cardiac function prior to and during
treatment
Ribociclib
• Haematological: neutropenia, leukopenia, infections
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
constipation
• Dermatological: alopecia, rash
• Respiratory: cough
• General: fatigue, headache
• Use with caution in patients with history of heart
problems and hepatic impairment
• Perform complete blood count before initiating
therapy; monitor it every 2 weeks for the first 2
cycles, at the beginning of each subsequent 4
cycles and as clinically indicated
Trastuzumab
• Cardiotoxicity: can be fatal
• Infusion reactions: fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, pain (in
some cases at tumour sites), headache, dizziness,
• Evaluate cardiac function prior to and during
treatment
• Prophylactic antihistamines should be given
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
dyspnoea, hypotension, rash, asthenia
• Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea
• Haematological: neutropenia, anaemia, infections
• Respiratory: cough
• General: fatigue, myalgia
HORMONAL THERAPY
Anastrozole
• Dermatological: hot flushes, rash
• Musculoskeletal: arthritis, pain, back pain, bone pain,
arthralgia, asthenia
• Hypertension, headache
• Depression, insomnia
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, pharyngitis
• Bone: osteoporosis, fractures
• Peripheral oedema, lymphoedema
• Respiratory: cough, dyspnoea
• Monitor bone mineral density throughout
treatment
Exemestane
• Dermatological: hot flushes, sweating
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, increased appetite
• General: fatigue
• Monitor bone mineral density
Fulvestrant
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, constipation, anorexia
• Dermatological: injection site pain, hot flushes
• Musculoskeletal: bone pain, back pain, musculoskeletal
pain, arthralgia, fatigue
• Respiratory: dyspnoea
• Increased hepatic enzymes
• Use with caution in patients with hepatic
impairment
Letrozole
• Dermatological: hot flushes, flushing
• Headache, dizziness
• Arthralgia, asthenia
• Oedema
• Monitor bone mineral density throughout
treatment
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
MEDICATION
COMMON SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
• Hypercholesterolaemia
• Increased sweating
• Bone and musculoskeletal pain
Tamoxifen
• Gastrointestinal disorders: nausea
• General disorder: fatigue/asthenia
• Use with caution in patients with history of
thromboembolic events
Sources:
1. Xeloda® (capecitabine) [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Hoffman-La Roche, Inc :2015.
2. Endoxan® (cyclophosphamide) [package insert]. Deerfield, IL; Baxter, Inc: 2013.
3. Taxotere® (docetaxel) [package insert]. Bridgewater, NJ; Sanofi-Aventis, Inc: 2019.
4. Adriamycin® (doxorubicin) [package insert]. New York, NY: Pfizer, Inc: 2019.
5. Ellence® (epirubicin) [package insert]. New York, NY: Pfizer, Inc: 2019.
6. Halaven® (eribulin) [package insert]. Woodcliff Lake, NJ: Eisai, Inc: 2017.
7. Micromedex Solutions, Truven Health Analytics Inc. MIMS Gateway Service Portal. (Available at: http//www.mimsgateway.com/Malaysia/Online.as)
8. Gemzar® (gemcitabine) [package insert]. Indianapolis, IN: Eli Lilly, Inc: 2019.
9. Paclitaxel Injection, USP (paclitaxel) [package insert]. Lake Forest, IL: Hospira, Inc: 2018
10. Navelbine® (vinorelbine) [package insert]. Boulogne, France: Pierre Fabre, Inc: 2014.
11. Verzenio® (abemaciclib) [package insert]. Indianapolis, IN: Eli Lilly, Inc: 2019.
12. Kadcyla® (ado-trastuzumab emtansine) [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Genentech, Inc: 2019.
13. Afinitor® (everolimus) [package insert]. East Hanover, NJ: Novartis, Inc: 2018.
14. Tykerb® (lapatinib) [package insert]. East Hanover, NJ: Novartis, Inc: 2018.
15. Lynparza® (olaparib) [package insert]. Wilmington, DE: AstraZeneca, Inc: 2019.
16. Ibrance® (palbociclib) [package insert]. New York, NY: Pfizer, Inc: 2019.
17. Perjeta® (pertuzumab) [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Genentech, Inc: 2018.
18. Kisqali® (ribociclib) [package insert]. East Hanover, NJ: Novartis, Inc: 2019.
19. Herceptin® (trastuzumab) [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Genentech, Inc: 2015.
20. Arimidex® (anastrozole) [package insert]. Baudette, MN: ANI Pharmaceuticals, Inc: 2018.
21. Aromasin® (exemestane) [package insert]. New York, NY: Pfizer, Inc: 2019.
22. Faslodex® (fulvestrant) [package insert]. Wilmington, DE: AstraZeneca, Inc: 2019.
23. Femara® (letrozole) [package insert]. East Hanover, NJ: Novartis, Inc: 2014.
24. Nolvadex®-D (ribociclib) [package insert]. Mississauga, Ontario: AstraZeneca Canada, Inc: 2015.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 8
BRCA1/2 TESTING CRITERIAa,b
Meeting one or more of these criteria warrants further personalised
risk assessment, genetic counselling and, often genetic testing and
management. Testing of an individual without a cancer diagnosis
should only be considered when an appropriate affected family member
is unavailable for testing.
• Individual from a family with a known BRCA1/2 pathogenic/likely
pathogenic variant, including such variants found on research
testingb
• Personal history of breast cancerc + one or more of the following:
 Diagnosed ≤45 years of age
 Diagnosed 46 - 50 years of age with:
– An additional breast cancer primary at any aged
– ≥1 close blood relativee with breast cancer at any age
– ≥1 close blood relativee with high-grade (Gleason score ≥7)
prostate cancer
– An unknown or limited family historya
 Diagnosed ≤60 years of age with:
– Triple negative breast cancer
 Diagnosed at any age with:
– ≥1 close blood relativee with:
• breast cancer diagnosed ≤50 years of age; or
• ovarian carcinoma;f or
• male breast cancer; or
• metastatic prostate cancer;g or
• pancreatic cancer
– ≥2 additional diagnosesg of breast cancer at any age in patient
and/or in close blood relatives
 Ashkenazi Jewish ancestryh
• Personal history of ovarian carcinomaf
• Personal history of male breast cancer
• Personal history of pancreatic canceri
• Personal history of metastatic prostate cancerg
• Personal history of high-grade prostate cancer (Gleason score ≥7)
at any age with
 ≥1 close blood relativese with ovarian carcinoma, pancreatic
cancer or metastatic prostate cancerg at any age or breast cancer
<50 years of age; or
 ≥2 close blood relativese with breast or prostate cancer at any
age; or
 Ashkenazi Jewish ancestryh
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• BRCA1/2 pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant detected by tumour
profiling on any tumor type in the absence of germline pathogenic/
likely pathogenic variant analysis
• Regardless of family history, some individuals with an BRCA-related
cancer may benefit from genetic testing to determine eligibility for
targeted treatmentj
• An individual who does not meet the other criteria but with ≥1
first- or second-degree bloode relativek meeting any of the above
criteria. The significant limitations of interpreting test results for an
unaffected individual should be discussed.
a For further details regarding the nuances of genetic counselling and testing, see BR/
OV-A.
b Irrespective of degree of relatedness
c For the purposes of these guidelines, invasive and ductal carcinoma in situ breast
cancers should be included
d Two breast cancer primaries includes bilateral (contralateral) disease or two or more
clearly separate ipsilateral primary tumours either synchronously or asynchronously
e Close blood relatives include first-, second- and third-degree relatives on same side
of family (see BR/OV-B)
f Includes fallopian tube and primary peritoneal cancers. BRCA-related ovarian
cancers are associated with epithelial non-mucinous histology. Lynch syndrome
can be associated with both non-mucinous and mucinous epithelial tumours. Be
attentive for clinical evidence of Lynch syndrome (see NCCN
Guidelines for Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Colorectal). Specific types
of non-epithelial ovarian cancers and tumours can also be associated with other
rare syndromes. Examples include an association between sex-cord tumours with
annular tubules and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome or Sertoli-Leydig tumors and DICER1related disorders.
g Metastatic prostate cancer is biopsy-proven and/or with radiographic evidence
and includes distant metastasis and regional bed or nodes. It is not a biochemical
recurrence.
h Testing for Ashkenazi Jewish founder-specific pathogenic/likely pathogenic
variant(s), should be performed first. Comprehensive genetic testing may be
considered if ancestry also includes non-Ashkenazi Jewish relatives or if other
BRCA-related criteria are met. Founder pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants exist
in other populations.
i Approximately 2 - 5% of unselected cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma will have
BRCA1/2 pathegonic/likely pathogenic variant. However, the disease is highly lethal
and the option to test the affected relative may not be available in future. Thus,
there may be significant benefit to family members in testing these patients near
the time of diagnosis. In addition, increasing evidence suggests that identification of
BRCA1/2 pathogenic/like pathogenic variant may direct use of targeted therapies
for patients with pancreatic cancer (see NCCN Guidelines for Pancreatic
Adenocarcinoma). (Holter S, Borgida A, Dodd A, et al. J Clin Oncol 2015;33:31243129. Shindo K, YU J, Suenaga M, et al. J Clin Oncol 2017;35:3382-3390.
j E.g., PARP inhibitors for ovarian cancer and metastatic HER2-negative breast
cancer; platinum therapy for prostate cancer. See the relevant NCCN treatment
guidelines (e.g. NCCN Guidelines for Breast Cancer; NCCN Guidelines for Prostate
Cancer) for further details.
k This may be extended to an affected third-degree relative if related through two male
relatives (e.g. paternal grandfather’s mother or sister).
Source: National Comprehensive Cancer Network Guidelines Version 3.2019.
BRCA-Related Breast and/or Ovarian Cancer Syndrome. NCCN; 2019.
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
Appendix 9
POST-TREATMENT CANCER SURVIVORSHIP
(MANAGEMENT OF TREATMENT COMPLICATIONS)
Breast cancer patients may be at risk of developing treatment-related
complications. Thus, healthcare providers must recognise and manage
the long-term sequelae of the constellation of therapeutic modalities.
There is limited evidence for multidisciplinary rehabilitation among
these populations. A systematic review concluded that multidisciplinary
rehabilitation was not harmful and may improve functional ability and
quality of life in the short-term.1
• Breast cancer-related lymphoedema
Breast cancer-related lymphoedema (BCRL) is a common consequence
of breast cancer treatment. Patient should be counselled on ways to
prevent or reduce risk of lymphedema. Weight loss for those who are
overweight or obese may reduce this risk.2,3 Good evidence showed
that there was no increased risk of BRCL with exercise; thus patient
should not restrict or avoid physical activity.4 Patients should be
routinely examined for clinical symptoms or swelling suggestive of
lymphoedema. They should be referred to therapists knowledgeable
about the diagnosis and treatment of it.
• Physiotherapist plays an important role in the rehabilitation care of
women with breast cancer as well as the care of the survivors.
• Late onset cardiotoxicity
Occurrence of late onset cardiotoxicity associated with chemotherapy
is generally low except for anthracycline especially if dose given is
above the limit. If occur, it typically presents as reduced left ventricular
function failure. In contrast, trastuzumab cardiotoxicity usually occur
during treatment and does not have risk of delayed cardiotoxicity.5
Identification of high-risk patients including patients with pre-existing
heart problems, cardiovascular (CV) risk factors and treatments like
trastuzumab and anthracyclines,6 education of patients on healthy
lifestyle modifications, aggressive management of underlying CV
risk factors, consideration of cardioprotective strategies and, routine
surveillance of left ventricular function before and after therapies
are recommended to reduce breast cancer treatment-associated
cardiotoxicities.7 Aerobic exercise is considered a promising nonpharmacological strategy to prevent and/or treat chemotherapyinduced cardiotoxicity.5
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
• Cognitive impairment
Cognitive impairment is one of the frequent complications reported
by patients with breast cancer. All patients need to be screened for
cognitive impairment and to identify reversible contributing factors e.g.
organic brain disease, mood disorder, endocrine problem, dehydration,
infections or medication-related and optimally treat when possible.
• Fatigue
Studies of long-term cancer survivors suggested that approximately
one-quarter to one-third experienced persistent fatigue for up to 10
years after cancer diagnosis.8 Fatigue has a negative impact on work,
social relationship, mood and daily activities. It causes impairment in
overall quality of life during and after treatment. All patients should be
assessed for fatigue and treated for any causative factors including
anaemia, cardiac dysfunction, depression, sleep disturbance, etc.
Patients without otherwise identifiable cause are encouraged to
engage in regular physical activity and cognitive behavioural therapy
as appropriate.
• Pain
Approximately 20 - 50% of patients complain of pain during the
survivorship period. Types of pain may be nociceptive, neuropathic
or mixed pattern.9,10 Pain will lead to physical, emotional, spiritual and
functional discomfort. Pain can be assessed with a comprehensive
history taking and simple pain scales e.g. visual analog scale. Aetiology
of the pain needs to be identified before initiation of treatment. Refer to
CPG on Management of Cancer Pain.11
• Bone health
Survivors of breast cancer are at high risk of significant bone loss.
Assessment of bone mineral density in high risk patients as detailed
below are:12
 post-menopausal survivors should have a baseline DEXA scan
 a repeat DEXA scans every two years should be done for:
– women taking AIs
– pre-menopausal women on GnRHa
– women who have chemotherapy-induced premature menopause
Non-pharmacologic interventions including lifestyle changes, vitamin D
and calcium supplements are extremely important.13
Source:
1. Khan F, Amatya B, Ng L, et al. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation for follow-up of
women treated for breast cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2012, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD009553
2. Lawenda BD, Mondry TE, Johnstone PA. Lymphedema: a primer on the
identification and management of a chronic condition in oncologic treatment. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2009;59(1):8-24
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
3. Mak SS, Yeo W, Lee YM, et al. Predictors of lymphedema in patients with breast
cancer undergoing axillary lymph node dissection in Hong Kong. Nurs Res.
2008;57(6):416-25
4. Kwan ML, Cohn JC, Armer JM, et al. Exercise in patients with lymphedema: a
systematic review of the contemporary literature. J Cancer Surviv. 2011;5(4):32036
5. Zamorano JL, Lancellotti P, Rodriguez Muñoz D, et al. 2016 ESC Position Paper
on cancer treatments and cardiovascular toxicity developed under the auspices
of the ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines: The Task Force for cancer
treatments and cardiovascular toxicity of the European Society of Cardiology
(ESC). Eur Heart J. 2016;37(36):2768-2801
6. Ginzac A, Passildas J, Gadéa E, et al. Treatment-Induced Cardiotoxicity in Breast
Cancer: A Review of the Interest of Practicing a Physical Activity. Oncology.
2019;96(5):223-234
7. Caron J, Nohria A. Cardiac Toxicity from Breast Cancer Treatment: Can We
Avoid This? Curr Oncol Rep. 2018;20(8):61-100
8. Bower JE, Ganz PA, Desmond KA, et al. Fatigue in long-term breast carcinoma
survivors: a longitudinal investigation. Cancer. 2006;106(4):751-8
9. van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH, Hochstenbach LM, Joosten EA, et al.
Update on Prevalence of Pain in Patients with Cancer: Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2016;51(6):1070-1090.e9
10. Langford DJ, Schmidt B, Levine JD, et al. Preoperative Breast Pain Predicts
Persistent Breast Pain and Disability After Breast Cancer Surgery. J Pain
Symptom Manage. 2015;49(6):981-94
11. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya: MoH; 2010
12. Pan K, Hurria A, Chlebowski RT. Breast cancer survivorship: state of the science.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2018;168(3):593-600
13. Abdel-Razeq H, Awidi A. Bone health in breast cancer survivors. J Cancer Res
Ther. 2011;7(3):256-63
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
3D
three-dimensional
18FDG
(18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose
ACR
American College of Radiology
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
AIs
aromatase inhibitors
ALND
axillary lymph nodes dissection
ASR
Age-Standardised Incidence Rate
AUC
area under the curve
BCRL
Breast cancer-related lymphoedema
BCS
breast conserving surgery
BCSS
breast cancer-specific survival
BI-RADS®
Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System
BOADICEA
Breast and Ovarian Analysis of Disease Incidence and Carrier
Estimation Algorithm
BR
breast reconstruction
BRCA
BReast CAncer gene
CBE
clinical breast examination
CDK
cyclin-dependent kinase
CI
confidence interval
cm
centimetre
cm3
centimetre square
COH
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CT
computed tomography
CV
cardiovascular
DBT
digital breast tomosynthesis
DCIS
ductal carcinoma in situ
DEXA
dual‑energy X‑ray absorptiometry
DFS
disease free survival
DMFS
distant metastasis-free survival
DOR
diagnostic odds ratio
ER(-/+)
estrogen receptor (negative/positive)
FFDM
full-field digital mammography
FNAC
fine needle aspiration cytology
FP
fertility preservation
g
gramme
GnRHa
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists
IBTR
ipsilateral breast tumour recurrences
IHC
immunohistochemistry
ISH
in-situ hybridisation
IV
intravenous
HER2(-/+)
Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (negative/positive)
HR
hazard ratio
LA
luminal A
LABC
locally advanced breast cancer
LB
luminal B
LCIS
lobular carcinoma-in-situ
LR
local recurrence
LRR
locoregional recurrence
MBC
metastatic breast cancer
MCG
Mainstreaming Cancer Genetics
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
MDT
multidisciplinary team
MET
metabolic equivalent of task
MIBT
minimally invasive biopsy technique
mg
milligramme
MoH
Ministry of Health
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
mTOR
mammalian target of rapamycin
NACT
neoadjuvant chemotherapy
NET
neoadjuvant endocrine therapy
OAS
ovarian ablation or suppression
OC
oral contraceptives
ONJ
osteonecrosis of the jaw
OR
odds ratio
OS
overall survival
PBI
partial breast irradiation
PET
positron emission tomography
PFS
progression free survival
PMRT
post-mastectomy radiation therapy
PNP
patient navigation programme
PR(-/+)
progesterone receptor (negative/positive)
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RGCT
rapid genetic counselling and testing
RR
relative risk
RS
relative survival
RRM
risk-reducing mastectomy
RRSO
risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
RT
radiotherapy
SC
subcutaneous
SERD
selective estrogen receptor degrader
SLND
sentinel lymph nodes dissection
SLNs
sentinel lymph nodes
SREs
skeletal-related events
SRS
stereotactic radiosurgery
TE
tissue expander
TNM
Tumour Node Metastasis
US
ultrasound
vs
versus
WBI
whole breast irradiation
WBRT
whole brain radiotherapy
WHO
World Health Organization
Management of Breast Cancer (Third Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Rosnani Abdul Latip on retrieval of evidence
• Professor Dr. Nur Aishah Mohd. Taib, Dr. Caryn Chan Mei Hsien
and Ms. Nur Haidzat Abdul Wahid on Psychological Assessment
and Intervention Section
• Assoc. Prof. Dr. Julia Patrick Engkasan, Head & Consultant
Rehabilitation Physician, and Dr. Chan Soo Chin, Senior Lecturer
& Rehabilitation Physician, Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya on
Post-Treatment Cancer Survivorship Chapter
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Breast Cancer (Third
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
=