MOH/P/PAK/435.19(GU)-e
ORAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
MINISTRY OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
ORAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
MINISTRY OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
Published by:
Oral Health Technology Section
Oral Health Programme
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E10, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is Oral Health Programme (OHP), Ministry of
Health Malaysia. Content may be reproduced in any number of copies and in any
format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to OHP is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse any product or
service and not used inappropriately or misleading context.
ISBN: 978-967-16632-5-7
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.ohd.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These guidelines update and supplant the previous guidelines developed in
2010 and are based on the best available contemporary evidence. They are
intended as a guide for the best clinical practice in the management of
avulsed permanent anterior teeth presently. However, it must be noted that
adherence to these guidelines do not necessarily lead to the best clinical
outcome in individual patient care, as every health care provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical presentation and management options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
These guidelines were issued in December 2019 and will be reviewed in
2024 or earlier if important new evidence becomes available. When it is due
for updating, the head of related specialty will be informed about it. A
multidisciplinary team will be formed and discussion will be done on the need
for a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. The systematic review
methodology used by the Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section
(MaHTAS) will be employed in review of the guidelines.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at
the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions,
corrections will be published in the web version of this document, which is the
definitive version at all times.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
TABLES OF CONTENTS
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES, CLINICAL QUESTIONS AND TARGET POPULATION
TARGET GROUP / USER AND SETTINGS
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
REVIEWERS
ALGORITHM:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Tooth
(At the Site of Incident)
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Tooth (Immature Root)
At the Dental Clinic
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Tooth (Mature Root)
At the Dental Clinic
INTRODUCTION
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AT SITE OF INCIDENTS
CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR REPLANTATION
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
4.1 Informed Consent
4.2 Pre-operative Assessment
4.3 Imaging
4.4 Replantation Technique
4.5 Splinting Technique
4.6 Post-operative Care
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
5.1 Extra-alveolar Time
5.2 Storage Medium
5.3 Tooth Maturity
5.4 Root Canal Treatment
5.5 Contamination of Root Surface
5.6 Type and Duration of Splinting
5.7 Root Surface Treatment
5.8 Systemic Antibiotics
FOLLOW-UP AND MONITORING
6.1 Follow-up Intervals
6.2 Complications of Replanted Avulsed Permanent Anterior Tooth
Page
i
i
iii
iii
v
vi
viii
ix
x
1
2
4
5
5
5
5
6
7
7
7
8
8
10
10
13
14
15
15
15
16
17
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
xi
TABLES OF CONTENTS
8.
REFERENCES
APPENDIX 1: Search Strategy
APPENDIX 2: Clinical Questions
APPENDIX 3: Main characteristics, efficacy and accessibility of each
storage medium for avulsed permanent anterior teeth
APPENDIX 4: Dental Trauma Data Collection Form
APPENDIX 5: Clinical and radiographic parameters to be recorded
during review appointment
APPENDIX 6: Possible complications and expected timing of
occurrence following replantation of avulsed permanent
anterior teeth.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS, DISCLOSURE STATEMENT AND
SOURCES OF FUNDING
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
8.3 Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators
7.1 Pulp Necrosis and Inflammatory Root Resorption
7.2 Replacement Root Resorption and Ankylosis
7.3 Tooth Loss (Interim & Long-term Treatment Options)
Page
18
19
21
22
23
23
24
25
32
33
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
34
35
37
38
39
MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
7.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) were developed by an expert
committee consisting of Paediatric Dental Specialists, Dental Public Health
Specialists, a Restorative Dental Specialist, Dental Officers and a Dental
Therapist mainly from the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Higher
Education.
The previous edition of the CPG on Management of Avulsed Permanent
Anterior Teeth in Children (November 2010) was used as the basis for the
development of these guidelines. The recommendations were formulated
taking into consideration the best available evidence and local practices.
Several improvements have been introduced in this edition. The scope has
been expanded to include management of all avulsed permanent anterior
teeth. In addition, new and updated information have been included in these
guidelines. Besides this, clinical audit indicators have also been identified for
the purpose of monitoring and evaluating outcomes.
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic databases:
Medline, Pubmed, Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) and
Embase while full text journal articles were retrieved from these databases.
LEVEL
STUDY DESIGN
Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomised
controlled trial.
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation.
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic
studies, preferably from more than one centre or research group.
Evidence obtained from multiple time series studies, with or without
intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could also
be regarded as this type of evidence.
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert committees.
l
lII
lI-1
lI-2
lI-3
Source: Adapted from Harris RP, Helfand M, Woolf SH, Lohr KN, Mulrow CD, Teutsch SM, Atkins D.
Current Methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: A Review of the Process. Am J Prev Med.
2001;20 (suppl 3):21-35.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
The literature search was limited to human study, English language and
published articles from inception of databases to June 2019. In addition, the
reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to
further identify relevant studies. Literature searches were repeated for all
clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published to be included. Future CPG updates will consider
evidence published after this cut-off date. The search strategy can be found
in Appendix 1. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
There were eight (8) clinical questions which were assigned to members of
the development group. The group members met a total of 10 times throughout
the development of these guidelines. All retrieved literature were appraised
by at least two members, presented in the form of evidence tables and
discussed during group meetings. All statements and recommendations
formulated were agreed upon by both the development group and reviewers.
This CPG is based on the findings of systematic reviews, randomised
controlled trials, observational studies, with local practices taken into
consideration. However, when there was lack of evidence, recommendations
were based on consensus of group members. Although ideally patients’
views and preferences need to be considered in the development of CPGs,
in this instance, it was not feasible.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/Canadian
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001), while the
formulation of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE.
The writing of the CPG strictly follows the requirements of Appraisal of
Guidelines Research and Evaluation (AGREE II).
The draft was reviewed by a panel of internal and external reviewers.
Recommendations were presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for
CPGs, and finally to the HTA and CPG Council, Ministry of Health, Malaysia
for approval.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
OBJECTIVE
To review and expand the scope of the existing guidelines and to provide
evidence-based recommendations for best management practices of all
avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
To disseminate and reinforce knowledge on the management of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth among healthcare professionals and the public.
To recommend current evidence-based management of all avulsed
permanent anterior teeth, which encompasses the following aspects:
Emergency management at site of incidents.
Clinical management at the dental clinic.
Clinical management of outcome of replanted avulsed permanent
anterior teeth during follow-up.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
1.
2.
a.
b.
c.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by these guidelines can be found in
Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
These guidelines are applicable to all patients with avulsed permanent
anterior teeth.
i. Inclusion criteria
Patients with traumatically avulsed permanent anterior teeth
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
2. Public
SETTINGS
Healthcare: Outpatient and inpatient settings in all healthcare facilities
Site of incidents: e.g. schools, playground, swimming pool, home,
residential area
All health care providers involved in the diagnosis and management of
avulsed permanent anterior teeth namely:
TARGET GROUP / USER
1.
Dental officers
Medical officers
Allied health professionals
a) Primary care providers
Related dental specialists (i.e. Paediatric Dental Specialists,
Orthodontists, Dental Public Health Specialists, Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgeons, Periodontologists, Restorative Dental
Specialists)
Related medical specialists (i.e. Family Medicine Specialists,
Accident and Emergency Physicians, and Anaesthetists)
b) Specialists of related disciplines
Patients with avulsed permanent anterior teeth associated with
comminuted alveolar fractures
Patients with avulsed permanent anterior teeth due to other causes
than trauma such as periodontal disease and pathology
ii. Exclusion criteria
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Members
Secretary
Dr Sarimah Mohd Mokhtar
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar
70300 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Dr Suriani Sukeri
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Aras 3, Hospital Wanita dan Kanak-Kanak
Lot 25, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz
50300 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Zakiah Muhammad
Dental Public Health Specialist
Klinik Pergigian Besar Jalan Za’aba
Jalan Zaaba
70100 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Dr Roziana Abdullah
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Ampang
Jalan Mewah Utara, Pandan Mewah
68000 Ampang
Selangor
Dr Mohd Ridzuan Mohd Razi
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Sultanah Aminah
Jalan Persiaran Abu Bakar Sultan
80100 Johor Bahru
Johor
Dr Suhailiza Saharudin
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Jalan Raja Ashman Shah
30450 Ipoh
Perak
Dr Noor Hasmin Mokthar
Dental Officer
Program Kesihatan Pergigian KKM
Aras 5 Blok E10 Kompleks E Presint 1
Pusat Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan
62590 WP Putrajaya
Dr Ithnaniah Abdul Wahab
Restorative Dental Specialist
Klinik Pakar Pergigian Restoratif
Klinik Pergigian Komuniti Tanglin
Jalan Cenderasari
50584 Kuala Lumpur
Dr Salleh Zakaria
Dental Public Health Specialist
Program Kesihatan Pergigian KKM
Aras 5 Blok E10 Kompleks E Presint 1
Pusat Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan
62590 WP Putrajaya
Dr Ahmad Faisal Ismail
Lecturer & Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Kuliyyah Pergigian
Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Malaysia (UIAM)
Bandar Indera Mahkota
25200 Kuantan Pahang
Dr Ameera Syafiqah Aly
Dental Officer
Jabatan Komuniti Kesihatan Pergigian &
Pencegahan Klinikal
Fakulti Pergigian Universiti Malaya
50603 Kuala Lumpur
Chitra Devi Subramaniam
Senior Dental Therapist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Aras 3, Hospital Wanita dan Kanak-Kanak
Lot 25, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz
50300 Kuala Lumpur
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
REVIEWERS (INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL)
These guidelines were reviewed by a panel of independent reviewers from
both public and private sectors who were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of interpretation of the evidence
supporting the recommendations in this CPG. The following internal and
external reviewers provided comments and feedbacks on the proposed draft:
INTERNAL REVIEWERS
Col. (Dr) Zahani Mohamed Yusoff
Pediatric Dental Specialist
Hospital Angkatan Tentera Tuanku Mizan
No 3, Jalan 4/27A, Seksyen 2,
Wangsa Maju
53300 Kuala Lumpur
Malaysia
Dr Saadah Atan
Pediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Melaka
Jalan Mufti Haji Khalil
75400 Melaka,
Malaysia
Dr Rasidah Ayob
Consultant Periodontologist
Unit Pakar Periodontik
Klinik Pergigian Peringgit
Jalan Pantai Peringgit
75400 Peringgit
Melaka, Malaysia
Assoc. Prof. Dr Siti Noor Fazliah Mohd Noor
Associate Professor / Paediatric Dentistry Consultant
Advanced Medical and Dental Institute
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Bertam, 13200 Kepala Batas
Pulau Pinang, Malaysia
Dr Zuraidah Wahid
Emergency Physician
Jabatan Kecemasan dan Trauma
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar
Jalan Rasah
70300 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia
Dr Abd Halim bin Abu Bakar
Dental Officer
Klinik Pergigian Chini,
klinik Kesihatan Chini
26690 Chini
Pahang, Malaysia
Dr Arilatha Arimuthu
Restorative Dental Specialist
Unit Pakar Restoratif
Klinik Pergigian Bandar Seri Putra
Jalan Seri Putra 1/9
Bandar Seri Putra
43000 Kajang
Selangor, Malaysia
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Dr Shahid Mitha
Senior Assistant Professor
PAPRSB Institute of Health Sciences
Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Jalan Tungku Link
BE1410
Brunei Darussalam
Dr Savithri N. Vengadasalam
Head of Department
Dental Public Health
Faculty of Dentistry
MAHSA University
Jalan SP 2, Bandar Saujana Putra,
42610 Jenjarom
Selangor, Malaysia
Madam Raja Intan Alfarisha Raja Alias
Parent / Public
Penasatria Sdn Bhd
No 10-G-13, Ground Floor, Block 10,
Desa Cempaka, 71800 Nilai
Negeri Sembilan. Malaysia
Dr Nazatul Sabariah Ahmad
Consultant in Paediatric Dentistry
Klinik Pergigian Dental Valet@Bangi
8-15-01 & 8-17-01 (GF)
Jalan Medan PB7A, Bangi Sentral
43650 Bandar Baru Bangi
Selangor, Malaysia
Dr Susan Parekh
Consultant in Paediatric Dentistry
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
UCL Eastman Dental Institute
256 Grays Inn Road
WC1X 8LD London
United Kingdom
Dr Nik Roslin Suraini Nik Sulaiman
Private Dental Practitioner
Klinik Pergigian Fauziah
316G, Lorong Selangor
Taman Melawati
53100 Kuala Lumpur
Malaysia
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
ALGORITHM FOR
MANAGEMENT OF AVULSED PERMANENT ANTERIOR TOOTH
AT THE SITE OF INCIDENT
Avulsed permanent
anterior tooth
**Prepare the
tooth
***Replant
*Contraindication for
replantation?
Yes
Yes
No
No
Go to nearest dental
clinic or hospital as
soon as possible
Place in suitable storage
medium (fresh milk/saline/
patient’s saliva) or place in
a clean plastic bag
Go to nearest dental
clinic or hospital as
soon as possible
Go to nearest dental
clinic or hospital as
soon as possible
Replantation into
socket is possible
*Contraindication for replantation
Do not replant if the person suffers
Other concomitant injury to the surrounding areas, the head or other part of the body
Medical problem
**Preparing the tooth for replantation
Pick tooth by its crown. Do not hold or touch the root
Check if the root is clean
Rinse very briefly with normal saline or tap water for 10 seconds if dirt is present.
Do not scrub dirt that is present on the root
***During replantation:
Place avulsed tooth into socket gently
Bite on a clean cloth
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
ALGORITHM FOR
MANAGEMENT OF AVULSED PERMANENT ANTERIOR TOOTH
(IMMATURE ROOT) AT THE DENTAL CLINIC
*During replantation and stabilisation:
**1% sodium hypochlorite can be prepared
fresh with 1:5 dilution of 5% sodium
hypochlorite (1 part bleach to 5 parts
distilled water).
Verify position with radiograph
Splint for at least 7 days
Prescribe antibiotic, analgesic and
mouthwash
Avulsed permanent
anterior tooth with
immature root
<15 min EAT or
<60 min in SM
LEGEND
EAT
EO
IO
SM
NS
min
: extra-alveolar time
: extra-oral
: intra-oral
: storage medium
: normal saline
: minutes
Yes
Place in NS
>15 min EAT
>60 min EAT or SM
**Immerse in 1%
sodium hypochlorite
for 15 min
Immediate EO
pulp extirpation
and obturation
*Replant and
stabilise
Place in NS
*Replant and
stabilise
Immediate IO
pulp extirpation
and obturation
Follow up:
Develop
complication
Refer to
Dental Specialist
Definitive
treatment &
monitoring
*Replant and stabilise
No
Yes
No
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
ALGORITHM FOR
MANAGEMENT OF AVULSED PERMANENT ANTERIOR TOOTH
(MATURE ROOT) AT THE DENTAL CLINIC
*During replantation and stabilisation:
**1% sodium hypochlorite can be prepared
fresh with 1:5 dilution of 5% sodium
hypochlorite (1 part bleach to 5 parts
distilled water).
Verify position with radiograph
Splint for at least 7 days
Prescribe antibiotic, analgesic and mouthwash
Avulsed
permanent
anterior tooth with
mature root
<60 min EAT
or in SM
LEGEND
EAT
EO
IO
SM
NS
min
: extra-alveolar time
: extra-oral
: intra-oral
: storage medium
: normal saline
: minutes
Yes
Place in NS
No
*Replant and stabilise
Follow up:
Develop
complication
Definitive
treatment &
monitoring
Refer to
Dental Specialist
Yes
No
**Immerse in 1% sodium
hypochlorite for 15 min
*Replant and stabilise
Immediate EO pulp
extirpation and obturation
IO pulp extirpation 7-14 days
and intracanal dressing
Obturation at later stage
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES
Key Message 1
Intraoral radiographs are required for diagnosis and baseline record of
avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
Cone-beam computed tomography can be an advantage especially in
the diagnosis and management of complex dental trauma.
Key Message 2
For an avulsed permanent anterior tooth, the best storage medium is
the tooth socket itself.
Key Message 3
During follow-up, emphasis should be placed on the recognition of
clinical and radiographical characteristics which represent the
development of complications. This is to ensure measures can be
instituted to reduce risk of failure and early loss of replanted avulsed
permanent anterior teeth.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1
Avulsed permanent anterior tooth should be immediately replanted into
its socket preferably within 15 minutes.
If immediate replantation is not possible, the avulsed permanent
anterior tooth should be kept in an appropriate storage medium.
Recommendation 2
Replantation of avulsed permanent anterior tooth should not be carried
out in patients who suffer severe concomitant injuries or are severely
medically compromised.
Recommendation 3
Early pulp extirpation should be carried out for replanted mature
avulsed permanent anterior tooth to minimise the possibility of
inflammatory root resorption, which would cause early failure.
For better outcome of replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth with
guarded prognosis, the pulp should be extirpated early within 7 to 14
days.
Recommendation 4
All cases of replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth should be
followed up for five years.
Recommendation 5
Autotransplantation may be considered in the management of
ankylosed replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth when donor
tooth is available.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
1. INTRODUCTION
Tooth avulsion (Figure 1, 2 and 3) is defined as the complete dislocation of
a tooth from the alveolar bone and soft-tissue socket.1 A sufficient force is
required to disrupt the tooth from its periodontal ligament, as it is embraced
in the alveolar socket.
The prevalence of tooth avulsion among adults aged 18 years and above
ranged from 5% to 15%.2-6 The number of individuals suffering from tooth
avulsion increases with a decrease in age.7 Adults aged between 18 to 30
years, have been shown to have the lowest number of tooth avulsion
reported (15%), as compared to adolescents (17%) and children (68%).5 In
young children, the relatively resilient alveolar bone provides only minimal
resistance to extrusive forces.
The National Oral Health Survey of Schoolchildren in 2017 reported the
prevalence of traumatised anterior teeth among children aged between 16
years and below to be 7.2%8 which was lower than that reported in other
countries.9-12 84.5% of the traumatised anterior teeth amongst 12 years old
remained untreated.8 A local retrospective study from 2001 to 2006 showed
avulsion of permanent teeth occurred between the age of 10 and 13 years,
with most cases involving permanent maxillary incisors.
The causative factors for traumatic dental injuries vary across age groups.
Sports-related accidents are the main cause for trauma to anterior teeth in
adolescents, while, the most prevalent cause for the late adolescents and
young adults is car accidents.4 In young children, the alleged identified
causes for tooth avulsion were motor-vehicle accidents (57%), falls (40%)
and hit by object (3%). More than 80% of the cases were referred to the
Paediatric Dental Specialist from the Accident and Emergency Department
of the local hospital.13 Avulsion has also been reported as one of the common
outcomes of domestic violence among women, children, adolescents and
the elderly of both genders.14
Traumatic dental injuries inclusive of tooth avulsion, showed higher
prevalence in boys to girls.8, 11, 12, 15-17 Boys tend to be more energetic and
more inclined towards vigorous outdoor activities than girls.13, 18 A significantly
higher prevalence of traumatic dental injuries occurred in children with Class
II Division 1 malocclusion, inadequate lip coverage and an overjet of more
than 5 mm.12, 18-20
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
The management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth particularly during the
emergency period can be distressing. An apparent lack of knowledge among
public and healthcare professionals regarding the management of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth results in delay in seeking treatment, inappropriate
handling and treatment, affecting the prognosis of the avulsed teeth with
unwarranted consequences.
Hence, it is of primary importance to develop effective interventional
strategies, in order to avoid or alleviate the negative effects of tooth avulsion
on quality of life, psychological and social problems, and high cost of
treatment, both to patients and healthcare provider.
Figure 1: Socket of an avulsed permanent anterior tooth.
Arrow showing the tooth socket.
Figure 2: Radiographic image of and empty socket
Figure 3: An avulsed permanent anterior tooth
Root with an
immature apex
Crown part
of a tooth
2. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AT SITE OF INCIDENTS
(For patients / parents / teachers / paramedics and bystanders)
Immediate replantation of an avulsed permanent anterior tooth is the main
philosophy for treatment success and offers the greatest chance of tooth
survival.21, level III Of utmost importance is the prevention of tooth being
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
dried, which causes loss of normal physiologic metabolism and morphology
of the periodontal ligament cells for healing reattachment.22, level III
Time is a critical factor for the success of the management of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth.23, 24, level III A systematic review showed that
replantation of avulsed permanent teeth within 15 minutes gives a favourable
long-term prognosis, with the least incidence of root resorption.25, level II-1
Findings from other studies reveal significant improvements in periodontal
healing for teeth stored in dry condition for less than 15 minutes. Therefore,
every effort should be made to replant the tooth within the first 15
minutes.26-28, level II-2 The aim is to replant a clean tooth into its socket with an
undamaged root surface as gently as possible at the incident site, after which
the patient should be brought to the clinic or hospital for treatment as quickly
as possible.22, level III
The followings should be performed at the site of incident:
If immediate replantation is not possible for any reason, the avulsed
permanent anterior tooth should be stored in a suitable medium to be
transported to the nearest dental clinic or hospital emergency service as
soon as possible.29, 30 Placing the avulsed permanent anterior tooth in a
temporary physiologic storage solution has been reported to extend the
viability of periodontal ligament cells before replantation.31-33, level III The most
recommended storage medium is in the following order:
Tooth socket
Fresh milk
Normal saline
Patient’s saliva
Other storage medium such as coconut water, propolis and green tea can
also be considered. For more information, please refer to Appendix 3.
Pick the tooth by its crown. Do not hold or touch the root.
Check to see if the root surface is clean.
Briefly rinse it with normal saline or tap water for 10 seconds if dirt is
present. Do not scrub dirt that is present on the root.
Gently place the tooth into its socket without traumatising the tooth and
the adjacent structures.
Get the patient to bite on a clean cloth to keep the tooth in place.
Go to the nearest dental clinic as soon as possible.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
In the event that the above media are unavailable, the tooth should be placed
in a clean plastic bag/container for transportation. The tooth may also be
placed in the buccal sulcus (between the cheek and teeth) of the patient.
However, this is not recommended for fear of accidental swallowing or
aspiration, especially in a young child.
Replantation of an avulsed permanent anterior tooth is frequently the best
treatment. Replantation is absolutely contraindicated in the following
conditions:
Where other injuries are more severe and warrant preferential
emergency treatment and / or intensive care (such as severe head
injury or poly-trauma)
Patients with compromised medical history that would be put at risks by
replantation of a tooth (such as immunodeficiency, congenital cardiac
defects and bleeding dyscrasia). In this type of patient, it is prudent to
discuss the treatment options with the medical physician in charge.
Replantation may not be appropriate in certain instances. However,
decisions should be made on case by case basis. These include:
The tooth has evidence of extensive caries or advanced periodontal
disease
The tooth has very short root (i.e. less than the crown length)
The alveolar socket has major comminutions or fractures
Uncooperative patient and / or non-compliant patient, parents or
guardian
3. CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR REPLANTATION
Avulsed permanent anterior tooth should be immediately replanted into
its socket preferably within 15 minutes.
If immediate replantation is not possible, the avulsed permanent
anterior tooth should be kept in an appropriate storage medium.
Recommendation 1
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
4.1. Informed Consent
Informed consent should be obtained from patients (above 18 years old) /
parents/ caretaker/ guardians in managing avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
4.2. Pre-operative Assessment
Pre-operative assessments must be thorough and well-documented to
ensure proper management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth including
related and accompanying hard and soft tissues injuries. The assessments
should include the following:
4.3. Imaging
Intraoral periapical radiograph should be taken for baseline records and
diagnostic purposes. There is an increasing trend in the usage of cone-beam
computed tomography (CBCT) in the management of dental trauma.
However, there were no retrievable evidence on the use of CBCT for
diagnosis and management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth. CBCT may
be used in situations where three-dimensional imaging is required to
facilitate diagnosis and treatment planning, especially in complex dental
trauma.34, level III
Medical history
Trauma history
Clinical examination
Radiographic investigations
Photographic records
Replantation of avulsed permanent anterior tooth should not be carried
out in patients who suffer severe concomitant injuries or are severely
medically compromised.
Recommendation 2
4. CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
For more information on patient’s assessments, please refer to Appendix 4.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
4.4. Replantation Technique
The aim is to replant the avulsed permanent anterior tooth into its socket with
minimal handling.
Place the tooth in normal saline.
Administer local anaesthesia.
Gently irrigate the socket with normal saline.
For immediate or early replantation (<15 minutes extra-alveolar dry
time or <60 minutes stored in recommended storage medium):
Handle the tooth by its crown. Do not touch the root.
Run normal saline over the tooth to remove any contamination.
Gently dab with gauze soaked in normal saline if there is still
residue of contamination.
It is advisable at this time to estimate the length of the tooth from
tip of crown to apex. This is important as baseline for future
endodontic treatment if needed.
Seat the tooth back gently into its socket using light finger
pressure. Do not use excessive force.
Avoid scraping or curettage of the socket.
Avoid scraping off the root.
Stabilise the tooth by splinting
Take a periapical radiograph to verify the position of replanted
avulsed permanent anterior tooth.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
For delayed replantation (>60 minutes extra-alveolar dry time or stored
in recommended storage medium):
v.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
Remove old blood clot in the socket and induce fresh normal
bleeding. Avoid scraping or excessive curettage of the socket.
Remove any visible contamination on the root surface with gauze.
Immerse the tooth into antiseptic agent 1% sodium hypochlorite for
15 minutes. 1% sodium hypochlorite can be prepared fresh with 1:5
dilution of 5% sodium hypochlorite (1 part bleach to 5 parts distilled
water). Then, run normal saline over the tooth.
a.
b.
c.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Intraoral radiographs are required for diagnosis and baseline record of
avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
Cone-beam computed tomography can be an advantage especially in
the diagnosis and management of complex dental trauma
Key Message 1
4.5 Splinting Technique
The replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth needs to be stabilised in
position, by splinting for at least 7 days:
Splint the avulsed permanent anterior tooth to the adjacent firm teeth
Different types of splinting methods can be utilised (refer to section 5.6)
Splinting should be extended to at least 4 weeks if there is a
concomitant alveolar bone fracture.
i.
ii.
iii.
4.6 Post-operative care
The followings can be carried out after replantation and splinting:
i. Prescribe
Systemic antibiotics (refer to section 5.8)
Oral
analgesic
(Paracetamol,
Ibuprofen,
Naproxen
and
Diclofenac are adequate to manage mild pain; however,
moderate or severe pain requires combination with other agents,
most commonly the opioid group) 35, level III
0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash twice daily for 1 week
ii. Home care advice includes:
Avoid biting on splinted teeth
Eat soft diet
Maintain good oral hygiene
5. PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
Knowledge on the factors that affect the prognosis of avulsed permanent
anterior teeth is an essential element of the management process which
dictates the decision making and actions of the healthcare provider.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Perform endodontic treatment as stated in Table 3.
Seat the tooth back gently into its socket using light finger pressure.
Do not use excessive force.
Stabilise the tooth by splinting
Take a periapical radiograph to verify the position of replanted
avulsed permanent anterior tooth.
d.
e.
f.
g.
The prognosis of replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth depends on the
vitality of pulp and viability of periodontal ligament cells. It is associated with
various prognostic factors such as:- 25, level II-1
However, the following factors may not affect the prognosis of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth:
Extra-alveolar time (i.e. duration when tooth is out of its socket)
Storage medium
Tooth maturity (i.e. immature or mature apex)
Root canal treatment (early or delayed)
Contamination of root surface
5.1. Extra-alveolar Time
Extra-alveolar time is important in determining the viability of periodontal
ligament cells. Total extra-alveolar time consists of extra-alveolar dry time,
and time in storage medium. For better prognosis of periodontal healing, the
followings should be obtained during history taking.25, level II-1
5.2. Storage Medium
If for any reason immediate replantation is not possible, the avulsed
permanent anterior tooth should be stored in a suitable medium, to be
transported to the nearest dental clinic or hospital emergency service as
soon as possible.29, 30, level III Storage in a suitable physiologic medium will
ensure that the avulsed tooth is kept moist at all times. This will preserve and
extend the viability of the periodontal ligament cells before replantation.31-33,
level III
However, the best prognostic predictor is extra-alveolar dry time prior to
storage or replantation of avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
Type and duration of splinting
Root surface treatment
Systemic antibiotics
Extra-alveolar dry time: <15 minutes
Total extra-alveolar time (dry time and time in storage medium): <60
minutes
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
The best storage medium is the tooth socket itself. Other considerations for
storage medium are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Options of storage medium*
Table 2: Storage medium according to their efficacy and accessibility
STORAGE MEDIUM
PREPARATION
Milk
Pasteurized fresh or UHT milk, cold, low-fat,
non-flavoured. NOT condensed or powdered milk.
Normal Saline
Physiological saline contains 0.9% sodium chloride
Saliva
Get the patient to spit into a clean container
Coconut water
Fresh tender coconut water
Propolis
10 – 50% concentration of natural propolis
Green tea
Commercial green tea extract (soaked in water for
5 min)
Egg
Egg white only
*The temperature of the storage medium should be cold (not frozen) or within
room temperature around 26 ± 2°C. Do not use hot water or milk to store the
tooth.
In the event that the above media are unavailable, the tooth should be placed
in a clean plastic bag/ container for transportation. The efficacy and
accessibility of storage medium is summarised in Table 2. 31-33, level III
EFFICACY
EXCELLENT
GOOD
POOR
ACCESSIBILITY
+ +
+
-
Milk
-
Propolis,
Green tea
-
Coconut water,
Egg
-
Normal Saline,
Saliva
-
-
++ easily available, + available, - less available
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Please refer to Appendix 3 for further main characteristics, efficacy and
accessibility of each storage medium for avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
For an avulsed permanent anterior tooth, the best storage medium is
the tooth socket itself.
Key Message 2
5.3. Tooth Maturity
Tooth maturity is an important factor in determining the prognosis of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth.
The absence of inflammatory root resorption is an indicator of periodontal
healing. A meta-analysis on replanted avulsed teeth showed higher
incidence of inflammatory (30%) and replacement (39%) root resorption in
immature teeth compared to mature teeth (24% and 33% respectively).25, level
II-1
With regards to pulp healing of immature avulsed permanent anterior tooth,
shorter pulp length (less than ¾ root form) shows higher chance of
pulp revascularisation than longer pulp length. The pulp’s width or
diameter of apical foramen has no effect on the possibility of pulp
revascularisation.36, level II-2
For mature avulsed tooth where the apex is closed or nearly closed (<1mm),
the possibility of pulp revascularisation is very minute.36, level II-2; 37-39, level III
5.4. Root Canal Treatment
Root canal treatment (Figure 4) in replanted avulsed permanent anterior
tooth is routinely carried out to improve the prognosis.
In a meta-analysis on the influence of pulp extirpation of replanted avulsed
permanent anterior teeth, there was significant difference in the development
of inflammatory root resorption, within 14 days compared with after 14 days
(OR=0.37, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.98). This means that delayed pulp extirpation
will have higher incidence of inflammatory root resorption. On the contrary,
there was no significant difference in terms of periodontal healing and
replacement root resorption between both groups. 40, level III
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Early pulp extirpation at day 1 or day 2, especially in mature avulsed tooth,
shows better periodontal ligament healing and less replacement root
resorption compared with pulp extirpation done within day 3 - 14.26, level III
However, early intervention of pulp extirpation must be balanced against the
need to allow time for initial injury healing, and resolution of associated pain
and swelling.
Figure 4: Radiographic image of replanted avulsed permanent anterior
tooth which was root canal treated extra-orally
5.4.1 Timing of pulp extirpation
Timing of pulp extirpation of a replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth
depends on extra-alveolar time and tooth maturity. These factors will
determine the prognosis of the tooth whether it is good, guarded or poor
(Table 3). Timing of endodontic management of a replanted avulsed
permanent anterior tooth based on clinical presentations of different types of
tooth maturity is shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Tooth maturity and endodontic management
Tooth maturity
Immature root
Mature root
<15 min
>15 min
>60 min
<60 min
>60 min
extra-
extra-
extra-
extra-
extra-
Clinical
presentation
alveolar
dry time
<60 min
alveolar
dry time
alveolar
dry time
or in
alveolar
dry time
or in
alveolar
dry time
or in
in storage
storage
storage
storage
medium
medium
medium
medium
Prognosis
Good
Guarded* Poor
Guarded* Poor
11
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
An immature avulsed permanent anterior tooth which is replanted within 15
minutes or replanted within 60 minutes (stored in storage medium) would
have good prognosis (refer to section 5.1). Therefore, root canal treatment
can be delayed and the replanted tooth should be monitored regularly (refer
to section 6) in order to determine if revascularisation would occur, or until
there are definite signs of pulpal necrosis.
Pulp extirpation should be performed early, preferably during extra-alveolar
period prior to replantation of an avulsed permanent anterior tooth that has
been stored dry, or in unsuitable storage medium for more than 60 minutes.
Extra-alveolar root canal treatment showed no significant difference
compared to intra-oral root canal treatment, in terms of treatment outcome of
replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth for longer than 60 minutes
extra-alveolar dry time.41, level I Added advantages of extra-alveolar root canal
treatment are ease of technique, and completed pulp extirpation and
obturation in one sitting, which reduces the number of review visits and the
need for patient co-operation.
For mature teeth where revascularisation is unlikely, early root canal
treatment is recommended 37-39, level III as a preventive approach to reduce the
possibility of inflammatory resorption developing.37, level III
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Early pulp extirpation should be carried out for replanted mature
avulsed permanent anterior tooth to minimise the possibility of
inflammatory root resorption, which would cause early failure
For better outcome of replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth with
guarded prognosis, the pulp should be extirpated early within 7 to 14
days.
Recommendation 3
Endodontic
management
Monitor
Pulp
extirpation
once sign
and
symptom
present
Early pulp
extirpation
intra-orally
between 7
to14 days
Early pulp
extirpation
intra-orally
between 7
to14 days
Extra-oral
complete
root
canal
treatment
before
replantation
Extra-oral
complete
root canal
treatment
before
replantation
Tooth maturity
Immature root
Mature root
Guarded prognosis*: the outcome is uncertain
A water-soluble paste containing 1% triamcinolone and 3% demeclocycline
has been advocated as intra-canal medicament for replanted avulsed teeth
27, level II-2; 37, level III and became as a favoured material as calcium hydroxide.
A multi-centre randomised controlled trial comparing these two intra-canal
medicaments (calcium hydroxide versus a water-soluble paste containing
1% triamcinolone and 3% demeclocycline), found no significant difference in
the periodontal healing of replanted avulsed teeth.45, level I
5.4.3. Obturation materials
Gutta-percha has been widely used as a root canal filling material. Guttapercha must be used with root canal sealers to encourage adequate root
canal seal.
Mineral Trioxide Aggregate and bioactive calcium silicate-based materials
have been introduced recently as root canal filling, or apical plug for open
apices and has been shown to result in favourable outcomes. Other advantages of these materials include reduced number of treatment visits, and
reduced chances of fracture in the long term. The possible drawbacks of
Mineral Trioxide Aggregate include crown discolouration, systemic effects
and difficulty in removing the material during retreatment when used as a
root filling material or apical plug.46, level III
5.5. Contamination of Root Surface
The degree of contamination of the root surface of avulsed permanent anterior
tooth is a risk factor for root resorption.47-49, level III The presence of foreign
materials and bacteria will aggravate inflammatory response. Contamination
on the root surface where viable periodontal ligament cells are present,
should be carefully removed by washing with saline or damp gauze.
In delayed replantation, necrotic periodontal ligament cells and bacteria on
the root surface should be removed. In an experimental study on necrotic
periodontal ligament cells from delayed replanted teeth, the use of an
antiseptic agent 1% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) for 15 minutes or 5.25%
5.4.2. Intracanal medications
Intracanal dressings in root canal treatment are used to inhibit or control the
inflammatory resorption.42, level III The most widely used intra-canal
medicament is non-setting calcium hydroxide.43. level III The main disadvantage
of long-term use of calcium hydroxide is significant reduction in the strength
of the teeth, causing an increase in fracture risk.44 level III
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
5.6. Type and Duration of Splinting
The replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth needs to be stabilised in
position by a splint, to prevent further displacement and injury to the pulp and
periodontal ligament during the healing phase. Available splints used for
management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth are:
Composite-wire splint (Figure 5 and 6)
Direct composite splint
Titanium trauma splint
Button-bracket splint
Fibre reinforced meshed splint
Figure 5 and 6: Examples of composite-wire splint
A systematic review showed that the periodontal healing outcome of
traumatised teeth, including tooth avulsion, was not determined by type of
splint.51, level II-2 Therefore, the choice of splinting material depends on its
availability in local settings.
The prevalence of root resorption was slightly lower in splinting period of 4 –
10 days compared with 11 – 19 days and > 20 days, although it was nonsignificant. There was no significant difference observed in periodontal
healing > 40 days of splinting, compared with a shorter period. 52, level II-2
For local setting, the splinting period of at least 7 days is fairly reasonable to
allow healing, as well as to comply with the follow-up intervals. The removal
of splint depends on the clinical presentations (e.g. reduced mobility to grade
1 or physiological mobility) during the follow-up review.
NaOCl for five minutes was effective at removing the necrotic cells with
minimal influence on cementum integrity. The usage of 1% NaOCl for 15
minutes was proven to be less damaging to the cementum.50, level III
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
5.7. Root Surface Treatment
The use of enamel matrix protein derivatives in avulsed permanent teeth has
no beneficial effect on the prognosis.25, level II-1 Moreover, there is insufficient
retrievable evidence to show the effectiveness and safety of other root
surface treatment on the periodontal regeneration. Therefore, the CPG
development group is unable to suggest any forms of root surface treatment
(e.g. fluoride, enamel matrix protein derivatives, citric acid and antibiotics) in
the management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
5.8. Systemic Antibiotics
Systemic antibiotics is commonly prescribed to treat and prevent dental
infections. Infections in replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth may be
caused by bacterial contamination of the pulp and the periodontal ligament,
from the environment and exposure to saliva during replantation. These
infections may eventually lead to inflammatory root resorption.53, level III
A meta-analysis on systemic antibiotic prescription for replanted avulsed
teeth showed inconclusive evidence of acceptable healing. However,
systemic antibiotics may be indicated in the following conditions: 53, level III
Gross contamination of the tooth and soft tissue
Severe injury including injuries to other body sites
Patients with medical conditions that are prone to infection
Inability to keep injury site free from contamination
Based on National Antibiotic Guidelines 2nd Edition in 2017, penicillin-based
antibiotics (e.g. penicillin V or ampicillin or amoxicillin) can be prescribed
immediately if indicated.54, level III
Follow-up and monitoring of replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth are
an important aspect of its management. Once the avulsed tooth is replanted
and stabilised, it is crucial that the tooth is followed up according to planned
intervals. During the follow-up, the pulpal and periodontal condition are
assessed, and possible outcomes of healing and complications are carefully
evaluated. The clinical and radiographic parameters to be assessed and
recorded during review appointments are shown in Appendix 5.
6. FOLLOW-UP AND MONITORING
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Pulpal healing following replantation can be determined clinically by a
positive sensibility response, and radiographically by obliteration of the root
canal or continuation of root development during the follow-up. Periodontal
healing is observed by the absence of root resorption as well as evidence of
either complete, partial or arrested root growth formation for immature
apex.55, level II-3
Refer to Appendix 6 for possible complications, expected timing of
occurrence and, clinical and radiographic findings.
6.1. Follow-up Intervals
Patients with replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth should be reviewed
at the following intervals post-replantation:56, 57, level III
At every follow-up after the first month, sensibility test and radiographic
examination should be performed.
During follow-up, emphasis should be placed on the recognition
of clinical and radiographical characteristics which represent the
development of complications. This is to ensure measures can be
instituted to reduce risk of failure and early loss of replanted avulsed
permanent anterior teeth.
Key Message 3
All cases of replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth should be followed
up for five years.*
Recommendations 4
1 week
2 weeks
1 month
3 months
6 months
every 6 months until 2 years
yearly thereafter until 5 years
*Refer to the preceding text on follow-up intervals.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
6.2. Complications of Replanted Avulsed Permanent Anterior Tooth
Complications of replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth is a common
occurrence. The followings are the possible complications of replanted
avulsed permanent anterior tooth with clinical importance:
6.2.1. Pulpal Necrosis
Pulpal necrosis is the most common pulp complication.58, level III Once vessels
are severed due to avulsion, infarction and coagulation necrosis of pulp
occurs. The pulp often becomes contaminated by microorganisms from the
extra-oral and intra-oral environment. Continual bacterial contamination of
the pulp and root surface leads to infection, which could arrest pulp
revascularisation and cause total pulp necrosis.36,level II-2, 37, level III
Pulpal necrosis can be detected as early as two weeks following
replantation, and can occur at any time during the early two-year period of
replantation (refer Appendix 6).56, level III
6.2.2. Inflammatory Root Resorption
The development of inflammatory root resorption is directly related to the
mechanical damage of the periodontium at the time of trauma.36, level II-2, 37, level III
Loss of cementum results in dentinal tubule exposure to the surrounding
periodontal ligament and bone. In addition, untreated pulpal necrosis due to
contamination of bacteria within the root canal and dentinal tubules,
contributes to and aggravates the inflammatory root resorption process.
Furthermore, inflammatory root resorption could cause dentine exposure
through which toxins from bacteria present in the tubules and/or the infected
root canal can be transmitted to the periodontal ligament.37, level III
Inflammatory root resorption occurs in 23% (range of 0% to 64%) 25, level II-1 of
replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth and can usually be diagnosed at
8 months (between 5 and 12 months) post-replantation.56, level III Immature
teeth demonstrated slightly higher prevalence to mature teeth of developing
inflammatory root resorption, despite having the potential for pulpal
revascularisation (6.2%-69.2% for immature teeth and 2.8%-64.3% for
mature teeth).25, level II-1
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
pulpal necrosis
inflammatory root resorption
replacement root resorption or ankylosis
tooth loss
6.2.3. Replacement Root Resorption or Ankylosis
Replacement root resorption is the predominant type of root resorption. It
occurs in 51% (range of 13% to 100%) of replanted avulsed permanent
anterior teeth.25, level II-1 Clinically, it is common to detect replacement root
resorption at 14 months (range between 6 – 24 months).56, level III
Replacement root resorption is a serious complication following the death of
viable periodontal ligament cells. The damaged periodontal ligament is being
replaced by bone tissues causing fusion of tooth and bone or ankylosis.
Continued replacement of the cementum and dentin eventually result in total
replacement of tooth root with alveolar bone. This is of particular concern in
younger patients, who have not reached their full growth potential, where
ankylosis can have greater effects than in adults.
6.2.4. Tooth Loss
Failure of replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth will lead to its loss.
Survival rate of replanted avulsed permanent anterior tooth ranges from
70 – 83%.36, level II, 26, 59, level III
Proper and timely management of complications of replanted avulsed
permanent anterior tooth could help to reduce risks of its failure and early
loss.37, level III
7.1. Pulp Necrosis and Inflammatory Root Resorption
Early pulp extirpation of replanted mature avulsed permanent anterior tooth
should be performed to prevent complication of pulpal necrosis.26, level III
Failure to extirpate the necrotic pulp tissue will lead to uncontrolled infection
and the development of inflammatory resorption,26, level III subsequently
resulted in tooth loss.40, level II-2
Replanted immature avulsed permanent anterior tooth has the potential for
pulp revascularisation. It should be carefully monitored during follow-ups
(refer to section 1.1). Immediate root canal treatment is indicated if there
are clinical and radiographic signs of inflammatory root resorption.37, level III
After completion of root canal treatment, the replanted tooth should be
reviewed for any signs or symptoms of further infections.
7. MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
7.2. Replacement Root Resorption or Ankylosis
There is insufficient high-quality evidence regarding the management of
replacement root resorption or ankylosed replanted avulsed permanent
anterior tooth which poses a great challenge for clinical practice. Its
management is complex and requires short- and long-term treatment
planning with inter-disciplinary involvements.
Tooth ankylosis in growing children often leads to failure of eruption resulting
in infra-occlusion. It disrupts local alveolar growth development and results in
space loss, tilting of adjacent teeth and poor aesthetic. The progression of
replacement root resorption in young children can be rapid, especially when
diagnosed before the age of 10. 60, level II-2
On the contrary, tooth ankylosis in older patients may be considered an
acceptable outcome. This age group has achieved skeletal maturity and the
replacement resorption progress is slow. Minor infra-occlusion may not
cause major aesthetic concerns. The ankylosed tooth can survive for a
number of years, before total bony replacement of root occurs. Eventually,
the crown may be lost spontaneously or by surgical intervention.60, level II-2
In the management of ankylosed replanted avulsed permanent anterior
teeth, clinicians should base the treatment planning on their experience and
skill, patients’ preferences and perspectives. The interventions of ankylosed
replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth are as follows:
Tooth autotransplantation61, level II-2; 62, level III
Decoronation63, level II-2l; 64, 65, level III
Surgical luxation or intentional luxation66, level III
Orthodontic treatment with distraction osteogenesis67, level III
Surgical osteotomy and distraction osteogenesis68, level III
Minor modifications of crown with composite build-up69, level II-2
Amongst all the above-mentioned techniques, the most commonly
performed procedures are tooth autotransplantation and decoronation.61, level
II-2; 62-65, level III; 70-73, level II-2 Whereas, other techniques are novel and may not be
replicated due to the specific presentation of the cases.66-68, level III
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
7.2.1. Tooth autotransplantation
Tooth autotransplantation in healthy growing children and adolescents may
be considered for the replacement of ankylosed replanted avulsed permanent
anterior tooth, when appropriate donor is available. Premolar is the most
common donor tooth in autotransplantation. Orthodontic consultation is
required in the treatment planning as part of a multidisciplinary team
approach, before performing premolar autotransplantation.
A meta-analysis of autotransplantation of teeth with incomplete root
formation reported a 10-year survival rate of 96.3% (CI 89.8 – 98.7%), whilst
the weighted estimated success rate per year was 96.6% (CI 97.8 – 94.8%).
The rate of complications such as ankylosis, root resorption, and pulp
necrosis was found to be low (<5%).61, level II-2
A systematic review of premolar autotransplantation to anterior maxilla
showed survival rate of 96.7% at 9 months - 22 years of follow-up. However,
the quality of primary papers included in this study were of low to moderate
level.62, level III
A successful tooth autotransplantation allows continuous tooth eruption,
preservation of alveolar bone volume, tooth movement by orthodontic forces
and normal proprioception in contrast to osseointegrated dental implant.72, 73,
level II-2
Hence, a successful tooth autotransplantation represents a good alternative
to orthodontic space closure or prosthetic replacement.
7.2.2. Decoronation
The purpose of decoronation is to preserve alveolar bone volume and to
prevent further infra-occlusion in growing children.63, level III Tooth extraction is
known to cause up to 50% resorption of the alveolar ridge width within 3
months.74, level III Though decoronation may offer the most benefits when it is
performed at the age of rapid growth whereby it may preserve alveolar bone
height, 63, level III contradicting evidence were also retrieved.65, level III
Autotransplantation may be considered in the management of
ankylosed replanted avulsed permanent anterior teeth when donor
tooth is available.
Recommendation 5
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Decoronation must be weighed against the need for temporary prosthetic
replacement in young growing patients, when permanent prosthesis such as
implant is contraindicated.
7.3. Tooth Loss (Interim and Long-term Treatment Options)
Failure to replant or failure following replantation of avulsed permanent tooth
will lead to premature loss of permanent maxillary anterior tooth.
Alveolar ridge preservation (ARP) procedures following tooth loss have been
introduced to minimise alveolar ridge atrophy to facilitate future implant
placement. Various techniques or materials used for ARP can be categorised
into three:- 75, level II-2
Bone grafts/ substitutes (i.e. autologous bone and platelet-rich
plasma or PRP)
Guided Bone Regeneration (GBR) (i.e. collagen membrane)
Biological active materials (i.e. bone morphogenic protein).
In a systematic review on ARP, the reduction in ridge width and height
following different ARP techniques may be less than that which occurs
following natural socket healing. However, ARP does not totally eliminate
post-extraction alveolar ridge resorption or predictably promote new bone
formation.75, level II-2 Clinicians may consider ARP in situations requiring that
implant placement is significantly delayed after tooth extraction, such as, due
to the young age of the patient.76, level III
Long-term treatment options can be considered for the treatment of lost
tooth. The treatment options are as follows:
Space maintenance using:
removable or fixed denture prosthesis (FDPs)
tooth autotransplantation (e.g. autotransplantation of developing
premolar)
implant prosthesis
Orthodontic space closure
Orthodontic space closure in combination with prosthesis/ tooth
autotransplantation/ implant (for cases involving loss of multiple
maxillary anterior teeth)
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Tooth avulsion of permanent anterior tooth occurs most commonly in children
and adolescents, during which facial growth is not completed. Therefore,
patients may have to wear non-invasive interim restorations during this
growth period prior to more definitive treatment. The interim restorations
available are:
removable retainer
metal resin-bonded FDPs
ceramic resin-bonded FDPs
fibre-reinforced composite resin-bonded restorations
Survival rates for both resin-bonded FDPs and composite resin-bonded
restorations are 73% at 4.5 years.77, level III The success rate of tooth
autotransplantation when using premolar to replace maxillary incisors can be
very high (i.e. 100% at 4.8 years).71, level II-2
As for implants, it should not be placed until the skeletal growth is completed.
Thus, this is a major disadvantage of planning aesthetic treatment with
implants as an option for the management of unsuccessful replanted avulsed
permanent anterior tooth among children and adolescents. Therefore,
patient’s age should be considered in the treatment strategy for anterior
permanent tooth loss due to avulsion or failed replanted avulsed permanent
anterior tooth.
It is important to standardise the management of avulsed permanent anterior
teeth at all healthcare levels in Malaysia using an evidence-based CPG in
order to manage it appropriately.
The outcomes of treatment are mostly dependent on the timely and
appropriate management of the avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
Recognition of the prognostic factors such as extra-alveolar time,
appropriate storage media and root canal treatment by clinicians, the
knowledge of what to do when a problem occurs, and the appropriate
responses from the health professionals are major factors in the
management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth. This professional
awareness is influenced by factors such as maintaining current
understanding of the nature of avulsed teeth, the appropriate management,
continuing professional education and an understanding of parents’ and
patient’s expectations.
8. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Therefore, it is important for these guidelines to be disseminated to all
healthcare professionals in primary and secondary healthcare facilities. This
can further be facilitated through the development of appropriate training
modules and quick references. These guidelines will also be beneficial to the
public by making this CPG available in a structured, user-friendly manner on
the internet.
Several factors may affect the implementation of the recommendations of the
CPG
8.1. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare professionals and
teaching institutions via printed and electronic copies
continuing professional education on the management of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth for healthcare professionals
adequate facilities at primary and secondary care level for diagnosing
and treating avulsed permanent anterior teeth
involvement
of
non-government
organisations
e.g.
Malaysian
Association of Paediatric Dentistry in Dental Trauma Talk and
Workshop
a)
b)
c)
d)
lack of understanding or limited knowledge on the management of
avulsed permanent anterior teeth
variation in skills and treatment practices
constraints in equipment and facilities
a)
b)
c)
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG include:
ensure widespread distribution of the CPG in hard and soft copy to
healthcare professionals in primary and secondary healthcare facilities
strengthen training of healthcare professionals to ensure knowledge
and information is up to date.
empower community with active involvement in trauma prevention and
management related activities
a)
b)
c)
8.2. Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
8.3. Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators.
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed as
clinical audit indicators for quality management of avulsed permanent
anterior teeth:
Retention rate of
replanted avulsed
permanent anterior
teeth over 2 years
Number of replanted avulsed
permanent anterior teeth
retained 2 years post operatively
Total number of replanted
avulsed permanent anterior
teeth over 2 years
100%
X
=
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
REFERENCES
Howe AS. Craniomaxillofacial Injuries. In: Seidenberg PH, Beutler AI, editors. The
Sports Medicine Resource Manual. 1 ed. Philadelphia; Edinburgh: Elsevier
Saunders; 2008. p. 253-71.
Bergman L, Milardovic Ortolan S, Zarkovic D, Viskic J, Jokic D, Mehulic K.
Prevalence of dental trauma and use of mouthguards in professional handball
players. Dent Traumatol. 2017; 33(3): 199-204.
Ugolini A, Parodi GB, Casali C, Silvestrini-Biavati A, Giacinti F. Work-related
traumatic dental injuries: Prevalence, characteristics and risk factors. Dent
Traumatol. 2018; 34(1): 36-40.
Enabulele JE, Oginni AO, Sede MA, Oginni FO. Pattern of traumatised anterior
teeth among adult Nigerians and complications from late presentation. BMC Res
Notes. 2016; 9(1): 70.
Rebouças PD, Macedo-Rodrigues LW, de Sousa Santiago AK, Gondim JO, Neto
JJSM. Prevalence of permanent teeth avulsion in a Brazilian trauma center: A 12
years retrospective study. Braz Dent Sci. 2015; 18(3): 3-9.
Lauridsen E, Hermann NV, Gerds TA, Kreiborg S, Andreasen JO. Pattern of
traumatic dental injuries in the permanent dentition among children, adolescents,
and adults. Dental Traumatology. 2012; 28(5): 358-363.
Mesquita GC, Soares PBF, Moura CCG, Roscoe MG, Paiva SM, Soares CJ. A
12-year retrospective study of avulsion cases in a Public Brazilian Dental Trauma
Service. Braz Dent J. 2017; 28(6): 749-756.
Oral Health Division Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Oral Health Survey of
Schoolchildren 2017 (NOHS 2017). Putrajaya: Ministry of Health Malaysia; 2017.
Cavalcanti AL, Bezerra PKM, De Alencar CRB, Moura C. Traumatic anterior
dental injuries in 7-to 12-year-old Brazilian children. Dent Traumatol. 2009; 25(2):
198-202.
Adekoya-Sofowora CA, Adesina OA, Nasir WO, Oginni AO, Ugboko VI.
Prevalence and causes of fractured permanent incisors in 12-year-old suburban
Nigerian schoolchildren. Dent Traumatol. 2009; 25(3): 314-317.
Bratteberg M, Thelen DS, Klock KS, Bårdsen A. Traumatic dental injuries and
experiences along the life course–a study among 16-yr-old pupils in western
Norway. Eur J Oral Sci. 2019.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Khandelwal V, Nayak UA, Nayak PA, Ninawe N. Prevalence of traumatic injuries
to the anterior teeth among 3-17-year-old school children of Indore and
correlating it with Kuppuswamy SES, occlusal relationship and ascertaining
percentage of those seeking the treatment. Int J Adolesc Med Health. 2018.
Mohd Ali A, H H. Clinical review on dental avulsion amongst children in Hospital
Sultanah Bahiyah 2001-2006. 6th Conference of Pediatric Dentistry Association
of Asia2008.
Garbin CAS, e Queiroz G, Rovida TAS, Garbin AJI. Occurrence of traumatic
dental injury in cases of domestic violence. Brazilian dental journal. 2012; 23(1):
72-76.
Damé-Teixeira N, Alves LS, Susin C, Maltz M. Traumatic dental injury among
12-year-old South Brazilian schoolchildren: Prevalence, severity, and risk
indicators. Dent Traumatol. 2013; 29(1): 52-58.
Hasan AA, Qudeimat MA, Andersson L. Prevalence of traumatic dental injuries in
preschool children in Kuwait–a screening study. Dent Traumatol. 2010; 26(4):
346-350.
Jagger RG, Abbasbhai A, Patel D, Jagger DC, Griffiths A. The prevalence of
dental, facial and head injuries sustained by schoolboy rugby players. A pilot
study. Prim Dent Care. 2010; 17(3): 143-146.
Zaleckiene V, Peciuliene V, Brukiene V, Drukteinis S. Traumatic dental injuries:
Etiology, prevalence and possible outcomes. Stomatologija. 2014; 16(1): 7-14.
Ravishankar TL, Kumar MA, Ramesh N, Chaitra TR. Prevalence of traumatic
dental injuries to permanent incisors among 12-year-old school children in
Davangere, South India. Chin J Dent Res. 2010; 13(1): 57-60.
Patel MC, Sujan SG. The prevalence of traumatic dental injuries to permanent
anterior teeth and its relation with predisposing risk factors among 8-13 years
school children of Vadodara city: An epidemiological study. J Indian Soc Pedod
Prev Dent. 2012; 30(2): 151.
Singletary EM, Zideman DA, De Buck EDJ, Chang W-T, Jensen JL, Swain JM, et
al. Part 9: First aid: 2015 International consensus on first aid science with
treatment recommendations. Circulation. 2015; 132(16_suppl_1): S269-S311.
Trope M. Avulsion of permanent teeth: Theory to practice. Dent Traumatol. 2011;
27(4): 281-294.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
McIntyre JD, Lee JY, Trope M, Vann, Jr., William F. Permanent tooth replantation
following avulsion: Using a decision tree to achieve the best outcome. Pediatr
Dent. 2009; 31(2): 137-144.
Petrovic B, Marković D, Peric T, Blagojevic D. Factors related to treatment and
outcomes of avulsed teeth. Dent Traumatol. 2010; 26(1): 52-59.
Souza BDM, Dutra KL, Kuntze MM, Bortoluzzi EA, Flores-Mir C, Reyes-Carmona
J, et al. Incidence of root resorption after the replantation of avulsed teeth: A
meta-analysis. J Endod. 2018; 44(8): 1216-1227.
Werder P, von Arx T, Chappuis V. Treatment outcome of 42 replanted permanent
incisors with a median follow-up of 2.8 years. Schweiz Monatsschr Zahnmed.
2011; 121(4): 312-20.
Chappuis V, Von Arx T. Replantation of 45 avulsed permanent teeth: A 1-year
follow-up study. Dent Traumatol. 2005; 21(5): 289-296.
Andersson L, Bodin I. Avulsed human teeth replanted within 15 minutes - a
long-term clinical follow-up study. Dent Traumatol. 1990; 6(1): 37-42.
Moule A, Cohenca N. Emergency assessment and treatment planning for
traumatic dental injuries. Aust Dent J. 2016; 61 Suppl 1: 21-38.
Andreasen JO, Lauridsen E, Gerds TA, Ahrensburg SS. Dental Trauma Guide: A
source of evidence-based treatment guidelines for dental trauma. Dent
Traumatol. 2012; 28(5): 345-350.
Adnan S, Lone MM, Khan FR, Hussain SM, Nagi SE. Which is the most
recommended medium for the storage and transport of avulsed teeth? A
systematic review. Dent Traumatol. 2018; 34(2): 59-70.
Poi WR, Sonoda CK, Martins CM, Melo ME, Pellizzer EP, Mendonça MRd, et al.
Storage media for avulsed teeth: A literature review. Braz Dent J. 2013; 24(5):
437-445.
Udoye CI, Jafarzadeh H, Abbott PV. Transport media for avulsed teeth: A review.
Aust Endod J. 2012; 38(3): 129-136.
Kullman L, Al Sane M. Guidelines for dental radiography immediately after a
dento-alveolar trauma, a systematic literature review. Dent Traumatol. 2012;
28(3): 193-199.
Verghese ST, Hannallah RS. Acute pain management in children. J Pain Res.
2010; 3: 105-123.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Andreasen JO, Borum MK, Jacobsen HL, Andreasen FM. Replantation of 400
avulsed permanent incisors. 2. Factors related to pulpal healing. Dent Traumatol.
1995; 11(2): 59-68.
Abbott PV. Prevention and management of external inflammatory resorption
following trauma to teeth. Aust Dent J. 2016; 61: 82-94.
Sigurdsson A. The treatment of traumatic dental injuries 2014. Available from:
www.aae.org/clinical-resources/trauma-resources.aspx.
Andersson JO, Andreasen FM. Avulsion. In: Andersson JO, Andreasen FM,
Andersson L, editors. Textbook and Color Atlas of Traumatic Injuries to Teeth. 4
ed. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing; 2007. p. 444-488.
Hinckfuss SE, Messer LB. An evidence-based assessment of the clinical
guidelines for replanted avulsed teeth. Part I: Timing of pulp extirpation. Dent
Traumatol. 2009; 25(1): 32-42.
Day PF, Duggal M, Nazzal H. Interventions for treating traumatised permanent
front teeth: Avulsed (knocked out) and replanted. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2019; (2).
Mohammadi Z, Dummer PMH. Properties and applications of calcium hydroxide
in endodontics and dental traumatology. Int Endod J. 2011; 44(8): 697-730.
Madarati AA, Zafar MS, Sammani AMN, Mandorah AO, Bani-Younes HA.
Preference and usage of intracanal medications during endodontic treatment.
Saudi Med J. 2017; 38(7): 755.
Batur YB, Erdemir U, Sancakli HS. The long-term effect of calcium hydroxide
application on dentin fracture strength of endodontically treated teeth. Dent
Traumatol. 2013; 29(6): 461-464.
Day PF, Gregg TA, Ashley P, Welbury RR, Cole BO, High AS, et al. Periodontal
healing following avulsion and replantation of teeth: A multi-centre randomized
controlled trial to compare two root canal medicaments. Dent Traumatol. 2012;
28(1): 55-64.
Torabinejad M, Parirokh M, Dummer PMH. Mineral trioxide aggregate and other
bioactive endodontic cements: An updated overview–part II: Other clinical
applications and complications. Int Endod J. 2018; 51(3): 284-317.
Donaldson M, Kinirons MJ. Factors affecting the time of onset of resorption in
avulsed and replanted incisor teeth in children. Dent Traumatol. 2001; 17(5):
201-205.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Kinirons MJ, Gregg TA, Welbury RR, Cole BOI. Dental trauma: Variations in the
presenting and treatment features in reimplanted permanent incisors in children
and their effect on the prevalence of root resorption. Br Dent J. 2000; 189(5): 263.
Andreasen JO, Borum MK, Jacobsen HL, Andreasen FM. Replantation of 400
avulsed permanent incisors. 1. Diagnosis of healing complications. Dent
Traumatol. 1995; 11(2): 51-58.
Bai J, Qin M, Zhao YM, Huang MW, Ji AP. Chemical removal of necrotic
periodontal ligament on delayed replanted teeth by sodium hypochlorite:
morphological analysis and microhardness indentation test of cementum. Int
Endod J. 2016; 49(4): 393-401.
Kahler B, Heithersay GS. An evidence-based appraisal of splinting luxated,
avulsed and root-fractured teeth. Dent Traumatol. 2008; 24(1): 2-10.
Hinckfuss SE, Messer LB. Splinting duration and periodontal outcomes for
replanted avulsed teeth: A systematic review. Dent Traumatol. 2009; 25(2):
150-157.
Hinckfuss SE, Messer LB. An evidence-based assessment of the clinical
guidelines for replanted avulsed teeth. Part II: Prescription of systemic antibiotics.
Dent Traumatol. 2009; 25(2): 158-164.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Antibiotic Guidelines. 2nd ed. Putrajaya:
Ministry of Health Malaysia; 2017.
Andreasen JO, Borum MK, Jacobsen HL, Andreasen FM. Replantation of 400
avulsed permanent incisors. 4. Factors related to periodontal ligament healing.
Dent Traumatol. 1995; 11(2): 76-89.
Lin S, Pilosof N, Karawani M, Wigler R, Kaufman AY, Teich ST. Occurrence and
timing of complications following traumatic dental injuries: A retrospective study in
a dental trauma department. J Clin Exp Dent. 2016; 8(4): e429.
Andersson L, Andreasen JO, Day P, Heithersay G, Trope M, Diangelis AJ, et al.
International Association of Dental Traumatology guidelines for the management
of traumatic dental injuries: 2. Avulsion of permanent teeth. Dent Traumatol.
2012; 28(2): 88-96.
Rocha Lima TF, Nagata JY, de Souza-Filho FJ, de Jesus Soares A. Post-traumatic
complications of severe luxations and replanted teeth. J Contemp Dent Pract.
2015; 16(1): 13-19.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Karayilmaz H, Kirzioglu Z, Gungor OE. Aetiology, treatment patterns and
long-term outcomes of tooth avulsion in children and adolescents. Pak J Med Sci.
2013; 29(2): 464-468.
Malmgren B, Malmgren O. Rate of infraposition of reimplanted ankylosed incisors
related to age and growth in children and adolescents. Dent Traumatol. 2002;
18(1): 28-36.
Rohof ECM, Kerdijk W, Jansma J, Livas C, Ren Y. Autotransplantation of teeth
with incomplete root formation: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Oral
Investig. 2018; 22(4): 1613-1624.
Akhlef Y, Schwartz O, Andreasen JO, Jensen SS. Autotransplantation of teeth to
the anterior maxilla: A systematic review of survival and success, aesthetic
presentation and patient-reported outcome. Dent Traumatol. 2018; 34(1): 20-27.
Malmgren B, Tsilingaridis G, Malmgren O. Long-term follow up of 103 ankylosed
permanent incisors surgically treated with decoronation - a retrospective cohort
study. Dent Traumatol. 2015; 31(3): 184-189.
Tsukiboshi M. Autotransplantation of teeth: Requirements for predictable
success. Dent Traumatol. 2002; 18(4): 157-180.
Lin S, Schwarz-Arad D, Ashkenazi M. Alveolar bone width preservation after
decoronation of ankylosed anterior incisors. J Endod. 2013; 39(12): 1542-1544.
Moffat MA, Smart CM, Fung DE, Welbury RR. Intentional surgical repositioning of
an ankylosed permanent maxillary incisor. Dent Traumatol. 2002; 18(4): 222-226.
Dolanmaz D, Karaman AI, Pampu AA, Topkara A. Orthodontic treatment of an
ankylosed maxillary central incisor through osteogenic distraction. Angle Orthod.
2010; 80(2): 391-395.
Nocini PF, De Santis D, Ferrari F, Bertele GP. A customized distraction device for
alveolar ridge augmentation and alignment of ankylosed teeth. Int J Oral
Maxillofac Implants. 2004; 19(1).
Ionta FQ, Gonçalves PSP, Honório HM, Oliveira GCd, Alencar CRBd, Santos NM,
et al. Delayed tooth reimplantation with 4-year follow-up: The management of
ankylosis during facial growth. Gen Dent. 2018; 66(3): 53-57.
Díaz JA, Jans GA, Zaror CE. Long-term evaluation and clinical outcomes of
children with dental transplants in Temuco City, Chile. Eur J Paediatr Dent. 2014;
15(1): 6-12.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Kvint S, Lindsten R, Magnusson A, Nilsson P, Bjerklin K. Autotransplantation of
teeth in 215 patients: A follow-up study. Angle Orthod. 2010; 80(3): 446-451.
Czochrowska EM, Stenvik A, Bjercke B, Zachrisson BU. Outcome of tooth
transplantation: Survival and success rates 17-41 years posttreatment. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2002; 121(2): 110-119.
Czochrowska EM, Stenvik A, Album B, Zachrisson BU. Autotransplantation of
premolars to replace maxillary incisors: A comparison with natural incisors. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2000; 118(6): 592-600.
Schropp L, Wenzel A, Kostopoulos L, Karring T. Bone healing and soft tissue
contour changes following single-tooth extraction: A clinical and radiographic
12-month prospective study. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent. 2003; 23(4).
Horvath A, Mardas N, Mezzomo LA, Needleman IG, Donos N. Alveolar ridge
preservation. A systematic review. Clin Oral Investig. 2013; 17(2): 341-63.
Tonetti MS, Jung RE, Avila-Ortiz G, Blanco J, Cosyn J, Fickl S, et al. Management
of the extraction socket and timing of implant placement: Consensus report
and clinical recommendations of group 3 of the XV European Workshop in
Periodontology. J Clin Periodontol. 2019; 46: 183-194.
Zitzmann NU, Özcan M, Scherrer SS, Bühler JM, Weiger R, Krastl G. Resinbonded restorations: A strategy for managing anterior tooth loss in adolescence.
J Prosthet Dent. 2015; 113(4): 270-276.
Moorrees CF, Fanning EA, Hunt EE, Jr. Age variation of formation stages for ten
permanent teeth. J Dent Res. 1963; 42: 1490-502.
Andreasen JO, Paulsen HU, Yu Z, Bayer T, Schwartz O. A long-term study of 370
autotransplanted premolars. Part II. Tooth survival and pulp healing subsequent
to transplantation. Eur J Orthod. 1990; 12(1): 14-24.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Appendix 1
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic databases:
Medline, Pubmed, Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) and
Embase while full text journal articles were retrieved from these databases.
The literature search was limited to human study, English language and
published articles from inception of databases to June 2019.
Clinical Question: What is the effective and safe emergency
management of avulsed permanent anterior teeth?
Example of Search Strategy
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
TOOTH AVULSION/ (2372)
(tooth adj1 (avuls* or dislocat* or luxat*)).tw. (575)
(teeth adj1 (avuls* or dislocat* or luxat*)).tw. (541)
INCISOR/ (22398)
incisor*.tw. (29357)
DENTITION, PERMANENT/ (1882)
((adult or permanent or secondary) adj1 dentition).tw. (3207)
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 (43548)
EMERGENCIES/ (40649)
emergenc*.tw. (407865)
EMERGENCY TREATMENT/ (10752)
(emergency adj1 therap*).tw. (701)
(emergency adj1 treatment*).tw. (4675)
9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 (427169)
8 and 14 (822)
limit 15 to (english language and humans and yr="2009 -Current") (278)
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Appendix 2
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
What is the effective and safe emergency management of avulsed
permanent anterior teeth?
What are the contraindications for replantation of avulsed permanent
anterior teeth?
What are the appropriate preoperative clinical and radiographic
assessments of avulsed permanent anterior teeth?
What are the prognostic factors for avulsed permanent anterior teeth?
What are the indications and timing for root canal treatment for avulsed
permanent anterior teeth?
Are splinting and systemic antibiotics effective and safe in avulsed
permanent anterior teeth?
What is the follow-up protocol for replanted avulsed permanent anterior
teeth?
What are the treatment options of complications of replanted avulsed
permanent anterior teeth?
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Appendix 3
Main characteristics, efficacy and accessibility of each storage medium
for avulsed permanent anterior teeth 31-33, level III
STORAGE
MEDIUM
CHARACTERISTICS
EFFICACY ACCESSIBILITY
Excellent
- -
- -
Physiological pH, osmolality
and nutrients
Excellent
Physiological pH, osmolality
and favourable to cell growth
- -
Excellent
Physiological pH and
hypothermal capacity
- -
Excellent
Nutrients, antimicrobial
property and growth factors
--
Excellent
Anti-inflammatory, antibacterial
and antioxidant properties
--
Excellent
Anti-inflammatory, antibacterial
and antioxidant properties
+
Good
Low microbial contamination,
contains nutrients and water
+
Good
Sterile, natural product
and contains nutrients
+
Good
Essential cells and nutrients
+
Poor
Antimicrobial property,
preservatives
+
Poor
Physiological pH and osmolality
++
Very poor
Microbial contamination,
hypotonic, non-physiological pH
and osmolality
++
Very poor
Microbial contamination,
hypotonic, non-physiological pH
and osmolality
+
Poor
Low pH and hypertonic
+
Excellent
Small bacterial contents, isotonic,
physiological pH, osmolality,
unique combination of growth
factors and nutrients
Hank’s Balanced
Salt Solution
(HBSS)
Viaspan
R
Euro-Collins
R
Minimum Essential
Medium (MEM)
Propolis
Green tea
Egg white
Coconut water
Ricetral
Contact lens
solution
Normal Saline
Water
Saliva
Milk
Gatorade
R
++ easily available, + available, - less available, - - least available
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Appendix 4
Name:
For tooth avulsion injury, please state:
1. Total extra-alveolar time:
2. Dry time:
3. Storage medium (type and time):
4. Tooth maturity (open or closed apex):
Identification Card (IC) No:
Age:
Gender:
Ethnic:
Hospital Registration No:
Patient details
DENTAL TRAUMA DATA COLLECTION FORM
General health
Medical history (including immunization and regular medication):
Time:
Location
Date:
Relevant Past Dental History:
General details of injury
Cause/Mechanism:
Current complaint:
Previous dental treatment received for this particular injury?
(State any management ie tetanus injection, analgesics, antibiotics, radiographs, replantation etc)
Presentation and nature of injury
Relevant extraoral presentation (E.g. Concomitant injury, basal bone fracture, soft tissue injury, etc.)
Relevant general intraoral presentation (E.g. Oral hygiene, soft tissue injury, dento-alveolar fracture etc.)
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Dental charting
Occlusion: (E.g. Premature contact, extrusion, infra-occlusion, derangement, etc.)
Tooth
Clinical injury
(e.g. avulsion,
intrusion, lateral
luxation, etc.)
Sinus tract/
Abscess/
Swelling
Sensibility
test
Mobility
Colour
Root
stage
Percussion
Sound
Tenderness
Cold
EPT
Clinical presentation
Sinus tract/ Abscess/
Swelling
-ve Absent
+ve Present
Cold test
-ve No response
+ve Normal response
++ Hyper sensitive
Root stage
(Moorrees Classification 1963)
Stage 1 (R¼ = Root length ¼)
Stage 2 (R½ = Root length ½)
Stage 3 (R¾ = Root length ¾)
Stage 4 (RC = Root length complete)
Stage 5 (A½ = Apex ½ closed
Stage 6 (AC = Apical closure complete)
EPT
-ve No response
+ve State the reading
Mobility (grade 0-3)
0 No mobility
1 Mobility <1mm
2 Mobility 1-2mm
3 Mobility >2mm depressible
Colour (Crown Discoloration)
-ve Absent (Normal)
+ve Present (to state colour)
Percussion Sound
-ve Normal
+ve Metallic/Ankylotic sound
Tenderness to Percussion (TTP)
-ve No
+ve Yes
++ Severe response
Root Stages according to Moorrees Classification
Radiographic presentation (views taken and evaluation)
Tooth
(E.g. Loss of lamina dura, periapical radiolucency, root resorption, pulp obliteration, etc.)
Diagnosis
Treatment Plan
Recorded by:
Designation:
Hospital:
Date
Tooth
(WHO Pulp tissue and PDL diagnosis )
(E.g To record splinting material and duration, extra- or intra-oral RCT, etc)
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Appendix 5
Clinical and radiographic parameters to be recorded
during review appointment
CLINICAL
RADIOGRAPHIC
Sinus tract/ Abscess/ Swelling
Colour (Crown discoloration)
* If yes, please state the colour
of crown
Percussion Test
a) Tenderness
b) Metallic/Ankylotic sound
Sensibility Test
a) Cold test
b) Electric Pulp (EPT)
Periodontal
a) Pocket depth
b) Gingival recession
c) Bleeding on probing
Occlusion
a) Premature contact
b) Extrusion
c) Infra-occlusion
Loss of lamina dura
Periapical radiolucency
Root resorption
Pulp obliteration
Immature tooth with open apex
- Thickening of dentinal wall
- Root growth
- *Root stage
(Stage 1-6 )
Mobility (Grade 0-3)
Fill in the boxes as –ve for absent or +ve for present
*Stage of root maturity according to Moorrees Classification 1963:78, 79
Stage 1 = R¼ or Root length ¼;
Stage 2 = R½ or Root length ½;
Stage 3 = R¾ or Root length ¾;
Stage 4 = RC or Root length complete;
Stage 5 = A½ or Apex ½ closed;
Stage 6 = AC or Apical closure complete
TOOTH
(To include replanted avulsed and control tooth)
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Date :
Appendix 6
Possible complications and expected timing of occurrence following
replantation of avulsed permanent anterior teeth.
No. Complications
Findings
Clinical
Radiographic
Expected
timing of
occurrence56
1
Pulpal
necrosis
2 weeks –
2 years
Symptomatic
(pain/tender/swelling)
No respond to
sensibility test
No specific
characteristics can be
appreciated or
presence of periapical
radiolucency
2
Inflammatory
resorption
5 months –
2 years
Symptomatic
(pain/tender/swelling)
Presence of sinus/
abscess/ swelling
The tooth is mobile
(grade >1), possibly
extruded
Tenderness to
percussion
No respond to
sensibility test
Crown discolouration
Periodontal pocket
depth >3mm,
presence of bleeding
on probing
Presence of gingival
recession
Loss of lamina dura
Presence of periapical
radiolucency
Radiolucent
saucershaped
cavitation along the
root surface
3
Replacement
resorption or
ankylosis
6 months –
2 years
Asymptomatic
The tooth is immobile
(grade 0)
No tenderness to
percussion and
percussion tone is
high (metallic sound)
Infra-occlusion of the
tooth in growing
patient
Loss of lamina dura
and replacement of
periodontal space with
bone
Continuous
replacement of root
with bone
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in
pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are
available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “Management of Avulsed Permanent
Anterior Teeth” was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of
Health Malaysia and was developed without any involvement of the
pharmaceutical industry.
CPG council
Panel of internal and external reviewers
Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
Dr Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof, and Dr Ainol Haniza binti Kherul
Anuwar, CPG Unit, Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section,
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
-
-
-
-
-
2019
Management of Avulsed Permanent Anterior Teeth
Oral Health Technology Section
Oral Health Programme
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E10, Precinct 1
Federal Government Ofﬁces Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia