or
NSA
ral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS
IN ORAL SURGERY FOR PREVENTION
OF SURGICAL SITE
INFECTION
(Second Edition)
November 2015
n
Ww
=
—l
wi
=
>
o
wi
2
=
[S)
=z
oc
a
a
<=
SI
=
a
(6)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
TARGET POPULATION, TARGET GROUP
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE AND GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS
MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
1.0 INTRODUCTION
2.0 INDICATIONS FOR PROPHYLACTIC ANTIBIOTICS
2.1 Patients with underlying medical problems
2.2 Clean surgery
2.3 Clean-contaminated surgery
2.3.1 Minor clean-contaminated surgery
2.3.1.1 Lower third molar surgery
2.3.1.2 Periodontal Surgery
2.3.1.3 Minor clean-contaminated surgery with high
degree of difficulty / long duration
2.3.1.4 Surgery to place dental implants
2.3.1.5 Surgery associated with the use of bone grafts
2.3.2 Major clean-contaminated surgery
2.4 Cancer surgery
2.5 Oral and maxillofacial trauma
2.6 Site of surgery involving bone previously exposed to radiotherapy
3.0 ADMINISTRATION OF PROPHYLACTIC ANTIBIOTICS
3.1 Choice of antibiotic
3.2 Dose of antibiotic
3.3 Timing of first dose of antibiotic
3.4 Additional doses (duration) and dose intervals of the antibiotic
4.0 CONCLUSIONS
5.0 IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
5.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
5.2 Potential Resource Implications
REFERENCES
APPENDIX 1: SEARCH STRATEGY
APPENDIX 2: ASA PHYSICAL STATUS CLASSIFICATION
SYSTEM
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
SOURCES OF FUNDING
Page
i
iii
iii
iii
iv
v
vi
1
2
2
3
4
4
4
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
10
10
13
14
15
16
17
17
18
19
25
26
28
28
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
These Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) were developed by a
committee comprising six Oral Surgeons, one Periodontist, one
Clinical Microbiologist, three Dental Public Health Specialists and one
Pharmacist.
After development, the guidelines were scrutinized by an internal review
committee who gave feedback primarily on the comprehensiveness
of the guidelines and accuracy of the interpretation of evidences
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
A respected clinician and academic was invited as external reviewer
and provided useful feedback on the guidelines.
The previous edition of the CPG on Antibiotic Prophylaxis against
Wound Infection for Oral Surgical Procedures (August 2003) was used
as a reference.
Several changes have been made in these updated guidelines. Sections
on periodontal surgery, cancer surgery and surgery in previously
irradiated bone have been included. The section on trauma has been
simplified. There are also some changes in the choice and regime of
the recommended antibiotics. In addition to the new and updated
information, key messages are given where the available evidence is
too weak to make a recommendation.
Clinical audit indicators have been identified for the purpose of
monitoring and evaluating outcomes and are recommended for use in
individual centres.
In reviewing these guidelines, publications from the year 2003 onwards
were retrieved and scrutinized. A literature search was carried out using
the following electronic databases: PubMed/MEDLINE; Cochrane
Database of Systemic Reviews (CDSR); ISI Web of Knowledge and
full text journal articles via the OVID search engine. In addition, the
reference lists of all relevant articles retrieved were searched to identify
further studies. Free text terms or MeSH terms were used either singly
or in combination to retrieve the articles (Appendix 1). Only literature
in English was retrieved. Each article retrieved was appraised by at
least two members. The selected articles were assigned their evidence
level according to the U.S./Canadian Preventive Services Task Force
guide and the key information in each article was presented in an
evidence table. These were then discussed during group meetings.
Recommendations made were graded according to the Scottish
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) guide. All statements
and recommendations formulated were agreed upon by both the
development group and review committee.
The recommendations in this CPG were made taking into consideration
both current scientific evidence as well as local circumstances. Where
there was lack of or weak evidence, recommendations were made
based on consensus of the group members.
The draft guidelines were also posted on the Ministry of Health website
for comments and feedback. The final draft of the CPG was presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPGs, the Health Technology
Assessment (HTA) division and the CPG Council of the Ministry of
Health, Malaysia for approval.
OBJECTIVE
The main aim of these guidelines is to assist dental practitioners make
informed decisions on prophylactic antibiotic use in the prevention of
oral surgical site infections.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
1. To identify the procedures in oral surgery that would benefit from
surgical antibiotic prophylaxis.
2. To assist in deciding which antibiotics to prescribe and what
regime to follow if prophylactic antibiotics are indicated.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by the guidelines are:
i.
When are antibiotics indicated for the prevention of surgical site
infections in oral surgery?
ii.
What antibiotics are appropriate in surgical prophylaxis?
iii. Could the inappropriate use of antibiotics in surgical prophylaxis
be reduced or eliminated?
TARGET POPULATION
These guidelines are applicable to patients undergoing oral and
maxillofacial (OMF) surgical procedures.
TARGET GROUP/USER
These guidelines will be useful for oral and maxillofacial surgeons as
well as dental practitioners involved in the surgical management of
patients. Academicians involved in the training of dentists and dental
specialists would also benefit.
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and specialist care (public and private sectors).
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
LEVEL
STUDY DESIGN
l
Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomised
controlled trial
ll-1
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomization
ll-2
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or research
group
ll-3
Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the
intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such
as the results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the
1940s) could also be regarded as this type of evidence
lll
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Source: Adapted from U.S./Canadian Preventive Services Task Force
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS
GRADE
STUDY DESIGN
A
At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or RCT or evidence
rated as good or directly applicable to the target population
B
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable to
the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of
results; or evidence extrapolated from meta-analysis, systematic
reviews or RCT
C
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and or
clinical experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence
of directly applicable clinical studies of good quality
Source: Modified from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN)
MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Co-Chairperson
Dr. Stephen Joseph Royan
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeon
Hospital Melaka
Jalan Mufti Haji Khalil
75400 Melaka
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Christopher
Vincent
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeon
International Medical University
No 126 Jalan Jalil Perkasa 19
Bukit Jalil, 57000 Kuala Lumpur
Members
Dr. Abdul Latif b. Ab Hamid
Senior Consultant Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgeon
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar Seremban
70300 Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Norhayati bt. Omar
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeon
Hospital Serdang
Jalan Puchong, 43000 Kajang
Selangor
Dr. Sharifah Tahirah bt. Syed Alwi
Al Junid
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
50586 Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Chan Yoong Kian
Consultant Periodontist
Klinik Pergigian Besar
Jalan Abdul Samad
80100 Johor Baharu
Dr. Syed Nabil b. Syed Omar
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon
Fakulti Pergigian
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
43600 Bangi
Selangor
Dr. Zubaidah bt. Abdul Wahab
Senior Consultant Clinical
Microbiologist
Jabatan Patologi
Hospital Sungai Buloh
45000 Selangor
Datin Dr. Nooral Zeila bt. Junid
Dental Public Health Specialist
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E 10, Parcel E
62590 Putrajaya
Ms. Foo Yen See
Pharmacist
Hospital Serdang
41000 Serdang
Selangor
Dr. Salleh b. Zakaria
Dental Public Health Specialist
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E 10, Parcel E
62590 62590 Putrajaya
Dr. Zainab bt. Shamdol
Dental Public Health Specialist
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E 10, Parcel E
62590 Putrajaya
MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
These guidelines were reviewed by a panel of independent reviewers
comprising both local and international experts. They were asked
to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy of
interpretation of the evidence supporting the recommendations in
the guideline. The following internal and external reviewers provided
comments and feedback on the proposed draft:
INTERNAL REVIEWERS
Dr. Ferdinand Jesudian Kovilpillai
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon
Hospital Taiping
Taiping, Perak
Datin Dr. Sorayah Sidek
Consultant Periodontist
Klinik Pergigian Besar
Kuantan, Pahang
Dr. K. Sivakama Sunthari
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon
Hospital Ampang
Ampang, Selangor
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Professor StJohn Crean
Executive Dean of the College of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences
Professor of Medicine in Dentistry
Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon
University of Central Lancashire
United Kingdom
1.0 INTRODUCTION
A landmark animal study by Burke3, level III and subsequent clinical
studies by Polk4, level III and Stone5, level III initially defined the scientific
basis for the prophylactic use of antimicrobial agents to prevent
surgical site infection. From these studies several important
principles were established which remain valid to this day:
i) Our body’s defence against bacteria depends primarily on its
own natural resistance.
ii) The risk of infection can be decreased and sometimes
prevented by supplementing the body’s natural resistance
with antibiotics.
iii) Antibiotics must be delivered before bacterial contamination
of the tissue occurs.
iv) Antibiotics serve no purpose if they are administered after the
end of the period of active bacterial contamination.
There are however significant risks associated with antibiotic use.
When an antibiotic is administered, strains of bacteria sensitive
to the antibiotic are killed allowing the proliferation of resistant
strains. Repeated ‘selection’ of resistant strains of bacteria would
eventually render the antibiotic ineffective for prophylaxis or
treatment of infections associated with these bacteria. Antibiotic
choice is becoming increasingly limited by antimicrobial
resistance6, level III and new antibiotic discovery is not keeping pace
with the rates of this antimicrobial resistance.7, level III
Also, an antibiotic administered to a patient can act as an
antigenic stimulus and hence produce an allergic reaction.
Allergic reactions manifest either locally or systemically at
varying degrees of severity ranging from minor skin lesions to
anaphylactic shock and death.
Antibiotics in general should be used only when the benefits
outweigh the risks to the patient and are therefore only indicated
when the consequence of infection is severe or when the
incidence of infection is high.
2.0 INDICATIONS FOR PROPHYLACTIC ANTIBIOTICS
The United States Centers for Disease Control’s (CDC) National
Nosocomial Infection Surveillance (NNIS) classification system
for the risk of Surgical Site Infection (SSI) which is based on a
large multicentre study (Study on the Efficacy of Nosocomial
Infection Control - SENIC) lists multiple factors that increase the
risk of SSI.8, level II-2 These factors include:
• Patients with underlying medical problems (ASA score)
• Wound class
• Duration of surgery
Other factors such as previous exposure of the site of the surgery
to radiotherapy may also increase the risk of SSI.
2.1 Patients with underlying medical problems
A Swedish Systematic Review of the Literature did not find any
clinical trials on antibiotic prophylaxis in medically compromised
patients other than patients with heart disease. The authors noted
that despite the lack of evidence, recommendations in Sweden
include many different medical conditions for which antibiotic
prophylaxis should be used.9, level 1
A Cochrane Review stated that though there is some evidence
that prophylactic antibiotics can reduce infection and dry sockets
following third molar extraction, it was unclear whether the
evidence in the review is generalizable to those with concomitant
illnesses or immunodeﬁciency. They however concluded that such
patients are more likely to beneﬁt from prophylactic antibiotics,
because infections in them are likely to be more frequently
associated with complications and be more difﬁcult to treat.10, level 1
The French Health Products Safety Agency Recommendations
states that patients with certain medical conditions have
an increased susceptibility to infection which would include
oncological patients, patients with congenital or immunological
immunodepression, patients with immunodepression due to
medication, patients with infectious immunodepression (AIDS),
patients with metabolic disorders (diabetes), and patients with
renal and hepatic insufficiency. Such patients would require
antibiotic prophylaxis. 11, level III
The large multicentre trial of CDC’s SENIC Project showed that
patients with ASA (Appendix 2) scores of 1 and 2 had lower
infection rates than patients with ASA scores of 3 or more. 8, level II-2
RECOMMENDATON 1
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for all surgical procedures
carried out on medically compromised patients especially
those with ASA score of 3 or more. (Grade B)
2.2 Clean surgery
This category of surgery refers to surgical procedures in the
maxillofacial region in which the incision and exposure does
not extend into the oral cavity and includes submandibular and
parotid gland surgery and TMJ surgery.
Johnson et al. 12, level III reported a very low infection rate of 0.6%
for clean surgery in the head and neck region (parotidectomy,
thyroidectomy, or submandibular gland excision) without the use
of prophylactic antibiotics.
The CDC’s SENIC Project had a low infection rate of 1% for clean
general surgery cases with no other risk factors. 8, level II-2
Knight et al.13, level III presented a very low infection rate of 0.2 %
for clean general surgery cases in which antibiotic prophylaxis
were not given. It is important to note that this infection rate was
similar to that of clean general surgery cases in which antibiotic
prophylaxis was given (0.94%).
In an attempt to reduce the inappropriate use of antibiotics Liu et
al.14, level II-3 demonstrated that with continuing medical education
100% of the surgeons at their hospital stopped using prophylactic
antibiotics for clean surgery.
Chattopadhyayl et al.15, level III and Knight et al.13, level III showed
that clean surgery of long duration (> 75th percentile for similar
procedures / > 2 hours) is not associated with higher infection
rates.
Current evidence therefore indicates that clean surgery is
associated with low infection rates with or without antibiotics.
RECOMMENDATION 2
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not indicated for clean surgery in
healthy patients. (Grade B)
2.3 Clean-contaminated surgery
This category of surgery refers to surgical procedures in the oral
and maxillofacial region limited to the oral cavity or which extends
into the oral cavity.
In this category fall a wide range of procedures. They range from
minor soft tissue and dentoalveolar surgery to surgery to place
dental implants to major oral and maxillofacial surgery.
2.3.1 Minor clean—contaminated surgery
2.3.1.1 Lower third molar surgery
Various randomised controlled trials found that prophylactic
antibiotics did not have a statistically significant effect on postoperative infections in third molar surgery and concluded that
antibiotics should not be routinely administered when third molars
are removed in healthy individuals.16-20, level 1
A local retrospective study by Royan et al.21, level III also showed
no difference in infection rates between patients who were given
prophylactic antibiotics and those who were not.
A large multicentre prospective Malaysian study showed that the
infection rate in healthy patients given a single dose of antibiotics
(0.6%) was lower than that in patients not given antibiotics (2%)
or in patients given five days of antibiotics post-operatively
(2%). All the infections were also noted to be mild and easily
treated. The study concluded that the low infection rate and mild
infections in patients not given antibiotics did not justify the use
of prophylactic antibiotics. The authors commented that it was
not justifiable to give antibiotics to 100 patients to prevent mild
infections in two of them.2, level II-2
A Cochrane Review stated that there is some evidence that
prophylactic antibiotics can reduce infection and dry sockets
following third molar extraction. The authors however concluded
that due to the increasing prevalence of bacteria which are
resistant to treatment by currently available antibiotics, clinicians
should consider the fact that because the infection rate is low,
giving antibiotics is likely to do more harm than good. 10, level I
There is no evidence for the use of prophylactic antibiotics in
surgery to remove other impacted teeth. However, an inference
can be made from the evidence for third molar surgery that the
use of prophylactic antibiotics would similarly not be beneficial.
RECOMMENDATION 3
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not indicated for lower third molar
surgery. (Grade A)
2.3.1.2 Periodontal Surgery
The incidence of infection after periodontal surgery is low
(0.55% - 2.09%).22-23, level III A retrospective study by Callis et
al.22, level III showed that patients who received antibiotics as
part of the surgical protocol (pre- and/or post- surgery) had an
infection rate of 2.85% compared to an infection rate of 1.81%
when no antibiotics were used. This result was not statistically
significant.23, level III Here again, because of the low infection rate,
giving antibiotics is likely to do more harm than good.
RECOMMENDATION 4
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended for routine
periodontal surgery. (Grade B)
2.3.1.3 Minor clean-contaminated surgery with high degree
of difficulty / long duration
Clean contaminated surgery of long duration (> 75th percentile
for similar procedures) is associated with higher infection rates. 8,
level II-2; 13, level III
This higher infection rate is to be expected as the deeper tissues of
the surgical site are exposed to the oral cavity for a longer period
of time. Also, surgery with a higher degree of difficulty causes
more injury to the tissues resulting in compromised healing and
immune responses.
RECOMMENDATION 5
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis may be indicated for minor surgery
with a high degree of difficulty in which the duration of the
surgery is predicted to be long. (Grade B)
2.3.1.4 Surgery to place dental implants
Despite the high success rates published in the literature, implant
failures do occur. Some of the early dental implant losses could
be due to bacterial contamination during implant insertion which
may lead to infections around the implant. Such infections when
they do occur are very difficult to manage. The financial loss of
implant failure is also great. In order to minimize early infection
after dental implant placement, systemic antibiotic prophylaxis
regimes have been advocated.
Two recent Cochrane systematic reviews concluded that there is
some evidence suggesting 2g of amoxicillin given orally 1 hour
preoperatively significantly reduces failures of dental implants
placed in ordinary conditions.24-25, level 1
RECOMMENDATION 6
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for surgery to place
dental implants. (Grade A)
2.3.1.5 Surgery associated with the use of bone grafts
There is a paucity of evidence on whether antibiotic prophylaxis
is indicated when bone grafts are inserted intra-orally. The reason
for this lack of evidence is probably due to the fact that surgeons
consider the financial cost and morbidity too great if a bone graft
is lost through infection and therefore prescribe antibiotics.
A search of the literature found only one randomized controlled
double blind study. The results of this study showed there was a
statistically significant increased risk of having an infection after
an intra-oral bone grafting procedure when antibiotic prophylaxis
was not used. 26, level 1
RECOMMENDATION 7
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for minor oral surgical
procedures in which a bone graft is inserted. (Grade A)
2.3.2 Major clean-contaminated surgery
Orthognathic surgery is the archetype of major clean contaminated
maxillofacial surgery. This category of surgery also includes
surgery for large benign tumours and cysts.
In major maxillofacial surgery, the duration of the surgery is
expected to be long with the wound open into the mouth for the
duration of the surgery. As discussed above in Section 2.3.1.3,
clean-contaminated surgery of longer duration is associated with
an increased incidence of SSI. 8, level II-2; 13, level III
Using proper surgical techniques and prophylactic antibiotics,
Peterson 27, level III stated that it was possible to reduce infection
rates to as low as 1.0%.
Tan et al. 28, level 1 and Oomens et al. 29, level 1 in their systematic
reviews and meta-analysis of clinical trials recommended that
prophylactic antibiotics are indicated for orthognathic surgery.
RECOMMENDATION 8
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for major clean
contaminated maxillofacial surgery. (Grade A)
2.4 Cancer surgery
Patients with head and neck cancer are usually older and are often
medically compromised. Simo and French 30, level III advocated the
use of prophylactic antibiotics for clean surgery associated with
malignancy as it has a significantly higher infection rate when
compared to surgery for benign disease. A prospective controlled
study on antibiotic prophylaxis in clean neck dissections done by
Seven et al. 31, level II-1 showed a significantly higher incidence of
infections in patients who were not given antibiotics.
In clean-contaminated cancer surgery of the head and neck
involving major resections and flap reconstruction, Hirakawa et
al.32, level II-3 showed an infection rate 32% and Skitarelic et al.33,
level II-3 found an infection rate of 22.0% even with prophylactic
antibiotics.
RECOMMENDATION 9
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated in all forms of head and
neck cancer surgery. (Grade A)
2.5 Oral and maxillofacial trauma
There is little strong evidence relating to the use of prophylactic
antibiotics in trauma surgery. A few points from the literature
should however, be highlighted:
•
Prophylactic antibiotic therapy reduces the risk of infection
in the treatment of mandibular fractures. 34, level II-3
•
There is no good evidence for the use of post-operative
antibiotics after open reduction and internal fixation of
fractured mandibles.35, level III; 36, level II-2; 37, level II-3
•
The incidence of SSI following surgery for fractures of the
zygoma is low whether antibiotics are given or not. 34, level II-3
•
Infection rates for maxillary fracture treatment are very low.
35, level II-3
It is also logical to consider that trauma to tissue renders it less
resistant to infection.
In view of the lack of strong evidence, the indication for antibiotic
prophylaxis in open reduction and internal fixation of facial bone
fractures is considered as for clean, contaminated surgery and
placement of implants.
RECOMMENDATION 10
•
Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for open reduction and
internal fixation of facial bone fractures. (Grade B)
•
Antibiotics should not be continued postoperatively.
(Grade B)
2.6 Site of surgery involving bone previously exposed to
radiotherapy
Patients who have had radiation for the treatment of head and
neck malignancy are at risk of osteoradionecrosis following oral
surgical intervention to the jaws. While osteoradionecrosis itself
is not considered an infection, surgical site infection involving the
bone can cause osteoradionecrosis by means of inflammatory
and infectious insult to the compromised bone. As a result of
the morbidity associated with osteoradionecrosis, antibiotics
have been widely used peri-operatively in association with
surgery involving bone to try and prevent the occurrence of
osteoradionecrosis.
No randomized controlled trial has been conducted to determine
if prophylactic antibiotics are effective in preventing the onset
of osteoradionecrosis. In one systematic review 38, level II-3 the
incidence of osteoradionecrosis following tooth extraction was
slightly lower when prophylactic antibiotic was used as compared
to when no antibiotics was used (6% vs. 7%). The conclusions
of this systematic review were, however, derived from weak
evidence consisting mainly of retrospective and non-randomised
prospective studies. Prophylactic antibiotics therefore do not
appear to be effective in preventing osteoradionecrosis.
There is no difference in the incidence of osteoradionecrosis
following tooth extraction whether antibiotics are administered
or not.
If osteoradionecrosis does occur, there appears to be a changing
trend in its management. There is evidence of the effectiveness
of conservative medical management incorporating antioxidant
therapy (Pentoxyphyline and Tocopherol).39, level III The addition of
low dose doxycycline or biphophonates to this also shows some
promise.40, level III
3.0 ADMINISTRATION OF PROPHYLACTIC ANTIBIOTICS
Once it has been decided that prophylactic antibiotics are
indicated, Peterson 27, level III has suggested that several principles
be followed:
• The correct antibiotic must be used.
• The plasma antibiotic level must be high.
• The timing of administration must be correct.
• The shortest antibiotic exposure must be used.
3.1 Choice of antibiotic
3.1.1 Surgery confined to the oral cavity
One of the principles followed in choosing antibiotics is their
effectiveness against the likely organisms causing the infection.
Following this principle alone, the choice of antibiotics for
odontogenic infections becomes complicated due to the
polymicrobial nature of these infections.
The bacteria involved in odontogenic infections include the
facultative anaerobic Gram-positive cocci (Streptococcus
viridans), the strict anaerobic Gram-negative rods (Porphyromona,
Prevotella and Fusobacterium spp.) and the strict anaerobic
Gram-positive cocci (Peptostreptococcus spp.)41, level III; 42, level II-1
There is agreement that facultative and strict anaerobes act
synergistically and not in isolation in causing infection.41, level III;
42, level II-1; 43, level II-3 Gaetti-Jardim et al.43, level II-3 went on to suggest
that it may be sufficient just to break the established synergism
between different bacteria, rather than to try and target every
single potential organism that may be involved in the infection.
Yuvaraj et al.42, level II-1 showed that in interdependent, synergistic
mixed infections, one bacterial species sensitive to penicillin may
render the entire pathogenic complex non-pathogenic.
Penicillin and amoxicillin are effective against the organisms
causing odontogenic infections and penicillin is still regarded by
many authorities as the drug of choice. 42, level II-1; 44, level II-3; 45, level II-3;
46, level 1
There is emerging resistance to penicillin by the Streptococcus
viridans group due to modifications of the penicillin binding
proteins (PBP). This resistance however can be overcome
by increasing the dose of the antibiotic. The resistance of the
anaerobic gram negative rods to penicillin is however due to the
production of beta lactamase. As a result of this, the use of the
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid combination is becoming increasingly
popular. 41, level III
The amoxicillin-clavulanic acid combination is a broad spectrum
antibiotic. It should be avoided when other more narrow-spectrum
antibiotics could be used. It increases the risk of Clostridium
difficile, MRSA and other resistant infections.47, level I This antibiotic
should therefore be prescribed only for appropriate indications
so that it remains an effective antibiotic when needed.
Clindamycin has been shown to be effective against the facultative
and strict anaerobes involved in odontogenic infections and is
therefore often the drug of choice in patients allergic to penicillin.
43, level II-3
The choice of antibiotic however must be justified by the
antibiotic susceptibility patterns in the population. Table 1
represents the antibiotic resistance patterns of oral organisms
isolated in Hospital Sungai Buloh for 2014. The results show that
Streptococcus viridans is still very sensitive to penicillin G and
clindamycin but resistant to ampicillin. It also appears that the
anaerobic organisms are showing some resistance to penicillin G
and clindamycin.
Table 1. Antibiotic resistance patterns of oral organisms- Hospital
Sg. Buloh, 2014
Organism
Streptococcus
intermedius
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
6
Streptococcus
viridans
11
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
Peptostreptococcus
sp.
4
0
0
0
50
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
Prevotella
intermedia
1
0
100
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
Prevotella bivia
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
Prevotella oralis
5
100
20
0
0
20
5
5
5
5
5
Fusobacterium
varium
3
0
33
0
0
33
3
3
3
3
3
Fusobacterium
mortiferum
5
40
0
0
0
0
5
5
5
5
5
NB: The upper figure in each row refers to the percentage resistance and the lower figure
refers to the no. of isolates tested.
Microorganisms intervene in the odontogenic infection in a
chronological manner. It is therefore logical to assume that
effective antibiotic prophylaxis against the initiating bacteria,
which are usually the facultative bacteria (mainly Streptococcus
viridans), could prevent the infection. 45, level III
In the light of these findings, penicillin G and clindamycin would
be obvious choices as prophylactic antibiotics.
Total isolate
Ampicilin
Clindamycin
Ceftriaxone
Cefotaxime
Erythromycin
Gentamicin
Imipenem
Metronidazole
Penicillin G
Piperacilin Tazobactam
Trimethoprim/Sulbactam
Tetracycline
Vancomycin
3.1.2 Surgery involving the oral cavity extending onto the skin
The pathogenic organisms involved in surgical site infections
for surgery extending onto the skin may also include methicillin
sensitive Staphylococcus aureus in addition to the oral organisms.
The penicillinase resistant antibiotics cloxacillin and cefazolin
(1st generation cephalosporin) would be the drugs of choice.
Cloxacillin needs to be prescribed together with penicillin as it
is effective only against Staphylococcus aureus and not the oral
organisms. Cefazolin however can be prescribed alone as it is
effective against both. Clindamycin is the antibiotic of choice
for patients allergic to penicillin and is effective against all the
organisms involved. 48, level III
RECOMMENDATION 11
•
Amoxicillin, Penicillin G and Clindamycin are appropriate
choices of antibiotics for oral surgical prophylaxis. (Grade
B)
•
Cloxacillin, cefazolin or clindamycin should be considered
if the surgery extends onto the skin. (Grade C)
3.2 Dose of antibiotic
The dose of the antibiotic should be based on its pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic properties and on patient factors. The
clinical guidelines by Bratzler et al.49, level II-2 and Mangram et al.50, level
II-3 have recommended that full therapeutic doses for antibiotics
be used for prophylaxis. In obese patients, it is suggested that the
dosage be increased although relevant studies are lacking. The
recommendations for initial dose strengths of various antibiotics
are as in Table 2.
RECOMMENDATION 12
•
The dose of antibiotic to be administered for surgical
prophylaxis should be at the full therapeutic dose of the
antibiotic. (Grade B)
Table 2. Initial dose strengths of various antibiotics
Route
Antibiotic
Initial dose strength
Oral
Amoxicillin
1.0 g
Clindamycin
600mg
Amoxicillin/
clavulanic acid
1.0 g of the amoxicillin
component
Cefuroxime
500mg
Parenteral
Benzyl Penicillin
2 mega units
Clindamycin
600 mg
Amoxicillin/
clavulanic acid
1.2g
Cloxacillin
1.0g
Cefazolin
2.0g
Cefuroxime
1.5g
3.3 Timing of first dose of antibiotic
Peterson suggested that for prophylaxis against wound infection
to be effective, the tissue antibiotic levels must be high at the
time of surgery which would necessitate the administration of the
antibiotic preoperatively. The first dose of the antibiotic should be
administered within 60 minutes prior to the surgical incision.44, 50,
level II-3
A number of studies have demonstrated that there is an increased
rate of SSI when antibiotics are given earlier than 60 minutes
before incision.49, level II-2; 50, level II-3; 51, level II-2 A Dutch study of 1922
patients showed that the highest risk of SSI was found in patients
who were given prophylaxis after incision. 52, level II-2
It should be noted however that an important animal study in
1990 by Berney and Francioli led to the establishment of the
“two hour rule”.53, level III This rule states that antibiotics given less
than two hours from the start of the procedure is still effective as
prophylaxis against wound infection. Beyond this time, antibiotics
will be ineffective as prophylaxis. This “two hour rule” might be
considered if prophylactic antibiotics were not administered
pre-procedure and it was subsequently felt either during or
immediately after the procedure that antibiotics are needed. Such
situations may arise due to a decision error or if the duration of the
procedure lasts longer than initially expected.
RECOMMENDATION 13
•
The first dose of the antibiotic should be administered
within 60 minutes prior to the surgical incision. (Grade B)
3.4 Additional doses (duration) and dose intervals of the
antibiotic
Mangram et al. suggests that additional doses of the antibiotic
be given if the length of the surgery exceeds two half-lives of the
drug or if there is excessive bleeding (more than 1500 ml). 50, level II-3
Another suggestion by Sancho-Puchades et al.41, level II-1 is that if
the surgical intervention extends in time or if the tissue damage is
considerable, another antibiotic dose can be administered at the
equator (half) of its therapeutic interval. This is to ensure adequate
serum and tissue concentrations of the drug until the wound is
closed. The interval between doses is measured from the time of
the first preoperative dose.
If additional doses of the antibiotic are to be administered, the
dose given should be the same as the initial prophylactic dose
of the antibiotic.49, level II-2 The additional dosing suggested for the
recommended antibiotics are as in Table 3.
Post-operative antibiotic administration is not necessary for most
surgical procedures as it does not proffer any added advantage in
preventing surgical site infections.50, Level II-3; 33, level 1
RECOMMENDATION 14
•
Additional doses of prophylactic antibiotics should be
administered if the length of surgery exceeds either two halflives or half the therapeutic interval of the drug. (Grade B)
•
The additional dose strength should be the same as the
initial prophylactic dose of the antibiotic. (Grade C)
•
Post-operative antibiotics should not be prescribed for
surgical prophylaxis. (Grade B)
Table 3. Additional dosing recommendations for long
operations
Antibiotic
Additional dose
strength
Dose
Interval
Benzyl Penicillin
2 mega units
2 hours
Clindamycin
600 mg
6 hours
Amoxicillin/Clavulanic
Acid
1.2g
3 hours
Cloxacillin
1.0g
4 hours
Cefazolin
2.0g
4 hours
Cefuroxime
1.5g
4 hours
4.0 CONCLUSION
These guidelines are the current recommendations of the
committee towards good practice with respect to the appropriate
use of antibiotics in surgical prophylaxis. Dental practitioners may
have individual preferences but all decisions made must be in
the light of available evidence, resources and the circumstances
presented by their patients.
It is important to emphasize that the appropriate use of antibiotics
in patient care is of paramount importance and that antibiotic
prophylaxis in surgery is an adjunct to and not a substitute
for good surgical technique. Antibiotic prophylaxis should be
regarded as one component of an effective policy for control of
surgical site infection.
5.0 IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The first edition of these clinical practice guidelines (CPG) on
antibiotic prophylaxis against wound infection for oral surgical
procedures was developed and published in 2003. An audit
carried out in 2010 however found that more than half of the
respondents did not use the CPG. 1, level III It also found that the
most important sources of information that clinicians used were
their own clinical experience and the opinions of their colleagues.
A study done in 2012 by the IHSR 2, level III found a wide variation in
the use of antibiotics by doctors for patients undergoing dentoalveolar surgery. At the start of the study it was discovered that
doctors followed 3 patterns of prescribing, either i) they did not
prescribe any antibiotics, ii) prescribed only a single dose of
antibiotic pre-operatively or iii) prescribed 5 days of antibiotics
post-operatively. For the doctors who prescribed antibiotics
post-operatively, 77% prescribed one antibiotic while the rest
prescribed two. There was also a wide range of the types of
antibiotics prescribed which included amoxicillin, bacampicillin,
co-amoxiclav, metronidazole, cloxacillin and cefuroxime.
It is important to ensure that the use of prophylactic antibiotics
in oral surgery is evidence-based. The rational use of antibiotics
by all healthcare professionals will help to prevent the emergence
of resistant organisms. Appropriate antibiotic use will assist in
successful treatment outcomes and reduce adverse reactions. In
addition, the financial cost in the management of patients.2, level III
could be reduced.
5.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the
CPG include:
a) Wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare professionals
via printed and electronic copies.
b) Continuing
professional
education
for
healthcare
professionals.
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the
CPG include:
a) Non-standard teaching related to prophylactic antibiotic use
b) Variation in treatment practice and preferences
5.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a) Ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare
professionals.
b) Reinforce training of healthcare professionals to ensure
information is up to date.
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are
proposed as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
a. Lower third minor surgery
Indicator: Percentage of patients undergoing lower third molar
surgery requiring antibiotic prohylaxis < 10%.
No. of impacted lower third molar surgery cases given antibiotics x 100%
No. of impacted lower third molar surgery cases
b. Trauma
Indicator: Percentage of patients undergoing open reduction and
internal fixation (ORIF) of simple mandibular fractures given postop antibiotics < 2%.
No. of patients given antibiotic prescriptions post-ORIF x 100%
No. of patients undergoing ORIF
REFERENCES
1. Institute of Health Systems Research. A study on the Effectiveness
of Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) In Managing Dental Problems.
Unpublished report. 2010.
2. Vincent C, Abdul Hamid AL, Royan SJ, Aljunid ST, Junid NZ, Mahat
M. The effectiveness of the MOH CPG on Prophylactic Antibiotic
Usage for Oral Surgery Procedures. Institute for Health Systems
Research. MOH/S/IPSK/70.12(RR). 2012.
3. Burke JF. The effective period of preventive antibiotic action in
experimental incisions and dermal lesions. Surgery 1961;50:16168.
4. Polk HC, Lopez-Mayor JF. Postoperative wound infection: A
prospective study of determinant factors and prevention. Surgery,
1969 Jul;66(1):97-103.
5. Stone HH, Haney BB, Kolb LD, Geheber CE, Hooper CA.
Prophylactic and preventive antibiotic therapy. Ann Surg.,1979
Jun;189(6): 691-9.
6. Wilcox MH. The tide of antimicrobial resistance and selection. Int
J Antimicrob Agents, 2009 Aug; 34 Suppl 3:S6-10.
7. Brooks BD, Brooks AE. Therapeutic strategies to combat antibiotic
resistance. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2014 Nov; 78:14-27.
8. Culver DH, Horan TC, Gaynes RP, Martone WJ, Jarvis WR, Emori
TG, Banerjee SN, Edwards JR, Tolson JS, Henderson TS, et al.
Surgical wound infection rates by wound class, operative procedure
and patient risk index. Am J Med.,1991 Sep 16;91(3B):152S-7S.
9. Ellervall E, Vinge E, Rohlin M, Knutsson K.Antibiotic prophylaxis
in
oral
healthcare
–
The
agreement
between
Swedish
recommendations and evidence. Br Dent J. 2010 Feb 13;208(3):E5;
discussion 114-5.
10. Lodi G, Figini L, Sardella A, Carrassi A, Del Fabbro M, Furness S.
Antibiotics to prevent complications following tooth extractions.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012; Issue 11. Art.
No.: CD003811. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003811.pub2.
11. French Health Products Safety Agency. Prescribing antibiotics in
odontology and stomatology. Recommendations by the French
Health Products Safety Agency. Fundam Clin Pharmacol., 2003;17:
725-9.
12. Johnson JT, Wagner RL. Infection following uncontaminated
head and neck surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.,1987
Apr;113(4): 368-9.
13. Knight R, Charbonneau P, Ratzer E, Zeren F, Haun W, Clark J.
Prophylactic antibiotics are not indicated in clean general surgery
cases. Am J Surg., 2001 Dec;182:682-686.
14. Liu SA, Chiu YT, Lin WD, Chen SJ. Using information technology
to reduce the inappropriate use of surgical prophylactic antibiotic.
Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol.,2008;265:1109-1112.
15. Chattopadhyay R, Zaroukian S, Potvin E. Surgical site infection
rates ar the Pontiac Health Care Centre, a rural community hospital.
Can J Rural Med., 2006;11(1):41-8.
16. Poeschl PW, Eckel D, Poeschl Ellen. Postoperative prophylactic
antibiotic treatment in third molar surgery— A Necessity? J Oral
Maxillofac Surg., 2004;62:3-8.
17. Ataoglu H, Oz GY, Candirli C, Kiziloglu D. Routine antibiotic
prophylaxis is not necessary during operations to remove third
molars. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg.,2008;46(2):133–135.
18. Siddiqi A, Morkel JA, Zafar S. Antibiotic prophylaxis in third molar
surgery: A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled clinical
trial using split-mouth technique. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg.,2010;
39:107–114.
19. Olojede OA, Gbotolorun OM, Ibikunle AA, et al. A Comparative
Clinical Evaluation of the Effect of Preoperative and Postoperative
Antimicrobial Therapy on Postoperative Sequelae after Impacted
Mandibular Third Molar Extraction. J Oral Maxillofac Res.,2014(AprJun); 5(2e):1-6.
20. Arteagoitia I, Ramos E, Santamaria G, Barbier L, Alvarez J,
Santamaria J. Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 2000/125mg to prevent
complications due to infection following completely bone-impacted
lower third molar removal: a clinical trial. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Path Oral Radiol., 2015;119(1):8-16.
21. Royan SJ, Kamsinah O, Zuhaibah M. Perioperative oral antibiotics
in third molar surgery: do they make a difference? Mal J Oral
Maxillofac Surg.,2007; 5: 6-9.
22. Callis S, Lemmer J, Touyz LZ. Antibiotic prophylaxis in periodontal
surgery. A retrospective study. J Dent Assoc S Afr .,1996
Dec;51(12):806-9.
23. Powell CA, Mealey BL, Deas DE, McDonnell HT, Moritz AJ. Postsurgical infections: prevalence associated with various periodontal
surgical procedures. J Periodontol.,2005 Mar;76(3):329-33.
24. Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Loli V, Coulthard P, Worthington HV.
Does antibiotic prophylaxis at implant placement decrease early
implant failures? - A Cochrane systematic review. Eur J Oral
Implantol., 2010 Summer;3(2):101-10.
25. Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Worthington HV. Interventions for
replacing missing teeth: antibiotics at dental implant placement
to prevent complications - Cochrane Database Syst Rev., 2013
;7:CD004152.
26. Lindeboom JA, Van Den Akker HP. Prospective placebo-controlled
double blind trial of antibiotic prophylaxis in intra oral bone grafting
procedures: a pilot study. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radio Endod , 2003 Dec; 96(6):669-72.
27. Peterson LJ. Antibiotic prophylaxis against wound infections in oral
and maxillofacial surgery: J Oral Maxillofac Surg.,1990; 48:617-62.
28. Tan SK, Lo J, Zwahlen RA. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis
in orthognathic surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of clinical trials. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod.,2011 Jul;112(1):19-27.
29. Oomens MAEM, Verlinden CRA, Goey Y, et al. Prescribing
antibiotic prophylaxis in orthognathic surgery: A systematic review.
Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg., 2014; 43:725-731.
30. Simo R, French G. The use of prophylactic antibiotics in head
and neck oncological surgery. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg.,2006 Apr;14(2):55-61.
31. Seven H, Sayin I, Turgut S. Antibiotic prophylaxis in clean neck
dissections. J Laryngol Otol.,2004; 118:213-216.
32. Hirakawa H, Hasegawa Y, Hanai N, Ozawa T, Hyodo I, Suzuki M.
Surgical site infection in clean-contaminated head and neck cancer
surgery: risk factors and prognosis. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol,
2013 Mar;270(3):1115-23.
33. Skitarelic N, Morovic M, Manestar D. Antibiotic prophylaxis
in clean-contaminated head and neck oncological surgery. J
Craniomaxillofac Surg.,2007 Jan;35(1):15-20.
34. Andreassen JO, Jensen SS, Schwartz O, Hillerup Y. A Systematic
Review of Prophylactic Antibiotics in the Surgical Treatment of
Maxillofacial Fractures. J Oral Maxillofac Surg.,2006, 64: 16641668.
35. Lovato C, Wagner JD. Infection rates following perioperative
prophylactic antibiotics versus postoperative extended regimen
prophylactic antibiotics in surgical management of mandibular
fractures. J Oral Maxillofac Surg., 2009 Apr;67(4):827-32.
36. Miles BA et al. The efficacy of postoperative antibiotic regimens
in the open treatment of mandibular fractures: A prospective
randomised trial. J Oral Maxillofac Surg., 2006, 64: 576-582.
37. Hindawi YH, Oakley GM, Kinesella Jr CR, et al. Antibiotic duration
and Postoperative infection rates in Mandibular Fractures. J
Craniofac Surg., 2011;22:1375-1377.
38. Nabil S, Samman N. Risk factors for osteoradionecrosis after head
and neck radiation: a systematic review. Oral Surg, Oral Med, Oral
Pathol, Oral Radiol., 2012 Jan;113(1):54-69.
39. Delanian S,Lefaix J-L. The radiation induced fibroatrophic process:
Therapeutic perspective via the antioxidant pathway. Radiotherapy
and oncology, Nov 2004:73(2):119-131.
40. D’Souza J,Lowe D,Rogers SN. Changing trends and the role
of medical management on the outcome of patients treated for
osteoradionecrosis of the mandible: experience from a regional
head and neck unit. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2014;52:356-362.
41. Sancho-Puchades M, Herraz-Vilas JM, Berini-Aytez L, GayEscoda C. Antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent local infection in oral
surgery: use or abuse? Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal., 2009 Jan;
14(1):E28-33.
42. Yuvaraj V, Alexander M, Pasupathy S. Microflora in Maxillofacial
Infections – a Changing Scenario? J Oral Maxillofac Surg., 2012;
70:119-125.
43. Gaetti-Jardim EC, Marqueti AC, Faverani LP, Gaetti-Jardim E. Jr.
Antimicrobial resistance of aerobes and facultative anaerobes
isolated from the oral cavity. J Appl Oral Sci.,2010 Dec; 18(6): 5519.
44. Sanchez R, Mirada E, Arias J et al. Severe odontogenic infections:
epidemiological, microbiological and therapeutic factors. Med Oral
Patol Oral Cir Bucal.,2011 Aug; 16(5): E670-6.
45. Shweta, Prakash SK. Dental abscess: A microbiological review.
Dent Res J., (Isfahan) 2013 Sep; 10(5): 585-91.
46. Flynn TR. What are the antibiotics of choice for odontogenic
infections and how long should the treatment course last? Oral
Maxillofac Surg Clin N Am., 2011; 23:519-536.
47. Slimings C, Riley TV. Antibiotics and hospital-acquired Clostridium
difficile infection: update of systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Apr;69(4):881-91.
48. Rosengren H, Dixon A. Antibacterial Prophylaxis in Dermatologic
Surgery: An Evidence Based Review. Am J Clin Dermatol ,2010;
11 (1): 35-44.
49. Bratzler DW, Dellinger EP, Olsen KM, et al. Clinical practice
guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis in surgery. Am J HealthSyst Pharm., 2013; 70:195-283.
50. Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML et al. Hospital Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee: Guidelines for Prevention
of Surgical Site Infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol., 1999;
20:247-278.
51. Steinberg JP, Braun BI, Hellinger WC et al. Timing of antimicrobial
prophylaxis and the risk of surgical site infection: results from the
Trial to Reduce Antimicrobial Prophylaxis Errors. Ann Surg., 2009;
250:10-6.
52. Weber WP, Marti WR, Zwahlen M et al. The timing of surgical
antimicrobial prophylaxis. Ann Surg., 2008; 247:918-26.
53. Berney P1, Francioli P. Successful prophylaxis of experimental
streptococcal endocarditis with single-dose amoxicillin administered
after bacterial challenge. J Infect Dis. 1990 Feb;161(2):281-5.
Appendix 1
SEARCH STRATEGY
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly
or in combination, search was limit to English, human and 2003 to
current:
Microbiology
•
oral bacteria
•
oral microorganisms
•
microflora
•
Antibiotic sensitivity
•
Antibiotic resistance
•
Odontogenic infections
•
Surgical site infections
Treatment
•
Oral surgery
•
Dental surgery
•
Maxillofacial surgery
•
Clean surgery
•
Clean-contaminated surgery
•
Minor oral surgery
•
Wisdom teeth surgery
•
Periodontal surgery
•
Traumatic injuries to face and jaws
•
Cancer surgery
•
Orthognathic surgery
•
Osseointegrated implants
•
Osteoradionecrosis
•
Bone grafts
•
Skin incisions
Antibiotics
•
Therapy
•
Prophylaxis
•
Penicillin
•
Amoxicillin
•
Clindamycin
•
Co-amoxiclav
•
Antibiotic regime
•
Dosage
•
Duration
•
Re-dosing protocol
•
Pre-operative antibiotics
•
Post-operative antibiotics
Appendix 2
ASA PHYSICAL STATUS CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
Last approved by the ASA House of Delegates on October 15, 2014
Current definitions (NO CHANGE) and Examples (NEW)
ASA PS
Classification
Definition
Examples, including, but not
limited to:
ASA I
A normal healthy
patient
Healthy, non-smoking, no or
minimal alcohol use
ASA II
A patient with
mild systemic
disease
Mild diseases only without
substantive functional
limitations.
Examples include (but not
limited to):
Current smoker, social alcohol
drinker, pregnancy, obesity (30
< BM < 40), well controlled DM/
HTN, mild lung disease
ASA III
A patient with
severe systemic
disease
Substantive functional
limitations; One or more
moderate to severe diseases.
Examples include (but not
limited to):
Poorly controlled DM or
HTN, COPD, morbid obesity
(BMI ≥40), active hepatitis,
alcohol dependence or
abuse, implanted pacemaker,
moderate reduction of ejection
fraction, ESRD undergoing
regularly scheduled dialysis,
premature infant PCA < 60
weeks, history (>3 months) of
MI, CVA, TIA, or CAD/stents.
ASA IV
A patient with
severe systemic
disease that is a
constant threat
to life
Examples include (but not
limited to):
recent ( < 3 months) MI, CVA,
TIA, or CAD/stents, ongoing
cardiac ischemia or severe
valve dysfunction, severe
reduction of ejection fraction,
sepsis, DIC, ARD or ESRD not
undergoing regularly scheduled
dialysis
ASA V
A moribund
patient who is
not expected to
survive without
the operation
Examples include (but not
limited to):
Ruptured abdominal/thoracic
aneurysm, massive trauma,
intracranial bleed with mass
effect, ischemic bowel in the
face of significant cardiac
pathology or multiple organ/
system dysfunction
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of the development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
-
The external reviewer
-
Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input
and feedback
-
Ms Zabidah Bt. Othman for processes involved in the publication
-
All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members completed disclosure forms. None held shares in
pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are
available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS IN ORAL
SURGERY FOR PREVENTION OF SURGICAL SITE INFECTION“ was
supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health, Malaysia
and was developed without any involvement of the pharmaceutical
industry.
(Ora Heath Technology Section
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level, ck 10 Precinct
Federal Goeernmentminsetve Centre