CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2020 MOH/P/PAK/444,20(GU)-¢
Management of
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
in Children & Adolescents
(Second Edition)
bedaf
vjklmn
“ste
yz
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e-ISBN: 978-967-19299-3-3
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.psychiatry-malaysia.org
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2020 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2024) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed, and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which will be the definitive version at all time. This version
can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1 Management of ADHD
x
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
2
3.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
4
3.1 Assessment
4
3.2 Diagnostic Criteria
5
3.3 Investigations
6
3.4 Co-morbidities
6
4.
TREATMENT
8
4.1 Psychoeducation
8
4.2 Non-pharmacological Treatment
9
4.3 Pharmacological Treatment
14
4.4 Combination Treatment
16
4.5 Dietary Modification
16
5.
TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICATION
17
6.
SPECIAL POPULATION
18
6.1 Transition to Adulthood
18
6.2 Adults
18
7.
MANAGEMENT IN PRIMARY CARE
21
8.
REFERRAL
21
9.
MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
22
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
23
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
23
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
REFERENCES
25
Appendix 1. Example of Search Strategy
29
Appendix 2. Clinical Questions
30
Appendix 3. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
31
Disorder Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
Appendix 4. International Statistical Classification of
34
Diseases and Related Health Problems,
10th Revision (ICD-10)
Appendix 5. Advice for Behavioural Management
35
Appendix 6. School-based Intervention
37
Appendix 7. Pharmacological Treatment of ADHD
38
Appendix 8. Management of Common Adverse Effects
40
Associated With Stimulant Use in ADHD
List of Abbreviations
41
Acknowledgement
42
Disclosure Statement
42
Source of Funding
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following are highlighted by the CPG Development Group as the
key recommendations that answer the main questions addressed in the
CPG and should be prioritised for implementation.
a.
Assessment
• Information from parents/carers and teachers should be sought
to increase accuracy of the attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) assessment.
• Diagnosis of ADHD should be based on diagnostic criteria of
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder Fifth Edition
(DSM-5) or hyperkinetic disorders from International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th
Revision (ICD-10).
• Any child or adolescent presenting with academic difficulties,
behavioural problems, mood disturbances, substance use or
personality disorders should be evaluated for ADHD to prevent
deleterious outcomes in adulthood.
b.
Psychoeducation
• Psychoeducation should be offered in attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder.
c.
Non-pharmacological treatment
• Occupational therapy should be offered as an adjunct in attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
• The following therapies should be considered in ADHD:
 organisational skills training
 cognitive behavioural therapy-based interventions
• Parent training and behavioural intervention should be offered in
ADHD.
• School-based interventions should be offered in ADHD.
d.
Pharmacological treatment
• Methylphenidate should be offered to children aged ≥6 years and
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) if
medication is indicated.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
• If medication for ADHD is indicated in children <6 years old, it should
be initiated by a child psychiatrist or a paediatrician with expertise in
managing ADHD.
e.
Combination treatment
• Combination treatment (pharmacological and non-pharmacological)
should be considered in children ≥6 years of age and adolescents
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder when the symptoms
persist and cause functional impairment.
f.
Monitoring
• Healthcare providers should provide continued care and longterm monitoring to children and adolescents with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans,
“all child (0 to 18 years)” (in most searches), publication from year “2008
to Current” and English language. In addition, the reference lists of all
retrieved literature and guidelines were searched and, experts in the
field contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted
from 19 Mac 2017 to 18 May 2018. Literature searches were repeated
for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process
allowing any relevant papers published before 21 January 2020 to be
included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after
this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) e.g.:
• Canadian ADHD Practice Guidelines (CAP-Guidelines), 4.1
[Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance (CADDRA), 2020]
• Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children
and Adolescents [American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), 2019]
• Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: diagnosis and management
[National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 2018]
• Management of attention deficit and hyperkinetic disorders in
children and young people [Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network (SIGN), 2009]
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 14 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 24 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
v
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This
CPG is based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, metaanalyses and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634).
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of ADHD in the following
aspects:
a. risk factors
b. assessment and diagnosis
c. treatment
d. referral and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
1. Inclusion Criteria
Children and adolescents with ADHD (<18 years old)
In certain CQs, evidence is done on adults with ADHD
2. Exclusion Criteria
Management of other disorders with ADHD as co-morbidity is beyond
the scope of this CPG.
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of ADHD at any healthcare level including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients and their advocates
v. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
vii
Associate Professor Dr. Aili Hanim Hashim
Consultant Child, Adolescent & Adult
Psychiatrist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Akramul Zikri Abd Malek
Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Ang Wei Nei
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Ms. Ee Su Im
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Eni Rahaiza Muhd Ramli
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Taiping, Perak
Dr. Farahidah Md Dai
Senior Consultant Child & Adolescent
Psychiatrist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Public Health Physician & Head of CPG Unit
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Noor Ayuni Bazura Muhamad
Senior Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Noorul Amilin Harun
Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan, Pahang
Dr. Norley Shuib
Lecturer & Psychiatrist
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Norharlina Bahar
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Prince Court Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ranjini S Sivanesom
Consultant Developmental Paediatrician
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Sharlene Teo Shu Lin
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Selvasingam Ratnasingam
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Datin Dr. Sheila Marimuthu
Consultant Adolescent Paediatrician
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Tengku Bahiah Tengku Lih
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Padang Luas, Terengganu
Dr. Ummu Kalsum Mustapha
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Sungai Chua, Selangor
Dr. Yusni Yusuff
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Nurulwafa Hussain
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Ms. Chan Pek Har
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hazli Zakaria
President of Malaysian Psychiatric Association &
Consultant Psychiatrist
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Izan Hairani Ishak
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bukit Kuda, Selangor
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Juriza Ismail
Consultant Developmental Paediatrician
Department of Paediatrics
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Khairani Omar
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Management & Science University, Selangor
Pn. Noor Ratna Naharuddin
Head of Pharmacist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Pn. Rokiah Alias
Head of Occupational Therapy Department
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Wan Salwina Wan Ismail
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Department of Psychiatry
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
viii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Norhayati Nordin
Director & Senior Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
ix
Dr. Anthony James
Consultant Child and Adolescent
Psychiatrist & Honorary Senior Lecturer
University of Oxford
Oxford Health Care NHS Foundation Trust
United Kingdom
Dr. Anuradha a/p Thiagarajan
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bukit Minyak, Pulau Pinang
Ms. Belinda Ling Lik Fung
Pharmacist
Hospital Permai, Johor
Dr. Bruno Falissard
Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist &
Professor in Public Health
Université Paris-Saclay, France
Dr. Cindy Chan Su Huay
Developmental Paediatrician
Sunway Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Daniel Fung Shuen Sheng
Chairman of Medical Board &
Senior Consultant
Institute of Mental Health, Singapore
Dr. Ezura Madiana Md Monoto
Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr. Hjh Fauzi Ismail
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Dr. Masne Kadar
Senior Lecturer & Occupational Therapist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Mohamad Minhajul Abidin Suhaimi
Patient advocate & Vice President
Persatuan ADHD Malaysia (myADHD)
Dr. Norhazmi Mohamad
General Practitioner
Poliklinik Idaman, Tanjung Sepat, Selangor
Ms. Norsyamimi Rusli
Assistant Director (Occupational Therapy)
Special Education Division
Ministry of Education, Putrajaya
Dr. Rose Peng
Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist
Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Salmah Jopri
Director
Special Education Division
Ministry of Education, Putrajaya
Datin Dr. Sherina Mohd Sidik
Professor & Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Ms. Tan Cheng Yii
Chartered Educational Psychologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Toh Teck Hock
Paediatrician &
Head of Clinical Research Centre
Hospital Sibu, Sarawak
Dr. Yang Wai Wai
Senior Lecturer & Clinical Child Psychologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical
Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yee Kok Wah
General Practitioner
Klinik Dr Yee, Melaka
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
x
ALGORITHM: MANAGEMENT OF ATTENTION-DEFICIT/
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER (ADHD)
*Refer Chapter 7 on Referral
YES
NO
NO
YES
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most
common neurodevelopmental disorders of childhood. It is defined as
a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactive and impulsive
behaviour that is more frequent and severe than is typically seen in a
child at a given developmental stage. It appears in childhood and often
lasts into adulthood.
Children and adolescents with ADHD face significant problems in
behavioural control, interpersonal relationships, academic performance
and personal issues.1, 2 They have worse health-related quality of life
scores than the typically developing groups varying from a small to
moderate degree in physical domains and a large degree in psychosocial
domains.3 Therefore, early recognition, assessment and management
of this condition is very important in helping them and their parents to
improve the educational and psychosocial difficulties.
Worldwide, the estimated prevalence of childhood ADHD is 5.29%.4
In Malaysia, the estimated prevalence of ADHD range from 1.6% to
4.6%.5, 6 Boys are three to four times more likely to be diagnosed with
ADHD than girls.6 - 8
This CPG is a full review of the previous edition of guidelines on the
management of ADHD published in 2008. It aims to reduce variation
in practice and, address advancement in diagnosis and treatment
of ADHD. In this edition, a new scope on adult ADHD and transition
period into adulthood is addressed because of its growing significance
in clinical practice.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
2. RISK FACTORS
• ADHD has a multifactorial and complex aetiology which includes
both biological and environmental factors.
a. Biological factors
• Gender
 Males are associated with increased risk of ADHD (OR=3.05,
95% CI 2.34 to 3.98).8, level II-2
 This is supported by a recent cohort study of more than 1.5 million
individuals in Sweden showing the ADHD ratio between male and
female of 3.7:1.7, level II-2
• Genetics
 Genetics plays a role in the aetiology of ADHD with a heritability
estimate of 76%.9 The rate of ADHD in relatives of individuals with
ADHD compared with the rate in relatives of individuals without
ADHD is increased with increasing genetic relatedness:7, level II-2
- monozygotic twins, HR=70.45, 95% CI 38.19 to 129.96
- dizygotic twins, HR=8.44, 95% CI 5.87 to 12.14
- full siblings, HR=8.27, 95% CI 7.86 to 8.70
- maternal half-siblings, HR=2.86, 95% CI 2.61 to 3.13
- paternal half-siblings, HR=2.31, 95% CI 2.07 to 2.58
- full cousins, HR=2.24, 95% CI 2.11 to 2.38
- half cousins, HR=1.47, 95% CI 1.35 to 1.61
b. Environmental factors
• Pre-pregnancy maternal obesity
 Pre-pregnancy maternal obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2) is associated
with an increased risk of ADHD among children (HR=1.65, 95%
CI 1.55 to 1.76). The risk is also increased in overweight women
(BMI 25 - 29.9 kg/m2) with HR of 1.27 (95% CI 1.17 to 1.37).10, level II-2
• Prenatal factors
 Hypertensive disorder in pregnancy (HDP)
In a meta-analysis, maternal HDP showed a small risk of ADHD in
the offspring (OR=1.29, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.36).11, level II-2
 Maternal diabetes
A recent meta-analysis of six cohort studies demonstrated that
maternal diabetes increased the risk for ADHD in offspring
(RR=1.40, 95% CI 1.27 to 1.54), with gestational diabetes mellitus
showing a higher risk (RR=2.00, 95% CI 1.42 to 2.81).12, level II-2
However, significant publication bias would have overestimate the
findings.
 Maternal psychosocial stress
Children born to mothers who experienced a major stressful event
during pregnancy or reported a high level of perceived stress are
more likely to have ADHD [OR of 1.45 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.99) and
OR of 3.03 (95% CI 2.19 to 4.20) respectively].13, level II-2
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
 Maternal cigarette, drug and alcohol use
- Maternal cigarette smoking and, drug and alcohol abuse are
known to be associated with ADHD.14
- Maternal smoking during pregnancy is associated with
increased risk of ADHD in the offspring:15, level II-2
 OR in cohort studies of 1.35, 95% CI 1.20 to 1.52
 OR in case-control studies of 1.85, 95% CI 1.57 to 2.19
 Maternal paracetamol use
A
meta-analysis
showed
that
maternal
acetaminophen
(paracetamol) use during pregnancy was associated with a small
risk of ADHD in the offspring (RR=1.25, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.34). The
duration of its use for ≥28 days prenatally showed a RR of 1.63,
95% CI 1.23 to 2.16.16, level II-2 However the primary papers used
in this meta-analysis has heterogenous methodology leading to
possible misclassification bias.
 Maternal antidepressants use
Antidepressants use during pregnancy was not associated with
increased risk of ADHD (HR=1.2, 95% CI 1.0 to 1.4).17, level II-2
 Maternal use of valproate
There is contradictory evidence on the association of maternal
valproate use and ADHD.18 - 19, level II-2
• Perinatal factors
 Apgar score
A lower Apgar score is associated with a higher risk of ADHD
in childhood compared with Apgar scores of 9 or 10 at 5
minutes.20, level II-2
- Apgar scores of 1 to 4 (HR=1.75, 95% CI 1.15 to 2.11)
- Apgar scores of 5 to 6 (HR=1.63, 95% CI 1.25 to 2.11)
 Preterm birth and low birth weight
Preterm birth is associated with more than twice the risk of
developing ADHD, while children with low birth weight have two-
to three-fold increased risk.9
• Traumatic brain injury (TBI)
Children with TBI have higher risk of ADHD (HR=1.32, 95% CI 1.19
to 1.45).21, level II-2
• Nutritional factors in children
 There is no association between sucrose consumption and the
prevalence of ADHD among children.22, level II-2
 To date there is no conclusive evidence that food dyes and food
preservatives cause ADHD.
• Screen-time
Preschool children with more than 2-hours of screen-time/day have
an increased risk of ADHD (OR=7.7, 95%CI 1.6 to 38.1).23, level II-2
• Others
Studies had shown that lead was associated with ADHD.24, level II-2
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
3. ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
Children and adolescents presenting with core symptoms of inattention
and/or hyperactivity and impulsivity should be evaluated for ADHD.
The assessment and diagnosis of ADHD requires obtaining information
from multiple informants, including parents and teachers, as well as
conducting a clinical examination on the individual.
ADHD is commonly under-recognised in girls.1 ADHD without
hyperactivity (i.e. predominantly inattentive symptoms) is a diagnosis
that needs to be considered in girls.25
A meta-analysis on diagnostic accuracy of ADHD using various rating
scales revealed that either parents or teachers were able to identify
ADHD with a sensitivity of 0.86. On the other hand, reports by both
parents and teachers gave a specificity of 0.91.26, level III
3.1 Assessment
a. History
The clinical history should include the following:
• core symptoms of ADHD (inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity)
at home, in school and social settings and impact of the symptoms
• age of onset, duration and progression of symptoms
• perinatal history, birth and developmental history including
development milestones, past medical history (e.g. meningitis,
traumatic brain injury)
• behaviour in school and academic performance, as well as
strengths, weaknesses and possible difficulties or stressors.
Explore areas of learning difficulty, disciplinary issues, parenting
concerns, bullies, peers’ rejection, excessive punishment, school
rejection and engagement in dangerous activities
• estimated level of intellectual functioning (via a detailed learning
and adaptive functioning history)
• activities of daily living (ADL) functioning (self-care, play and
leisure including screen-time, schoolwork and house chores)
• impact of difficulties and behaviour on the individual i.e. selfesteem, self-worth
• impact of child’s difficulties and behaviour on family functioning
and peer relationships
• restless, fidgety, disruptive and unsafe behaviours
• co-morbid psychiatric conditions including changes in mood,
appetite, sleep and any substance use
• medical/social conditions that mimic ADHD symptoms (e.g.
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual disability, conditions
producing chronic sleep deprivation; obstructive sleep apnoea;
neuro-behavioural side effects of medications taken for other
chronic conditions; physical, sexual and emotional abuse)
• family structure and dynamics, parenting styles and expectations
• family history of ADHD, substance abuse and maternal smoking,
parents’ or carers’ mental health e.g. maternal depression
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
b. Physical and Mental State Examination
A comprehensive physical examination (including vital signs, height
and weight) should be performed to exclude physical conditions which
mimic ADHD.9
Mental status examination should focus on the following:9
• general appearance and behaviour
• activity level and social interaction
• speech and language
• mood and affect
• thought process
• attention and concentration
• intelligence and academic skills
c. Rating scales
• Behavioural rating scales are useful adjuncts to the clinical interview
in gathering more information about the individual. It should not be
used as the sole criterion for clinical diagnosis of ADHD.27, level III
• Common behaviour rating scales used are:
 Conners’ Rating Scales (CRS)
 Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL)
 Vanderbilt ADHD Rating Scale
 ADHD Rating Scale-5
 Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)
• These behavioural rating scales can be self-administered. However,
they do not give a complete diagnosis of ADHD, and the scores
should be interpreted with caution by trained healthcare providers.
• The evaluation of any child and adolescent for ADHD should consist
of clinical interviews with the parents/caregivers and the patient
by obtaining information about the patient’s school or day care
functioning, evaluating comorbid psychiatric disorders and reviewing
the patient’s medical, family and social histories.2
A meta-analysis showed that Conners’ Abbreviated Symptom
Questionnaire (ASQ), Child Behavior Checklist-Attention Problem
(CBCL-AP) scale and Conners’ Rating Scale–Revised (CRS-R) were
effective rating scales to detect ADHD symptoms with sensitivity
ranging from 0.75 to 0.83.28, level III
3.2 Diagnostic Criteria
• ADHD is diagnosed based on diagnostic criteria of Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) (refer
to Appendix 3) or hyperkinetic disorders from 10th Revision of
the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problem (ICD-10) (refer to Appendix 4).
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
The core symptoms of ADHD are:29; 30
• inattention
• hyperactivity and impulsivity
In order to meet diagnostic criteria, the core symptoms should:29; 30
• be persistent
• be pervasive (present in two or more setting)
• have caused significant functional impairment
• not better accounted for by other mental disorders (e.g. pervasive
developmental disorder, schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders,
depression or anxiety)
The onset of symptoms should be before the age of five years for
hyperkinetic disorder30 or 12 years for ADHD.29
• Children and adolescents with signs and symptoms suggestive of
ADHD should be referred for assessment and further management.
Recommendation 1
• Information from parents/carers and teachers should be sought
to increase accuracy of the attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) assessment.
• Diagnosis of ADHD should be based on diagnostic criteria of
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder Fifth Edition
(DSM-5) or hyperkinetic disorders from International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th
Revision (ICD-10).
3.3 Investigations
a. Laboratory tests
There is no diagnostic laboratory test for ADHD. Laboratory tests should
be performed only if there is clinical indication.
b. Other investigations
Electroencephalogram (EEG) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
are not indicated in the diagnosis of ADHD.
3.4 Co-morbidities
In children with ADHD:
• learning disorders, sleep disorders and oppositional defiant
disorders (ODD) are common31, level III
• 31% have co-occurring ODD, 10% have conduct disorders (CD)
while 3% have both ODD and CD32, level II-2
• 20% developed chronic tic disorder33, level I
In a meta-analysis of 18 cross-sectional studies, girls with ADHD
showed higher risk of anxiety (OR=3.19, 95% CI 1.81 to 5.65) and
depression (OR=4.21, 95% CI 2.08 to 8.51) compared with those
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
without ADHD.34, level III However, there was no mention on inclusion
criteria and quality assessment in the meta-analysis.
A systematic review showed that ADHD in children and adolescents
were significantly associated with allergic conditions e.g. allergic rhinitis,
allergic conjunctivitis, atopic dermatitis and asthma.35, level II-2
• Children with ADHD should be evaluated for co-morbidities.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
4. TREATMENT
As ADHD is a chronic condition, children and adolescents with ADHD
and their families require long-term follow-up.
• The goal of treatment is to improve symptoms, functioning and
learning. It also aims to increase the child’s self-esteem and self-worth.
The treatment includes psychoeducation, non-pharmacological and/
or pharmacological approaches. In view of difficulties with diagnosis
and special requirements of management, pre-schoolers (children
below six years old) suspected of ADHD should be referred to a child
psychiatrist or a paediatrician.
4.1 Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation should be provided to patients, parents, caregivers
and teachers. In a systematic review, psychoeducation demonstrated
positive outcomes in children and adolescents with ADHD with regards
to:36, level I
• significant reduction of core ADHD symptoms
• excellent adherence to medical recommendations
• reduction in fears associated with medication usage (including
side effects)
• improvements in academic achievements
Psychoeducation also improved maternal well-being.
Parents’ perceptions of ADHD and treatment acceptability are the main
barriers to medication adherence. An early structured psychoeducation
programme provides a new approach in improving medication
adherence and clinical symptoms in children with ADHD in the clinical
setting.37, level I
• Psychoeducation should ideally contain the following:
 a good patient-healthcare provider relationship
 disorder-related information e.g. symptoms, potential causation/
risk factors and negative effects in the life course
 treatment-related information outlining pharmacological and
non-pharmacological approaches, particularly regarding the
effectiveness and adverse effects of medication
 barriers to adherence and coping skills
 parenting skills
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Recommendation 2
• Psychoeducation should be offered in attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder.
4.2 Non-Pharmacological Treatment
There are many non-pharmacological therapies available for individuals
with ADHD. They differ in names and, have different techniques and
strategies. However, they share a set of principles to achieve the same
aims.
4.2.1 Occupational therapy
Occupational therapy is one of the supporting therapies in the
management of ADHD. Therapeutic methods recommended include
sensory motor activities, motor training, social skills training, cognitive
interventions, behaviour intervention and play-based interventions.
38 - 39, level I
A systematic review on the effectiveness of occupational therapy
interventions for school-aged children with ADHD showed:38, level I
• cognitive interventions
 cognitive orientation to daily occupational performance
improved motor performance
 family-centered intervention improved behavioural outcome
and parental perception
• motor interventions
 three-dimensional fine motor training significantly improved
speed and consistent letter shapes in handwriting
 Theraplay intervention significantly improved visual motor
integration
• sensory interventions
 weighted vests improved attention and on-task behaviour
 stability balls improved in-seat and on-task behaviour
• play based interventions
 Theraplay intervention reduced ADHD symptoms and,
enhanced relationships and child’s overall performance
 play-based intervention improved playfulness and interpersonal
empathy
 parent-delivered intervention increased play skills
 social skills training improved communication, interactions skills
and improve process skills
In local settings, occupational therapy is a useful adjunct intervention in
the management of ADHD.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
4.2.2 Organisational skills training
Organisational skills deficits in children with ADHD are shown to impair
academic performance and may be associated with psychosocial,
occupational and economic difficulties later in life.40, level I These children
frequently have problems dealing with school materials and completing
school assignments on time.
In a meta-analysis of 12 RCTs, organisational skills training was more
effective than control in improving organisational skills and the ratings
of inattention and academic performance of children with ADHD:40, level I
• parent-reported organisational skills (Hedge’s g=0.830, 95% CI
0.324 to 1.336)
• teacher-reported organisational skills (Hedge’s g=0.539, 95% CI
0.169 to 0.909)
• parent-reported attention (Hedge’s g=0.558, 95% CI 0.379 to
0.736)
• teacher-reported attention (Hedge’s g=0.264, 95% CI 0.006 to
0.522)
• teacher-reported academic performance (Hedge’s g=0.326, 95%
CI 0.143 to 0.508)
4.2.3 Psychological intervention
a. Cognitive behavioural therapy-based interventions
Cognitive behavioural therapy-based intervention is one of the
psychological interventions that has been proposed in the treatment of
ADHD. A good meta-analysis showed modest effectiveness of cognitive
behavioural therapy (CBT) in reducing externalising symptoms in children
with ADHD (Cohen’s d= -0.549, 95% CI -0.774 to -0.324).41, level I
In a cross-over RCT, an eight-month assessment showed CBT was
effective for adolescents with ADHD who continued to exhibit persistent
symptoms despite medications.42, level I
In another RCT, CBT group was significantly more effective than control
group in reducing ADHD symptoms and severity, and decreasing
functional impairment in adolescents who continued presenting with
significant symptoms despite being on pharmacological treatment:
43, level I
• self-rated ADHD symptoms (Cohen’s d=7.5)
• parent-rated ADHD symptoms (Cohen’s d=8.38)
• self-rated symptom severity (Cohen’s d=3.75)
• clinician-rated symptom severity (Cohen’s d=7.71)
• evaluator-rated functional impairment (Cohen’s d=7.51)
CBT sessions include modules on psychoeducation, organisational/
planning skills, impulsivity and motivation management, and relapse
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
prevention.42 - 43, level I These sessions should be conducted by trained
personnel.
b. Mindfulness-based intervention
Mindfulness-based intervention (MBI) is a promising strategy to reduce
ADHD symptoms.
A meta-analysis demonstrated MBI was effective in children with ADHD
in terms of:44, level I
• reduction in inattention (Hedges’ g= -0.825, 95% CI -1.161 to
-0.488)
• reduction in hyperactivity/impulsivity (Hedges’ g= -0.676, 95% CI
-0.975 to -0.377)
However, the above results must be interpreted with caution because of
high heterogeneity across the studies (I2=69.10 to 76.24%).
4.2.4 Assistive Technology
There is no strong evidence for assistive technology in ADHD. The
use of fidget spinner is associated with only temporary decrease in
gross motor activity (Cohen’s d= -0.44, p<0.05). It worsens attentional
functioning (Cohen’s d=0.65, p<0.001).45, level II-3
Recommendation 3
• Occupational therapy should be offered as an adjunct in attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
• The following therapies should be considered in ADHD:
 organisational skills training
 cognitive behavioural therapy-based interventions
4.2.5 Family-based Intervention
Parent training and behavioural intervention
Parents often experience high level of stress in handling children with
ADHD and their associated impairments. Stress may affect parenting
effectiveness, quality of parent-child relationships and the child’s
functioning.
Adolescents with ADHD and their parents reported more parentadolescent conflicts. Parents of adolescents with ADHD reported a
greater intensity of anger in the parent-adolescent communication. They
also reported having their own conflicts and mental health issues.3, level III
Parent training and behavioural interventions improve parenting skills
46, level I and reduce parenting stress.47, level I Parent training assists
parents to understand and support the child, cope with stressful
situations and encourage appropriate behaviours. It helps parents to
modify and shape their child’s behaviour while improving the child’s
ability to regulate his or her behaviour.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
In children with ADHD, parent training and behavioural interventions:
• reduce ADHD symptoms (SMD=0.61, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.83) for
preschool children either with or without the child’s involvement
48, level I
• reduce oppositional behaviour,49, level I destructive behaviour and
ADHD symptoms46, level I
• reduce anxiety and depression,49, level I as well as internalising
behaviour47, level I
• increase self-control behaviour49, level I
Parent training and behavioural interventions may need to be done
continuously for overall benefits to be sustained.49, level I The intervention
can be done individually or in groups. Other caregivers involved in
the care of the child are encouraged to take part in the training and
intervention.
Parent training is also recommended by other guidelines in ADHD.
1; 14; 50 The positive effect of behavioural therapy persists while positive
effect of medications cease when the medication is stopped.2
In view of the benefits of parent training, more local healthcare providers
need to be trained to carry out the intervention. Refer Appendix 5 on
Advice for Behavioural Management.
Recommendation 4
• Parent training and behavioural intervention should be offered in
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
4.2.6 School-based Intervention
School-based intervention is any strategy implemented in a classroom
setting to improve the well-being of students. It reduces and prevents
school-related difficulties. The intervention requires interdisciplinary
coordination among healthcare providers and educational staff handling
children with ADHD. Interventions may incorporate activities e.g.
behavioural interventions and modifications to academic instructions.
A health technology assessment showed that school-based intervention
led to improvement in both core ADHD symptoms and academic
outcome:51, level I
i. average beneficial effect on core ADHD symptoms
• neurocognitive assessment on inattention (Cohen’s d=0.44,
95% CI 0.18 to 0.70) and hyperactivity/impulsivity (Cohen’s
d=0.33, 95% CI 0.13 to 0.53)
• teacher-rated inattention assessed using various rating scales
e.g. CRS, CRS-R, CBCL, ADHD-RS etc. (Cohen’s d=0.60, 95%
CI 0.14 to 1.06)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
ii. small effect on externalising symptoms reported by teachers
(Cohen’s d=0.28, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.53)
iii. small effect on perceptions of school-related adjustment as
assessed by teachers (Cohen’s d=0.26, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.47)
A meta-analysis of 19 moderate quality RCTs showed that behavioural
classroom programmes had small positive effects on teacher-rated
disruptive behaviour (Cohen’s d= -0.20, 95% CI -0.29 to -0.10) and
classroom-observed on-task behaviour (Cohen’s d=0.39, p<0.001).
52, level I
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends
that more education about ADHD be provided to trainee teachers.
Teachers who have received training on ADHD and its management
should provide behavioural interventions in the classroom to help
children and young people with ADHD.1
American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that educational
interventions and individualised instructional supports, including school
environment, class placement, instructional placement and behavioural
supports, are a necessary part of any treatment plan and they often
include an Individualised Education Programme (IEP).53
Recommendation 5
• School-based interventions should be offered in attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder.
Refer Appendix 6 on School-Based Intervention.
4.2.7 Others
Neurofeedback (NF) consists of measuring brain waves and providing
a feedback signal which teaches self-control of brain functions.54 In
a meta-analysis of 10 RCTs, NF was more effective than control in
hyperactivity/impulsivity at six months follow-up (SMD=0.32, 95% CI
0.14 to 0.49) but not in inattention.55, level I However there was no report
on quality assessment of primary papers. The Canadian ADHD Practice
Guidelines concludes that there is insufficient data to recommend NF
as a standard treatment for ADHD.56
• There is insufficient evidence to support the use of NF in the treatment
of ADHD.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
4.3 Pharmacological Treatment
• Medication should be offered to children aged ≥6 years and
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder:
 if their ADHD symptoms are persistent and causing significant
impairment in at least one domain despite behavioural and
environmental interventions.1
 along
with
evidence-based
training
interventions
and/or
behavioural interventions, if available.53
a. Stimulants/Non-stimulants
Methylphenidate (MPH) and atomoxetine (ATX) are indicated for ADHD
in children six years and older.57; 58, level III
A Cochrane systematic review showed that MPH, compared with
placebo, in children and adolescents with ADHD reduced:59, level I
• teacher-rated ADHD symptoms (SMD= -0.77, 95% CI -0.90 to
-0.64)
• independent assessor-rated ADHD symptoms (SMD= -0.64, 95%
CI -0.89 to -0.39)
• parent-rated ADHD symptoms (SMD= -0.66, 95% CI -0.82 to
-0.51)
In a meta-analysis of 11 RCTs in children and adolescents with
ADHD, symptom improvement was higher with MPH compared
to ATX (RR=1.14, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.20). However, on the ADHDRS, improvement was seen only in inattention (SMD= -0.13, 95%
CI -0.25 to -0.01) and not in the total and hyperactivity/impulsivity
domains.60, level I
In comparison with placebo, patients on MPH had more non-serious
adverse events (RR=1.29, 95% CI 1.10 to 1.51).59, level I MPH had less
drowsiness (RR=0.17, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.26), nausea (RR=0.49, 95% CI
0.29 to 0.85) and vomiting (RR=0.41, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.63) but more
insomnia (RR=2.27, 95% CI 1.63 to 3.15) compared with ATX.60, level I
In both meta-analyses the primary papers were of moderate quality.
NICE recommends offering MPH (either short- or long-acting) as firstline pharmacological treatment for children aged ≥5 years and young
people with ADHD. ATX can be offered in those who:1
• cannot tolerate MPH
• do not respond to separate 6-week trials of MPH, having
considered alternative preparations and adequate doses
There is no current indication to perform an electrocardiogram (ECG)
in a child prior to or during treatment using stimulants unless indicated
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
by history or physical examination.1; 61, level III Cardiac risk factors should
be assessed, including child or adolescent’s history of specific cardiac
symptoms apart from family history of sudden death, cardiovascular
symptoms, etc.53
Recommendation 6
• Methylphenidate should be offered to children aged ≥6 years and
adolescents with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder if medication
is indicated*.
 Atomoxetine may be used as an alternative.
*Refer yellow box above.
b. Others
In a good network meta-analysis of 133 double-blind RCTs on children
and adolescents with ADHD, the following medications were superior to
placebo in reducing ADHD core symptoms as rated by clinicians:62, level I
• amphetamines (SMD= -1.02, 95% CI -1.19 to -0.85)
• ATX (SMD= -0.56, 95% CI -0.66 to -0.45)
• bupropion (SMD= -0.96, 95% CI -1.69 to -0.22)
• clonidine (SMD= -0.71, 95% CI -1.17 to -0.24)
• guanfacine (SMD= -0.67, 95% CI -0.85 to -0.50)
• MPH (SMD= -0.78, 95% CI -0.93 to -0.62)
• modafinil (SMD= -0.62, 95% CI -0.84 to -0.41)
By contrast, in comparisons based on teachers’ ratings, only MPH
(SMD= -0.82, 95% CI -1.16 to -0.48) and modafinil (SMD= -0.76, 95%
CI -1.15 to -0.37) were more efficacious than placebo.
In head to head comparisons, clinical ratings showed:62, level I
• amphetamines were superior to modafinil (SMD= -0.39, 95% CI
-0.67 to -0.12), ATX (SMD= -0.46, 95% CI -0.65 to -0.27), and
MPH (SMD= -0.24, 95% CI -0.44 to -0.05)
• ATX was inferior to MPH (SMD=0.22 95% CI 0.05 to 0.39)
With respect to tolerability, all study medications were inferior to
placebo:62, level I
• amphetamines (OR=2.30, 95% CI 1.36 to 3.89)
• ATX (OR=2.30, 95% CI 1.36 to 3.89)
• bupropion (OR=1.51, 95% CI 0.17 to 13.27)
• clonidine (OR=4.52, 95% CI 0.75 to 27.03)
• guanfacine (OR=2.64, 95% CI 1.20 to 5.81)
• MPH (OR=1.44, 95% CI 0.90 to 2.31)
• modafinil (OR=1.34, 95% CI 0.57 to 3.18)
In head to head comparisons, MPH was more tolerable than ATX,
amphetamines, guanfacine, clonidine and bupropion. However, the
differences were not statistically significant.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
In the MoH Medicines Formulary, only MPH and ATX are approved
for use in the treatment of ADHD in children over six years.57 Refer to
Appendix 7 on Pharmacological Treatment of ADHD.
c. Treatment for Pre-schoolers (Children below six years old)
There was no strong evidence retrieved for pre-schoolers with ADHD
and the CPG DG acknowledges the concerns around the adverse
effects of medication in this group.
NICE recommends not to offer medication to any child under five years
without a second specialist opinion from an expert in managing ADHD
in young children.1
In the previous Malaysian CPG, the recommendation was that
medication for pre-schoolers should be initiated by a child psychiatrist
or a paediatrician familiar with the management of ADHD in this group.9
Recommendation 7
• If medication for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is
indicated in children <6 years old, it should be initiated by a child
psychiatrist or a paediatrician with expertise in managing ADHD.
4.4. Combination Treatment
Pharmacotherapy alone or in combination with non-pharmacological
treatment can be offered in ADHD. The combination of pharmacotherapy
and behavioural therapy in ADHD allows for the use of lower stimulant
dosages, which may reduce risk of medication-related side effects.2
Recommendation 8
• Combination treatment (pharmacological and non-pharmacological)
should be considered in children ≥6 years of age and adolescents
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder when the symptoms
persist and cause functional impairment.
4.5. Dietary Modification
Dietary modification for ADHD is divided into elimination and
supplementation diets. Elimination diet includes removal of artificial
food colourants, additives, sugar, artificial sweeteners and Few Foods
Diet (FFD). FFD is a diet that excludes all but a few food items
for a certain duration. It normally includes two types of meat, two
sources of carbohydrates, two vegetables, two fruits, oil and water.
Supplementation diet involve addition of amino acids, essential fatty
acids, vitamins and minerals.63, level I
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
The evidence for dietary modification in management of ADHD are
mostly inconclusive.63, level I
NICE recommends not to advise elimination of artificial colouring,
additives and dietary fatty acid supplementations. There is also no
evidence of long-term effectiveness of FFD.1
In the previous Malaysian CPG on ADHD, the recommendation was
that parents should monitor and document the association between a
particular food item and hyperactive behaviour in children with ADHD.
The particular food item should be avoided if it is clearly associated with
behavioural changes.9
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend dietary modification in
the treatment of ADHD.
5. TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICATION
Traditional and complementary medication that were frequently studied
in the management of ADHD include nutritional medicines (zinc, iron,
omega-3, vitamin C and acetyl-L-carnitine) and herbal medicines
[ginkgo, St. John’s wort, French maritime pine bark and Ningdong
granule (traditional Chinese herbal formula)]. There is no clear evidence
for recommendation of these medications in treating ADHD.64, level I
A systematic review showed no evidence on the usefulness of medicinal
cannabinoids for the treatment of ADHD in adults.65, level I
In a meta-analysis, physical exercise has a medium effect on ADHD
functional outcomes (Hedge’s g=0.627, 95% CI 0.273 to 0.982) with
significant heterogeneity (I2=78%).66, level I However, quality assessment
of primary studies was not reported.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
6. SPECIAL POPULATION
6.1. Transition to Adulthood
Transition is the period from adolescence to adulthood. It is important
to continuously provide accessible and age-appropriate services in this
period. A majority (60 - 85%) of children with ADHD will continue to
meet the criteria for the disorder during their teenage and adult years.2
However, ADHD treatment rates decline sharply from childhood through
young adulthood.67, level III The decline in treatment is because:
• there is an interruption in management of the disorder when
adolescent patients transit to adult health care services as there is
no provision of transitional care for the patients67, level III
• of the belief that ADHD resolves during adolescence and young
adulthood with minimal impact in functioning68, level III
• of the perception that adolescents with ADHD do not meet the
diagnostic criteria and, therefore, do not require treatment69, level III
• the presentation is masked by the presence of comorbid psychiatric
syndromes68, level III
• there is limited service availability67, level III
• clinicians are not well equipped to handle adults with ADHD67, level III
• the stigma and myths about ADHD and its treatment68, level III
Symptoms of ADHD in adolescence and adulthood:68, level III
• may change; hyperactivity and impulsivity becoming less evident,
while inattention symptoms remain
• include prominent impairment in executive functioning
• are complicated by the presence of comorbid psychiatric symptoms
• are associated with continued clinical and psychosocial impairments
• Optimising services during childhood and transition to adult health
care improves treatment and prognosis of individuals with ADHD.
Recommendation 9
• Children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
should continue to receive treatment throughout their lifespan.
6.2. Adults
Observational studies of childhood outcomes of ADHD suggested
persistence of symptoms into adulthood. Inattention symptoms
remained prominent, while symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity
may persist, decline or change in their presentation.70, level II-2
ADHD persistence rates from childhood to adulthood ranged from
40 - 50%.71, level III
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
a. Risk factors for persistence of ADHD into adulthood
A meta-analysis of 16 studies found that the risk factors for persistence
of ADHD into adulthood were:72, level II-2
• severity of ADHD (OR=2.33, 95% CI 1.60 to 3.39)
• CD (OR=1.85, 95% CI 1.06 to 3.24)
• major depressive disorder (MDD) (OR=1.80, 95% CI 1.10 to 2.95)
• parental psychopathology
 paternal anxiety-mood disorder (OR=2.40, 95% CI 1.10 to 5.50)
 parental (mother or father) antisocial personality disorder
(OR=2.20, 95% CI 1.20 to 4.20)
The same meta-analysis showed that factors not significantly
associated with the persistence of ADHD into adulthood were gender,
socioeconomic status at childhood, intelligence quotient (IQ), ODD,
exposure to trauma and adversities e.g. single parent families.72, level II-2
b. Co-morbidities
In a small cross-sectional study on individuals aged 17 to 74 years
old, adults with ADHD had significantly higher rates of DSM-IV Axis I
(46.9%) and Axis II (27.31%) co-morbidities compared with non-ADHD
adults.73, level III
Among adults with ADHD, those with ADHD-C (combined hyperactivity
and inattention) had significantly higher rates of past and current MDD
and anxiety disorders compared with ADHD-I (inattention). They also
had significantly higher rates of past CD and antisocial personality
disorder.73, level III
c. Outcome of childhood ADHD
Adults with childhood ADHD, compared with those without ADHD, had
higher risk of:
• academic difficulties74, level II-2
 grade retention (OR=3.64, 95% CI 2.39 to 5.56)
 school suspension (OR=6.31, 95% CI 2.53 to 15.73)
 increased use of education services (OR=6.37, 95% CI 2.58 to
15.73)
 failure to finish high school (OR=3.70, 95% CI 1.96 to 6.99)
• psychiatric disorders74, level II-2
 ODD (OR=7.05, 95% CI 2.63 to 18.85)
 CD (OR=5.40, 95% CI 2.53 to 11.55)
 antisocial disorder (OR=2.83, 95% CI 1.23 to 6.52)
 depression (OR=2.31, 95% CI 1.45 to 3.70)
 use of mental health services (OR=2.35, 95% CI 1.42 to 3.89)
• substance and alcohol use75, level II-2
 lifetime nicotine use (OR=2.08, 95% CI 1.66 to 2.60)
 lifetime marijuana use (OR=2.78, 95% CI 1.64 to 4.74)
 nicotine abuse/dependence (OR=2.82, 95% CI 2.41 to 3.29)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
 alcohol use disorder (OR=1.74, 95% CI 1.38 to 2.20)
 marijuana abuse/dependence (OR=1.58, 95% CI 1.16 to 2.14)
 cocaine abuse/dependence (OR=2.05, 95% CI 1.38 to 3.04)
 general illicit drug abuse/dependence (OR=2.64, 95% CI 1.77
to 3.94)
• legal issues74, level II-2
 arrests (OR=2.43, 95% CI 1.62 to 3.65)
 convictions (OR=2.01, 95% CI 1.25 to 3.24)
 driving summons (OR=2.13, 95% CI 1.09 to 4.19)
 vehicular-accidents-at-faults (OR=1.98, 95% CI 1.03 to 3.81)
• problems in other areas of life
 social functioning76, level II-2
 low self-esteem76, level II-2
 less likely to stay married (p<0.001)70, level II-2
 lower salary (p<0.001)70, level II-2
 lower work functioning (p<0.001)70, level II-2
 poorer social economic status (p<0.001)70, level II-2
 obesity76, level II-2
Adults with ADHD who received treatment in childhood compared to
those who did not, had higher academic attainment and employment,
lower rates of lifetime occurrence of depression, anxiety and bipolar
disorder.77, level II-2 They also had better outcomes in driving, obesity, selfesteem, social functioning and drug use/addictive behaviour.76, level II-2
• In the management of adults with ADHD, the assessment and
treatment of ADHD, co-morbidities and psychosocial complications
are crucial.
Recommendation 10
• Any child or adolescent presenting with academic difficulties,
behavioural problems, mood disturbances, substance use or
personality disorders should be evaluated for attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder to prevent deleterious outcomes in adulthood.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
7. MANAGEMENT IN PRIMARY CARE
In primary care setting, diagnosis of ADHD can be confirmed by a
Family Medicine Specialist (FMS)/Primary Care Physician. Patients can
be managed in the primary care facility if the condition is mild. Patients
with moderate to severe ADHD should be referred to a psychiatrist/
paediatrician for further management.
Table 1. Severity of ADHD based on DSM-5 Criteria
Severity
Features
Mild
Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required
to make the diagnosis are present, and symptoms
result in no more than minor impairments in social or
occupational functioning.
Moderate Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild”
and “severe” are present.
Severe
Many symptoms in excess of those required to make
the diagnosis, or several symptoms that are particularly
severe, are present, or the symptoms result in marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Non-pharmacological treatment of ADHD can be initiated by FMS/
Primary Care Physician. They can provide psychoeducation and
general advice on family- and school-based interventions. Patients can
also be referred to an occupational therapist for further interventions.
8. REFERRAL
In view of no retrievable evidence on referral criteria for ADHD, the
CPG development group proposes the following terms for referral.
• Patients with ADHD should be referred to the psychiatrist/
paediatrician when there is:
 uncertainty of diagnosis
 lack of response to non-pharmacological treatment
 indication to start pharmacotherapy
 severe side effects of medication
 co-morbidities (e.g. substance abuse)
• All pre-schoolers (below six years of age) with suspicion of ADHD
should be referred to the child psychiatrist or a paediatrician with
expertise in managing ADHD for further management.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
9. MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
Clinicians should provide regular follow-up for individuals with ADHD.
During the follow-up, emphasise treatment adherence and, monitor the
effectiveness and side effects of medication prescribed.1
The following should be monitored during follow-up:
• height and weight
• vital signs (especially heart rate and rhythm)
• loss of appetite
• rebound hyperactivity
• sleep
• worsening behaviour
• mood changes
• stimulant diversion (giving another person the medication meant
for the individual, e.g. giving a friend or selling one’s prescribed
medication)
Refer to Appendix 8 for further information.
In addition, for children aged 12 years and above, clinicians should
assess for changes in mood and presence of risky behaviours
e.g. intentional self-harm, substance use, suicidal and risky sexual
behaviours. 2; 53
If a child or adolescent’s growth over time is significantly affected by
medication (i.e. they have weight loss and/or have not met the height
expected for their age) consider a planned break in treatment over
school holidays to allow “catch-up” growth.1
If a patient with ADHD has been symptom free for at least one year,
enquiries should be made on whether the patient and family still think
the medication is beneficial. If the decision is made to discontinue the
medication, it should be done at a low-stress time.2
Parents and adolescents with ADHD are encouraged to discuss any
preferences to stop or change medication and to be involved in any
decision about stopping treatment.1 Medications should be resumed
in the event of recurrence of symptoms or deterioration in functioning.
• Children with ADHD are eligible to get additional support e.g.:
 registration for Orang Kurang Upaya (OKU) with District Social
Welfare Office (Pejabat Kebajikan Masyarakat Daerah)
 special needs education under District Education Office (Pejabat
Pendidikan Daerah), including inclusive education in the
mainstream setting
 examination and classroom accommodation (e.g. extra time,
reduced distraction)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Recommendation 11
• Healthcare providers should provide continued care and longterm monitoring to children and adolescents with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder.
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of ADHD should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
10.1. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to healthcare
providers
• training and updates on ADHD
• public awareness campaigns related to mental health
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited exposure and training among healthcare providers on
management of ADHD
• variation in availability of expertise and access to service provision
due to financial constraints
• lack of awareness among patients, families and educators on ADHD
10.2. Potential Resource Implications
In local scenario, children with ADHD are often missed. Adults and
peers often consider the children as having behavioural problems,
not listening and not putting in effort. They are often labelled, isolated,
ignored or punished.
There are also negative/false perceptions regarding ADHD e.g.:
• it is not a medical illness
• the medications increase the risk of substance use
• the condition will disappear as the child gets older
• boys are usually hyperactive anyway
• only boys have ADHD
The CPG recommends early detection and referral, comprehensive
assessment and treatment of the disorder. This requires increased
awareness among parents, educators and healthcare providers to
establish diagnosis and embark on intervention early. Collaboration
with various experts and agencies is required to provide optimal
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
management e.g. psychological and behavioural intervention, parent
and teachers training, and classroom accommodation.
Thus, the implementation of this CPG requires resources to provide:
• training of healthcare providers and educators
• assessment and intervention tools
• better access to pharmaco- and non-pharmacological therapy
• access to policy makers
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of ADHD:
*if their ADHD symptoms are persistent and causing significant
impairment in at least one domain despite behavioural and
environmental interventions.
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
• Percentage of newly
diagnosed children
and adolescents
with ADHD offered
parent training
and behavioural
intervention
=
Number of newly diagnosed children and
adolescents with ADHD in the same period
Number of newly diagnosed children and
adolescents with ADHD offered parent training
and behavioural intervention in a period
• Percentage of
children ≥6 years
diagnosed with
ADHD prescribed
methylphenidate
(MPH) when
indicated*
=
Number of children ≥6 years diagnosed with
ADHD and indicated for MPH in the same period
Number of children ≥6 years diagnosed
with ADHD prescribed MPH in a period
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:
diagnosis and management. London: NICE; 2018.
2. Pliszka S. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46(7):894-921.
3. Lee YC, Yang HJ, Chen VC, et al. Meta-analysis of quality of life in children and adolescents with
ADHD: By both parent proxy-report and child self-report using PedsQL™. Res Dev Disabil. 2016;5152:160-72.
4. Polanczyk G, de Lima MS, Horta BL, et al. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review
and metaregression analysis. The American journal of psychiatry. 2007;164(6):942-8.
5. Sahril N, Ahmad NA, Idris IB, et al. Mental Health Problems of Children. National Health & Morbidity
Survey 2015. 2. Kuala Lumpur: Ministry of Health Malaysia; 2015. p. 190-205.
6. Gomez R, Hafetz N. DSM-IV ADHD: Prevalence based on parent and teacher ratings of Malaysian
primary school children. Asian journal of psychiatry. 2011;4(1):41-4.
7. Chen Q, Brikell I, Lichtenstein P, et al. Familial aggregation of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2017;58(3):231-9.
8. St Sauver JL, Barbaresi WJ, Katusic SK, et al. Early life risk factors for attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: a population-based cohort study. Mayo Clin Proc. 2004;79(9):1124-31.
9. Ministry of Health Malaysia (MoH). Management of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in
Children and Adolescents. Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2008.
10. Jenabi E, Bashirian S, Khazaei S, et al. The maternal prepregnancy body mass index and the risk
of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder among children and adolescents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Korean journal of pediatrics. 2019;62(10):374-9.
11. Maher GM, O’Keeffe GW, Kearney PM, et al. Association of Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy
With Risk of Neurodevelopmental Disorders in Offspring: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(8):809-19.
12. Zhao L, Li X, Liu G, et al. The association of maternal diabetes with attention deficit and hyperactivity
disorder in offspring: a meta-analysis. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment. 2019;15:675-84.
13. Okano L, Ji Y, Riley AW, et al. Maternal psychosocial stress and children’s ADHD diagnosis: a
prospective birth cohort study. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol. 2019;40(3):217-25.
14. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). Management of attention deficit and hyperkinetic
disorders in children and young people. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2009.
15. Huang L, Wang Y, Zhang L, et al. Maternal Smoking and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in
Offspring: A Meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2018;141(1).
16. Gou X, Wang Y, Tang Y, et al. Association of maternal prenatal acetaminophen use with the
risk of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder in offspring: A meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Psychiatry.
2019;53(3):195-206.
17. Boukhris T, Sheehy O, Berard A. Antidepressant Use in Pregnancy and the Risk of Attention Deficit
with or without Hyperactivity Disorder in Children. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2017;31(4):363-73.
18. Christensen J, Pedersen L, Sun Y, et al. Association of Prenatal Exposure to Valproate and Other
Antiepileptic Drugs With Risk for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Offspring. JAMA Netw
Open. 2019;2(1):e186606.
19. Veroniki AA, Rios P, Cogo E, et al. Comparative safety of antiepileptic drugs for neurological
development in children exposed during pregnancy and breast feeding: a systematic review and
network meta-analysis. BMJ Open. 2017;7(7):e017248.
20. Li J, Olsen J, Vestergaard M, et al. Low Apgar scores and risk of childhood attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. J Pediatr. 2011;158(5):775-9.
21. Yang LY, Huang CC, Chiu WT, et al. Association of traumatic brain injury in childhood and attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: a population-based study. Pediatr Res. 2016;80(3):356-62.
22. Del-Ponte B, Anselmi L, Assuncao MCF, et al. Sugar consumption and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD): A birth cohort study. J Affect Disord. 2019;243:290-6.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
23. Tamana SK, Ezeugwu V, Chikuma J, et al. Screen-time is associated with inattention problems in
preschoolers: Results from the CHILD birth cohort study. PLoS One. 2019;14(4):e0213995.
24. Donzelli G, Carducci A, Llopis-Gonzalez A, et al. The Association between Lead and AttentionDeficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019;16(3).
25. Quinn PO, Madhoo M. A review of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in women and girls:
uncovering this hidden diagnosis. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord. 2014;16(3).
26. Bied A, Biederman J, Faraone S. Parent-based diagnosis of ADHD is as accurate as a teacherbased diagnosis of ADHD. Postgrad Med. 2017;129(3):375-81.
27. Parker A, Corkum P. ADHD Diagnosis: As Simple As Administering a Questionnaire or a Complex
Diagnostic Process? J Atten Disord. 2013;20(6):478-86.
28. Chang LY, Wang MY, Tsai PS. Diagnostic Accuracy of Rating Scales for Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder: A Meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2016;137(3):e20152749.
29. American Psychiatric Association (APA). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition. Arlington, VA: APA; 2013.
30. World Health Organization (WHO). The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders:
Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva: WHO; 2016.
31. Reale L, Bartoli B, Cartabia M, et al. Comorbidity prevalence and treatment outcome in children and
adolescents with ADHD. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2017;26(12):1443-57.
32. Bendiksen B, Svensson E, Aase H, et al. Co-Occurrence of ODD and CD in preschool children with
symptoms of ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2017;21(9):741-52.
33. Bloch MH, Panza KE, Landeros-Weisenberger A, et al. Meta-analysis: treatment of attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder in children with comorbid tic disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2009;48(9):884-93.
34. Tung I, Li JJ, Meza JI, et al. Patterns of Comorbidity Among Girls With ADHD: A Meta-analysis.
Pediatrics. 2016;138(4).
35. Muskens JB, Velders FP, Staal WG. Medical comorbidities in children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorders and attention deficit hyperactivity disorders: a systematic review. Eur Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2017;26(9):1093-103.
36. Montoya A, Colom F, Ferrin M. Is psychoeducation for parents and teachers of children and
adolescents with ADHD efficacious? A systematic literature review. Eur Psychiatry. 2011;26(3):166-75.
37. Bai GN, Wang YF, Yang L, et al. Effectiveness of a focused, brief psychoeducation program for
parents of ADHD children: improvement of medication adherence and symptoms. Neuropsychiatr
Dis Treat. 2015;11:2721-35.
38. Nielsen SK, Kelsch K, Miller K. Occupational Therapy Interventions for Children with Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review. Occupational Therapy in Mental Health.
2017;33(1):70-80.
39. Wilkes-Gillan S, Bundy A, Cordier R, et al. A Randomised Controlled Trial of a Play-Based
Intervention to Improve the Social Play Skills of Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD). PLoS One. 2016;11(8):e0160558.
40. Bikic A, Reichow B, McCauley SA, et al. Meta-analysis of organizational skills interventions
for children and adolescents with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Clin Psychol Rev.
2017;52:108-23.
41. Battagliese G, Caccetta M, Luppino OI, et al. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for externalizing
disorders: A meta-analysis of treatment effectiveness. Behav Res Ther. 2015;75:60-71.
42. Sprich SE, Safren SA, Finkelstein D, et al. A randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral
therapy for ADHD in medication-treated adolescents. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2016;57(11):1218-26.
43. Vidal R, Castells J, Richarte V, et al. Group therapy for adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2015;54(4):275-82.
44. Xue J, Zhang Y, Huang Y. A meta-analytic investigation of the impact of mindfulness-based
interventions on ADHD symptoms. Medicine. 2019;98(23):e15957-e.
45. Graziano PA, Garcia AM, Landis TD. To Fidget or Not to Fidget, That Is the Question: A Systematic
Classroom Evaluation of Fidget Spinners Among Young Children With ADHD. J Atten Disord.
2018:1087054718770009.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
46. Charach A, Carson P, Fox S, et al. Interventions for preschool children at high risk for ADHD: a
comparative effectiveness review. Pediatrics. 2013;131(5):e1584-604.
47. Zwi M, Jones H, Thorgaard C, et al. Parent training interventions for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD) in children aged 5 to 18 years. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(12):Cd003018.
48. Mulqueen JM, Bartley CA, Bloch MH. Meta-analysis: parental interventions for preschool ADHD. J
Atten Disord. 2015;19(2):118-24.
49. Huang YH, Chung CY, Ou HY, et al. Treatment effects of combining social skill training and parent
training in Taiwanese children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Formos Med Assoc.
2015;114(3):260-7.
50. Singapore Academy of Medicine. AMS-MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines: Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder. Singapore: MoH Singapore; 2014.
51. Richardson M, Moore DA, Gwernan-Jones R, et al. Non-pharmacological interventions for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) delivered in school settings: systematic reviews of quantitative
and qualitative research. Health Technol Assess. 2015;19(45):1-470.
52. Veenman B, Luman M, Oosterlaan J. Efficacy of behavioral classroom programs in primary school.
A meta-analysis focusing on randomized controlled trials. PLoS One. 2018;13(10):e0201779.
53. Wolraich ML, Hagan JF, Jr., Allan C, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis, Evaluation,
and Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics.
2019;144(4).
54. Marzbani H, Marateb HR, Mansourian M. Neurofeedback: A Comprehensive Review on System
Design, Methodology and Clinical Applications. Basic Clin Neurosci. 2016;7(2):143-58.
55. Van Doren J, Arns M, Heinrich H, et al. Sustained effects of neurofeedback in ADHD: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2019;28(3):293-305.
56. Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance (CADDRA). Canadian ADHD Practice Guidelines. 4.1 ed.
Toronto ON: CADDRA; 2020.
57. Bahagian Perkhidmatan Farmasi, Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia. Formulari Ubat Kementerian
Kesihatan Malaysia 2016. Petaling Jaya: KKM; 2016
58. Medication Guide. Ritalin® (methylphenidate hydrochloride, USP) tablets CII. (Available at https://
www.fda.gov/media/72922/download)
59. Storebo OJ, Ramstad E, Krogh HB, et al. Methylphenidate for children and adolescents with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(11):Cd009885.
60. Liu Q, Zhang H, Fang Q, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of methylphenidate and atomoxetine
for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents: Meta-analysis based on headto-head trials. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2017;39(9):854-65.
61. Hamilton R, Gray C, Belanger SA, et al. Cardiac risk assessment before the use of stimulant
medications in children and youth: A joint position statement by the Canadian Paediatric Society, the
Canadian Cardiovascular Society and the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. J
Can Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;18(4):349-55.
62. Cortese S, Adamo N, Del Giovane C, et al. Comparative efficacy and tolerability of medications for
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children, adolescents, and adults: a systematic review and
network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(9):727-38.
63. Heilskov Rytter MJ, Andersen LB, Houmann T, et al. Diet in the treatment of ADHD in children - a
systematic review of the literature. Nord J Psychiatry. 2015;69(1):1-18.
64. Sarris J, Kean J, Schweitzer I, et al. Complementary medicines (herbal and nutritional products)
in the treatment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): a systematic review of the
evidence. Complement Ther Med. 2011;19(4):216-27.
65. Black N, Stockings E, Campbell G, et al. Cannabinoids for the treatment of mental disorders
and symptoms of mental disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry.
2019;6(12):995-1010.
66. Vysniauske R, Verburgh L, Oosterlaan J, et al. The Effects of Physical Exercise on Functional
Outcomes in the Treatment of ADHD: A Meta-Analysis. J Atten Disord. 2020;24(5):644-54.
67. Treuer T, Chan KLP, Kim BN, et al. Lost in transition: A review of the unmet need of patients with
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder transitioning to adulthood. Asia Pac Psychiatry. 2017;9(2).
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
68. Kooij SJ, Bejerot S, Blackwell A, et al. European consensus statement on diagnosis and treatment
of adult ADHD: The European Network Adult ADHD. BMC Psychiatry. 2010;10:67.
69. Robb A, Findling RL. Challenges in the transition of care for adolescents with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. Postgrad Med. 2013;125(4):131-40.
70. Klein RG, Mannuzza S, Olazagasti MA, et al. Clinical and functional outcome of childhood attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder 33 years later. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2012;69(12):1295-303.
71. Sibley MH, Mitchell JT, Becker SP. Method of adult diagnosis influences estimated persistence of
childhood ADHD: a systematic review of longitudinal studies. The lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(12):1157-65.
72. Caye A, Spadini AV, Karam RG, et al. Predictors of persistence of ADHD into adulthood: a systematic
review of the literature and meta-analysis. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016;25(11):1151-9.
73. Cumyn L, French L, Hechtman L. Comorbidity in adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Can J Psychiatry. 2009;54(10):673-83.
74. Erskine HE, Norman RE, Ferrari AJ, et al. Long-Term Outcomes of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder and Conduct Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2016;55(10):841-50.
75. Lee SS, Humphreys KL, Flory K, et al. Prospective association of childhood attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and substance use and abuse/dependence: a meta-analytic review.
Clin Psychol Rev. 2011;31(3):328-41.
76. Shaw M, Hodgkins P, Caci H, et al. A systematic review and analysis of long-term outcomes
in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: effects of treatment and non-treatment. BMC Med.
2012;10:99.
77. Halmoy A, Fasmer OB, Gillberg C, et al. Occupational outcome in adult ADHD: impact of symptom
profile, comorbid psychiatric problems, and treatment: a cross-sectional study of 414 clinically
diagnosed adult ADHD patients. J Atten Disord. 2009;13(2):175-87.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective pharmacological
treatments for ADHD? - Stimulants
1.
ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER WITH HYPERACTIVITY/
2.
(attention deficit adj2 disorder*).tw.
3.
attention deficit disorder* with hyperactivity.tw.
4.
((attention deficit hyperactivity or attention deficit-hyperactivity)
adj3 disorder*).tw.
5.
(hyperkinetic adj1 syndrome*).tw.
6.
adhd.tw.
7.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM STIMULANTS/
9.
(analeptic adj1 (agent* or drug*)).tw.
10. analeptic*.tw.
11. central nervous system stimulant*.tw.
12. METHYLPHENIDATE/
13. methylphenidate.tw.
14. (methylphenidate adj1 hydrochloride).tw.
15. ritalin.tw.
16. ritalin sr.tw.
17. ritalin-sr.tw.
18. concerta.tw.
19. ritalin LA.tw.
20. adderall.tw.
21. 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19
or 20
22. 7 and 21
23. limit 22 to (english language and humans and yr=”2008 -Current”
and “all child (0 to 18 years)”)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. Risk Factors
• What are the risk factors for ADHD?
2. Diagnosis
• What are the accurate screening instruments for ADHD?
• What are the accurate diagnostic criteria and diagnostic
instruments for ADHD?
• What are the accurate supporting investigations for the diagnosis
of ADHD?
• What are the associated co-morbidities of ADHD?
3. Treatment
• What are the safe and effective non-pharmacological treatments
for ADHD?
 Psychoeducation
 Behavioural therapy
 Individual
 Family-based
 School-based
 Assistive technology
• What are the safe and effective pharmacological treatments for
ADHD?
 Stimulants
 Non-stimulants
 Others
• What are the appropriate assessments for pre-pharmacological
treatment in ADHD?
• What are the safe and effective pharmacological treatments for
pre-schoolers with ADHD?
• What are the safe and effective traditional and complementary
medication in ADHD?
• What are the safe and effective dietary modification in ADHD?
4. Special populations
• What are the important issues to be addressed in ADHD in the
following special population?
 Transition to adulthood
 Adults
5. Referral
• What are the referral criteria of children with ADHD to the
following services:
 Primary care
 Secondary/tertiary care
6. Monitoring and follow-up
• What are the effective follow-up and monitoring practices in ADHD?
• What is the safety and effectiveness of drug holiday in ADHD?
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL
DISORDER FIFTH EDITION (DSM-5)
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity
that interferes with functioning or development, as characterised by
(1) and/or (2):
1. Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have
persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent
with developmental level and that negatively impacts directly on
social and academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of
oppositional behavior, defiance, hostility, or failure to understand
tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age 17
and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless
mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or during other activities
(e.g., overlooks or misses details, work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play
activities (e.g., has difficulty remaining focused during
lectures, conversations, or lengthy reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g.,
mind seems elsewhere, even in the absence of any obvious
distraction).
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails
to finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace
(e.g., starts tasks but quickly loses focus and is easily side
tracked).
e. Often has difficulty organising tasks and activities (e.g.,
difficulty managing sequential tasks; difficulty keeping
materials and belongings in order; messy, disorganised
work; has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines).
f.
Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks
that require sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or
homework; for older adolescents and adults, preparing
reports, completing forms, reviewing lengthy papers).
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g.,
school materials, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys,
paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones).
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older
adolescents and adults, may include unrelated thoughts).
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
i.
Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores,
running errands; for older adolescents and adults, returning
calls, paying bills, keeping appointments).
2. Hyperactivity and impulsivity: Six (or more) of the following
symptoms have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that
is inconsistent with developmental level and that negatively
impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of
oppositional behavior, defiance, hostility, or a failure to
understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and
adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is
expected (e.g., leaves his or her place in the classroom,
in the office or other workplace, or in other situations that
require remaining in place).
c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is
inappropriate. (Note: In adolescents or adults, may be
limited to feeling restless.)
d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.
e. Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is
unable to be or uncomfortable being still for extended time,
as in restaurants, meetings; may be experienced by others
as being restless or difficult to keep up with).
f.
Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been
completed (e.g., completes people’s sentences; cannot
wait for turn in conversation).
h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting
in line).
i.
Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into
conversations, games, or activities; may start using other
people’s things without asking or receiving permission; for
adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what
others are doing).
B. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were
present prior to age 12 years.
C. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present
in two or more settings (e.g., at home, school, or work; with friends
or relatives; in other activities).
D. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce
the quality of, social, academic, or occupational functioning.
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of
schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder and are not better
explained by another mental disorder (e.g., mood disorder, anxiety
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder, substance
intoxication or withdrawal).
Specify whether:
314.01 (F90.2) Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1
(inattention) and Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for
the past 6 months.
314.00 (F90.0) Predominantly inattentive presentation: If
Criterion A1 (inattention) is met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivityimpulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
314.01
(F90.1)
Predominantly
hyperactive/impulsive
presentation: If Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is met and
Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the past 6 months.
Specify if:
in partial remission: When full criteria were previously met,
fewer than the full criteria have been met for the past 6 months,
and the symptoms still result in impairment in social, academic, or
occupational functioning.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make
the diagnosis are present, and symptoms result in no more than
minor impairments in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and
“severe” are present.
Severe: Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis, or several symptoms that are particularly severe, are
present, or the symptoms result in marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning.
Source: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-5. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association,
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
AND RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS, 10TH REVISION (ICD-10)
F90 Hyperkinetic disorders
A group of disorders characterized by an early onset (usually in the
first five years of life), lack of persistence in activities that require
cognitive involvement, and a tendency to move from one activity to
another without completing any one, together with disorganized, illregulated, and excessive activity. Several other abnormalities may be
associated. Hyperkinetic children are often reckless and impulsive,
prone to accidents, and find themselves in disciplinary trouble because
of unthinking breaches of rules rather than deliberate defiance. Their
relationships with adults are often socially disinhibited, with a lack of
normal caution and reserve. They are unpopular with other children
and may become isolated. Impairment of cognitive functions is
common, and specific delays in motor and language development are
disproportionately frequent. Secondary complications include dissocial
behaviour and low self-esteem.
Excl.: anxiety disorders (F41.-)
mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39)
pervasive developmental disorders (F84.-)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
F90.0 Disturbance of activity and attention
Attention deficit:
• disorder with hyperactivity
• hyperactivity disorder
• syndrome with hyperactivity
Excl.: hyperkinetic disorder associated with conduct disorder (F90.1)
F90.1 Hyperkinetic conduct disorder
Hyperkinetic disorder associated with conduct disorder
F90.8 Other hyperkinetic disorders
F90.9 Hyperkinetic disorder, unspecified
Hyperkinetic reaction of childhood or adolescence NOS
Hyperkinetic syndrome NOS
Source: World Health Organisation. ICD-10 Classifications of Mental and Behavioural
Disorder: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva. 2016.
(Available at: https://icd.who.int/browse10/2016/en#/F90.0)
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
ADVICE FOR BEHAVIOURAL MANAGEMENT
General advice for parents
1. Remain calm and in control.
2. Schedule one on one time, at least 10 to 15 minutes every day with
your child to let him/her know how important he or she is to you.
3. Individuals with ADHD benefit from frequent feedback. Notice your
child’s strength and praise him/her regularly.
4. Model the behaviour you would like to see from your child.
5. Use schedules and routines.
6. Post lists and reminders for the routines in places they will be seen.
7. Discuss the behavioural goals with your child.
8. Discuss the behavioural target(s), expectation and feedback with
your child’s other caregivers so he/she gets a consistent message.
9. Target one to two behaviours that you want to change at one time.
10. Give directions one at a time and track your child’s response.
11. Use desired activities (screen time/play) as privileges/rewards for
success on behavioural targets.
12. Ensure regular mealtimes and good rest for your child and yourself.
Younger Children
1. Routines are very important. Balance higher energy and quieter
activities throughout the day.
2. Use visual prompts in the order of routines you would like him/her
to learn (e.g. steps to get ready for bed).
3. Choose your battles - ignore minor misbehaviours.
4. Give choices but limit the number.
5. Use and reinforce “rules” (e.g. keeping hands to self) immediately
before venturing into a community setting.
6. Prepare your child before an outing (e.g. crowded areas, in the car)
School-age child at home
1. Include homework/study time as a part of the family routine in a
venue free from distraction.
2. Check your child’s school schedule every day and help him/her
organise the homework into doable portions.
3. Help your child use a system (e.g. labelled folders for each subject)
to get the homework back to school.
4. Plan brief breaks between the homework portions.
5. Use the activities your child enjoys as incentives for getting work
done (homework and chores).
6. Consider getting one to one help for your child’s schoolwork.
7. Help the child to be mindful of his/her deadlines.
8. Communicate with your child’s teacher about homework, grades,
and behaviour.
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
9. If your child is still struggling at school, consider working with the
school and special education unit for inclusive assistance in the
mainstream or in an integrated special education setting.
10. Invite peers one at a time to reduce stimulation and encourage
appropriate social behaviours.
Adapted: Ministry of Health Malaysia (MoH). Management of Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents. Kuala Lumpur: MoH;
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
SCHOOL-BASED INTERVENTION
The following are suggestions for implementation of school-based
intervention programme.
• Have consistent rules and expectations with predictable classroom
settings e.g. use visual schedules in class.
• Allow regular breaks and incorporate movement during the breaks.
• Place the child near the teacher and away from distractions (e.g.
windows and doors).
• Give short and simple instructions.
• Periodically check to see if the child stays focused.
• Teach the child time management and study skills (e.g. using timers).
• Reduce the need for the children to copy assignments from the board.
Instead use handouts and worksheets.
• Establish a daily communication method between school and home
regarding targeted behaviours and learning tasks (e.g. homework).
• Praise and reward performance and good behaviour (e.g. use reward
chart).
• Refrain from using verbal or physical punishments.
• Consider allowing computers or other digital devices to help the child in
the learning process.
• Establish “buddy system” in class to help the child adjust with
schoolwork and socialisation.
• Work with school and education department for special measures that
children with ADHD are eligible during tests and examination (e.g. extra
time, separate exam room, reminder from invigilator to stay on task,
etc).
Adapted: Ministry of Health Malaysia (MoH). Management of Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents. Kuala Lumpur: MoH;
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT OF ADHD
Methylphenidate
HCL 10 mg
Immediate-release
(IR) tablet
Children over six
years and
adolescents:
Initial 5 mg
1 - 2 times daily
Increase by 5 - 10 mg
daily at weekly intervals
3 - 5 hours
Headache, insomnia,
irritability, decreased
appetite, xerostomia,
nausea, increased
heart rate
It is advisable to have a meal
before taking the medication if
patient develops loss of appetite
as a side effect
Avoid dosing late in the day
because of risk of insomnia
Conversion from IR to LA:
Use equivalent total daily dose
administered once daily
Refer to product insert for porcine/
bovine origin of gelatine capsule
Total daily dose
60 mg/day
(in 2 to 3 divided doses),
not to exceed
2 mg/kg/day
Methylphenidate
HCL 18 mg, 27 mg*,
36 mg Extendedrelease (ER) tablet
Children over six
years and
adolescents:
18 mg once daily
Increase by 18 mg at
weekly intervals
Administer in the morning
with or without food
8 - 12 hours
Conversion from IR to ER:
• IR 5 mg 2 to 3 times daily: ER 18
mg once every morning
• IR 10 mg 2 to 3 times daily: ER 36
mg once every morning
• IR 15 mg 2 to 3 times daily: ER 54
mg once every morning
• IR 20 mg 2 to 3 times daily: ER 72
mg once every morning
Total 72 mg once daily
Methylphenidate
HCI 20 mg, 30 mg*,
40 mg Long-acting
(LA) capsule
Children over six
years and
adolescents:
20 mg once daily
May increase 10 mg daily
at weekly intervals
Administer in the morning
with or without food
For patients with
swallowing difficulties,
contents may be
sprinkled on soft food
6 - 8 hours
Total 60 mg/day
Drug
Minimum Dose Maximum Dose
Titration and Timing
Duration of
Action
Common Adverse
Effects
Comments
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
*not listed in MoH Medicines Formulary
Source:
1. Ministry of Health Medicines Formulary (Updated April 2019)(Available at https://www.pharmacy.gov.my/v2/sites/default/files/document-upload/fukkmbil.1.2019.pdf)
2. Wolters Kluwer Clinical Drug Information, Inc. UpToDate® [Mobile application software]
3. American Pharmacists Association. Drug Information Handbook with International Trade Names Index, 24th Edition. Lexi-Comp’s Inc. Houston, 2015
Atomoxetine HCl
10 mg, 18 mg,
25 mg, 40 mg,
60 mg capsule
Children over six
years and
adolescents:
≤70 kg: Initial
dose 0.5 mg/kg/
day once daily
Increase after minimum
of three days to
1.2 mg/kg/day
May administer as either
a single daily dose or two
evenly divided doses in
the morning and late
afternoon/early
evening
Up to 24 hours
Headache, insomnia,
drowsiness,
hyperhidrosis,
xerostomia, nausea,
decreased appetite,
abdominal pain,
vomiting, constipation
In adolescents:
erectile dysfunction,
ejaculatory
dysfunction,
dysmenorrhoea
Renal impairment:
No dosage adjustment necessary
Hepatic impairment:
Mild: No dosage adjustment
Moderate: Reduce to 50%
of normal dose
Severe: Reduce to 25% of
normal dose
1.4 mg/kg/day
or 100 mg,
whichever is less
Children over six
years and
Adolescents:
>70 kg: Initial
dose 40 mg once
daily
Increase after minimum
of three days to 80 mg/day
May administer as either
a single daily dose or two
evenly divided doses in
the morning and late
afternoon/early
evening
May increase to
100 mg/day in 2 - 4
additional weeks to achieve
optimal response
Take with or without food
Swallow capsules whole
Do not open capsules
100 mg/day
Drug
Minimum Dose Maximum Dose
Titration and Timing
Duration of
Action
Common Adverse
Effects
Comments
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
MANAGEMENT OF COMMON ADVERSE EFFECTS ASSOCIATED
WITH STIMULANT USE IN ADHD
Adapted:National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder: Diagnosis and Management (NG87). London, NICE,
2018
• Ask about appetite regularly
• Children ≤10 years old: measure weight every three months
after starting treatment
• Children >10 years old: measure weight at three and six
months after starting treatment and, every six months
thereafter or more often if concerns arise
• Advise taking medication either with or after food, rather than
before meals
• Take additional meals early in the morning or late in the evening
after medications effects have worn off
• Take a planned break from treatment (drug holiday)
• Change medication
• Measure height every six months in children and adolescents
• Consider drug holiday
• Monitor the behaviour response to medication
• If behaviour worsens, adjust medication and review diagnosis
• Review ADHD medication and stop any medication that might
be contributing to the seizures
• After investigation and if ADHD medication is unlikely to cause
the seizures, may cautiously reintroduce the medication or
consider non-stimulant medications
• Consider if the tics are related to the stimulant (tics naturally
wax and wane)
• Observe and if it worsens may consider non-stimulant
medications
• Monitor changes in sleep pattern (e.g. with a sleep diary)
• Adjust medication accordingly
• Monitor heart rate and blood pressure and, compare with the
normal range for age before and after each dose change and
every six months
• ECG is not indicated unless there is clinical indication
• If there is persistent tachycardia, reduce the dose and may
refer to paediatrician or physician
ADVERSE EFFECTS
MONITORING AND ADVICE
Decrease appetite and
weight loss
Linear growth impairment
Insomnia
Palpitation
(tachycardia)
Tics
Seizures
Worsening behaviour
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ADHD
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
ADHD-C
ADHD, combined type
ADHD-I
ADHD, inattentive type
ADHD-RS
ADHD Rating Scale
ADL
activities of daily living
ASD
autism spectrum disorder
ASQ
Abbreviated Symptom Questionnaire
ATX
atomoxetine
CBCL
Child Behaviour Checklist
CBCL-AP
Child Behaviour Checklist - Attention Problem
CBT
cognitive behavioural therapy
CD
conduct disorder
CI
confidence interval
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CQ(s)
clinical question(s)
CRS-R
Conners Rating Scale - Revised
DSM-5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
DSM-IV
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition
ECG
electrocardiogram
EEG
electroencephalogram
e.g.
example
ER
extended release
FFD
few foods diet
FMS
Family Medicine Specialist
HCl
hydrochloride
HDP
hypertensive disorder in pregnancy
HR
hazard ratio
ICD-10
10th Revision of the International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problem
IEP
Individualised Education Programme
IQ
intelligence quotient
IR
immediate release
kg
kilogramme
LA
long-acting
MBI
mindfulness-based intervention
MDD
major depressive disorder
mg
miligramme
MPH
methylphenidate
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NF
neurofeedback
NICE
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NOS
not otherwise specified
ODD
oppositional defiance disorder
OR
odds ratio
p
p-value
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RR
risk ratio
SDQ
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
SMD
standardised mean difference
TBI
traumatic brain injury
Management of Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children & Adolescents (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Dr. Toh Chin Lee, Senior Consultant Child and Adolescent
Psychiatrist on the development of the CPG
• Dr. Junainah Sabirin, Consultant Public Health Physician on the
development of the CPG
• Ms. Zamilah Mat Jusoh@Yusof on retrieval of evidence
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents (Second Edition)
was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
MALAYSIAN HEALTH TECHNOLOGY
ASSESSMENT SECTION
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia