2nd Edition
Clinical Practice Guidelines of
Stable
Coronary
Artery
Disease
2018
MOH/P/PAK/392.18(GU)
PUBLISHED BY:
National Heart Association of Malaysia
D-13A-06, Menara SUEZCAP 1, KL Gateway
No.2 Jalan Kerinchi, Gerbang Kerinchi Lestari
59200 Kuala Lumpur
eISBN 978-967-11794-3-7
COPYRIGHT
The owners of this publication are the National Heart Association of Malaysia
(NHAM) and the Academy of Medicine Malaysia. The content in this document may
be produced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a
copyright acknowledgement to the owners is included and the content is not
changed in any form or method, not sold and not used to promote or endorse any
product or service. In addition, the content is not to be used in any inappropriate or
misleading context.
© 2018 National Heart Association of Malaysia. All right reserved.
This guideline was developed to be a guide for best clinical practice, based on the
best available evidence at the time of development. Specific attempts were made to
use local data and publications to ensure local relevance. Adherence to this
guideline does not necessarily lead to the best clinical outcome in individual patient
care. Every health care provider is responsible for the management of his/her unique
patient based on the clinical presentation and management options available locally.
This guideline is issued in 2018 and will be reviewed in 2023 or earlier if important
new evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat:
Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Level 4, Block EI, Parcel E
Government Offices Complex
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.malaysiaheart.org
This is an update to the Clinical Procedure Guidelines of Management of Stable
Angina Pectoris published in 2010. This CPG supersedes the previous CPG.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
1
STATEMENT OF INTENT
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINE
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH
The previous clinical practice guidelines for the management
of stable angina were issued in 2010. Since then, there have
been advances in both diagnostic and therapeutic strategies in the
management of this progressive disease. Therefore, it is timely
for the publication of this CPG, with a title that is now evolved
from stable angina to that of stable coronary artery disease (SCAD).
Atherosclerosis is a systemic vascular disease, but it is in the
coronary arteries where this progressive disease exerts its
most serious effects which can significantly affect morbidity
and mortality.
Clinical manifestation of SCAD, by means of stable angina, has long been the point
whereby an individual begins to seek medical attention. However, the combination of
earlier screening by an increasingly greater number of the general population at risk of
coronary artery disease has seen more patients being diagnosed with the subclinical
SCAD. The high prevalence of risk factors of cardiovascular disease in Malaysia,
including diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidaemia and smoking, and the emergence of
better diagnostic equipment have both contributed to this effect.
In both subclinical and clinically evident SCAD, there are now new drugs and non-drug
interventions available, which are now more readily available compared to when this
last CPG was published. In addition, new clinical evidence have emerged on these
new therapies. In this respect, the publication of this CPG, which reviews published
research on these new therapies and strategies, is timely.
The management of SCAD has to be tailored carefully to an individual, as the right
therapeutic strategies often improves symptoms. This CPG reviews most available
treatment options in Malaysia and makes recommendations on strategies that can
improve both the patients’ clinical outcomes and quality of life.
Finally, I would like to thank Dr Jeyamalar Rajadurai and the multidisciplinary team on
the expert panel who have worked hard to put this CPG together, as well as the
external reviewers of this CPG. I believe this CPG will be a relevant document for
every practicing healthcare professional who manages patients with SCAD.
Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah
Director General of Health Malaysia
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Chairperson:
Dr Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Consultant Cardiologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor
Secretary:
Dr Robaayah Zambahari
Senior Consultant Cardiologist
Institut Jantung Negara, KL
Expert Panel Members (in alphabetical order):
Dr Alan Fong
Consultant Cardiologist
Sarawak General Hospital
Dr Effarezan Abd Rahman
Consultant Cardiologist
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM)
Dr K Sree Raman
Senior Consultant Physician
Perdana University
Dr Narul Aida Salleh
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur
Ms Nirmala Jagan
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr Ong Mei Lin
Consultant Cardiologist
Gleneagles Penang
Dr Rahal Yusoff
Consultant Physician & Non-invasive Cardiologist
Columbia Asia Group Hospitals Klang, Selangor
Dr Tey Yee Sin
Consultant Physician
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar, Seremban
Dr Wan Azman Wan Ahmad
Professor and Head of Cardiology Laboratory Unit
Universiti Malaya Medical Centre
MEMBERS OF THE EXPERT PANEL
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Datuk Dr Abdul Kahar Abdul Ghapar
Dato’ Dr Amin Ariff Nuruddin
Head of Department and National Head of Cardiology,
Head of Cardiology Department,
Hospital Serdang
Institut Jantung Negara, Kuala Lumpur
Dr Azani Mohamed Daud
Dr Feisul Idzwan Mustapha
Consultant Cardiologist,
Public Health Physician,
Gleneagles Kuala Lumpur
Non-Communicable Disease Section,
Disease Control Division, Ministry Of Health
Dr Lee Fatt Soon
Dr Letchuman Ramanathan
Head of Medical Department,
National Head Medicine,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Hospital Taiping
Dr Mastura Ismail
Ms Sahimi Mohamed
Family Medicine Specialist,
Head of Inpatient Pharmacy Unit,
Klinik Kesihatan Ampangan, Seremban
Pharmacy Department,
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan, Kuantan
Dato’ Dr Venugopal Balchand
Dr Zaid Chelvaraj
Cardiothoracic Surgeon,
General Practitioner,
Pantai Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Catterall, Khoo, Raja Malek & Partners Clinic
Prof Dato’ Dr Zulkarnai Yusof
Head of Medicine and Cardiology Department,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
MEMBERS OF THE EXPERT PANEL
3
CONTENTS
5
ABBREVIATION
7
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
10
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION AND LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
15
SUMMARY
16
1.
INTRODUCTION
26
2.
CLINICAL SPECTRUM OF STABLE CAD
27
2.1
Chest pain
27
2.2
Dyspnoea / LV dysfunction
28
2.3
Palpitations/near syncope/syncope
28
3.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
29
4.
NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSIS OF STABLE CAD
31
5.
DIAGNOSIS OF CAD-BASIC ASSESSMENT
32
5.1
Clinical Assessment
33
5.2
Biochemistry
35
5.3
Resting ECG
36
5.4
Echocardiography (at rest)
36
5.5
Chest radiography
37
6.
OTHER NON-INVASIVE INVESTIGATIONS FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF CAD
38
6.1
Principles of diagnostic testing
38
6.2
Functional Tests for Myocardial ischemia in the Diagnosis of CAD
41
6.2.1 Diagnostic Accuracy of Exercise stress ECG
41
6.2.2 Stress testing in combination with imaging in the detection of myocardial
ischemia and diagnosis of CAD
46
6.3
Anatomical testing in the Diagnosis of CAD
49
6.3.1 Coronary Calcium Score (CAC)
49
6.3.2 Diagnostic Accuracy of Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA)
50
6.3.3 Diagnostic Accuracy of Invasive Coronary Angiography (ICA)
51
7.
RISK STRATIFICATION IN STABLE CAD
53
7.1
Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Clinical Evaluation
54
7.2
Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Resting ECG
55
7.3
Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Left Ventricular Function
55
7.4
Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Non-invasive Testing
55
CONTENTS
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
7.5
Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Anatomic testing
56
7.5.1 Coronary Calcium (CAC) Score
56
7.5.2 Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA)
57
7.5.3 Risk Stratification by Invasive Coronary Angiography (ICA)
58
7.5.4 Risk assessment by Physiological Assessment of the functional severity of
coronary lesions
58
7.6
Guidelines for referral to a tertiary cardiac center
60
8.
MANAGEMENT (Fig 2, pg 25)
62
8.1
Behavioural modification therapy (BMT)
63
8.1.1 Patient education
63
8.1.2 Diet
63
8.1.3 Physical activity
63
8.1.4 Smoking Cessation
67
8.1.5 Weight management
68
8.2
Pharmacological therapy
69
8.2.1 Prevention of future CV events
69
8.2.2 Management of symptoms - Anti-ischemic therapy (Fig 2, pg 25)
74
8.3
Myocardial revascularization
81
9.
CHRONIC REFRACTORY ANGINA
84
10. SPECIAL GROUPS
85
10.1 Diabetes
85
10.2 Women
86
10.2.1 Diagnosis of CAD in women
88
10.2.2 Management
89
10.3 Elderly
89
10.3.1 Diagnostic testing in the elderly
89
10.3.2 Management
90
10.4 Chronic Kidney Disease
90
10.4.1 Diagnostic testing in CKD
91
10.4.2 Management
91
11. FOLLOW-UP OF PATIENTS WITH STABLE CAD
93
12. PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENT FOR ELECTIVE NON-CARDIAC SURGERY
95
13. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
97
REFERENCES
98
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
123
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
123
SOURCES OF FUNDING
123
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
3-KAT
3-ketoacyl CoA Thiolase
ACEi
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitor
ACS
Acute Coronary Syndrome
AF
Atrial Fibrillation
AHA/ACC
American Heart Association/american College Of Cardiology
ARB
Angiotensin Receptor Blocker
ATP
Adenosine Triphosphate
BMI
Body Mass Index
BMT
Behavioural Modification Therapy
BP
Blood Pressure
CABG
Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery
CAD
Coronary Artery Disease
CAC
Coronary Calcium Score
CASS
Coronary Artery Surgery Study
CCB
Calcium Channel Blockers
CCS
Canadian Cardiovascular Society
CHF
Congestive Heart Failure
CHO
Carbohydrate
CKD
Chronic Kidney Disease
CMR
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CT
Computerised Tomographic
CTA
Computerised Tomographic Angiography
CV
Cardiovascular
CVD
Cardiovascular Disease
DAPT
Dual Antiplatelet Therapy
DASH
Dietary Approaches To Stop Hypertension
DHP
Dihydropyridine
DSE
Dobutamine Stress Echocardiogram
DTS
Duke Treadmill Score
ECG
Electrocardiogram
ED
Erectile Dysfunction
EECP
Enhanced External Counterpulsation
eGFR
Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate
ESC
European Society of Cardiology
ESMR
Extracorporeal Shockwave Myocardial Revascularisation
FFR
Fractional Flow Reserve
ABBREVIATIONS
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
GFR
Glomerular Filtration Rate
GTN
Glyceryl Trinitrate
HbA1c
Glycated Haemoglobin
HDL-C
High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
HIV
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HOCM
Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy
HR
Heart Rate
HRT
Hormone Replacement Therapy
ICA
Invasive Coronary Angiogram
iFR
Instantaneous Wave-Free Ratio
ISCHEMIA-CKD International Study Of Comparative Health Effectiveness With Medical And
Invasive Approaches-Chronic Kidney Disease
ISDN
Isosorbide Dinitrate
ISMN
Isosorbide Mononitrate
K(ATP)
Adenosine Triphosphate Sensitive Potassium
LAD
Left Anterior Descending
LBBB
Left Bundle Branch Block
LDL-C
Low Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
LV
Left Ventricle
LVEF
Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction
LVH
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
MET
Metabolic Equivalent
MI
Myocardial Infarction
MPI
Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MUFA
Monounsaturated Fatty Acid
NCVD
National Cardiovascular Disease Registry
NOAC
Newer Oral Anticoagulant
NSTEMI
Non-ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction
OMT
Optimal Medical Therapy
OSA
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
PA
Physical Activity
PCI
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
PDE5
Phosphodiesterase Type 5 Inhibitor
PET
Positron Emission Tomography
PTP
Pre-Test Probability
PUFA
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
ABBREVIATIONS
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
SCAD
Stable Coronary Artery Disease
SCD
Sudden Cardiac Death
SFA
Saturated Fatty Acid
SLE
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
SPECT
Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography
STEMI
ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction
TIA
Transient Ischemic Attack
TFA
Trans Fatty Acid
TMR
Transmyocardial Revascularization
UA
Unstable Angina
ABBREVIATIONS
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
Rationale:
Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) covers a wide spectrum from asymptomatic
individuals to patients with stable CAD, Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) and
Sudden Cardiac Death (SCD). This Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on Stable
CAD is directed at individuals:
• with stable chest pain or other symptoms (e.g. dyspnea) which are known or
suspected to be due to CAD.
• who had a previous episode of ACS but who are now stable and need regular
follow up and monitoring.
• post revascularization by Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery (CABG) or
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI) who are at present asymptomatic or
have stable symptoms due to CAD.
• who are asymptomatic but are suspected or known to have CAD on non-invasive
testing. This may occur in the absence or presence of ischemia and/or left
ventricular (LV) dysfunction.
This CPG on Stable CAD has been drawn up by a committee appointed by the
National Heart Association of Malaysia, Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Academy
of Medicine. It comprises cardiologists, endocrinologists, general and family
physicians and consultant internal medicine physicians and pharmacists from the
Public Health Division, government and private hospitals and the universities. This is
the 2nd edition of the CPG, the first being published in 2010.
Objectives:
The objectives of this CPG are to provide guidance on:
 the diagnosis of CAD in individuals presenting with stable chest symptoms.
 the risk stratification of individuals who are diagnosed with CAD. This helps
determine the need for revascularization guided by the patient’s preferences.
 optimal medical therapy (OMT) in all individuals with CAD.
 revascularization strategies.
Process:
A review of current medical literature on Stable CAD for the last 10 years was
performed. Literature search was carried out using the following electronic databases
- PubMed and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.The search was conducted
for the period January 2006 till 31st August 2016. The following MeSH terms or free
text terms were used either singly or in combination:
1“angina”, “stable angina”, “stable coronary artery disease”, “stable ischemic heart
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
disease”, “refractory angina”, “epidemiology of CAD”, “pathophysiology of CAD”,
“diagnostic testing of CAD”, “exercise stress ECG”, “stress echocardiogram”,
“magnetic perfusion imaging”, “cardiac magnetic resonance imaging”, “coronary
calcium score”, “CT coronary angiogram”, “Invasive coronary angiogram”, “fractional
flow reserve”, “iFR”, “coronary revascularization”, “optimal medical therapy”,
“percutaneous coronary intervention in stable CAD”, “coronary artery bypass
grafting in Stable CAD”.
The search was filtered to clinical trials and reviews, involving humans and
published in the English language. The relevant articles were carefully selected from
this huge list. In addition, the reference lists of all relevant articles retrieved were
searched to identify further studies. Local CPGs were also studied. Experts in the
field were also contacted to obtain further information. International guidelines
mainly that from the American Heart Association/ American College of Cardiology
(AHA/ACC) and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) were used as main
references.
All literature retrieved were appraised by members of the Expert Panel and all
statements and recommendations made were collectively agreed by the group. The
grading of evidence and the level of recommendation used in this CPG was adapted
from the AHA/ACC and the ESC (pg 15).
After much discussion, the draft was then drawn up and submitted to the Technical
Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines, MOH Malaysia and key health
personnel in the major hospitals of the MOH and the private sector for review and
feedback.
Clinical Questions Addressed:
There were several topics and subtopics that were formulated using the patient,
intervention, comparison, outcome (PICO) method, addressing diagnosis, prognosis
and management of Stable CAD.
The topics and subtopics were as follows:
P: Population- Persons:
 who are asymptomatic with no previous history of CAD
 with chest pain suspected to be due to CAD
 with known CAD
 with diabetes
 with chronic kidney disease
 who are elderly
 women
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
I: Intervention:
For diagnosis and Prognosis:
 Resting electrocardiogram (ECG)
 Chest X-Ray
 2D echocardiogram
 Exercise stress ECG
 Stress echocardiogram
 Myocardial perfusion imaging(MPI)
 Cardiac Magnetic Resonance (CMR) Imaging
 Coronary Calcium (CAC) Score
 CT coronary angiogram
 Invasive coronary angiogram
 Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR) and iFR
For management:
 Optimal medical therapy - including diet, exercise
 Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
 Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG)
C: Comparison:
 Different diagnostic modalities
 Optimal medical therapy vs PCI vs CABG in Stable CAD
O: Outcome:
 Accuracy of the test in making a diagnosis of CAD - i.e. its validity, reliability
 Reduction in Cardiovascular (CV) Disease- CV Events, vascular mortality
 Reduction in All cause mortality
Type of Question- Involves:
 Diagnosis - Diagnosis of CAD
 Therapy - optimal medical therapy, PCI, CABG
 Harm - Increase in CV Event Rate, mortality
 Prognosis - Reduction in CV events and mortality
 Prevention of CV Disease
Type of Study:
 Systematic review and meta analysis
 Randomised Controlled Studies
 Cohort studies
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Thus, there were numerous clinical questions formulated.
E.g. of some of these Clinical Questions:
• What is the validity (sensitivity, specificity and predictive value) of an Exercise
ECG in an asymptomatic individual with no previous medical illness, in the
diagnosis of CAD?
• What is the validity (sensitivity, specificity and predictive value) of an Exercise
ECG in diagnosing CAD in an individual with chest pain suspected to be due
to CAD?
• What is the validity (sensitivity, specificity and predictive value) of an Exercise
ECG when compared to a stress echocardiogram in diagnosing CAD in an
individual with chest pain suspected to be due to CAD?
• What is the prognostic value of an abnormal Exercise ECG in an individual
with chest pain suspected to be due to CAD?
• In an individual with known stable CAD, does optimal medical therapy as
compared to PCI, lead to a reduction in CV events and all cause mortality?
Target Group:
These guidelines are directed at all healthcare providers - all medical practitioners,
and allied health personnel.
Target Population:
These guidelines are directed at individuals with stable CAD.
Period of Validity of the Guidelines:
These guidelines need to be revised at least every 5 years to keep abreast with new
developments and knowledge.
Implementation of the Guidelines:
The implementation of the recommendations of a CPG is part of good clinical
governance. To ensure successful implementation of this CPG we suggest:
• Continuous medical education and training of healthcare providers on diagnosis
and management of Stable CAD. This can be done by road shows, electronic
media, and in-house training sessions.
• Performance measures that include:
 Percentage of patients with Stable CAD on optimal medical therapy with
aspirin (or clopidogrel or ticlid if aspirin intolerance) and statin therapy?
Applicability of the Guidelines and Resource Implications:
This guideline was developed taking into consideration our local health resources.
Almost all the investigations and most of the medications recommended are
available in public hospitals or at the cardiac centres in Malaysia.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
This guideline aims to educate health care professionals on strategies to optimize
existing resources in the diagnosis and management of stable CAD.
Facilitators and Barriers:
The main barrier for the successful implementation of this CPG is the lack of
knowledge of the public and healthcare providers on the:
• role/limitations of the available non-invasive investigations in the diagnosis and
risk stratification of individuals with CAD.
• benefits of optimal medical therapy in the management of persons with stable
CAD.
• role/limitations of PCI in the management of individuals with stable CAD-the
fallacies of the “oculostenotic reflex”.
• “commercialization” of the medical industry in promoting expensive and
sometimes unnecessary investigations and PCIs.
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
A
Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or meta analyses.
B
Data derived from a single randomized clinical trial or large non
randomized studies.
C
Only consensus of opinions of experts, case studies or standard of care.
15
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION AND LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
I
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that a
given procedure/therapy is beneficial, useful and/or effective.
II
Conditions for which there is conflicting evidence and/or divergence of
opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of a proce dure/therapy.
II-a
Weight of evidence/opinion is in favour of its usefulness/efficacy.
II-b
Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion.
III
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that a
procedure/therapy is not useful/effective and in some cases may be
harmful.
Adapted from the American College of Cardiology Foundation / American Heart Association and the European
Society of Cardiology
(Available at: http://assets.cardiosource.com/Methodology_Manual_for_ACC_AHA_Writing-_Committees and
at http://www.escardio.org/guidelines-surveys/escguidelines/about/Pages
/rules-writing.aspx).
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
• Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) covers a wide spectrum - from persons who are
asymptomatic to those presenting with acute coronary syndromes (ACS) and
sudden cardiac death (SCD).
• Stable CAD includes individuals:
 with stable chest pain or other symptoms (e.g. dyspnoea) which are known to
be due to CAD.
 who had a previous episode of ACS but who are now stable.
 post revascularization (by CABG or PCI).
 who are asymptomatic but are known to have CAD on non-invasive testing.
This may occur in the absence or presence of ischemia and/or Left Ventricular
(LV) dysfunction.
• Stable CAD may present as:
 Chest pain
 Dyspnea
 Palpitations, near syncope and syncope.
• In Stable CAD, angina is due to myocardial ischemia resulting from a transient
and reversible imbalance (mismatch) between myocardial oxygen demand and
supply. In contrast, in an ACS, the thrombotic component of the ruptured plaque
dominates the overall pathophysiological process and clinical picture.
In the DIAGNOSIS of CAD in patients presenting with stable chest symptoms
(Fig 1, pg 23)
• A detailed history and physical examination are of paramount importance.
• Clinical investigations are necessary for:
 detection of myocardial ischemia and/or
 confirmation of the diagnosis and/or
 prognostication.
• Exercise stress ECG is the non-invasive test of choice in patients who can
exercise and have interpretable ECGs.
• Stress imaging tests are useful in individuals who have intermediate Pre-test
probability (PTP) of CAD (Table 1, pg 22) and who:
 are unable to exercise adequately and/or
 have uninterpretable resting ECG and/or
 have exercise stress ECG with equivocal results or which are abnormal at
moderate to high workloads.
• Coronary Calcium (CAC) Score - This is more important in risk stratification than
in the diagnosis of CAD.
SUMMARY
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
• Computerised Tomographic Coronary Angiogram (CTA) - may be considered
in individuals with low to intermediate risk PTP of CAD and who have mild or
equivocal changes of ischemia in the exercise stress test or stress imaging tests
and who are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic with good exercise capacity.
• Invasive Coronary Angiogram (ICA) - This is not commonly used for the
diagnosis of CAD. It is important in risk stratification and in determining the optimal
mode of revascularization.
The RISK STRATIFICATION of patients with CAD who have stable symptoms of at
least 2 months duration involves:
• Clinical evaluation
• Resting ECG
• Assessment of LV function by echocardiography
• Non-invasive assessment for myocardial ischemia - (Table 2, pg 24)
• Where indicated, evaluation of coronary anatomy and physiological assessment
of the significance of the coronary lesion by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR).
Risk may be defined as:
• high risk - annual mortality of >3%
• intermediate risk - annual mortality of 1-3%
• low risk - annual mortality of <1%
In general, individuals with no ischemia demonstrated by non-invasive testing and/or
have no or minimal plaque in the coronary arteries by CTA have an excellent
prognosis with a rate of cardiovascular (CV) death/non-fatal Myocardial
Infarction(MI) of <0.5% and an annual mortality of <1%.
• Low risk individuals can be managed with risk factor reduction and/or anti
anginal medications as necessary. Revascularization has not been shown to
improve their long-term CV outcomes. Thus, no further intervention is required.
This includes individuals who are:
 asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic.
 have no demonstrable or minimal ischemia on non-invasive testing. (Table 2,
pg 24)
• Intermediate risk individuals may be managed with risk reduction strategies +/-
anti anginal therapy or considered for invasive coronary angiogram and
revascularization depending on the clinical condition, ischemic burden and patient
preferences.
• High risk individuals, in addition to risk reduction strategies, should be considered
for invasive coronary angiography with view to revascularization. This includes
individuals who:
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
 continue to have troubling angina/angina equivalents despite OMT.
 Have significant ischemia on non-invasive testing. (Table 2, pg 24)
All individuals with CAD who are at Intermediate and High Risk should be referred
to tertiary cardiology centers for further evaluation and revascularization as indicated.
Individuals at low risk can be managed both at the hospital and also in general
outpatient clinics with Family Medicine Specialists.
Following stabilization and revascularization, intermediate and high risk individuals
can be transferred back to the general outpatient clinics with Family Medicine
Specialists after a period of 1 - 2 years or at the discretion of the attending doctor.
Management (Fig 2, pg 25) should be multifaceted and involves OMT which
includes both behavioural modification therapy and pharmacological therapy.
• Behavioral modification therapy (BMT) - patient education and lifestyle modification.
• Pharmacological therapy - This aims at:
 Prevention of CV events.
 All patients should receive aspirin and a statin (+/- non-statin therapy) with
the aim of achieving a LDL-C <1.8 mmol/l - the lower the better.
 All CV risk factors should be treated to target.
 Patients with depressed LV function (LVEF <40%) should receive ACEi/ARB,
β-blockers and mineralocorticoid antagonists as tolerated. Angiotensin-
receptor-neprilysin inhibitors may also be considered.
 Relieving symptoms
 β-blockers and/or calcium channel blockers (CCBs) should be prescribed
as first-line treatment to reduce angina because they are widely available.
 Ivabradine, trimetazidine, long-acting nitrates and ranolazine are recommended
as add-on therapy in patients who remain symptomatic.
• Myocardial revascularization - OMT should be instituted prior to revascularization
procedures. The decision to revascularize will depend on:
 symptoms - presence of angina affecting quality of life.
 extent of ischemia as determined by non-invasive testing
 extent of coronary disease and where applicable physiological functional
testing using FFR. Individuals with:
 FFR <0.75 - benefit from revascularization as compared to OMT.
 FFR between >0.75 but <0.8 - have intermediate benefit with revascularization
and management should be based on clinical judgement.
 FFR >0.8 - do not benefit from revascularization.
• Wherever possible, a discussion with the patient and Heart Team should be
encouraged prior to revascularization to determine the best strategy - PCI or CABG.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
A) Diagnosis of CAD in persons having stable chest pain/angina equivalent
of more than 2 months’ duration
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1:
In making a diagnosis of CAD:
• A detailed history and a thorough physical examination are important.
• Relevant laboratory investigations to assess the general health status of the
individual and to look for co-morbidities.
• A resting ECG, preferably during an episode of chest pain/angina equivalent.
• An echocardiogram is not a routine investigation but is indicated in the:
 Presence of abnormal auscultatory findings and/or
 Presence of abnormal resting ECG and/or
 Assessment of LV function/regional wall motion abnormalities in patients
with shortness of breath and/or known CAD.
• A chest radiograph is not a routine investigation but may be helpful in assessing
cardiac size, pulmonary vasculature and excluding certain non-cardiac causes
of chest pain.
Recommendation 2:
In persons with suspected CAD and undergoing non-invasive cardiac testing, it is
important to determine the:
• Pre-Test Probability (PTP) of CAD of that individual. (Table 1, pg 22). In the
Euro model for assessing PTP, which this writing group has adopted,
(Table 1, pg 22) patients with a:
 low PTP of <15% can be assumed to have no significant obstructive CAD.
In these individuals, CV risk factors should be treated to target. Other
causes of chest pain should be looked for. (Table 5, pg 35)
 intermediate PTP (≥15-≤ 85%) require further non-invasive evaluation.
 high PTP >85% can be assumed to have significant obstructive CAD and
nvasive coronary angiography maybe a more appropriate investigation.
• Sensitivity and specificity of the different diagnostic modalities.
(Table 6, pg 39)
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
B) Risk Stratification of patients with suspected or known CAD
Recommendation 3:
In non-invasive cardiac testing: (Fig 1, pg 23)
• Exercise stress ECG is the non-invasive test of choice in patients who can
exercise and have interpretable ECGs.
• Stress imaging tests are used in individuals who have intermediate PTP of
CAD and who:
 are unable to exercise adequately and/or
 have uninterpretable resting ECG and/or
 have exercise stress ECG with equivocal results or which are abnormal at
moderate to high workloads depending upon the clinical condition.
• Coronary Calcium has been used to detect CAD but is more useful for CV
risk assessment.
• CTA may be considered in individuals with low to intermediate risk PTP of
CAD and who have mild or equivocal changes of ischemia in the exercise
stress test or stress imaging tests and who are asymptomatic or mildly
symptomatic with good exercise capacity.
• Invasive Coronary Angiogram (ICA) is rarely necessary in stable patients
with suspected CAD for the sole purpose of establishing the diagnosis of
CAD. It is indicated, following non-invasive risk stratification, to determine
the most appropriate mode of revascularization.
Recommendation 4:
• This is done by: (section 7, pg 53-61)
 Clinical evaluation
 Resting ECG
 Non-invasive assessment of myocardial ischaemia (Table 2, pg 24)
 Assessment of Left ventricular function
 Where indicated, evaluation of coronary anatomy and physiological assessment
of the significance of the coronary lesion by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR).
• Low risk individuals (annual mortality of <1%) should be managed with risk
factor reduction and/or anti anginal medications as necessary. No further
intervention is required.
• Intermediate risk individuals (annual mortality of 1-3%) may be managed with
risk reduction strategies +/- anti anginal therapy or considered for invasive
coronary angiogram and revascularization depending on the clinical condition
and patient preferences.
• High risk individuals (annual mortality of >3%) in addition to risk reduction
strategies, should be considered for invasive coronary angiography with view
to revascularization.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
21
C) Management of Stable CAD
Recommendation 5
• Low risk individuals can be managed in the general outpatient clinics with
Family Medicine Specialists.
• Intermediate and high risk individuals should be referred to tertiary cardiac
centers for further evaluation and revascularisation as indicated.
Recommendation 7:
• The decision to revascularize patients with stable CAD on OMT will depend on:
 Symptoms
 Extent of ischemia
 Extent of coronary disease and where applicable physiological functional
testing using FFR.
• Wherever possible, a discussion with the patient and Heart Team should be
encouraged prior to revascularization to determine the best strategy.
Recommendation 8:
• All patients with Stable CAD with no change in symptoms and medications
over a period of 1-2 years, can be discharged from the speciality cardiac
clinics.
• When there is a change in the patient’s clinical condition, they should be
referred to tertiary cardiac centres for optimization of management.
Recommendation 6:
• All patients should be on Optimal Medical Therapy (Behavioural modification
therapy and appropriate pharmacotherapy). (Fig 2, pg 25)
• Appropriate pharmacotherapy includes:
 aspirin (or clopidogrel/ticlopidine if aspirin intolerant) and
 statin (+/- non- statin therapy) with the aim of achieving LDL-C targets and
 at least 2 anti anginal agents.
• In addition:
 All CV risk factors should be treated to target.
 Patients with depressed LV function (LVEF <40%) should receive ACEi/ARB,
β-blockers and mineralocorticoid antagonists.
• Optimal medical therapy should be instituted prior to revascularization procedures.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Table 1: Pre-Test Probability (PTP) of CAD in patients with stable Chest Pain*
Red boxes: High PTP >85%; Yellow boxes: Intermediate PTP >15-<85%;
Green box: Low PTP <15%
*Adapted from Montalescot G, Sechtem U, Achenbach S, Andreotti F, Arden C et al. The Task
Force on the management of stable coronary artery disease of the European Society of
Cardiology. 2013 ESC guidelines on the management of stable coronary artery disease. Eur
Heart J 2013: 34, 2949-3003
Pre-test Probability of CAD
Age
Typical Angina
Atypical Angina
Non-anginal Pain
Men
Women
Men
Women
Men
Women
30-39
59
28
29
10
18
5
40-49
69
37
38
14
25
8
50-59
77
47
49
20
34
12
60-69
84
58
59
28
44
17
70-79
89
68
69
37
54
24
>80
93
76
78
47
65
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Figure 1: Algorithm for the investigation of individuals with stable chest
symptoms suspected to be due to CAD
*The choice of non-invasive tests will depend on the patient’s ability to exercise, ECG
interpretability, obesity and the presence of good echo windows and availability of local services
and expertise
**In individuals with typical symptoms and a high pre-test likelihood of CAD (PTP>85%),
an invasive coronary angiogram may be the initial investigation of choice (please refer to
Appropriate Use Criteria for Investigations and Revascularization in CAD 2015 (1st edition):
available at www.acadmed.org.my)
Symptomatic individuals with intermediate pre-test likelihood of CAD
(PTP >15% - < 85%)
Normal ECG,
Good exercise tolerance
Abnormal ECG,
Limited exercise tolerance
• Equivocal
• Positive at low
to moderate
workloads
• Negative but
PTP is high
(>65%)
Exercise stress test
*Exercise/ Dobutamine
Stress Echo or
*Myocardial perfusion
Imaging bySPECT or
*Cardiac Magnetic
Resonance Imaging or
*Calcium score and/or CT
coronary angiogram
Equivocal/Positive Test
Negative Test
Positive
At low work
loads
**Invasive Coronary
Angiogram
Risk Factor Reduction ±
Medical Therapy for
CAD
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Table 2: Prognostic indicators for Adverse CV outcomes on Non-Invasive
testing1–9
*Non- obstructive < 50% stenosis 8,9
24
Modality
Exercise Stress
Test based on
Duke Treadmill
Score (DTS)
(Table 7, pg 44)
Stress
Echocardiogram
Exercise MPI
(nuclear)
Stress CMR
CT coronary
Angiography
(CTA)
Definition of Risk
DTS: ≤ -11: High risk
DTS: +4 to -10: Moderate Risk
DTS: ≥ +5: Low risk
Low risk: No inducible ischemia
(negative test)
High Risk: inducible wall motion
abnormalities in ≥3 segments of the
standard LV model
No inducible ischemia (Negative test)
High risk: stress induced reversible
perfusion defect (≥10% of total LV
myocardium
No inducible ischemia (Negative test)
≥4 of 32 stress perfusion defects or ≥
3 dysfunctional dobutamine induced
segments
Absence of any plaque
Coronary plaque but without
stenosis*
Left main stenosis or proximal triple
vessel disease
Risk
Annual mortality >5%
Annual mortality 0.25-5%
Annual mortality <0.25%
Annual rate of CV death /MI
0.54%, annual mortality <1%
Annual rate of CV death/MI:
4.5% (range: 3.8% to 5.9%
/yr)
Annual rate of CV death/MI:
0.45% per year
Annual rate of CV death/MI:
4.9% (interquartile range:
3.7% to 5.3%/year)
The 3-year event-free
survival: 99.2%.
Annual risk of CAD death/
MI: ~5%
CV event rate is low - 0.24%
for CV death/non-fatal MI;
annual mortality: 0.28%.
Annual mortality rate is
higher but remains < 0.5%
HR for all-cause mortality:
3.70
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Figure 2: Management of Stable CAD
Symptom control
Prevention of CV events
Short-acting nitrate, e.g.
GTN
+
β-blocker and/or CCB
• Behavioural Modification Therapy
• Risk factor control
• Aspirin 75-150mg once daily
(Clopidogrel/Ticlopidine in
Aspirin intolerance)
• Lipid-lowering therapy to target
• Consider ACEi/ARB in the
presence of:
 Diabetes
 Hypertension
 LV dysfunction (LVEF<40%)
• Consider β-blocker for LV
dysfunction (LVEF<40%)
If symptoms persist,
consider:
• long-acting Nitrates
• trimetazidine
• ivabradine
• ranolazine
• nicorandil
If symptoms not
controlled or large
ischaemic burden
by non-invasive testing
Consider coronary
angiography with
view for
revascularization.
Management of Stable CAD
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
1.
INTRODUCTION
Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in
Malaysia.10-12 It has been the main cause of death in both gender for over a decade
although in recent years, the mortality trend has shown a small decrease.10-12 In most
Western countries however, mortality due to CAD has been on a significant
downward trend due to appropriate primary prevention strategies, improved
diagnosis and early treatment.13-15
CAD covers a wide spectrum - from persons who are asymptomatic to those
presenting with ACS and sudden cardiac death (SCD).
This CPG on Stable CAD is directed at individuals:
• with stable chest pain or other symptoms (e.g. dyspnoea) which are known or
suspected to be due to CAD.
• who had a previous episode of ACS but who are now stable and need regular
follow up and monitoring.
• post revascularization (by CABG or PCI) who are at present asymptomatic or
have stable symptoms due to CAD.
• who are asymptomatic but are suspected or known to have CAD on non-invasive
testing. This may occur in the absence or presence of ischemia and/or Left
Ventricular (LV) dysfunction.
It provides guidance on:
• diagnosis of CAD in individuals presenting with stable chest symptoms.
• risk stratification of individuals who are diagnosed with CAD. This helps
determine the need for revascularization guided by the patient’s preferences.
• optimal medical therapy in all individuals with CAD.
• revascularization strategies.
Individuals with CAD, even with minimal or absent symptoms, including those
post-revascularization, are at high risk for recurrent cardiovascular (CV) events.16-18
In a large multinational registry, the 4-year rate of CV death, MI or stroke in patients
with stable CAD but no previous ischemic events was 12.2% and in those with
previous ischemic events, it was 18.3%.19 Almost 20% of individuals continue to
have angina one year after their MI.20
In a more recent registry of patients with stable CAD who were enrolled 1-year post
ACS and managed in the contemporary era with optimal medical therapy, the
prognosis was much better.21
This CPG does not address individuals who do not have CAD but who are at risk for
CAD. This is covered in the CPG Primary and Secondary Prevention of CVD, 2017.22
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key Messages:
• CAD covers a wide spectrum – from individuals who are asymptomatic to
those presenting with ACS and SCD.
• Individuals with CAD, even with minimal or absent symptoms, including those
post-revascularization, are at high risk for recurrent CV events.
2.
CLINICAL SPECTRUM OF STABLE CAD
Stable CAD may present as:
• chest pain
• dyspnoea
• palpitations, near syncope and syncope
2.1 Chest pain
Stable CAD often manifests as chest pain. Occasionally the individual may be
asymptomatic or may have atypical symptoms e.g. pain in the jaw, shoulder or
epigastrium precipitated by stress - physical and/or emotional (angina equivalent).
Chest pain may be categorized into:
• Stable angina (typical/definite angina) - This is a clinical syndrome of retrosternal
chest discomfort with the following characteristics and fulfilling these 3
criteria:23–25 (Table 3, pg 29)
1. predictable and with possible radiation to jaw, shoulders, arms and/or back.
2. provoked by physical exertion and/or emotional stress.
3. relieved by rest and/or with glyceryl trinitrate (GTN).
• Atypical angina (probable) - chest pain or discomfort which meets 2 out of the
above 3 criteria.
• Non-anginal chest pain or discomfort - this meets one or none of the typical
angina criteria.
Chest pain is more likely to be due to CAD in the older individual, in males, in those
with a family history of premature CAD and in the presence of CV risk factors or a
previous cardiac event.
Chest pain may also occur at rest due to:
• coronary vasospasm (de novo or superimposed on a fixed stenosis) of an
epicardial vessel (variant/Printzmetal angina) and/or
• microvascular dysfunction.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
These individuals are managed as stable CAD.
Chest pain with the following features may be due to an ACS: (Section 5.1, pg 33-34)
• of recent onset (<2 months) and/or
• occurring at rest and/or
• associated with other features such as sweating and dyspnoea.
Management of these individuals are in the CPGs on ST Elevation Myocardial
Infarction (STEMI) and Unstable Angina/Non-ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction
(UA/NSTEMI).26,27
The prevalence of angina is dependent upon age and sex and is often under
estimated.24,28 The Health Survey for England (2006) reported that 3% of women and
8% of men aged 55 to 64 years have or had angina.25
In the United States, the prevalence of angina in adults ≥20 years was 3.4% and was
higher in the older age groups.29 Among individuals aged 55-64 years, the
prevalence was about 7% in both gender.29
In the Malaysian National Cardiovascular Disease Registry (NCVD) ACS 2014-15
report, 9.2% of patients admitted with ACS had a history of chronic angina.30 In this
registry, this was defined as onset of chest pain more than 2 weeks prior to
admission.30
2.2 Dyspnoea / LV dysfunction
Individuals with stable CAD may also present with dyspnoea. This may be due to
either:
• myocardial ischemia (angina equivalent) and/or
• LV dysfunction from a hibernating but viable myocardium or from previously
infarcted muscle (scar tissue).
2.3 Palpitations/near syncope/syncope
A less common presentation is palpitations due to arrhythmia. The presence of
syncope/near syncope may be due to:
• tachyarrhythmia - atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia
• bradyarrhythmia from drug therapy, conduction disturbances and/or co existing
sick sinus syndrome and/or
• hypotension from drug therapy particularly diuretic use.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key messages:
Stable CAD may present as:
• Chest pain- This may be categorized into:
 Stable angina (typical/definite angina) - This is a clinical syndrome of
retrosternal chest discomfort with the following characteristics and fulfilling
the 3 criteria listed in Table 3, pg 29:
 Atypical angina (probable) - chest pain or discomfort which meets 2 out of
the above 3 criteria.
 Non-anginal chest pain or discomfort - this meets one or none of the
typical angina criteria.
• Dyspnoea - This may be due to either:
 myocardial ischemia (angina equivalent) and/or
 LV dysfunction from a hibernating but viable myocardium or from previous
infarcted muscle (scar tissue).
• Palpitations, near syncope and syncope
Typical/definite angina - is retrosternal chest discomfort characterized by the
following 3 criteria:
1. predictable and with possible radiation to jaw, shoulders, arms and/or back.
2. provoked by physical exertion and/or emotional stress.
3. relieved by rest and/or with GTN.
Table 3: Definition of Typical/Definite Angina
3.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Angina is due to myocardial ischemia resulting from a transient and reversible
imbalance (mismatch) between myocardial oxygen demand and supply. This may
occur in the presence of a fixed stenosis or the result of a dynamic stenosis
(vasospasm) of the coronary arteries. In contrast, in an ACS, the thrombotic
component of the ruptured plaque dominates the overall pathophysiological process
and clinical picture.
Myocardial ischemia may also occur in the absence of chest pain or with atypical
symptoms (angina equivalent) such as dyspnoea, unexplained sweating, extreme
fatigue, or pain at a site other than the chest. This is more common in diabetics, the
elderly and in women.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Myocardial ischemia may occur in the presence of:31
• Atherosclerotic obstructive CAD (coronary lesions >50% luminal narrowing)
• Non-obstructive CAD (≥20% and <50% luminal narrowing). The prognosis of
these patients is worse if myocardial ischemia is documented.
• Normal coronary arteries (Cardiac Syndrome X) - (<20% luminal narrowing)
The commonest cause of myocardial ischemia is atherosclerotic plaque related
obstructive CAD. Generally, in stable CAD, a stenosis of ≥50% in the left main
coronary artery and ≥70% in one or several of the major epicardial coronary
arteries is necessary to cause myocardial ischemia. In an ACS, lesser degrees
of coronary stenosis may give rise to angina.
The pathophysiology of myocardial ischemia in patients with non-obstructive CAD
and normal coronaries is not clear. Postulated mechanisms include:
• coronary vasospasm
• microvascular dysfunction. About 50% of women with chest pain have evidence
of microvascular dysfunction,32-34 but only about 20% to 25% showed signs of
ischaemia33,35,36 There are no gender differences in the prevalence of coronary
microvascular dysfunction.37
• myocardial bridging - At autopsy, the incidence has been reported to be
between 40-80% although functional myocardial bridging is less common
(0.5% to 16.0% of cases).38,39 The left anterior descending coronary artery is
most commonly involved. These patients are generally asymptomatic but may
present with exertional angina, syncope, and even sudden death. Medical
therapy with β-blockers and CCBs remain the mainstay of treatment.38,39 If
medical therapy fails, surgery may be considered.39 Stent implantation may be
complicated by stent fracture, perforation, thrombosis and restenosis.39
• enhanced pain perception.40,41
Other common causes of myocardial ischemia include:
• hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
• aortic stenosis
• coronary vasculitis from connective tissue disease
• aortic aneurysms
• anaemia - this may be a precipitating cause for the angina
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key messages:
• Angina in Stable CAD is due to myocardial ischemia from a transient and
reversible imbalance (mismatch) between myocardial oxygen demand and
supply.
• It may occur in the presence of:
 Atherosclerotic obstructive CAD (coronary lesions >50% luminal narrowing)
 Non-obstructive CAD (≥20% and <50% luminal narrowing). The prognosis
of these patients is not benign. It is worse if myocardial ischemia is
documented.
 Normal coronary arteries (Cardiac Syndrome X) – (<20% luminal narrowing)
4.
NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSIS OF STABLE CAD
The natural history of Stable CAD is marked by episodes of sudden deterioration
due to plaque fissuring, ulceration or erosion with superimposed thrombosis
resulting in an acute decrease in myocardial oxygen supply and the clinical picture
of ACS. The episodes of chest pain become more frequent, occurring at rest or with
minimal exertion and with no obvious trigger. Accelerated chest pain may also occur
due to an episode of increased myocardial oxygen demand as in periods of emotional
or strenuous physical stress/exertion.
Earlier studies reported that the annual rate of MI in persons with stable angina was
3.0-3.5%.42,43 Generally, the annual mortality has been estimated to be in the range
of 1.2-2.4% per annum, cardiac death 0.6-1.4% per annum and non-fatal MI
0.6-2.7%.44
However, in a recent registry of patients with stable CAD managed in the contemporary
era and who had their ischemic events and/or revascularization 4 to 5 years earlier,
the incidence of MI occurred linearly at a rate of 0.8% per year and about a third of
these were STEMI.21 About 20% of the MIs in this registry were due to very late stent
thrombosis.21
Prognosis in any individual patient however, will depend on the nature and extent of
the underlying disease, the LV function, the age of the patient, the presence of CV
risk factors and other co-morbidities. In the registry study mentioned earlier, baseline
predictors of MI were: 21
 CV risk factors such as active smoking, poorly controlled diabetes and/or lipids,
 persistent angina and
 multivessel disease
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key messages:
• The natural history of Stable CAD is marked by episodes of sudden
deterioration due to plaque fissuring, ulceration or erosion with superimposed
thrombosis resulting in ACS.
• In patients with Stable CAD on OMT, the incidence of MI occurs at a rate
of 0.8% per year.
• Predictors of MI are CV risk factors such as active smoking, poorly controlled
diabetes and/or lipids, persistent angina and multivessel disease.
• The most important predictors of adverse CV outcomes are LV function
and the extent of myocardial ischemia (total ischemic burden).
Previous CABG was inversely associated with the risk of MI.21
The most important predictors of adverse CV outcomes are LV function and the
extent of myocardial ischemia (total ischemic burden).45–51 This is not necessarily
equivalent to the number of vessels diseased.
The association between angina and the combined CV end points of CV death, MI
or stroke is weak.52–54 Individuals with angina are, however, at increased risk for
heart failure, CV hospitalizations, coronary revascularization and death than
individuals without angina.52,55
In a large registry of outpatients with stable CAD, about half of CV events (CV deaths
and non-fatal MI) occurred in individuals without angina or ischemia.56 Unlike earlier
studies, in this large registry, patients with angina and myocardial ischemia fared
worse than those who only had silent ischemia.47,48,56
This highlights the importance of optimal medical therapy in all patients with CAD
irrespective of the presence of symptoms
5.
DIAGNOSIS OF CAD -BASIC ASSESSMENT
In the management of individuals with suspected or known CAD, the following need
to be performed concurrently:
• Establishing a diagnosis of stable CAD by clinical assessment and appropriate
investigations.
• Risk stratification and prognostication.
• Initiating Optimal Medical Therapy (OMT).
• Determining if the patient would benefit from revascularization.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
I, C
Clinical assessment and relevant investigations are necessary for:
• diagnosis and
• prognosis
5.1 Clinical Assessment
In making a diagnosis of stable angina, a detailed history and physical
examination are of paramount importance. Clinical investigations are
necessary for confirmation of the diagnosis, detection of myocardial ischemia
and for prognostication.
• History
 Detailed history of angina i.e. character of the pain, location, radiation
and severity (Table 3, pg 29)
 Character - heaviness, pressure, tightness, constricting or burning.
 Location - typically present in the retrosternal area but may also be felt
in the epigastrium with radiation to neck/jaw, shoulders, back and arm.
 Duration - not more than 20 min.
 Precipitating factors - exertion, heavy meal, emotional stress.
 Relieving factors - rapidly relieved by rest and/or GTN.
 Severity of chest pain can be graded according to the Canadian
Cardiovascular Society (CCS) Classification.57 (Table 4, pg 34)
 Presence of CV risk factors i.e. diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
dyslipidaemia, smoking, family history of premature CAD, (father, male
sibling or son <55 years of age or mother, female sibling or daughter
<65 years of age).
 Previous history of MI and coronary revascularization.
 Women and the elderly can present with atypical symptoms.
Angina of less than 2 months duration is classified as recent onset or
unstable angina (UA).58 In the presence of a good effort tolerance, normal
cardiac biomarkers and LV function and absence of ischemia at low to
moderate workloads, these individuals (low risk UA) can be managed as
stable CAD. All other individuals should be managed as in the Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) on UA/NSTEMI.26
• Physical examination
This involves:
 inspection of the general habitus of the patient, looking for signs of
anaemia, polycythaemia and stigmata of hyperlipidaemia.
 examination of the peripheral pulses.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Class
Severity of Exertional Stress Inducing
Limitation of Ordinary
Angina
Activity
I
Strenuous, rapid or prolonged exertion
None
at work or recreation
II
Walking or climbing stairs rapidly,
Slight
walking uphill, walking or stair climbing
after meals, or in cold, or in wind, or
under emotional stress, or only during the
few hours after awakening
III
Walking one or two blocks on the level*
Marked
and climbing one flight of stairs in normal
conditions and at a normal pace
IV
Inability to carry out any physical
Discomfort in all
activity without discomfort or symptoms
activity performed
may be present at rest
 measurement of the blood pressure.
 auscultation of the precordium for additional heart sounds and murmurs and the
carotid and renal arteries for bruit.
 excluding non-coronary causes of angina such as severe aortic stenosis,
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and hyperthyroidism.
If the history of chest pain is not suggestive of angina, then other causes should be
considered. (Table 5, pg 35)
Table 4: Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) Classification of Angina57
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Table 5: Other causes of non-ischaemic chest pain
5.2 Biochemistry
Relevant laboratory investigations are performed to assess the general
health status of the individual and to look for co-morbidities. These include:
• Full Blood Count
• Fasting glucose and/or A1c
• Lipid profile - fasting or non-fasting
• Renal profile - electrolyte, serum creatinine and/or glomerular filtration
rate (eGFR)
• Liver enzymes
I, C
I, C
I, C
I, C
IIa, C
System Involvement
Condition
Gastrointestinal system
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
Oesophageal spasm
Peptic Ulcer Disease
Gallstone disease
Pancreatitis
Respiratory system
Pleurisy
Pneumothorax
Pulmonary Embolism
Pneumonia
Neurology
Neuralgia
Psychiatry
Anxiety disorder
Psychosomatic disorder
Musculoskeletal
Costochondritis
Myalgia
Cardiovascular
Pericarditis
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
5.3 Resting ECG
All patients with chest pain/ angina equivalent should have a baseline resting
12-lead ECG performed.
Preferably, the ECG should be done during an episode of chest pain.
The resting 12 lead ECG:
• is usually normal - A normal resting ECG does not rule out CAD or
myocardial ischemia.
• may show evidence of CAD such as pathological Q waves, left bundle
branch block (LBBB), ST-T abnormalities.
• may help to identify other causes of chest discomfort such as pericardial
disease, dynamic ST-T changes of coronary vasospasm, hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM).
5.4 Echocardiography (at rest)
Echocardiography is not a routine investigation in individuals suspected
of having CAD. In most of these individuals, the study is normal. The
echocardiogram, however, provides valuable information on LV function
which is important in risk stratification.
It is indicated in the:
• Presence of abnormal auscultatory findings and/or
• Presence of abnormal resting ECG and/or
• Assessment of LV function/regional wall motion abnormalities in patients
with shortness of breath and/or known CAD.
It is a useful test to assess LV function in individuals with:
• hypertension and/or diabetes.
• chest pain suspected to be due to CAD
I, C
I, B
I, C
I, C
I, C
IIa, C
IIa, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key messages:
• In the management of individuals with suspected or known CAD, the following
need to be performed concurently:
 Establishing a diagnosis of stable CAD by clinical assessment and
appropriate investigations.
 Risk stratification and prognostication.
 Initiating Optimal Medical Therapy (OMT).
 Determining if the patient would benefit from revascularization.
• A detailed history and physical examination are of paramount importance in
making the diagnosis of Stable CAD.
• Clinical investigations are necessary for the confirmation of diagnosis,
detection of myocardial ischemia and for prognostication.
5.5 Chest radiography
The diagnostic yield of a chest radiograph in individuals with stable CAD is
low.
Where indicated, it may be helpful in assessing cardiac size, pulmonary
vasculature and excluding certain non-cardiac causes of chest pain.
It is not a routine investigation in individuals with suspected or known stable
CAD.
IIa, C
IIb, C
Recommendation 1:
In making a diagnosis of CAD:
• A detailed history and a thorough physical examination are important.
• Relevant laboratory investigations to assess the general health status of
the individual and to look for co-morbidities.
• A resting ECG, preferably during an episode of chest pain/angina equivalent
• An echocardiogram is not a routine investigation but is indicated in the:

Presence of abnormal auscultatory findings and/or

Presence of abnormal resting ECG and/or

Assessment of LV function/regional wall motion abnormalities in
patients with shortness of breath and/or known CAD.
• A chest radiograph is not a routine investigation but may be helpful in
assessing cardiac size, pulmonary vasculature and excluding certain
non-cardiac causes of chest pain.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
6.
OTHER NON-INVASIVE INVESTIGATIONS FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF CAD
6.1 Principles of diagnostic testing
Additional non-invasive investigations help in the diagnosis of CAD and its
prognostication. Important considerations are availability of resources, costs
and the potential harm of any procedure including avoiding, wherever
possible, false positive or false negative results. A false positive result can
result in unnecessary, expensive further downstream investigations and
anxiety while a false negative result can result in a missed diagnosis and
opportunity for appropriate treatment.
In addition to a resting ECG, chest radiograph and echocardiogram, other
non-invasive tests may be:
• Functional - for myocardial ischemia or
• Anatomical - for visualization of the epicardial coronary arteries
In symptomatic patients with suspected CAD, functional testing as
compared to an initial strategy of anatomical testing with CTA did not result in
an improvement in clinical outcomes.59 A meta-analysis found a small
decrease in the incidence of MI but no improvement in mortality or cardiac
death at the cost of greater downstream invasive procedures.60 CTA, however,
provided better prognostic information than functional testing by identifying
patients at risk due to non-obstructive CAD.61
In patients with known CAD presenting with atypical symptoms, a functional
test for myocardial ischemia is a more appropriate initial investigation.
The interpretation of these diagnostic investigations will depend on:
• the pre-test probability (PTP) i.e. the likelihood of CAD in that patient.
The PTP can be estimated using different models based on the patient’s
age, sex and clinical history of chest pain.28,44,62–64
• the diagnostic accuracy of the test which is represented by its sensitivity
and specificity. (Table 6, pg 39) Sensitivity is the frequency of a true
positive while specificity is the frequency of a true negative. In addition,
the positive predictive value is the frequency that a patient with a positive
test does have CAD and the negative predictive value is the frequency
that a patient with a negative test truly does not have CAD. The predictive
value of a test is dependent on the prevalence of CAD in the population
being studied. As the prevalence of CAD in the population decreases,
the positive predictive value declines and the negative predictive value
increases.
I, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Diagnostic testing is most valuable when the pre-test probability of CAD is intermediate.
The precise definition of intermediate probability (i.e. between 15% and 85%) is
somewhat arbitrary. An accurate model to assess PTP of CAD ensures to some
extent, the most appropriate test for the patient at that level of risk.
In patients presenting with stable chest pain of more than two months duration and
suspected to be due to CAD, the writing group had adapted the Euro model for
assessing the PTP and the cut offs proposed by the ESC.44 (Table 1, pg 22) This
model has however not been validated in the local population.
Patients with a:
• low PTP of <15% can be assumed to have no significant obstructive CAD. In
these individuals, the presence of CV risk factors should be determined, and
these treated to target. Other causes of chest pain should be looked for.
• intermediate PTP (≥15-≤85%) - require further non-invasive testing.
• high PTP >85% can be assumed to have significant obstructive CAD and
invasive coronary angiography maybe a more appropriate initial investigation.
In patients with intermediate PTP, the choice of non-invasive tests will depend on the
patient’s ability to exercise, ECG interpretability, obesity and the presence of good
echo windows and the local availability of services and expertise.
Table 6: Sensitivity and Specificity of the Various Non-Invasive Diagnostic
tests for CAD*
*Montalescot G, Sechtem U, Achenbach S, Andreotti F, Arden C et al. The Task Force on the management of
stable coronary artery disease of the European Society of Cardiology. 2013 ESC guidelines on the management
of stable coronary artery disease. European Heart Journal (2013) 34, 2949–3003
Diagnosis of CAD
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Exercise ECG
45 - 50
85 - 90
Exercise stress echocardiography
80 - 85
80 - 88
Exercise stress SPECT
73 - 92
63 - 87
Dobutamine stress echocardiography
79 - 83
82 - 86
Dobutamine stress MRI
79 - 88
81 - 91
Vasodilator stress echocardiography
72 - 79
92 - 95
Vasodilator stress SPECT
90 - 91
75 - 84
Vasodilator stress MRI
67 - 94
61 - 85
Coronary CTA
95 - 99
64 - 83
Vasodilator stress PET
81 - 97
74 - 91
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Recommendation 2:
In persons with suspected CAD and having stable chest pain/angina equivalent
of more than 2 months and undergoing non-invasive cardiac testing, it is
important to determine the:
• Pre-Test Probability (PTP) of CAD of that individual. (Table 1, pg 22) In the
Euro model for assessing PTP, (Table 1, pg 22) which this writing group has
adopted, patients with a:
 low PTP of <15% can be assumed to have no significant obstructive CAD.
In these individuals, CV risk factors should be treated to target. Other causes
of chest pain should be looked for.
 intermediate PTP (≥15-≤ 85%) require futher non-invasive evaluation
 high PTP >85% can be assumed to have significant obstructive CAD and
invasive coronary angiography maybe a more appropriate investigation.
• Sensitivity and specificity of the different diagnostic modalities. (Table 6, pg 39)
Key messages:
• In the diagnosis of CAD in patients presenting with stable chest pain, non-inva
sive tests may be:
 Functional – for myocardial ischemia or
 Anatomical – for visualization of the coronary arteries
 It is important to determine the:
 Pre-Test Probability (PTP) of CAD of that individual.
 Sensitivity and specificity of the different diagnostic modalities.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
I, A
6.2. Functional Tests for Myocardial ischemia in the Diagnosis of CAD
6.2.1 Diagnostic Accuracy of Exercise stress ECG
Exercise stress ECG is an important investigative tool in the diagnosis of
CAD and in risk stratification. The sensitivity and specificity vary from 70-77%
depending on the prevalence of CAD in the population being studied.28 It is
lower in females.
Despite its pitfalls, exercise stress ECG is a useful first line strategy in both
gender in the evaluation of individuals with chest pain.28,65-68 (Fig 1, pg 23)
This recommendation differs from that of the NICE guidelines where CTA is
recommended as a first line strategy in individuals with typical or atypical
angina or if clinical assessment indicates non anginal pains, but the resting
ECG is abnormal.24
Patient selection for exercise stress ECG is important. The individual should be:
• able to perform moderate physical activity (e.g. household chores,
gardening or recreational work, activities of daily living). In these instances,
exercise stress testing is superior to pharmacological stress because it
will allow correlation with the patient’s symptoms on exercise and the
assessment of functional capacity.
• without disabling comorbidities such as frailty, marked obesity, peripheral
arterial disease, chronic obstructive airways disease or orthopaedic
limitations.
Before ordering an exercise stress ECG, the following should be evaluated:
• The individual’s PTP of CAD (Table 1, pg 22, Section 6.1, pg 38-39) - The
most suitable candidates are those with an intermediate PTP of CAD.
• The resting ECG - An interpretable ECG should not have any resting ST
segment depression (>0.1mV), LBBB, LV hypertrophy with repolarization
abnormalities, pre-excitation, paced rhythm or digoxin effect.
If the exercise stress ECG is being done for diagnostic reasons, it is best to
stop all anti-anginal medications for at least 48 hours.
If it is being done for prognosis, then anti-anginal medications should be
continued.
A positive exercise stress ECG includes:
• horizontal or down-sloping ST segment depression of ≥1mm (at 60-80
ms after the J point) in two contiguous leads.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
• ST segment elevation of ≥1mm (at 60-80 ms after the J point) in leads
that do not have Q wave(s) - This is an important marker of a high grade
coronary stenosis and severe transmural ischemia.
• ST segment elevation in lead aVR, particularly if higher than lead V1, is
reflective of high risk CAD, including significant left main CAD, multivessel
disease or ostial/proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery
occlusion.69,70
• symptoms - chest pain or other ischemic equivalents.
The timing and magnitude of the ST segment changes/symptoms is an
important prognostic indicator. The ST segment changes may sometimes
only occur during recovery.
In addition to the ST segment changes, other important parameters that
enhance the interpretation and predictive value of the exercise stress ECG
include:
• Duke treadmill score - there is good correlation with mortality and the
extent of CAD.1,2 (Table 7, pg 44)
• Exercise capacity - metabolic equivalent (MET) or exercise duration.
(Fig 3, pg 45)
• Presence of ventricular arrhythmias.
• Heart rate and blood pressure response.
The Duke treadmill scoring system allows a method for risk stratification:1,2
• Low-risk - the predicted 4-year survival was 99%, annual mortality
0.25%. Thus, in this group, no further testing is required.
• High-risk - the predicted 4-year survival was 79%, annual mortality: 5%.
This group should be considered for invasive coronary angiography.
• Intermediate-risk - these patients require further evaluation using stress
imaging techniques and/ or CTA
The patient should be made to attain maximal symptom limited exercise
level.
Achieving 85% of age-predicted maximal heart rate might not indicate
sufficient stress.71 This should not be used as criteria to terminate an exercise
stress ECG. Should the patient have inadequate levels of stress, use of
pharmacological stress imaging may help in further evaluation.
I, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
In the diagnosis of chest pain:
A negative stress test does not necessarily indicate absence of obstructive
CAD.
If the exercise stress test is negative and there is:44
• intermediate to high probability of CAD (PTP >65%), the patient should
be referred for further evaluation
• low probability of CAD, (PTP 15-65%) appropriate risk reduction therapy
(lifestyle modification) should be advised. These individuals, even if
obstructive CAD is present, are generally at low risk and have a good
prognosis. Their long-term survival has not been shown to be improved
further by interventional strategies as compared to optimal medical
therapy (OMT).72–76
If the exercise stress test is positive:
• at low workloads, the patient should be referred for an invasive coronary
angiogram (ICA).
• at moderate to high workloads, depending on the clinical condition, the
patient may be:
 treated conservatively with OMT if the PTP is low
 referred for a non-invasive stress imaging test, C TA or ICA
If the exercise stress test is inconclusive or equivocal, depending on the
clinical condition, the patient may be referred for a non-invasive stress
imaging test or CTA.
Following the initiation of treatment, an exercise stress ECG may be repeated
to:
• assess the efficacy of OMT +/- revascularisation
• guide an exercise regime
• reassess the clinical condition if there is a change in symptoms
The benefits of routine periodic exercise stress testing in the asymptomatic
individual with stable CAD is unknown.
43
I, C
I, C
I, C
I, C
I, C
I, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Table 7: Duke Treadmill Score (DTS)*1,2
*Using standard Bruce protocol
**At 80msc after the J point
44
DTS
: Exercise Time - (5 x max ST) - (4 x Angina Index)
Exercise Time
: Treadmill exercise time (minutes) by Bruce protocol
Maximum ST
: Maximum net ST deviation (except aVR) (mm) **
Angina Index
: Treadmill angina index
1. No angina during exercise
2. Non-limiting angina
3. Exercise induced angina
DTS Risk
: Duke Treadmill Score
> +5: Low risk
+4 to -10: Moderate risk
< -11: High risk
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Figure 3: Nomogram of the percentage of Predicted Exercise
capacity for Age in asymptomatic Individuals
Adapted from:
Gulati M, Black HR, Shaw LJ, Arnsdorf MF, Merz NB et al. The Prognostic Value of a Nomogram for Exercise
Capacity in Women. N Engl J Med 2005; 353: 468-75
Morris CK, Myers J, Froelicher VF, Kawaguchi T, Ueshima K, Hideg A. Nomogram based on metabolic
equivalents and age for assessing aerobic exercise capacity in men. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993; 22: 175-182.
45
150
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
Women
50
40
30
20
10
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
Men
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Percentage of Predicted Exercise Capacity for Age
Age (yr)
MET
85
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
Figure 3. Nomogram of the Percentage of Predicted Exercise Capacity for Age in Asymptomatic Men and Women.
A line drawn from the patients’s age on the lefthand scale to the MET value of the righthand scale will cross the percentage line at
the point corresponding to the patients’s percentage of predicted exercise capacity for age. The nomogram for men was modiﬁed
from Morris et al.6
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
6.2.2 Stress testing in combination with imaging in the detection of myocardial
ischemia and diagnosis of CAD
Stress testing may be performed in combination with:
• echocardiography or
• Myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) via single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) or
• Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging
The stressor agent is either:
• an exercise treadmill or
• pharmacologic agents such as:
 dobutamine in the case of echocardiography and CMR imaging or
 vasodilators like adenosine and dipyridamole for MPI and CMR imaging
Stress imaging techniques have better diagnostic sensitivity and specificity
compared to exercise stress ECG because they identify ischemia prior to changes in
ECG and prior to onset of symptoms (the ischemic cascade).77,78 They can localize
the territory of ischemia and are also superior in the presence of myocardial scarring.
In a study in low risk women who had good exercise capacity, both exercise ECG
and stress MPI resulted in similar CV outcomes.65 An initial strategy of exercise ECG
was also more cost effective than an initial strategy of stress MPI.65,79
Stress echocardiogram, however, was found to be superior to exercise ECG as an
initial strategy for the prediction of CAD in individuals presenting with chest pain.80 It
was also found to be cost-beneficial.80
These imaging techniques have the advantage that they allow better localization of
ischemic areas especially in patients with prior MI, PCI or CABG. The diagnostic
performance of these modalities is almost similar and the preference to use one
imaging modality or the other depends on local expertise and availability.3,81
The choice of stress imaging technique will depend on:
• the patient - ability to exercise, obesity, lung problems which may affect image
quality.
• local resources and expertise.
Prior to performing the test, the following should be considered:
• the modality is performed and interpreted by adequately trained personnel.
• each modality of testing has its own inherent risk e.g. radiation, contrast
sensitivity, bodily injury and interpretation error which should be explained to
the patient.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
In the diagnosis of CAD, these modalities are used in individuals who have
intermediate PTP of CAD and who:
• are unable to exercise adequately or
• have exercise stress ECG with equivocal results or abnormal at moderate
to high workloads, or
• have un-interpretable ECG that makes interpretation of exercise stress
ECG test difficult.
In the presence of LBBB and ventricular paced rhythms, stress imaging
techniques are the non-invasive tests of choice although the diagnostic
accuracy in these situations, is reduced.82
In patients with multivessel disease, imaging tests especially Stress MPI can
sometimes underestimate the amount of myocardial ischemia. This is
because these tests are based on the principle of perfusion differences
between different myocardial territories and therefore require at least one
non-ischemic myocardial territory as a “normal” reference to be able to detect
inducible myocardial ischemia in another territory. If all 3 vessels are
significantly narrowed or there is a combination of left main and multivessel
CAD, uniform tracer uptake due to “balanced” ischemia may lead to a rather
homogeneous tracer uptake and result in a false negative result.83-85
6.2.2.1 Diagnostic Accuracy of Stress echocardiogram - exercise or
pharmacological stress (dobutamine)
This is one of the least expensive and most widely available stress imaging
techniques.
An exercise stress echocardiogram is more physiological than pharmacological
stress and is the stress of choice wherever possible.86,87
Pharmacological stress is preferred if the patient is unable to exercise or if
there are wall motion abnormalities seen at rest. The pharmacological stressor
most often used is dobutamine. The increase in cardiac workload seen with
dobutamine is less than that with exercise. The addition of atropine augments
the sensitivity of the dobutamine stress echocardiogram (DSE).86,88 With the
use of dobutamine, viability can also be assessed.89
The marker for ischemia in stress echocardiogram is absence of wall thickening
and inducible new or worsening wall motion abnormalities before, during and
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
after the stress.86,87 If severe, there is also a decrease in LV ejection fraction and LV
enlargement on stress.86,87 The presence of inducible wall motion abnormalities
implies significant limitation of blood flow at peak stress, and usually corresponds to
a functionally significant stenosis, although the anatomic severity and physiologic
consequences are poorly related.86
DSE has good sensitivity and specificity especially in the setting of multivessel
disease and previous MI.81,87,90-92 The interpretation is dependent on the adequacy of
stress. In the diagnosis of CAD, the sensitivity of DSE is reduced in the presence of
single vessel disease, small vessels and distal disease.86 It has greater use in
prognostication of CAD and for the prediction of myocardial viability.86,87,91,93
DSE has also a long learning curve and is relatively subjective relying on the human
eye for the accurate assessment of myocardial motion. With the usage of myocardial
contrast agents or microbubbles, endocardial border delineation is enhanced, and
image quality and diagnostic accuracy improved.94-96
6.2.2.2. Diagnostic Accuracy of Myocardial Perfusion Imaging (MPI) via
SPECT
MPI most commonly uses technetium-99m sestamibi as the radiotracer and SPECT
for imaging. Stress can be either by exercise or pharmacological agents -
adenosine, dipyridamole or dobutamine.
Ischemia is indicated by reduced radiotracer uptake during stress when compared
with the uptake at rest. Transient ischaemic dilatation and reduced post-stress LV
ejection fraction are important predictors of severe CAD.
SPECT detects a relative reduction in myocardial blood volume that occurs earlier
than wall thickening abnormality in the ischaemic cascade. Despite this, SPECT has
not been shown to be significantly superior to stress echocardiography in terms of
sensitivity and detecting the extent of CAD.97 This is due to the poorer spatial
resolution of SPECT (12mm) as compared to stress echocardiography (2mm).91
In the diagnosis of CAD, MPI with SPECT has good sensitivity and specificity.98 The
diagnostic image quality is affected in obese patients, as well as in women with large
breasts. The diagnostic accuracy is also reduced in the presence of LBBB and
ventricular pacing.82,99 Other disadvantages are the use of ionizing radiation and its
cost.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
6.2.2.3 Diagnostic Accuracy of Stress Cardiac Magnetic Resonance (CMR)
Stress CMR with the use of dobutamine can be used to look at regional wall motion
abnormalities similar to DSE and with a similar safety profile.100-102 In studies on
patients with high disease prevalence, stress CMR demonstrated overall good
sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of CAD.103-105 It is particularly useful in
patients where it is difficult to acquire good echocardiographic images due to poor
acoustic windows.
Perfusion CMR (with adenosine) also has good diagnostic accuracy as compared to
MPI (nuclear studies).101,105-107 It has also demonstrated good correlation with
Pressure wire (Fractional Flow Reserve) measurements.108
6.3. Anatomical testing in the Diagnosis of CAD
6.3.1 Coronary Calcium Score (CAC)
Calcium accumulates in coronary arteries in an age-related manner. Thus, all scores
must be adjusted for age, as well as for sex.109 The relationship of arterial calcification,
like that of angiographic coronary artery stenosis, to the probability of plaque rupture
is unknown. Vulnerable plaques are frequently present in the absence of calcification.109
Coronary calcium score has been used to detect CAD. Most studies demonstrated a
high sensitivity but a much lower specificity, and an overall predictive accuracy of ≈
70% in typical CAD patient populations.109 CAC was found not to be superior to other
non-invasive diagnostic modalities for the detection of CAD.109 In general, a negative
test (CAC =0):109
• makes the presence of atherosclerotic plaques, including unstable plaques,
very unlikely.
• is highly unlikely in the presence of significant luminal obstructive disease.
• occurs in most patients who have angiographically normal coronary arteries.
CAC score is more useful in CV risk assessment. (Section 7.5.1, pg 56)
In the emergency room, CAC may be used in the triage of patients with a negative
resting ECG and normal cardiac biomarkers. A CAC=0 has a high sensitivity and a
very high negative predictive value for CAD.110,111
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
6.3.2 Diagnostic Accuracy of Computed Tomography Angiography
(CTA)
CTA allows visualization of the coronary arteries non-invasively. It can also
determine the extent of coronary calcification, degree of luminal stenosis,
degree of luminal remodelling and plaque characteristics.
It is usually done as a 2-stage procedure. The first being the quantification of
coronary calcium (CAC) and the second is the CTA. The 64-slice detector is
the minimum machine requirement. It has a negative predictive value of
93-99%
and
sensitivity
and
specificity
of
90-94%
and
95-97%
respectively.112-120 It is most useful in the diagnostic assessment of individuals
with low or intermediate PTP of CAD.112–115
Careful patient selection and preparation is integral to obtaining good
images. These include:
• patients with adequate breath holding capabilities.
• absence of severe obesity.
• a favourable calcium score (<400 Agatston score) and distribution.
• presence of sinus rhythm (absence of ectopics).
• heart rate of less than 65 beats per minute.
A high coronary calcium score reduces the accuracy of the test.112 However,
per-segment calcification (circumferential extent of calcium - arc calcium) has
a stronger influence on diagnostic accuracy than the total calcium score.121
Coronary CTA interpretation is less reliable in the presence of coronary
stents of <3mm.122 In situations where the clinical presentation suggests
low-to-intermediate probability for restenosis and in the presence of larger
stents, coronary CTA may be a reasonable alternative to invasive
angiography to rule out significant in-stent restenosis.123
It is highly accurate in the assessment of coronary artery bypass grafts.124
The interpretation of native coronary vessels in post bypass patients is
however, more difficult.124
CTA may be considered in:
• individuals with low to intermediate PTP of CAD and who have mild or
equivocal changes of ischemia in the exercise stress test or stress
imaging tests and who are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic with
good exercise capacity.112–115
I, A
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
CTA should not be used as a screening test for CAD in the asymptomatic
individual.
Due to the low prevalence of disease in most individuals undergoing health
screening, there tends to be too many false-positive lesions. Also, many
minor lesions not causing ischemia may be found, potentially resulting in
unnecessary downstream invasive procedures and intervention.
6.3.3 Diagnostic Accuracy of Invasive Coronary Angiography (ICA)
Invasive Coronary angiography has been the “gold standard” for the
diagnosis of CAD. It can detect obstructive lesions with negative remodelling
accurately but unlike CTA, it may not be able to detect non-obstructive
lesions with positive remodelling where the lumen diameter may be
maintained.
ICA is rarely necessary in stable patients with suspected CAD for the sole
purpose of establishing the diagnosis of CAD. It is indicated, following
non-invasive risk stratification, to determine the most appropriate mode of
revascularization.
III, C
I, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key messages:
In the diagnosis of CAD in patients presenting with stable chest pain:
• Exercise stress ECG is the non-invasive test of choice in patients who can
exercise and have interpretable ECGs.
 If the exercise stress test is negative and there is:
 intermediate to high probability of CAD (PTP >65%), the patient should
be referred for further evaluation.
 low probability of CAD, (PTP 15-65%) appropriate risk reduction therapy
and treatment of CV risk factors to target should be advised. These
individuals, even if obstructive CAD is present, are generally at low risk
and have a good prognosis. Their long-term survival has not been shown
to be improved further by interventional strategies as compared to OMT.
 If the exercise stress test is positive at:
 low workloads, the patient should be referred for an invasive coronary
angiogram (ICA).
 moderate to high work loads, depending on the clinical condition, the
patient may be:
 treated conservatively with OMT.
 referred for a non-invasive stress imaging test, CTA or ICA.
• Stress imaging tests are used in individuals who have intermediate PTP of
CAD and who:
 are unable to exercise adequately and/or
 have uninterpretable resting ECG and/or
 have exercise stress ECG with equivocal results or which are abnormal at
moderate to high workloads depending upon the clinical condition.
• Coronary Calcium has been used to detect CAD but is more useful for CV risk
assessment.
• CTA:
 May be considered in individuals with low to intermediate risk PTP of CAD
and who have mild or equivocal changes of ischemia in the exercise stress
test or stress imaging tests and who are asymptomatic or mildly symptomat
ic with good exercise capacity.
 It should not be used as a screening tool for CAD in the asymptomatic
individual.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
7.
RISK STRATIFICATION IN STABLE CAD
The objectives of risk stratification in stable CAD are for:
• prognosis
• choosing the appropriate management strategy (e.g. revascularisation in high risk
groups)
Absolute levels of what constitutes high risk and low risk are not clearly defined for
those with stable CAD. There are several risk assessment scores for individuals with
stable CAD using different CV end points.1,2,64,125-128
The ESC guidelines define risk as:44
• high risk - annual mortality of >3%
• intermediate risk - annual mortality of 1-3%
• low risk - annual mortality of <1%
Recommendation 1:
In the diagnosis of CAD in patients having stable chest pain/angina equivalent:
• Exercise stress ECG is the non-invasive test of choice in patients who can
exercise and have interpretable ECGs.
• Stress imaging tests are used in individuals who have intermediate PTP of
CAD and who:
 are unable to exercise adequately and/or
 have uninterpretable resting ECG and/or
 have exercise stress ECG with equivocal results or which are abnormal at
moderate to high workloads depending upon the clinical condition.
• Coronary Calcium has been used to detect CAD but is more useful for CV risk
assessment.
• CTA:
 May be considered in individuals with low to intermediate risk PTP of CAD
and who have mild or equivocal changes of ischemia in the exercise stress
test or stress imaging tests and who are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic
with good exercise capacity.
• Invasive Coronary Angiogram (ICA)
• ICA is rarely necessary in stable patients with suspected CAD for the sole
purpose of establishing the diagnosis of CAD. It is indicated, following
non-invasive risk stratification, to determine the most appropriate mode of
revascularization.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Patients with stable CAD should be risk stratified using the following parameters:
• clinical evaluation
• resting ECG
• assessment of left ventricular function
• non-invasive assessment of myocardial ischemia
• where indicated, evaluation of coronary anatomy and physiological
assessment of the significance of the coronary lesion
7.1 Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Clinical Evaluation
Important predictors of adverse outcomes in patients with stable CAD
are:28,63,129–142
• increasing age
• prior MI
• symptoms and signs of CHF
• pattern of occurrence of angina (recent onset or progressive)
• severity of angina, particularly if unresponsive to therapy
• presence of atherosclerotic disease in other vascular beds - peripheral
vessels, cerebral and/or aorta
• presence of CV risk factors:
 Diabetes
 Hypertension
 Metabolic syndrome
 Current smoking
 Dyslipidaemia
 Family history of premature CAD
• co-existing medical conditions:
 Diabetes
 Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
• psychosocial factors
 Depression
 Poor social support
The above adverse clinical predictors especially the severity of angina help
modulate decisions made based on non-invasive tests of ischemia and
where indicated, physiological testing by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR).
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
7.2 Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Resting ECG
Resting ECG abnormalities can predict patients at greater risk of future CV
events
than
those
with
a
normal
ECG.
These
abnormalities
include:63,127,133,135,143-145
• evidence of prior MI
• LBBB
• left anterior hemiblock,
• Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
• second or third-degree AV block
• atrial fibrillation (AF)
7.3 Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Left Ventricular Function
LV function is the strongest predictor of survival. Patients with an LVEF of
<50 % are already at high risk of CV death (annual mortality rate of >3%)
without incorporating other risk factors.45,46,133,134,146,147
In the presence of a depressed LV function, it is important to determine if this
is due to infarcted (scar) tissue or viable but stunned ischemic myocardium.
This can be done by stress imaging techniques. In the presence of ischemic
but viable myocardium, coronary revascularisation can result in an
improvement in LV function and survival.148
7.4 Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Non-invasive Testing
Non-invasive tests provide useful information for prognostication. (Table 2,
pg 24) A negative test carries a good prognosis but the clinical evaluation
(e.g. age, ability to exercise, exercise duration, co-morbidity such as
diabetes, CKD etc) and LV function should also be considered when
assessing CV risk.
Small imaging sub studies have shown mixed results when looking at CV
outcomes in individuals with moderate to severe ischemia treated with
revascularization as compared to OMT.149–152 Two large clinical trials have not
shown any advantage of revascularization as compared to OMT in these
patients.76,153 In individuals with depressed LV function (LVEF ≤35%) CABG
did not reduce all-cause mortality but resulted in a reduction in CV mortality
and hospitalizations.154 The ISCHEMIA trial is a large randomized clinical trial
I, B
I, B
I, C
I, C
IIa, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
that is currently underway specifically addressing the role of revascularisation
versus OMT in patients with moderate to severe myocardial ischemia.155
In patients with unprotected Left Main stem stenosis of > 50%, revascularisation
by CABG has been shown to improve survival in the pivotal Coronary Artery
Surgery Study (CASS) Registry.156 In view of this “the benefit of surgery over
medical treatment in patients with significant LMS stenosis (greater than
50%) is little argued.” 157
7.5. Risk Stratification of Stable CAD by Anatomic testing
7.5.1 Coronary Calcium (CAC) Score
CAC scores help with CV risk stratification.158-163 (Table 8, pg 57) It guides risk
reduction strategy, OMT and the need for further evaluation.
CAC score alone was able to predict CHD risk independently of the
Framingham Risk Score.156,157 When used together with the traditional CV risk
factors, it had incremental value in CV risk prediction.164,165 There is a
significant correlation between CAC score and overall coronary artery
atherosclerotic plaque, with a high sensitivity >95% and a high negative
predictive value of >95%.109,166,167 The CAC score was found to be highly
predictive of CV risk in 4 ethnic groups - white, black, Hispanic, and
Chinese.168
Persons both asymptomatic and symptomatic, with a calcium score =0 have
a low CV event rate and an excellent long-term survival.167,169 However the
PTP of disease and the clinical setting should be considered when
interpreting the test result. In interpreting a CAC =0:170
• if the PTP of CAD is low (e.g. asymptomatic individuals), there is low risk
of CAD and a low risk of near-term coronary events.
• in older asymptomatic patients with risk factors, there is a moderate
increased risk of CV events.
• in persons with clinical signs and symptoms associated with an intermediate
to high risk of CAD, there is often associated myocardial ischemia on
provocative testing and a high risk of near-term coronary events.171
IIa, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
IIa, A
I, A
Calcium score
HR for incident
CV Risk
MI and CHD mortality
(Risk of death at 10 years)
0-100
1.0
Mild
101-400
2.4
Moderate
401-1000
5.1
High
>1000
7.6
Very High
*Based on a prospective study of subjects ≥55 years of age that began in 1990, mean age 71 years and
adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, hypertension, total cholesterol, HDL-Cholesterol, smoking, diabetes
and a family history of MI.
#Vliegenthart R, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Oei HH, van Dijck W, van Rooij FJ, Witteman JC. Coronary
calcification improves cardiovascular risk prediction in the elderly. Circulation. 2005:112:572-7.
Table 8: Coronary Calcium score and CV risk*#
7.5.2 Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA)
CTA may also be used for prognostication. There is a strong predictive value
for mortality and major CV events independent of traditional risk
factors.7-9,172-174
In assessing prognosis, in patients with:
• absence of any plaque the CV event rate is low - 0.24% for CV
death/non-fatal MI and an annual mortality of 0.28%.7,8
• coronary plaque but without stenosis, the mortality rate is higher but
remains below 0.5%.9
• left main stenosis or proximal triple vessel disease - the hazard ratio for
all-cause mortality is 3.70.7
Despite its’ excellent predictive value, in a randomized controlled trial
comparing functional testing with MPI using SPECT and CTA as initial
diagnostic strategies in patients with suspected CAD, there were no
differences in clinical outcomes.59
Due to the potential overestimation of obstructive coronary disease by CTA,
it may be advisable to perform additional testing for the presence of ischemia
prior to revascularization in the asymptomatic individual.175,176
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
7.5.3 Risk Stratification by Invasive Coronary Angiography (ICA)
ICA continues to be the “gold standard” in assessing coronary anatomy
although it has its limitations. It cannot detect vulnerable plaques which are in
most cases not severe (<50% stenosis) but have a rich lipid core.
Despite these limitations, the extent and site of coronary lesions provide good
prognostic indicators. The prognosis is worse if: 46,146,147
• the greater the number of vessels involved.
• there is left main stem stenosis of >50%.
• the proximal LAD is involved.
Recent large clinical trials did not however, show any improvement in clinical
outcomes in patients with significant stable CAD when an initial strategy of
coronary revascularization was compared to intensive OMT.76,153,154
In patients who have unprotected left main stem stenosis, CABG has been
shown to improve survival when compared to medical therapy in the large
CASS registry.156 Although this trial was performed before the era of current
intensive OMT, it is considered unethical to repeat it.
Coronary arteriography should NOT be performed in patients:
• with angina who refuse invasive diagnostic procedures.
• who prefer to avoid coronary revascularization either by PCI or CABG.
• who are not candidates for PCI or CABG.
• in whom PCI/CABG will not improve quality-of-life.
7.5.4 Risk assessment by Physiological Assessment of the functional
severity of coronary lesions
Coronary angiography is of limited value in defining the functional
significance of coronary stenosis. Yet the most important factor related to
outcome is the presence and extent of inducible ischemia.177 If a stenosis is
not flow-limiting, it will not cause angina and the prognosis without coronary
intervention is excellent, with a ‘hard’ event rate (cardiac death or non-fatal
MI) of <1% per year.175 This event rate was not reduced with PCI and
stenting.175
III, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
7.5.4.1 Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR)
The functional severity of coronary lesions visualized angiographically may
be assessed invasively, by measuring the intracoronary artery pressure or
Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR). FFR is more accurate than visual
assessment of the significance and severity of coronary lesions.176 Even in
the presence of angiographically insignificant stenosis, lesions with low FFR
showed significantly higher event rates than those with high FFR.178
FFR is presently considered as the ‘gold standard’ for invasive assessment
of the significance of coronary stenosis and is useful in decision making in the
need for coronary revascularization. This: 84
• takes into consideration collateral blood flow.
• takes into consideration the amount of viable myocardial mass.
• is independent of haemodynamic variations.
• has a high reproducibility.
FFR is indicated for all coronary artery stenosis of 50-90%, including left main
stenosis, side branch stenosis, tandem lesions and even in the setting of
non-culprit lesions in ACS.84,179-181 In patients with multivessel CAD, PCI
guided by FFR results in an improved outcome irrespective of available
non-invasive functional test results.182-184
FFR is calculated as the ratio of distal coronary pressure to aortic pressure
measured during maximal hyperaemia with either intracoronary or
intravenous infusion of adenosine. A normal value for FFR is 1.0 regardless
of the status of the microcirculation. In individuals on OMT with:84,179-184
• FFR >0.80 - have no improved outcomes with revascularisation.
• FFR between >0.75 but <0.8 - have intermediate benefit with
revascularisation and management should be based on clinical
judgement.
• FFR <0.75 - benefit from revascularisation.
Use of FFR accurately identifies which coronary lesions should be
revascularized and improves outcome.
It is recommended that in individuals with stable CAD, FFR be used to guide
revascularization of lesions of intermediate severity.182-185
At present, there are ongoing studies on the use of instantaneous wave-free
ratio (iFR), a pressure-derived index of stenosis severity that is not obtained
59
I, A
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
60
with the administration of a vasodilator such as adenosine.186-188 The cut-off
point is 0.89 when compared to 0.80 for FFR.186 The initial clinical trials
indicate that an iFR-guided revascularization strategy was non-inferior to an
FFR-guided revascularization strategy.187,188
FFR may also be assessed using CT. A recent meta-analysis showed that
FFRCT achieves a moderate diagnostic performance for non-invasive
identification of ischemic lesions in stable patients with suspected or known
CAD in comparison to invasive FFR measurement.189 This tool is not yet
widely available.
7.5.4.2 Intravascular Ultrasound / Optical Coherence Tomography
FFR provides physiological assessment of the severity of a coronary lesion,
while intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) and optical coherence tomography
(OCT) allow visual assessment of the lesion. IVUS makes use of the
minimum lumen area (MLA) as the marker for significance of coronary
stenosis. Overall, IVUS studies showed a relatively high negative predictive
value but a low positive predictive value for ischemia.190
Both IVUS and OCT should not be performed to determine the functional
significance of a coronary lesion before intervention.191 These are useful in
optimizing stent deployment and determining the size of the vessel
undergoing stent implantation.
7.6 Guidelines for referral to a tertiary cardiac center
Following risk stratification:
Low risk individuals should be managed with risk factor reduction and/or
anti anginal medications as necessary. No further intervention is required.
Intermediate risk individuals may be managed with risk reduction
strategies +/- anti anginal therapy or considered for invasive coronary
angiogram and revascularization depending on the clinical condition and
patient preferences.
IIa,B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
61
High risk individuals in addition to risk reduction strategies, should be considered
for invasive coronary angiography with view to revascularization.
Low risk individuals can be managed in the general outpatient clinics with Family
Medicine Specialists. Intermediate and high risk individuals should be referred to
tertiary cardiac centers for further evaluation and revascularisation as indicated.
Key messages:
• Risk may be defined as:
 high risk - annual mortality of >3%
 intermediate risk - annual mortality of 1-3%
 low risk - annual mortality of <1%
Recommendation 4:
• All patients with suspected or known CAD should be risk stratified.
• This is done by:
 Clinical evaluation
 Resting ECG
 Non-invasive assessment of myocardial ischaemia
 Assessment of Left ventricular function
 Where indicated, evaluation of coronary anatomy (non-invasively by CT or
by invasively) and physiological assessment of the significance of the
coronary lesion by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR)
• Low risk individuals (annual mortality <1%) should be managed with risk factor
reduction and/or anti anginal medications as necessary. No further intervention
is required.
• Intermediate risk individuals (annual mortality 1-3%) may be managed with risk
reduction strategies +/- anti anginal therapy or considered for invasive coronary
angiogram and revascularization depending on the clinical condition and
patient preferences.
• High risk individuals, (annual mortality >3%) in addition to risk reduction
strategies, should be considered for invasive coronary angiography with view
to revascularization.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
62
8.
MANAGEMENT (Fig 2, pg 25)
The treatment goals in stable CAD are to:
• alleviate symptoms and improve quality of life,
• reduce risk of adverse CV outcomes and improve survival and
• prevent progression of atherosclerotic disease.
Optimal Medical Therapy (OMT) is the cornerstone of management of
patients with both obstructive and non-obstructive CAD.72,76,153,154 It has been
shown
to
improve
prognosis,
reduce
symptoms
and
myocardial
ischemia.72,76,153,154
OMT involves:
• intensive lifestyle changes (healthy diet, regular physical activity,
smoking cessation and optimal management of risk factors and weight)
and
• pharmacotherapy which includes:
 anti-platelet agents and
 statins to achieve target LDL-C.
In addition, ACEi, β-blockers and anti-anginal medications may be necessary
to treat co-existing hypertension, LV dysfunction and/or angina.
The management of these patients with Stable CAD should be multifaceted
and include:
• behavioural modification therapy (BMT) - patient education and lifestyle
modification and
• pharmacological therapy and
• myocardial revascularization when indicated.
All patients should be educated on behavioural modification therapy and
receive OMT for survival benefit. Treatment of CV risk factors to target and
adherence to treatment recommendations should also be addressed.
I, A
Recommendation 5
• Low risk individuals can be managed in the general outpatient clinics with
Family Medicine Specialists.
• Intermediate and high risk individuals should be referred to tertiary cardiac
centers for further evaluation and revascularisation as indicated.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
63
8.1 Behavioural modification therapy (BMT)
8.1.1. Patient education
This should include:
• cause of angina and factors that can provoke symptoms.
• circumstances in which urgent medical attention should be sought, especially
if there is a sudden worsening in symptom frequency or severity.
• role and importance of behavioural modification.
• risk-benefit profile of pharmacological treatments.
• importance of adherence to treatment recommendations and OMT.
8.1.2 Diet
Dietary habits influence a variety of cardio-metabolic risk factors such as body
weight, cholesterol, blood pressure, glucose metabolism, oxidative stress and
inflammation.192,193 It is being increasingly recognized that instead of focussing on
specific nutrients, it is more important to look at specific foods and overall dietary
patterns.192,193 A Mediterranean diet significantly reduces CV events.194–200
The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet is associated with a
significant reduction in hypertension.201 A ‘high-fat/low-fibre’ and ‘high-sugar’ diet
showed a trend for an increased risk of CV events in older men aged 60-79 years.202
General recommendations should fit in with the local culture. Energy intake should
be adjusted to avoid overweight/obesity. (Table 9, pg 65) Refer to CPG Prevention
of Cardiovascular Disease 2017.22
8.1.3 Physical activity
Any amount of physical activity (PA) is better than none, as it can offer health
benefits.203 As secondary prevention in patients with stable CAD and post ACS,
regular PA confers significant mortality and morbidity benefits.204-208 Thus it should be
incorporated into daily activities.
PA is any bodily movement that substantially increases energy expenditure. This
includes: (Table 10, pg 66)
• leisure-time physical activities
• occupational activities
• commuting activities
• exercise: a subset of PA that is planned and structured, involving repetitive bodily
movement done with a goal to improve or maintain physical fitness.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
64
Aerobic exercise should be offered to patients with stable CAD, usually as
part of a structured cardiac rehabilitation program. This is a medically
supervised program consisting of exercise training, education on heart
healthy living and counselling to reduce stress. It helps patients return to an
active lifestyle and recover more quickly.
In addition, a cardiac rehabilitation program:
• helps the identification and management of comorbid conditions and
psychosocial disorder (anxiety and depression).209,210
• ensures patient adherence to medical and lifestyle therapies to achieve
cardiovascular (CVD) prevention goals.211
The recommended duration of PA in healthy adults regardless of age
is:22,212,213
• at least 150 minutes a week of moderate intensity or
• 75 minutes a week of vigorous intensity PA or an equivalent combination
Sedentary patients should be strongly encouraged to start light-intensity
exercise programmes after an adequate exercise-related risk stratification.214
In patients with significant CAD who are not candidates for revascularization,
exercise training may offer an alternative means of symptom alleviation and
improved prognosis.
All individuals should be encouraged to exercise. Any amount of PA is better
than none.203–208
Wherever possible, individuals should be referred to physiotherapists/
exercise physiologists for exercise prescription.
I, B
I, B
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
65
Table 9: Nutritional Recommendations
A
Recommended Nutrient Intake; Dietary Patterns
Grade of Recommendation
and Level of Evidence
Fat requirements
• 20-25 % with an upper safe limit of 30% of energy from fat
I,B
 7-10% saturated fatty acid (SFA)
I,B
 Substitute SFA with monounsaturated fatty acid
(MUFA) / polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA)
 PUFA/MUFA should represent the rest of the calorie intake
from fat
• <1 % trans fatty Acid (TFA)
I,A
 Minimise consumption of high fat processed meat
(sausages, corned meat, nuggets, salami, burger, pepperoni,
ham, serunding etc) and bakery products including cakes,
biscuits, frozen pizza, cookies, crackers, and hard
margarines and other spreads
 Reduce consumption of partially hydrogenated fats
Cholesterol rich foods/eggs
IIa,B
• No evidence for restriction.* However, it must be cautioned that
dietary cholesterol-rich foods such as beef and pork also carry
significant content of SFA which are known to increase TC and
LDL-C levels.
Protein
• 10-20 % of energy intake
I,B
Carbohydrate (CHO)
• 50-60 % of energy intake
 Encourage high fibre, complex CHO, wholegrains, fruits,
vegetables
I,B
 Limit intake of sugar to 5-10% of energy intake. This includes
sugar sweetened beverages, kuihs etc
I,A
# Malaysian Healthy Plate and Current Healthy Eating
Recommendation
• Increase plant-based foods such as nuts, legumes, beans,
fruits and vegetables. (taufu, tempe, ‘ulam’)
• Consume whole grain foods (oats, barley, bran, brown rice)
• Eat fish more often (oily/marine fishes - e.g. oily ‘kembong/
pelaling’, patin, keli, terubuk)
• Consume low-fat dairy products
• Consume less sweet foods (no added sugar, limit canned and
carbonated drinks, fruit juices and 3in1 beverages)
• Healthy oils (use blended oils, peanut oil, sunflower oil, olive oil,
canola oil and corn oil)
• Reduce intake of processed/salty foods.
I,B
B
Individual Dietary Pattern
• Dietary fibre of 20-30 g fibre per day (vegetables, fruits,
legumes and whole grain cereals are encouraged)
I,B
• Whole grain should form 50% of the total grain intake
I,B
• 5 servings of fruits and vegetables per day
I,B
• 30 gram unsalted nuts per day
IIa,B
• <10% of total energy intake from added sugar. This is equivalent
to 50 g (or around 12 level teaspoons) for an adult of healthy
body weight consuming approximately 2000 calories per day
I,A
• <5 g salt or 1 level teaspoon per day or (2000 mg sodium per day)
I,A
• Abstinence or not more than 1-2 standard servings of alcohol
intake per day.
IIa,B
*In individuals with Very High and High CV risk advise < 200mg cholesterol a day
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
66
Table 10: Classification of Physical Activity*
*Adapted from Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Hermann SD et al. The Compendium Of Physical Activities Tracking
Guide. Healthy Lifestyles Research Centre, College of Nursing & Health Innovation, Arizona State University.
Pa
Leisure Time &
Intensity
Sports
Low
• Walk with pet
• Push stroller
with child
• Bowling,
recreational
• Golf, recreational
• Slow ballroom
dancing
Moderate
• Vigorously
playing with
children
• Non-competitive
sports:
 Cricket
 Ping-pong
 Badminton
 Basketball
 Kayaking/
paddle boat
 Snorkelling
 Backpacking
High
• Rope skipping
• Marathon,
mountain biking
• Football, hockey,
martial arts, rugby,
rollerblading,
volleyball
• Track & field
Occupational
• Sweeping floor,
mopping,
vacuuming
• Washing car
• Doing laundry,
washing dishes,
cooking
• Childcare & elderly
care
• General plumbing
& light gardening
• Commercial
driving, moderate
machinery
operation
• Typing, desk job,
light office work
• Scrubbing
bathroom
• Carrying/ moving
boxes
• Using a hoe &
spade, mowing
lawn, shovelling
10-15 minutes
vigorously
• Moderate yard
work, using power
tools,
• Carrying load up
stairs
• Heavy carpentry/
farming
• Farming vigorously
• Fire fighting
• Commercial
fishing
• Factory work
Commuting
• Driving
automobile/ light
trucks
• Pushing
wheelchair on flat
surface
• Walking from
house to car/bus
to places/ worksite
• Cycling
• Walking and
carrying approx.
7kg load
• Walking uphill
• Using crutches
• Fast stair climbing
• Hiking cross
country
Exercises
Aerobic Exercise:
• Walking
(4.0-4.8 kmh)
• Yoga
• Stretching
• Pilates
• Rowing machine,
moderate pace
Resistance
training (moderate
effort):
• Circuit training
Aerobic Exercise:
• Fast walking
(5-8kmh)
• Combination of jog
& walk (< 10
minutes jogging)
• Stationary bicycle
• Elliptical machine
• Slow-moderate
swimming
• Water-based
aerobics
Resistance
training,
(vigorous effort)
• Weight training
Aerobic Exercise:
• Jog/ run > 8km/hr
• Vigorous
swimming or
calisthenics
• Stair-treadmill
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.1.4 Smoking Cessation
Smoking is an independent risk factor for CVD.215
It also interacts with other CV risk factors, such as glucose intolerance and
low serum levels of HDL-C in a multiplicative manner215–217 Examples:
 the presence of smoking alone is reported to double the level of risk, but
the simultaneous presence of another major risk factor is estimated to
quadruple the risk (2 × 2).215
 the presence of two other risk factors with smoking may result in approx
imately eight times the risk (2 × 2 × 2) of persons with no risk factors.215
Smoking is an important cause of plaque rupture leading to ACS.218 Data from
the NCVD-ACS Registry 2014-2015 showed that 37% of patients were
smokers.30 In the INTERHEART study, a dose response relationship was
demonstrated between the number of cigarettes smoked and MI, where
smokers who smoked >40 cig/day were found to have a 9-fold relative risk of
MI compared with non-smokers.219
Changing cigarette designs such as filtered, low-tar, and “light” variations,
have not reduced overall disease risk among smokers.215
Stopping smoking after an MI is the most effective prevention measure.215
There is significant reduction on morbidity within the first 6 months of quitting
and the risks of CVD almost equals the risk of never smokers after 10-15
years of cessation.215
Patients may be referred to the mQuit Services. Currently this smoking
cessation service is being implemented both in government and private
facilities including general practice clinics, private hospital and community
pharmacies. More information is available at www.jomquit.moh.gov.my
Non-smokers exposed to second-hand smoke increase their risk of developing:220
 CHD by 25-30%.
 stroke by 20-30%.
 lung cancer by 20-30%.
There is no safe level of exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke.220
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
68
E-cigarette aerosol (vaping) is harmful.221,222
 The use of products containing nicotine poses dangers to youth, pregnant
women, and foetuses.
 Nicotine exposure during adolescence can cause addiction and can
harm the developing adolescent brain.
The use of e-cigarettes and shisha are not recommended.221,222
8.1.5. Weight management
Both overweight and obesity are associated with an increased risk of death in
CAD.
Obesity increases the risk of:223–225
 all-cause mortality by about 20%.
 overall CV mortality by 50%.
 CHD mortality by about 50% in women and about 60% in men.
Every 5 kg/m² higher BMI, was associated, on the average, with a 30% higher
overall mortality and 40% increase for vascular mortality. 225 In morbid obesity
(BMI ≥40 kg/m²) CV mortality is increased by 200% to 300%.226 The presence
of sleep apnoea symptoms should be carefully assessed, especially in obese
patients. Sleep apnoea has been associated with an increase in CV mortality
and morbidity.227,228
Weight loss is a challenge and preventing weight regain after weight loss may
be even more difficult. Modest weight loss of between 5 to 10%, can reduce
blood pressure (BP), improve glycaemic control, lipid profile, and quality of
life.229
The goals of weight management are to achieve 5 to 10% weight loss 229-234
and to maintain this over a period of 1-2 years before attempting further
weight loss.
Methods of weight loss include dietary intervention, increased physical
activity, behavioural modifications (e.g. self-monitoring of eating habits),
pharmacological agents and bariatric surgery.
III, B
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Anti-obesity drugs that are available locally are:
 Sympathomimetic (Phentermine) - this drug should not be used
continuously for longer than 6 months at any one time.235,236
 Lipase Inhibitor - Orlistat.237-239
 Glucagon-like peptide 1 Receptor Agonist - Liraglutide.240
These drugs may be considered for overweight and obese people with: 22
 BMI >25.0 kg/m2 plus 2 CV risk factors or
 BMI ≥27.0 kg/m2 after failing to lose weight despite 6 months of lifestyle
modification
In patients with morbid obesity, bariatric surgery may be considered.22,241, 245
8.2. Pharmacological therapy
The aims of pharmacological therapy in patients with both obstructive and
non-obstructive CAD are to:
• prevent future CV events and
• relieve symptoms of angina and improve quality of life.
8.2.1. Prevention of future CV events
This is achieved by:
• reducing the progression and possibly causing regression of the
coronary atherosclerotic plaque,
• stabilizing the plaque and
• preventing thrombosis in the event of plaque rupture.
8.2.1.1. Antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants
A)
Antiplatelet agents
In patients with stable CAD, aspirin reduces the risk of non-fatal MI, non-fatal
stroke and vascular death by 22%.246-248
Aspirin monotherapy at a dosing of 75-150 mg daily remains the initial
antiplatelet agent of choice.246-248
IIa, B
IIa, B
I, A
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
In patients who cannot tolerate aspirin, alternatives include:
• Clopidogrel249
• Ticlopidine - its use is limited by the scarcity of evidence on cardiac outcomes
and the associated risk of blood dyscrasias.250
• Triflusal - Triflusal is an antiaggregant related to the salicylate group. A
review did not find any difference between trifusal and aspirin in secondary
prevention of stroke or MI.251
Ticagrelor and prasugrel as monotherapy have not been studied in patients
with stable CAD.
Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) has been shown to reduce all-cause
mortality, MI and stroke post ACS whether this is managed medically, by PCI
or surgically. The current recommendation is for DAPT for 12 months post
ACS.22,252,253
Following an ACS, the risk of a recurrent cardiac event remains high.17-19,254
This may be due to stent thrombosis (late, very late), in-stent restenosis
and/or de novo lesions.
The use of DAPT (aspirin + thienopyridine) beyond one year has been shown
to reduce additional ischemic events but the risk of bleeding is also
increased.255–257 Similarly, in an extended >one year study of patients post
ACS, the use of aspirin in combination with ticagrelor was also associated
with a reduction in ischemic events but at the cost of an increased risk of
bleeding.258
The use of DAPT beyond one year, in patients with stable CAD who have
undergone PCI and stenting, has to be individualized weighing the risk of a
recurrent ischemic event versus bleeding risks.22,253
In patients with high bleeding risk, the duration of DAPT post stenting can be
shortened.259,260
I, A
IIb, B
IIb, B
IIa, A
IIa, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
71
B) Newer Oral Anticoagulant (NOACs) / Anticoagulant therapy
(Table 11, pg 72)
In patients with Stable CAD, NOACs are indicated for:
• Non-valvular AF both paroxysmal and persistent depending on the
CHA2DS2-VASc score.22,261,262
• Valvular AF (excluding mechanical heart valves and rheumatic mitral
stenosis)263
In these patients, concomitant antiplatelet agents is not warranted.264
In patients with AF who have undergone PCI and stenting with drug eluting
stents, the use of NOACs with antiplatelet therapy is associated with a lower
risk of bleeding than the standard triple therapy (DAPT + warfarin).265 The
following regimens are recommended: 266,267
 Rivaroxaban 15mg daily (10mg if Creatinine clearance: 30 to 50ml per
minute) + clopidogrel 75mg daily (or ticagrelor at a dose of 90mg twice
daily or prasugrel at a dose of 10mg once daily)
 Rivaroxaban 2.5mg BD and DAPT - aspirin 75 to 100 mg per day +
clopidogrel 75mg once daily (or ticagrelor at a dose of 90mg twice daily
or prasugrel at a dose of 10mg once daily) - The duration of DAPT will
depend on the risk of stent thrombosis versus bleeding risk. This dose
of rivaroxaban is yet to be registered in Malaysia.
or,
 Dabigatran 110 or 150mg bid and clopidogrel 75mg daily or ticagrelor
90mg bid
In patients with CAD and non-valvular AF who have undergone PCI and
stenting, antiplatelet therapy may be discontinued after a year in stable
patients (and only maintained on NOAC as per guidelines).264,265
• Reduction of CV events
 The use of rivaroxaban 2.5mg twice daily in combination with aspirin
100mg daily in high risk stable CAD patients, significantly reduced the
risk of major CV events (the composite of CV death, stroke, or MI)
compared to aspirin alone but the risk of major bleeding was also
significantly higher.268
I, A
IIa, A
IIa, B
IIa, B
IIa, B
IIa, B
IIa, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
72
Warfarin is indicated in patients with Stable CAD for:
• Valvular and non-valvular AF both paroxysmal and persistent.22,261,262
• LV thrombus - In patients with stable CAD and depressed LV function and
a LV thrombus demonstrated for the first time by echocardiography, warfarin
for at least 6 months may be considered.
I, A
IIa, C
Valvular AF, paroxysmal and
persistent
LV thrombus
Non-valvular AF depending on
the CHA2DS2-VASc score
Non-valvular AF + PCI and
stenting with DES
Antiplatelet therapy may be
discontinued after a year in
stable patients and maintained
on warfarin or NOAC alone
Reduction of CV events
Warfarin
Maintain target INR.
At least for 6 months
Maintain target INR
Concomitant anti platelet
therapy not warranted.
Warfarin + DAPT **
Not indicated
NOAC
Not indicated at the present time
for rheumatic mitral stenosis
and mechanical heart valves
Not indicated at the present time
Indicated
Concomitant anti platelet
therapy not warranted.
Rivaroxaban 15mg daily (10mg
if Creatinine clearance: 30 to
50ml per minute) +
• clopidogrel 75mg daily or
• ticagrelor 90mg bid or
• prasugrel 10mg daily
OR
Rivaroxaban 2.5mg BD + DAPT
- aspirin 75-100mg per day +
• clopidogrel 75mg daily or
• ticagrelor 90mg bid or
• prasugrel 10mg daily
OR
Dabigatran 110 or 150mg bid +
clopidogrel 75mg daily or
ticagrelor 90mg bid
Rivaroxaban 2.5mg bid + aspirin
100mg daily in high risk stable
CAD patients
** Higher risk of bleeding with warfarin + DAPT
Table 11: Indications for Warfarin and NOACs in patients with Stable CAD
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.2.1.2. Lipid modifying agents
Lipid modifying agents have been shown to improve prognosis in patients
with stable CAD, the lower the Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (LDL-C)
achieved, the better the CV outcome.269-277
In addition to behavioural modification therapy, statins should be initiated to
achieve LDL-C targets, the lower the level of LDL-C achieved, the better the
outcome.278,279
There appears to be a dose-dependent reduction in CVD with LDL-C
lowering; the greater the LDL-C reduction, the greater the CV risk
reduction.269,270 Levels of LDL-C <1.8 mmol/L has been associated with less
progression of atherosclerotic plaques.280 At levels of LDL-C <1.6 mmol/L,
regression of atherosclerotic plaques has been demonstrated.281-283
A meta-analyses showed that more intensive compared with less intensive
LDL-C lowering was associated with a greater reduction in total and CV
mortality in individuals with higher baseline LDL-C levels of > 2.6 mmol/l.284
If LDL-C levels cannot be achieved, the additional use of other non-statin
therapy (e.g. ezetimibe, PCSK-9 inhibitors) may be considered.276-278
Reloading with high intensity statin before PCI may be considered in patients
with stable CAD. This has been shown to reduce peri-procedural MI in both
statin-naive and patients receiving chronic statin therapy.285-290
8.2.1.3. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers consist of angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists.
Early trials indicated improved CV outcomes with ACEi in patients with stable
CAD and preserved LV function.291,292 Recent data however show that
ACEi/ARB do not have any additional benefits in reducing CV events and
death in this group of patients.293-296
The routine use of ACEi/ARB in patients with Stable CAD without
hypertension and normal LV function is not recommended. 293-296
I, A
I, A
IIa, B
IIa, B
IIb, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.2.1.4. Depressed LV function (LVEF <40%)
In patient with stable CAD and reduced LV function, the following drugs
should be given to improve survival and other CV outcomes:297
• ACEi/ARB
• β-blockers
• mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists - spironolactone and eplerenone 298–300
• angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor - Sacubitril/Valsartan (Entresto) 301
8.2.2. Management of symptoms - Anti-ischemic therapy (Fig 2, pg 25)
Anti-ischemic therapy is used to treat the symptoms of angina. While these
medications have been shown to reduce symptoms, none have been shown
to prevent MI or death in patients with stable CAD.
These medications prevent attacks of angina by:
• decreasing myocardial oxygen consumption (lowering heart rate, blood
pressure, myocardial loading, or myocardial contractility) and/or
• increasing myocardial oxygen supply (increasing coronary blood flow).
The available anti-ischemic therapy includes:
• β-blockers
• Nitrates
• Calcium channel blockers (CCB)
• Trimetazidine
• Ivabradine
• Ranolazine
• Nicorandil
The choice of anti-ischemic therapy should be individualised depending upon:
• presence of co-morbidities (such as asthma) and/or
• physiological parameters such as resting heart rate, blood pressure, LV
function and/or
• Cost and availability
Combination of anti-ischemic therapy may be necessary to control symptoms.
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.2.2.1. β-blockers
β-blockers are suitable first-line agents to reduce the symptoms of angina. They act
by competitively inhibiting catecholamines from binding to β1, β2 and β3 receptors,
thus reducing heart rate, myocardial contractility and blood pressure. This results in
a decrease in myocardial oxygen demand.302 The prolongation of diastole also
results in improved coronary arterial filling.302 All these result in an improvement in
symptoms and exercise tolerance.
β-blockers have not been shown to reduce the rate of CV events or mortality in
patients with stable CAD. A meta-analysis of trials done in post MI patients in the
pre-primary PCI era, showed that β-blockers reduced all-cause mortality and
nonfatal MI.303 Current data however, have not shown β-blockers to reduce long term
mortality if continued beyond 1-year post MI.304,305
β-blockers reduce all-cause mortality in individuals with reduced LV function, both
ischemic and non-ischemic heart failure.306 In these patients however, only
carvedilol, bisoprolol, long acting metoprolol and nebivolol have been shown to
improve prognosis and CV outcomes.307-314
All β-blockers appear to be equally effective in treating stable CAD. However,
nebivolol has not been studied in patients with angina or who have had a recent MI.
In diabetes, vasodilating β-blockers seem to have better metabolic profile since they
cause less insulin resistance.315 Nebivolol, a β1 selective blocker, has a favourable
metabolic profile, improves insulin sensitivity and does not cause deleterious effects
on lipid profile.316,317 Likewise, carvedilol, a non-selective β- and α1-blocker,
maintains glycaemic control, while improving insulin sensitivity.318
Side-effects of β-blockers include hypotension, fatigue, bradycardia, heart block,
bronchospasm, peripheral vasoconstriction, impotence, hypoglycaemia and
depression. β-blockers are contraindicated in patients with known conduction
disorders, cardiogenic shock and should be used with caution in patients with
asthma.319
β-blockers can worsen symptoms in patients with vasospastic (Prinzmetal) angina
and should therefore be avoided in these patients.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.2.2.2. Calcium Channel Blockers (CCBs)
CCBs dilate systemic arterioles and coronary arteries, resulting in reduced afterload
and peripheral vascular resistance.320 Selective, non-competitive inhibition of
voltage-dependent L-type calcium channels lead to reduced myocardium contractility,
smooth muscle relaxation and nodal inhibition leading to a slowing down of
conduction.320
CCBs can be classified as:
• dihydropyridines (DHPs) - amlodipine, felodipine, long-acting nifedipine. These
have greater binding affinity to the calcium channels in vascular smooth muscle
• non-DHPs - verapamil and diltiazem. These agents act mainly on the sinus
node resulting in a reduction in the heart rate.
DHPs do not lower heart rate or reduce myocardial contractility. In addition to their
anti-anginal effects, they are also effective in controlling co-existing hypertension.
The CCB-β-blocker combination is beneficial because the DHPs induced reflex
tachycardia is blunted with the co-existing use of a β-blocker.25,321
The short-acting formulations of DHPs (short acting nifedipine) should be avoided in
patients with CAD. Studies have shown that they increase the risk of MI while, at
higher doses, they increased mortality rates.322,323
Non-DHPs such as verapamil and diltiazem are as efficacious as β-blockers as
anti-anginal therapy and cause less symptoms of depression.25,324,325 However, the
multiple daily dosing of the immediate release formulations of the non-DHPs can
result in reduced adherence. Concurrent use of a non-DHP and a β-blocker, should
be used with caution because of the risk of bradycardia and heart block.326 They may
also be used cautiously in patients with LV dysfunction.
CCBs are effective anti-anginal therapy but have not been shown to have any effect
on long term CV outcomes.327,328
8.2.2.3. Nitrates
Nitrates are effective in the management of angina due to their coronary arteriolar
and venous vasodilatation properties that result in a reduction in preload and
afterload.329
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.2.2.3.1. Nitrates for acute angina
Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) can be given for immediate relief of angina. The
aerosol formulation has a faster onset of action. GTN improves exercise tolerance
when given prophylactically, thus preventing anticipated angina caused by exertion.
Besides its anti-anginal properties, GTN also has shown antithrombotic and
antiplatelet activity.330,331
GTN tablets should be kept in an amber coloured bottle and protected from sunlight.
Once the bottle has been opened, the life-span is reduced to 8 weeks. The aerosol
formulation can be used until the expiry date.
8.2.2.3.2. Nitrates for angina treatment and prophylaxis
Nitrates are often used with β-blockers or CCBs to prevent or reduce angina and
increase exercise tolerance in symptomatic patients. Isosorbide mononitrate (ISMN)
has similar efficacy as isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN) but with a longer duration of action
and a better side effect profile.
Long-term regular use of nitrates without a nitrate-free or nitrate-low interval of about
8-10 hours can lead to nitrate tolerance. This could offset the beneficial short-term
ischemic preconditioning effects and potentially worsen endothelial dysfunction.332,332
Twice daily dosing of ISDN that provides a 10-12-hour nitrate-free interval each day
is preferred.
The most common side effect of nitrates is headache. It may also cause hypotension.
Concurrent use with a phosphodiesterase type-5 (PDE5) inhibitor like sildenafil is
contraindicated because of severe hypotension.
8.2.2.4. Ivabradine (If inhibitor)
An elevated heart rate is associated with an increase in both all-cause as well as CV
mortality.334–337 This relationship is independent of other risk markers. Decreasing
heart rate can lead to an improvement in angina by reducing myocardial oxygen
consumption and by increasing diastolic perfusion time.302
Ivabradine is a selective inhibitor of the sinus node If ion current (‘funny current’). It
is negatively chronotropic (slows heart rate), thereby decreasing myocardial oxygen
demand with no effect on myocardial contractility or systemic blood pressure.338,339
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
78
Ivabradine has been shown to improve symptoms and reduce CV hospitalization,
fatal and non-fatal MI and the need for coronary revascularization in patients with
stable CAD, moderate LV dysfunction and HR >70 bpm.340-344
Ivabradine may be considered for symptomatic treatment of stable CAD in patients
with normal sinus rhythm, especially in those who have a contraindication to or
intolerance to β-blockers. It may also be used in combination with β-blockers in
patients with high resting heart rates.344-347 The dose should be decreased or
discontinued if HR remains below 50bpm.
Ivabradine is not suitable for patients who are in atrial fibrillation. Its use with
rate-limiting non-DHPs should be avoided because of the QT prolonging effect.348
Side-effects include bradycardia and reversible visual disturbances.338 There is no
significant interaction with most other cardiac drugs e.g. ACEis, ARBs, warfarin,
amiodarone, anti-platelet agents, cholesterol lowing agents, digoxin and diuretics.
8.2.2.5.
Trimetazidine (3-Ketoacyl CoA thiolase [KAT] inhibitor)
Trimetazidine inhibits 3-KAT (3-ketoacyl CoA thiolase) enzyme in myocardial
cells-resulting in a switch of the energy substrate from fatty acid to glucose oxidation.
This is a more efficient pathway for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production.
In small clinical studies, trimetazidine has been shown to be effective in providing
angina symptom relief, reduction in the need for nitrates, time to onset of ST depression
and improving functional capacity.349-353 It is useful as monotherapy and in combination
with other anti-ischaemic agents.349-353 Trimetazidine has not been evaluated in large
outcome studies in patients with stable CAD.
In patients with erectile dysfunction and using PDE5 inhibitor, the concomitant use
of trimetazidine is safe.354 Trimetazidine should be used with caution in the presence
of CKD.355 There have been reports of association between trimetazidine and
symptoms of parkinsonism.356
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
79
8.2.2.6.
Ranolazine (Late Na current inhibitor)
Ranolazine selectively inhibits the late inward sodium current in the myocardium,
leading to a reduction in intracellular calcium levels and diastolic LV wall tension,
thereby reducing myocardial oxygen demand. Doses of 500-2000 mg daily reduced
angina and increased exercise capacity without changes in heart rate or BP.357
Compared to placebo, or as additional to current anti-anginal therapy, ranolazine
improved angina symptoms, exercise tolerance, and decreased angina attacks and
GTN consumption.357-361 It was equally effective in diabetic patients.362 Ranolazine
has been shown to have a beneficial effect on glycaemic control with significant
reduction of HbA1c in patients with and without diabetes.357,362-367
Ranolazine was found not to be beneficial in the management of angina following
incomplete revascularization by PCI and in the setting of an ACS.366 Studies on the
use of ranolazine for the treatment of microvascular angina has produced conflicting
results.369-371
Commonly reported side-effects include dizziness, constipation and nausea.
Ranolazine prolongs the QTc interval in a dose-related manner although clinical
experience has not shown an increased risk of proarrhythmia or sudden death.372
It should be used with caution in patients with a prolonged QTc interval, liver
cirrhosis and stage IV CKD.
8.2.2.7. Nicorandil (K channel activator)
Nicorandil is a nitrate derivative of nicotinamide. It has dual pharmacological
mechanism of action with adenosine triphosphate sensitive potassium (KATP)
channel agonist and nitrate-like properties.373
The antianginal efficacy of nicorandil is similar to β-blockers, CCBs and
nitrates.374–377 It can be used as add-on therapy to other anti-ischemic medications.
Tolerance however, develops with long-term use.378
Nicorandil can cause serious skin, mucosal, and eye ulceration which persists
unless treatment is discontinued.379 The concurrent use of nicorandil with aspirin
increases the risk of gastrointestinal ulcers, perforations, and haemorrhages.380
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
80
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key Messages:
Optimal medical therapy is the cornerstone of management of patients with
obstructive and non-obstructive CAD.
Pharmacological management of stable CAD aims at:
• prevention of cardiovascular events
 All patients should receive aspirin and a statin (+/- non- statin therapy) with
the aim of achieving LDL-C targets - the lower the better.
 All CV risk factors should be treated to target.
 Patients with depressed LV function (LVEF <40%) should receive ACEi/ARB,
β-blockers and mineralocorticoid antagonists. Angiotensin-receptor-neprilysin
inhibitors may also be considered.
• relieving symptoms
 β-blockers and/or CCBs should be prescribed as first-line treatment to
reduce angina because it is widely available.
 Ivabradine, trimetazidine, long-acting nitrates and ranolazine are recom
mended as add-on therapy in patients who remain symptomatic.
• Optimal medical therapy should be instituted prior to revascularization
procedures.
Recommendation 6:
• All patients with suspected or known CAD should be on Optimal Medical
Therapy (Behavioural modification therapy and appropriate pharmacotherapy).
• Appropriate pharmacotherapy includes:
 aspirin (or ticlopdine/clopidogrel if aspirin intolerant) and
 statin (+/- non- statin therapy) with the aim of achieving LDL-C targets and
 at least 2 anti anginal agents.
• In addition:
 All CV risk factors should be treated to target.
 Patients with depressed LV function (LVEF <40%) should receive ACEi/ARB,
β-blockers and mineralocorticoid antagonists. Angiotensin-receptor-neprilysin
inhibitors may also be considered.
• Optimal medical therapy should be instituted prior to revascularization
procedures.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
81
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
8.3 Myocardial revascularization
Recent clinical trials have not shown that an initial strategy of PCI in
combination with OMT to be superior to OMT alone in reducing death, MI or
repeat revascularization during short term and long term follow
up.72-76,153,154,381 In a small randomised controlled trial, PCI did not improve
exercise time or angina frequency at 6 weeks when compared to a sham
procedure.382
CABG however, has been shown to improve survival when compared to
OMT in patients with LM or three-vessel stable CAD, particularly when the
proximal LAD is involved.383 Benefits are greater in those with severe
symptoms, early positive exercise tests, and impaired LV function.383
The decision to revascularize patients with stable CAD on OMT will depend
on:
• Symptoms - presence of angina affecting quality of life
• Extent of ischemia as determined by non-invasive testing - mild vs moderate
to severe myocardial ischemia151,384,385 Individuals with moderate to severe
ischemia benefit from revascularization while those with no or mild ischemia
do better with OMT.151,384–387 (Table 2, pg 24)
• Extent and severity of coronary disease and where applicable physiological
functional testing using FFR:84
 FFR <0.75 - benefit from revascularisation as compared to OMT.
 FFR between >0.75 but <0.8 - have intermediate benefit with revascularisation
and management should be based on clinical judgement.
 FFR >0.8 - no benefit from revascularisation.
Revascularization has generally been shown to be more effective than OMT
in relieving angina and myocardial ischemia.388,389
Choice of revascularization strategies is guided by several factors such as
number of coronary vessels involved, anatomic complexity of the target
lesions, likelihood of complete revascularization, patient comorbidities as well
as preference (see Table 12, pg 82).
I, C
IIa, B
I, A
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
82
Table 12: Factors influencing decision on revascularization strategies
Anatomical Factors
Single versus multivessel disease, left main involvement,
proximal LAD, chronic total occlusion, number of patent
coronaries and SYNTAX score
Technical Factors
Lesion length, calcification, tortuosity, aneurysms,
previous PCI or CABG, complete versus incomplete
revascularization
Patient Factors
Age, gender, presence of comorbidities such as diabetes,
chronic kidney disease, fragility, previous stroke,
peripheral artery disease, bleeding risk and life expectancy
Other Factors
Cost, availability of expertise, experience of the operator,
patient’s preference, volume of the centre and waiting list
There is an inherent difference between the 2 modes of myocardial revascularisation
- PCI treats only the coronary lesion and leaves the other segments alone while
CABG treats the entire vessel proximal to the site of implantation of the graft.
Wherever possible, a discussion with the patient and Heart Team should be
encouraged prior to revascularization.44,390-391
In general, in patients with a low burden of CAD - single vessel disease not involving
proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) or dominant circumflex artery, low-risk
findings on non-invasive testing and absence of LV systolic dysfunction and
diabetes, OMT should be the initial step. In the presence of continuing symptoms
and impaired quality of life, PCI may be an option if the coronary stenosis is
significant (FFR <0.8).
In patients with complex CAD, evaluation by a Heart Team is recommended. For
patients with multivessel CAD, preserved LV systolic function, low complexity
coronary anatomy, and absence of diabetes, PCI may be considered. In patients
with multivessel disease, complex anatomy, diabetes and low surgical risk, CABG
has a better survival benefit.383,392 Please refer to Malaysian Appropriate Use Criteria
for Investigations and Revascularizations in CAD, 1st Ed, 2015.68
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
83
Key Messages:
The decision to revascularize patients with stable CAD on OMT will depend on:
• Symptoms - presence of angina affecting quality of life.
• Extent of ischemia as determined by non-invasive testing - mild vs moderate
to severe myocardial ischemia. Individuals with moderate to severe
ischemia benefit from revascularization while those with no or mild ischemia
do better with OMT. (Table 2, pg 24)
• Extent of coronary disease and where applicable physiological functional
testing using FFR. In individuals with:
 FFR <0.75 - benefit from revascularisation as compared to OMT.
 FFR between >0.75 but <0.8 - have intermediate benefit with revascu
larisation and management should be based on clinical judgement.
 FFR >0.8 - no benefit from revascularisation
Wherever possible, a discussion with the patient and Heart Team should be
encouraged prior to revascularization to determine the best strategy - PCI or
CABG.
Recommendation 7:
• The decision to revascularize patients with stable CAD on OMT will depend on:
 Symptoms
 Extent of ischemia
 Extent of coronary disease and where applicable physiological functional
testing using FFR.
• Wherever possible, a discussion with the patient and Heart Team should be
encouraged prior to revascularization to determine the best strategy.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
84
9.
CHRONIC REFRACTORY ANGINA
Chronic refractory angina is a clinical diagnosis based on the symptoms of ischaemic
chest pain of >3 months duration which is not controlled by a combination of maximal
medical therapy and/or revascularization.
Most common reasons why revascularisation (or repeat revascularization) is not
undertaken:
• unsuitable anatomy - e.g. diffuse small vessels disease, calcified aorta
• one or several previous CABG and/or PCI have been performed
• severely depressed LV function
• lack of available graft conduits
• extra-cardiac diseases with increased perioperative morbidity and mortality
• advanced age, in combination with the above factors
Medical management of these patients requires optimisation of risk factors and the
use of combination antianginal drugs in maximal tolerated doses.
Options available to these symptomatic patients who are not amenable to
conventional therapy include:
• cardiac rehabilitation - This has not been validated in an independent study nor
has it been tested in a trial appropriately powered to assess its effect on
symptom improvement.
• enhanced external counter pulsation (EECP)393-396
• extracorporeal shockwave myocardial revascularisation (ESMR) 397-400
• acupuncture401
• cell therapy and angiogenesis402-409
• chelation therapy410
Other investigational therapies include:
• neuromodulation techniques (transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation and
spinal cord stimulation)411-413
• trans myocardial (TMR) or percutaneous laser revascularization414-424
• thoracic epidural anaesthesia
• endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy
• stellate ganglion blockade
• heart transplantation
• drugs that modulate metabolism
• coronary Sinus Reducer425
• oral morphine therapy
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
85
In small clinical trials, these alternative therapies have been shown to relieve
angina and improve quality of life to a variable degree in some patients with
refractory angina.393-425
These therapies should only be considered in patients who continue to have
troubling angina despite conventional therapy or when conventional therapy
is not feasible. 393-425
Key messages:
• Chronic refractory angina is a clinical diagnosis based on the symptoms of
ischaemic chest pain of >3 months duration which is not controlled by a
combination of maximal medical therapy and/or revascularization.
• Alternative and investigational therapies have been shown to relieve angina
and improve quality of life to a variable degree in some of these patients.
• They should only be considered in patients who continue to have troubling
angina despite adequate conventional treatments.
10. SPECIAL GROUPS
10.1 Diabetes
Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of CVD. CAD mortality is
increased by 3-fold in diabetic men and 2-5 fold in diabetic women.426-429
Diabetics have a higher prevalence of asymptomatic myocardial ischemia.430
Symptoms occur at an earlier age. Diabetics may also have subclinical
ventricular dysfunction which may reduce their exercise capacity.431
In patients with diabetes, the poorer the glycaemic control the greater the
incidence of CVD.432,433 Diabetics tend to have extensive CAD with high rates
of multi-vessel disease and restenosis, post-PCI. This is due to the chronic
metabolic disturbances.434,435
Conventional
therapies
for
CAD
and
indications
for
coronary
revascularisation are similar in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.436
IIb, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
86
DM management should include:
• Lifestyle and pharmacotherapy (OMT) measures to achieve a near-normal
HbA1c437
• Long-term maintenance of near-normal blood glucose levels substantially
reduces complications and mortality.438-441 However, this should be
individualized based on the patient’s age and comorbidities.
• In the pharmacotherapy of diabetic patients with CAD:
 both the SGLT2i and the GLP-1 agonists have been shown to be
associated with a reduction in the risk of CV composite end-points.442-445
 the SGLT2i have been shown to reduce the risk of heart failure.442
 In a meta-analysis, the SGLT2i and GLP-1 agonists have been
associated with a reduction in all cause mortality.446
 thiazolidinediones are associated with an increase in the incidence of
heart failure and should be avoided in those in NYHA Functional class
3 & 4.447,448
 Saxagliptin, a DPP-4i, was also shown to be associated with an
increase in hospitalization for heart failure.449 However this is not seen
with the other agents of the same class.450
In general, in diabetic patients with multivessel disease, CABG is the
preferred revascularization strategy.153,381
10.2. Women
CVD is the main cause of death among women both worldwide and in
Malaysia.451 It is 2½ times more common as a cause of death than all cancers
combined.10
There are numerous gender differences in the epidemiology of CAD. There is
a significantly lower age-specific risk of CAD in women, the risk of death
being similar to that of men 10 years younger.451-454 Despite this, the greater
likelihood of survival of women to advanced age, produces nearly equal
numbers of actual deaths due to CAD in both gender.451-454
Women with angina may have:455
• atherosclerotic obstructive Coronary Artery Disease (CAD)
• non-obstructive CAD (≥20% and <50% luminal narrowing)
• normal coronary arteries (Cardiac Syndrome X) - (<20% luminal
narrowing)
I, B
I, B
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
87
Other unique gender specific cardiac issues include:455
• Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy
• spontaneous coronary artery dissections
Other diseases that are associated with increased CV risk in women include:455
• connective tissue diseases (especially rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) and systemic vasculitis) and the drugs that are used to
treat these diseases
• chemotherapy and radiation induced cardio toxicity
• infections such as influenza, periodontal disease and human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)
• obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
Angina is a more common presentation in women as compared to ACS and sudden
death in men. Women often have atypical presentations.456 In addition to chest pain
or discomfort, women also have a lot of non-chest related pain symptoms.
Compared to men, women’s symptoms are more often precipitated by mental or
emotional stress and less frequently by exertion. 456
Following an MI, women have worse outcomes irrespective of age.457,458 More
women had sudden cardiac death (SCD) before their arrival in hospital and almost
two thirds of women who died suddenly, had no previous symptoms.459,460
Non-obstructive CAD is more common in women.461,462 Patients with non-obstructive
CAD may present as stable angina, ACS and sudden death.461 The prognosis of this
condition is not benign. Compared to persons with no apparent coronary lesions
(<20% luminal narrowing), non-obstructive CHD (≥20% and <50% luminal narrowing)
was associated with significantly higher risk of MI and all-cause mortality in both
gender.461,463
The WISE study showed that the 5-year cardiac event rate for MI and CVD death
were significantly different (P ≤0.002) in the 3 subgroups:464
• 16% for women with angina and non-obstructive CAD (stenosis <50%)
• 7.9% for women with angina and normal coronary arteries (Cardiac Syndrome X)
• 2.4% for the asymptomatic control group
Women with non-obstructive CAD and documented myocardial ischemia have a
poorer prognosis.34,465 Women with Syndrome X and severe endothelial dysfunction
have a 30% increased risk of developing CAD at 10 years.464,466-468
Paradoxically, women tend to have lower prevalence of obstructive coronary
disease but more symptoms, ischemia and adverse outcomes.459,469 It has been
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
postulated that this could be due to abnormal coronary vasomotor reactivity,
microvascular dysfunction, distal coronary erosion/embolization and non-obstructive
coronary disease. 459,470
Data seems to suggest that the adverse outcomes seen in women could be due to
their baseline risk and clinical characteristics rather than to gender dependent
factors or to bias in therapies.471
10.2.1. Diagnosis of CAD in women
The diagnosis of angina in women is more difficult for the following reasons:
• Atypical chest pain and angina-equivalent symptoms such as dyspnoea are
more common in women.
• Correlation between symptoms and 'significant' luminal obstruction at coronary
angiography is weaker in women.
• Angina with demonstrable myocardial ischaemia may be present in the presence
of normal coronaries or minor atherosclerotic disease.
In the non-invasive evaluation of women with chest pain, exercise stress ECG is the
first test of choice in women with good exercise capacity and a normal resting ECG.
Exercise stress ECG have higher false positive rates in women than in men. The
sensitivity is 31-71% and specificity is about 66 to 78% in women and about 80% for
both in men.66,472,473
Despite these limitations, a normal exercise stress ECG at adequate workloads in
women with intermediate probability of CAD is a good indication that there is no
significant obstructive lesion.66,471 An exercise ECG stress test, however, does not
detect myocardial ischemia in women with non-obstructive coronary lesions.
Due to the limitations of exercise ECG stress testing, stress echocardiography
(exercise or dobutamine) and stress SPECT have been recommended in women.
Both these tests can detect myocardial ischemia in the presence of obstructive and
non-obstructive coronary lesions.66 These tests also have higher specificity.473 The
diagnostic accuracy of SPECT however, can be reduced in women by both breast
tissue and obesity, especially in the anterior myocardial segments, resulting in
false-positives.
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance (CMR) is a newer imaging tool to investigate CAD in
women. A negative stress CMR study is associated with very low risk of CV death
and MI.474
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
89
10.2.2. Management
Management should be similar in both gender. Women tend to present at an older
age and therefore have higher morbidity and mortality after an MI, PCI and CABG.455
For more details please refer to CPG Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in
Women, 2nd Ed.455
10.3. Elderly
In the elderly, often defined as >75 years of age, there is equal prevalence of CAD
in both gender.475
In this age group, complaints of chest discomfort, weakness and dyspnoea are
common, and evaluation of chest pain can be difficult. This may be further
compounded when some of the elderly have difficulties expressing their symptoms
due to dysphasia or cognition issues. Comorbidities that can mimic stable CAD are
common (e.g. gastroesophageal reflux disease, musculoskeletal pain). The elderly
are usually undertreated and under-represented in clinical trials and most of the
available knowledge is derived from sub analyses of main trials or retrospective
studies.
10.3.1. Diagnostic testing in the elderly
Diagnostic testing in the elderly may be problematic. Exercise stress testing is often
difficult due to muscle weakness and deconditioning and osteoarthritis of the knees.
Less challenging exercise stress protocols or pharmacological stress imaging such
as DSE may be appropriate.476
The specificity of test results is often reduced because of a higher rate of false
positive results due to abnormal resting ECG and a higher prevalence of
confounders including prior Ml, conduction disturbances, hypertension and left
ventricular hypertrophy. At the same time a negative test may be a false negative in
a population with high prevalence of disease. Arrhythmias are also more common at
higher exercise workloads.477
CTA may not be suitable in the elderly because of the presence of coronary
calcification making visualization of the lumen difficult.
Elderly patients with objective evidence of moderate to severe ischemia on
non-invasive testing or with troubling angina despite OMT, should have similar
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
access to ICA as younger patients. Elective coronary angiography is safe in this age
group.478-480 Age > 75 years is an important predictor of contrast-induced
nephropathy.481
The elderly are more likely to have extensive disease and impaired LV function.
10.3.2. Management
Elderly patients have the same benefit from OMT and coronary revascularization as
younger patients.482-487 Management should be individualised taking into
consideration comorbidities and should not be based on age alone.
Important considerations in drug therapy in the elderly are dose modification, drug
interactions, polypharmacy and compliance.488,489
Meta-analysis have shown that patients >65 years of age with multivessel disease
had better outcomes when they underwent CABG compared with PCI, while younger
patients tended to have more favourable outcomes with PCI.490-492 An all comers
registry demonstrated that patients in the age group ≥74 years and triple vessel CAD
had significantly higher all-cause mortality when they underwent PCI as compared
to CABG (even after adjustment of confounders).493 PCI was also associated with a
significantly higher risk for cardiac death, MI, heart failure hospitalization, and new
coronary interventions, but with a similar risk for sudden death, and significantly
lower risk for stroke.493
Frailty is an important confounding factor when one looks at CV outcomes following
PCI. It often results in poorer outcomes.494,495 However, the difficulty lies in the
diagnosis of frailty as there are numerous scales with little agreement on the best
assessment tool.
The choice of revascularization in the elderly should be discussed by the Heart
Team considering local expertise and patient preferences.
10.4. Chronic Kidney Disease
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is strongly associated with CAD and has a major
impact on outcomes and therapeutic decisions. The incidence and severity of
obstructive CAD increases as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) declines. 496,497
Patients with CKD have diffuse multi-vessel disease with coronary calcification.497,498
Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality are inversely and independently associated
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
with kidney function, particularly in patients with advanced CKD (GFR<15 ml/min per
1.73 m2).139,499-502
Emerging evidence indicates that the pathology and manifestation of CVD differs in
the presence of CKD. It is being increasingly recognized that mineralocorticoid
excess, mineral and bone metabolism abnormalities play a role in the pathogenesis
of CAD and its complications in CKD patients.503-505
10.4.1. Diagnostic testing in CKD
The increased prevalence of CAD among CKD patients reduces the negative predictive
value of diagnostic studies.
Exercise ECG stress testing is limited by an abnormal baseline resting ECG, lack of
specificity of the ST-segment response and by the inability of many CKD patients to
exercise to a diagnostic workload.506,507
Stress echocardiography may be compromised by small LV cavity size in patients
with elevated LV mass index.508,509 Sensitivity and specificity for pharmacological
stress echocardiography in CKD patients is 69-95% and 76-94%, respectively.510,511
Nephrotoxicity of contrast agents limit the use of CMR and CTA. Further, the high
prevalence of coronary calcification makes interpretation of CTA very difficult.
MPI is more sensitive but less specific than stress echocardiography. The accuracy
of exercise and of pharmacological MPI is reduced in CKD patients, and the
sensitivities and specificities are <80%.512
10.4.2. Management
The role of lifestyle modification, good glycaemic and blood pressure control to
reduce CV events in patients with advanced CKD remains unclear. Strict glycaemic
control may not benefit patients with advanced CKD.513 Randomized data on the
efficacy of specific BP goals in advanced CKD patients are lacking.514,515 Lifestyle
modification has not been widely studied in CKD patients.
Data regarding the efficacy of prophylactic aspirin is also limited. Subgroup analyses
of randomized trials have demonstrated CV risk reduction with aspirin in individuals
with eGFR <45 mL/min per 1.73 m2, despite a higher incidence of bleeding.246,516
Several antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents are metabolized through the kidneys
and require dose adjustment in CKD patients.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
92
Subgroup analysis of several randomized clinical trials suggests benefit with the use
of statins in patients with moderate CKD.517 However, two large trials comparing
statins with placebo in haemodialysis patients did not demonstrate benefit.518,519 In
the SHARP trial, the combination of simvastatin and ezetimibe in CKD patients
(including stage V) reduced major atherosclerotic events by 17%, but did not reduce
overall mortality.520 As no significant harm from statin use was demonstrated in any
of the trials, this reduction in non-fatal events provides a rationale for the use of
statins in CKD patients despite the apparent lack of efficacy in reducing the risk of
death.
There is a paucity of data regarding revascularization in CKD patients with stable
CAD. There have been no randomized clinical trials comparing coronary
revascularization strategies in advanced CKD patients. A subgroup analysis of the
COURAGE trial did not find a benefit from PCI compared with OMT in ~320 patients
with CKD Stage III-IV who had predominantly low-risk, multivessel disease.521 The
ARTS-1 trial found no significant difference in the primary end point (death, MI,
stroke) between PCI and CABG surgery in 290 patients with creatinine clearance
<60 ml/min.522
Observational data consistently show increased risk of serious operative
complications in CKD patients.523-525 Incidence of operative death after CABG is
9-12.2% for CKD stage V, and 3- to 7-fold higher in CKD stage IV-V than in
non-CKD.523,524 PCI may be an alternative but may pose the added risk of
contrast-induced nephropathy. In a study of CKD stage V patients undergoing first
revascularization, in-hospital mortality was lower with PCI (4.1 vs 8.6%), but 2-year
survival was better with CABG (56.4 vs 48.4%).525
The ISCHEMIA-CKD (International Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness With
Medical and Invasive Approaches-Chronic Kidney Disease) trial is a randomized
ongoing trial with a target of 1,000 patients with eGFRs <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 (or on
dialysis therapy) and moderate ischemia to determine whether a routine invasive
strategy (cardiac catheterization and then revascularization together with OMT) is
superior to a conservative strategy (OMT; catheterization and revascularization
available as indicated). 526
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
93
Key Messages:
• Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of CVD.
 Conventional therapies for CAD and indications for coronary revascularisation
are similar in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
 Long-term maintenance of near-normal blood glucose levels substantially
reduces complications and mortality.
 The SGLT2i and the GLP-1 agonists have been associated with improved
CV outcomes.
• There are difficulties in the diagnosis of CAD in women and the elderly.
 Women should, in general, be managed in a similar manner as men.
 In the elderly, management should be individualised taking into consideration
comorbidities and should not be based on age alone.
• Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is strongly associated with CAD and has a
major impact on outcomes and therapeutic decisions. However, there is limited
data on the efficacy and the role of pharmacotherapy and revascularization in
these patients.
11. FOLLOW-UP OF PATIENTS WITH STABLE CAD
All patients with Stable CAD (no change in symptoms and medications over a period
of 1-2 years) can be discharged from the speciality cardiology clinics.
There are no randomized trials evaluating the impact on outcome of different
strategies for the follow-up of patients with stable CAD. In addition, there are currently
no data suggesting that any form of follow up stress testing improves outcome in
asymptomatic patients.527
The frequency of follow-up and further evaluation of these patients will depend on:
• severity of CAD
• comorbidities and optimization of risk factors
• symptoms - particularly a change in symptoms and functional capacity
• local resources
Clinical judgement is required in determining the need for repeated testing.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Key Messages:
• All patients with Stable CAD can be managed both at hospital and at general
outpatient clinics.
• In general, a repeat exercise stress ECG (or pharmacological stress) may be
warranted if there is a change in the patient’s:
 symptoms - worsening angina or effort tolerance
 clinical condition eg worsening LV function as detected by echocardiogram
and/or heart failure
 development of malignant arrhythmias
• Whenever indicated, these patients should be referred to tertiary cardiac
centres for optimization of management. When stable, they can be transferred
back to genaral outpatient clinics with Family Medicine Specialists.
In general, a repeat exercise stress ECG (or pharmacological stress) may be
warranted if there is a change in the patient’s:
• symptoms - worsening angina or effort tolerance
• clinical condition eg worsening LV function as detected by echocardiogram
and/or heart failure
• development of malignant arrhythmias
When a patient with stable CAD develops an ACS and worsening angina,
factors that need to be considered include:
• ensuring that the patient has quit smoking.
• treatment of BP and diabetes have been optimized.
• aiming for LDL-C goals that are lower than when the patient developed the
ACS – at least < 1.8 mmol/l - the lower the better.
• adequately addressing psychosocial stressors.
Wherever necessary, these patients should be referred back to tertiary
cardiac centres for optimization of management and revascularization as
indicated. When stable, they can be transferred back to their primary or
general physicians.
Close follow-up and rapport with patients generally leads to improved
adherence to OMT.
IIa, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
Recommendation 8:
• All patients with Stable CAD with no change in symptoms and medications
over a period of 1-2 years, can be discharged from the speciality cardiac clinics.
• When there is a change in the patient’s clinical condition, they should be
referred to tertiary cardiac centres for optimization of management. When
stable, they can be transferred back to general outpatient clinics with Family
Medicine Specialists.
12. PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENT FOR ELECTIVE NON-CARDIAC
SURGERY
The extent of investigation in the pre-operative assessment of patients with
stable CAD going for elective non-cardiac surgery will depend on the risk of
the surgery:
• low risk surgery (risk of death or MI <1%528 e.g. cataract, simple plastic
surgery)
• intermediate risk and High-Risk surgery (risk of death or MI > 1%528
e.g. intra peritoneal, intra thoracic surgery)
• vascular surgery/liver and kidney transplant
In addition, other factors that need to be considered include the presence of:
• diabetes
• CKD
• LV dysfunction
In general, a resting ECG should be performed in all patients and compared
with previous ECGs.
An echocardiogram may be considered in:528
• intermediate and high-risk surgery
• >1 other clinical risk factors that include:
 CAD - previous revascularization/MI
 heart failure
 stroke/TIA
 renal dysfunction (serum creatinine >170umol/l or Cr Cl <60 mL/min)
 diabetes
If a previous echocardiogram had been done within the last 12 months and it
was normal and the patient has no change in his symptoms, then a repeat
examination is not warranted.
I, C
IIa, B
I, C
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
If the patient is asymptomatic with good effort tolerance (>4 METS*), no
further investigations is necessary.68,528
Non-invasive stress testing may be considered if the patient has:68
 poor functional capacity (<4 METS) and
 ≥1 clinical risk factors and
 undergoing intermediate and high-risk surgery or vascular surgery/liver
and kidney transplant.
We advocate that these considerations should be done prior to listing the
patient for surgery, for proper evaluation, planning of investigations and
appropriate ethical informed consent process to be offered.
In patients who have undergone PCI and stenting and are on DAPT, a
consultation with the cardiologist is necessary.
*4 METS is equivalent to doing housework, sweeping floors and climbing 1 flight of stairs.
IIa, B
IIb, C
I, C
Key Messages:
• The extent of investigation in the pre-operative assessment of patients with
stable CAD going for elective non-cardiac surgery will depend on the risk of
the surgery:
 low risk surgery (risk of death or MI <1% e.g. cataract, simple plastic surgery)
 intermediate risk and High-Risk surgery (risk of death or MI > 1% e.g. intra
peritoneal, intra thoracic surgery)
 vascular surgery/liver and kidney transplant
• In addition, other factors that need to be considered include the presence of:
 diabetes
 CKD
 LV dysfunction
• In general, a resting ECG should be performed in all patients and compared
with previous ECGs.
• An echocardiogram may be considered in selected patients.
• If the patient is asymptomatic with good effort tolerance (>4 METS), no further
investigations is necessary.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
13. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
Recommended Performance Indicators for Management of Stable CAD - to be
audited on hospital discharges and at review at the outpatient clinics on an annual
basis.
Percentage of patients with CAD on antiplatelet therapy:
No. of patients with CAD on aspirin
(or clopidogrel or ticlopidine, if aspirin intolerant)
=
X 100%
No. of patients with CAD seen on that clinic day
Percentage of patients with CAD on statins:
No. of patients with CAD on statin
=
X 100%
No. of patients with CAD seen on that clinic day
(Target > 70%)
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Mark DB, Shaw L, Harrell FE, Hlatky MA, Lee KL, et al. Prognostic value of a treadmill exercise score in
outpatients with suspected coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:849-853.
2.
Shaw LJ, Peterson ED, Shaw LK, Kesler KL, DeLong ER, et al. Use of a Prognostic Treadmill Score in
Identifying Diagnostic Coronary Disease Subgroups. Circulation. 1998;98:1622-1630.
3.
Metz LD, Beattie M, Hom R, Redberg RF, Grady D, et al. The prognostic value of normal exercise
myocardial perfusion imaging and exercise echocardiography: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;
49:227-237.
4.
Marwick TH, Case C, Vasey C, Allen S, Short L, et al. Prediction of mortality by exercise echocardiography:
a strategy for combination with the duke treadmill score. Circulation. 2001;103:2566-2571.
5.
Olmos LI, Dakik H, Gordon R, Dunn JK, Verani MS, et al. Long-term prognostic value of exercise
echocardiography compared with exercise 201Tl, ECG, and clinical variables in patients evaluated for
coronary artery disease. Circulation. 1998;98:2679-2686.
6.
Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Picard MH, Friedrich MG, Kwong RY, et al. Comparative definitions for moderate-
severe ischemia in stress nuclear, echocardiography, and magnetic resonance imaging. JACC Cardiovasc
Imaging. 2014;7:593-604.
7.
Hadamitzky M, Täubert S, Deseive S, Byrne RA, Martinoff S, et al. Prognostic value of coronary computed
tomography angiography during 5 years of follow-up in patients with suspected coronary artery disease.
Eur Heart J. 2013;34:3277-3285.
8.
Min JK, Dunning A, Lin FY, Achenbach S, Al-Mallah M, et al. Age- and sex-related differences in all-cause
mortality risk based on coronary computed tomography angiography findings results from the International
Multicenter CONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiography Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: An International
Multicenter Registry) of 23,854 patients without known coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;
58:849-860.
9.
Min JK, Shaw LJ, Devereux RB, Okin PM, Weinsaft JW, et al. Prognostic value of multidetector coronary
computed tomographic angiography for prediction of all-cause mortality. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1161-1170.
10. WHO | Noncommunicable diseases country profiles 2014 [Internet]. WHO. [cited 2018 Feb 6];Available
from: http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd-profiles-2014/en/
11. Health Informatics Centre, Planning and Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Number of
discharges and deaths in government hospitals. Health Informatics Centre, Health Facts 2016 [Internet].
2016 [cited 2018 Jan 2]. Available from: http://www.moh.gov.my/images/gallery/publications/KKM%20HEALTH%
20FACTS%202016.pdf
12. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Burden of Disease 2015 Factsheet [Internet]. 2018 [cited
2018 Jan 2];Available from: http://www.healthdata.org/briefs/global-burden-disease-2015-factsheet
13. Bhatnagar P, Wickramasinghe K, Wilkins E, Townsend N. Trends in the epidemiology of cardiovascular
disease in the UK. Heart. 2016;102:1945-1952.
14. Sidney S, Quesenberry CP, Jaffe MG, Sorel M, Nguyen-Huynh MN, et al. Recent Trends in Cardiovascular
Mortality in the United States and Public Health Goals. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:594-599.
15. Hartley A, Marshall DC, Salciccioli JD, Sikkel MB, Maruthappu M, et al. Trends in Mortality from Ischaemic
Heart Disease and Cerebrovascular Disease in Europe: 1980-2009. Circulation. 2016;133:1916-26.
16. Fox KAA, Carruthers KF, Dunbar DR, Graham C, Manning JR, et al. Underestimated and under-recognized:
the late consequences of acute coronary syndrome (GRACE UK–Belgian Study). Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2755-2764.
17. Jernberg T, Hasvold P, Henriksson M, Hjelm H, Thuresson M, et al. Cardiovascular risk in post-myocardial
infarction patients: nationwide real world data demonstrate the importance of a long-term perspective. Eur
Heart J. 2015;36:1163-1170.
18. Abu-Assi E, López-López A, González-Salvado V, Redondo-Diéguez A, Peña-Gil C, et al. The Risk of
Cardiovascular Events After an Acute Coronary Event Remains High, Especially During the First Year,
Despite Revascularization. Rev Espanola Cardiol Engl Ed. 2016;69:11-18.
19. Bhatt DL, Eagle KA, Ohman EM, Hirsch AT, Goto S, et al. Comparative determinants of 4-year cardiovascular
event rates in stable outpatients at risk of or with atherothrombosis. JAMA. 2010;304:1350-1357.
20. Maddox TM, Reid KJ, Spertus JA, Mittleman M, Krumholz HM, et al. Angina at 1 year after myocardial
infarction: prevalence and associated findings. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:1310-1316.
21. Lemesle G, Tricot O, Meurice T, Lallemant R, Delomez M, et al. Incident Myocardial Infarction and Very
Late Stent Thrombosis in Outpatients With Stable Coronary Artery Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2017;69:2149–2156
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
99
22. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Primary and Secondary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease 2017 [Internet]. 2017. Available from: www.acadmed.org.my
23. Diamond GA. A clinically relevant classification of chest discomfort. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1983;1:574-575.
24. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Clinical Guideline CG 95, Chest Pain of Recent
Onset: Assessment and Diagnosis [Internet]. 2010 [cited 2018 Jan 2];Available from:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg95
25. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Clinical Guideline CG 126. Stable Angina:
Management [Internet]. 2011 [cited 2018 Jan 2];Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg126
26. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guideline on Unstable Angina/Non ST Elevation Myocardial
Infarction, 2nd Ed [Internet]. 2011 [cited 2018 Jan 2]. Available from: www.acadmed.org.my
27. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of ST Elevation Myocardial
Infarction, 3rd Ed [Internet]. 2014. Available from: www.acadmed.org.my
28. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, Berra K, Blankenship JC, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/S
CAI/STS Guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a
report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association for Thoracic Surgery,
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:e44-e164.
29. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, Cushman M, Das SR, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2017
Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e146-e603.
30. Wan Azman W. Annual Report of the NCVD-ACS Registry, Year 2014-2015. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia:
National Cardiovascular Disease Database; 2017.
31. Maddox TM, Plomondon ME, Petrich M, Tsai TT, Gethoffer H, et al. A national clinical quality program for
Veterans Affairs catheterization laboratories (from the Veterans Affairs clinical assessment, reporting, and
tracking program). Am J Cardiol. 2014;114:1750-1757.
32. Reis SE, Holubkov R, Conrad Smith AJ, Kelsey SF, Sharaf BL, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunction
is highly prevalent in women with chest pain in the absence of coronary artery disease: results from the
NHLBI WISE study. Am Heart J. 2001;141:735-741.
33. Buchthal SD, den Hollander JA, Merz CNB, Rogers WJ, Pepine CJ, et al. Abnormal Myocardial Phosphorus-31
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy in Women with Chest Pain but Normal Coronary Angiograms.
N Engl J Med. 2000;342:829-835.
34. Doyle M, Weinberg N, Pohost GM, Bairey Merz CN, Shaw LJ, et al. Prognostic value of global MR
myocardial perfusion imaging in women with suspected myocardial ischemia and no obstructive coronary
disease: results from the NHLBI-sponsored WISE (Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation) study. JACC
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2010;3:1030-1036.
35. Johnson BD, Shaw LJ, Buchthal SD, Bairey Merz CN, Kim H-W, et al. Prognosis in women with myocardial
ischemia in the absence of obstructive coronary disease: results from the National Institutes of Health-National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute-Sponsored Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). Circulation.
2004;109:2993-2999.
36. Cannon RO. Microvascular Angina and the Continuing Dilemma of Chest Pain with Normal Coronary
Angiograms. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:877-885.
37. Kobayashi Y, Fearon WF, Honda Y, Tanaka S, Pargaonkar V, et al. Effect of Sex Differences on Invasive
Measures of Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction in Patients With Angina in the Absence of Obstructive
Coronary Artery Disease. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8:1433-1441.
38. Bourassa MG, Butnaru A, Lespérance J, Tardif J-C. Symptomatic myocardial bridges: overview of ischemic
mechanisms and current diagnostic and treatment strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:351-359.
39. Corban MT, Hung OY, Eshtehardi P, Rasoul-Arzrumly E, McDaniel M, et al. Myocardial bridging:
contemporary understanding of pathophysiology with implications for diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:2346-2355.
40. Chauhan A, Mullins PA, Thuraisingham SI, Taylor G, Petch MC, et al. Abnormal cardiac pain perception in
syndrome X. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994;24:329-335.
41. Cannon RO, Quyyumi AA, Schenke WH, Fananapazir L, Tucker EE, et al. Abnormal cardiac sensitivity in
patients with chest pain and normal coronary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1990;16:1359–1366.
42. Kannel WB, Feinleib M. Natural history of angina pectoris in the Framingham study. Prognosis and survival.
Am J Cardiol. 1972;29:154-163.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
100
43. Elveback LR, Connolly DC. Coronary heart disease in residents of Rochester, Minnesota. V. Prognosis of
patients with coronary heart disease based on initial manifestation. Mayo Clin Proc. 1985;60:305-311.
44. Task Force Members, Montalescot G, Sechtem U, Achenbach S, Andreotti F, et al. 2013 ESC guidelines
on the management of stable coronary artery disease: the Task Force on the management of stable
coronary artery disease of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2949-3003.
45. Mock MB, Ringqvist I, Fisher LD, Davis KB, Chaitman BR, et al. Survival of medically treated patients in the
coronary artery surgery study (CASS) registry. Circulation. 1982;66:562-568.
46. Emond M, Mock MB, Davis KB, Fisher LD, Holmes DR, et al. Long-term survival of medically treated
patients in the Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS) Registry. Circulation. 1994;90:2645-2657.
47. Deedwania PC, Carbajal EV. Silent ischemia during daily life is an independent predictor of mortality in
stable angina. Circulation. 1990;81:748-756.
48. Klein J, Chao SY, Berman DS, Rozanski A. Is “silent” myocardial ischemia really as severe as symptomatic
ischemia? The analytical effect of patient selection biases. Circulation. 1994;89:1958-1966.
49. Bruce RA, Hossack KF, DeRouen TA, Hofer V. Enhanced risk assessment for primary coronary heart
disease events by maximal exercise testing: 10 years’ experience of Seattle Heart Watch. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 1983;2:565-573.
50. Hachamovitch R, Berman DS, Shaw LJ, Kiat H, Cohen I, et al. Incremental prognostic value of myocardial
perfusion single photon emission computed tomography for the prediction of cardiac death: differential
stratification for risk of cardiac death and myocardial infarction. Circulation. 1998;97:535-543.
51. Hoque A, Maaieh M, Longaker RA, Stoddard MF. Exercise echocardiography and thallium-201 single-photon
emission computed tomography stress test for 5- and 10-year prognosis of mortality and specific cardiac
events. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2002;15:1326-1334.
52. Eisen A, Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Eagle KA, Goto S, et al. Angina and Future Cardiovascular Events in Stable
Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: Insights From the Reduction of Atherothrombosis for Continued
Health (REACH) Registry. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004080.
53. Dagenais GR, Lu J, Faxon DP, Bogaty P, Adler D, et al. Prognostic impact of the presence and absence of
angina on mortality and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and stable coronary artery
disease: results from the BARI 2D (Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes) trial. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:702–711.
54. Tamis-Holland JE, Lu J, Korytkowski M, Magee M, Rogers WJ, et al. Sex differences in presentation and
outcome among patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease treated with contemporary
medical therapy with or without prompt revascularization: a report from the BARI 2D Trial (Bypass
Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1767-1776.
55. Beatty AL, Spertus JA, Whooley MA. Frequency of Angina Pectoris and Secondary Events in Patients with
Stable Coronary Heart Disease (From the Heart and Soul Study). Am J Cardiol. 2014;114:997-1002.
56. Steg PG, Greenlaw N, Tendera M, Tardif J-C, Ferrari R, et al. Prevalence of anginal symptoms and
myocardial ischemia and their effect on clinical outcomes in outpatients with stable coronary artery disease:
data from the International Observational CLARIFY Registry. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:1651-1659.
57. Lucien C. Grading of Angina Pectoris. Circulation. 1976;54:522-523.
58. Braunwald E. Unstable angina. A classification. Circulation. 1989;80:410-414.
59. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, Mark DB, Al-Khalidi HR, et al. Outcomes of anatomical versus
functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1291-1300.
60. Foy AJ, Dhruva SS, Peterson B, Mandrola JM, Morgan DJ, et al. Coronary Computed Tomography
Angiography vs Functional Stress Testing for Patients With Suspected Coronary Artery Disease:
A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177:1623-1631.
61. Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, Picard MH, Truong QA, et al. Prognostic Value of Noninvasive
Cardiovascular Testing in Patients With Stable Chest Pain: Insights From the PROMISE Trial (Prospective
Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain). Circulation. 2017;135:2320-2332.
62. Diamond GA, Forrester JS. Analysis of probability as an aid in the clinical diagnosis of coronary-artery
disease. N Engl J Med. 1979;300:1350-1358.
63. Pryor DB, Shaw L, McCants CB, Lee KL, Mark DB, et al. Value of the history and physical in identifying
patients at increased risk for coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 1993;118:81-90.
64. Genders TSS, Steyerberg EW, Alkadhi H, Leschka S, Desbiolles L, et al. A clinical prediction rule for the
diagnosis of coronary artery disease: validation, updating, and extension. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1316-1330.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
101
65. Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, Boden WE, Gulati M, et al. Comparative effectiveness of exercise
electrocardiography with or without myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography in
women with suspected coronary artery disease: results from the What Is the Optimal Method for Ischemia
Evaluation in Women (WOMEN) trial. Circulation. 2011;124:1239-1249.
66. Mieres JH, Gulati M, Bairey Merz N, Berman DS, Gerber TC, et al. Role of noninvasive testing in the clinical
evaluation of women with suspected ischemic heart disease: a consensus statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;130:350-379.
67. Shaw LJ, Xie JX, Phillips LM, Goyal A, Reynolds HR, et al. Optimising diagnostic accuracy with the exercise
ECG: opportunities for women and men with stable ischaemic heart disease. Heart Asia. 2016;8:1-7.
68. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Appropriate Use Criteria for Investigations and Revascularization in CAD
[Internet]. National Heart Association of Malaysia; 2015 [cited 2018 Feb 5]. Available from: https://www.
malaysianheart.org/files/55629fdb9531d.pdf
69. Yamaji H, Iwasaki K, Kusachi S, Murakami T, Hirami R, et al. Prediction of acute left main coronary artery
obstruction by 12-lead electrocardiography. ST segment elevation in lead aVR with less ST segment
elevation in lead V(1). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:1348-1354.
70. Gorgels AP, Engelen DJ, Wellens HJ. Lead aVR, a mostly ignored but very valuable lead in clinical
electrocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:1355-1356.
71. Pinkstaff S, Peberdy MA, Kontos MC, Finucane S, Arena R. Quantifying exertion level during exercise
stress testing using percentage of age-predicted maximal heart rate, rate pressure product, and perceived
exertion. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85:1095-1100.
72. Pursnani S, Korley F, Gopaul R, Kanade P, Chandra N, et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention versus
optimal medical therapy in stable coronary artery disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;5:476-490.
73. Stergiopoulos K, Boden WE, Hartigan P, Möbius-Winkler S, Hambrecht R, et al. Percutaneous coronary
intervention outcomes in patients with stable obstructive coronary artery disease and myocardial ischemia:
a collaborative meta-analysis of contemporary randomized clinical trials. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:232-240.
74. Hannan EL, Samadashvili Z, Cozzens K, Walford G, Jacobs AK, et al. Comparative outcomes for patients
who do and do not undergo percutaneous coronary intervention for stable coronary artery disease in New
York. Circulation. 2012;125:1870-1879.
75. Katritsis DG, Ioannidis JPA. Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Versus Conservative Therapy in
Nonacute Coronary Artery Disease: A Meta-Analysis. Circulation. 2005;111:2906-2912.
76. Boden WE, O’Rourke RA, Teo KK, Hartigan PM, Maron DJ, et al. Optimal Medical Therapy with or without
PCI for Stable Coronary Disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503-1516.
77. Nesto RW, Kowalchuk GJ. The ischemic cascade: temporal sequence of hemodynamic, electrocardiographic
and symptomatic expressions of ischemia. Am J Cardiol. 1987;59:23C-30C.
78. Nallamothu N, Ghods M, Heo J, Iskandrian AS. Comparison of thallium-201 single-photon emission
computed tomography and electrocardiographic response during exercise in patients with normal rest
electrocardiographic results. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;25:830-836.
79. Sabharwal NK, Stoykova B, Taneja AK, Lahiri A. A randomized trial of exercise treadmill ECG versus stress
SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging as an initial diagnostic strategy in stable patients with chest pain and
suspected CAD: cost analysis. J Nucl Cardiol 2007;14:174-186.
80. Zacharias K, Ahmadvazir S, Ahmed A, Shah BN, Acosta D, et al. Relative diagnostic, prognostic and
economic value of stress echocardiography versus exercise electrocardiography as initial investigation for
the detection of coronary artery disease in patients with new onset suspected angina. Int J Cardiol Heart
Vasc. 2015;7:124-130.
81. Heijenbrok-Kal MH, Fleischmann KE, Hunink MGM. Stress echocardiography, stress single-photon-emission
computed tomography and electron beam computed tomography for the assessment of coronary artery
disease: a meta-analysis of diagnostic performance. Am Heart J. 2007;154:415-423.
82. Biagini E, Shaw LJ, Poldermans D, Schinkel AFL, Rizzello V, et al. Accuracy of non-invasive techniques for
diagnosis of coronary artery disease and prediction of cardiac events in patients with left bundle branch
block: a meta-analysis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2006;33:1442-1451.
83. Bourque JM, Beller GA. Stress myocardial perfusion imaging for assessing prognosis: an update. JACC
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4:1305-1319.
84. Pijls NHJ, Sels J-WEM. Functional measurement of coronary stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1045–1057.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
102
85. Melikian N, De Bondt P, Tonino P, De Winter O, Wyffels E, et al. Fractional flow reserve and myocardial
perfusion imaging in patients with angiographic multivessel coronary artery disease. JACC Cardiovasc
Interv. 2010;3:307-314.
86. Marwick TH. Stress echocardiography. Heart. 2003;89:113-118.
87. Sicari R, Cortigiani L. The clinical use of stress echocardiography in ischemic heart disease. Cardiovasc
Ultrasound. 2017;15:7.
88. Ling LH, Pellikka PA, Mahoney DW, Oh JK, McCully RB, et al. Atropine augmentation in dobutamine stress
echocardiography: Role and incremental value in a clinical practice setting. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28:551-557.
89. Cornel JH, Bax JJ, Elhendy A, Maat AP, Kimman GJ, et al. Biphasic response to dobutamine predicts
improvement of global left ventricular function after surgical revascularization in patients with stable coronary
artery disease: implications of time course of recovery on diagnostic accuracy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:1002-1010.
90. Picano E, Molinaro S, Pasanisi E. The diagnostic accuracy of pharmacological stress echocardiography for
the assessment of coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Ultrasound. 2008;6:30.
91. Senior R, Monaghan M, Becher H, Mayet J, Nihoyannopoulos P, et al. Stress echocardiography for the
diagnosis and risk stratification of patients with suspected or known coronary artery disease: a critical
appraisal. Supported by the British Society of Echocardiography. Heart Br Card Soc. 2005;91:427-436.
92. Mahajan N, Polavaram L, Vankayala H, Ference B, Wang Y, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of myocardial
perfusion imaging and stress echocardiography for the diagnosis of left main and triple vessel coronary
artery disease: a comparative meta-analysis. Heart Br Card Soc. 2010;96:956-966.
93. Bax JJ, Wijns W, Cornel JH, Visser FC, Boersma E, et al. Accuracy of currently available techniques for
prediction of functional recovery after revascularization in patients with left ventricular dysfunction due to
chronic coronary artery disease: comparison of pooled data. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30:1451-1460.
94. Dolan MS, Gala SS, Dodla S, Abdelmoneim SS, Xie F, et al. Safety and efficacy of commercially available
ultrasound contrast agents for rest and stress echocardiography a multicenter experience. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2009;53:32-38.
95. Plana JC, Mikati IA, Dokainish H, Lakkis N, Abukhalil J, et al. A randomized cross-over study for evaluation
of the effect of image optimization with contrast on the diagnostic accuracy of dobutamine echocardiography
in coronary artery disease The OPTIMIZE Trial. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008;1:145-152.
96. Senior R, Moreo A, Gaibazzi N, Agati L, Tiemann K, et al. Comparison of sulfur hexafluoride microbubble
(SonoVue)-enhanced myocardial contrast echocardiography with gated single-photon emission computed
tomography for detection of significant coronary artery disease: a large European multicenter study. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1353-1361.
97. Geleijnse ML, Elhendy A. Can stress echocardiography compete with perfusion scintigraphy in the
detection of coronary artery disease and cardiac risk assessment? Eur J Echocardiogr. 2000;1:12-21.
98. Jaarsma C, Leiner T, Bekkers SC, Crijns HJ, Wildberger JE, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninvasive
myocardial perfusion imaging using single-photon emission computed tomography, cardiac magnetic
resonance, and positron emission tomography imaging for the detection of obstructive coronary artery
disease: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1719-1728.
99. America YGCJ, Bax JJ, Boersma E, Stokkel M, van der Wall EE. Prognostic value of gated SPECT in
patients with left bundle branch block. J Nucl Cardiol. 2007;14:75-81.
100. Wahl A, Paetsch I, Gollesch A, Roethemeyer S, Foell D, et al. Safety and feasibility of high-dose
dobutamine-atropine stress cardiovascular magnetic resonance for diagnosis of myocardial ischaemia:
experience in 1000 consecutive cases. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:1230-1236.
101. Secknus MA, Marwick TH. Evolution of dobutamine echocardiography protocols and indications: safety
and side effects in 3,011 studies over 5 years. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:1234-1240.
102. Nagel E, Lehmkuhl HB, Bocksch W, Klein C, Vogel U, et al. Noninvasive diagnosis of ischemia-induced
wall motion abnormalities with the use of high-dose dobutamine stress MRI: comparison with dobutamine
stress echocardiography. Circulation. 1999;99:763-770.
103. Nandalur KR, Dwamena BA, Choudhri AF, Nandalur MR, Carlos RC. Diagnostic performance of stress
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in the detection of coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1343-1353.
104. Nagel E. Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging for detection of ischemic heart disease. Heart Metab.
2008;19-21.
105. Vincenti G, Masci PG, Monney P, Rutz T, Hugelshofer S, et al. Stress Perfusion CMR in Patients With
Known and Suspected CAD: Prognostic Value and Optimal Ischemic Threshold for Revascularization.
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:526-537.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
103
106. Greenwood JP, Maredia N, Younger JF, Brown JM, Nixon J, et al. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance and
single-photon emission computed tomography for diagnosis of coronary heart disease (CE-MARC): a
prospective trial. Lancet. 2012;379:453-460.
107. Greenwood JP, Motwani M, Maredia N, Brown JM, Everett CC, et al. Comparison of cardiovascular
magnetic resonance and single-photon emission computed tomography in women with suspected coronary
artery disease from the Clinical Evaluation of Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Coronary Heart Disease
(CE-MARC) Trial. Circulation. 2014;129:1129-1138.
108. Lockie T, Ishida M, Perera D, Chiribiri A, De Silva K, et al. High-resolution magnetic resonance myocardial
perfusion imaging at 3.0-Tesla to detect hemodynamically significant coronary stenoses as determined by
fractional flow reserve. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:70-75.
109. O’Rourke RA, Brundage BH, Froelicher VF, Greenland P, Grundy SM, et al. American College of Cardiology
/American Heart Association Expert Consensus Document on electron-beam computed tomography for the
diagnosis and prognosis of coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:326-340.
110. McLaughlin VV, Balogh T, Rich S. Utility of electron beam computed tomography to stratify patients
presenting to the emergency room with chest pain. Am J Cardiol. 1999;84:327-328, A8.
111. Georgiou D, Budoff MJ, Kaufer E, Kennedy JM, Lu B, et al. Screening patients with chest pain in the
emergency department using electron beam tomography: a follow-up study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:105-110.
112. Arbab-Zadeh A, Miller JM, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, Niinuma H, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of CT Coronary
Angiography According to Pretest Probability of Coronary Artery Disease and Severity of Coronary Arterial
Calcification: The CorE-64 International, Multicenter Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:379-387.
113. Paech DC, Weston AR. A systematic review of the clinical effectiveness of 64-slice or higher computed
tomography angiography as an alternative to invasive coronary angiography in the investigation of
suspected coronary artery disease. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2011;11:32.
114. Gorenoi V, Schönermark MP, Hagen A. CT coronary angiography vs. invasive coronary angiography in
CHD. GMS Health Technol Assess [Internet]. 2012;8. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC3334923/
115. Meijboom WB, van Mieghem CAG, Mollet NR, Pugliese F, Weustink AC, et al. 64-slice computed tomography
coronary angiography in patients with high, intermediate, or low pretest probability of significant coronary
artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1469-1475.
116. Meijboom WB, Meijs MFL, Schuijf JD, Cramer MJ, Mollet NR, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 64-slice
computed tomography coronary angiography: a prospective, multicenter, multivendor study. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008;52:2135-2144.
117. Miller JM, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, Arbab-Zadeh A, Niinuma H, et al. Diagnostic performance of coronary
angiography by 64-row CT. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2324-2336.
118. Rochitte CE, George RT, Chen MY, Arbab-Zadeh A, Dewey M, et al. Computed tomography angiography
and perfusion to assess coronary artery stenosis causing perfusion defects by single photon emission
computed tomography: the CORE320 study. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1120-1130.
119. Chow BJW, Abraham A, Wells GA, Chen L, Ruddy TD, et al. Diagnostic accuracy and impact of computed
tomographic coronary angiography on utilization of invasive coronary angiography. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging. 2009;2:16-23.
120. Budoff MJ, Dowe D, Jollis JG, Gitter M, Sutherland J, et al. Diagnostic performance of 64-multidetector row
coronary computed tomographic angiography for evaluation of coronary artery stenosis in individuals
without known coronary artery disease: results from the prospective multicenter ACCURACY (Assessment
by Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography of Individuals Undergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography)
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1724-1732.
121. Vavere AL, Arbab-Zadeh A, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, Niinuma H, et al. Coronary Artery Stenoses: Accuracy
of 64-Detector Row CT Angiography in Segments with Mild, Moderate, or Severe Calcification-A Subanalysis
of the CORE-64 Trial. Radiology. 2011;261:100-108.
122. Group CCTW, Taylor AJ, Cerqueira M, Hodgson JM, Mark D, et al. ACCF/SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/ASNC/
NASCI/SCAI/SCMR 2010 Appropriate Use Criteria for Cardiac Computed Tomography: A Report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, the Society of
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, the American College of Radiology, the American Heart
Association, the American Society of Echocardiography, the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, the
North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging, the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, and the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. Circulation. 2010;122:e525-e555.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
104
123. Mark DB, Berman DS, Budoff MJ, Carr JJ, Gerber TC, et al. ACCF/ACR/AHA/NASCI/SAIP/SCAI/SCCT
2010 expert consensus document on coronary computed tomographic angiography: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Expert Consensus Documents. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2010;55:26632699.
124. Weustink AC, Nieman K, Pugliese F, Mollet NR, Meijboom WB, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of computed
tomography angiography in patients after bypass grafting: comparison with invasive coronary angiography.
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2009;2:816-824.
125. Lauer MS, Pothier CE, Magid DJ, Smith SS, Kattan MW. An externally validated model for predicting
long-term survival after exercise treadmill testing in patients with suspected coronary artery disease and a
normal electrocardiogram. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:821-828.
126. Ho K-T, Miller TD, Hodge DO, Bailey KR, Gibbons RJ. Use of a simple clinical score to predict prognosis of
patients with normal or mildly abnormal resting electrocardiographic findings undergoing evaluation for
coronary artery disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 2002;77:515-521.
127. Miller TD, Roger VL, Hodge DO, Gibbons RJ. A simple clinical score accurately predicts outcome in a
community-based population undergoing stress testing. Am J Med. 2005;118:866-872.
128. Sekhri N, Perel P, Clayton T, Feder GS, Hemingway H, et al. A 10-year prognostic model for patients with
suspected angina attending a chest pain clinic. Heart. 2016;102:869-875.
129. Hjemdahl P, Eriksson SV, Held C, Forslund L, Näsman P, et al. Favourable long term prognosis in stable
angina pectoris: an extended follow up of the angina prognosis study in Stockholm (APSIS). Heart.
2006;92:177-182.
130. Spertus JA, Jones P, McDonell M, Fan V, Fihn SD. Health status predicts long-term outcome in outpatients
with coronary disease. Circulation. 2002;106:43-49.
131. Rapsomaniki E, Shah A, Perel P, Denaxas S, George J, et al. Prognostic models for stable coronary artery
disease based on electronic health record cohort of 102 023 patients. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:844-852.
132. Frey P, Waters DD, DeMicco DA, Breazna A, Samuels L, et al. Impact of smoking on cardiovascular events
in patients with coronary disease receiving contemporary medical therapy (from the Treating to New
Targets [TNT] and the Incremental Decrease in End Points Through Aggressive Lipid Lowering [IDEAL]
trials). Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:145-150.
133. Daly CA, Stavola BD, Sendon JLL, Tavazzi L, Boersma E, et al. Predicting prognosis in stable angina-
results from the Euro heart survey of stable angina: prospective observational study. BMJ. 2006;332:262-267.
134. Daly C, Norrie J, Murdoch DL, Ford I, Dargie HJ, et al. The value of routine non-invasive tests to predict
clinical outcome in stable angina. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:532-540.
135. Clayton TC, Lubsen J, Pocock SJ, Vokó Z, Kirwan B-A, et al. Risk score for predicting death, myocardial
infarction, and stroke in patients with stable angina, based on a large randomised trial cohort of patients.
BMJ. 2005;331:869.
136. Kaul P, Naylor CD, Armstrong PW, Mark DB, Theroux P, et al. Assessment of activity status and survival
according to the Canadian Cardiovascular Society angina classification. Can J Cardiol. 2009;25:e225-231.
137. Grenon SM, Vittinghoff E, Owens CD, Conte MS, Whooley M, et al. Peripheral artery disease and risk of
cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery disease: insights from the Heart and Soul Study.
Vasc Med. 2013;18:176-184.
138. Gansevoort RT, Correa-Rotter R, Hemmelgarn BR, Jafar TH, Heerspink HJL, et al. Chronic kidney disease
and cardiovascular risk: epidemiology, mechanisms, and prevention. Lancet. 2013;382:339-352.
139. Go AS, Chertow GM, Fan D, McCulloch CE, Hsu C. Chronic Kidney Disease and the Risks of Death,
Cardiovascular Events, and Hospitalization. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1296-1305.
140. van der Velde M, Matsushita K, Coresh J, Astor BC, Woodward M, et al. Lower estimated glomerular
filtration rate and higher albuminuria are associated with all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. A
collaborative meta-analysis of high-risk population cohorts. Kidney Int. 2011;79:1341-1352.
141. Berkman LF, Blumenthal J, Burg M, Carney RM, Catellier D, et al. Effects of treating depression and low
perceived social support on clinical events after myocardial infarction: the Enhancing Recovery in Coronary
Heart Disease Patients (ENRICHD) Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3106-3116.
142. Ruo B, Rumsfeld JS, Hlatky MA, Liu H, Browner WS, et al. Depressive symptoms and health-related quality
of life: the Heart and Soul Study. JAMA. 2003;290:215-221.
143. Liao YL, Liu KA, Dyer A, Schoenberger JA, Shekelle RB, et al. Major and minor electrocardiographic
abnormalities and risk of death from coronary heart disease, cardiovascular diseases and all causes in men
and women. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1988;12:1494-1500.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
105
144. Kannel WB, Anderson K, McGee DL, Degatano LS, Stampfer MJ. Nonspecific electrocardiographic
abnormality as a predictor of coronary heart disease: the Framingham Study. Am Heart J. 1987;113:370-376.
145. Larsen CT, Dahlin J, Blackburn H, Scharling H, Appleyard M, et al. Prevalence and prognosis of
electrocardiographic left ventricular hypertrophy, ST segment depression and negative T-wave; the
Copenhagen City Heart Study. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:315-324.
146. Califf RM, Mark DB, Harrell FE, Hlatky MA, Lee KL, et al. Importance of clinical measures of ischemia in the
prognosis of patients with documented coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1988;11:20-26.
147. Hammermeister KE, DeRouen TA, Dodge HT. Variables predictive of survival in patients with coronary
disease. Selection by univariate and multivariate analyses from the clinical, electrocardiographic, exercise,
arteriographic, and quantitative angiographic evaluations. Circulation. 1979;59:421-430.
148. Allman KC, Shaw LJ, Hachamovitch R, Udelson JE. Myocardial viability testing and impact of revascularization
on prognosis in patients with coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction: a meta-analysis. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:1151-1158.
149. Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, Althouse AD, Sansing VV, et al. Impact of left ventricular function and
the extent of ischemia and scar by stress myocardial perfusion imaging on prognosis and therapeutic risk
reduction in diabetic patients with coronary artery disease: results from the Bypass Angioplasty
Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:658-669.
150. Shaw LJ, Weintraub WS, Maron DJ, Hartigan PM, Hachamovitch R, et al. Baseline stress myocardial
perfusion imaging results and outcomes in patients with stable ischemic heart disease randomized to
optimal medical therapy with or without percutaneous coronary intervention. Am Heart J. 2012;164:243-250.
151. Hachamovitch R, Hayes SW, Friedman JD, Cohen I, Berman DS. Comparison of the short-term survival
benefit associated with revascularization compared with medical therapy in patients with no prior coronary
artery disease undergoing stress myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography.
Circulation. 2003;107:2900-2907.
152. Gibbons RJ, Miller TD. Should extensive myocardial ischaemia prompt revascularization to improve
outcomes in chronic coronary artery disease? Eur Heart J. 2015;36:2281-2287.
153. BARI 2D Study Group, Frye RL, August P, Brooks MM, Hardison RM, et al. A randomized trial of therapies
for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2503-2515.
154. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, Jain A, Sopko G, et al. Coronary-Artery Bypass Surgery in Patients with
Left Ventricular Dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1607-1616.
155. ISCHEMIA Study [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2018 Jan 16];Available from: http://www.ischemiatrial.org/
156. Caracciolo EA, Davis KB, Sopko G, et al. Comparison of surgical and medical group survival in patients
with left main equivalent coronary artery disease. Long-term CASS experience. Circulation 1995;91: 2335-44.
157. Eagle KA,Eagle KA, Guyton RA, Davidoff R, et al. ACC/AHA 2004 guideline update for coronary artery
bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1999 Guidelines for Coronary Artery Bypass
Surgery). J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:e213-311.
158. Greenland P, LaBree L, Azen SP, Doherty TM, Detrano RC. Coronary artery calcium score combined with
Framingham score for risk prediction in asymptomatic individuals. JAMA. 2004;291:210-215.
159. Taylor AJ, Bindeman J, Feuerstein I, Cao F, Brazaitis M, et al. Coronary calcium independently predicts
incident premature coronary heart disease over measured cardiovascular risk factors: mean three-year
outcomes in the Prospective Army Coronary Calcium (PACC) project. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:807-814.
160. LaMonte MJ, FitzGerald SJ, Church TS, Barlow CE, Radford NB, et al. Coronary artery calcium score and
coronary heart disease events in a large cohort of asymptomatic men and women. Am J Epidemiol.
2005;162:421-429.
161. Vliegenthart R, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Oei H-HS, van Dijck W, et al. Coronary calcification improves
cardiovascular risk prediction in the elderly. Circulation. 2005;112:572-577.
162. Kondos GT, Hoff JA, Sevrukov A, Daviglus ML, Garside DB, et al. Electron-beam tomography coronary
artery calcium and cardiac events: a 37-month follow-up of 5635 initially asymptomatic low- to
intermediate-risk adults. Circulation. 2003;107:2571-2576.
163. Arad Y, Goodman KJ, Roth M, Newstein D, Guerci AD. Coronary Calcification, Coronary Disease Risk
Factors, C-Reactive Protein, and Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Events: The St. Francis Heart
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:158-165.
164. Polonsky TS, McClelland RL, Jorgensen NW, Bild DE, Burke GL, et al. Coronary artery calcium score and
risk classification for coronary heart disease prediction. JAMA. 2010;303:1610-1616.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
106
165. McClelland RL, Jorgensen NW, Budoff M, Blaha MJ, Post WS, et al. 10-Year Coronary Heart Disease Risk
Prediction Using Coronary Artery Calcium and Traditional Risk Factors: Derivation in the MESA (Multi-Ethnic
Study of Atherosclerosis) With Validation in the HNR (Heinz Nixdorf Recall) Study and the DHS (Dallas
Heart Study). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1643-1653.
166. Rumberger JA, Simons DB, Fitzpatrick LA, Sheedy PF, Schwartz RS. Coronary artery calcium area by
electron-beam computed tomography and coronary atherosclerotic plaque area. A histopathologic
correlative study. Circulation. 1995;92:2157-2162.
167. Sarwar A, Shaw LJ, Shapiro MD, Blankstein R, Hoffmann U, et al. Diagnostic and prognostic value of
absence of coronary artery calcification. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2009;2:675-688.
168. Detrano R, Guerci AD, Carr JJ, Bild DE, Burke G, et al. Coronary calcium as a predictor of coronary events
in four racial or ethnic groups. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1336-1345.
169. Blaha M, Budoff MJ, Shaw LJ, Khosa F, Rumberger JA, et al. Absence of coronary artery calcification and
all-cause mortality. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2009;2:692-700.
170. Greenland P, Bonow RO. How Low-Risk Is a Coronary Calcium Score of Zero?: The Importance of
Conditional Probability. Circulation. 2008;117:1627-1629.
171. Schenker MP, Dorbala S, Hong ECT, Rybicki FJ, Hachamovitch R, et al. Interrelation of coronary
calcification, myocardial ischemia, and outcomes in patients with intermediate likelihood of coronary artery
disease: a combined positron emission tomography/computed tomography study. Circulation.2008;
117:1693-1700.
172. Chow BJW, Small G, Yam Y, Chen L, Achenbach S, et al. Incremental prognostic value of cardiac
computed tomography in coronary artery disease using CONFIRM: COroNary computed tomography
angiography evaluation for clinical outcomes: an InteRnational Multicenter registry. Circ Cardiovasc
Imaging. 2011;4:463-472.
173. Ostrom MP, Gopal A, Ahmadi N, Nasir K, Yang E, et al. Mortality incidence and the severity of coronary
atherosclerosis assessed by computed tomography angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1335-1343.
174. Hulten EA, Carbonaro S, Petrillo SP, Mitchell JD, Villines TC. Prognostic value of cardiac computed
tomography angiography: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1237-1247.
175. Pijls NHJ, van Schaardenburgh P, Manoharan G, Boersma E, Bech J-W, et al. Percutaneous coronary
intervention of functionally nonsignificant stenosis: 5-year follow-up of the DEFER Study. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2007;49:2105–2111.
176. Tonino PAL, Fearon WF, De Bruyne B, Oldroyd KG, Leesar MA, et al. Angiographic versus functional
severity of coronary artery stenoses in the FAME study fractional flow reserve versus angiography in
multivessel evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:2816-2821.
177. Califf RM, Armstrong PW, Carver JR, D’Agostino RB, Strauss WE. 27th Bethesda Conference: matching
the intensity of risk factor management with the hazard for coronary disease events. Task Force 5.
Stratification of patients into high, medium and low risk subgroups for purposes of risk factor management.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:1007-1019.
178. Lee JM, Koo B-K, Shin E-S, Nam C-W, Doh J-H, et al. Clinical Outcomes of Deferred Lesions With Angiographically
Insignificant Stenosis But Low Fractional Flow Reserve. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e006071.
179. Hamilos M, Muller O, Cuisset T, Ntalianis A, Chlouverakis G, et al. Long-term clinical outcome after
fractional flow reserve-guided treatment in patients with angiographically equivocal left main coronary
artery stenosis. Circulation. 2009;120:1505-1512.
180. Koo B-K, Park K-W, Kang H-J, Cho Y-S, Chung W-Y, et al. Physiological evaluation of the provisional side-branch
intervention strategy for bifurcation lesions using fractional flow reserve. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:726-732.
181. Ntalianis A, Sels J-W, Davidavicius G, Tanaka N, Muller O, et al. Fractional flow reserve for the assessment
of nonculprit coronary artery stenoses in patients with acute myocardial infarction. JACC Cardiovasc Interv.
2010;3:1274-1281.
182. Tonino PAL, De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, Siebert U, Ikeno F, et al. Fractional Flow Reserve versus Angiography
for Guiding Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:213-224.
183. De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, Kalesan B, Barbato E, Tonino PAL, et al. Fractional Flow Reserve-Guided PCI
versus Medical Therapy in Stable Coronary Disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:991-1001.
184. De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NHJ, Barbato E, Tonino P, et al. Fractional Flow Reserve-Guided PCI for
Stable Coronary Artery Disease. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1208-1217.
185. Wijns W, Kolh P, Danchin N, Falk V, Folliguet T, et al. Guidelines on myocardial revascularization. Eur
Heart J. 2010;31:2501-2555.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
107
186. Escaned J, Echavarría-Pinto M, Garcia-Garcia HM, van de Hoef TP, de Vries T, et al. Prospective
Assessment of the Diagnostic Accuracy of Instantaneous Wave-Free Ratio to Assess Coronary Stenosis
Relevance: Results of ADVISE II International, Multicenter Study (ADenosine Vasodilator Independent
Stenosis Evaluation II). JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8:824-833.
187. Davies JE, Sen S, Dehbi H-M, Al-Lamee R, Petraco R, et al. Use of the Instantaneous Wave-free Ratio or
Fractional Flow Reserve in PCI. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1824-1834.
188. Götberg M, Christiansen EH, Gudmundsdottir IJ, Sandhall L, Danielewicz M, et al. Instantaneous
Wave-free Ratio versus Fractional Flow Reserve to Guide PCI. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1813-1823.
189. Wu W, Pan D-R, Foin N, Pang S, Ye P, et al. Noninvasive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary
computed tomography angiography for identification of ischemic lesions: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Sci Rep. 2016;6.
190. Mintz G. Clinical Utility of Intravascular Imaging and Physiology in Coronary Artery Disease.J am Coll
Cardiol 2014: 64: 207-222.
191. Lotfi A, Jeremias A, Fearon WF, Feldman MD, Mehran R et al. Expert Consensus Statement on the Use of
Fractional Flow Reserve, Intravascular Ultrasound, and Optical Coherence Tomography: A Consensus
Statement of the Society of Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. Catheterization and Cardiovascular
Interventions 00:00-00 (2013)
192. Mozaffarian D. Dietary and Policy Priorities for Cardiovascular Disease, Diabetes, and Obesity: A
Comprehensive Review. Circulation. 2016;133:187-225.
193. Astrup A, Dyerberg J, Elwood P, Hermansen K, Hu FB, et al. The role of reducing intakes of saturated fat
in the prevention of cardiovascular disease: where does the evidence stand in 2010? Am J Clin Nutr.
2011;93:684-688.
194. Ricco A, Chiaradia G, Piscitelli M, Torre GL. The effects of Mediterranean Diet on Cardiovascular diseases:
a systematic review. Ital J Public Health. 2012;4:119-127.
195. Sofi F, Abbate R, Gensini GF, Casini A. Accruing evidence on benefits of adherence to the Mediterranean
diet on health: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;92:1189-1196.
196. Sofi F, Macchi C, Abbate R, Gensini GF, Casini A. Mediterranean diet and health status: an updated
meta-analysis and a proposal for a literature-based adherence score. Public Health Nutr. 2014;17:2769-2782.
197. Mitrou PN, Kipnis V, Thiébaut ACM, Reedy J, Subar AF, et al. Mediterranean dietary pattern and prediction
of all-cause mortality in a US population: results from the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study. Arch Intern
Med. 2007;167:2461-2468.
198. Knoops KTB, Groot de LC, Fidanza F, Alberti-Fidanza A, Kromhout D, et al. Comparison of three different
dietary scores in relation to 10-year mortality in elderly European subjects: the HALE project. Eur J Clin
Nutr. 2006;60:746-755.
199. Liyanage T, Ninomiya T, Wang A, Neal B, Jun M, et al. Effects of the Mediterranean Diet on Cardiovascular
Outcomes-A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLOS ONE. 2016;11:e0159252.
200. Bloomfield HE, Koeller E, Greer N, MacDonald R, Kane R, et al. Effects on Health Outcomes of a
Mediterranean Diet With No Restriction on Fat Intake: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Ann Intern
Med. 2016;165:491-500.
201. Siervo M, Lara J, Chowdhury S, Ashor A, Oggioni C, et al. Effects of the Dietary Approach to Stop
Hypertension (DASH) diet on cardiovascular risk factors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Nutr.
2015;113:1-15.
202. Atkins JL, Whincup PH, Morris RW, Lennon LT, Papacosta O, et al. Dietary patterns and the risk of CVD
and all-cause mortality in older British men. Br J Nutr. 2016;116:1246-1255.
203. Ford ES, Caspersen CJ. Sedentary behaviour and cardiovascular disease: a review of prospective studies.
Int J Epidemiol. 2012;41:1338-1353.
204. Taylor RS, Brown A, Ebrahim S, Jolliffe J, Noorani H, et al. Exercise-based rehabilitation for patients with
coronary heart disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Med.
2004;116:682-692.
205. Clark AM, Hartling L, Vandermeer B, McAlister FA. Meta-analysis: secondary prevention programs for
patients with coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 2005;143:659-672.
206. Williams MA, Ades PA, Hamm LF, Keteyian SJ, LaFontaine TP, et al. Clinical evidence for a health benefit
from cardiac rehabilitation: an update. Am Heart J. 2006;152:835-841.
207. Taylor RS, Unal B, Critchley JA, Capewell S. Mortality reductions in patients receiving exercise-based
cardiac rehabilitation: how much can be attributed to cardiovascular risk factor improvements? Eur J
Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2006;13:369-374.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
208. Stewart RAH, Held C, Hadziosmanovic N, Armstrong PW, Cannon CP, et al. Physical Activity and Mortality
in Patients With Stable Coronary Heart Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1689-1700.
209. Artham SM, Lavie CJ, Milani RV. Cardiac rehabilitation programs markedly improve high-risk profiles in
coronary patients with high psychological distress. South Med J. 2008;101:262-267.
210. Milani RV, Lavie CJ. Impact of cardiac rehabilitation on depression and its associated mortality. Am J Med.
2007;120:799-806.
211. Shah ND, Dunlay SM, Ting HH, Montori VM, Thomas RJ, et al. Long-term medication adherence after
myocardial infarction: experience of a community. Am J Med. 2009;122:961.e7-13.
212. Samitz G, Egger M, Zwahlen M. Domains of physical activity and all-cause mortality: systematic review and
dose-response meta-analysis of cohort studies. Int J Epidemiol. 2011;40:1382-1400.
213. Löllgen H, Böckenhoff A, Knapp G. Physical activity and all-cause mortality: an updated meta-analysis with
different intensity categories. Int J Sports Med. 2009;30:213-224.
214. Wen CP, Wai JPM, Tsai MK, Yang YC, Cheng TYD, et al. Minimum amount of physical activity for reduced
mortality and extended life expectancy: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2011;378:1244-1253.
215. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US), National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion (US), Office on Smoking and Health (US). How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The
Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-Attributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon General [Internet].
Atlanta (GA): Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US); 2010. Available from: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK53017/
216. Blanco-Cedres L, Daviglus ML, Garside DB, Liu K, Pirzada A, et al. Relation of cigarette smoking to 25-year
mortality in middle-aged men with low baseline serum cholesterol: the Chicago Heart Association Detection
Project in Industry. Am J Epidemiol. 2002;155:354-360.
217. Leone A. Relationship between cigarette smoking and other coronary risk factors in atherosclerosis: risk of
cardiovascular disease and preventive measures. Curr Pharm Des. 2003;9:2417-2423.
218. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (US) Office on Smoking and Health.
The Health Consequences of Smoking-50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General [Internet].
Atlanta (GA): Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US); 2014. Available from: http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK179276/
219. Teo KK, Ounpuu S, Hawken S, Pandey MR, Valentin V, et al. Tobacco use and risk of myocardial infarction
in 52 countries in the INTERHEART study: a case-control study. Lancet. 2006;368:647-658.
220. Office on Smoking and Health (US). The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco
Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General [Internet]. Atlanta (GA): Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (US); 2006. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK44324/
221. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A
Report of the Surgeon General [Internet]. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2016 [cited 2018 Feb 5]. Available from: https://e-cigarettes.
surgeongeneral.gov/documents/2016_sgr_full_report_non-508.pdf
222. Pisinger C, Døssing M. A systematic review of health effects of electronic cigarettes. Prev Med.
2014;69:248-260.
223. Angelantonio ED, Bhupathiraju SN, Wormser D, Gao P, Kaptoge S, et al. Body-mass index and all-cause
mortality: individual-participant-data meta-analysis of 239 prospective studies in four continents. The Lancet.
2016;388:776-786.
224. Flegal KM, Graubard BI, Williamson DF, Gail MH. Cause-specific excess deaths associated with
underweight, overweight, and obesity. JAMA. 2007;298:2028-2037.
225. Prospective Studies Collaboration, Whitlock G, Lewington S, Sherliker P, Clarke R, et al. Body-mass index
and cause-specific mortality in 900 000 adults: collaborative analyses of 57 prospective studies. Lancet.
2009;373:1083-1096.
226. Lenz M, Richter T, Mühlhauser I. The morbidity and mortality associated with overweight and obesity in
adulthood: a systematic review. Dtsch Arzteblatt Int. 2009;106:641-648.
227. Somers VK, White DP, Amin R, Abraham WT, Costa F, et al., American Heart Association Council for High
Blood Pressure Research Professional Education Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, American
Heart Association Stroke Council, American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular Nursing,
American College of Cardiology Foundation. Sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease: an American Heart
Association/american College Of Cardiology Foundation Scientific Statement from the American Heart
Association Council for High Blood Pressure Research Professional Education Committee, Council on
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
109
Clinical Cardiology, Stroke Council, and Council On Cardiovascular Nursing. In collaboration with the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute National Center on Sleep Disorders Research (National Institutes
of Health). Circulation. 2008;118:1080-1111
228. Young T, Finn L, Peppard PE, Szklo-Coxe M, Austin D, et al. Sleep disordered breathing and mortality:
eighteen-year follow-up of the Wisconsin sleep cohort. Sleep. 2008;31:1071-1078.
229. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. Management of obesity:
a national clinical guideline [Internet]. Edinburgh: Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; 2010.
Available from: http://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/sign115.pdf
230. Magkos F, Fraterrigo G, Yoshino J, Luecking C, Kirbach K, et al. Effects of Moderate and Subsequent
Progressive Weight Loss on Metabolic Function and Adipose Tissue Biology in Humans with Obesity. Cell
Metab. 2016;23:591-601.
231. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, Safford M, Knowler WC, et al. Benefits of modest weight loss in improving
cardiovascular risk factors in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2011;34:1481-1486.
232. Look AHEAD Research Group, Wing RR. Long-term effects of a lifestyle intervention on weight and
cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: four-year results of the Look AHEAD
trial. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170:1566-1575.
233. Leblanc ES, O’Connor E, Whitlock EP, Patnode CD, Kapka T. Effectiveness of primary care-relevant
treatments for obesity in adults: a systematic evidence review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:434-447.
234. US Department of Health and Human Service. Guidance for Industry Developing Products for Weight
Management [Internet]. 2007 [cited 2018 Jan 2]. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm071612.pdf
235. Li Z, Maglione M, Tu W, Mojica W, Arterburn D, et al. Meta-analysis: pharmacologic treatment of obesity.
Ann Intern Med. 2005;142:532-546.
236. Kim KK, Cho H-J, Kang H-C, Youn B-B, Lee K-R. Effects on Weight Reduction and Safety of Short-Term
Phentermine Administration in Korean Obese People. Yonsei Med J. 2006;47:614-625.
237. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN, Sjöström L. XENical in the prevention of diabetes in obese
subjects (XENDOS) study: a randomized study of orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes for the prevention
of type 2 diabetes in obese patients. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:155-161.
238. Hollander PA, Elbein SC, Hirsch IB, Kelley D, McGill J, et al. Role of orlistat in the treatment of obese
patients with type 2 diabetes. A 1-year randomized double-blind study. Diabetes Care. 1998;21:1288-1294.
239. Lindgärde F. The effect of orlistat on body weight and coronary heart disease risk profile in obese patients:
the Swedish Multimorbidity Study. J Intern Med. 2000;248:245-254.
240. Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, Greenway F, Halpern A, et al. A Randomized, Controlled Trial of 3.0 mg
of Liraglutide in Weight Management. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:11-22.
241. Flum DR, Dellinger EP. Impact of gastric bypass operation on survival: a population-based analysis. J Am
Coll Surg. 2004;199:543-551.
242. Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, Halverson RC, Simper SC, et al. Long-Term Mortality after Gastric
Bypass Surgery. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:753-761.
243. Busetto L, Mirabelli D, Petroni ML, Mazza M, Favretti F, et al. Comparative long-term mortality after
laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding versus nonsurgical controls. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2007;3:496-502;
discussion 502.
244. Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Schauer PR, Young JB. Surgical Management of Obesity and the Relationship to
Cardiovascular Disease. Circulation. 2013;127:945-959.
245. Sjöström L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, Sjöström CD, Karason K, et al. Bariatric surgery and long-term
cardiovascular events. JAMA. 2012;307:56-65.
246. Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet
therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71-86.
247. Collaborative overview of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy-I: Prevention of death, myocardial
infarction, and stroke by prolonged antiplatelet therapy in various categories of patients. Antiplatelet
Trialists’ Collaboration. BMJ. 1994;308:81-106.
248. Juul-Möller S, Edvardsson N, Jahnmatz B, Rosén A, Sørensen S, et al. Double-blind trial of aspirin in
primary prevention of myocardial infarction in patients with stable chronic angina pectoris. The Swedish
Angina Pectoris Aspirin Trial (SAPAT) Group. Lancet Lond Engl. 1992;340:1421-1425.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
249. CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomised, blinded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of
ischaemic events (CAPRIE). CAPRIE Steering Committee. Lancet. 1996;348:1329-1339.
250. Paradiso-Hardy FL, Angelo CM, Lanctôt KL, Cohen EA. Hematologic dyscrasia associated with ticlopidine
therapy: evidence for causality. Can Med Assoc J. 2000;163:1441-1448.
251. Costa J, Ferro JM, Matias-Guiu J, Alvarez-Sabin J, Torres F. Triflusal for preventing serious vascular
events in people at high risk. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;CD004296.
252. The Clopidogrel in Unstable Angina to Prevent Recurrent Events Trial Investigators. Effects of Clopidogrel
in Addition to Aspirin in Patients with Acute Coronary Syndromes without ST-Segment Elevation. N Engl J
Med. 2001;345:494-502.
253. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Fihn SD, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on
Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: A Report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2016;68:1082-1115.
254. Alnasser SMA, Huang W, Gore JM, Steg PG, Eagle KA, et al. Late Consequences of Acute Coronary
Syndromes: Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) Follow-up. Am J Med. 2015;128:766-775.
255. Mauri L, Kereiakes DJ, Yeh RW, Driscoll-Shempp P, Cutlip DE, et al. Twelve or 30 Months of Dual
Antiplatelet Therapy after Drug-Eluting Stents. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:2155-2166.
256. Bhatt DL, Fox KAA, Hacke W, Berger PB, Black HR, et al. Clopidogrel and Aspirin versus Aspirin Alone for
the Prevention of Atherothrombotic Events. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1706-1717.
257. Bhatt DL, Flather MD, Hacke W, Berger PB, Black HR, et al. Patients with prior myocardial infarction,
stroke, or symptomatic peripheral arterial disease in the CHARISMA trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:1982–1988.
258. Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, Steg PG, Storey RF, et al. Long-Term Use of Ticagrelor in Patients with
Prior Myocardial Infarction. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1791-1800.
259. Gargiulo G, Windecker S, Costa BR da, Feres F, Hong M-K, et al. Short term versus long term dual
antiplatelet therapy after implantation of drug eluting stent in patients with or without diabetes: systematic
review and meta-analysis of individual participant data from randomised trials. BMJ. 2016;355:i5483.
260. Bittl JA, Baber U, Bradley SM, Wijeysundera DN. Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy: A Systematic
Review for the 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in
Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1116-1139.
261. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, Calkins H, Cigarroa JE, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the
management of patients with atrial fibrillation: executive summary: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.
Circulation. 2014;130:2071-2104.
262. Kirchhof P, Benussi S, Kotecha D, Ahlsson A, Atar D, et al. 2016 ESC Guidelines for the management of
atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with EACTS. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2893-2962.
263. Renda G, Ricci F, Giugliano RP, et al. Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants in patients with atrial
fibrillation and valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:1363-1371.
264. Lip GYH, Huber K, Andreotti F, Arnesen H, Airaksinen JK, et al. Antithrombotic management of atrial
fibrillation patients presenting with acute coronary syndrome and/or undergoing coronary stenting: executive
summary—a Consensus Document of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Thrombosis,
endorsed by the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) and the European Association of Percutaneous
Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI). Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1311-1318.
265. Lip GYH, Windecker S, Huber K, Kirchhof P, Marin F, et al. Management of antithrombotic therapy in atrial
fibrillation patients presenting with acute coronary syndrome and/or undergoing percutaneous coronary or
valve interventions: a joint consensus document of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on
Thrombosis, European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), European Association of Percutaneous
Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI) and European Association of Acute Cardiac Care (ACCA) endorsed
by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) and Asia-Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS). Eur Heart J.
2014;35:3155-3179.
266. Gibson CM, Mehran R, Bode C, Halperin J, Verheugt FW, et al. Prevention of Bleeding in Patients with
Atrial Fibrillation Undergoing PCI. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:2423-2434.
267. Cannon CP, Bhatt DL, Oldgren J, Lip GYH, Ellis SG, et al. Dual Antithrombotic Therapy with Dabigatran
after PCI in Atrial Fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1513-1524.
268. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Bosch J, Dagenais GR, Hart RG, et al. Rivaroxaban with or without Aspirin in
Stable Cardiovascular Disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1319-1330.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
269. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration, Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, Holland LE, et
al. Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000
participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet. 2010;376:1670-1681.
270. Silverman MG, Ference BA, Im K, Wiviott SD, Giugliano RP, et al. Association Between Lowering LDL-C
and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction Among Different Therapeutic Interventions: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. JAMA. 2016;316:1289-1297.
271. Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study Group. Randomised trial of cholesterol lowering in 4444 patients
with coronary heart disease: the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). Lancet. 1994;344:1383-1389.
272. LaRosa JC, Grundy SM, Waters DD, Shear C, Barter P, et al. Intensive Lipid Lowering with Atorvastatin in
Patients with Stable Coronary Disease. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1425–1435.
273. Pedersen TR, Faergeman O, Kastelein JJP, Olsson AG, Tikkanen MJ, et al. High-dose atorvastatin vs
usual-dose simvastatin for secondary prevention after myocardial infarction: the IDEAL study: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;294:2437-2445.
274. Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol lowering with
simvastatin in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;360:7-22.
275. Collins R, Reith C, Emberson J, Armitage J, Baigent C, et al. Interpretation of the evidence for the efficacy
and safety of statin therapy. Lancet. 2016;388:2532-2561.
276. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, McCagg A, White JA, et al. Ezetimibe Added to Statin Therapy
after Acute Coronary Syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2387-2397.
277. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Keech AC, Honarpour N, Wiviott SD, et al. Evolocumab and Clinical Outcomes
in Patients with Cardiovascular Disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1713-1722.
278. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guideline Management of Dyslipidaemia 2017 (5th Edition)
[Internet]. 2017 [cited 2018 Jan 16]. Available from: www.acadmed.org.my
279. Ridker PM, Mora S, Rose L, JUPITER Trial Study Group. Percent reduction in LDL cholesterol following
high-intensity statin therapy: potential implications for guidelines and for the prescription of emerging
lipid-lowering agents. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1373-1379.
280. Nissen SE, Tuzcu EM, Schoenhagen P, Brown BG, Ganz P, et al. Effect of intensive compared with
moderate lipid-lowering therapy on progression of coronary atherosclerosis: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2004;291:1071-1080.
281. Nissen SE, Nicholls SJ, Sipahi I, Libby P, Raichlen JS, et al. Effect of Very High-Intensity Statin Therapy on
Regression of Coronary Atherosclerosis: The ASTEROID Trial. JAMA. 2006;295:1556-1565.
282. Tsujita K, Sugiyama S, Sumida H, Shimomura H, Yamashita T, et al. Impact of Dual Lipid-Lowering
Strategy With Ezetimibe and Atorvastatin on Coronary Plaque Regression in Patients With Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention: The Multicenter Randomized Controlled PRECISE-IVUS Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2015;66:495-507.
283. Nicholls SJ, Puri R, Anderson T, Ballantyne CM, Cho L, et al. Effect of Evolocumab on Progression of
Coronary Disease in Statin-Treated Patients: The GLAGOV Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2016;316:2373-2384.
284. Navarese EP, Robinson JG, Kowalewski M, et al. Association Between Baseline LDL-C Level and Total
and Cardiovascular Mortality After LDL-C LoweringA Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA.
2018;319(15):1566-1579
285. Briguori C, Visconti G, Focaccio A, Golia B, Chieffo A, et al. Novel approaches for preventing or limiting
events (Naples) II trial: impact of a single high loading dose of atorvastatin on periprocedural myocardial
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:2157-2163.
286. Di Sciascio G, Patti G, Pasceri V, Gaspardone A, Colonna G, et al. Efficacy of atorvastatin reload in
patients on chronic statin therapy undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: results of the ARMYDA
-RECAPTURE (Atorvastatin for Reduction of Myocardial Damage During Angioplasty) Randomized Trial. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:558-565.
287. Tsimikas S. High-dose statins prior to percutaneous coronary intervention: a paradigm shift to influence
clinical outcomes in the cardiac catheterization laboratory. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:2164-2166.
288. Kim JW, Yun KH, Kim EK, Kim YC, Joe D-Y, et al. Effect of High Dose Rosuvastatin Loading before Primary
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention on Infarct Size in Patients with ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial
Infarction. Korean Circ J. 2014;44:76-81.
289. Sardella G, Lucisano L, Mancone M, Conti G, Calcagno S, et al. Comparison of high reloading ROsuvastatin
and Atorvastatin pretreatment in patients undergoing elective PCI to reduce the incidence of MyocArdial
periprocedural necrosis. The ROMA II trial. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3715-3720.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
112
290. Pasceri V, Patti G, Nusca A, Pristipino C, Richichi G, et al. Randomized trial of atorvastatin for reduction of
myocardial damage during coronary intervention: results from the ARMYDA (Atorvastatin for Reduction of
MYocardial Damage during Angioplasty) study. Circulation. 2004;110:674-678.
291. Fox KM, EURopean trial On reduction of cardiac events with Perindopril in stable coronary Artery disease
Investigators. Efficacy of perindopril in reduction of cardiovascular events among patients with stable
coronary artery disease: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial (the EUROPA study).
Lancet. 2003;362:782-788.
292. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators, Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, Bosch J, et al.
Effects of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk
patients. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:145-153.
293. Danchin N, Cucherat M, Thuillez C, Durand E, Kadri Z, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in
patients with coronary artery disease and absence of heart failure or left ventricular systolic dysfunction: an
overview of long-term randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:787-796.
294. Sorbets E, Labreuche J, Simon T, Delorme L, Danchin N, et al. Renin-angiotensin system antagonists and
clinical outcomes in stable coronary artery disease without heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1760-1768.
295. Braunwald E, Domanski MJ, Fowler SE, Geller NL, Gersh BJ, et al. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme
inhibition in stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2058-2068.
296. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Wandel S, Toklu B, Wandel J, et al. Renin angiotensin system inhibitors for
patients with stable coronary artery disease without heart failure: systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. BMJ. 2017;356:j4.
297. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Heart Failure 3rd Ed [Internet]. 2014 [cited 2018 Jan 3].
Available from: www.acadmed.org.my
298. Pitt B, Zannad F, Remme WJ, Cody R, Castaigne A, et al. The Effect of Spironolactone on Morbidity and
Mortality in Patients with Severe Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:709-717.
299. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, Neaton J, Martinez F, et al. Eplerenone, a Selective Aldosterone Blocker, in
Patients with Left Ventricular Dysfunction after Myocardial Infarction. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1309-1321.
300. Zannad F, McMurray JJV, Krum H, van Veldhuisen DJ, Swedberg K, et al. Eplerenone in Patients with
Systolic Heart Failure and Mild Symptoms. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:11-21.
301. McMurray JJV, Packer M, Desai AS, Gong J, Lefkowitz MP, et al. Angiotensin–Neprilysin Inhibition versus
Enalapril in Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:993-1004.
302. López-Sendón J, Swedberg K, McMurray J, Tamargo J, Maggioni AP, et al. Expert consensus document
on beta-adrenergic receptor blockers. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:1341-1362.
303. Freemantle N, Cleland J, Young P, Mason J, Harrison J. β Blockade after myocardial infarction: systematic
review and meta regression analysis. BMJ. 1999;318:1730-1737.
304. Puymirat E, Riant E, Aissaoui N, Soria A, Ducrocq G, et al. β blockers and mortality after myocardial
infarction in patients without heart failure: multicentre prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2016;354:i4801.
305. Dondo TB, Hall M, West RM, Jernberg T, Lindahl B, et al. β-Blockers and Mortality After Acute Myocardial
Infarction in Patients Without Heart Failure or Ventricular Dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2710-2720.
306. Fauchier L, Pierre B, de Labriolle A, Babuty D. Comparison of the beneficial effect of beta-blockers on
mortality in patients with ischaemic or non-ischaemic systolic heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. Eur J Heart Fail. 2007;9:1136-1139.
307. Packer M, Coats AJS, Fowler MB, Katus HA, Krum H, et al. Effect of Carvedilol on Survival in Severe
Chronic Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1651-1658.
308. Dargie HJ. Effect of carvedilol on outcome after myocardial infarction in patients with left-ventricular
dysfunction: the CAPRICORN randomised trial. Lancet. 2001;357:1385-1390.
309. Australia/New Zealand Heart Failure Research Collaborative Group. Randomised, placebo-controlled trial
of carvedilol in patients with congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease. Lancet. 1997;349:375-380.
310. Willenheimer R, van Veldhuisen DJ, Silke B, Erdmann E, Follath F, et al. Effect on survival and hospitalization
of initiating treatment for chronic heart failure with bisoprolol followed by enalapril, as compared with the
opposite sequence: results of the randomized Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study (CIBIS) III. Circulation.
2005;112:2426-2435.
311. MERIT-HF Study Group. Effect of metoprolol CR/XL in chronic heart failure: Metoprolol CR/XL Randomised
Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF). Lancet. 1999;353:2001-2007.
312. Poole-Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Cleland JGF, Di Lenarda A, Hanrath P, et al. Comparison of carvedilol and
metoprolol on clinical outcomes in patients with chronic heart failure in the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol
European Trial (COMET): randomised controlled trial. Lancet Lond Engl. 2003;362:7-13.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
113
313. The RESOLVD Investigators. Effects of Metoprolol CR in Patients With Ischemic and Dilated Cardiomyopathy:
The Randomized Evaluation of Strategies for Left Ventricular Dysfunction Pilot Study. Circulation.
2000;101:378-384.
314. van Veldhuisen DJ, Cohen-Solal A, Böhm M, Anker SD, Babalis D, et al. Beta-blockade with nebivolol in
elderly heart failure patients with impaired and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction: Data From
SENIORS (Study of Effects of Nebivolol Intervention on Outcomes and Rehospitalization in Seniors With
Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:2150-2158.
315. Kallistratos MS, Poulimenos LE, Manolis AJ. Vasodilator β-blockers: a different class of antihypertensive
agents? Future Cardiol. 2014;10:669-671.
316. Dhakam Z, Yasmin null, McEniery CM, Burton T, Brown MJ, et al. A comparison of atenolol and nebivolol
in isolated systolic hypertension. J Hypertens. 2008;26:351-356.
317. Lacourcière Y, Arnott W. Placebo-controlled comparison of the effects of nebivolol and low-dose
hydrochlorothiazide as monotherapies and in combination on blood pressure and lipid profile in hypertensive
patients. J Hum Hypertens. 1994;8:283-288.
318. Bakris GL, Fonseca V, Katholi RE, McGill JB, Messerli FH, et al. Metabolic effects of carvedilol vs metoprolol
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2004;292:2227-2236.
319. Dal Negro R, Tognella S, Micheletto C. Pharmacokinetics of the Effect of Nebivolol 5mg on Airway Patency
in Patients with Mild to Moderate Bronchial Asthma and Arterial Hypertension: A Randomised, Placebo
-Controlled Study. Clin Drug Investig. 2002;22:197-204.
320. Abernethy DR, Schwartz JB. Calcium-Antagonist Drugs. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1447-1457.
321. Frishman WH, Glasser S, Stone P, Deedwania PC, Johnson M, et al. Comparison of controlled-onset,
extended-release verapamil with amlodipine and amlodipine plus atenolol on exercise performance and
ambulatory ischemia in patients with chronic stable angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 1999;83:507-514.
322. Furberg CD, Psaty BM, Meyer JV. Nifedipine. Dose-related increase in mortality in patients with coronary
heart disease. Circulation. 1995;92:1326-1331.
323. Opie LH, Yusuf S, Kübler W. Current status of safety and efficacy of calcium channel blockers in cardiovascular
diseases: a critical analysis based on 100 studies. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2000;43:171-196.
324. Rehnqvist N, Hjemdahl P, Billing E, Björkander I, Eriksson SV, et al. Effects of metoprolol vs verapamil in
patients with stable angina pectoris. The Angina Prognosis Study in Stockholm (APSIS). Eur Heart J.
1996;17:76-81.
325. Ried LD, Tueth MJ, Handberg E, Kupfer S, Pepine CJ, et al. A Study of Antihypertensive Drugs and
Depressive Symptoms (SADD-Sx) in patients treated with a calcium antagonist versus an atenolol
hypertension Treatment Strategy in the International Verapamil SR-Trandolapril Study (INVEST). Psychosom
Med. 2005;67:398-406.
326. Steffensen R, Grande P, Pedersen F, Haunsø S. Effects of atenolol and diltiazem on exercise tolerance
and ambulatory ischaemia. Int J Cardiol. 1993;40:143-153.
327. Poole-Wilson PA, Lubsen J, Kirwan B-A, van Dalen FJ, Wagener G, et al. Effect of long-acting nifedipine
on mortality and cardiovascular morbidity in patients with stable angina requiring treatment (ACTION trial):
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364:849–857.
328. Smith NL, Reiber GE, Psaty BM, Heckbert SR, Siscovick DS, et al. Health outcomes associated with
beta-blocker and diltiazem treatment of unstable angina. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;32:1305-1311.
329. Torfgård KE, Ahlner J. Mechanisms of action of nitrates. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1994;8:701-717.
330. Münzel T, Mülsch A, Kleschyov A. Mechanisms underlying nitroglycerin-induced superoxide production in
platelets: some insight, more questions. Circulation. 2002;106:170-172.
331. Lacoste LL, Théroux P, Lidón RM, Colucci R, Lam JY. Antithrombotic properties of transdermal nitroglycerin
in stable angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 1994;73:1058-1062.
332. Thadani U, Fung HL, Darke AC, Parker JO. Oral isosorbide dinitrate in angina pectoris: comparison of duration
of action an dose-response relation during acute and sustained therapy. Am J Cardiol. 1982;49:411-419.
333. Münzel T, Daiber A, Mülsch A. Explaining the phenomenon of nitrate tolerance. Circ Res. 2005;97:618-628.
334. Kannel WB, Kannel C, Paffenbarger RS, Cupples LA. Heart rate and cardiovascular mortality: the Framingham
Study. Am Heart J. 1987;113:1489-1494.
335. A˚ke Hjalmarson. Heart rate: an independent risk factor in cardiovascular disease. Eur Heart J Suppl 2007:
9 (Supplement F), F3-F7
336. Diaz A, Bourassa MG, Guertin M-C, Tardif J-C. Long-term prognostic value of resting heart rate in patients
with suspected or proven coronary artery disease. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:967-974.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
337. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, Tendera M, Robertson M, et al. Heart rate as a prognostic risk factor in patients
with coronary artery disease and left-ventricular systolic dysfunction (BEAUTIFUL): a subgroup analysis of
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;372:817-821.
338. Savelieva I, Camm AJ. I f inhibition with ivabradine
: electrophysiological effects and safety. Drug Saf.
2008;31:95-107.
339. DiFrancesco D. Funny channels in the control of cardiac rhythm and mode of action of selective blockers.
Pharmacol Res. 2006;53:399-406.
340. Tardif J-C, Ford I, Tendera M, Bourassa MG, Fox K, et al. Efficacy of ivabradine, a new selective I(f)
inhibitor, compared with atenolol in patients with chronic stable angina. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:2529-2536.
341. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, Tendera M, Ferrari R, et al. Ivabradine for patients with stable coronary artery
disease and left-ventricular systolic dysfunction (BEAUTIFUL): a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet. 2008;372:807-816.
342. Ye L, Ke D, Chen Q, Li G, Deng W, et al. Effectiveness of Ivabradine in Treating Stable Angina Pectoris.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95:e3245.
343. Koester R, Kaehler J, Meinertz T. Ivabradine for the treatment of stable angina pectoris in octogenarians.
Clin Res Cardiol. 2011;100:121-128.
344. Tardif J-C, Ponikowski P, Kahan T, ASSOCIATE Study Investigators. Efficacy of the I(f) current inhibitor
ivabradine in patients with chronic stable angina receiving beta-blocker therapy: a 4-month, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:540-548.
345. Amosova E, Andrejev E, Zaderey I, Rudenko U, Ceconi C, et al. Efficacy of ivabradine in combination with
Beta-blocker versus uptitration of Beta-blocker in patients with stable angina. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther.
2011;25:531-537.
346. Werdan K, Ebelt H, Nuding S, Höpfner F, Stöckl G, et al. Ivabradine in Combination with Metoprolol Improves
Symptoms and Quality of Life in Patients with Stable Angina Pectoris: A post hoc Analysis from the
ADDITIONS Trial. Cardiology. 2016;133:83-90.
347. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, Tardif J-C, Tendera M, et al. Ivabradine in Stable Coronary Artery Disease without
Clinical Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1091-1099.
348. European Medicines Agency. Procoralan. Summary of Product Characteristics [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2018
Jan 18];Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Product_
Information/human/000597/WC500043590.pdf
349. Chazov EI, Lepakchin VK, Zharova EA, Fitilev SB, Levin AM, et al. Trimetazidine in Angina Combination
Therapy--the TACT study: trimetazidine versus conventional treatment in patients with stable angina
pectoris in a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter study. Am J Ther. 2005;12:35-42.
350. Szwed H, Sadowski Z, Elikowski W, Koronkiewicz A, Mamcarz A, et al. Combination treatment in stable
effort angina using trimetazidine and metoprolol: results of a randomized, double-blind, multicentre study
(TRIMPOL II). TRIMetazidine in POLand. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:2267-2274.
351. Ciapponi A, Pizarro R, Harrison J. Trimetazidine for stable angina. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2005;CD003614.
352. Fragasso G, Piatti Md PM, Monti L, Palloshi A, Setola E, et al. Short- and long-term beneficial effects of
trimetazidine in patients with diabetes and ischemic cardiomyopathy. Am Heart J. 2003;146:E18.
353. Peng S, Zhao M, Wan J, Fang Q, Fang D, et al. The efficacy of trimetazidine on stable angina pectoris: a
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Int J Cardiol. 2014;177:780-785.
354. Rosano GMC, Marazzi G, Patrizi R, Cerquetani E, Vitale C, et al. Comparison of trimetazidine plus sildenafil
to chronic nitrates in the control of myocardial ischemia during sexual activity in patients with coronary
artery disease. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95:327-331.
355. European Medical Agency. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP). Questions and
answers on the review of medicines containing trimetazidine (20 mg tablets, 35 mg modified release tablet
and 20 mg/ml oral solution). Outcome of a procedure under Article 31 of Directive 2001/83/EC as amended.
3 September 2012.EMA/608974/2012 Rev 1 .EMEA/H/A-31/1305 [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2018 Jan 18];
Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Referrals_document/Trimetazidine
_31/WC500129195.pdf
356. Martí Massó J-F, Martí I, Carrera N, Poza J-J, López de Munain A. Trimetazidine induces parkinsonism,
gait disorders and tremor. Therapie. 2005;60:419-422.
357. Chaitman BR, Pepine CJ, Parker JO, Skopal J, Chumakova G, et al. Effects of ranolazine with atenolol,
amlodipine, or diltiazem on exercise tolerance and angina frequency in patients with severe chronic angina:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291:309-316.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
358. Wilson SR, Scirica BM, Braunwald E, Murphy SA, Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E, et al. Efficacy of ranolazine
in patients with chronic angina observations from the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
MERLIN-TIMI (Metabolic Efficiency With Ranolazine for Less Ischemia in Non-ST-Segment Elevation
Acute Coronary Syndromes) 36 Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:1510-1516.
359. Stone PH, Gratsiansky NA, Blokhin A, Huang I-Z, Meng L, et al. Antianginal efficacy of ranolazine when
added to treatment with amlodipine: the ERICA (Efficacy of Ranolazine in Chronic Angina) trial. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2006;48:566-575.
360. Chaitman BR, Skettino SL, Parker JO, Hanley P, Meluzin J, et al. Anti-ischemic effects and long-term
survival during ranolazine monotherapy in patients with chronic severe angina. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2004;43:1375-1382.
361. Banon D, Filion KB, Budlovsky T, Franck C, Eisenberg MJ. The usefulness of ranolazine for the treatment
of refractory chronic stable angina pectoris as determined from a systematic review of randomized controlled
trials. Am J Cardiol. 2014;113:1075-1082.
362. Kosiborod M, Arnold SV, Spertus JA, McGuire DK, Li Y, et al. Evaluation of ranolazine in patients with type
2 diabetes mellitus and chronic stable angina: results from the TERISA randomized clinical trial (Type 2
Diabetes Evaluation of Ranolazine in Subjects With Chronic Stable Angina). J Am Coll Cardiol.
2013;61:2038-2045.
363. Morrow DA, Scirica BM, Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E, Murphy SA, Budaj A, et al. Effects of ranolazine on
recurrent cardiovascular events in patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: the
MERLIN-TIMI 36 randomized trial. JAMA. 2007;297:1775-1783.
364. Morrow DA, Scirica BM, Chaitman BR, McGuire DK, Murphy SA, et al. Evaluation of the glycometabolic
effects of ranolazine in patients with and without diabetes mellitus in the MERLIN-TIMI 36 randomized
controlled trial. Circulation. 2009;119:2032-2039.
365. Gutierrez JA, Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E, Murphy SA, Belardinelli L, Farzaneh-Far R, et al. Effects of
Ranolazine in Patients With Chronic Angina in Patients With and Without Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
for Acute Coronary Syndrome: Observations From the MERLIN-TIMI 36 Trial. Clin Cardiol. 2015;38:469-475.
366. Eckel RH, Henry RR, Yue P, Dhalla A, Wong P, et al. Effect of Ranolazine Monotherapy on Glycemic
Control in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2015;38:1189-1196.
367. Timmis AD, Chaitman BR, Crager M. Effects of ranolazine on exercise tolerance and HbA1c in patients with
chronic angina and diabetes. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:42-48.
368. Weisz G, Généreux P, Iñiguez A, Zurakowski A, Shechter M, et al. Ranolazine in patients with incomplete
revascularisation after percutaneous coronary intervention (RIVER-PCI): a multicentre, randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2016;387:136-145.
369. Mehta PK, Goykhman P, Thomson LEJ, Shufelt C, Wei J, et al. Ranolazine improves angina in women with
evidence of myocardial ischemia but no obstructive coronary artery disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging.
2011;4:514-522.
370. Villano A, Di Franco A, Nerla R, Sestito A, Tarzia P, et al. Effects of ivabradine and ranolazine in patients
with microvascular angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:8-13.
371. Bairey Merz CN, Handberg EM, Shufelt CL, Mehta PK, Minissian MB, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of late Na current inhibition (ranolazine) in coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD): impact on angina
and myocardial perfusion reserve. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1504-1513.
372. Cobbe S. Electrophysiological perspectives - what has ranolazine taught us? Eur Heart J Suppl. 2004;6:i9-i11.
373. Horinaka S. Use of nicorandil in cardiovascular disease and its optimization. Drugs. 2011;71:1105-1119.
374. Markham A, Plosker GL, Goa KL. Nicorandil. An updated review of its use in ischaemic heart disease with
emphasis on its cardioprotective effects. Drugs. 2000;60:955-974.
375. Döring G. Antianginal and anti-ischemic efficacy of nicorandil in comparison with isosorbide-5-mononitrate
and isosorbide dinitrate: results from two multicenter, double-blind, randomized studies with stable coronary
heart disease patients. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1992;20 Suppl 3:S74-81.
376. Di Somma S, Liguori V, Petitto M, Carotenuto A, Bokor D, et al. A double-blind comparison of nicorandil and
metoprolol in stable effort angina pectoris. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1993;7:119-123.
377. IONA Study Group. Effect of nicorandil on coronary events in patients with stable angina: the Impact Of
Nicorandil in Angina (IONA) randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;359:1269-1275.
378. Rajaratnam R, Brieger DB, Hawkins R, Freedman SB. Attenuation of anti-ischemic efficacy during chronic
therapy with nicorandil in patients with stable angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 1999;83:1120-1124, A9.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
379. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Nicorandil (Ikorel): now second-line treatment for
angina - risk of ulcer complications - GOV.UK [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2018 Jan 3];Available from: https://www.
gov.uk/drug-safety-update/nicorandil-ikorel-now-second-line-treatment-for-angina-risk-of-ulcer-complications
380. Takahashi Y, Takano H, Akiya M, Okazaki H, Komiyama H, et al. P-256 Nicorandil Enhances the Risk of
Aspirin-Related Hemorrhagic Gastroduodenal Mucosal Injury in Patients with Cardiovascular Disease.
CVD Prev Control. 2009;4:S125.
381. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, Siami FS, Dangas G, et al. Strategies for Multivessel Revascularization
in Patients with Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2375-2384.
382. Al-Lamee R, Thompson D, Dehbi HM, et al., on behalf of the ORBITA Investigators. Percutaneous coronary
intervention in stable angina (ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2018;391:31-40.
383. Yusuf S, Zucker D, Passamani E, Peduzzi P, Takaro T, et al. Effect of coronary artery bypass graft surgery
on survival: overview of 10-year results from randomised trials by the Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery
Trialists Collaboration. Lancet. 1994;344:563-570.
384. Davies RF, Goldberg AD, Forman S, Pepine CJ, Knatterud GL, et al. Asymptomatic Cardiac Ischemia Pilot
(ACIP) Study Two-Year Follow-up: Outcomes of Patients Randomized to Initial Strategies of Medical
Therapy Versus Revascularization. Circulation. 1997;95:2037-2043.
385. Vanzetto G, Ormezzano O, Fagret D, Comet M, Denis B, et al. Long-term additive prognostic value of
thallium-201 myocardial perfusion imaging over clinical and exercise stress test in low to intermediate risk
patients
: study in 1137 patients with 6-year follow-up. Circulation. 1999;100:1521-1527.
386. Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Shaw LJ, Stone GW, Thomson LEJ, et al. Impact of ischaemia and scar on
the therapeutic benefit derived from myocardial revascularization vs. medical therapy among patients
undergoing stress-rest myocardial perfusion scintigraphy. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1012-1024.
387. Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, Soares PR, Ribeiro EE, et al. Ten-year follow-up survival of the Medicine,
Angioplasty, or Surgery Study (MASS II): a randomized controlled clinical trial of 3 therapeutic strategies
for multivessel coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2010;122:949-957.
388. Weintraub WS, Spertus JA, Kolm P, Maron DJ, Zhang Z, et al. Effect of PCI on Quality of Life in Patients
with Stable Coronary Disease. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:677-687.
389. Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, Grantham JA, Maddox TM, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/
SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017 Appropriate Use Criteria for Coronary Revascularization in Patients With Stable
Ischemic Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task
Force, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of
Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2212-2241.
390. Windecker S, Kolh P, Alfonso F, Collet J-P, Cremer J, et al. Guidelines on myocardial revascularization. Eur
Heart J. 2014;35:2541-2619.
391. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, Bittl JA, Byrne JG, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS
Focused Update of the Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic
Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1929-1949.
392. Mohr FW, Morice M-C, Kappetein AP, Feldman TE, Ståhle E, et al. Coronary artery bypass graft surgery
versus percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with three-vessel disease and left main coronary
disease: 5-year follow-up of the randomised, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet. 2013;381:629-638.
393. Arora RR, Chou TM, Jain D, Fleishman B, Crawford L, et al. The multicenter study of enhanced external
counterpulsation (MUST-EECP): effect of EECP on exercise-induced myocardial ischemia and anginal
episodes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:1833-1840.
394. Soran O, Kennard ED, Kelsey SF, Holubkov R, Strobeck J, et al. Enhanced External Counterpulsation as
Treatment for Chronic Angina in Patients With Left Ventricular Dysfunction: A Report From the International
EECP Patient Registry (IEPR). Congest Heart Fail. 2002;8:297-312.
395. Zhang C, Liu X, Wang X, Wang Q, Zhang Y, et al. Efficacy of Enhanced External Counterpulsation in
Patients With Chronic Refractory Angina on Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) Angina Class: An
Updated Meta-Analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94:e2002.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
396. Linnemeier G, Rutter MK, Barsness G, Kennard ED, Nesto RW, et al. Enhanced External Counterpulsation
for the relief of angina in patients with diabetes: safety, efficacy and 1-year clinical outcomes. Am Heart J.
2003;146:453-458.
397. Naber C, Ebralidze T, Lammers S, Hakim G, Erbel R. Non invasive cardiac angiogenesis shock wave
therapy increases perfusion and exercise tolerance in endstage CAD patients. Eur J Heart Fail. 2007;7:71.
398. Fukumoto Y, Ito A, Uwatoku T, Matoba T, Kishi T, et al. Extracorporeal cardiac shock wave therapy
ameliorates myocardial ischemia in patients with severe coronary artery disease. Coron Artery Dis.
2006;17:63-70.
399. Slavich M, Ancona F, Margonato A. Extracorporeal shockwave myocardial revascularization therapy in
refractory angina patients. Int J Cardiol. 2015;194:93.
400. Alunni G, Marra S, Meynet I, D’amico M, Elisa P, et al. The beneficial effect of extracorporeal shockwave
myocardial revascularization in patients with refractory angina. Cardiovasc Revascularization Med Mol
Interv. 2015;16:6-11.
401. Zhang Z, Chen M, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Wu W, et al. Meta-analysis of acupuncture therapy for the treatment
of stable angina pectoris. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015;8:5112-5120.
402. Kandala J, Upadhyay GA, Pokushalov E, Wu S, Drachman DE, et al. Meta-analysis of stem cell therapy in
chronic ischemic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:217-225.
403. Wang S, Cui J, Peng W, Lu M. Intracoronary autologous CD34+ stem cell therapy for intractable angina.
Cardiology. 2010;117:140-147.
404. Lee F-Y, Chen Y-L, Sung P-H, Ma M-C, Pei S-N, et al. Intracoronary Transfusion of Circulation-Derived
CD34+ Cells Improves Left Ventricular Function in Patients With End-Stage Diffuse Coronary Artery
Disease Unsuitable for Coronary Intervention. Crit Care Med. 2015;43:2117-2132.
405. Losordo DW, Henry TD, Davidson C, Sup Lee J, Costa MA, et al. Intramyocardial, autologous CD34+ cell
therapy for refractory angina. Circ Res. 2011;109:428-436.
406. Povsic TJ, Junge C, Nada A, Schatz RA, Harrington RA, et al. A phase 3, randomized, double-blinded,
active-controlled, unblinded standard of care study assessing the efficacy and safety of intramyocardial
autologous CD34+ cell administration in patients with refractory angina: design of the RENEW study. Am
Heart J. 2013;165:854-861.e2.
407. Mathiasen AB, Haack-Sørensen M, Jørgensen E, Kastrup J. Autotransplantation of mesenchymal stromal
cells from bone-marrow to heart in patients with severe stable coronary artery disease and refractory
angina--final 3-year follow-up. Int J Cardiol. 2013;170:246-251.
408. Jimenez-Quevedo P, Gonzalez-Ferrer JJ, Sabate M, Garcia-Moll X, Delgado-Bolton R, et al. Selected
CD133+ progenitor cells to promote angiogenesis in patients with refractory angina: final results of the
PROGENITOR randomized trial. Circ Res. 2014;115:950-960.
409. Mann I, Rodrigo SF, van Ramshorst J, Beeres SL, Dibbets-Schneider P, et al. Repeated Intramyocardial
Bone Marrow Cell Injection in Previously Responding Patients With Refractory Angina Again Improves
Myocardial Perfusion, Anginal Complaints, and Quality of Life. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8.
410. Seely DM, Wu P, Mills EJ. EDTA chelation therapy for cardiovascular disease: a systematic review. BMC
Cardiovasc Disord. 2005;5:32.
411. Yang EH, Barsness GW, Gersh BJ, Chandrasekaran K, Lerman A. Current and future treatment strategies
for refractory angina. Mayo Clin Proc. 2004;79:1284-1292.
412. Faircloth ME, Redwood SR, Marber MS. Strategies for refractory angina--electric not eclectic? Int J Clin
Pract. 2004;58:650-652.
413. Kim MC, Kini A, Sharma SK. Refractory angina pectoris: mechanism and therapeutic options. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2002;39:923-934.
414. De Decker K, Beese U, Staal MJ, DeJongste MJL. Electrical neuromodulation for patients with cardiac
diseases. Neth Heart J. 2013;21:91-94.
415. Rimoldi O, Burns SM, Rosen SD, Wistow TE, Schofield PM, et al. Measurement of Myocardial Blood Flow
With Positron Emission Tomography Before and After Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization.
Circulation. 1999;100:II-134-Ii-138.
416. Horvath KA. Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization. J Card Surg. 2008;23:266-276.
417. Aaberge L, Nordstrand K, Dragsund M, Saatvedt K, Endresen K, et al. Transmyocardial revascularization
with CO2 laser in patients with refractory angina pectoris. Clinical results from the Norwegian randomized
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;35:1170-1177.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
418. Allen KB, Dowling RD, Fudge TL, Schoettle GP, Selinger SL, et al. Comparison of Transmyocardial
Revascularization with Medical Therapy in Patients with Refractory Angina. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1029-1036.
419. Burkhoff D, Schmidt S, Schulman SP, Myers J, Resar J, et al. Transmyocardial laser revascularisation
compared with continued medical therapy for treatment of refractory angina pectoris: a prospective
randomised trial. ATLANTIC Investigators. Angina Treatments-Lasers and Normal Therapies in Comparison.
Lancet Lond Engl. 1999;354:885–890.
420. Frazier OH, March RJ, Horvath KA. Transmyocardial Revascularization with a Carbon Dioxide Laser in
Patients with End-Stage Coronary Artery Disease. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1021–1028.
421. Jones JW, Schmidt SE, Richman BW, Miller CC, Sapire KJ, et al. Holmium:YAG laser transmyocardial
revascularization relieves angina and improves functional status. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;67:1596-1601;
discussion 1601-1602.
422. Schofield PM, Sharples LD, Caine N, Burns S, Tait S, et al. Transmyocardial laser revascularisation in
patients with refractory angina: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Lond Engl. 1999;353:519-524.
423. Bridges CR, Horvath KA, Nugent WC, Shahian DM, Haan CK, et al. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
practice guideline series: transmyocardial laser revascularization. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:1494-1502.
424. Diegeler A, Cheng D, Allen K, Weisel R, Lutter G, et al. Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization: A
Consensus Statement of the International Society of Minimally Invasive Cardiothoracic Surgery (ISMICS)
2006. Innov Phila Pa. 2006;1:314-322.
425. Verheye S, Jolicœur EM, Behan MW, Pettersson T, Sainsbury P, et al. Efficacy of a Device to Narrow the
Coronary Sinus in Refractory Angina. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:519-527.
426. Haffner SM. Coronary heart disease in patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1040-1042.
427. Sowers JR. Diabetes in the elderly and in women: cardiovascular risks. Cardiol Clin. 2004;22:541-551.
428. McFarlane SI, Banerji M, Sowers JR. Insulin resistance and cardiovascular disease. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2001;86:713-718.
429. Blendea MC, McFarlane SI, Isenovic ER, Gick G, Sowers JR. Heart disease in diabetic patients. Curr Diab
Rep. 2003;3:223-229.
430. Young LH, Jose P, Chyun D. Diagnosis of CAD in patients with diabetes: who to evaluate. Curr Diab Rep.
2003;3:19-27.
431. Fang ZY, Sharman J, Prins JB, Marwick TH. Determinants of exercise capacity in patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2005;28:1643-1648.
432. Turner RC, Millns H, Neil HA, Stratton IM, Manley SE, et al. Risk factors for coronary artery disease in
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus: United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS: 23). BMJ.
1998;316:823-828.
433. Wei M, Gaskill SP, Haffner SM, Stern MP. Effects of diabetes and level of glycemia on all-cause and
cardiovascular mortality. The San Antonio Heart Study. Diabetes Care. 1998;21:1167-1172.
434. Standl E, Schnell O. A new look at the heart in diabetes mellitus: from ailing to failing. Diabetologia.
2000;43:1455-1469.
435. Way KJ, Katai N, King GL. Protein kinase C and the development of diabetic vascular complications. Diabet
Med. 2001;18:945-959.
436. Fox K, Garcia MAA, Ardissino D, Buszman P, Camici PG, et al. Guidelines on the management of stable
angina pectoris: executive summary: The Task Force on the Management of Stable Angina Pectoris of the
European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:1341-1381.
437. Fraker TD, Fihn SD, 2002 Chronic Stable Angina Writing Committee, American College of Cardiology,
American Heart Association, et al. 2007 chronic angina focused update of the ACC/AHA 2002 guidelines
for the management of patients with chronic stable angina: a report of the American College of Cardiology
/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines Writing Group to develop the focused
update of the 2002 guidelines for the management of patients with chronic stable angina. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2007;50:2264-2274.
438. Feld S. The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists Medical Guidelines for the Management of
Diabetes Mellitus: The AACE System of Intensive Diabetes Self-Management - 2002 Update. Endocr
Pract. 2002;8:40-82.
439. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or
insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 33). UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:837-853.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
119
440. Hellman R, Regan J, Rosen H. Effect of intensive treatment of diabetes of the risk of death or renal failure
in NIDDM and IDDM. Diabetes Care. 1997;20:258-264.
441. The American Associationof Clinical Endocrinologists. Medical Guidelines for the Management of Diabetes
Mellitus: The AACE system of intensive diabetes self management-2000 update. Endocr Pract. 2000;6:43-84.
442. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, Fitchett D, Bluhmki E, et al. SE, EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators.
Empagliflozin, Cardiovascular Outcomes, and Mortality in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2117–2128.
443. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, Kristensen P, Mann JFE, et al. Liraglutide and Cardiovascular
Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:311-322.
444. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, Eliaschewitz FG, Jódar E, et al. Semaglutide and Cardiovascular Outcomes
in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1834-1844.
445. Neal B, Perkovic V,Mahaffey KW,de Zeeuw D, Fulcher G et al for the CANVAS Program Collaborative
Group. Canagliflozin and Cardiovascular and Renal Events in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017; 377:644-657.
446. Sean L. Zheng SL, Roddick AJ, ; Aghar-Jaffar R,; et al. Association Between Use of Sodium-Glucose
Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors, Glucagon-like Peptide 1 Agonists, and Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 Inhibitors With
All-Cause Mortality in Patients With Type 2 DiabetesA Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA.
2018;319(15):1580-1591
447. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, Gomis R, Hanefeld M, et al., RECORD Study Group. Rosiglitazone
evaluated for cardiovascular outcomes--an interim analysis. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:28-38.
448. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, Curtis PS, Gomis R, et al., RECORD Study Team. Rosiglitazone
evaluated for cardiovascular outcomes in oral agent combination therapy for type 2 diabetes (RECORD):
a multicentre, randomised, open-label trial. Lancet Lond Engl. 2009;373:2125-2135.
449. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, Steg PG, Davidson J, et al., SAVOR-TIMI 53 Steering Committee and
Investigators. Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J
Med. 2013;369:1317-1326.
450. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, Buse JB, Engel SS, et al., TECOS Study Group. Effect of Sitagliptin
on Cardiovascular Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:232-242.
451. Department of Statistics Malaysia. Statistics on causes of death, Malaysia, 2014 [Internet]. 2016 [cited
2018 Jan 18];Available from: https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/index.php?r=column/pdfPrev&id=TY2NW00S3BLb1
dldWJmVFNMWmphQT09
452. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2015
Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:e29-e322.
453. Kappert K, Böhm M, Schmieder R, Schumacher H, Teo K, et al. Impact of sex on cardiovascular outcome
in patients at high cardiovascular risk: analysis of the Telmisartan Randomized Assessment Study in
ACE-Intolerant Subjects With Cardiovascular Disease (TRANSCEND) and the Ongoing Telmisartan Alone
and in Combination With Ramipril Global End Point Trial (ONTARGET). Circulation. 2012;126:934-941.
454. Anand SS, Islam S, Rosengren A, Franzosi MG, Steyn K, et al. Risk factors for myocardial infarction in
women and men: insights from the INTERHEART study. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:932-940.
455. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Women.
2nd Ed. [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2018 Jan 4]. Available from: www.acadmed.org.my
456. Douglas PS, Ginsburg GS. The Evaluation of Chest Pain in Women. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1311-1315.
457. Khera S, Kolte D, Gupta T, Subramanian KS, Khanna N, et al. Temporal Trends and Sex Differences in
Revascularization and Outcomes of ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction in Younger Adults in the
United States. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1961-1972.
458. Smolina K, Wright FL, Rayner M, Goldacre MJ. Long-term survival and recurrence after acute myocardial
infarction in England, 2004 to 2010. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:532-540.
459. Shaw LJ, Bugiardini R, Merz CNB. Women and ischemic heart disease: evolving knowledge. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2009;54:1561-1575.
460. Shaw LJ, Shaw RE, Merz CNB, Brindis RG, Klein LW, et al. Impact of ethnicity and gender differences on
angiographic coronary artery disease prevalence and in-hospital mortality in the American College of
Cardiology-National Cardiovascular Data Registry. Circulation. 2008;117:1787-1801.
461. Pepine CJ, Ferdinand KC, Shaw LJ, Light-McGroary K, Shah RU, et al. Emergence of Nonobstructive
Coronary Artery Disease: A Woman’s Problem and Need for Change in Definition on Angiography. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1918-1933.
462. Davis MB, Maddox TM, Langner P, Plomondon ME, Rumsfeld JS, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of
women veterans undergoing cardiac catheterization in the Veterans Affairs Healthcare System: insights
from the VA CART Program. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2015;8:S39-47.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
120
463. Lee B-K, Lim H-S, Fearon WF, Yong A, Yamada R, et al. Invasive Evaluation of Patients with Angina in the
Absence of Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease. Circulation. 2015;131:1054-60.
464. Gulati M, Cooper-DeHoff RM, McClure C, Johnson BD, Shaw LJ, et al. Adverse cardiovascular outcomes
in women with nonobstructive coronary artery disease: a report from the Women’s Ischemia Syndrome
Evaluation Study and the St James Women Take Heart Project. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:843-850.
465. Sicari R, Palinkas A, Pasanisi EG, Venneri L, Picano E. Long-term survival of patients with chest pain
syndrome and angiographically normal or near-normal coronary arteries: the additional prognostic value of
dipyridamole echocardiography test (DET). Eur Heart J. 2005;26:2136-2141.
466. Bugiardini R, Manfrini O, Pizzi C, Fontana F, Morgagni G. Endothelial function predicts future development
of coronary artery disease: a study of women with chest pain and normal coronary angiograms. Circulation.
2004;109:2518-2523.
467. Jespersen L, Hvelplund A, Abildstrøm SZ, Pedersen F, Galatius S, et al. Stable angina pectoris with no
obstructive coronary artery disease is associated with increased risks of major adverse cardiovascular
events. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:734-744.
468. Sedlak TL, Lee M, Izadnegahdar M, Merz CNB, Gao M, et al. Sex differences in clinical outcomes in
patients with stable angina and no obstructive coronary artery disease. Am Heart J. 2013;166:38-44.
469. Smilowitz NR, Sampson BA, Abrecht CR, Siegfried JS, Hochman JS, et al. Women have less severe and
extensive coronary atherosclerosis in fatal cases of ischemic heart disease: an autopsy study. Am Heart J.
2011;161:681-688.
470. Eitel I, Desch S, de Waha S, Fuernau G, Gutberlet M, et al. Sex differences in myocardial salvage and
clinical outcome in patients with acute reperfused ST-elevation myocardial infarction: advances in
cardiovascular imaging. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:119-126.
471. Shaw LJ, Bairey Merz CN, Pepine CJ, Reis SE, Bittner V, et al. Insights from the NHLBI-Sponsored
Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) Study: Part I: gender differences in traditional and novel
risk factors, symptom evaluation, and gender-optimized diagnostic strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2006;47:S4-S20.
472. Mora S, Redberg RF, Cui Y, Whiteman MK, Flaws JA, et al. Ability of exercise testing to predict cardiovascular
and all-cause death in asymptomatic women: a 20-year follow-up of the lipid research clinics prevalence
study. JAMA. 2003;290:1600-1607.
473. Mieres JH, Shaw LJ, Hendel RC, Miller DD, Bonow RO, et al. A Report of the American Society of Nuclear
Cardiology Task Force on Women and Heart Disease (Writing Group on Perfusion Imaging in Women) J
Nucl Cardiol. 2003 ;10:95-101.
474. Lipinski MJ, McVey CM, Berger JS, Kramer CM, Salerno M. Prognostic value of stress cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging in patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:826-838.
475. Lernfelt B, Landahl S, Svanborg A. Coronary heart disease at 70, 75 and 79 years of age: a longitudinal
study with special reference to sex differences and mortality. Age Ageing. 1990;19:297-303.
476. Kasser IS, Bruce RA. Comparative Effects of Aging and Coronary Heart Disease on Submaximal and
Maximal Exercise. Circulation. 1969;39:759-774.
477. Vasilomanolakis EC. Geriatric cardiology: when exercise stress testing is justified. Geriatrics. 1985;40:47-50,
53-54, 57.
478. Ohlow M-A, Hassan A, Lotze U, Lauer B. Cardiac catheterisation in nonagenarians: Single center experience.
J Geriatr Cardiol JGC. 2012;9:148-152.
479. Walsh J, Hargreaves M. Outcome and complications following diagnostic cardiac catheterisation in older
people. Br J Cardiol. 2014;21:37.
480. Niebauer J, Sixt S, Zhang F, Yu J, Sick P, et al. Contemporary outcome of cardiac catheterizations in 1085
consecutive octogenarians. Int J Cardiol. 2004;93:225-230.
481. Mehran R, Aymong ED, Nikolsky E, Lasic Z, Iakovou I, et al. A simple risk score for prediction of contrast-induced
nephropathy after percutaneous coronary intervention: development and initial validation. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2004;44:1393-1399.
482. Gundersen T, Abrahamsen AM, Kjekshus J, Rønnevik PK. Timolol-related reduction in mortality and
reinfarction in patients ages 65-75 years surviving acute myocardial infarction. Prepared for the Norwegian
Multicentre Study Group. Circulation. 1982;66:1179-1184.
483. Hannan EL, Zhong Y, Berger PB, Walford G, Curtis JP, et al. Comparison of intermediate-term outcomes
of coronary artery bypass grafting versus drug-eluting stents for patients ≥75 years of age. Am J Cardiol.
2014;113:803-808.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
121
484. Palmerini T, Barlocco F, Santarelli A, Bacchi-Reggiani L, Savini C, et al. A comparison between coronary
artery bypass grafting surgery and drug eluting stent for the treatment of unprotected left main coronary
artery disease in elderly patients (aged ≥75 years). Eur Heart J. 2007;28:2714-2719.
485. Hannan EL, Wu C, Walford G, Culliford AT, Gold JP, et al. Drug-Eluting Stents vs. Coronary-Artery Bypass
Grafting in Multivessel Coronary Disease. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:331-341.
486. Weintraub WS, Grau-Sepulveda MV, Weiss JM, O’Brien SM, Peterson ED, et al. Comparative Effectiveness
of Revascularization Strategies. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1467-1476.
487. Wu C, Camacho FT, Zhao S, Wechsler AS, Culliford AT, et al. Long-Term Mortality of Coronary Artery
Bypass Graft Surgery and Stenting with Drug-Eluting Stents. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95:1297-1305.
488. Montamat SC, Cusack BJ, Vestal RE. Management of Drug Therapy in the Elderly. N Engl J Med. 1989;
321:303-309.
489. Fleg JL, Aronow WS, Frishman WH. Cardiovascular drug therapy in the elderly: benefits and challenges.
Nat Rev Cardiol. 2011;8:13-28.
490. Flather M, Rhee J-W, Boothroyd DB, Boersma E, Brooks MM, et al. The effect of age on outcomes of
coronary artery bypass surgery compared with balloon angioplasty or bare-metal stent implantation among
patients with multivessel coronary disease. A collaborative analysis of individual patient data from 10
randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:2150-2157.
491. Sipahi I, Akay MH, Dagdelen S, Blitz A, Alhan C. Coronary artery bypass grafting vs percutaneous coronary
intervention and long-term mortality and morbidity in multivessel disease: meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials of the arterial grafting and stenting era. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:223-230.
492. Benedetto U, Amrani M, Bahrami T, Gaer J, De Robertis F, et al. Survival probability loss from percutaneous
coronary intervention compared with coronary artery bypass grafting across age groups. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2015;149:479–484.
493. Yamaji K, Shiomi H, Morimoto T, Nakatsuma K, Toyota T, et al. Effects of Age and Sex on Clinical Outcomes
after Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Relative to Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting in Patients with Triple
Vessel Coronary Artery Disease. Circulation. 2016;133:1878-91.
494. Tso G. Frailty and Mortality Outcomes After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2017.09.002
495. Murali-Krishnan R. Impact of frailty on outcomes after percutaneous coronary intervention: a prospective
cohort study., Open Heart. 2015; 2(1): e000294.doi: 10.1136/openhrt-2015-000294
496. Nakano T, Ninomiya T, Sumiyoshi S, Fujii H, Doi Y, et al. Association of kidney function with coronary
atherosclerosis and calcification in autopsy samples from Japanese elders: the Hisayama study. Am J
Kidney Dis. 2010;55:21-30.
497. Chonchol M, Whittle J, Desbien A, Orner MB, Petersen LA, et al. Chronic kidney disease is associated with
angiographic coronary artery disease. Am J Nephrol. 2008;28:354-360.
498. Ix JH, Shlipak MG, Liu HH, Schiller NB, Whooley MA. Association between renal insufficiency and inducible
ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease: the heart and soul study. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;
14:3233-3238.
499. Gibson CM, Pinto DS, Murphy SA, Morrow DA, Hobbach HP, et al. Association of creatinine and creatinine
clearance on presentation in acute myocardial infarction with subsequent mortality. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2003;42:1535-1543.
500. Suwaidi JA, Reddan DN, Williams K, Pieper KS, Harrington RA, et al. Prognostic Implications of Abnormalities
in Renal Function in Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes. Circulation. 2002;106:974-980.
501. Anavekar NS, McMurray JJV, Velazquez EJ, Solomon SD, Kober L, et al. Relation between Renal Dysfunction
and Cardiovascular Outcomes after Myocardial Infarction. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1285-1295.
502. Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium, Matsushita K, van der Velde M, Astor BC, Woodward M,
et al. Association of estimated glomerular filtration rate and albuminuria with all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality in general population cohorts: a collaborative meta-analysis. Lancet. 2010;375:2073-2081.
503. Briet M, Schiffrin EL. Aldosterone: effects on the kidney and cardiovascular system. Nat Rev Nephrol.
2010;6:261-273.
504. Giovannucci E, Liu Y, Hollis BW, Rimm EB. 25-hydroxyvitamin D and risk of myocardial infarction in men:
a prospective study. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:1174-1180.
505. Kovesdy CP, Ahmadzadeh S, Anderson JE, Kalantar-Zadeh K. Association of activated vitamin D treatment
and mortality in chronic kidney disease. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:397-403.
506. Schmidt A, Stefenelli T, Schuster E, Mayer G. Informational contribution of noninvasive screening tests for
coronary artery disease in patients on chronic renal replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001;37:56-63.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
122
507. Karthikeyan V, Ananthasubramaniam K. Coronary risk assessment and management options in chronic
kidney disease patients prior to kidney transplantation. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2009;5:177-186.
508. Bangalore S, Yao S-S, Chaudhry FA. Usefulness of stress echocardiography for risk stratification and
prognosis of patients with left ventricular hypertrophy. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:536-543.
509. Yuda S, Khoury V, Marwick TH. Influence of wall stress and left ventricular geometry on the accuracy of
dobutamine stress echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:1311-1319.
510. Herzog CA, Marwick TH, Pheley AM, White CW, Rao VK, et al. Dobutamine stress echocardiography for
the detection of significant coronary artery disease in renal transplant candidates. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;
33:1080-1090.
511. Sharma R, Mehta RL, Brecker SJD, Gaze DC, Gregson H, et al. The diagnostic and prognostic value of
tissue Doppler imaging during dobutamine stress echocardiography in end-stage renal disease. Coron
Artery Dis. 2009;20:230-237.
512. Marwick TH, Steinmuller DR, Underwood DA, Hobbs RE, Go RT, et al. Ineffectiveness of dipyridamole
SPECT thallium imaging as a screening technique for coronary artery disease in patients with end-stage
renal failure. Transplantation. 1990;49:100-103.
513. Shurraw S, Majumdar SR, Thadhani R, Wiebe N, Tonelli M, et al. Glycemic control and the risk of death in
1,484 patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55:875-884.
514. Zager PG, Nikolic J, Brown RH, Campbell MA, Hunt WC, et al. “U” curve association of blood pressure and
mortality in hemodialysis patients. Medical Directors of Dialysis Clinic, Inc. Kidney Int. 1998;54:561-569.
515. Agarwal R. Blood pressure and mortality among hemodialysis patients. Hypertens Dallas Tex 1979. 2010;
55:762-768.
516. Jardine MJ, Ninomiya T, Perkovic V, Cass A, Turnbull F, et al. Aspirin is beneficial in hypertensive patients
with chronic kidney disease: a post-hoc subgroup analysis of a randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2010;56:956-965.
517. Tonelli M, Isles C, Curhan GC, Tonkin A, Pfeffer MA, et al. Effect of Pravastatin on Cardiovascular Events
in People With Chronic Kidney Disease. Circulation. 2004;110:1557–1563.
518. Wanner C, Krane V, März W, Olschewski M, Mann JFE, et al. Atorvastatin in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus Undergoing Hemodialysis. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:238-248.
519. Fellström BC, Jardine AG, Schmieder RE, Holdaas H, Bannister K, et al. Rosuvastatin and Cardiovascular
Events in Patients Undergoing Hemodialysis. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:1395-1407.
520. Baigent C, Landray MJ, Reith C, Emberson J, Wheeler DC, et al. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol
with simvastatin plus ezetimibe in patients with chronic kidney disease (Study of Heart and Renal Protection):
a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377:2181-2192.
521. Sedlis SP, Jurkovitz CT, Hartigan PM, Goldfarb DS, Lorin JD, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or without
percutaneous coronary intervention for patients with stable coronary artery disease and chronic kidney
disease. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:1647-1653.
522. Ix JH, Mercado N, Shlipak MG, Lemos PA, Boersma E, et al. Association of chronic kidney disease with
clinical outcomes after coronary revascularization: the Arterial Revascularization Therapies Study (ARTS).
Am Heart J. 2005;149:512-519.
523. Liu JY, Birkmeyer NJO, Sanders JH, Morton JR, Henriques HF, et al. Risks of Morbidity and Mortality in
Dialysis Patients Undergoing Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery. Circulation. 2000;102:2973-2977.
524. Cooper WA, O’Brien SM, Thourani VH, Guyton RA, Bridges CR, et al. Impact of renal dysfunction on
outcomes of coronary artery bypass surgery: results from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons National Adult
Cardiac Database. Circulation. 2006;113:1063-1070.
525. Szczech LA, Reddan DN, Owen WF, Califf R, Racz M, et al. Differential survival after coronary revascularization
procedures among patients with renal insufficiency. Kidney Int. 2001;60:292-299.
526. ISCHEMIA-CKD (International Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness With Medical and Invasive
Approaches-Chronic Kidney Disease) trial. Available at :https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01985360
527. Harb SC, Cook T, Jaber WA, Marwick TH. Exercise testing in asymptomatic patients after revascularization:
are outcomes altered? Arch Intern Med. 2012;172:854-861.
528. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA, Beckman JA, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline
on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:e77-137.
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 2018
(2nd Edition)
123
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The committee of this guideline would like to express their gratitude and appreciation
to the following for their contribution:
 Technical Advisory Committee, Clinical Practice Guidelines, Ministry of
Health for their valuable input and feedback
 Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
 Secretariat - Azmi Burhani Consulting
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG was funded through education grants from Menarini
and Servier provided to the National Heart Association of Malaysia. The views and
interests of the funding body did not influence the content of the guideline.