Clinical Practice Guidelines
MANAGEMENT OF
IYPODONTIA
(SECOND EDITION)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Published by:
Oral Health Technology Section
Oral Health Programme
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 5, Block E10, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is Oral Health Programme
(OHP), Ministry of Health (MOH) Malaysia. Content may be reproduced
in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that
a copyright acknowledgement to OHP is included and the content is
not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse any product or
service and not used inappropriately or misleading context.
ISBN: 978-629-98561-8-4
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://hq.moh.gov.my/ohp/ms/
Also available as an app for Android and iOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These guidelines update and supplant the previous guidelines
developed in 2012 and are based on the best available contemporary
evidence. They are intended as a guide for the best clinical practice in
the management of hypodontia presently. However, it must be noted
that adherence to these guidelines do not necessarily lead to the best
clinical outcome in individual patient care, as every health care provider
is responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on
the clinical presentation and management options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
These guidelines were issued in November 2023 and will be reviewed
in 2027 or earlier if important new evidence becomes available. When
it is due for updating, the head of the related specialty will be informed
about it. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and discussion will be
done on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised clinical
practice guidelines (CPG). The systematic review methodology used by
the Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) will be
employed in reviewing the guidelines.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
i
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
i
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES
ii
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
v
OBJECTIVES AND CLINICAL QUESTIONS
vii
TARGET POPULATION, TARGET GROUP / USER
AND SETTINGS
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
viii
REVIEWERS
ix
ALGORITHM 1: Diagnosis of Hypodontia
xi
ALGORITHM 2: Management of Hypodontia by
xii
Multidisciplinary Team
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
CLASSIFICATION
3
3.
AETIOLOGY
4
3.1 Genetic Factors
4
3.2 Environmental Factors
5
4.
PREVALENCE
7
5.
EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS
9
5.1 General Assessment
9
5.1.1 Patient’s Complaint
9
5.1.2 History
9
5.2 Clinical Assessment
9
5.2.1 Clinical Examination
9
5.2.2 Investigation
13
5.3 Referral
15
5.4 Pre-treatment Record
16
6.
MANAGEMENT
17
6.1 Conservative Treatment
17
6.2 Interceptive Treatment
19
6.3 Management by Space Closure
20
6.3.1 Orthodontic Space Closure
21
6.3.2 Modification of Tooth Size and Shape
23
6.4 Management by Space Opening
24
6.4.1 Orthodontic Space Opening
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
6.4.2 Rehabilitation with Prosthetic Replacement
25
6.4.3 Autotransplantation
28
7.
POST-ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT RETENTION
31
7.1 Removable Retainer
31
7.2 Fixed Retainer
33
8.
IMPACT ON ORAL HEALTH RELATED
35
QUALITY OF LIFE (OHRQoL)
9.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
37
9.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
37
9.2 Potential Resource Implications
37
9.3 Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators
37
APPENDIX 1: Search Strategy
39
APPENDIX 2: Clinical Questions
40
APPENDIX 3: International Classification of Diseases
41
11th Revision (ICD-11)
APPENDIX 4: Tooth Eruption Charts
42
APPENDIX 5: The Dental Health Component of Index of
43
Orthodontic Treatment Need (IOTN)
APPENDIX 6: Summary Management of Hypodontia
44
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
45
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS, DISCLOSURE
46
STATEMENT AND SOURCES OF FUNDING
REFERENCES
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed
randomised controlled trial.
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials
without randomisation.
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or
research group.
Evidence obtained from multiple time series studies, with
or without intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled
experiments (such as the results of the introduction of
penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could also be regarded as
this type of evidence.
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical
experience; descriptive studies and case reports; or reports
of expert committees.
Source: Adapted from Harris RP, Helfand M, Woolf SH, Lohr KN, Mulrow CD, Teutsch SM, Atkins
D. Current Methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: A Review of the Process.
Am J Prev Med. 2001;20 (suppl 3):21-35.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the Grading
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
(GRADE) was adopted in the work process. The quality of each retrieved
evidence and its effect size are carefully assessed and reviewed by the
CPG Development Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall
balances of the following aspects are considered in determining the
strength of the recommendations:
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
ii
LIST OF KEY MESSAGES
Key Message 1
Hypodontia is suspected when there is:
• 1.5 years delayed eruption from its chronological eruption age
• 6 months delay after contralateral tooth erupted
• absence of bulge upon palpation of eruption site
• prolonged retained deciduous teeth
• a family history of hypodontia
• history of congenitally missing deciduous teeth
• anomalies associated with hypodontia seen (refer to Table 4)
Key Message 2
Hypodontia is categorised under Grade 5 and 4 in IOTN which
indicates a high need for orthodontic treatment.
Key Message 3
Comprehensive treatment requiring space management of hypodontia
patients should be managed by a multidisciplinary team.
Key Message 4
Factors to determine prognosis of retained deciduous teeth are:
• caries
• restoration
• root resorption
• bone resorption
• periapical or interradicular pathology
• ankylosis
• infraocclusion
• gingival recession
Key Message 5
Factors to be considered prior to implant placement in hypodontia patient:
• medical condition
• completion of growth
• oral hygiene
• thickness of ridge or bone volume at hypodontia site
• diameter of dental implant
• space availability
• root parallelism
• operator’s skill
• cost
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
iii
Key messages 6
Factors to be considered when prescribing types of retainers for
hypodontia patients are:
• initial malocclusion
• treatment modality (open space or close space)
• tendency of relapse
• oral hygiene
• patients’ compliance
• patients’ preference
• operator’s skill & laboratory support
• cost
Key message 7
Hypodontia has a negative impact on oral health-related quality of life
(OHRQoL) however, it can be improved with appropriate management.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
iv
LIST OF KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS
• In hypodontia patients:
 intraoral radiograph should be considered once a tooth is clinically
missing
 panoramic radiograph should be delayed until age of 9 to 10 years
old
• Cone Beam Computed Tomography should be avoided as a
diagnostic tool for hypodontia patients
• Early referral should be considered once hypodontia is diagnosed
• Essential pre-treatment records may include panoramic and lateral
cephalometric radiographs, dental casts, intra- and extra-oral
photographs
MANAGEMENT
In hypodontia patients:
• preservation of deciduous teeth may be considered as an option
• extraction of deciduous teeth with infraocclusion may be considered
• orthodontic space closure should be considered if both orthodontic
space closure and prosthetic replacement is a viable option
• premolars with open apex may be considered for autotransplantation
POST-ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT RETENTION
Dual retention may be considered among hypodontia patients with high
relapse tendency.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
v
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) were developed by a
multidisciplinary expert committee consisting of Orthodontic Specialists,
a Paediatric Dental Specialist, a Restorative Dental Specialist, a Dental
Public Health Specialist, Dental Officers and a Dental Therapist mainly
from the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Higher Education and private
sector.
The previous edition of the CPG on Orthodontic Management of
Developmentally Missing Incisors (2012) was used as the basis for
the development of these guidelines. The recommendations were
formulated by taking into consideration the best available evidence and
local practices. Several improvements have been introduced in this
edition. The scope has been expanded to include new and updated
information. In addition, clinical audit indicators have also been identified
for the purpose of monitoring and evaluating outcomes.
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Medline, Pubmed, Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews (CDSR) and Embase while full text journal articles were
retrieved from these databases. The literature search was limited to
human study, English language and published articles from 2012 to
March 2023. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
An example of the search strategy used can be found in Appendix 1.
Details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from the
CPG Secretariat.
There were eleven (11) clinical questions which were assigned to
members of the development group. The group members met a total of
12 times throughout the development of these guidelines. All retrieved
articles were appraised using the Critical Appraisal Skill Programme
(CASP) checklist by at least two members, presented in the form of
evidence tables and discussed during group meetings. All statements
and recommendations formulated were agreed upon by both the
development group and reviewers. This CPG is based on the findings
of systematic reviews, randomised controlled trials, and observational
studies, with local practices taken into consideration. However,
when there was lack of evidence, recommendations were based on
consensus of group members. Although ideally patients’ views and
preferences need to be considered in the development of CPGs, in this
instance, it was not feasible.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US /
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
vi
while the formulation of recommendation was done using the principles
of GRADE. The writing of the CPG strictly follows the requirements of
Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation (AGREE II).
The draft was reviewed by a panel of internal and external reviewers.
Recommendations were presented to the Technical Advisory Committee
for CPGs, and finally to the HTA and CPG Council, Ministry of Health,
Malaysia for approval.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
vii
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
To review and expand the scope of the existing guidelines and to
provide evidence-based recommendations for the best management
practices of hypodontia patients.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
1. To disseminate and reinforce knowledge in the management of
hypodontia among healthcare professionals and the public.
2. To determine factors that affect the outcome of treatment options for
hypodontia patients.
3. To recommend current evidence-based management of hypodontia
patients.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by these guidelines can be found in
Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
These guidelines are to be applied to all patients presenting with
congenitally missing teeth.
Inclusion criteria
Children and adults with congenitally missing permanent teeth.
Exclusion criteria
1. Cleft lip and palate or craniofacial syndromes.
2. Missing teeth due to caries or trauma.
3. Congenitally missing deciduous teeth.
4. Congenitally missing third molars.
TARGET GROUP / USER
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of hypodontia at any healthcare level including:
i. Dental specialists
ii. Dental officers
iii. General dental practitioners
iv. Dental therapists
v. Dental students
vi. Patients and their advocates
vii. Professional societies
SETTINGS
Primary and specialist oral healthcare settings.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
viii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr Hjh Ummu Aiman bt Yusoff
Orthodontic Specialist
Klinik Pakar Ortodontik
Jalan Meriam, Muar, Johor
Members
Dr Nadia Izyan bt Muhamad Sabri
(Secretary)
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Pekan Nanas
Pontian, Johor
Dr Nor Ziana bt Ibrahim
Restorative Dental Specialist
Unit Pakar Pergigian Restoratif
Klinik Pergigian Kapar
Klang, Selangor
Dr Zubaidah bt Mohammad Zubir
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Kluang
Kluang, Johor
Dr Thavamalar A/P Marimuthoo
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Dr Noor Akmal bt Muhamat
Dental Public Health Specialist
Pejabat Kesihatan Pergigian Daerah
Petaling, Selangor
Dr Muhammad Zahran b Abd Razak
Dental Officer
Klinik Pergigian Penjara Kluang
Jabatan Penjara Malaysia
Kementerian Dalam Negeri
Puan Norizan bt Alwai @ Alwi
Senior Dental Therapist
Klinik Pergigian Bandar Maharani
Muar, Johor
Assoc. Prof. Dr Asma Alhusna bt
Abang Abdullah
Senior Lecturer/ Orthodontic Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik dan Ortodontik
Fakulti Pergigian
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Dr Noorunisa bt Shawal Hamid
Orthodontic Specialist
Klinik Pergigian Aimi, Pakar Ortodontik
Bandar Sunway
Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Dr Siti Aishah bt Salim
Orthodontic Specialist
Klinik Pakar Pergigian Ortodontik
Kota Setar
Alor Setar, Kedah
Dr Noor Azreen bt Mohd Nor @ Mohd
Orthodontic Specialist
Head of Orthodontic Unit
Klinik Pergigian Jalan Perak
Pulau Pinang
Dr Nur Auliana bt Tan Sri Zainul Ariff
Orthodontic Specialist
Unit Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Seksyen 19
Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr Parveen A/P Thanabalen
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Cawangan Teknologi Kesihatan Pergigian
Program Kesihatan Pergigian
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
ix
INTERNAL REVIEWERS
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Hjh Fatimah bt Abdullah
Head of Orthodontic Speciality Services
Consultant Orthodontist
Unit Pakar Ortodontik
Klinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Prof. Dr Aida Nur Ashikin bt Abd
Rahman
Dean / Consultant Orthodontist
Fakulti Pergigian
Universiti Teknologi MARA
Dr Leong Kei Joe
Paediatric Dental Consultant
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Queen Elizabeth,
Kota Kinabalu
Dr Mastura bt Misran
General Dental Practitioner
Klinik Pergigian Mastura
Klang, Selangor
Assoc. Prof. Dr Noor Azlin bt Yahya
Senior Lecturer/ Restorative Dental
Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Restoratif
Fakulti Pergigian, Universiti Malaya
Dr Norzakiah bt Mohamed Zam Zam
Orthodontic Specialist
Klinik Pergigian & Pakar Ortodontik
Dental Avenue
Subang Jaya, Selangor
Dr Nurul Hayati bt Anwar
Dental Public Health Specialist
Cawangan Penjagaan Kesihatan
Pergigian Kepakaran,
Program Kesihatan Pergigian
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Dr Roshima bt Mohd Sharif
Head of Restorative Speciality Services
Restorative Dental Consultant
Unit Pakar Restoratif
Klinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria
Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr Siti Adibah bt Othman
Consultant Orthodontist /
Vice President of Malaysian Association
of Orthodontist (MAO)
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik & Ortodontik,
Universiti Malaya
Dr Sofiah bt Mat Ripen
Dental Public Health Specialist /
Deputy Director
Cawangan Teknologi Kesihatan Pergigian
Program Kesihatan Pergigian
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Ms. Too Bee Kiew
State Supervisor Dental Therapist
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian
Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur &
Putrajaya
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
x
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
(in alphabetical order)
Assoc. Prof Dr Budi Aslinie Md. Sabri
Deputy Dean of Research and
Industrial Linkages /
Dental Public Health Specialist
Fakulti Pergigian
Universiti Teknologi MARA
Dr Eizatul Aishah bt Berhan Nordin
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Georgetown, Pulau Pinang
Dr Jama’iah Bt Mohd Sharif
Paediatric Dental Consultant
Dental Centre, Sunway Medical Centre
Faculty Of Dentistry, International
Medical University (visiting)
Dr Loke Shuet Toh
Consultant Orthodontist
Klinik Pergigian C & K
Klang, Selangor
Dr Muhammad Zulkefli b Ramlay
Dental Public Health Specialist /
Senior Principal Assistant Director
(Oral Health Care)
Bahagian Kesihatan Pergigian
Jabatan Kesihatan Negeri Selangor
Dr Norazlina Mohammad
Senior Lecturer / Restorative Dental
Specialist
Department of Conservative Dentistry &
Prosthodontics
Faculty of Dentistry
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Dr Nor Sitah bt Markom
Restorative Dental Specialist
Unit Pakar Pergigian Restoratif
Klinik Pergigian Bakri
Muar, Johor
Dr Roziana bt Abdullah
Paediatric Dental Specialist
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik
Hospital Ampang
Selangor
Dr Sarah Haniza bt Dato’ Abdul Ghani
Senior Consultant Orthodontist
Klinik Pakar Pergigian Ortodontik Dr Sarah
Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr Zamri b Radzi
Dean / Consultant Orthodontist &
Treasurer, South East Asia Association for
Dental Education (SEAADE)
Jabatan Pergigian Pediatrik & Ortodontik
Fakulti Pergigian, Universiti Malaya
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 1: DIAGNOSIS OF HYPODONTIA
xi
Clinically
missing teeth
Unerupted
Review eruption
3 to 6 months
Presence
of clinical
features*
*Any presence of
clinical features of
hypodontia:
• 1.5 years delayed
eruption
• 6 months after
contralateral tooth
erupted
• Absence of bulge
• Prolonged retained
deciduous tooth
Diagnostic imaging
Regular dental check-up
Presence of teeth
No
Yes
Yes
Differential Diagnosis:
• Delayed eruption
• Impaction
• Pathology
Hypodontia**
** Refer to any
relevant dental
specialist
Erupted
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
xii
ALGORITHM 2 : MANAGEMENT OF HYPODONTIA BY
MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAM
Hypodontia
Active treatment
*Patient and clinical
assessment with IOTN
4h & 5h
**Factors to be considered
Refer chapter 6.3 & 6.4
Conservative
treatment:
• Preservation of
deciduous teeth
• Acceptance of
occlusion &
function
Space opening
• Orthodontic
• Prosthetic
replacement
• Autotransplant
Treatment need*
Interceptive
treatment
Space
management**
Extraction of
deciduous teeth
Require
comprehensive
treatment
Space Closure
• Orthodontic
• Restorative
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Retention and follow-up
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
1.
INTRODUCTION
Hypodontia is a condition characterised by the congenital absence of
one or more teeth.(1) It is also known as “congenital tooth agenesis”,
specifically defined by the terms hypodontia, oligodontia and anodontia.
According to The International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision
(ICD-11), hypodontia is defined as congenital agenesis of less than 6
teeth, oligodontia is when 6 or more teeth are missing and anodontia is
when agenesis of all teeth, excluding third molars.(2)
It is a relatively common developmental anomaly that affects globally
with prevalence of 6.4% (95% CI 5.7 to 7.2%) and 6.3% in Asia (95%
CI 4.4 to 9.1%).(3) level II-2 However, prevalence among the Malaysian
population was 1%.(4) level III This condition can occur in both deciduous
and permanent dentitions and the most commonly affected teeth are
the permanent incisors and premolars. The aetiology of congenital
tooth agenesis is multifactorial.
Hypodontia has unfavorable implications on dental and facial
development particularly on functional and aesthetic outcomes. It can
lead to problems with speech, mastication and self-esteem which may
require complex and costly dental treatments. Patients may present
with varying degrees of severity, prompting them to seek possible
treatment. Hypodontia has been shown to have an impact on the oral
health and well-being of individuals.
Early intervention and/or interceptive management can reduce the
severity of malocclusion and preserve dental structures necessary for
restorative/prosthesis procedures later.(5) Treatment approach whether
to open or close space for the replacement of the missing tooth
depends on various parameters involving dento-skeletal profile, type
of malocclusion, space availability, age and cooperation of the patient,
periodontal health as well as financial issues.
Hypodontia patients may require a multidisciplinary treatment approach
involving orthodontist, paediatric dental specialist, restorative dental
specialist and other dental specialties. Thus, understanding the
aetiology, diagnosis and management of hypodontia is crucial for dental
professionals to facilitate appropriate care.
This updated review of the clinical practice guidelines (CPG) takes into
account recent treatment modalities in the management of hypodontia
patients, incorporating the aforementioned issues by embracing
evidence-based decision making. It is anticipated that this new CPG
will serve as a valuable resource for healthcare providers at all levels
of care, enabling them to effectively manage patients with hypodontia.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
This CPG is also essential to create awareness and knowledge among
patients and guardians.
In this edition of CPG, more clinical questions were added to address the
advances in the management of hypodontia, and its scope broadened,
to include all permanent teeth rather than confining to missing incisors.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
ICD-11 (CODE)
Classification Number of missing teeth
All deciduous and permanent teeth
Less than 6 permanent teeth
6 and more permanent teeth
Anodontia
Hypodontia
Oligodontia
LA30.0
LA30.1
LA30.2
2.
CLASSIFICATION
There are many ways to classify congenitally missing teeth. The
International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision (ICD-11) released
in 2022, described; Refer to Appendix 3. Classification of hypodontia
based on ICD-11 is summarised in Table 1.(2)
Table 1: Classification of hypodontia(2)
Figure 1 illustrates a hypodontia patient with missing left maxillary
lateral incisor (MxLI) and small right MxLI.(6) Figure 2 illustrates an
oligodontia patient with multiple missing permanent teeth. Figure 3
illustrates complete missing permanent teeth in an anodontia patient.
Figure 1: Hypodontia Figure 2: Oligodontia
Figure 3: Anodontia
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
3.
AETIOLOGY
Tooth agenesis is one of the most common dental anomalies which
can occur in syndromic (e.g. ectodermal dysplasia, Down’s syndrome
and hemifacial microsomia) or non-syndromic conditions (e.g. cleft
lip and palate). Multiple theories and evidences demonstrate that the
development of tooth agenesis is linked to genetic and environmental
factors.(6)
3.1
Genetic Factors
Tooth agenesis is closely related to cellular-level issues involving
pathogenic variants of certain genes, which is the protein product
in craniofacial and tooth development. To date, mutated genes
have been identified related to tooth agenesis. These genes can be
inherited through either paternal or maternal transmission in complete
penetrance. Mutation of the genes is also noticed in persons with tooth
agenesis even without familial history.(7, 8)
In a recent systematic review, aimed to characterise and correlate
oligodontia phenotypes with their causative genetic aetiologies, based
upon analyses of available cases supplemented with a characterization
of ten additional families with oligodontia showed:(9) level II-2
• frequency of tooth absence at each tooth position was an effect of
different causative genes
• PAX9 (24.7%), MSX1 (14.5%), WNT10A (26.0%), WNT10B
(1.5%), AXIN2 (6.1%), EDA (5.9%), EDAR (4.0%), EDARADD
(1.3%), LRP6 (4.1%), KREMEN1 (3.8%), PITX2 (2.8%), and
SMOC2 (1.5%) mutation genes related to non-syndromic tooth
agenesis
• WNT10A mutation caused 53.84% of syndromic oligodontia cases
with a mean of 13.0 ± 6.2 teeth missing per case
• PAX9 mutation has a significantly higher percentage of missing
teeth (p<0.05) in maxillary second molar, maxillary first molar,
mandibular first molar, and mandibular second molar positions
• EDA mutation has a significantly higher percentage of missing
teeth (p<0.05) in maxillary lateral incisor, mandibular lateral
incisor, and mandibular central incisor positions
A retrospective cohort study reporting genetic mutation of PAX9
and phenotypic variation within the tooth agenesis spectrum
revealed:(10) level II-2
• missing lower second molar tooth was the most common pattern
in patients with PAX9 mutations with a 100% affected rate
• the prevalence of missing teeth in patients with a PAX9 nonsense
mutation (66.1%) was significantly higher (p=0.004) than those
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
with a PAX9 frameshift mutation (49.6%) or a missense mutation
(40.5%)
• the prevalence of microdontia in the missense mutation group
(4.76%) was less than the frameshift mutation group (9.8%)
and nonsense (9.8%) mutation group, and the difference was
statistically significant (p<0.001)
In a case-controlled study assessing the genetic background of nonsyndromic hypodontia (NSH), a significant association was observed
between the heterozygous and homozygous variant genotypes of
MSX1, increasing the risk of hypodontia in the studied population when
comparing the entire NSH group with controls (p=0.0008).(11) level II-2
Summary of the affected genes based on the missing teeth in maxilla
and mandible showed in Table 2.
Table 2: Summary of affected genes
3.2
Environmental Factors
Environmental variables may have stopped or disturbed the growth of
teeth by preventing the dental lamina’s tooth bud cells from proliferating
which leads to failure of odontogenesis.
Tooth agenesis is occasionally caused by other environmental factors
including:
• patient factor
 infection e.g. osteomyelitis
 trauma in the dental region
 disturbances in jaw innervations
 cancer treatment e.g. chemotherapy, radiotherapy and antineoplastic
agents
Affected genes
PITX2(9) level II-2
EDA, LRP6 and KREMEN1(9) level II-2
AXIN2, WNT10A and SMOC2(9) level II-2
PAX9(10) level II-2, (9) level II-2
KREMEN1(9) level II-2
EDA, WNT10B and KREMEN1(9) level II-2
AXIN2 and MSX1(11) level II-2 EDARADD and
SMOC2(9) level II-2
PAX9(10) level II-2, (9) level II-2
Maxilla
Mandible
Central Incisor
Lateral Incisor
Second Premolar
Second Molar
Central Incisor
Lateral Incisor
Second Premolar
Second Molar
Missing Tooth
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
• maternal factor
 infection e.g. rubella
 nutrition
 substance abuse (smoking, alcohol and drug abuse)
In a recent meta-analysis of six case control studies investigating the
association between dental agenesis and various types of cancer
showed:(11) level II-2
• the odds of a patient with hypodontia having ovarian cancer is 6.43
times higher compared to patient without hypodontia (OR=6.43 95%
CI 3.20 to 12.93)
• no significant difference in dental agenesis of patients with or without
history of colorectal cancer.
• the odds of a patient with family history of cancer being diagnosed
with tooth agenesis is 2.71 times higher compared to patient without
family history of cancer (OR=2.71 95% CI 1.90 to 3.86)
However, the included studies were of very low certainty.
In a meta-analysis of 15 cohort studies assessing adverse effects of
chemotherapy administered in children with mean age of 6.6 years
demonstrated:(12) level II-2
• a considerable increase in the risk of tooth agenesis compared to
untreated patients (RR =2.47, 95% CI 1.30 to 4.71)
• every 7th child with cancer exposed to chemotherapy may develop
tooth agenesis. (Number Needed to Treat, NNT=7)
However, the quality of the evidence was low due to bias.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
4.
PREVALENCE
A large meta-analysis aimed to determine the prevalence of hypodontia
and associated factors in schoolchildren, dental patients and orthodontic
patients showed:(3) level II-2
• global prevalence is 6.4% (95% CI 5.7 to 7.2%) and by regions are
listed below:
• females had a higher prevalence compared to males (OR=1.22, 95%
CI 1.14 to 1.30)
• higher in Class III malocclusion compared to Class I and Class II
(OR=2.15, 95% CI 0.78 to 5.89)
• higher percentage of missing teeth in maxilla 53.2% (95% CI 49.3 to
57%) compared with mandible 46.8% (95% CI 43 to 50.7%)
• most commonly missing teeth are listed below in descending order:
• no statistically significant difference within Asian countries
However, the included primary papers were moderate to good quality.
In a recent systematic review, the prevalence of hypodontia is reported
to be 6.8 ± 4.2% ranging from 3.4 ± 2.2% in Africa to 8.1 ± 6.3% in
Europe.(13) level III
Region
Africa
Europe
Asia
Australia
North America
Latin America and Caribbean
Prevalence (%)
95% CI (%)
13.4
7.0
6.3
6.3
5.0
4.4
9.7 to 18.0
6.0 to 8.0
4.4 to 9.1
5.3 to 7.4
4.1 to 5.9
3.2 to 6.1
Types of teeth
Mandibular second premolar
Maxillary lateral incisor
Maxillary second premolar
Mandibular central incisor
Mandibular lateral incisor
Maxillary first premolar
Mandibular first premolar
Maxillary canine
Other teeth
Prevalence (%)
29.9
24.3
13.7
6.1
4.3
3.6
2.7
2.5
<2.0
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
A cross-sectional study investigating the trend from the year of 2000
to 2018 of prevalence and distribution of hypodontia in an Australian
population, who presented for orthodontic treatment, showed:(14) level III
• most commonly missing permanent teeth in descending order:
 mandibular second premolars
 maxillary lateral incisors
 maxillary second premolars
• occurrence of hypodontia in females was ranged 1.92 to 1.94 higher
than males
• unilateral agenesis of maxillary lateral incisors and mandibular
second premolars was more common than bilateral agenesis of the
same tooth
A large cross-sectional study among Malaysian population assessing
pattern and distribution of tooth agenesis showed:(4) level III
• prevalence was 1.005%
• most frequently missing teeth were lateral incisors (28%) and second
premolars (26.67%)
• maxilla (54.67%) and right side (54.67%) teeth were more frequently
affected
• unilateral (71.42%) was more common compared to bilateral
(28.57%)
• no significant difference between male and female
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
5.
EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS
5.1
General Assessment
5.1.1 Patient’s complaint
Patients with hypodontia may experience various symptoms depending
on the primary characteristics of the condition and also the opinions
of the patients, their families and friends. Some of the most frequently
reported symptoms include:(5)
• impaired aesthetics due to spacing which may be exacerbated by:
 number of missing teeth
 size and shape of remaining teeth
 dimensions of the jaws
 location of the spacing
• challenges with chewing particularly if multiple posterior teeth are
missing
• difficulties with speech which are likely caused by the absence of
anterior teeth
5.1.2 History
It is essential to obtain a comprehensive medical, dental and family
history to confirm the developmental absence of permanent teeth
and determine the potential aetiology. This is summarised in Table
3.(5) However, aetiology is usually multifactorial and often influenced
by a combination of gene function, environmental interaction and
developmental timing.
Table 3: History associated with hypodontia(5)
5.2
Clinical Assessment
5.2.1 Clinical examination
a.
Extra-oral
There is an altered craniofacial morphology with tendency towards
Class III malocclusion and reduced lower anterior facial height.(15)
History
Description
May be associated with medical conditions such as Ectodermal
Dysplasia and Down Syndrome
To exclude clinically missing teeth due to either extraction or
trauma
Presence of hypodontia in other family members is an indication
of a genetic basis
Medical
Dental
Family
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
In a hospital-based cohort study investigating the differences in the
facial soft tissue morphology between mild and severe hypodontia
using a three-dimensional (3D) optical surface scanner in growing
patients found significant differences (p<0.05) in reduction of:(16) level II-2
• alar base
• lower face height
• nasolabial angle
• transgonial distance
Although the preceding evidence showed significant reduction in
nasolabial angle, the CPG DG members opine that nasolabial angle is
commonly found to be increased in the local population.
Figure 4 illustrates frontal and lateral three-dimensional surface
scan views of one of the subjects with landmarks assessed in the
study.(16) level II-2
Figure 4: Frontal and lateral three-dimensional surface scan views
A meta-analysis with seven case-control studies, assessing dental
agenesis with craniofacial morphological pattern showed statistically
significant association between dental agenesis (mild, moderate and
severe) and a retrognathic maxilla as indicated by a smaller sellanasion angle (−1.74°, 95% CI −2.55 to −0.92). The included primary
studies were of moderate to high quality.(17) level II-2
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Figure 5 illustrates severe hypodontia case with retrusive facial profile
and reduced vertical proportions, resulting in increased overbite.(18)
Figure 5: A case of severe hypodontia
a.
Intra-oral:
A tooth is considered to be congenitally missing if it has not erupted in
the oral cavity and is not visible on radiograph at an age when it should
be detected. Permanent teeth can be clinically diagnosed between
ages 12-14, but radiographic diagnosis can be done earlier, depending
on age and stages of tooth development.(15)
In a recent cross-sectional study, comparing the difference between
chronological age (CA) and dental age (DA) in permanent dentition
among Spanish children with agenesis, showed significantly (p<0.01)
lower in agenesis group (-0.16yrs±1.12) compared to a control group
(-0.58yrs±0.90), which suggests a delay in teeth development.(19) level III
Two studies investigated the association between DA and CA in
hypodontia patients.
• A systematic review showed statistically significant:(20) level III
 delay in DA compared with the control group ranging from 1.20
years to 1.64 years
 delay in DA with increasing severity of dental agenesis (p<0.01),
with each additional missing permanent tooth resulting in a delay
of 0.13 year in DA compared to CA
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
However, gender and ethnicity have no effect on DA delay.
• A cross-sectional study showed significant association with delayed
development of permanent teeth (OR=8.931, 95% CI 3.89 to 20.52).
(21) level III
Multiple cross-sectional studies evaluating hypodontia with other dental
anomalies showed:
• significant association with:
 peg-shaped lateral incisor (p=0.0445) on the contralateral
side(19) level III
 microdontia of maxillary incisors (OR=5.921, 95% CI 3.32 to
10.57)(21) level III
 distoangulation of the mandibular second premolar (OR=5.163,
95% CI 1.96 to 13.64)(21) level III
 infra-occlusion of primary molar (OR=2.933, 95% CI 1.35 to 6.36)
(21) level III
• 61.11% patients of those with agenesis have other associated dental
anomalies (microdontia, hypomineralization and infra-occlusion)(22) level III
A local study among Malaysian population observing the pattern and
distribution of tooth agenesis documented presence of 8.57% pegshaped tooth and 5.71% microdontia.(4) level III
Dental features that co-associated with hypodontia are summarised in
Table 4.(5)
Table 4: Intra-oral features co-associated with hypodontia(5)
Feature
Microdontia
Conical teeth
Ectopic eruption
Retained
deciduous teeth
Reduced alveolar
ridge development
Delayed eruption
of permanent teeth
Enamel defects
Abnormal tooth
position
Descriptions
May be localised or generalised; may affect the
crowns and roots of teeth; is a contributor to spacing
May be localised (e.g. peg lateral incisor) or generalised
Ectopic eruption into lateral incisor space; impaction
and transposition may affect the maxillary canine
Teeth may be infraoccluded or ankylosed
May complicate prosthodontic management and
orthodontic tooth movement
An average delay in eruption is 1.5 years. May delay
onset of orthodontic treatment
Hypoplasia, hypocalcifications
Rotations (especially premolars)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
According to American Academy of Paediatric Dentistry (AAPD),
hypodontia should be anticipated in patients presenting with delayed or
asymmetric eruption sequence, retained deciduous teeth, or ankylosis.
They also recommended that palpation of unerupted teeth should be part
of every dental examination during the early mixed dentition stage.(23)
Figure 6 illustrates patient with missing right MxLI, and retained
deciduous molars.(18)
Figure 6: Hypodontia case
5.2.2 Investigation
A definitive diagnosis usually can be established by carrying out a
radiographic examination. A tooth is considered missing if there is no
evidence of the tooth when observed either clinically or radiographically.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
a.
Radiographic Imaging
The standard radiographic techniques used for this purpose include
periapical views, upper standard occlusal radiographs and dental
panoramic radiographs. These imaging methods may be used if there
are indications of underlying disease or developmental anomalies.(24)
The use of panoramic radiography is recommended together with clinical
examination in detecting or confirming a diagnosis of tooth agenesis.
(23) When an unerupted tooth is not palpable, hypodontia should be
suspected and diagnosis can be confirmed with dental radiographs.
These radiographs are indicated to be taken at the time of early mixed
dentition to provide diagnostic information concerning hypodontia.(23)
Radiographic examination is often necessary to make a conclusive
diagnosis of hypodontia, but caution must be taken to avoid taking
radiographs too early. This is because the development of some
permanent teeth such as the second premolars may not begin until a
child is 9 to 10 years old. Therefore, waiting until a child is over 9 years
of age before taking a dental panoramic radiograph for the diagnosis of
hypodontia is essential.(5)
A recent systematic review of healthy children and adolescents revealed
that out of 123 articles reporting various dental anomalies, 44 articles
reported hypodontia. All of the 44 articles used radiographs as diagnostic
tool to confirm hypodontia.(13) level III
Recommendation 1
In diagnosing hypodontia:
• intraoral radiograph should be considered once a tooth is clinically
missing.
• panoramic radiograph should be delayed until age of 9 to 10 years
old.
b.
Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT)
Orthodontic patients are typically evaluated using low-dose radiographic
imaging, which carries a small risk of cancer induction through stochastic
effects. However, young orthodontic patients are at an increased risk,
especially when undergoing high-dose CBCT imaging.(24)
Based on Ministry of Health (MOH) Guideline, CBCT should not be
routinely used for screening purposes, including for orthodontic
diagnosis.(25)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 2
Cone Beam Computed Tomography should be avoided as a diagnostic
tool for hypodontia patients.
5.3
Referral
Clinicians should be aware of family history of hypodontia or other
abnormalities in affected parents or siblings, as delayed eruption is
common among hypodontia patients. It is essential to determine the
reasons for failure of tooth eruption, particularly if there is a disturbance
of the sequence of tooth eruption.
Potential hypodontia patients presenting in the primary care setting
should undergo the following:
• general and clinical assessment
• diagnostic imaging to confirm the hypodontia status
To ensure the optimal treatment outcome, it is crucial to refer the patient
promptly after a diagnosis. The referral can be directed to any relevant
dental specialist within the multidisciplinary team which may consist of
orthodontist, paediatric dental specialist and restorative dental specialist.
Referrals should be made within 1.5 years from the hypodontia tooth’s
chronological eruption age. If it exceeds this range, it will be considered
as late referrals. Thus, potentially increase treatment complexity and
compromise the treatment outcome. Refer Appendix 4 (Tooth Eruption
Chart) which was adopted from the American Dental Association (ADA).(26)
Key message 1
Hypodontia is suspected when there is:
• 1.5 years delayed eruption from its chronological eruption age
• 6 months delay after contralateral tooth has erupted
• absence of bulge upon palpation of eruption site
• prolonged retained deciduous teeth
• a family history of hypodontia
• history of congenitally missing deciduous teeth
• anomalies associated with hypodontia (refer to Table 4)
Recommendation 3
Early referral should be considered once hypodontia is diagnosed.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
The Index of Orthodontic Treatment Need (IOTN) is used routinely
in the orthodontic services within the MOH Malaysia to assess the
need and eligibility for orthodontic treatment based on dental health
component.(27) (Refer Appendix 5)
Key message 2
Hypodontia is categorised under Grade 5 and 4 in IOTN which indicates
a high need for orthodontic treatment.
In cases where further comprehensive treatment is required,
consultation with multidisciplinary team will help to develop an
appropriate treatment plan.
Key message 3
Comprehensive treatment requiring space management of hypodontia
patients should be managed by orthodontist or multidisciplinary team.
5.4
Pre-treatment Record
According to the AAPD:(23)
• diagnostic dental casts can be obtained for patients with hypodontia
to:
 evaluate the occlusal relationship
 determine the necessary arch length for inter- and intra-arch tooth
size relationships
• intra-oral and extra-oral photographs to supplement clinical findings
In local setting, essential pre-treatment records required before
treatment planning in hypodontia patients include panoramic and
lateral cephalometric radiographs, dental casts, intra- and extra-oral
photographs.
Recommendation 4
Essential pre-treatment records may include panoramic and lateral
cephalometric radiographs, dental casts, intra- and extra-oral
photographs in hypodontia patients.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
6.
MANAGEMENT
Management of hypodontia depends on various factors (i.e. size,
shape and colour of the adjacent tooth, site of hypodontia, facial
profile, smile line, arch length-tooth size discrepancy, ridge thickness,
malocclusion, age, cooperation and aesthetic expectation of the
patient) that should be taken into consideration during treatment
planning for optimal aesthetic and functional outcomes.(28)
Treatment planning
Diagnostic orthodontic wax-up of study models or Kesling set-up,
serves as a valuable tool for patient communication. It enables the
orthodontist to visually explain the treatment plan, demonstrate the
potential outcome and discuss the available options with the patient.
This helps in managing patient expectations, gaining informed
consent and actively involving the patient in the decision-making
process. With recent technological advancements, 3D scanners may
be incorporated for digital treatment planning.
However, in growing hypodontia patients, the provision of
comprehensive treatment related to prosthetic replacements (e.g.
implant and bridges) may be delayed.
6.1
Conservative Treatment
Conservative treatment is an option in hypodontia if the occlusion is
acceptable and the patient is satisfied with the dentition and not willing
to commit to lengthy and costly treatment. This includes preservation
of deciduous teeth with continuous monitoring. Preservation of
deciduous teeth in hypodontia patients refers to the process of
maintaining them in place and may involve various treatment options
such as fillings, crowns and root canal therapy to ensure their longevity
until exfoliated.
A recent systematic review comprising three observational studies
assessing survival rate of deciduous molars with agenesis of
premolars showed 82% to 89% of the retained molars were in good
condition over a follow-up ranging from 5 to 13 years. However, all the
three studies were of low certainty.(29) level II-2
In two retrospective studies analysing retained deciduous teeth with
the same cohort of severe hypodontia patients showed, the tooth
types with the highest tendency to remain in good condition were
mandibular deciduous canine (64.3%) and second deciduous molar
(35.7%) at 12 years follow up. Thus, preserving such teeth is often a
worthy choice in growing patients.(30) level II-2; (31) level II-2
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Another systematic review of moderate to good quality with seven
observational studies assessing preservation of deciduous teeth in
terms of:(32) level II-2
• survival rate
 four studies reported deciduous tooth survival between 83% to
93% over follow-up of 5 to 15 years
• lifespan of deciduous tooth, only one study reported
 mandibular deciduous canines had the most predictable prognosis
followed by maxillary deciduous canines
 deciduous molar teeth had the poorest and least predictable
prognosis
• root resorption
 reported in all studies, however its rate and pattern of progression
varied among the studies
• infraocclusion
 the incidence ranged from 25% to 43.6%
 three studies reported the incidence and severity of infraocclusion
increased over time, even into adulthood
However, most of the results above were not reported descriptively in
terms of statistical analysis.
A systematic review of six observational studies among congenitally
missing premolars with a mean follow-up of 12.5 years in preservation
of deciduous molar showed:(33) level I
• survival rate of 89.7%
• success rate of 51.7% when there is no associated root resorption,
ankylosis or infraocclusion
Careful monitoring of retained deciduous teeth is crucial in hypodontia
patients to identify potential complications like ankylosis, root
resorption, or infraocclusion. This monitoring plays an important role
in preserving the alveolar bone and the remaining teeth, as to ensure
optimal prognosis of retained deciduous teeth.
Figure 7 illustrates retained upper left deciduous canine as seen in
left buccal view photograph and panoramic radiograph.
Figure 7: A case of retained deciduous tooth
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 5
Preservation of deciduous teeth may be considered as an option in
individuals with hypodontia.
6.2
Interceptive Treatment
Interceptive treatment of hypodontia in early mixed dentition prevents
the development of malocclusion and complications in the permanent
dentition, eventually reducing or eliminating the need for complex
treatment. In cases of missing maxillary permanent lateral incisor,
early extraction of deciduous incisor or canine may prevent impaction
and allow eruption of permanent canine into the lateral incisor position.
(34) Extraction of deciduous teeth when permanent successors are
missing, constitutes an active treatment modality.
A recent Cochrane Review assessed the effectiveness of extraction of
the primary teeth to promote the eruption of palatally displaced canine
(PDC) among 9 to 14 years old patients.(35) level I
• An RCT found extracting the primary canine may increase the
proportion of PDCs that successfully erupt into the mouth at 12
months compared with no extraction (RR=2.87, 95% CI 0.90 to 9.23).
However, statistically there was no significant difference between the
groups.
• Three RCTs comparing single versus double primary teeth extraction
found no significant difference between the two groups in terms of
eruption of PDC at 18 months. However, at 48 months, 2 out of 3
RCTs showed significantly higher eruption of the PDC when double,
compared to a single primary tooth, was extracted (RR=1.28, 95% CI
1.06 to 1.54).
Despite the low risk of bias of the included RCTs, the certainty of the
evidence was very low.
A retrospective study evaluating the prognosis of retained deciduous
mandibular molars without successors showed significant correlation
between root resorption and infraocclusion (mesial root r=0.37;
p=0.001; distal root r=0.29; p=0.006).(30) level II-2 As the severity of root
resorption increases, the likelihood of infraocclusion also tends to
increase. Thus, in the presence of infraocclusion, extraction of the
deciduous teeth is advisable.
Interceptive treatment is an integral part of the overall management of
hypodontia as it is sufficient to obtain a partial result, while establishing
the pre-requirements for normal growth. The prognosis of retained
deciduous teeth is determined based on clinical and radiographic
examination of the alveolar, crown and root.(36)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
A multidisciplinary team approach is needed when deciding on
extracting retained deciduous teeth in congenitally missing permanent
dentition. Long-term prognosis of the deciduous teeth, future space
requirements and patient preferences are some of the aspects which
should be considered in managing hypodontia patients.(23); (37); (38)
Key message 4
Factors to determine prognosis of retained deciduous are:(36)
• caries
• restoration
• root resorption
• bone resorption
• periapical or interradicular pathology
• ankylosis
• infraocclusion
• gingival recession
Recommendation 6
Extraction of deciduous teeth with infraocclusion may be considered
in hypodontia patients.
6.3
Management by Space Closure
Space closure approach is a treatment option for ensuring overall
dental health in the long-term which can be achieved either via
orthodontically closing the space or by modification of the tooth for
aesthetic reasons.
Factors to be considered for space closure are:
• facial profile
 a straight or slight convex profile.(38) level II-3; (39) level II-2
 bimaxillary dentoalveolar protrusion.(34)
 Class II division 1 incisor relationship
• canine angulation
 mesial tilting of the canine crown as to imitate the tilting of the
lateral incisor
• shade of canine
 canines have darker shade than incisors and the colour difference
between canines and incisors is to be considered
• gingival height
 if the canine is replacing the lateral incisor, then extrusion of
the canine and intrusion of the first premolar will result in better
marginal gingival height
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
6.3.1 Orthodontic Space Closure
a.
Missing Maxillary Lateral Incisors (MxLI)
Two systematic reviews comprising 10 observational studies
comparing the outcome of two treatment alternatives between
orthodontic space closure (SC) and implant-supported prosthetic
replacement (PR) for patients with MxLI agenesis showed in terms of:
• aesthetics:
 both treatments were equally satisfying but SC was more
acceptable than PR aesthetically, however, there was no
statistically significant difference between the groups(40) level II-2
 only one cross-sectional study using 5-point Likert scale by dentists
and laypersons found aesthetics after SC to be statistically more
pleasant (p<0.05)(40) level II-2
 one study had assessed and revealed good acceptability in the
implant group. However, there was no statistically significant
difference between the 2 groups(41) level II-2
 overall, patients were almost equally satisfied with both
approaches(41) level II-2
• periodontal status:
 no significant difference in tooth mobility(40) level II-2; (41) level II-2
 no significant differences were found in plaque index and bleeding
when probing(40) level II-2
 in both systematic reviews, gingival recession was found
significantly more common in the SC group (p<0.001)(40) level II2although no recession was greater than 2 mm (p<0.05)(41) level II-2
 another cross-sectional study showed gingival recession and
papillary defect to be more common in the PR group, however
there was no significant difference between the two groups(40) level II-2
 significant elevation in probing depth of more than 3 mm occurred
in 12 out of 14 replaced teeth in implant group (p<0.001)(40) level II-2;
(41) level II-2
 one study reported significant infra-occlusion in the implant
group(41) level II-2
• temporomandibular joint and occlusion morphology disorder, there
was no significant difference between the two groups40) level II-2; (41) level II-2
Nevertheless, primary papers included in these observational studies
were of low to moderate risk of bias, thus clinical trials are needed to
support the evidence.
Another systematic review comparing effectiveness between
orthodontic space closure versus implant-supported and toothsupported dental prostheses for MxLI agenesis showed in terms
of:(42) level II-2
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
• aesthetics
 no significant differences in terms of patient’s opinion on shape,
symmetry and distribution of spaces in upper anterior teeth except
for colour of teeth where more patients in the PR (80%) were
satisfied than in the SC (45%) (p<0.01)
 no significant differences of the width-to-height ratio of the 6
anterior teeth and the gingival zenith of the tooth or the dental
prosthesis located in the position of the lateral incisor between the
two groups
 increased interdental space in the implant group (p<0.05)
• periodontal status
 three observational studies found no significant difference in
gingival recession of upper premolars between SC and PR
• occlusal function
 prevalence of group function in SC (96-100%) was more than PR
(67-89%)
 no statistically significant difference in the temporomandibular
disorder (TMD) index (modified Helkimo) between the two groups
However, the included primary papers are of moderate quality.
In a retrospective cohort study to evaluate periodontal health status
between agenesis of MxLI with orthodontic space closure (AG) and
control group (CG) over a 10-year period showed in terms of:(43) level II-2
• probing depth:
 in AG, only 0.5% had a pocket depth >4 mm, and 2.4% sites were
4 mm
 no significant differences between the two groups.
 97.1% of probing pocket depths were within normal limits (4mm) in
both groups
• bleeding on probing:
 was observed in 8.6% of the 3942 examined sites in AG whilst
17.6% of the 1536 examined sites in CG
 significantly higher in the interproximal sites in CG compared to
AG (p<0.05) however, no significant differences on the labial and
lingual sites in both groups
• gingival recession and tooth mobility:
 no significant differences between the two groups
This study also reviewed occlusal function and TMD. The study found
most patients had group function occlusion in lateral excursions
both in AG (92.3%) and CG (68%) with a small percentage having a
canine-raised occlusion. The quality of the study is moderate, due to
the small sample size, and because the control group only included
non-extraction orthodontic patients.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Figure 8 illustrates a case where spaces had been closed
orthodontically and the canines resembled missing MxLI.(5)
Figure 8: Orthodontic space closure
Recommendation 7
If both orthodontic space closure and prosthetic replacement is a
viable option in hypodontia cases, orthodontic space closure should
be considered.
b.
Missing Mandibular Second Premolars
Congenitally missing mandibular second premolars have less
aesthetic impact compared to missing MxLI, but careful management
is still required.(44)
• In a crowded arch, retained second deciduous molars should be
removed and the space closed.
• In a well aligned or spaced arch, closing the space may cause
excessive retraction of the anterior teeth. However, second deciduous
molar:
 can be kept if the long-term prognosis is good
 should be extracted if the prognosis is poor and the space should
be restored
 extraction may result in a decrease in alveolar width, which can
pose challenges for implant placement
6.3.2 Modification of Tooth Size and Shape
Orthodontic space closure with canine substitution or existing residual
space without malalignment where no orthodontic intervention needed
often requires modification of tooth size and shape by reshaping with
composite restoration build up or porcelain laminate veneers.
A systematic review of 30 cohort studies evaluating effectiveness
of porcelain laminate veneers (PLVs) showed survival rate at longterm (>10 years) ranged from 73% to 100%, at medium-term (6-10
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
years) ranged from 47% to 100% and at short term (<5 years) was
more than 90%.(45) level II-2 Included primary studies in this review were
of moderate to good quality. However, the studies included patients
who received PLVs irrespective of their hypodontia status, but the
presence or absence of hypodontia did not have an impact on the
survival rate of the PLVs.
Figure 9 illustrates a combination of missing right MxLI and pegshaped left MxLI. Treatment involved orthodontic space closure with
composite build-up of left MxLI and right maxillary canine.(46)
Figure 9: Orthodontic space closure with composite build-up
6.4
Management by Space Opening
Space opening approach in hypodontia patients can vary depending
on the individual's needs and the available treatment options. This will
require multidisciplinary management from various dental specialties
such as orthodontist, paediatric dental specialist, periodontist,
restorative specialist, and oral maxillofacial surgeon.
Factors to be considered for space opening:
• facial profile
 Class I malocclusion with normal intercuspation of posterior teeth
 Class II malocclusion with well aligned or spaced mandibular
dentition
 Class III malocclusion with a concave facial profile or spaced
maxillary dentition
• multiple missing teeth
• cost
 depends on type of definitive prosthesis
6.4.1 Orthodontic Space Opening
Space opening involves orthodontic space redistribution to create
enough space for future dental replacements such as an implant,
bridge, removable denture or autotransplantation. However, the
specific treatment plan should be determined by experienced and
trained clinicians.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
6.4.2 Rehabilitation with Prosthetic Replacement
There are various types of prosthetic replacements available for the
treatment of hypodontia. These prosthetic replacements aim to improve
the patient's appearance and function of the dentition, as well as to
prevent further complications such as bone loss and malalignment of
the remaining teeth. Prosthetic replacements for hypodontia patients
include dental implants, resin-bonded bridge (RBB), fixed partial
dentures (conventional bridgework) and removable dentures. The
choice of prosthetic replacement will depend on various factors such
as growth, extent of the missing teeth, status of remaining dentition,
financial status and patient’s preferences.
The survival rate is defined as the likelihood that the prosthetic
replacement will remain securely in place and functioning for the
intended duration.
a.
Implant
Two systematic reviews of 20 observational studies of dental implants
in hypodontia patients showed survival rate:
• 86% to 100% with follow-up ranging from 0.1 to 18 years.(32) level II-2
• 35.7% to 98.7% (mean 93.7%). Most implants were lost during
the first year after placement. No long-term results (>10 years) are
available.(47) level II-2
Key Message 5
Factors to be considered prior to implant placement in hypodontia
patient:
• Medical condition
• Completion of growth
• Oral hygiene
• Thickness of ridge or bone volume at hypodontia site
• Diameter of dental implant
• Space availability
• Root parallelism
• Operator skill
• Cost
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Figure 10 illustrates a patient with missing right MxLI where space
had been opened orthodontically before dental implant placement five
years later.(48)
Figure 10: Pre- and post-implant treatment of missing right MxLI
b.
Bridge
i.
Resin-Bonded Bridge
Two systematic reviews of 21 moderate quality studies were conducted
on the survival rate of RBB showed:
• in 24 months was 96.9% and 100 months was 59%(32) level II-2
• in 5 years was 83.6% (CI: 0.77 to 0.886) and 10 years was 64.9%
(CI: 0.478 to 0.789)(49) level II-2
A systematic review of five studies comparing effectiveness between
single-retainer versus two-retainer RBB among patients with missing
anterior teeth.(50) level I
• A prospective cohort study showed significantly lower failure rates
in single-retainer cantilever RBB (OR=0.08, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.75)
compared to two-retainer RBB
• No significant difference in terms of debonding between the two
groups in all the studies
Another good quality systematic review of one RCT and seven
observational studies with moderate risk of bias at estimated
5-years follow-up among patients who require all-ceramic RBB in the
replacement of missing teeth showed:(51) level I
• cantilevered design (single-retainer) of all-ceramic RBB had a
significantly higher survival rate (RBB remaining in situ for the followup time without multiple debonding) compared with the two-retainer
design (98.1% vs. 92.0%, p<0.01)
• two-retainer design of all-ceramic RBB had a significantly higher
debonding rate compared to cantilevered design (7.2% vs. 6.1%,
p<0.05)
• two-retainer design of all-ceramic RBB had a significantly higher
fracture rate compared to cantilevered design (10.7% vs. 1.4%,
p<0.01)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Figure 11 illustrates orthodontic space opening followed by composite
build-up of right MxLI and prosthetic replacement for left MxLI with
RBB.(5)
• Right MxLI is a microdont and left MxLI is missing (Figure 11a)
• Space was opened orthodontically for the missing left MxLI (Figure
11b)
• Right MxLI was built-up with composite and an RBB replaced the left
MxLI (Figure 11c)
Figure 11a: Pre-orthodontic
Figure 11b: Post-orthodontic
treatment
treatment
Figure 11c: Post-restorative treatment
Figure 12 illustrates prosthetic replacement with single retainer RBB
to replace missing right mandibular second premolar
Figure 12: Pre- and post-prosthetic replacement
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Figure 13 illustrates fabrication of two-retainer RBB to replace missing
mandibular central incisors.
Figure 13: Missing mandibular central incisors replaced
with two-retainer RBB
ii.
Conventional Bridge
There is a scarcity of literature reporting on the use and outcomes
of conventional bridgework (fixed partial dentures), specifically in
hypodontia patients. This is likely because most hypodontia patients
receive treatment at a younger age where abutment teeth have large
pulp chambers. Thus, bridgework preparation of the abutment teeth
would be destructive to the healthy tooth structure.(32) level II-2
c.
Partial Denture
Removable partial dentures can be an interim phase as space
maintainer and for stability before implant therapy or prior to definitive
treatment, in severe hypodontia patients.(34) However, it may need to
be replaced within 3.5 to 4 years on average due to its deteriorated
appearance, fracture, wear or oral changes.(47) level II-2 It also can be the
definitive treatment for patients who cannot afford or refuse any fixed
prosthesis replacement.
6.4.3 Autotransplantation
Autotransplantation can be an alternative for missing tooth replacement.
It is a technique that involves surgical transplantation of a donor tooth
to a receptor site in the same individual. It can be performed at an early
age in a growing patient.(52) In current practice, ideal timing for the tooth
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
to be transplanted is when root development is between one half to two
thirds completed.
The survival rate of an autotransplanted tooth is commonly assessed by
the percentage of transplanted teeth present at the time of examination
over the total number of transplanted teeth. The success rate is usually
based on the presence of the tooth in the mouth without ankylosis or
inflammatory root resorption, and/or continuation of root development.
A meta-analysis of 17 observational studies assessing open apex
autotransplanted teeth with or without socket preparation for a minimum
12 months follow-up showed:(53) level II-2
• success rate
 was higher in premolars compare to molars (OR=0.46, 95% CI
0.25 to 0.84)
 no significant difference in terms of development stage of the root
and receptor site (maxilla and mandible)
• survival rate was 98.21% (95% CI 96.99 to 99.44)
However, the quality of included primary papers were of high risk of
bias.
Another meta-analysis of six observational studies with at least 6
years of follow-up assessing the prognosis of autotransplanted teeth in
replacing missing teeth found:(54) level II-2
• prevalence of survival rate was 81% (95% CI 0.738 to 0.866)
• rate of ankylosis was 4.8% (95% CI 0.023 to 0.098)
• rate of root resorption was 4%, (95% CI 0.018 to 0.085)
However, the included primary papers were of moderate risk of bias.
In a systematic review of 11 studies assessing on autotransplantation
regardless mature or immature teeth with a minimum follow-up of 12
months showed success rate ranged 44% to 96% and survival rate
ranged 87% to 100%.(33) level I
Autotransplantation of premolar to missing incisor site is recommended
if:(34)
• donor premolar roots are less than ¾ formed
• multiple incisors are missing
• the procedure is handled by skilled surgeons
Subsequently, the autotransplanted teeth may require root canal
treatment depending on the root maturity followed by permanent
restoration.
Autotransplantation is a valuable technique for treating hypodontia
patients. However, it is important to note that the success of the
procedure is highly technique-sensitive by the dental professional.
The benefits can only be achieved if the procedure is performed with
precision and expertise.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Recommendations 8
Autotransplantation may be considered using premolars with open
apex in hypodontia patients.
Management of hypodontia is summarised in Appendix 6.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
7.
POST-ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT RETENTION
Retention is the final phase of orthodontic treatment with the aim
to maintain the teeth in their corrected positions after completion of
orthodontic treatment. Teeth tend to move back to its original position
which is known as relapse. Orthodontic retainers are needed to
prevent relapse.
Orthodontic retainers can be categorised into removable and fixed
retainers. Removable retainers can be removed by the patient for
cleaning and eating and are worn as prescribed by the clinician. Fixed
retainers (bonded retainers) are typically bonded to the lingual or
palatal surface of the teeth and cannot be removed by the patient.
Both types of retainers have their advantages and disadvantages, and
the choice between them often depends on the patient's individual
needs and preferences.
7.1
Removable Retainer
Removable retainers which are most commonly used are Hawley and
vacuum-formed retainers. Vacuum-formed retainers are also known
as thermoplastic or Essix retainers.
A systematic review investigating the performance of the Hawley-type
retainers compared with other types of retainers.(55) level I
• Two RCTs showed no significant difference between the two types of
retainers in terms of survival, lost retainer, assessment of occlusion,
discomfort, self-reported compliance at 3 months, speech, overjet
(OJ), overbite (OB), intercanine width (ICW), intermolar width (IMW),
and arch length.
• An RCT showed significantly greater dental arch measurements
changes by using Little’s Irregularity Index in Hawley retainer at six
months follow-up (p<0.05).
• Another RCT showed relapse during retention in terms of teeth
rotation was significantly higher in Hawley retainers compared to
thermoplastic (p<0.04) in nine months follow-up.
However, possible adverse effects related to the retainers were not
investigated in this study.
A Cochrane systematic review of 13 RCTs, of low to moderate quality
was assessed for effectiveness and safety comparing Hawley retainer
vs thermoplastic retainer showed significant difference in terms
of:(56) level I
• stability (Little's Irregularity Index)
 in upper arch, more relapse was found in Hawley retainer (MD=
0.25 mm, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.42)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
 in lower arch, thermoplastic retainers were better compared to
Hawley (MD=0.42, CI 95% 0.23 to 0.61), and Begg retainers (MD=
0.25, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.31)
However, there is no significant difference between part-time wear
compared full-time wear in both groups.
• failure
 Hawley retainers were more likely to break (RR=2.96, 95% CI 1.58
to 5.55)
• patient satisfaction
 ability to wear retainer as instructed was higher in thermoplastic
retainers (RR=0.89, 95% CI 0.83 to 0.96)
 feeling embarrassed by the retainers was less with thermoplastic
retainers (RR=2.42, 95% CI 1.30 to 4.49)
 Hawley retainers were more difficult to wear (RR=9.37, 95% CI
3.80 to 23.10)
An RCT in a systematic review comparing the efficacy of vacuumformed and Hawley retainers in retaining corrected tooth rotations
showed derotated teeth are better retained with thermoplastic
retainers (9 months part time) than with Hawley retainers (3 months
full time, 6 months part time)(57) level I
Figure 14 and Figure 15 illustrate the use of a Hawley retainer to
replace the missing left maxillary central incisor and Essix retainers
with pontic of maxillary left central incisor respectively.(58)
Figure 14: Hawley retainer with pontic
Figure 15: Essix retainer with pontic
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Key messages 6
Factors to be considered when prescribing types of retainers for
hypodontia patients are:
• initial malocclusion
• treatment modality (open space or close space)
• tendency of relapse
• oral hygiene
• patients’ compliance
• patients’ preference
• operator’s skill & laboratory support
• cost
7.2
Fixed Retainer
A meta-analysis comprising eight RCTs evaluating the amount of
relapse of anterior crowding and effectiveness of retention appliances
after fixed orthodontic treatment between 6 and 24 months follow-up
using Little’s Irregularity Index showed:(59) level I
• significant relapse for:
 mandibular removable retainers (MD=0.72mm, 95% CI 0.47 to
0.98)
 maxillary removable retainers (MD=0.48mm, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.68)
• no significant changes were found for mandibular fixed retainers.
Even though removable retainers had small statistical differences in
the alignment of both arches, it is not clinically significant.
Dual retention, which is a fixed retainer combined with removable
retainer worn at night, is usually indicated for high relapse tendency
among hypodontia patients.
Due to a lack of sufficient evidence-based studies on orthodontic
retention, expert opinions and clinical evidence are often relied upon
to determine the best long-term maintenance for treatment results.
Therefore, it is important for clinicians to assess each individual
patient with hypodontia to determine types of retention.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Figure 16 illustrates fixed retainer in a patient with missing single
mandibular incisor.
Figure 16: Mandibular fixed retainer
Recommendation 9
Dual retention may be considered among hypodontia patients with high
relapse tendency.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
8.
IMPACT ON ORAL HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) is the extent to which
oral disorders could affect function and psychosocial wellbeing. Many
instruments had been developed to assess OHRQoL such as the Oral
Health Impact Profile (OHIP), Child Perceptions Questionnaire (CPQ)
and condition-specific-quality-of-life-in-children-with-developmentallyabsent-teeth (ChildQoLDAT).
The OHIP is a validated questionnaire with seven domains namely
functional limitation, physical pain, psychological discomfort, physical
disability, psychological disability, social disability and handicap. The
CPQ is another validated questionnaire assessing impact in oral
symptoms, functional limitation, emotional and social wellbeing of
children. Meanwhile, ChildQoLDAT is a condition-specific questionnaire
for assessing OHRQoL in patients with hypodontia.
In a prospective (pre-post) study assessing the impact of implant
retained crowns on OHRQoL using OHIP-20 among hypodontia in the
anterior maxilla found that significant improvement in OHRQoL following
treatment (p=0.026) with the effect size of 1.17, indicating a large clinically
meaningful change at 24 months post-treatment.(60) level II-3 However, the
study had a small sample size.
A cross-sectional study comparing agenesis and non-agenesis using
OHIP-14 among participants aged 14 to 55 years old revealed that the
agenesis group has significantly higher overall mean score (p=0.01),
indicating poorer OHRQoL, and in the specific domain:
• psychological discomfort (p=0.04)
• psychological disability (p=0.01)
• social disability (p=0.04).
However, other four domains i.e. functional limitation, physical pain,
physical disability and handicap were not significant between the two
groups.(61) level III Unfortunately, the severity of hypodontia was not taken
into consideration in this study.
A small cross-sectional study in children aged 11 to 14 years old
showed overall scores of CPQ were significantly higher with tooth
agenesis (p=0.001) compared to non-agenesis in all the domains
(oral symptoms, functional limitations, social well-being and emotional
well-being), indicating poorer OHRQoL. No significant correlation was
detected between the number of missing teeth and the quality of life
score.(62) level III
Another cross sectional study using ChildQoLDAT questionnaire among
oligodontia children revealed that younger children (11–12 years old)
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
were less negatively affected (p=0.048) by their condition than the older
ones (13–17 years).(47) level III
Despite limited available evidence and heterogeneity of tools used
to measure OHRQoL, hypodontia does have a negative impact on
OHRQoL and can vary among individuals.
Key message 7
Hypodontia has a negative impact on oral health-related quality of life
(OHRQoL) however, it can be improved with appropriate management.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
9.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The implementation of this CPG is the responsibility of the healthcare
providers. The management of hypodontia should be guided by an
evidence-based approach in order to provide safe and optimum care
for the patients. Clinicians are required to keep abreast with knowledge
through continuing professional education as well as understanding of
patients’ expectations.
Therefore, it is important for these guidelines to be disseminated to
all healthcare professionals in primary and secondary healthcare
facilities. This can be facilitated through the development of appropriate
training modules and quick references. Several factors may affect the
implementation of the recommendations of the CPG.
9.1
Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a) wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare professionals and
teaching institutions via printed and electronic copies
b) continuing professional education on the management of
hypodontia for healthcare professionals
c) adequate facilities at primary and secondary care level for
diagnosing and managing hypodontia patients
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
include:
a) lack of understanding or limited knowledge on the management of
hypodontia patients
b) variation in skills and treatment practices
c) constraints in equipment and facilities
9.2
Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a) ensure widespread distribution of the CPG in hard and soft copy
to healthcare professionals in primary and secondary healthcare
facilities
b) strengthen training of healthcare professionals to ensure knowledge
and information is up to date
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
9.3
Proposed Clinical Audit Indicators
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management of hypodontia:
Target percentage : <30% of late referral of hypodontia patients
to orthodontic clinic
*Late referral is considered when referrals are made exceed 1.5
years from the hypodontia tooth’s chronological eruption age. (Refer
Appendix 4)
Percentage of
late referral*
of hypodontia
patients to
orthodontic
clinic
=
Total number of referral of hypodontia patients to
orthodontic clinic in the same period of time
Number of late referral of hypodontia patients
to orthodontic clinic in a period of time
x100%
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
Search Strategy
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Medline, Pubmed, Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews (CDSR) and Embase while full text journal articles were
retrieved from these databases. The following Medical Subject Heading
terms of free text terms were used either singly or in combination. The
literature search was limited to human study, English language and
published articles from 2012 to 2023.
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective early/interceptive
treatments for hypodontia patients?
1.
Anodontia/
3923
2.
(ageneses, familial tooth or agenesis, familial tooth or anodontia
or familial tooth ageneses or familial tooth agenesis or hypodontia
or hypodontia oligodontia 1 or hypodontia oligodontia 1s or
oligodontia 1, hypodontia or oligodontia 1s, hypodontia or tooth
ageneses, familial or tooth agenesis, familial or tooth agenesis,
selective, 1).mp 4797
3.
(hypodontia adj1 patient*).tw.
62
4.
1 or 2 or 3
4797
5.
Orthodontics, Interceptive/ or Orthodontics, Preventive/
1704
6.
orthodontics, interceptive.mp. 1039
7.
orthodontics, preventive.mp. 761
8.
5 or 6 or 7
1708
9.
4 and 8 31
10. limit 9 to (english language and humans and yr="2012 -Current") 6
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
1.
What is the aetiology of hypodontia in permanent dentition?
2.
What is the prevalence of hypodontia in permanent dentition?
3.
What are the accurate types of investigations in diagnosing
hypodontia patients?
4.
What are the safe and effective early/interceptive treatments for
hypodontia patients?
5.
What are the safe and effective approaches in orthodontic space
management for hypodontia patients?
6.
What are the safe and effective tooth modifications or replacement
options for hypodontia patients?
7.
What are the indications of close space management for hypodontia
patients?
8.
What are the indications of open space management for hypodontia
patients?
9.
What are the implications of space management for hypodontia
patients?
10. What are the safe and effective types of retention for orthodontically
treated hypodontia patients?
11. What is the impact of hypodontia on oral health-related quality of
life?
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision (ICD-11)2
Missing teeth is coded under LA30.
1.
LA30.0 Anodontia
Description:
Anodontia is a genetic disorder commonly defined as the absence
of all teeth, affecting both temporary and permanent dentitions, and
is extremely rarely encountered in pure form without any associated
abnormalities. Rare but more common than complete anodontia are
hypodontia.
2.
LA30.1 Hypodontia
Description :
Hypodontia presents as lack of one or a few (less than 6) permanent
teeth, without any systemic disorders.
Inclusions :
Congenital absence of one tooth
3.
LA30.2 Oligodontia
Description :
A genetic condition characterised by the development of fewer than the
normal number of teeth. The diagnosis of Oligondontia is usually made
in cases in which more than six teeth are missing.
Source: https://icd.who.int/devct11/icd11_mms/en/beta
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
Tooth Eruption Charts
Tooth Eruption Charts for the deciduous dentition
Tooth Eruption Charts for the permanent dentition
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
The Dental Health Component of Index of Orthodontic Treatment
Need (IOTN)
Grade 5
(very great)
Grade 4
(great)
Grade 3
(Borderline)
Grade 2
(little)
Grade 1
(none)
Dental Health Component of IOTN
(Treatment from a dental health perspective)
a Increased overjet > 9 mm
h Extensive hypodontia with restorative implications (more than one tooth missing in
any quadrant) requiring pre-restorative orthodontics
l
lmpeded eruption of teeth (with the exception of third molars) due to crowding,
displacement, the presence of supernumerary teeth, retained deciduous teeth and
any pathological cause
m Reverse overjet greater than 3.5 mm with reported masticatory and speech difficulties
p Defects of cleft lip and palate
s Submerged deciduous teeth
a Increased overjet > 3.5 mm but ≤ 6 mm with incompetent lips.
b Reverse overjet greater than 1 mm but ≤ 3.5 mm
c Anterior or posterior crossbites with > 1 mm but ≤ 2 mm discrepancy between
retruded contact position and intercuspal position
d Displacements of teeth > 2 mm but to ≤ 4 mm
e Lateral or anterior open bites greater than 2 mm but ≤ 4 mm
f
Increased and complete overbite without gingival or palatal trauma
a Increased overjet > 3.5 mm but ≤ 6 mm with competent lips.
b Reverse overjet > 0 mm but ≤ 1 mm
c Anterior or posterior crossbites with ≤ 1 mm discrepancy between retruded contact
position and intercuspal position
d Displacements of teeth > 1 mm ≤ 2 mm
e Anterior or posterior open bite > 1 mm but ≤ 2 mm
f
Increased overbite ≥ 3.5 without gingival contact
g Prenormal or postnormal occlusions with no other anomalies. Includes up to half a
unit discrepancy
Extremely minor malocclusions including displacements < 1 mm
a Increased overjet > 6 mm but ≤ 9 mm
b Reverse overjet > 3.5 mm with no masticatory or speech difficulties
c Anterior or posterior crossbites with > 2 mm discrepancy between retruded contact
position and intercuspal position
d Severe displacements of teeth > 4 mm
e Extreme lateral or anterior open bites > 4 mm
f
Increased and complete overbite with gingival or palatal trauma
h Less extensive hypodontia requiring pre-restorative orthodontics or orthodontic
space closure to obviate the need for a prosthesis
l
Posterior lingual crossbite with no functional occlusal contact in one or both buccal
segments
m Reverse overjet greater than 1 mm but ≤ 3.5 mm with recorded masticatory and
speech difficulties
t Partially erupted teeth, tipped and impacted against adjacent teeth.
x Supplemental teeth.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
Summary Management of Hypodontia
Conservative Treatment
Preservation of deciduous teeth with acceptable occlusion. Patient satisfied
with the dentition and not willing to commit lengthy and costly treatment.
Final phase to maintain the teeth in their corrected positions after completion of orthodontic treatment.
The choice between the retainers depends on the patient's individual needs
and preferences.
Reducing or eliminating the need for complex treatment by extraction of
deciduous teeth with infraocclusion
Achieved either via orthodontically closing the space or modification of the
tooth for aesthetic reasons.
Factors to be considered for space closure:
• facial profile
• canine angulation
• shade of canine
• gingival height
Space opening involves orthodontic space redistribution to create enough
space for future prosthetic replacements.
Factors to be considered for space opening:
• facial profile
• multiple missing teeth
• cost
Interceptive Treatment
Management
by Space
Closure
Orthodontic
space closure
Missing maxillary lateral
incisors
Missing mandibular
second premolars
Modification of tooth size and shape
Orthodontic space opening
Management
by Space
opening
Rehabilitation
with prosthetic
replacement
Implant
Bridge
Resin Bonded
Bridge
Conventional
bridge
Partial Denture
Autotransplantation
Removable retainer
Fixed retainer
PostOrthodontic
Treatment
Retention
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAPD
American Academy Of Paediatric Dentistry
AGREE
Appraisal Of Guidelines Research and Evaluation
CA
Chronological Age
CASP
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme
CBCT
Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
CDSR
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
ChildQoLDAT
Condition-Specific-Quality-Of-Life-In-Children-With-
Developmentally-Absent-Teeth
CI
Confidence Intervals
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CPQ
Child Perceptions Questionnaire
DA
Dental Age
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluation
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
ICD-11
International Classification of Diseases 11th
ICW
Intercanine Width
IMW
Intermolar Width
IOTN
Index of Orthodontic Treatment Need
MaHTAS
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section
MD
Mean Difference
MOH
Ministry Of Health
MxLI
Maxillary Lateral Incisor
NNT
Number Needed to Treat
OB
Overbite
OHIP
Oral Health Impact Profile
OHP
Oral Health Programme
OHRQoL
Oral Health Related Quality of Life
OJ
Overjet
OR
Odd Ratio
PDC
Palatally Displaced Canine
PLVs
Porcelain Laminate Veneers
PR
Prosthetic Replacement
RBB
Resin-Bonded Bridge
RCT
Randomised Control Trials
RR
Relative Risk
SC
Space Closure
SD
Standard Deviation
TMD
Temporomandibular Disorders
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the development group of these guidelines would
like to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:
• panel of internal and external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• HTA and CPG Council for approval of the CPG
• Dr Mohd. Aminuddin b Mohd. Yusof, CPG Unit, Malaysian Health
Technology Assessment Section, Medical Development Division,
Ministry of Health Malaysia
• Dr Maryana bt Musa and Dr Aina Najwa bt Mohd. Khairuddin
• Dr Nur Laila Sofia bt Ahmad
• Dr Farah Nadzirah bt Abd. Majid on the design cover page of the
CPG
• all those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held shares
in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details
are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “Management of Hypodontia”
was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health
(MOH) Malaysia and was developed without any involvement of the
pharmaceutical industry.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Goodman J, Jones S, Hobkirk J, King P. Hypodontia: 1. Clinical features and the
management of mild to moderate hypodontia. 1994.
2.
ICD-11. World Health Organization. International Classification of Diseases
11th Revision. Available at: https://www.who.int/news/item/11-02-2022-icd-112022-release#:~:text=ICD%2D11%20key%20features,Digital%20reference%20
guide.
3.
Khalaf K, Miskelly J, Voge E, Macfarlane TV. Prevalence of hypodontia
and associated factors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of
Orthodontics. 2014;41(4):299-316.
4.
Fauzi NH, Lestari W, Kharuddin AF, Ardini YD. Prevalence, pattern and
distribution of non-syndromic tooth agenesis in permanent dentition among
Malaysian population. Materials Today: Proceedings. 2019;16:2204-9.
5.
Gill D, Barker C. The multidisciplinary management of hypodontia: a team
approach. British Dental Journal. 2015;218(3):143-9.
6.
Chhabra N, Goswami M, Chhabra A. Genetic basis of dental agenesis-molecular
genetics patterning clinical dentistry. Medicina Oral, Patología Oral y Cirugía
Bucal. 2014;19(2):e112.
7.
Albu C-C, Pavlovici R-C, Imre M, Ţâncu AMC, Stanciu IA, Vasilache A, et al.
Research algorithm for the detection of genetic patterns and phenotypic variety of
non-syndromic dental agenesis. Romanian Journal of Morphology Embryology.
2021;62(1):53.
8.
Mártha K, Kerekes Máthé B, Moldovan VG, Bănescu C. Study of rs12532,
rs8670 polymorphism of Msh homeobox 1 (MSX1), rs61754301, rs4904155
polymorphism of paired box gene 9 (PAX9), and rs2240308 polymorphism of
axis inhibitor protein 2 (AXIN2) genes in nonsyndromic hypodontia. BioMed
Research International. 2019;2019(1):2183720.
9.
Zhou M, Zhang H, Camhi H, Seymen F, Koruyucu M, Kasimoglu Y, et al.
Analyses of oligodontia phenotypes and genetic etiologies. International Journal
of Oral Science. 2021;13(1):32.
10. Wong S-W, Han D, Zhang H, Liu Y, Zhang X, Miao M, et al. Nine novel PAX9
mutations and a distinct tooth agenesis genotype-phenotype. Journal of Dental
Research. 2018;97(2):155-62.
11. Medina MCG, Bastos RTdRM, Mecenas P, Pinheiro JdJV, Normando D.
Association between tooth agenesis and cancer: a systematic review. Journal of
Applied Oral Science. 2021;29.
12. Busenhart DM, Erb J, Rigakos G, Eliades T, Papageorgiou SN. Adverse effects
of chemotherapy on the teeth and surrounding tissues of children with cancer: a
systematic review with meta-analysis. Oral Oncology. 2018;83:64-72.
13. De Ridder L, Aleksieva A, Willems G, Declerck D, Cadenas de Llano-Pérula M.
Prevalence of orthodontic malocclusions in healthy children and adolescents:
a systematic review. International Journal of Environmental Research Public
Health. 2022;19(12):7446.
14. Naoum S, Allan Z, Yeap CK, Razza JM, Murray K, Turlach B, et al. Trends in
orthodontic management strategies for patients with congenitally missing lateral
incisors and premolars. The Angle Orthodontist. 2021;91(4):477-83.
15. Cobourne MT. Orthodontic management of the developing dentition: Springer;
2017.
16. Johal A, Hasan E, Zou LF, Wong F, Shahdad S, Al-Klash R. The influence of
mild versus severe hypodontia on facial soft tissues? A three-dimensional optical
laser scanning-based cohort study. Journal of Orthodontics. 2021;48(1):33-41.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
17. Rodrigues AS, Antunes LS, Pinheiro LHM, Guimarães LS, CalansansMaia JDA, Küchler EC, et al. Is dental agenesis associated with craniofacial
morphology pattern? A systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal
of Orthodontics. 2020;42(5):534-43.
18. Cobourne MT, Fleming PS, DiBiase AT, Ahmad S. Clinical cases in orthodontics:
John Wiley & Sons; 2012.
19. León-Rubio C, Martín-Vacas A, Saavedra-Marbán G, Paz-Cortés MM.
Association between dental agenesis and delay in dental development: a
preliminary study in a Spanish paediatric population in relation with Dental
Anomaly Pattern (DAP). BMC Oral Health. 2022;22(1):468.
20. Ruiz-Mealin EV, Parekh S, Jones SP, Moles DR, Gill DS. Radiographic study of
delayed tooth development in patients with dental agenesis. American Journal of
Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2012;141(3):307-14.
21. Choi SJ, Lee JW, Song JH. Dental anomaly patterns associated with tooth
agenesis. Acta Odontologica Scandinavica. 2017;75(3):161-5.
22. Ţenţ A, Todor L, Ciavoi G, Popovici-Muţ AM, Domocoş D, Pogan MD, et al.
Non-syndromic hypodontia of permanent dentition associated with other dental
anomalies in children and adolescents. Romanian Journal of Morphology and
Embryology. 2018;59(3):879-83.
23. AAPD. American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. Management of the developing
dentition and occlusion in pediatric dentistry. The Reference Manual of Pediatric
Dentistry Chicago, Ill: American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. 2021;408-25.
24. Isaacson KG. Guidelines for the use of radiographs in clinical orthodontics.
2016.
25. MOH. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guidelines on the use of cone beam computed
tomography CBCT in government dental facilities. Available at: https://hq.moh.
gov.my/ohp/images/pdf/xtvtnsop/Guidelines-on-The-Use-of-Cone-BeamComputed-Tomography-CBCT-In-Government-Dental-Facilities.pdf
26. Sukeri S. Problems of tooth eruption, Portal MyHealth. Available at: http://
wwwmyhealthgovmy/en/problems-tooth-eruption/ 2017.
27. MOH. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Garis panduan rujukan rawatan ortodontik
di fasiliti perkhidmatan pergigian Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia (KKM).
Available
at:
https://hqmohgovmy/ohd/images/pdf/publication/GARIS%20
PANDUAN%20RUJUKAN%20RAWATAN%20ORTODONTIKpdf 2022.
28. Gupta SP, Rauniyar S. Management of missing maxillary lateral incisor: a
contemporary review. Orthodontic Journal of Nepal. 2021;11(1):72-8.
29. Dos Santos CCO, Melo DL, da Silva PP, Normando D. What is the survival
rate of deciduous molars in cases with agenesis of premolar successors? A
systematic review. The Angle Orthodontist. 2022;92(1):110-7.
30. Hvaring CL, Birkeland K. The long-term fate of persisting deciduous molars and
canines in 42 patients with severe hypodontia: a 12-year follow-up. European
Journal of Orthodontics. 2020;42(6):581-6.
31. Hvaring CL, Øgaard B, Stenvik A, Birkeland K. The prognosis of retained primary
molars without successors: infraocclusion, root resorption and restorations in
111 patients. European Journal of Orthodontics. 2014;36(1):26-30.
32. Laverty DP, Fairbrother K, Addison O. The current evidence on retaining or
prosthodontically replacing retained deciduous teeth in the adult hypodontia
patient: a systematic review. The European Journal of Prosthodontics Restorative
Dentistry. 2018;26(1):2-15.
33. Terheyden H, Wüsthoff F. Occlusal rehabilitation in patients with congenitally
missing teeth—dental implants, conventional prosthetics, tooth autotransplants,
and preservation of deciduous teeth—a systematic review. International Journal
of Implant Dentistry. 2015;1(1):1-25.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
34. MOH. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Orthodontic management of developmentally
missing incisors: Available at: https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/attachments/
CPG%202014/Orthodontic1.pdf
35. Benson PE, Atwal A, Bazargani F, Parkin N, Thind B. Interventions for promoting
the eruption of palatally displaced permanent canine teeth, without the need
for surgical exposure, in children aged 9 to 14 years. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2021(12).
36. Hua L, Thomas M, Bhatia S, Bowkett A, Merrett S. To extract or not to extract?
Management of infraoccluded second primary molars without successors. British
Dental Journal. 2019;227(2):93-8.
37. Alqahtani ND. Successful treatment modalities for missing lateral incisors–a
systematic review. The Saudi Dental Journal. 2021;33(6):308-15.
38. Kiliaridis S, Sidira M, Kirmanidou Y, Michalakis K. Treatment options for
congenitally missing lateral incisors. European Journal of Oral Implantology.
2016;9(Suppl 1):S5-24.
39. Seehra J, Al-Ali A, Pandis N, Cobourne MT. Space closure versus space opening
for bilateral absent upper lateral incisors: what is the duration of orthodontic
treatment? European Journal of Orthodontics. 2020;42(4):460-5.
40. Šikšnelytė J, Guntulytė R, Lopatienė K. Orthodontic canine substitution vs.
implant-supported prosthetic replacement for maxillary permanent lateral incisor
agenesis: a systematic review. Stomatologija. 2021;23(4):106-13.
41. Shyagali TR, Kapoor S, Gupta A. Canine substitution versus implant for treating
congenitally missing lateral incisors: a systematic review. Iranian Journal of
Orthodontics. 2021;16(2):1-7.
42. Silveira GS, de Almeida NV, Pereira DMT, Mattos CT, Mucha JN. Prosthetic
replacement vs space closure for maxillary lateral incisor agenesis: a systematic
review. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics.
2016;150(2):228-37.
43. Rosa M, Lucchi P, Ferrari S, Zachrisson BU, Caprioglio A. Congenitally missing
maxillary lateral incisors: long-term periodontal and functional evaluation after
orthodontic space closure with first premolar intrusion and canine extrusion.
American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2016;149(3):339-48.
44. Cobourne MT, DiBiase AT. Handbook of orthodontics e-book: Elsevier Health
Sciences; 2015.
45. AlJazairy YH. Survival rates for porcelain laminate veneers: a systematic review.
European Journal of Dentistry. 2020;15(02):360-8.
46. Stenvik A, Zachrisson BU. Missing anterior teeth: orthodontic closure and
transplantation as viable options to conventional replacements. Endodontic
Topics. 2006;14(1):41-50.
47. Filius M, Cune M, Raghoebar G, Vissink A, Visser A. Prosthetic treatment
outcome in patients with severe hypodontia: a systematic review. Journal of Oral
Rehabilitation. 2016;43(5):373-87.
48. Jamilian A, Perillo L, Rosa M. Missing upper incisors: a retrospective study of
orthodontic space closure versus implant. Progress in orthodontics. 2015;16:1-6.
49. Balasubramaniam G. Predictability of resin bonded bridges–a systematic review.
British Dental Journal. 2017;222(11):849-58.
50. Wei Y-R, Wang X-D, Zhang Q, Li X-X, Blatz MB, Jian Y-T, et al. Clinical
performance of anterior resin-bonded fixed dental prostheses with different
framework designs: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Dentistry.
2016;47:1-7.
51. Chen J, Cai H, Ren X, Suo L, Pei X, Wan Q. A systematic review of the survival
and complication rates of all-ceramic resin-bonded fixed dental prostheses.
Journal of Prosthodontics. 2018;27(6):535-43.
Management of Hypodontia (Second Edition)
52. Martin K, Nathwani S, Bunyan R. Autotransplantation of teeth: an evidencebased approach. British Dental Journal. 2018;224(11):861-4.
53. Atala-Acevedo C, Abarca J, Martínez-Zapata MJ, Díaz J, Olate S, Zaror C.
Success rate of autotransplantation of teeth with an open apex: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery. 2017;75(1):35-50.
54. Machado L, Do Nascimento R, Ferreira D, Mattos C, Vilella O. Long-term
prognosis of tooth autotransplantation: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
International Journal of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery. 2016;45(5):610-7.
55. Al Rahma WJ, Kaklamanos EG, Athanasiou AE. Performance of Hawley-type
retainers: a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. European Journal of
Orthodontics. 2018;40(2):115-25.
56. Littlewood SJ, Millett DT, Doubleday B, Bearn DR, Worthington HV. Retention
procedures for stabilising tooth position after treatment with orthodontic braces.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016(1).
57. Wouters C, Lamberts TA, Kuijpers-Jagtman AM, Renkema AM. Development of
a clinical practice guideline for orthodontic retention. Orthodontics Craniofacial
Research. 2019;22(2):69-80.
58. Doğramacı EJ, Jones VS, Jones AG. The Hawlix: a simple and aesthetic prostheticorthodontic retainer. Australasian Orthodontic Journal. 2016;32(2):229-32.
59. Lo Giudice A, Isola G, Rustico L, Ronsivalle V, Portelli M, Nucera R. The efficacy
of retention appliances after fixed orthodontic treatment: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Applied Sciences. 2020;10(9):3107.
60. Allen PF, Lee S, Brady P. Clinical and subjective evaluation of implants in
patients with hypodontia: a two-year observation study. Clinical Oral Implants
Research. 2017;28(10):1258-62.
61. Antunes LAA, Freire JS, Da Silva GIM, Rodrigues AS, Antunes LDS. Assessment
of oral health-related quality of life in adolescents, young adults, and adults with
dental agenesis: a comparative study. Special Care in Dentistry. 2019;39(6):587-92.
62. Kotecha S, Turner PJ, Dietrich T, Dhopatkar A. The impact of tooth agenesis
on oral health-related quality of life in children. Journal of Orthodontics.
2013;40(2):122-9.
ong ey
sanaener
Stanton