aoe
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Management Of
MENOPAUSE
in Malaysia
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES:
Management Of MENOPAUSE
in Malaysia
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
I
First published 2022
Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia / Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES: Management Of MENOPAUSE in Malaysia 2022.
Mode of access: Internet
eISBN 978-967-14066-7-0
1. Menopause--Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Menopause--Diagnosis--Handbooks, manuals, etc.
3. Menopause--Hormone therapy--Handbooks, manuals, etc.
4. Electronic books.
618.175
REPRODUCTION RIGHTS:
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without written permission of OGSM & MMS.
PUBLISHER:
Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society of Malaysia (OGSM)
A-05-10, No. 2 Jalan Kiara, Plaza Mont Kiara, Mont Kiara,
50480, Kuala Lumpur
Malaysian Menopause Society (MMS)
Wisma Goshen (Ground & 1st Floor) 60 & 62, Jalan SS 22.21
Damansara Jaya, 47400 Petaling Jaya, Selangor
DESIGNED BY:
Pronto Ad Sdn Bhd
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
II
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This clinical practice guideline (CPG) is a guide to clinical management of
menopause and its related problems in the local setting. It is based on the best
available evidence present at the time of development and print. Adherence to
these guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case.
Every health care provider is responsible for the management of his / her patient
based on the clinical picture presented and the patient’s unique characteristics,
using management options available locally.
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines are issued in 2022 and will be reviewed within a minimum period
of 4 years (2026) or sooner if new evidence arises which may affect management.
In due course, at time of reviewing the CPG, the Chairperson or the Head of the
Menopause Subdivision of the Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society will work
together with the Malaysian Menopause Society to carry out the necessary revision
in accordance with the latest systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS.
Every care has been taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail
at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections
will be published in the web version which would be the definite version at all
times.
This CPG will be made available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.ogsm.org.my
https://www.menopausefacts.org.my
http://menopause.org.my/wordpress
This CPG will also be made available as an app for Android and IOS platform:
MyMAHTAS
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
III
Table of Contents
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations
viii
Formulation of Recommendations
viii
Key Recommendations
ix
Development of Guidelines
xvi
Objectives
xviii
Target Population / Group / Users / Health Care Settings
xix
Applicability of Guidelines and Resource implications
xix
Implementation of this Guideline
xx
Key Messages on Menopausal Hormone Therapy
xxi
CPG Developmental Group
xxii
Review Committee
xxiii
External Reviewers
xxiv
Clinical Audit Criteria
xxv
Algorithm
xxvi
A. Management of Menopause in Malaysia
Introduction
1
Section 1. Definition of Menopause
1.1.
Menopause in Malaysia
2
1.2. Stages of Menopause
2
1.3. The Perimenopause
5
1.4. Premature Ovarian Insufficiency (POI)
8
Section 2. Symptoms of Menopause
2.1
Vasomotor Symptoms (VMS)
11
2.2 Mood Disorders
12
2.3 Genitourinary Syndrome of Menopause (GSM)
13
2.4 Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)
14
2.5 Stroke
15
2.6 Venous Thromboembolism (VTE)
16
2.7 Osteoporosis
17
2.8 Sarcopenia
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
IV
2.9 Metabolic Syndrome, Weight, and Diabetes Mellitus
19
2.10 Cognition
19
2.11 Skin
20
2.12 Hair, Dentition, and Special Senses
20
2.13 Quality of Life (QoL)
23
Section 3. Clinical Assessment and Investigations
23
Section 4. Lifestyle Changes During Menopause
25
Section 5. Menopausal Hormone Therapy
5.1
Introduction
27
5.2 Starting Menopausal Hormone Therapy
29
5.3 Types of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
30
5.4 Delivery Routes
33
5.5 Available Menopausal Hormone Therapy in Malaysia
35
5.6 Benefits and Risks of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
39
5.7 Duration of Use of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
41
5.8 Side Effects of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
43
5.8 (i)
Management of breakthrough bleeding
46
5.8 (ii) Cyclical therapy with absent scheduled bleeding 47
5.9 Choice of Estrogen in Menopausal Hormone Therapy
48
5.10 Choice of Progestogen in Menopausal Hormone Therapy
49
5.11 Follow-Up of Women on Menopausal Hormone Therapy
52
5.12 Stopping Menopausal Hormone Therapy
54
Section 6. Effects of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
6.1
Menopausal Hormone Therapy in Perimenopause
56
6.2 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Vasomotor
58
Symptoms (VMS)
6.3 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Mood Disorders
59
6.4 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Genitourinary
60
Syndrome of Menopause (GSM)
6.5 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cardiovascular
62
Disease (CVD) & All-Cause Mortality
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
V
6.6 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Stroke
65
6.7 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Venous
66
Thromboembolism (VTE)
6.8 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Osteoporosis
68
6.9 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Sarcopenia
69
6.10 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and
70
Metabolic Syndrome, Weight and Diabetes
6.11 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cognitive Function
72
6.12 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Skin
73
6.13 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Hair, Dentition,
74
and Special Senses
6.14 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and the Breast
75
6.15 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Other Cancers
80
6.16 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Quality of Life (QOL)
83
6.17 Menopausal Hormone Therapy, All-Cause Mortality
83
and Global Index
Section 7. Menopausal Hormone Therapy (MHT) in Women with Special Problems
7.1
MHT and Endometriosis
85
7.2 MHT and Uterine Fibroids
86
7.3 MHT and Hypertension
87
Section 8. Tibolone
87
Section 9. Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs)
89
Section 10. Non-hormonal Management of Menopause
10.1 Pharmacological Therapy
92
10.2 Herbal Products
94
10.3 Supplements
95
10.4 Alternative Therapy
97
Section 11. Compounded Hormones
98
Section 12. Body Identical Hormones
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
VI
Section 13. Religious Perspectives
100
B.
Tables
103
C.
Appendix
1. Example of Search Strategy
104
2. Questions for Search Strategy Table
106
3. Menopause Questionnaire
108
4. OSTA (The Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool for Asians)
1 1 1
5. Benefits and Risks of MHT use in women aged 50 – 59 years 112
6. Different types of MHT preparations
113
D.
Abbreviations
114
E.
References
119
F.
Acknowledgements
141
G.
Disclosure Statements
141
H.
Source of Funding
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
VII
Menopause, a natural biological process that is accompanied by estrogen deficiency, will
affect every woman. As the average age of menopause in Malaysia is around 50 years,
one-third of the lives of women are going to be without the hormone estrogen, making
them susceptible to a multitude of problems; ranging from social to medical issues such
as coronary heart disease, non-communicable diseases, osteoporosis, and cancers.
This Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) on Management of Menopause in Malaysia, a
collaboration between the Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society of Malaysia, the
Malaysian Menopause Society along with the College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Academy of Medicine, Malaysia is an excellent start on what we can do for our aging
women. Awareness of problems that menopause can bring, preventive strategies, early
detection, and menopause management are essential. We need to take away the
menopause “vacuums’ that have been created over the years and talk more openly about
menopausal health.
Menopausal hormone therapy remains an effective option for menopausal symptoms.
Robust clinical data has indicated the effectiveness and safety of these therapies in early
menopause. It is therefore important to reappraise the current evidence available and the
production of this guideline is timely to encourage healthcare professionals to play an
important role in promoting, counseling, and providing health education regarding
menopausal hormonal therapy.
Thank you to the members of the expert panel, the review committee, HTA at MOH, and
the external reviewers for producing this clear and concise guideline. It is my fervent hope
that this CPG will help educate our healthcare workers to be proactive in managing
menopausal health, as preventive and early detection strategies can be implemented as
a woman goes through menopause
KHAIRY JAMALUDDIN
MINISTER OF HEALTH MALAYSIA
FOREWARD
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
VIII
Levels of Evidence
Definitions of levels of evidence by the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health
Care 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the CPG unit of MaHTAS
is adapting GRADING RECOMMENDATIONS, ASSESSMENT, DEVELOPMENT
and EVALUATION (GRADE) in its work process. The quality of each retrieved
evidence and its effect size are carefully assessed / reviewed by the CPG
Development Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances
of the following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:
•
overall quality of evidence
•
balance of benefits versus harms
•
values and preferences
•
resource implications
•
equity, feasibility and acceptability
All statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the CPG Development Group and the Review Committee. This
CPG was developed largely based on the findings of systemic reviews, metaanalyses and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
Levels
Study Design
I
Evidence obtained from meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials (RCTs).
II – 1
Evidence from controlled trial (s) without randomisation.
II – 2
Evidence from cohort or case control analytic studies,
preferably from more than one centre or research group.
II – 3
Evidence from comparisons between times and places with or
without the intervention: dramatic results from uncontrolled
studies could be included here.
III
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical
experience: descriptive studies or reports of expert
committees.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
IX
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG Developmental
Group as the key recommendations that answer the main questions addressed
in the CPG and should be prioritised for implementation.
The Perimenopause
1.
Women
experiencing
abnormal
uterine
bleeding
in
the
perimenopause should always be investigated based on the FIGO
classification system of PALM-COEIN (polyps, adenomyosis,
leiomyoma, malignancy, coagulation disorders, ovulatory disorders,
endometrial causes, iatrogenic causes and not otherwise classified).
15 (Level III)
2.
Clinical investigations for a woman with abnormal uterine bleeding
include a vaginal examination, pap smear (in sexually active
women) and a pelvic ultrasound to rule out local pelvic pathology.
If a vaginal examination cannot be carried out, a pelvic ultrasound
on a full bladder would suffice.
Blood investigations for anemia, thyroid dysfunction and
coagulation disorders (if necessary) are advised.15 (Level III)
3.
Women with perimenopausal symptoms are advised either the
• low dose oral contraceptive pill as it acts as a contraceptive,
gives better cycle control and treats perimenopausal symptoms.
14 (Level I)
• menopausal hormone therapy which gives better cycle control
and treats perimenopausal symptoms but is inadequate as
a contraceptive. Non-hormonal contraception is advised, if
necessary.15 (Level I)
4.
The levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) is an alternative
treatment for perimenopausal women with heavy menstrual
bleeding. It acts as a contraceptive and provides endometrial
protection. Women requiring menopausal hormone therapy can
continue using the LNG-IUS and add estrogen either orally or via
the transdermal route.16 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
X
Premature Ovarian Insufficiency (POI)
1.
Women with premature ovarian insufficiency are at risk of longterm consequences of estrogen deficiency, especially osteoporosis
(8%), premature coronary artery disease, cardiovascular disease
and dementia.18 (Level I), 20 (Level 1)
2.
The low dose combined oral contraceptive pill (COC) is
recommended for women with premature ovarian insufficiency
till the age of menopause (50 years). It acts both as a hormone
replacement and a contraceptive.20 (Level1)
3.
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) may be used as an alternative
to the combined oral contraceptive (COC) pill in women with
premature ovarian insufficiency. Additional measures should be
advised if contraception is required.20 (Level1)
Menopausal Hormone Therapy (MHT)
1.
Women with menopausal symptoms who are less than 60 years of
age or within 10 years of menopause should be offered menopausal
hormone therapy for relief of vasomotor symptoms, genitourinary
symptoms of the menopause and prevention of bone loss. The risk
of cardiovascular disease, stroke and venous thromboembolism is
lower in this age group when compared to older post-menopausal
women.20, 97, 98, 175, 177 (Level I), 179 (Level II-2)
2.
For maximal cardio protective efficacy, women should start
menopausal hormone therapy with the onset of vasomotor
symptoms and within 10 years of menopause.122 (Level I)
3.
Women with menopausal symptoms who are at a higher risk of
stroke or venous thromboembolism are advised to use transdermal
estrogen preparations (non-oral) for relief of menopausal symptoms.
Women with an intact uterus will still need to add 12 -14 days of either
oral or vaginal progestogen or use the levonorgestrel intrauterine
system (LNG-IUS) for endometrial protection.114 (Level II-3), 118 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XI
4.
In
women
with
coexisting
morbidities
such
as
obesity,
hypertriglyceridemia,
active
gall
bladder
disease,
known
thrombophilia such as Factor V Leiden and have a higher risk of
venous thromboembolism; transdermal estrogen is preferred
over oral estrogen preparations as it is as effective for vasomotor
symptoms with a lower risk of venous thromboembolism.114 (Level II-3), 118
(Level II-1)
5.
The low dose vaginal estrogen therapy is advised for relief of
symptoms of genitourinary syndrome of menopause; additional
progestogen therapy is not required for endometrial protection.
However, any unscheduled vaginal bleeding should always be
investigated.116 (Level I)
6.
Younger women who undergo surgical menopause are advised
to take estrogen only therapy till the age of 50 years to prevent
immediate and long-term problems of the menopause.124 (Level I)
Types of Menopausal Hormone Therapy (MHT)
1.
Hysterectomised women (women without a uterus), need only
estrogen therapy for relief of menopausal symptoms. 101 (Level I)
2.
Non-hysterectomised women (women with an intact uterus) need
both estrogen and progestogen therapy for relief of menopausal
symptoms.
Progestogens
are
added
only
for
endometrial
protection.101 (Level I)
• Cyclical therapy (regular scheduled periods) is prescribed for
women in the perimenopause.112 (Level I)
• Continuous combined therapy (no bleed therapy) is prescribed
for women who are one year from their last period.112 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XII
Effects of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy treatment is recommended in women
less than 60 years of age and within 10 years of menopause as:
• it relieves vasomotor symptoms and other associated symptoms
such as disturbed sleep, irritability, concentration problems and
diminished quality of life which are related to the menopause.
102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1)
• it has a positive effect on mood disorders in women experiencing
menopause related mood changes. The transdermal estrogen
preparations may not show the same benefit.146 (Level I)
• it helps prevent and treat post-menopausal osteoporosis.183 (Level I)
• improves menopausal-specific quality of life scores (MsQOL)
and global quality of life scores (Gqol).246, 247, 247, 248 (Level I)
• results in a more favourable global health index and a lesser allcause mortality in women between the ages of 50 – 59 years.224,
175 (Level I)
2.
Women with symptoms related to genitourinary syndrome of
menopause are advised topical vaginal estrogen therapies as they
are highly efficacious and carry minimal side effects.101, 110, 148, 149, 150, 151
(Level 1)
3.
There are currently no recommendations for use of menopausal
hormone therapy for:
• prevention or treatment of sarcopenia in the menopause.189 (Level I)
• prevention or treatment of metabolic disorders in the menopause.
190,191 (Level I)
• sole treatment of cognition or for reduction of Alzheimer’s
Disease in the menopause.146, 195 (Level I), 196 (Level II-1)
• sole treatment of the aging skin.200 (Level II-2)
• treatment of menopausal changes to hair, dentition, eyesight,
hearing, smell, taste and voice.201 (Level I), 202 (Level II), 203 (Level II-1), 204 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XIII
Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cancers
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy and breast cancer:
• Estrogen only therapy for hysterectomised women (women
without a uterus) is associated with a non-significant risk
reduction or a very minimal increased risk of breast cancer which
is relative to duration of estrogen use.174,216 (Level I)
• Combined
estrogen
–
progestogen
therapy
for
nonhysterectomised women (women with a uterus) is associated
with a small increased risk of breast cancer which is relative to
duration of hormone use and type of progestogen used.174,216 (Level I)
• Menopausal hormone therapy may be recommended for
menopausal women with symptoms who have family history of
breast cancer or carry a positive BRCA mutation.220,221 (Level I)
• Menopausal hormone therapy is not advised for breast cancer
survivors.22(Level I), 226(Level lII)
• Women with estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer (past
or present) can use vaginal estrogen therapy for symptoms of
genitourinary syndrome of menopause. There is no increased
risk of breast cancer recurrence.116 (Level II-1)
2.
Women who have had a hysterectomy for cervical cancer may
use menopausal hormone therapy (estrogen only) for treatment of
menopausal symptoms.229 (Level II-2), 230(Level I)
3.
After endometrial cancer surgery, menopausal hormone therapy is
not advised for treatment of menopausal symptoms due to fears of
stimulating any remnant cancer cells.233 (Level 1)
4.
Menopausal hormone therapy (either estrogen only or estrogen
progestogen combination) may be used for treatment of
menopausal symptoms in women who have completed treatment
for ovarian cancer.174 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XIV
Duration of use of Menopausal Hormone Therapy (MHT)
1.
Post-menopausal women are allowed to continue menopausal
hormone therapy without any mandatory time limit as long as an
annual review with relevant investigations (see Section 5.11) and an
annual benefit-risk assessment is carried out.128 (Level I)
2.
When long term menopausal hormone therapy (beyond 10 years) is
considered, the low dose hormonal regime is advised.88 (Level II-1), 101 (Level I)
3.
Continued use of menopausal hormone therapy (beyond 10 years)
is recommended in post-menopausal women with persistent
vasomotor symptoms, to improve symptoms related to genitourinary
syndrome of menopause, to increase bone density and to reduce
fractures at all sites.8 (Level II-3)
Tibolone
1.
Post-menopausal women experiencing menopausal symptoms who
are one year after their last period or after a surgical hysterectomy
may be advised Tibolone.256 (Level I)
2.
Tibolone may also be advised in post-menopausal women:
• who are unable to tolerate menopausal hormone therapy and
for whom sexual health issues and libido are the main areas of
concern.256 (Level I)
• on continuous combined menopausal hormone therapy and
want to transition into tibolone for long term use.256 (Level I)
• with endometriosis or fibroids who need menopausal treatment,
as tibolone has less effect on estrogen stimulated growths.256 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XV
Non-Hormonal Management of Menopause
1.
Herbal supplements such as isoflavones and phytoestrogens may
be used for relief of vasomotor symptoms but have been found to
be not more efficacious than placebo.274, 275 (Level I), 276 (Level I)
2.
1200 mgs of calcium supplements (a combination of dietary sources
and supplements) is recommended due to its positive effect on
bone mineral density and fracture risk reduction.284 (Level II-3)
3.
Adequate Vitamin D supplementation to achieve Vitamin D levels of
more than 50 ng/mL is advised in order to maintain skeletal health
and reduce the risk of fractures and falls.285 (Level I)
4.
Women experiencing menopausal symptoms may consider alternative
therapy such as hypnotherapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, relaxation
techniques, sleep hygiene and enforcing of positive attitudes to help
ease anxiety, sleep and vasomotor symptoms.289 (Level I)
Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs)
1.
Raloxifene hydrochloride is recommended for women with postmenopausal osteoporosis as it causes a 55% reduction in new vertebral
fractures in women without prior fractures and a 31% reduction in
women with prior fractures, when given over 3 years.261 (Level I)
2.
Raloxifene hydrochloride may be recommended for women with
post-menopausal osteoporosis who are at a higher risk for breast
cancer as it has been shown to decrease estrogen receptor breast
cancer by 90% when given over 3 years.262, 263 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XVI
** Menopausal Hormone Therapy (MHT) is the new terminology to
replace Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT). Throughout this CPG,
MHT would be used and is synonymous with HRT.
DEVELOPMENT OF GUIDELINES
The members of the Development Group (DG) for this CPG comprised of
gynaecologists (both from the Ministry of Education and the private sector)
who have been actively involved in the management of menopause in Malaysia,
having run menopause clinics in their hospitals and published local papers
on menopause health in Malaysia. They were aided by an endocrinologist
from the private sector who specialises in post-menopausal osteoporosis and
metabolic problems.
There was active involvement of allied health care professionals in the
multidisciplinary review committee (RC) comprising of a family physician, an
occupational health doctor, a pharmacist, a staff nurse and a doctor from East
Malaysia so as to make this CPG as far reaching as possible. As this CPG is a
combined effort with the Ministry of Health and Academy of Medicine, the
representatives of each were present. Various ideas and suggestions were
incorporated to complete this CPG.
There were 10 meetings carried out in the offices of the Obstetrical and
Gynaecological Society of Malaysia in Kuala Lumpur. Two subsequent meetings
were in the meeting rooms of Pantai Hospital Kuala Lumpur. As the pandemic
struck, subsequent collaborations were through zoom.
A review of current and past literature was made using electronic databases
including Medscape, OVID, PubMed and the Cochrane Data base of Systemic
Reviews and Guidelines International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for
Example of Search Strategy). Due to evolvement of hormone replacement
therapy since 1990, the search covered literature published from 1990 – April
2021 on humans, specifically women and in English. In addition, the reference
lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched and experts in
the field contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted
from 12th August 2018 to 23rd Feb 2020. Literature search was repeated for
all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31st May 2021 to be included. Future CPG
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XVII
updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of
the search strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
A total of 9 main clinical questions were developed under different sections
(refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). Members of the working committee
were assigned individual questions within these sections. All literature retrieved
were appraised by at least two members of the working committee using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence tables
and further discussed in each meeting. All statements and recommendations
formulated after that were agreed upon by the developmental group, the
review committee and the external reviewers. Where evidence was insufficient,
the recommendations were made through the consensus of the working
committee, internal and external reviewers. Any differences in opinion were
resolved consensually.
This CPG is based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analysis, relevant
well conducted randomised clinical trials and cohort studies. Reference was
made to the
•
Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hormone Therapy During Menopause in
Malaysian Women 2010,
•
Clinical Practice Guidelines on Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in
Women 2016,
•
Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Osteoporosis 2015,
•
The 2017 hormone therapy position statement of the North American
Menopause Society,
•
International Menopause Society Recommendations on Women’s Midlife
Health and Menopause Hormone Therapy,
•
Position statements from the British Menopause Society, Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and Australian Menopause Society.
We looked into the national figures on prevalence and incidence of
cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis and other long-term health issues. An indepth review of all local data pertaining to menopause, its long-term effects
and the use of conventional hormone therapy and alternative therapy was
carried out. In view of Malaysia’s multi ethnicity, the attitudes of the various
cultures towards menopause and MHT use was studied in detail so as to
understand the individual sensitivities.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XVIII
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US / Canadian
Preventive Service Task Force Level of Evidence (2001) while the grading of
recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE. The writing of the
CPG follows strictly the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for Research
and Evaluation (AGREE II).
Key messages and recommendations were placed after each subheading to
aid the user as quick reference. An algorithm has been designed to guide
the user on management of a woman going through the menopause with or
without the use of menopausal hormone therapy.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by the two external reviewers.
The draft was finally presented to the Technical Advisory Committee for the
CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval.
Details of the CPG developmental methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained
from Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidence Based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015. (available at http;//www.moh.gov.my/
moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634)
OBJECTIVES
This clinical practice guideline has been drawn up to aid health care providers in:
•
Increasing awareness about the importance of menopause and its longterm effects.
•
Counselling a woman on the essential investigations that need to be carried
out around the menopausal period.
•
Advising a woman who is approaching menopause regarding lifestyle
changes, including diet and exercise.
It would also provide evidence-based recommendations in
•
Counselling and managing a woman on treatment with menopausal
hormone therapy (MHT).
•
Counselling and advising a woman on non-pharmacological treatments
available in menopause.
•
Identifying high-risk women, including those who menopause prematurely,
and managing them appropriately for prevention of long-term health
issues.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XIX
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
•
Women in the perimenopause, menopause and post menopause age
group.
•
Women who have been diagnosed with premature ovarian insufficiency
(POI).
TARGET GROUP / USERS
This CPG is to guide those involved in the management of menopause at any
healthcare level including:
•
Doctors.
•
Allied health professionals.
•
Trainees and medical students.
•
Professional medical bodies.
•
Pharmacists.
•
Patients and their caregivers/ advocates
•
Policy makers.
HEALTH CARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
APPLICABILITY OF THE GUIDELINES AND RESOURCE
IMPLICATIONS
Present health focus on an aging woman is on non-communicable diseases,
osteoporosis, mental health and other age-related problems. This CPG aims to
shift this focus to preventive and early detection strategies that could be put
into place as a woman goes through menopause so as to decrease the health
burden for the later years.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XX
The initiation of menopausal hormone therapy should be carried out by
specialists in the tertiary referral centres or health practitioners who are
trained in menopause management. Continuation of treatment can be carried
out in the district hospital setting using the algorithm set in this CPG.
Blood investigations, physical examinations including a pelvic examination
and pap smear (if necessary), can be carried out at all levels of health care
with the guidelines set in this CPG. Mammograms and bone mineral density
examinations can be arranged periodically at district level hospitals or any
health care facility.
The availability of various menopausal hormone therapy is also scarce and
often unavailable at the peripheral health centres. With clear guidelines drawn
with regards initiation, continuation and follow up of a woman whilst on MHT,
it is hoped that the varied types of MHT become available for use.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS GUIDELINE
The successful implementation of this CPG is part of good clinical governance.
•
Increasing public awareness towards menopause and its implications,
management strategies and the use of MHT if necessary. This could be
carried out by public forums in the various states of the countries. This
could also be carried out by appropriate sites in face book, in various
magazines, news and media. In view of the multi ethnicity of Malaysia,
dispersing this message in the 3 main languages would reach a bigger
fraction of the population.
•
Making this CPG readily available in various medical society-based websites
as listed above. This could be assessed by both the medical and public
sector.
•
Continuous medical educations (CME) programs either through workshops,
meetings or seminars.
The Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society of Malaysia, the Malaysian
Menopause Society and the Academy of Medicine (Chapter of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology) would be working together towards implementing a
Menopause Care Programme. This programme would involve an annually
held weekend structured course with post course assessment test and a
subsequent certificate as a “Menopause Care Practitioner”. This certification is
to be reviewed every 3 years.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XXI
KEY MESSAGES ON MENOPAUSAL HORMONE THERAPY (MHT)
1.
Women going through the menopause should be thoroughly
evaluated with a detailed history and a complete physical
examination. Risk factor assessment for possible medical problems
help in prevention and early diagnosis of menopause related health
issues.
2.
Abnormal uterine bleeding in the perimenopause should always
be investigated based on the FIGO classification system of PALMCOEIN (polyps, adenomyosis, leiomyoma, malignancy, coagulation
disorders, ovulatory disorders, endometrial causes, iatrogenic
causes and causes which are not otherwise classified).15 (Level III)
3.
Menopausal hormone therapy initiated within 10 years of the last
menstrual period or in women younger than 60 years is an effective
treatment for the following indications.97 (Level I)
• Women with moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms
• Prevention and treatment of osteoporosis
• Genitourinary Syndrome of Menopause (GSM)
4.
Women who initiate menopausal hormone therapy 10 years after
menopause have a higher absolute risk of coronary heart disease,
stroke, venous thromboembolism and dementia.122 (Level I)
5.
There is presently no time limit to the duration of menopausal hormone
therapy use. However, every woman on menopausal hormone therapy
should have a risk/benefit assessment done on a yearly basis. Patient
care should always be individualised for reasons of safety.88 (Level II-1), 101 (Level
I), 128 (Level I)
6.
In view of the long-term health sequelae in women with premature
ovarian insufficiency, treatment with estrogen (and progestogen in
women with intact uterus) is strongly recommended.22 (Level1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XXII
Dr. Premitha Damodaran (Chair)
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecologist,
Pantai Hospital Kuala Lumpur,
59100 Kuala Lumpur.
Chair, Menopause Sub Division,
Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society
of Malaysia.
Dr. Ho Choon Moy
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecologist,
Pantai Hospital Cheras,
56100 Kuala Lumpur.
President, Malaysian Menopause
Society.
Assoc Professor Dr. Ng Beng Kwang
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecologist,
Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology,
UKM Medical Centre,
56000 Kuala Lumpur.
Vice President,
Malaysian Menopause Society.
Dr. Raman Subramaniam
Consultant Obstetrician
and Gynaecologist,
Fetal Medicine and
Gynaecology Centre,
46200 Petaling Jaya.
Professor Dr. Jamiyah Hassan
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecologist (Fetomaternal)
Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Teknologi MARA,
Sungai Buloh Campus,
47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Professor Dr. Nik Hazlina
Nik Hussain
Head, Women’s Health
Development Unit,
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecologist,
School of Medical Sciences,
Universiti Sains Malaysia,
16150, Kubang Kerian, Kelantan.
Prof Emeritus Dato’ Dr. Nik Mohd
Nasri (retired)
Faculty Perubatan & Sains Kesihatan,
University Sains Islam Malaysia,
Bandar Baru Nilai,
71800 Nilai.
Past President, Malaysian Menopause
Society.
Dr. SP Chan
Consultant Endocrinologist,
Honorary Professor, University Malaya
Medical Centre,
Subang Jaya Medical Centre,
47500 Subang Jaya.
CPG DEVELOPMENTAL GROUP
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XXIII
REVIEW COMMITTEE
Associate Prof Dr. Chandramani
Thuraisingham
President of Academy of Family
Physicians of Malaysia,
Department of Family Medicine,
IMU Clinical Campus Seremban,
International Medical University,
Jalan Rasah, 70300 Seremban.
Dr J. Ravichandran Jeganathan
Ex National Head of Obstetrics and
Gynaecological Services,
Ministry of Health (MOH).
Ex Head and Senior Consultant
Obstetrician and Gynaecologist,
Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology,
Hospital Sultanah Aminah Johor,
Jalan Persiaran Abu Bakar Sultan,
80100 Johor Bahru, Johor.
Dr. Michael J Samy
Ex-President, College of Obstetricians
& Gynaecologist,
Academy of Medicine of Malaysia.
Consultant Obstetrician and
Gynaecologist,
Gleneagles Hospital Kuala Lumpur,
50450 Kuala Lumpur.
Ms. Eleen Ong Bee Suat
Ex SRN Midwife,
No 23, Jalan Industri PBP 7,
Taman Industri Pusat Bandar Puchong,
47100 Puchong,
Selangor
Dato’ Faridah Md Yusof
Pharmacist,
No 121, Jalan Datuk Sulaiman,
Taman Tun Dr. Ismail,
60000 Kuala Lumpur.
Dr. Chuah Soo Ie
Occupational Health Doctor,
Klinik Harmony,
30, GF, Lorong Seri Jaya,
Taman Seri Jaya,
14000 Bukit Mertajam,
Penang.
Dr. Kang Marcus
Head of Department
Consultant Obstetrician &
Gynaecologist,
Hospital Sibu,
96000 Sarawak.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XXIV
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Professor Rodney Baber
Clinical Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
The University of Sydney,
Faculty of Medicine and Health.
Past President International Menopause Society.
Editor in Chief, Climacteric.
Associate Editor, Australia New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
(ANZJOG).
Chair, Patient Care Review Committee, North Shore Private Hospital.
Medical Suites,
North Shore Private Hospital,
Westbourne St. St. Leonards,
New South Wales, 2065 Australia.
Dr. Delfin Tan
Editorial Board for the International Menopause Society’s (IMS) Journal, Climacteric.
Professor, Head, Section of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
St. Luke’s Medical Center Quezon City,
1112 Metro Manila, Philippines
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XXV
CLINICAL AUDIT INDICATORS
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following parameters are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management of menopause hormonal
therapy use;
Percentage of women
developing coronary
heart disease after
menopausal hormone
therapy use
Number of women developing
coronary heart disease whilst on
menopausal hormone therapy yearly
Total number of women on
menopausal hormone therapy yearly
=
x 100
Percentage of
women developing
breast cancer after
menopausal hormone
therapy use
Number of women developing breast
cancer whilst on menopausal hormone
therapy yearly
Total number of women on
menopausal hormone therapy yearly
=
x 100
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
XXVI
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Management of a
Menopausal Woman
• Lifestyle changes
• Non-hormonal
therapies
Menopausal
symptoms
Contraindication
to MHT
Contraception
required
Consider MHT
Intact Uterus
Presence
of vasomotor
symptoms
• Lifestyle changes
• Estrogen progestogen
therapy (EPT) or
• Tibolone
Estrogen therapy only
If genitourinary
symptoms are also
present, to consider
adding local vaginal
therapies
• Hormonal therapy
• Non hormonal therapy
• Non ablative Laser
Genitourinary
symptoms only
• COC if no contraindications
• Change to MHT after 50 years
• LNG-IUS with oral /
transdermal estrogen
COC - combined oral contraceptive pill
MHT - menopausal hormone therapy
LNG IUS - levonorgestrel intrauterine system
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
1
A.
Introduction
Menopause is a definite phase in a woman’s life when her ovaries stop
producing estrogen and her menstrual cycle stops. It also marks the end of
her fertility. The diagnosis of menopause is made only after a woman has not
had a period for twelve full months. As estrogen carries a protective effect on
her organs, menopause then subjects a woman to various health problems
and long-term morbidities.
In 2021, the average life expectancy of a Malaysian woman was 78.3 years.
1 (Level II-3) As the average age of menopause in Malaysia is 50.7 years, one third
or more of her life is now going to be spent in the post-menopause, a state of
estrogen deficiency.2 (Level II-3)
While many women tend to be worried about the vasomotor symptoms and
skin changes that are associated with the menopausal change, the longterm effects of menopause are more alarming. Estrogen protects a woman
against metabolic diseases. Malaysian statistics show a high incidence of
diabetes, high blood pressure and elevated cholesterol levels in the local postmenopausal cohort. The increased abdominal fat layer that occurs in women
after menopause aggravates these medical health issues.3 (Level II-3)
Estrogen protects the heart and with menopause, the risk of cardiovascular
disease increases. After the age of 55 years, the incidence of cardiovascular
disease in both Malaysian men and women are on par, with coronary heart
disease (CHD) being the leading cause of death for both sexes. Women
unfortunately have an atypical presentation of CHD, which is usually
precipitated by microvascular heart disease. This is further exacerbated by
mental and emotional stress rather than with exertion, as in the man.
The risk of osteoporosis is doubled in post-menopausal women as compared
to a man. By 2050, more than 50% of the world’s hip fractures is projected to
occur in Asia. Unfortunately, local data reveals a 20% mortality rate after a hip
fracture with more than 40% of men and women always needing support or a
walking frame for the rest of their lives.4 (Level III)
Malaysian women seldom talk of their symptoms related to the genitourinary
syndrome of menopause (GSM) such as bladder incontinence, vaginal
dryness, painful intercourse and bleeding during sex (sexual health issues).
Many women suffer in silence and take it as an accepted part of growing old,
affecting their self-confidence and partner relationships.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
2
Mental health issues such as dementia and depression increase with age
and women are more prone compared to men. Though depression can be
multifactorial in origin, personal health issues with aging, loss of self-worth
along with loneliness, increases its risk.5 (Level II-3)
By 75 years of age, Malaysian statistics have shown that 1 in 4 men and women
develop cancer, an important health burden especially with the increased life
expectancy.6 (Level II-3)
More than half the women going through menopause in Malaysia today will
face 25 years of her life and more in an estrogen deficiency state. Many are
unaware and unprepared of the full extent of their health challenges. Education
of both health care workers and women approaching menopause regarding
Identifying their health issues early, instigating lifestyle changes and regular
monitoring of their health will definitely carry an overall beneficial effect.
Section 1: Definition of Menopause
1.1
Menopause in Malaysia
The average age of menopause in Malaysia is around 50.7 years.2 (Level II-3) In
2000, a study from an urban menopause clinic showed that hot flushes (56%)
and generalized tiredness (49%) were the predominant symptoms in urban
menopausal women.7 (Level II-3) More recently, a similar study in a similar urban
setting found joint pains (73%) and fatigue (59.3%) to be most prevalent
followed by vasomotor symptoms (55%).8 (Level II-3) Malaysian women were also
found to underestimate menopause-related problems and there was a lack in
seeking treatment.8,9 (Level II-3)
1.2
Stages of Menopause
The terminology used in the definition of menopause by the World Health
Organization (WHO) in 1996 was endorsed by the International Menopause
Society (IMS) in 1999.10(Level III) Clinically, the following definitions are used:
•
Natural menopause is defined as the permanent cessation of menstruation
resulting from loss of ovarian follicular activity. It is a retrospective
diagnosis. A woman is said to be in the menopause, when she has not
had any form of vaginal bleeding for 12 months after her last period, once
pathological or physiological causes have been ruled out.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
3
•
Perimenopause includes the period immediately before menopause
(when endocrinological, biological and clinical features of menopause
begin) till one year after the last menstrual period.
•
Menopausal transition starts when there is a variability in the menstrual
cycle and lasts till the last menstrual period.
•
The climacteric marks the transition from the reproductive phase to the
non-reproductive phase in a woman. This phase is longer and extends
from before the perimenopause to menopause.
•
Premenopause which is often used ambiguously refers to the one or
two years immediately before the menopause. This terminology is not
encouraged.
In 2001, the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) proposed
a staging system to depict the natural transition of a woman’s life from the
reproductive years to the time of menopause. This classification called the
STRAW classification, used the menstrual cycle and hormonal measurements
to define each stage of menopause.11 (Level III)
In 2012, this classification was updated based on new data taking into account
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) levels, antral follicle count (AFC), antimüllerian hormone (AMH) levels and inhibin B levels.11 (Level III) (Figure 1)
The STRAW +10 classification is mainly used in research and clinical contexts
when comparing studies of midlife women and facilitate clinical decision
making.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
4
Stage
-5
-4
-3
-3a
-2
-1
+1a
+1b
+1c
+2
Terminology
REPRODUCTIVE
MENOPAUSAL
POSTMENOPAUSE
TRANSITION
Early
Peak
Late
Early
Late
Early
Late
Perimenopause
Duration
variable
variable
1-3 years
2 years
3-6 years
Remaining
(1+1)
lifespan
PRINCIPAL CRITERIA
Menstrual
Variable
Regular
Regular
Subtle
Variable
Interval of
Cycle
to regular
changes in
Length
amenorrhea
Flow
Persistent
of>=60
Length
≥7-day
days
difference
in length of
consecutive
cycles
SUPPORTIVE CRITERIA
Endocrine
FSH
Normal
Variable*
Variable*
>25 IU/L**
Variable*
Stabilizes
AMH
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Very Low
Inhibin B
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Very Low
Antral Follicle
Low
Low
Low
Low
Very Low
Very Low
Count 2-10mm
DESCRIPTIVE CHARACTERISTICS
Symptoms
Vasomotor
Vasomotor
Increasing
symptoms
symptoms
symptoms of
Likely
Most Likely
urogenital atrophy
* Blood draw on cycle days 2-5 = elevated
** Approximate expected level based on assays using current pituitary standard
Menarche
FMP (0)
Figure 1. The STRAW +10 Classification11 (LevelI-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
5
1.3 The Perimenopause
Perimenopause is the phase before menopause when the endocrinological,
biological and clinical changes of menopause begin till one year after the last
menstrual period. During this phase, erratic peaks in serum estradiol and serum
progesterone can bring about a wide variation in cycles and flow.12 (Level II-3)
Perimenopausal women may exhibit more symptoms than their postmenopausal counterparts due to the fluctuating estrogen levels. The range
of symptoms may vary and may be interrelated. Symptoms are usually
exaggerated the further away the woman is from her last period with the
symptoms lessening once the period starts again. Fortunately, not all women
experience severe symptoms. Table 1 lists the more common symptoms
experienced during the perimenopause phase.
1.
The average age of menopause in Malaysia is 50.7 years.2 (Level II-3)
2.
A woman is said to be in the menopause when she has not had
a period for 12 months without any preceding pathological or
physiological cause.10 (Level III)
3.
The perimenopause is the period immediately before menopause
till one year after the last menstrual period.10 (Level III)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
6
Diagnosis of perimenopause is purely based on clinical signs and symptoms of
the menopause. Measurements of serum follicle-stimulating hormones (FSH)
levels and estradiol levels are unnecessary at this stage.
Perimenopause brings about altered menstrual cycles. The cycles may be
initially shorter followed by longer intervals. The flow may vary from prolonged
spotting to heavy periods with clots. A woman is said to be in the menopause
when she does not get a period for one whole year.
As ovulation can be unpredictable in the perimenopause, contraception is still
required till one year after the last menstrual period.14 (Level I)
Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) during the perimenopause should always
be investigated, based on the FIGO classification system of PALM-COEIN
(polyps, adenomyosis, leiomyoma, malignancy, coagulation disorders,
ovulatory disorders, endometrial causes, iatrogenic causes and not otherwise
classified).15 (Level III)
A change in the menstrual cycle and flow
Abdominal bloating
Headaches
Breast swelling and tenderness
Mood swings
Anxiety
Depressive symptoms
Memory problems
Skin dryness or itchiness
Myalgia, arthralgia, joint pains
Disturbed sleep patterns
Weight gain (mainly over the midriff)
Hair loss
Vasomotor symptoms (VMS) which include hot flushes and night sweats
Reduced sexual function
Table 1: The Perimenopause Symptoms13 (Level II-3)
Symptoms of Perimenopause
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
7
Sexually active women presenting with AUB, should have a vaginal examination,
a pap smear and a transvaginal pelvic ultrasound carried out to exclude
pathology in the cervix, uterus and ovaries. Pregnancy should also be ruled
out.
If a vaginal examination cannot be done, a pelvic ultrasound on a full bladder
would suffice to rule out pelvic pathology. Appropriate blood tests such as a
full blood count, thyroid profile and coagulation profile may become necessary.
Other invasive investigations such as an examination under anaesthesia (EUA),
endometrial biopsy or hysteroscopy are optional procedures based on the
findings of the above examination.15 (Level III)
Treatment options for abnormal bleeding in the perimenopause include nonhormonal medical treatments such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and
antifibrinolytics, the combined oral contraceptive pill or menopausal hormone
therapy and the levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) for endometrial
protection. 14,16 (Level I) This is further discussed in Section 6.1. Hormonal therapy
such as the combined oral contraceptive or menopausal hormone therapy can
only be given in the absence of contraindications.(Section 5.2)
Abdominal bloating is common in the perimenopause as the decreasing
hormones cause changes in the intestinal motility. This may lead to food
sensitivities and intolerance. Any unexplained changes in the gastrointestinal
system should always be investigated.
The fluctuating estrogen levels in the perimenopause may increase body
weight especially around the abdominal area which in turn increases metabolic
problems. Thyroid abnormalities are common in the perimenopause and
should always be ruled out.13 (Level II-3)
The other symptoms of the perimenopause are discussed in Section 2.
The perimenopause is the appropriate time to counsel a woman with regards to
her present health status and long-term consequences of menopause. Lifestyle
modifications in diet and exercise should be discussed. Breast screening and
bone density measurement (in high-risk individuals) may be carried out as
part of the screening. See Section 3 (Clinical Assessment and Investigations).
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
8
1.4 Premature Ovarian Insufficiency (POI)
Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) is the cessation of ovarian function
below the age of 40 years. It affects 1% of the female population.17 (Level II-3) The
most common cause is idiopathic, however it may also result from medical
diseases or surgical intervention. Ten percent of women with POI have a
genetic predisposition (Turner’s syndrome 45XO and Fragile X).18, 19 (Level I)
The two most clinically important autoimmune conditions associated with
POI are Addison’s disease and hypothyroidism. Other rare causes include
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), coeliac disease, antiphospholipid syndrome,
infection (mumps), metabolic, environmental factors and iatrogenic causes.
(Table 2)18 (Level I)
Given the diverse causes of POI, the clinical presentation varies. Twenty percent
of women with POI may present with primary amenorrhea and 10% will present
with secondary amenorrhea. Women who present with primary amenorrhea
do not have menopausal symptoms. Women with secondary amenorrhea
usually present with more severe menopausal symptoms compared to
women undergoing natural menopause. Psychological symptoms including
depression, anxiety, negative self-image and sexual dysfunction may manifest
with the onset of period abnormalities.
Recommendation 1
1.
Women
experiencing
abnormal
uterine
bleeding
in
the
perimenopause should always be investigated based on the FIGO
classification system of PALM-COEIN (polyps, adenomyosis,
leiomyoma,
malignancy,
coagulation
disorders,
ovulatory
disorders, endometrial causes, iatrogenic causes and not otherwise
classified).15 (Level 111)
2.
Clinical investigations for a woman with abnormal uterine bleeding
include a vaginal examination, a pap smear (in sexually active
women) and a pelvic ultrasound to rule out local pelvic pathology.
If a vaginal examination cannot be carried out, a pelvic ultrasound
on a full bladder would suffice.
3.
Blood
investigations
for
anemia,
thyroid
dysfunction
and
coagulation disorders (if necessary) are advised.5 (Level 111)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
9
Women with POI are at risk of long-term consequences of estrogen
deficiency, especially osteoporosis,20 (Level I) premature coronary artery disease,
cardiovascular disease and dementia.18 (Level I)
Diagnosis of POI is based on serum follicle-stimulating hormones (FSH) of
over 40IU/l at 4 to 6 weeks apart in women presenting with 4 months of
amenorrhea or irregular cycles. Anti-Mullerian Hormone (AMH) levels may
be considered as a diagnostic tool, as it is highly sensitive to ovarian ageing
and further excludes uncertainties associated with the intra and inter cycle
variability.21 (Level II-3)
Other investigations include:
•
Karyotyping to exclude Turner’s or other chromosomal abnormalities.
Permutation studies to exclude Fragile X syndrome is recommended in
normal karyotypes.
•
Autoimmune screen to exclude anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody, antiadrenal antibody and coeliac serology.
•
Ultrasound assessment of the pelvis may be performed in establishing
the diagnosis of POI other than to exclude pregnancy.
In view of the long-term health sequelae with POI, hormonal treatment with
estrogen and progestogen (in the absence of contraindications) is strongly
recommended. Women with POI would require higher doses of estrogen
than the dose available in MHT. The aim is to achieve approximately 100 pg/
ml of estradiol / day, which is necessary for the normal functioning of the
organs. Women with POI still have a 5-15 % chance of getting pregnant due to
intermittent ovarian activity.22 (Level1)
In women without contraindications to its use, the low dose combined oral
contraceptive (COC) is the ideal hormone replacement, acts as a contraceptive
and is recommended until the age of natural menopause (50 years).20 (Level1)
Thereafter, if hormones are still required, menopausal hormone therapy is
advised.
MHT may be used as an alternative to COC in women with POI, however
additional protection for contraception is required till the age of 50 years.20
(Level1)
The diagnosis of POI may bring about depression and other mental health
issues. A psychological consult is advised along with the regular gynaecological
visits.18, 22 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
10
Table 2: Causes of POI 18 (Level I)
Causes of POI
Idiopathic (most common)
Genetic causes (10%)
Turner’s syndrome
Fragile X
Autoimmune causes (20%)
Autoimmune hypothyroidism
Addison’s disease
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM)
Coeliac disease
Inborn errors of metabolism
Environmental causes
Smoking
Iatrogenic causes
Post chemotherapy
Radiotherapy
Surgical causes
Removal of both ovaries / removal
of uterus and both ovaries
1.
Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) is cessation of ovarian
function below the age of 40 years and affects 1 % of the female
population.17 (Level II-3)
2.
Diagnosis of POI is based on Follicular Stimulating Hormone (FSH)
levels of over 40 IU/l 4- 6 weeks apart in women with 4 months of
amenorrhea or irregular cycles.21 (Level II-3)
3.
In view of the long-term health sequelae in women with premature
ovarian insufficiency, treatment with estrogen (and progestogen in
women with intact uterus) is strongly recommended.22 (Level1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
11
Recommendation 2
1.
Women with premature ovarian insufficiency are strongly
recommended treatment with estrogen (and progestogen in women
with intact uterus) to prevent long term health sequelae such as
osteoporosis, premature coronary artery disease, cardiovascular
disease and dementia.18, 20, 22 (Level I)
2.
The low dose combined oral contraceptive pill (COC) is
recommended for women with premature ovarian insufficiency
and is advised till the age of menopause (50 years). It acts both as
a hormone replacement and a contraceptive.20 (Level1)
3.
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) may be used as an alternative
to the combined oral contraceptive (COC) pill in women with
premature ovarian insufficiency. Additional measures should be
advised if contraception is required.20 (Level1)
Section 2: Symptoms of Menopause
2.1 Vasomotor symptoms (VMS)
Vasomotor symptoms (VMS) which consists of both hot flushes and night
sweats are the cardinal symptoms which happen around menopause. Hot
flushes are sudden waves of heat over the upper body and face lasting 1-2
minutes, which is then followed by sweating. Night sweats are episodes of
sweating that happen in the night which result in poor sleep. VMS symptoms
do not occur in all women and its intensity may also vary from individual to
individual.
Women with frequent vasomotor symptoms have been shown to have a
twofold increase in developing coronary heart disease (CHD) over the next 14
years irrespective of their age, menopause status, lifestyle, and other chronic
disease risk factors when compared to women with no symptoms.23 (Level II-3) These
women have also been shown to have poorer endothelial function, more aortic
calcification and greater intima thickness than women without vasomotor
symptoms.24 (Level II-3)
Two different studies set in an urban population in Malaysia have shown that
hot flushes affect more than 50% of Malaysian women which then led to a
lowered quality of life.7, 8 (Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
12
The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) trials showed that women with more
frequent and intense VMS and night sweats experienced an almost two-fold
increase in hip fractures in the subsequent years of follow up.25 (Level I)
Presence of objective VMS has also been shown to correlate significantly with
memory loss, alterations in brain function during rest and is associated with
white matter hyper intensive areas in the brain.26 (Level I)
Night flushes and sweats can interrupt sleep and change sleep patterns. This
in turn leads to increased tiredness and mood changes. Though not vasomotor
in origin, joint pains, lethargy and fatigue were other common symptoms
experienced by Malaysian women during the transition.7, 8 (Level II-3)
2.2 Mood Disorders
Fluctuating estrogen and progesterone levels during the menopause transition
increase the risk of mood disorders and depression. The strongest predictors
of mood disorders during this phase are prior history of depression, history of
postpartum depression and severe premenstrual symptoms.27 (Level II-3)
Symptoms can range from irritability, palpitations, poor sleep, crying spells,
anxiety and feelings of low mood. The intensity of these symptoms may lessen
well into post menopause.
A study on about 4000 women in the perimenopausal age group in Malaysia
showed a 54% prevalence rate of depressive symptoms. These symptoms
were higher in the perimenopausal group compared to women who were
post-menopausal.28 (Level II-3)
1.
Hot flushes affect more than 50% of women in Malaysia.7, 8 (Level II-3)
2.
Women with frequent hot flushes have been shown to have a
twofold increase in developing coronary heart disease over the next
14 years irrespective of their age, menopause status, lifestyle, and
other chronic disease risk factors when compared to women with
no symptoms.23 (Level II-3)
3.
Women with intense hot flushes and night sweats experience a
twofold increase in developing hip fractures in the following years.
25 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
13
2.3 Genitourinary Syndrome of Menopause (GSM)
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM) replaces the term vulvovaginal
atrophy or atrophic vaginitis. The symptoms of GSM include vaginal dryness,
painful sex, sexual dysfunction, bladder and urethral symptoms, frequent
urinary tract infections along with vaginal burning, itching and irritation.29 (Level I)
Decreasing estrogen levels alter the normal multi-layered thick vaginal
epithelium rich in blood vessels and glycogen to a thin, dry epithelium. There
is concomitant change in vaginal flora, loss of lactobacilli and an increase in pH
which then leads to an increase in vaginal and urinary infections.29 (Level I)
These vaginal changes can lead to vaginal dryness (33%) and sexual dysfunction
(88%) within two years of menopause.30 (Level II-3) The Pan Asian Revive Study (a
questionnaire-based study which also involved Malaysian women between the
ages of 45 and 75 years) showed that 55% of Asian women suffered from
vaginal dryness, 44% had dyspareunia, 37% had vaginal irritation and 6% of
women experienced bleeding after sexual intercourse. Half of these women
felt that these problems were part of aging and that seeking advice from the
health care providers concerning these symptoms was not necessary.31 (Level II-3)
1.
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause is a very significant symptom
of the menopause which causes vaginal dryness, painful sex, sexual
dysfunction, bladder and urethral symptoms, frequent urinary tract
infections along with vaginal burning, itching and irritation.29 (Level I)
2.
Decreasing estrogen levels alter the previously thick vaginal
epithelium rich in blood vessels and glycogen into a thin dry
epithelium; with concomitant changes in vaginal flora, loss of
lactobacilli and an increase in pH.29 (Level I)
1.
Fluctuating estrogen and progesterone levels during the menopause
transition increase the risk of mood disorders and depression.27 (Level II-3)
2.
The strongest predictor for mood disorders during the menopause
is prior history of depression, history of post-partum depression
and severe premenstrual symptoms.27 (Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
14
2.4 Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death in Malaysian
women.32 (Level I) After a cardiovascular event, women tend to have poorer longterm outcomes and quality of life when compared to a man.33 (Level II-3)
A woman’s risk for CVD increases dramatically at menopause due to the
following factors:34, 35 (Level II-3), 36, 37,38,39 (Level I)
•
Effect of increasing age.
•
Loss of estrogen.
•
Changes in body fat distribution and storage.
•
Decrease in physical activity.
•
Increase in blood pressure.
•
Worsening lipid levels.
•
Worsening glucose tolerance and insulin resistance.
The incidence of coronary heart disease is 2-3 times higher in post-menopausal
women than in pre-menopausal women.35 (Level II-3) This is likely due to increased
microvascular disease and carotid intima media thickness (a marker of
subclinical atherosclerosis), which occur in the menopause.40 (Level II-3)
Women often present with varied, unrelated symptoms to the emergency
department which then result in a delayed diagnosis.41 (Level I) While angina
pectoris is more common in women compared to men, non-chest related
symptoms such as fatigue, epigastric pain and shortness of breath may
actually be related to a cardiac event.42 (Level I)
Reduction of modifiable risk factors is the most effective strategy for
prevention of CVD. The INTERHEART study, a global case-controlled study
which examined modifiable risk factors across many populations, determined
that in women, 94% of CVD risk could be attributed to modifiable factors such
as diabetes mellitus (OR 2.37), hypertension (OR 1.91), abdominal obesity (OR
1.62), current smoking (OR 2.87) and psychosocial stress (OR 2.67).43(Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
15
2.5 Stroke
Stroke is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide.
Women account for 60% of all stroke events. Although age adjusted stroke
risk is higher in men than women, more stroke events occur in women because
of their longer life expectancy and the higher incidence of strokes at a later
age.44,45 (Level I)
The risk of ischemic stroke increases with
•
Menopause. The risk of stroke doubles in women after 10 years of
menopause. Estradiol has been shown to provide a neuroprotective
effect in premenopausal women.46 (Level II-1)
•
Other risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, obesity (increased
waist – hip ratio), dyslipidaemia and smoking.47 (Level I)
The Malaysian Stroke Registry (2009- 2016) census gives the mean age of
stroke at 62.5 years. Sixty percent of stroke victims were more than 60 years,
26% were between 50 – 59 years with 13.6 % below the age of 49 years. The
risk of stroke was higher in males in all age groups till the age of 70 years
when women predominated, a factor that could be attributed to the increased
1.
Cardiovascular death is the leading cause of death in women in
Malaysia.32 (Level I)
2.
A woman’s risk of cardiovascular disease increases with age, loss
of estrogen, changes in body fat distribution, decrease in physical
activity and an increase in blood pressure, lipids and glucose levels.
34, 35 (Level II-3), 36, 37, 38, 39 (Level I)
3.
The incidence of coronary heart disease is 2-3 times more in postmenopausal women than in premenopausal women.35 (Level II-3)
4.
Women often present with varied, unrelated symptoms to the
emergency department which lead to delayed diagnosis.41 (Level I)
5.
Reduction of modifiable risk factors such as diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, abdominal obesity, current smoking and psychosocial
stress is the most effective strategy for prevention of cardiovascular
disease.43(Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
16
life expectancy of women. Hypertension (67%), diabetes (39.6%), cigarette
smoking (25.2%) and hyperlipidaemia (23%) were the other commonest risk
factors.48 (Level II-3)
2.6 Venous thromboembolism (VTE)
VTE includes deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE).
The incidence of VTE is 1 per 1000 person years amongst post-menopausal
women with a fatality rate of 10%. Seventy percent of cases of VTE are hospital
acquired.49, 50 (Level I)
The risk of VTE in Asia is increasing mainly due to increased life expectancy,
obesity, and cancer.51(Level I) Genetic factors such as Factor V Leiden mutation
and deficiencies of Protein C, S, and anti-thrombin are other factors that
increase the risk of VTE.
Women who menopause early (POI) have a lesser risk of VTE when compared
to women who menopause around 50 years. In view of this, hormone
replacement remains the treatment of choice in these women, without the
additional fear of possible VTE. 52 (Level II-1)
Women with late menopause have a higher risk of VTE. Each year’s delay
increases the risk of VTE by 7%. Having more than two children increases
the risk of VTE by 2-fold when compared to women with lesser children. The
combination of late menopause and high parity confers a threefold increase
in VTE risk.53 (Level II-3)
1.
The risk of stroke doubles after 10 years of menopause.46 (Level II-1)
2.
Other risk factors that can contribute to stroke are hypertension,
diabetes, obesity, dyslipidemia and smoking.
1.
The incidence of venous thromboembolism is 1 per 1000 person
years amongst post-menopausal women with a fatality rate of 10%.
49, 50 (Level I)
2.
Women who menopause early have a lesser risk of venous
thromboembolism (VTE) compared to women who menopause
late. Each year’s delay in menopause, increases the risk the risk of
VTE by 7%.53 (Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
17
2.7 Osteoporosis
Bone mineral density (BMD) peaks during the third decade of life and declines
with advancing age. The reduction in estrogen levels at menopause causes an
accelerated rate of bone loss.
Women lose about 50% of their trabecular bone and 30% of their cortical
bone during the course of their lifetime, about half of which is lost during the
first 10 years after the menopause.54,55 (Level I)
Accelerated bone loss starts during the late perimenopause and continues
during the early postmenopausal years. The annual rate of loss is 1.8–2.3% at
the spine and 1.0–1.4% at the hip.56 (Level II-3) Five years into menopause, there is
an estimated 7–10% decline in the spine BMD and 5–7% decline in the hip BMD.
This loss is estimated to increase fracture risk by 50–100%.57 (Level I)
Body weight is an important determinant of the rate of BMD loss. Women with
low body weight have a faster rate of BMD loss.56 (Level II-3). Ethnicity is not found
to influence the rate of bone loss.58 (Level I) (see Table 3)
Perimenopausal women with low body mass index (BMI) should be ideally
screened for osteoporosis. The OSTA (Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool for
Asians) may be used (see Appendix 4).
Table 3: Risk factors for Osteoporosis 58 (Level I)
Non-Modifiable Risk Factors
Modifiable Risk Factors
Advancing age
Low calcium and or Vitamin D intake
Female gender
Sedentary lifestyle
Premature Ovarian Insufficiency
Cigarette smoking
Cessation of periods before
Excessive alcohol intake
45 years
(> 3 units / day)
(including surgical menopause)
Personal history of non-traumatic
Excessive caffeine intake
fracture as an adult
(> 3 drinks / day)
Family history of osteoporotic hip
Low body mass index
fracture in first degree relative
(< 19 kg / m2)
Recurrent falls
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
18
1.
Women lose about 50% of their trabecular bone and 30% of their
cortical bone during the course of their lifetime, about half of which
is lost during the first 10 years after the menopause.54,55 (Level I)
2.
An estimated 7–10% decline in the spine bone mineral density
(BMD) and 5–7% decline in the hip BMD which occurs after 5 years
of menopause then increases fracture risk by 50–100%.57 (Level I)
2.8 Sarcopenia
Sarcopenia is an age-related involuntary loss of skeletal muscle mass and
strength. From the 4th decade of life, skeletal muscle mass and strength
decline in a linear fashion, with up to 50% of muscle mass being lost by the
8th decade of life.59 (Level II-3)
Potential causes of sarcopenia include age-related hormonal changes,
environmental factors (low levels of physical activity, reduced protein and
calorie intake) and increased oxidative stress. The decrease in muscle mass
with aging results from the bulk loss of Type 2 (fast twitch) motor units,60 (Level
II-1) with a marked infiltration of fibrous and adipose tissue into the skeletal
muscle.61 (Level I)
Loss of Type 2 muscle causes disability and problems with certain movements,
such as rising from a chair, climbing steps or regaining posture after a
disturbance in balance.
Sarcopenia is an age related, involuntary loss of skeletal muscle and
strength; up to 50% of muscle mass can be lost by 80 years of age.59
(Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
19
2.10 Cognition
Estrogen has been shown to have a positive effect on long-term cognition.
Women who are older at the time of menopause have better cognitive function,
particularly in verbal memory,67 (Level II-3) whilst women with POI have been shown
to have poorer long-term effects on cognitive function.68 (Level II-3)
Cardiovascular risk factors identified at midlife are shown to be able to predict
risk of cognitive decline and dementia later in life. The presence of diabetes,
hypertension, smoking and elevated cholesterol levels (dyslipidaemia) during
the forties doubled the risk of developing dementia when older.69 (Level II-3)
2.9 Metabolic Syndrome, Weight & Diabetes
The prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MetS) increases after menopause.62 (Level I)
MetS consists of abdominal obesity, insulin resistance/glucose dysregulation,
dyslipidaemia and hypertension.63 (Level I)
After menopause, there can be an average weight gain of 2.0-2.5 kg over 3
years. 64 (Level I) Weight gain and obesity are the main drivers of the increased
prevalence of MetS in postmenopausal women.65 (Level II-3)
The increase in visceral fat (especially around the abdomen), which can start as
early as 3-4 years before menopause, along with changes in body composition
and reduction in muscle mass, further affect metabolic health.66 (Level I)
Estrogen has a positive effect on long term cognition.67 (Level II-3)
Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) encompasses abdominal obesity, insulin
resistance / glucose dysregulation, dyslipidemia and hypertension.
MetS increases after menopause.62, 63 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
20
2.11 Skin
Total collagen declines an average of 2.1% per post-menopausal year over a
period of 15 years; however some studies have shown a 30% loss of both Type
I and II collagen in 5 years.70 (Level1)
Skin changes associated with loss of estrogen are 71(Level I)
•
Oily skin due to an increase in sebum production.
•
Sagging skin and wrinkles due to change in fat distribution.
•
Elastosis due to lesser production of collagen and elastin.
•
Thinning epidermis due to loss of blood capillaries and a reduction in the
barrier function of the epidermis. This can lead to dryness and itchiness
often experienced by menopausal women.
•
Hyperpigmentation or age spots due to increase in melanin synthesis as
a result of hormonal imbalance.
Up to thirty percent of skin collagen may be lost within the first 5 years
of menopause.70 (Level I)
2.12 Hair, Dentition, and Special Senses
2.12.1 Hair
With the change in the androgen: estrogen ratio, male pattern baldness may
appear alongside darker hair seen over the chin, upper lip and chest. Scalp hair
is also lesser and thinner.72 (Level II-3)
Thinning of scalp hair, male pattern baldness along with darker hair over
the chin, upper lip and chest can occur with the menopause.72 (Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
21
2.12.2 Dentition
During menopause, gums become more susceptible to plaque build-up leading
to a higher risk of gingivitis and advanced periodontis.73 (Level I)
The jaw bone also goes through bone loss leading to loosening of teeth and
mandibular dysfunction.74 (Level II-3) Other changes include mouth dryness due
to lesser saliva secretion, gingival atrophy, oral ulcerations, oral candidiasis,
sensations of painful mouth and burning mouth syndrome.75 (Level I)
2.12.3 Vision
Dry eyes is a common problem with menopause and is caused by an
inflammatory process within the lacrimal glands.76 (Level I) Cataracts are also more
prevalent in post-menopausal women as estrogen confers an anti-oxidative
protection against cataractogenesis.77 (Level I)
Surgical menopause in women before the age of 45 years carries an increased
incidence of macular degeneration compared to women who undergo
menopause naturally after 45 years (RR 3.8; 95% CI, 1.1-12.6).78 (Level II-1)
Menopausal changes to the dentition include increased risk of gum
disease, bone loss at the jaw leading to loosening of the teeth and
mandibular dysfunction along with changes associated with mouth
dryness.73,75 (Level 1), 74 (Level II-3)
Dry eyes and cataracts are prevalent in postmenopausal women.76, 77
(Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
22
2.12.4 Voice
Menopausal women have more throat clearing episodes and mouth dryness
compared to premenopausal women. Higher androgen levels may lead to
hoarseness of the voice.79 (Level II-1)
2.12.5 Hearing
The estrogen hormone may have a positive influence on hearing. A prospective
10-year longitudinal study of perimenopausal women found a continuous
decline in hearing at all frequencies with age, with a higher rate of decline
during the menopause period.80(Level II-3)
2.12.6 Smell
Ageing is accompanied by olfactory loss and hyposmia or anosmia; women
seem to be affected more strongly than men.81 (Level II-3)
2.12.7 Taste
Menopause can change taste and neuronal function. This is caused by reduction
in saliva production, dysesthesia and atrophic gingivitis.82 (Level II-1)
Mouth dryness and hoarseness of voice may occur in the menopause.
79 (Level II-1)
A higher rate of decline of hearing occurs during the menopause
period.80(Level II-3)
With ageing, women are more affected by olfactory loss and sense of
smell than men. 81 (Level II-3)
Menopausal women may experience a change in taste and neuronal
function.82 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
23
2.13 Quality of Life (QoL)
Several studies have demonstrated an association between menopausal
symptoms and a lowered quality of life.83, 84, 85 (Level II-3)
Depression and anxiety have been shown to have the largest effect on mental
Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) scores whilst joint stiffness and heart
palpitations are the main concerns in the physical HRQoL scores.86 (Level II-3)
Section 3: Clinical Assessment and Investigations
Women going through the menopause should be thoroughly evaluated
with a detailed history and a complete physical examination. This would be
considered Good Clinical Practice (GCP). Risk factor assessment for possible
medical problems help in prevention and early diagnosis. It also provides a
baseline for assessment if menopausal hormone therapy is considered.87 (Level I),
88 (Level II-1)
Menopause affects both mental and physical Health Related Quality of
Life scores. 86 (Level II-3)
Table 4: Detailed History (GCP) 87 (Level I), 88 (Level II-1)
Personal history, including menopausal symptoms (if any).
Menopausal Questionnaire may be used. (Appendix 3)
Obstetric history
Gynaecological history
Menstrual and sexual history
Previous medical history
Previous surgical history
History of allergies and drug sensitivities including sensitivities to
hormones
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
24
History of blood clotting problems
Family history especially of hormone related cancers, cardiovascular
disease, clotting problems and osteoporosis
Social history including history of smoking, vaping and alcohol intake
Lifestyle history including stress, dietary history and exercise history
Table 5: General Examination (GCP)
Blood pressure
BMI
Breast examination
Abdominal examination - to rule out pelvic masses
Vaginal examination (if applicable)*. To rule out infections, cervical
lesions, pelvic masses and to assess pelvic floor
Table 6: Recommended Investigations (GCP)
Full blood count
Liver and renal function tests
Fasting blood glucose and fasting serum lipids
Pap smear (if applicable) *
Breast screening using ultrasound and / or mammography
Bone mineral density (if needed)
OSTA can also be used to identify those at risk for osteoporosis
(Appendix 4)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
25
*Vaginal examinations and pap smears are carried out only in women who are
/ have been sexually active.
Blood tests for FSH (Follicular Stimulating Hormone) should not be routinely
considered when diagnosing menopause in women aged over 45 years.88 (Level II-1)
The breast ultrasound is complimentary to the mammogram especially in
younger women who have dense breast tissue.
Section 4: Lifestyle Changes During Menopause
Practicing a healthy lifestyle during the menopause is encouraged. This
involves eating healthy, maintaining an ideal weight, cessation of smoking,
reducing alcohol consumption, and optimising blood pressure and glucose
levels.90, 91(Level I)
•
Dietary changes should include a reduction in polyunsaturated fats,
trans fats, salt and sugar. Hot flushes may be exaggerated with excessive
coffee and spicy food intake.92 (Level I)
•
Regular exercise for 30 minutes at least five days a week is encouraged.90,
91(Level I) Regular physical activity can decrease physical and emotional
issues associated with menopause.93(Level II-1) Activities such as yoga, tai chi,
aerobics, walking, swimming, and strength training may also help reduce
the severity of menopausal symptoms.94 (Level I)
•
A sound sleep of 6-9 hours every night not only improves self-rated
quality of life but lowers depression scores. Sleep strongly influences
many aspects of health (physical, cognitive, and emotional) which in turn
improves general health.90, 91, 95 (Level I)
•
Women are usually stressed about how menopause would affect their
lives. Strategies that induce relaxation and inner tranquility such as
meditation, traditional massages, acupuncture and simple breathing
exercises help reduce this stress which in turn helps reduce menopausal
symptoms.96 (Level I)
Women going through the menopause should be thoroughly evaluated
with a detailed history and a complete physical examination. Risk factor
assessment for possible medical problems help in prevention and early
diagnosis of menopause related health issues.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
26
Women going through the menopause should be encouraged to
practice lifestyle changes which include healthy eating, regular
exercises, sleeping soundly, relaxation therapies and support group
involvement.
•
Support group programs have a significant effect on decreasing
physical, psychological, and social changes induced by the menopause.
Participation of other family members, especially spouses, in physical
and mental health programs, can contribute to a greater improvement of
women’s QoL.96 (Level I)
Table 7: Lifestyle changes that are Important in the Menopause (CGP)
1.
Maintaining a healthy weight
2.
Stop smoking or vaping
3.
Cutting down spicy food and excessive coffee intake
4.
Minimising polyunsaturated fats, trans fats, salt, and sugar
5.
Minimising alcohol
6.
Blood pressure control
7.
Regular exercise 5 days a week; 30 minutes each time
8.
Sleeping soundly for 6-9 hours every night
9.
Stress reduction
10.
Support group programs (in particular spousal support)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
27
Section 5: Menopausal Hormone Therapy
5.1 Introduction
The terminology “Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) has replaced “Hormone
replacement therapy (HRT)”
MHT is recommended to women who experience menopausal symptoms that
affect their quality of life. It is also advised for women to prevent or manage
chronic conditions that may occur with menopause.
Benefits of MHT outweigh risks when given to healthy symptomatic women
who are less than 60 years or within 10 years of onset of menopause.97 (Level I)
MHT is the most effective treatment for VMS and GSM. It is the only known
treatment that has been shown to prevent bone loss and reduce fractures.97 (Level I)
The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study was a large double blinded,
placebo controlled, randomised study that assessed the effect of hormones
on the health of 160,000 women between the ages of 50 – 79 years. The study
had two arms; one arm assessed the effect of conjugated equine estrogen
(CEE) and medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) in women with a uterus whilst
the other arm assessed the effect of CEE alone in women without a uterus.
In 2002 and 2004, both arms of the (WHI) study was prematurely stopped.
The study with women on the combined therapy of CEE and MPA was halted
at 5.6 years due to an increased risk of breast cancer and when other overall
risks exceeded benefits. The study with women on the estrogen only arm was
halted at 7.2 years due to an increased risk of stroke.98 (Level I)
Post WHI, further breakdown of the data has shown that the benefits and risks
of MHT vary with the woman’s age, time since menopause, underlying health
conditions, type of MHT used and delivery methods. The “timing hypothesis”
showed that the risks with MHT use was lower in women closer to menopause
onset than in those distant from the transition.
In 2017, a cumulative observational follow of the WHI study revealed that
women on hormone therapy, either CEE and MPA (non-hysterectomised
women) or CEE alone (hysterectomised women), showed no increased risk of
all-cause, cardiovascular or cancer mortality when compared to the women on
the placebo arm when followed up for 18 years.99 (Level I)
Women between 50 -59 years on the CEE and MPA combination showed a
non-significant lowered mortality trend towards CVD, cancer and other causes
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
28
whilst those on CEE alone showed a significant age-related lowered mortality
trend towards CVD, cancer and other causes.99 (Level I)
The use of MHT in healthy young menopausal women is safe. MHT use should
be individualized, taking into account
•
The woman’s personal health risks and preferences.
•
Her signs and symptoms and its effect on her quality of life.
•
Her age and/or time since menopause in relation to initiation or
continuation of MHT.
•
The balance of potential benefits and risks of MHT versus non-hormonal
therapies or other options.100 (Level I)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) is the most effective treatment
for vasomotor symptoms, genitourinary syndrome of menopause,
prevention of bone loss and reduction of fractures.97 (Level I)
2.
Benefits of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) outweigh risks
when given to healthy symptomatic women less than 60 years or
within 10 years of menopause.97 (Level I)
3.
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) treatment in women should
always be individualized.100 (Level I)
Recommendation 3
Women with menopausal symptoms who are less than 60 years of
age or within 10 years of menopause should be offered menopausal
hormone therapy for relief of vasomotor symptoms, genitourinary
symptoms of the menopause and prevention of bone loss.97 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
29
5.2 Starting Menopausal Hormone Therapy
Prior to starting MHT, a detailed history, examination and counselling is
mandatory. The risks and benefits of MHT to the potential user is discussed
and a well-informed decision is then made. (Appendix 5)
MHT is approved for four indications97, 101 (Level I)
•
Vasomotor symptoms (VMS): MHT reduces hot flushes and night sweats
and is recommended as first line-therapy for women with moderate to
severe VMS.102 (Level I)
•
Prevention of bone loss: MHT prevents bone loss and reduces fractures
in menopausal women. MHT decreases the incidence of all fractures,
including vertebral and hip fractures, even in women not at high risk
of fracture. MHT is the only therapy available with proven efficacy of
fracture reduction in patients with osteopenia.103,104 (Level I)
•
Hypoestrogenism: For women with hypoestrogenism caused by
hypogonadism, POI, or premature surgical menopause, hormonal
therapy either as the low dose COC or MHT is recommended at least until
the median age of menopause (50 years). Hormonal therapy relieves
VMS, prevents bone loss, and improves cognition, mood disorders and
improves lipid profiles. A benefit- risk assessment is carried out annually
if MHT is continued beyond 50 years.21 (Level II-3), 105, 106, 107, 108, 109 (Level I)
•
Genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM): In primary menopauserelated GSM issues, low-dose vaginal ET is recommended over systemic
ET as first-line hormonal therapy. MHT has been shown to effectively
restore genitourinary tract anatomy, increase superficial vaginal cells,
reduce vaginal pH, and treat symptoms of vulvovaginal atrophy
(VVA).110 (Level I)
Contraindications to MHT include women with past or present history of the
following conditions:111 (Level I)
•
Breast or endometrial cancer (any hormone related cancer).
•
Blood clots, particularly in the lungs, eyes, or deep veins.
•
Heart attack, stroke, or transient ischemic attack (TIA).
•
Liver disease or liver problems.
•
Inadequately controlled arterial hypertension
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
30
5.3 Types of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
The estrogen and progestogen component of MHT can differ in type and dose,
and are available in different combinations and delivery systems.
Hysterectomised women need estrogen therapy only (ET).101 (Level I)
Non-hysterectomised women (intact uterus) require both estrogen and
progestogen (EPT). This can be given as a cyclical preparation (in perimenopausal women and up to the first year of the last period) or as continuous
combined preparation in postmenopausal women (one year after the last
period).101 (Level I) (Appendix 6)
Cyclical therapy
Women in the perimenopause and up to one year from their last period are
advised the cyclical therapy; estrogen is administered daily while progestogen
is added for at least 12-14 days of the cycle to provide endometrial protection.
Women would experience regular monthly bleeds.112 (Level I).
Continuous combined therapy
Women one year or more from their last period are advised the continuous
combined therapy, also called the “no bleed therapy”; estrogen and progestogen
is taken daily. Initial spotting or staining (break through bleeding) is common
up to six months, after which there should not be any bleeding 112 (Level I)
•
Undiagnosed uterine or vaginal bleeding.
•
Porphyria.
•
Pregnancy.
Menopausal hormone therapy is approved for use in women
experiencing vasomotor symptoms, for prevention of bone loss and
reduction of fractures, genitourinary syndrome of menopause and for
women with hypoestrogenism due to hypogonadism and premature
ovarian insufficiency. 97, 101 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
31
The use of continuous combined preparations in perimenopausal women is not
encouraged due to the increased risk of irregular bleeding. Perimenopausal
women who are further away from their last menstrual period have lesser
break through bleeding than those closer to their last period.
Missing a pill or being non-compliant with the prescribed dosage may also
cause irregular bleeding. Unscheduled bleeding beyond 6 months of use
should always be investigated.112 (Level I).
Estrogen
The most commonly prescribed estrogen is estradiol valerate, estradiol
hemihydrate, 17 beta estradiol and conjugated equine estrogen (CEE). Different
types of estrogen have different effects on the brain, cardiovascular system,
stroke and venous thromboembolism.113,114 (Level II-3) Please see Section 5.9.
Progestogens
The commonly found progestogens in local MHT preparations are
dydrogesterone, mircronised progestogen, levonorgestrel, drospirenone,
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) and norethindrone acetate.115 (Level I)
Different progestogens have different effects on the cardiovascular disease,
venous thromboembolism and breast tissue.114 (Level II-3) Please see Section 5.10
Progestogen therapy is not required if only low-dose vaginal ET is used.
However appropriate evaluation of the endometrium should be performed if
abnormal vaginal bleeding occurs.116 (Level I)
Table 8 outlines the different estrogen and progestogen preparations in
Malaysia.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
32
Progestogen
Dydrogesterone 10 mg
Cyproterone Acetate 1 mg
Norgestrel 500 mcg
Drospirenone 2 mg
Micronised progesterone 100 mg
Medroxy progesterone acetate
10 mg
Levonorgestrel intrauterine system
(LNG IUS)
Estrogen
Estradiol Hemihydrate 1 mg, 2 mg
Estradiol Valerate (EV) 1mg, 2 mg
Conjugated equine estrogen (CEE)
0.3 mg, 0.625 mg
17 beta estradiol 1.25 gm, 2.5 gm
Estradiol gel 1mg, 2mg
Estradiol spray 1.53mg
1.
Hysterectomised women need only estrogen therapy (ET).101 (Level I)
2.
Women with an intact uterus need both estrogen and progestogen
(EPT).101 (Level I)
3.
Symptomatic women (with intact uterus) in the perimenopause and
up to one year of menopause are put on cyclical hormone therapy;
which constitutes daily estrogen with progestogen for 12 – 14 days
a month for endometrial protection; leading to regular scheduled
periods.112 (Level I).
4.
Symptomatic women (with intact uterus) who are one year after
menopause are advised the “no bleed therapy” or the continuous
combined preparation; which constitutes daily estrogen and
progestogen use.112 (Level I)
5.
Irregular bleeding after six months of continuous combined therapy
should always be investigated.112 (Level I).
Table 8: Different types and doses of estrogen and progestogen in the
various MHT preparations in Malaysia.117 (Level IV)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
33
Recommendation 4
1.
Hysterectomised women (women without a uterus), need only
estrogen therapy for relief of menopausal symptoms.101 (Level I)
2.
Non-hysterectomised women (women with an intact uterus) need
both estrogen and progestogen therapy for relief of menopausal
symptoms. Progestogen is added for endometrial protection.101 (Level I)
• Cyclical therapy (regular scheduled periods) is prescribed for
women in the perimenopause.112 (Level I)
• Continuous combined therapy (no bleed therapy) is prescribed
for women who are one year from their last period.112 (Level I)
3.
Low dose vaginal estrogen therapy is advised for relief of symptoms
of genitourinary syndrome of menopause; additional progestogen
therapy is not needed for endometrial protection. However, any
unscheduled vaginal bleeding should always be investigated.116 (Level I)
5.4 Delivery Routes
MHT may be delivered via oral, transdermal, vaginal and intrauterine routes.
These delivery systems allow for individualisation of MHT treatment in women.
In Malaysia, estrogen replacement therapy is available either as an oral tablet,
a transdermal gel or spray. In women with an intact uterus, progestogen is
always added to estrogen for endometrial protection. The types of estrogen
and progestogen available for use in MHT preparations in Malaysia is listed in
Table 9.
Micronised progesterone can be used orally or vaginally. The levonorgestrel
intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) is an ideal progestogen for endometrial
protection and can be combined with oral or transdermal estrogen.
Low-dose vaginal estrogen is available as a cream or as a tablet (which
is in combination with probiotics) and is suited for women with GSM. The
addition of progestogen is not required with vaginal estrogen therapy. Vaginal
estrogen therapy is not indicated for the treatment of hot flushes, prevention
of osteoporosis, heart disease, or other major health conditions.101 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
34
Recommendation 5
1.
Women with menopausal symptoms who are at a higher risk of
stroke or venous thromboembolism are advised to use transdermal
estrogen preparations for relief of menopausal symptoms. Women
with an intact uterus will still need to add 12 -14 days of either oral or
vaginal progestogen or use the levonorgestrel intrauterine system
(LNG-IUS) for endometrial protection.114 (Level II-3), 118 (Level II-1)
2.
Women with estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer (past or
present) are advised vaginal estrogen therapy for symptoms of
genitourinary syndrome of menopause. There is no increased risk
of breast cancer recurrence.116 (Level II-1)
Women with estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer (past or present) can
use vaginal estrogen therapy for GSM with no increased risk of breast cancer
recurrence.116 (Level II-1)
Non-oral routes of administration offer potential advantages on the clotting
profile because it bypasses the liver (first-pass hepatic effect). No increased
risk of stroke or VTE has been shown with transdermal estrogen preparations.114
(Level II-3), 118 (Level II-1)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy is available in the form of oral tablets,
the transdermal gel or spray, vaginal progesterone tablets and the
progestogen intrauterine system.117 (Level III)
2.
Vaginal estrogen is primarily used for symptoms of genitourinary
syndrome of menopause and is not indicated for the treatment
of hot flushes, prevention of osteoporosis, heart disease, or other
major health conditions.101 (Level I)
3.
Non-oral routes of administration offer potential advantages on
the clotting profile because it bypasses the liver (first-pass hepatic
effect). No increased risk of stroke or venous thromboembolism has
been shown with transdermal estrogen preparations.114 (Level II-3), 118 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
35
Estrogen only Preparations Transdermal Route
NAME
PREMARIN
TABLETS
0.3 mg
PREMARIN
TABLETS
0.625 mg
PROGYNOVA
1 mg
PROGYNOVA
2 mg
CONTENTS
Conjugated equine
estrogen (CEE).
Low dose
Conjugated equine
estrogen (CEE).
Estradiol valerate
Low dose.
Estradiol valerate.
TYPE
Low dose
Estrogen only
tablets
Estrogen only
tablets
Low dose
Estrogen only
tablets.
Estrogen only
tablets
USAGE
28 tablets in each
pack.
Estrogen only
tablets for
hysterectomised
women.
One tab daily.
May be used in
combination with
progestogen
for cyclical or
continuous
combined
therapy.
NAME
OESTROGEL
CONTENTS
17beta-estradiol.
1/2 ruler = 1.25 gm of
17beta-estradiol. (low
dose)
1 ruler = 2.5 gm of
17beta-estradiol.
TYPE
Transdermal
estrogen cream.
USAGE
Estrogen only for
hysterectomised
women.
May also be used
in combination
with progestogen
for cyclical or
continuous
combined
therapy.
5.5 Available Menopausal Hormone Therapy in Malaysia
The various preparations of MHT available in Malaysia is listed below.
Table 9: Menopausal Hormone Therapy preparations available in Malaysia117 (Level III)
Estrogen only Preparations Oral Route
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
36
NAME
DIVIGEL 1 mg
LENZETTO
1.53 mg
CONTENTS
Estradiol gel
(low dose)
1 sachet
Estradiol spray
TYPE
Transdermal
estrogen cream
Transdermal
estrogen spray
USAGE
28 sachets in
each box
Estrogen only for
hysterectomised
women.
1 or 2 (as
adviced) sachet
(s) to be applied
daily to upper
arm or thigh.
May be used in
combination with
progestogen
for cyclical or
continuous
combined
therapy.
Estrogen only for
hysterectomised
women.
2 sprays daily
on the forearm.
The dose may
be increased to
3 sprays daily if
required.
May be used in
combination with
progestogen
for cyclical or
continuous
combined
therapy
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
37
Estrogen only Preparations
Transvaginal Route for Genitourinary
Syndrome of Menopause
NAME
PREMARIN
VAGINAL
CREAM
CONTENTS
Conjugated equine
estrogen (CEE)
42.5gm/tube
TYPE
Vaginal estrogen
cream
USAGE
For moderate
to severe
dyspareunia due
to menopause:
0.5 gm of vaginal
cream twice a
week until as
directed.
Not to be used
as a vaginal
lubricant.
Cyclical Estrogen / Progestogen Preparations
NAME
FEMOSTON
1/10
FEMOSTON
2/10
CLIMEN 28
CONTENTS
14 orange tablets each
containing estradiol
hemihydrate 1 mg
14 yellow tablets each
containing estradiol
hemihydrate 1 mg &
dydrogesterone 10 mg
14 white tablets each
containing estradiol
hemihydrate 2 mg
14 blue tablets each
containing estradiol
hemihydrate 2 mg &
dydrogesterone 10 mg
16 white tablets each
containing estradiol
valerate 2 mg
12 pink tablets each
containing estradiol
valerate 2 mg &
cyproterone acetate
1 mg
TYPE
Cyclical MHT
(with low dose
estrogen)
Cyclical MHT
Cyclical MHT
USAGE
Each box has 28
tablets.
One tablet daily
at the same time.
No break
between boxes.
Regular
scheduled
bleeding.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
38
NAME
PROGYLUTON
CONTENTS
11 white tablets each
containing estradiol
valerate 2 mg,
10 brown tablets each
containing estradiol
valerate 2 mg &
norgestrel 500 mcg
TYPE
Cyclical MHT
USAGE
Each box has 21
tablets.
One tablet daily
at the same time.
7 day break
between boxes.
Regular
scheduled
bleeding
Continuous Combined Estrogen / Progestogen Preparations
NAME
ANGELIQ
FEMOSTON
CONTI 1/5
CONTENTS
Each tablet contains
estradiol 1 mg &
drospirenone 0.5 mg
Each orange tablet
contains estradiol
hemihydrate 1 mg &
dydrogesterone 5 mg
TYPE
Continuous
Combined MHT
(with low dose
estrogen and
progestogen)
Continuous
Combined MHT
(with low dose
estrogen and
progestogen)
USAGE
28 tablets in each
box One tablet
daily at the same
time.
No break
between boxes.
Initial spotting or
staining for the
first 6 months is
accepted after
which there is
no bleeding.
Unscheduled
bleeding should
be always be
investigated.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
39
The above list is accurate up to the date of printing of this guideline.
Progestogens
NAME
UTEROGESTAN
PROVERA
DUPHASTON
MIRENA LNGIUS
CONTENTS
100 mg micronised
progesterone
5 /10 mg of
medroxyprogesterone
acetate
10 mg of
dydrogesterone
52 mg LNG
(levonorgestrel)
20 mcg released daily
TYPE
100 mg (low
dose) or 200
mg daily as
prescribed
5 mg (low dose)
or 10 mg daily
as prescribed
10 mg daily
as prescribed
Intrauterine
system lasting 5
years
USAGE
30 tablets in
each box. Can
be used orally
or as vaginal
inserts. Used in
combination with
estrogen (orally
or transdermal)
either cyclically
or in a continuous
combined
preparation.
Used in
combination with
estrogen (orally
or transdermal)
either cyclically
or in a continuous
combined
preparation.
5.6 Benefits and Risks of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
Risks of MHT differ with the type of estrogen or progestogen used, dose and
duration of use, route of administration, timing of initiation, and whether only
estrogen or an estrogen / progestogen combination is prescribed. Treatment
should be individualized using the best available evidence to maximize
benefits and minimize risks, with periodic re-evaluation. There is presently no
fixed duration for the use of MHT.
In healthy symptomatic women who are less than 60 years or within 10 years
of menopause and with no contraindications to its use, the benefit-risk ratio of
MHT use is favourable towards VMS, GSM and bone health.116 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
40
However, for maximum cardio protective efficacy, a woman should initiate
MHT as soon as VMS symptoms occur, and preferably within the first 10
postmenopausal years. Hormone therapy is not indicated for primary or
secondary cardio protection.122 (Level I)
For women who initiate MHT after the age of 60 years or 10 years after
menopause, the benefit-risk ratio may be associated with greater absolute
risks towards CHD, stroke, VTE, and dementia.122 (Level I)
Recent evidence suggests that the use of CEE and estradiol-based MHT
regimes do not endanger the heart, but significantly reduces the incidence of
atherosclerosis, CHD events and mortality.122 (Level I), 123 (Level II-3)
Younger women who go through surgical menopause are advised ET (in the
absence of contraindications) to prevent immediate and long-term problems
of the menopause especially to the bone, brain and heart.124 (Level I)
The benefits and risks of MHT on specific areas is detailed in Section 6 and
Appendix 5.
1.
In women less than 60 years or within 10 years of menopause
and with no contraindications to its use, the benefit-risk ratio of
menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) treatment is favourable
towards relief of vasomotor symptoms, symptoms of genitourinary
syndrome of menopause and bone health. 116 (Level I)
2.
Women who initiate menopausal hormone therapy 10 years after
menopause have a higher absolute risk of coronary heart disease,
stroke, venous thromboembolism and dementia. 122 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
41
Recommendation 6
1.
Women with menopausal symptoms who are less than 60 years of
age or within 10 years of menopause, should be offered menopausal
hormone therapy for treatment of vasomotor symptoms, symptoms
of genitourinary syndrome of menopause and for bone health.116 (Level I)
2.
For maximal cardio protective efficacy, women should start
menopausal hormone therapy with the onset of vasomotor
symptoms and within 10 years of menopause.122 (Level I)
3.
Younger women who undergo surgical menopause are advised to
take ET till the age of 50 years to prevent immediate and long-term
problems of the menopause.124 (Level I)
5.7 Duration of Use of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
There is presently no mandatory limitation to duration of MHT use. Postmenopausal women can continue MHT as long as an annual review which
includes a benefit – risk assessment and relevant investigations are carried
out. Low dose MHT along with the most appropriate route of administration
should be used if long term MHT is considered.88 (Level II-1), 101 (Level I) (see Section 5.11)
The factors to be taken into consideration for continuous use of MHT include:
•
the patient’s personal preferences.
•
yearly review with benefit- risk assessment.
•
whether the primary use of MHT is for prevention or for QOL purposes.
8(Level II-3)
Continued use of MHT (beyond 10 years) will benefit women with persistent
VMS symptoms, improve GSM symptoms, increase bone density and reduce
fractures at all sites.8(Level II-3)
In women with POI or early menopause (natural, induced, surgical), early
initiation of either low dose COC or MHT till the natural age of menopause (50
years) is recommended. MHT may be continued after the age of 50 years if the
benefits of continued use of hormones outweighs the risks.101 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
42
Recommendation 7
1.
Post-menopausal women are allowed to continue menopausal
hormone therapy without any mandatory time limit as long as an
annual review with relevant investigations (see Section 5.11) and an
annual benefit-risk assessment is carried out.128 (Level I)
2.
When long term menopausal hormone therapy (beyond 10 years)
is considered, a low dose hormonal regime is advised.88 (Level II-1), 101 (Level I)
3.
Continued use of menopausal hormone therapy (beyond 10
years) is recommended in post-menopausal women with
persistent vasomotor symptoms, to improve symptoms related to
genitourinary syndrome of menopause, to increase bone density
and to reduce fractures at all sites.8(Level II-3)
With discontinuation of MHT:
•
VMS has an approximately 50% chance of recurring. This is independent
of the woman’s age and her duration of MHT use.124, 125 (Level II-1)
•
Further bone loss with increased risk of fractures may occur.126 (Level I), 127 (Level II-3)
•
Symptoms of GSM may recur.128 (Level I)
1.
There is presently no mandatory limitation to duration of menopausal
hormone therapy use.88 (Level II-1), 101 (Level I)
2.
Post-menopausal women can continue menopausal hormone
therapy as long as an annual review which includes a benefit – risk
assessment and relevant investigations are carried out.128 (Level I)
3
Continued use of menopausal hormone therapy (beyond 10 years)
will benefit post-menopausal women with persistent vasomotor
symptoms, improve symptoms related to genitourinary syndrome
of menopause, increase bone density and reduce fractures at all
sites.88 (Level II-1), 101 (Level I)
4.
Stopping menopausal hormone therapy may cause a recurrence in
vasomotor symptoms,124, 125 (Level II-1) symptoms related to genitourinary
syndrome of menopause128 (Level I) and further bone loss with an
increased risk of fractures.126 (Level I), 127 (Level II-3).
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
43
5.8 Side Effects to Menopausal Hormone Therapy
Side effects with MHT are usually transient and may resolve spontaneously with
continued use. Women are encouraged to persist with a particular hormone(s)
for at least 3 months before switching or stopping so as to allow the initial
side effects to settle. Side-effects are more likely to occur or be problematic
when women are further into their menopause or further away from their last
period.88 (Level II-1)
The side effects are usually related to the type of hormone used.
•
Estrogen-related. As estrogen is administered daily these side effects
occur continuously or randomly through the cycle.
•
Progestogen-related. Progestogen related side effects are more
problematic and are usually connected to the type, duration and dose of
progestogen.129 (Level II-1) With cyclical therapy, the side effects appear during
the progestogenic phase of the cycle. Those on the continuous combined
preparations can have random side effects throughout the cycle.
Side effects to estrogen and progestogen are listed in Table 10.
Table 10: Possible side effects of estrogen and progestogen preparations130 (Level III)
Progestogenic side effects
Breakthrough bleeding (BTB)
Abdominal bloating
Water retention
Migraine
Breast tenderness
Mood swings and depression
Premenstrual symptoms (PMS)
symptoms
Acne
Lower abdomen and back pain
Estrogenic Side effects
Breast tenderness
Leg cramps
Nausea
Dyspepsia
Headaches
Abdominal bloating
Indigestion
Vaginal bleeding
Water retention
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
44
Managing side effects of MHT
Breast Pain: MHT may initially cause breast pain due to the stimulation of breast
glands. This discomfort will gradually settle in four to six weeks. The MHT dose
can be lowered and with time increased to the normal dose. Alternatively, a
change of progestogen or a complete switch to Tibolone may help.131 (Level I)
Irregular bleeding: Women with an intact uterus need both estrogen and
progestogen. Adequate progestogen for at least 12 -14 days of each cycle is
added for endometrial protection.
Monthly cyclical preparations should produce regular, predictable and
acceptable bleeding pattern starting towards the end or soon after the
progestogen phase. This pattern may be altered by:132(Level I)
•
Irregular pill intake (non-compliance)
•
Gastrointestinal upsets
Continuous combined preparations may cause breakthrough bleeding (BTB)
up to six months of start of therapy. This occurs due to endometrial atrophy as
the progestogen prevents normal cell regeneration.132 (Level I)
Prolonged BTB beyond six months of MHT use (despite good compliance)
must always be investigated to rule out pelvic pathology.132 (Level I)
Abdominal bloating: Progestogen inhibits smooth muscle peristalsis of the
gut resulting in bloating and abdominal distention. Bloating usually settles
with time..132 (Level I)
Weight gain: Weight gain may happen in the menopause due to lowered
estrogen levels, loss of muscle tissue and lifestyle changes such as diet and lack
of exercise. The increased weight tends to be stored more in the abdominal
area which in turn increases the risk of metabolic problems.
Estrogen in MHT has been shown to redistribute the weight away from the
abdominal area. Studies have shown that eighty percent of women on MHT do
not change their weight over a period of 12 months. Up to 10% of women do
gain weight, while another 10% of women lose weight while using MHT.133 (Level I)
Appropriate dietary and lifestyle measures is always advised during menopause
and with MHT use.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
45
Leg cramps: Though not common, leg cramps do happen. Exercises and calf
stretching movements help reduce the incidence of leg cramps.134 (Level II-1)
Nausea and dyspepsia: Altering the time of intake of oral MHT or a change
to transdermal estrogen may help reduce gastrointestinal side effects. When
taken or used at night, nausea may not be experienced. Oral MHT may also be
taken with food to reduce gastric issues.88 (Level II-1)
Headaches: In women with persistent headaches, bypassing the liver with
transdermal MHT may be considered. Transdermal estrogen produces a more
stable estradiol level which may cut down the frequency of headaches.135 (Level I)
Mood swings and depression: Women on the combined MHT may exhibit mild
mood changes which usually disappear with prolonged use.136 (Level I)
Recommendation 8
Women on menopausal hormone therapy are encouraged to persist
with the prescribed hormonal preparation for at least 3 months to
allow the initial side effects to settle.88 (Level II-1)
Side effects to menopausal hormone therapy are usually transient and
resolves with time.88 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
46
5.8 (i) Management of Breakthrough Bleeding (BTB)
Breakthrough bleeding (BTB) is common in the first six months of a
continuous combined MHT regime and does not need further investigations.
Women who are not compliant with their prescribed hormone therapy
may also experience BTB. However, persistent bleed or a new onset bleed
needs further investigation by using the FIGO classification system of PALMCOEIN (polyps, adenomyosis, leiomyoma, malignancy, coagulation disorders,
ovulatory disorders, endometrial causes, iatrogenic causes and not otherwise
classified).15 (Level III)
Table 11 lists the different ways to handle break through bleeding.130 (Level III)
Table 11: Management of Breakthrough Bleeding (BTB)
Management
Increase progestogen dose.
Increase duration of
progestogen use from 14 days to
21 days.
Change the type of progestogen.
120 (Level I)
Increase the dose of
progestogen.
Change the type of progestogen.
130 (Level III)
To switch to the cyclical regime
for 3 months; then restart the
continuous combined regime.
130 (Level III)
Types of Break Through Bleeding
Increased or prolonged bleeding
Bleeding early in the progestogen
phase
Irregular bleeding on the
continuous combined regime
(once other causes are ruled out)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
47
5.8 (ii) Cyclical therapy with absent scheduled bleeding
Five percent of women who are compliant on the cyclical therapy may not
experience any bleeding due to presence of an atrophic endometrium.
However, pregnancy must be ruled out.137(Level I)
Recommendation 9
1.
Women on menopausal hormone therapy who experience
breakthrough bleeding after six months of continuous combined
therapy should be investigated for pelvic pathology by using the
FIGO classification system of PALM-COEIN (polyps, adenomyosis,
leiomyoma, malignancy, coagulation disorders, ovulatory disorders,
endometrial causes, iatrogenic causes and not otherwise classified).
132 (Level I)
2.
Irregular bleeding while on menopausal hormone therapy can be
managed by altering the dose, duration or type of progestogen.120
(Level I), 130 (Level III)
1.
Breakthrough bleeding may be expected up to 6 months with a
continuous combined preparation. Bleeding after 6 months of use
should always be investigated based on the FIGO classification
system
of
PALM-COEIN
(polyps,
adenomyosis,
leiomyoma,
malignancy, coagulation disorders, ovulatory disorders, endometrial
causes, iatrogenic causes and not otherwise classified).132 (Level I)
2.
Amenorrhoea or no periods may occur in 5% of women on cyclical
menopausal hormone therapy due to an atrophic endometrium;
however, pregnancy should always be ruled out.137(Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
48
5.9 Choice of Estrogen in Menopausal Hormone Therapy
Estrogen preparations available in Malaysia are 17 beta estradiol, estradiol
valerate, estradiol hemihydrate and conjugated equine estrogen (CEE). Different
estrogen have different effects, especially on the brain serotonergic system, with
estradiol providing a more robust anxiolytic and antidepressant effect.113 (Level II)
Both CEE and estradiol-based MHT regimes are safe for the cardiovascular
system and significantly reduce the incidence of atherosclerosis, CHD events
and mortality.122 (Level I), 123 (Level II-3)
17 beta estradiol is structurally similar to the major estrogen, estradiol (E2)
that is secreted by the female ovary. Recent data has shown that estradiol
carries a lower risk of VTE when compared to CEE and may be offered to
women with a higher risk of CHD events and VTE.114 (Level II-3)
Transdermal estrogen is as effective as oral estrogen in alleviating vasomotor
symptoms. It is also preferred over oral estrogen in women who are obese,
women with hypertriglyceridemia, active gall bladder disease and known
thrombophilia such as factor V Leiden. Transdermal estrogen preparations
have been shown to decrease the risk of VTE.114 (Level II-3), 118 (Level II-1)
Recommendation 10
Women
with
coexisting
morbidities
such
as
obesity,
hypertriglyceridemia,
active
gall
bladder
disease,
known
thrombophilia such as Factor V Leiden and have a higher risk of
venous thromboembolism; transdermal estrogen is preferred
over oral estrogen preparations in these women as it is as
effective for vasomotor symptoms with a lower risk of venous
thromboembolism.114 (Level II-3), 118 (Level II-1)
1.
17 beta estradiol is associated with a lesser risk of venous
thromboembolism when compared to conjugated equine estrogen.
114 (Level II-3)
2.
Transdermal estrogen is preferred over oral estrogen in women who
are obese, women with hypertriglyceridemia, active gall bladder
disease, and known thrombophilia such as factor V Leiden.114 (Level II-3),
118 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
49
5.10 Choice of Progestogen in Menopausal Hormone Therapy
Progestogens are substances that mimic the activity of endogenous
progesterone present in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. The
progestogens commonly used in Malaysia include dydrogesterone, micronised
progesterone,
levonorgestrel,
drospirenone,
micronized
progesterone,
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) and norethindrone acetate.115 (Level I)
Their biological activity is varied, depending on the chemical structure,
pharmacokinetics, receptor affinity and potency of action. The choice of
progestogen depends on knowledge of its benefits, with a focus on minimizing
potential side effects.137, 138 (Level I)
The
menopausal
hormone
therapy
combination
of
CEE
and
medroxyprogesterone (MPA) confer the highest risk for VTE (RR 2.10, 95% CI,
1.92 - 2.31) when compared to the estradiol / dydrogesterone preparation (RR
1.18, 95% CI, 0.98 -1.42).114 (Level II-3)
Progestogens such as micronised progesterone and dydrogesterone has not
been shown to affect the cardiovascular system, or increase the risk of VTE
and has minimal effect on the breast. The use of the LNG-IUS takes away the
need of oral progestogens thus decreasing further risks to these areas (see
Table 12)137, 138 (Level I).
Effects
A natural, ‘body-identical’ progesterone,
devoid
of
any
androgenic
and
glucocorticoid activity. It does not
affect the cardiovascular system, blood
pressure or increase the risk of venous
thromboembolism (VTE) and stroke. Its
anti-mineralocorticoid activity can cause
slight hypotension.
Observational studies have shown a
lowered breast cancer risk.137,138 (Level I)
It can be prescribed alongside oral or
transdermal estrogen at a dose of 200
Type of Progestogen
Micronised Progesterone
Table 12: Progestogens in Menopausal Hormone Therapy137, 138 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
50
Effects
mgs per day for at least two weeks of a
sequential therapy cycle.
For women on a low dose continuous
combined preparation, 100 mgs daily is
recommended. If taken at night, it may
aid sleep.
Dydrogesterone is devoid of androgenic
and glucocorticoid activity. It does not
increase endometrial hyperproliferation,
maintains
the
beneficial
effects
of
estradiol and minimises progestogen
associated risks to the cardiovascular
system including stroke, VTE and to
the breast tissue. it has minimal side
effects.37, 38 (Level I)
The intrauterine levonorgestrel system
is used as a contraceptive and for
endometrial protection. The progestogen
release is in utero which in turn leads to
lesser systemic side effects. Estrogen
may be added orally or as a transdermal
preparation.137, 138 (Level I)
This progestogen has anti androgenic
properties
along
with
antimineralocorticoid activity. It may help
women with slightly elevated blood
pressure.
Type of Progestogen
Dydrogesterone
LNG-IUS
Drospirenone
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
51
Recommendation 11
1.
Women with menopausal symptoms who need combined estrogenprogestogen therapy are advised progestogens such as micronised
progesterone or dydrogesterone as recent data has shown it to
be safer on the cardiovascular system, risk of stroke and venous
thromboembolism and has minimal effect on the breast.137, 138 (Level I)
2.
The levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) is a good option
for women with an intact uterus needing menopausal hormone
therapy. It works both as a contraceptive and for endometrial
protection. Estrogen therapy may be administered either orally or
through the transdermal route.137, 138 (Level I)
1.
Micronised progesterone does not affect the blood pressure or
the cardiovascular system, does not increase the risk of venous
thromboembolism (VTE) and stroke and has minimal effect on the
breast.137, 138 (Level I)
2.
Dydrogesterone does not increase endometrial hyper proliferation,
maintains the beneficial effects of estradiol (i.e., efficacy against
menopausal symptoms and prevention of osteoporotic fractures)
and minimizes progestogen associated risks to the breast and
cardiovascular system (stroke and venous thromboembolism).137, 138
(Level I)
3.
The intrauterine levonorgestrel system (LNG-IUS) is used as
a contraceptive and for endometrial protection. Estrogen for
menopausal hormone therapy may be added orally or through the
transdermal route.137, 138 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
52
5.11 Follow-Up of Women on Menopausal Hormone Therapy
Women who have initiated MHT should have an initial review after 3 months
to check on side effects and effectiveness of treatment. Upon a satisfactory
review, annual consultation is advised (see Table 13). Clinical indications for an
earlier review is given in Table 14.88 (Level II-1)
The annual consultation should include a physical examination, pelvic and
breast examination, update of medical and family history, relevant laboratory
and imaging investigations, a discussion on lifestyle changes and strategies
to prevent or reduce chronic disease. Annual benefit- risk assessments on
the continued use of MHT should be carried out. Regular mammographic and
cervical cancer screening should continue (see Table 13).
A three-month trial of MHT is suggested to achieve maximum effect. During
this time, improvement of symptoms should be noted and presence of residual
symptoms should be discussed.
Table 13: During the follow up visit of patients on MHT
1. Blood pressure, pulse rate and BMI measurement.
2. Presence of side-effects such as breast tenderness, nausea, headaches
and bleeding. Patients can be managed as in Section 5.8.
3. Presence of any new gynecological or non-gynecological problems.
4. Regular breast evaluation. Mammogram and / or breast ultrasound
examinations are carried out 1-2 yearly depending on the results of
the screening test and the individual’s inherent risk of breast cancer.
5. Cervical screening to be done (if applicable) at 1-3 yearly intervals.
6. A review and discussion on the individual’s benefit-risk ratio with
MHT.
7. Relevant blood investigations, especially pertaining to lipids and
glucose if necessary.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
53
Table 14: Reasons for earlier follow up of patients on MHT88 (Level II-1)
1. Unscheduled vaginal bleeding
2. Persistent side effects to MHT
3. Persistent menopausal symptoms
4. Recent blood-clotting disorder
5. Recent symptoms of cardiovascular disease
6. Recent hormone-dependent breast cancer or another hormonedependent cancer
7. Any recent new gynecological or non- gynecological problem that is
of concern to the individual
Table 15: Factors to be considered if a patient remains symptomatic whilst
on MHT
1. Gastrointestinal disturbances leading to poor absorption of MHT
2. Drug interactions which may reduce the bioavailability of estrogen
e.g. carbamazepine, phenytoin
3. Other overriding medical problems which may mimic menopause
e.g. hypothyroidism, diabetes
4. Inadequate estrogen dose
5. Patients’ expectations that all menopausal symptoms will be resolved
There is no set duration for the use of MHT. Periodic assessments are
emphasized and the decision to continue MHT should be based on the
individual’s symptoms and benefit-risk evaluation rather than being dependant
on a specific time frame.88 (Level II-1)
If long term MHT is being considered, the most appropriate dose and route of
administration should be used. Low dose MHT therapy is encouraged.88 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
54
Cessation of MHT can lead to recurring symptoms, especially VMS in up to
50% of women, which may impair quality of life.88 (Level II-1)
Women on menopausal hormone therapy should have a regular follow
up; an initial three-month review is advised followed by annual review.
88 (Level II-1)
5.12 Stopping Menopausal Hormone Therapy
There is presently no time limitation on the duration of MHT use. Women
can continue MHT if they are followed up regularly, carry out scheduled
investigations and their benefit-risk assessment is carried out annually.101 (Level I)
Women should be given correct information about the benefits and the
potential risks of MHT. The fear of cancer and cardiovascular disease has
caused many women who need MHT to abruptly stop MHT (against medical
advice). (see Appendix 5)
The table below may help the health care provider and the MHT user make the
appropriate decision to either stop or continue MHT.
Recommendation 12
1.
Women on menopausal hormone therapy are advised an initial 3
month follow up after commencement of hormones for review of
side effects and alleviation of symptoms; followed by an annual
benefit – risk assessment.88 (Level II-1)
2.
An earlier follow up is advised in case of serious side effects or if
symptoms do not improve.88 (Level II-1) (Section 5.8 / Algorithm E)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
55
Table 16. Reasons for stopping / continuing MHT
Women who stop MHT should be advised that menopausal symptoms may recur.
•
Vasomotor symptoms (hot flushes and night sweats) usually last between
two to five years. However, in some women, these symptoms may persist
longer. If the rebound vasomotor symptoms are severe after stopping
MHT, restarting treatment may be the most appropriate course of action.
88 (Level II-1)
•
GSM symptoms may recur once MHT is stopped, resulting in a decline in
pelvic and sexual health.20 (Level I)
•
Women who discontinue MHT, will lose BMD which can then increase the
risk of osteoporosis and fractures.126 (Level II-3)
It is vital for women with POI to continue using hormones (either low dose
COC or MHT) as advised till the natural age of menopause (i.e., 50 years).
Hormones are a necessity in these women especially for cardiovascular and
bone protection. Unfortunately, up to 79% of women with POI prematurely
stop hormonal therapy hormonal therapy due to unwarranted fears of breast
cancer. Subsequent long-term effects with this cessation remain unclear.139 (Level I)
Abrupt cessation or gradual withdrawal of HRT
There is no ideal way to stop MHT. Gradually decreasing the dose of MHT over
three to six months is recommended, to minimize the rebound symptoms.
However, studies have shown that the effect of stopping MHT abruptly may be
similar to when it is tapered off slowly.140 (Level II-3)
A woman is said to have successfully stopped her MHT if she has had none or
only minimal symptoms after 2-3 months of MHT cessation.141 (Level III-3)
Continuing MHT
Absence of contraindications
More benefits than risks
No side effects
Absence of symptoms
Patient’s preference
Stopping MHT
New contraindications
More risks than benefits
Side effects
Persistence of symptoms
Patient’s preference
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
56
Section 6: Effects of Menopausal Hormone Therapy
6.1 Menopausal Hormone Therapy in Perimenopause
The range of symptoms exhibited by the perimenopausal woman can vary
widely (see Table 1). Estrogen is the most effective treatment for perimenopausal
related symptoms of hot flushes and night sweats, mood swings, anxiety,
depression, disturbed sleep pattern and myalgia.102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1)
Bleeding irregularities are also common during this transition. Contraception
is important as the risk of pregnancy is 2-3% between ages of 45 to 50 years
and 1% after the age of 50 years if still not menopaused.141 (Level II-3)
Non-hormonal medical treatments such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs and anti-fibrinolytic agents are first line therapy that is often used for
heavy menstrual bleeding in the perimenopause.14 (Level I)
1.
Women who stop menopausal hormone therapy should be
counselled about a possible recurrence in vasomotor symptoms, 88
(Level II-1) worsening of symptoms related to genitourinary syndrome
of menopause,20 (Level I) and loss of bone mineral density with an
increased risk of fractures.126 (Level II-3)
2.
A woman is said to have successfully stopped her menopausal
hormone therapy, if she has had none or only minimal symptoms
after 2-3 months of hormone cessation.141 (Level III-3)
Recommendation 13
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy should be ceased gradually over a
period of 3-6 months rather than abruptly, to avoid a rebound of
symptoms.140 (Level II-3)
2.
In case of severe rebound of symptoms, restarting low dose
menopausal hormone therapy may be the most appropriate course
of action prior to attempting again.141 (Level III-3)
In cases of severe rebound of symptoms, it is advised to continue low dose
MHT for a longer period of time (preferably 3-6 months) prior to trying again.
141 (Level III-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
57
The low dose OCP or MHT is the ideal treatment for perimenopausal symptoms.
The low dose OCP (in women without contraindications) can be used up to
the age of 50 years. It is adequate as a contraceptive, achieves good cycle
control and reduces perimenopausal symptoms. At 50 years, the low dose
OCP is changed to MHT, if hormone therapy is still required.
Treatment with MHT alleviates perimenopausal symptoms and achieves good
cycle control. However, it is inadequate as a contraceptive as the dose of
estrogen and progestogen is less than that in the low dose OCP. Women above
50 years who are yet to reach menopause should be counselled about the 1%
risk of pregnancy and additional contraceptive measures are to be taken.15 (Level I)
LNG-IUS reduces heavy menstrual bleeding in the perimenopause, works
as a contraceptive, and can be used for endometrial protection. Women
needing estrogen for perimenopausal symptoms can use oral or transdermal
preparations.16 (Level I)
Counselling, management and follow up of a woman on hormonal therapy in
the perimenopause would continue as in Section 3 and Section 5.
1.
Estrogen is the most effective treatment for perimenopausal
symptoms such as hot flushes and night sweats, mood swings, anxiety,
depression, disturbed sleep pattern and myalgia.102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1)
2.
The low dose oral contraceptive pill is adequate as a contraceptive, achieves
good cycle control and reduces perimenopausal symptoms.14 (Level I)
3.
Menopausal hormone therapy helps cycle control and alleviation of
vasomotor symptoms in the perimenopause but is inadequate as a
contraceptive.15 (Level I)
4.
The levonorgestrel intrauterine system can be used to control bleeding
irregularities and for contraception in the perimenopause.16 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
58
6.2 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Vasomotor Symptoms (VMS)
MHT is the first line therapy for relief of VMS and other associated symptoms
such as disturbed sleep, irritability, concentration problems and diminished
QoL.
The Cochrane data base looked at 24 blinded trials of menopausal hormone
therapy against a placebo or a validated therapy, due to the large placebo effect
seen even in well conducted randomised controlled trials, and also because
menopause symptoms may fluctuate and often decline.102 (Level I) Standard doses
of estrogen alone or in combination with progestogen has been shown to
reduce the severity and frequency of VMS.102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1) However low-dose
MHT may take up to 6-8 weeks to control VMS symptoms.143 (Level I)
There is a 50% chance of recurrence of VMS when MHT is discontinued,
independent of age of patient and duration of MHT use.125 (Level II-1), 143 (Level II-3)
Micronised progesterone (300 mgs) at night has been found to be effective in
treating VMS, reducing hot flushes and improving sleep.144 (Level I)
Recommendation 14
1.
Women with perimenopausal symptoms are advised either the
• low dose oral contraceptive pill as it acts as a contraceptive,
gives better cycle control and treats perimenopausal symptoms.
14 (Level I)
• menopausal hormone therapy which gives better cycle control
and treats perimenopausal symptoms but is inadequate as
a contraceptive. Non-hormonal contraception is advised, if
necessary.15 (Level I)
2.
The levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) is an alternative
treatment for perimenopausal women with heavy menstrual
bleeding. It acts as a contraceptive and provides endometrial
protection. Women requiring menopausal hormone therapy can
continue using the LNG-IUS and add estrogen either orally or via
the transdermal route.16 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
59
6.3 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Mood Disorders
MHT is not an anti-depressant. Estrogen replacement may augment the effect
of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and have a positive effect on
mood disorders.145 (Level II)
In the Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Cognitive and Affective Study
(KEEPS-Cog), 220 women were randomized to receive 4 years of 0.45 mgs
per day oral conjugated equine estrogen plus 200 mgs per day micronised
progesterone for the first 12 days of each month, 211 women were randomized
to receive 50 ugs of transdermal estradiol daily plus 200 mgs per day of
micronised progesterone for the first 12 days of each month, and 262 women
were randomized to receive placebo pills and patches. Treatment with EPT
significantly improved mood in the depression–dejection scale and tension-
anxiety scale. Transdermal estrogen preparations did not show a similar
benefit. These findings are limited to recently postmenopausal women with
low cardiovascular risk profiles.146 (Level I)
Post-menopausal women with history of depression prior to menopause may
experience a recurrence of depressive symptoms if MHT is withdrawn.147 (Level I)
Recommendation 15
Women should be offered menopausal hormone therapy for relief
of vasomotor symptoms and other associated symptoms such as
disturbed sleep, irritability, concentration problems and diminished
quality of life which are related to the menopause.102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy is the first line therapy for relief of
vasomotor symptoms and other associated symptoms such as
disturbed sleep, irritability, concentration problems and diminished
quality of life.102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1)
2.
Lower doses of menopausal hormone therapy can take 6- 8 weeks
to relieve vasomotor symptoms.102 (Level I), 125 (Level II-1)
3.
Micronised progestogens when taken at night have been found to be
effective in treating vasomotor symptoms and improving sleep.144 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
60
6.4 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Genitourinary Syndrome of
Menopause (GSM)
Estrogen therapy is the most effective treatment for GSM. Low-dose vaginal
estrogen therapies which include creams, tablets and rings, are effective and
safe with minimal systemic effects.101,110,148,149,150,151 (Level I) The recent Cochrane review
(2016) showed no difference in efficacy between different local estrogen
preparations. Thirty RCTs were looked into and there was low-quality evidence
that intra-vaginal estrogenic preparations improve the symptoms of vaginal
atrophy in postmenopausal women when compared to placebo. However,
there was no evidence of a difference in adverse events between the various
estrogenic preparations compared with each other or with placebo.110 (Level I)
Topical vaginal estrogen used regularly for over two years has not been
associated with endometrial hyperplasia. Concurrent use of progestogen for
endometrial protection is not required.150,153 (Level I) The topical CEE cream when
compared to oral CEE therapy significantly improved sexual function and
dyspareunia in women with vaginal dryness.154 (Level I)
1.
Estrogen does not act as an antidepressant but may augment the
effect of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and have a
positive effect on mood disorders. 145 (Level II)
2.
Oral estrogen has been shown to improve mood significantly;
however transdermal estrogen preparations have not shown the
same benefit.146 (Level I)
3.
Post-menopausal women with history of depression before
menopause may experience recurrence of depressive symptoms if
menopausal hormone therapy is withdrawn.147 (Level I)
Recommendation 16
Women experiencing menopause related mood changes are
advised oral menopausal hormone therapy as it has a positive
effect on mood disorders. Transdermal estrogen preparations may
not show the same benefit.146 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
61
Ultra-low dose vaginal estriol 0.03mg in combination with Lactobacillus
acidophilus KS400 for the treatment of postmenopausal vaginal atrophy has
shown a significant improvement of the Vaginal Maturation Index (VMI) by
35.2% compared to 9.9% in placebo users over a period of three months. There
was a further increase of VMI to 55.4% with longer use.155 (Level I)
Non-hormonal therapies that may improve GSM and is used for treatment of
dyspareunia in post-menopausal women are as follows.
•
Lubricants which mainly consist of a combination of protectants or
thickening agents in a water-soluble base that have a maturation effect
on the urogenital epithelium. Lubricants are primarily used to relieve
vaginal dryness during intercourse and therefore do not provide a longterm solution.153 (Level I)
•
Moisturizers are hydrophilic, insoluble, cross-linked polymers. They are
usually used 2-3 times a week. Moisturizers help with vaginal dryness
as they are bio-adhesive and retain water by attaching to mucin and
epithelial cells on the vaginal wall.153 (Level I) A moisturizer containing a
combination of hyaluronic acid 1% (for natural hydration of tissues) and
l-arginine is available in Malaysia.
•
Ospemifene (60mg/day) demonstrated a significantly greater Female
Sexual Function Index (FSFI) score as compared to the placebo after
four weeks of use. This effect persisted at 12 weeks and all domains of
FSFI, which includes dyspareunia, arousal, and desire, were significantly
improved.156, 157,158, 159 (Level II-1)
•
The use of intravaginal 0.5% DHEA dehydroepiandrosterone (prasterone)
for 12 weeks was associated with improvement in sex function (arousal
/ sensation domain, arousal / lubrication, orgasm and dryness).160, 161 (Level
II-1):162,163 (Level I)
•
Non-ablative laser therapy has been shown to improve vulvovaginal
symptoms (vaginal dryness, burning, itching, dyspareunia, and dysuria)
as well as Vaginal Health Index Score (VHIS) on a short-term basis. This
form of therapy may need to be repeated at regular intervals.164,167 (Level I);
165,166 (Level II-3)
1.
Estrogen therapy is the most effective treatment for symptoms of
genitourinary syndrome of menopause.101,110,148,149,150,151 (Level 1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
62
6.5 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cardiovascular Disease and AllCause Mortality
Menopausal hormone therapy is currently not recommended for primary or
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in women.
The effect of MHT on the heart is complex and is dependent on the age of the
woman, her cardiovascular risk factors, whether only estrogen or an estrogen
/ progestogen combination is used, the type of estrogen or progestogen used
along with the delivery methods of these hormones.
The potential beneficial effects of estrogen include:168 (Level1)
•
An improvement in lipid profiles, primarily with oral estrogen.
•
Enhanced endothelial function particularly in younger healthier women.
Recommendation 17
Women with symptoms related to genitourinary syndrome of the
menopause are advised topical vaginal estrogen therapies as they
are highly efficacious and carry minimal side effects.101,110,148,149,150,151 (Level 1)
2.
Low-dose vaginal estrogen therapies (creams, tablets and rings)
are effective and safe with minimal systemic effects.101,110,148,149,150,151 (Level 1)
3.
Topical vaginal estrogen used regularly over two years is not
associated with endometrial hypertrophy.150,153 (Level I)
4.
Concurrent use of progestogens for endometrial protection is not
required with vaginal estrogen therapy.150,153 (Level I)
5.
Non hormonal therapies such as lubricants, moisturisers, ospemifene
and dehydroepiandrosterone may improve symptoms associated
with genitourinary syndrome of menopause especially dyspareunia.
153,162,163 (Level I) 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161 (Level II-1)
6.
Non ablative laser therapy has been shown to improve vulvovaginal
symptoms on a short-term basis but may need to be repeated at
regular intervals.164,167 (Level I); 165,166 (Level II-3)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
63
•
Improved insulin sensitivity.
The potential adverse effects of estrogen are:168 (Level1)
•
An increase in serum triglycerides with oral estrogen.
•
Prothrombotic effects with oral estrogen.
•
An increase in C reactive protein (CRP) through a non-inflammatory pathway.
Natural progesterone does not appear to negate the effects of estrogen on serum
lipids.168 (level1) However, synthetic progestogens such as medroxyprogesterone
acetate used in the WHI study and Estrogen / Progestin Replacement Study
(HERS) may negate some of the good effects of estrogen on lipids and
endothelial function.98,169 (Level I) Progestogens also increase CRP but through an
inflammatory pathway.
Estrogen therapy when started within 10 years of menopause or for women
less than 60 years of age may be cardio protective as compared with older
postmenopausal women. This period is often referred to as the “estrogen
window”, “window of opportunity” or “timing hypothesis”.170,171 (Level I), 172 (Level III)
In the Danish Osteoporosis Prevention Study (DOPS), younger women (around
50 years) taking MHT for 10 years had a reduced risk of mortality, heart failure, or
myocardial infarction, without an increased risk in stroke, VTE, or cancer.173 (Level I)
In the 13-year follow-up report of the WHI trial on both ET and EPT, the
absolute risks of adverse events in younger women were much lower than in
older women and the quality-of-life benefits were more likely to outweigh risks
if MHT was started early. 174 (Level I) Younger and low risk women on ET showed a
more favourable outcome to CVD (though not statistically significant) whilst
those on EPT had a more neutral effect on CVD (see Table 17).175 (Level I)
A recent cumulative follow up of 18 years of the WHI study and its patients
who were either on ET or EPT showed that MHT (with CEE plus MPA) for
a median of 5.6 years or with CEE alone for a median of 7.2 years was not
associated with risk of all-cause, cardiovascular or cancer mortality.99 (Level I)
Transdermal estrogen has a more favourable effect than oral estrogen on
markers for cardiovascular risk, is less thrombogenic and is associated with a
lower risk of VTE than estrogen.176 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
64
Age
Hazard Ratio (HR)
Absolute Excess Risks
(95% CI)
/ 10,000 person years
50 – 59 years
0.93 (0.65 - 1.33)
-2
60 – 69 years
0.98 (0.79 - 1.21)
-1
70 – 79 years
1.26 (1 - 1.59)
+19
Years since
Hazard Ratio (HR)
Absolute Excess Risks
menopause
(95% CI)
/ 10,000 person years
< 10 years
0.76 (0.5 - 1.16)
-6
10 - 19 years
1.10 (0.84 - 1.45)
+4
> 20 years
1.28 (1.03 - 1.58)
+17
Coronary Heart Disease
Coronary Heart Disease
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy is currently not recommended for
primary or secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in
menopausal women.168 (Level1)
2.
The absolute excess risk of cardiovascular disease is higher when
menopausal hormone therapy is started in women above the age of
60 years or who are more than 10 years from menopause.175 (Level I)
3.
Transdermal estrogen has a more favourable effect than oral
estrogen on markers for cardiovascular risk, is less thrombogenic
and is associated with a lower risk of venous thromboembolism
than oral estrogen.176 (Level I)
Table 17: Age Specific Risks for Cardiovascular Disease. The Estrogen
Window. A combined analysis of two WHI trials.175 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
65
Presence of cardiovascular risk factors (diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidaemia)
have been shown to increase the risk of stroke when on oral MHT. Transdermal
MHT preparations (estrogen alone or in combination with micronized
progesterone or dydrogesterone) does not increase this risk.20 (Level I)
Age
EPT
ET
Hazard Ratio (HR)
Hazard Ratio (HR)
(95% CI)
(95% CI)
50 – 59 years
1.41 (0.75 – 2.65)
0.89 (0.47 - 1.69)
60 – 69 years
1.37 (0.95 – 1.97)
1.63 (1.15 – 2.27)
70 – 79 years
1.21 (0.82 - 1.78)
1.20 (0.93 – 1.55)
Recommendation 18
Menopausal hormone therapy is the recommended treatment for
post-menopausal symptoms in women less than 60 years of age
and within 10 years of menopause as the risk of cardiovascular
disease is lower in this age group when compared to older postmenopausal women.175 (Level I)
6.6 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Stroke
Initiation of MHT in women under 60 years old and within 10 years of menopause
has minimal effect on the risk of stroke.98,177 (Level I)
The absolute risk of stroke from standard dose oral hormone therapy is about
2 additional strokes per 10,000 person-years, equivalent to one additional
stroke among 1000 women using hormone therapy for five years.178 (Level I)
Risk of ischaemic stroke is increased when MHT (either ET or EPT) is initiated
in women more than 60 years old or more than 10 years after menopause.179
(Level II-2)
Table 18: Age specific risks for Stroke with MHT use175 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
66
6.7 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Venous Thromboembolism (VTE)
In relatively healthy, recently menopaused women, the risk of VTE is minimal.118
(Level II-1),
The risk of VTE increases slightly with oral MHT but the absolute risk is still
rare below the age of 60 years. Oral ET is contraindicated in women with
history of VTE.20 (Level I)
Age
Hazard Ratio (HR) for VTE
(95% CI)
0 – 59 years
0.71 (0.40 – 1.26)
60 – 69 years
1.20 (0.82 – 1.76)
70 – 79 years
1.26 (0.79 – 1.99)
1.
Initiation of menopausal hormone therapy in women under 60 years
old and within 10 years of menopause has minimal effect on the risk
of stroke when compared to older post-menopausal women.98,177 (Level I)
2.
Risk of ischemic stroke is increased when menopausal hormone
therapy (either estrogen therapy or estrogen-progestogen therapy)
is initiated in women more than 60 years old or more than 10 years
of menopause.179 (Level II-2)
3.
Presence of cardiovascular risk factors (diabetes, hypertension,
dyslipidaemia) have been shown to increase the risk of stroke when
on oral menopausal hormone therapy.20 (Level I)
Recommendation 19
Menopausal hormone therapy is the recommended treatment for
post-menopausal symptoms in women less than 60 years of age
and within 10 years of menopause as the risk of stroke is minimal
in this age group when compared to older post-menopausal
women.98,177 (Level I), 179 (Level II-2)
Table 19: Age specific risks for VTE with MHT use175 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
67
Recommendation 20
Menopausal hormone therapy is the recommended treatment for
post-menopausal symptoms in women less than 60 years of age and
within 10 years of menopause as the risk of venous thromboembolism
is minimal in this age group when compared to older post-menopausal
women.20 (Level I)
Estradiol is now seen as the preferred estrogen to be used either alone (in
hysterectomised women) or in combination with micronised progesterone or
dydrogesterone (in women with an intact uterus) as it carries a lower risk of
VTE.114 (Level II-3)
Transdermal estrogen used alone or in combination with micronized
progesterone is not associated with an increased risk of VTE as compared to
oral ET or EPT.114 (Level II-3),180 (Level III); 181,182 (Level I)
Obesity is a significant risk factor to increase the risk of VTE in MHT users.
Transdermal preparations of MHT has not shown to increase the risk of VTE in
obese women..181 (Level I)
1.
The risk of venous thromboembolism increases slightly with oral
menopausal hormone therapy but the absolute risk is still rare below
the age of 60 years.20 (Level I)
2.
Transdermal estrogen alone or combined with micronised
progesterone was not associated with an increased risk of venous
thromboembolism as compared to oral estrogen therapy or
estrogen-progestogen therapy.114 (Level II-3),180 (Level III); 181,182 (Level I)
3.
Obesity can increase the risk of venous thromboembolism in
menopausal hormone therapy users. Transdermal preparations
does not increase this risk.181 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
68
6.8 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Osteoporosis
MHT is first-line treatment for the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal
osteoporosis in women below 60 years.183 (Level I)
MHT consisting of either estrogen alone or in combination with progestogen
slows bone turnover and increases BMD at all skeletal sites in early and late
postmenopause.183 (Level I) MHT also decreases fragility fracture risk (spine, hip
and non-vertebral sites) by 20-35%..103,104 (Level I)
Low dose MHT has been shown to protect bone by decreasing bone turnover
markers (BTM) and preventing bone loss. However, their anti-fracture efficacy
has not been confirmed.184, 185 (Level II-1)
The maximum bone protection is seen when estrogen therapy is given soon after
menopause, and is maintained as long as MHT is continued. Discontinuation
of MHT results in accelerated bone turnover, decrease in BMD and loss of antifracture efficacy.186 (Level II-3), 187 (Level II-1)
Use of MHT for prevention or treatment of osteoporosis in younger women (<
60 years of age) and those who are recently menopausal, has not been shown
to increase the risk of cardiovascular events, stroke, venous thromboembolism
(VTE) and haemorrhagic stroke.97 (Level I)
In women above 60 years or more than 10 years from the menopause, other
non-hormonal bone-active therapy is required for osteoporosis and prevention
of fragility fractures.188 (Level I)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy is the first-line treatment for the
prevention and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis in
women below 60 years.183 (Level I)
2.
Menopausal hormone therapy slows bone turnover, increases bone
mineral density at all skeletal sites and decreases fragility fractures
in early and late post menopause.103,104 (Level I)
3.
Low dose menopausal hormone therapy decreases bone turnover
markers however the data on fracture efficacy is unclear.184, 185 (Level II-1)
4.
Discontinuation of menopausal hormone therapy results in
accelerated bone turnover, decrease in bone mineral density and
loss of anti-fracture efficacy.186 (Level II-3), 187 (Level II-1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
69
6.9 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Sarcopenia
The skeletal frame is held up by muscles; preserving muscle strength and
prevention of sarcopenia helps prevent physical disability. The role of estrogen,
as a potential cause of sarcopenia remains controversial. The current consensus
is that the physical and metabolic consequences of sarcopenia are neither
specific to menopause nor gender.
The current gold standard in the management of sarcopenia emphasizes
improved nutrition and resistance training as it has been shown to be effective
in attenuating age-related muscle loss and strength.
A large systematic review and meta-analysis carried out in 2018 did not show
a significant benefit of MHT on muscle mass.189 (Level I)
Recommendation 22
There are currently no recommendations for use of menopausal
hormone therapy as a prevention or treatment strategy for
sarcopenia in the menopause.189 (Level I)
1.
The role of estrogen as a potential cause of sarcopenia remains
controversial.189 (Level I)
2.
There are currently no recommendations for use of menopausal
hormone therapy as a prevention or treatment strategy for
sarcopenia in the menopause.189 (Level I)
Recommendation 21
Menopausal hormone therapy treatment recommended for the
treatment of menopausal symptoms in women less than 60 years
of age or within 10 years of menopause helps prevent and treat
post-menopausal osteoporosis.183 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
70
6.10 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Metabolic Disease, Weight, and
Diabetes
MHT has a beneficial effect on the metabolic system.
In women without diabetes, MHT causes the following changes:190,191 (Level I)
•
An increase in lean body mass [3.3% (CI, 0.02–6.6%)].
•
Reduction in waist circumference [0.8% (CI, 1.2 to 0.4%)].
•
Reduction in abdominal fat [6.8% (CI, 11.8 to 1.9%)].
•
Significant reduction in fasting glucose levels [2.5%, (CI, 1.5–3.5%)].
•
Significant reduction in insulin levels [9.3%, (CI, 4.9–13.7%)].
•
Significant reduction in insulin resistance, HOMA-IR [12.9%, (CI, 8.6–
17.1%)].
•
A 30%- 40% reduction in new onset diabetes [RR 0.7 (CI, 0.6–0.9)].
In women with diabetes, MHT has the following effects:190,191 (Level I)
•
A reduction in “homeopathic model assessment of insulin resistance”
(HOMA-IR) by 35.8% (CI, 19.8–51.7%) compared to placebo or no
treatment. A greater reduction in HOMA-IR was seen in women with
diabetes compared to those without known diabetes, (p = 0.007).
•
A reduction of fasting glucose by 11.5% (CI, 5.1– 18.0%).
•
A reduction of fasting insulin by 20.2% (CI, 4.2–36.3%).
The benefits and risks of MHT use must be taken into consideration when
assessing the atherosclerotic risk in women. MHT has been shown to increase
high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and reduce low density lipoprotein
(LDL) cholesterol, lipoprotein a (Lp (a)), mean blood pressure, fibrinogen and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). However, oral estrogen has been
shown to increase triglyceride levels.190 (Level I)
Timing of initiation of MHT appears to have differential effects on insulin
action. There is an improvement in insulin stimulated glucose disposal when
MHT is given to women who were <6 years postmenopausal, while a reduction
in glucose disposal was found in women who were >10 years postmenopausal.
99 (Level Ib), 192 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
71
Recommendation 23
There are currently no recommendations for use of menopausal
hormone therapy as a prevention or treatment strategy for
metabolic disorders in the menopause.190,191 (Level I)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy has a beneficial effect on the
metabolic system; however, it is not recommended as first line
therapy for prevention of metabolic problems.190,191 (Level I)
2.
Menopausal hormone therapy is beneficial in post-menopausal
women with or without diabetes. There is an increase in lean body
mass, reduction in waist circumference, significant reduction in
fasting glucose levels, insulin levels and insulin resistance and a
30%- 40% reduction in new onset diabetes.190,191 (Level I)
3.
There is an improvement in insulin stimulated glucose disposal when
menopausal hormone therapy is given to women who were <6 years
postmenopausal, while a reduction in glucose disposal was found in
women who were >10 years postmenopausal.99 (Level Ib), 192 (Level I)
Unfortunately, despite the favourable effects of MHT on the parameters of
metabolic syndrome (MetS), insulin resistance and reduction in onset of
T2DM, there are currently no recommendations for use of MHT as a prevention
strategy for metabolic disorders in menopause.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
72
Recommendation 24
Menopausal hormone therapy should not be used solely for cognition
or for reduction of Alzheimer’s Disease in the menopause.146, 195(Level I),
196 (Level II-1)
1.
Estrogen plays a role in cognition by its effect on the cholinergic
and glutamate system, by stimulating neurons, protecting nerve
cells and is linked to prevention of amyloid in Alzheimer’s Disease.
193,194 (Level I)
2.
Most studies have not shown a beneficial effect of estrogen on the
brain.146, 195(Level I), 196 (Level II-1)
6.11 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cognition
Estrogen plays a role in cognition through its effect on the cholinergic and
glutamate system and its ability to stimulate neurons and protect nerve cells. It
has also been linked to prevention of amyloid in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD).193,194
(Level I)
Though some epidemiological and observational data of MHT in younger
postmenopausal women has shown that estrogen protects against cognitive
impairment in the later years, the WHI Memory Study [WHIMS),195(Level I), 196 (Level
II-1), the Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Study (KEEPS) trial146 (Level I) and the
Early versus Late Intervention Trial with Estradiol (ELITE) trial showed no
beneficial effects of estrogen therapy on cognition. However, the recent long
term follows up from the WHI study have shown that there is a reduction in
deaths from Alzheimer’s’ disease and other dementia in the ET users.99 (Level I)
MHT use in early menopausal women and within 10 years of menopause is
safe. However, MHT should not be prescribed solely for cognition or for the
reduction of AD.195, 196 (Level II)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
73
6.12 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Skin
Collagen loss is highest during the first 5 years of menopause. Other agerelated skin changes involve thinning of the epidermal and dermal skin layer,
reduction in elastin content, decrease in skin moisture and an increase in
wrinkles. These changes may be reversed by estrogen therapy.198 (Level I), 199 (Level II-3)
Topical facial estrogen (0.01% estrogen or 0.625 mg/gram of CEE cream) have
shown to be beneficial to the skin and collagen layer. However, MHT is not
recommended as first line therapy for the aging skin.200 (Level II-2)
Recommendation 25
Menopausal hormone therapy is not advised as first line treatment
for the aging skin.200 (Level II-2)
1.
Collagen loss is highest in the first 5 years of menopause.198 (Level I), 199
(Level II-3)
2.
Estrogen therapy may reverse collagen loss, epidermal and dermal
thickness layer, elastin content, skin moisture and wrinkles.198 (Level I), 199
(Level II-3)
3.
There are currently no recommendations for the use of menopausal
hormone therapy for treatment of the aging skin.200 (Level II-2)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
74
6.13 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Hair, Dentition and Special
Senses
6.13.1 Hair
MHT does not decrease menopause related hair loss or improve hair density.
201 (Level I), 202 (Level II)
6.13.2 Dentition
The risk of gum disease in MHT users is reduced up to 44%.203 (Level II-1) The WHI
study found that tooth loss was 24% lower in current MHT users than in
nonusers.204 (Level I)
6.13.3 Vision
MHT has been shown to decrease the risk of cataracts and primary open angle
glaucoma, however may increase symptoms of dry eyes.77 (Level b), 205 (Level I), 206 (Level II-1)
6.13.4 Voice Changes
MHT helps improve menopause related hoarseness of the voice. MHT users
have a higher habitual pitch than non-users, especially in women with
comparable BMI.79, 207 (Level II-1)
6.13.5 Hearing
Though conflicting data exists in preclinical models, MHT may play a role in
hearing loss and olfactory changes.208 (Level II-1)
In small trials, it may decrease dizziness and improve postural balance.209 (Level
II-2), 210 (Level II-1)
6.13.6 Smell
Olfactory test scores (odour identification, odour discrimination / memory,
odour threshold sensitivity) were significantly higher in women receiving
combined MHT than in past users and never users.208 (Level II-1)
6.13.7 Taste
MHT significantly improves blood flow in the salivary glands which then
reduces the incidence of dry mouth. This can indirectly affect taste.211 (Level II-2)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
75
Recommendation 26
Menopausal hormone therapy is not recommended as first line
treatment for menopausal changes to hair, dentition, eyesight,
hearing, smell, taste and voice.201 (Level I), 202 (Level II), 203 (Level II-1), 204 (Level I)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy does not decrease menopause
related hair loss or improve hair density.201 (Level I), 202 (Level II)
2.
Menopausal hormone treatment has been shown to decrease gum
disease and tooth loss, improve eyesight, hearing, smell, taste and
decrease voice hoarseness; however, it is not recommended as first
line treatment for these problems.203 (Level II-1), 204 (Level I)
6.14 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Breast
The most frequent cancer in women is breast cancer. Twelve percent of
women who reach 90 years of age, develop breast cancer. The etiology of
breast cancer is still poorly understood with known breast cancer risk factors
attributing to only a small proportion of cases (see Table 20). Over 80% of
breast cancers in postmenopausal women occur in women who have never
taken hormone therapy.212, 213 (Level I)
Table 20. Risk Factors for Developing Breast Cancer213 (Level I)
Non Modifiable Risks
Modifiable Risks
Getting older
Sedentary lifestyle
Genetic mutations
Overweight or obese especially
(such as BRCA 1 & 2)
after the menopause
Early menarche
First pregnancy after the age of
(before 12 years of age)
30 years
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
76
Large observational studies have shown that the risk of breast cancer may
vary with different doses and combinations of ET and EPT.20 (Level I)
In the New South Wales Cancer Lifestyle and Evaluation of Risk (CLEAR) study,
current use of MHT (but not past use) is associated with a small increased risk
of ER positive and ER and PR positive breast cancer. There is no increased risk
seen with the other breast cancer subtypes.214 (Level II-2)
WHI investigators also found that women on EPT have an increased risk of
abnormal mammograms, with a subsequent small increased risk of breast
cancer.215 (Level I)
In 2020, the Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer
(CGHFBC) meta-analysis found a small increase in the absolute risk of breast
cancer in MHT users.216 (Level1) The data was elaborated as follows:
Non Modifiable Risks
Modifiable Risks
Late menopause
Not breastfeeding
(after the age of 55 years)
Having dense breasts
Nulliparity
Personal history of breast cancer,
Increased alcohol consumption
atypical hyperplasia or lobular
carcinoma in situ
Family history of breast cancer
Combined MHT (estrogen and
progestogen)
Radiation treatment to the chest or
breasts before the age of 30 years
Women who were on diethylstilbestrol
(DES) between 1940 –1971 to prevent
miscarriages. Their daughters still
carry a risk.
(Source: Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, USA 2019)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
77
5-year intake of MHT at the age of 50 years and risk of breast cancer at age
50 – 69 years.
For continuous combined MHT
Increase from a baseline risk of 3/50 women not on MHT to 4/50 (i.e. 1 extra
case in 50 women)
For sequential combined MHT
Increase from a baseline risk of 4/70 women to 5/70 (i.e. 1 extra case in 70
women)
For estrogen only MHT
Increase from a baseline risk of 13/200 women to 14/200 (i.e. 1 extra case in
200 women)
10-year intake of MHT starting at the age of 50 years and risk of breast cancer
at age 50 – 69 years
For continuous combined MHT
Increase from a baseline risk of 3/50 women not on MHT to 5/50 (i.e. 2 extra
cases in 50 women)
For sequential combined MHT
Increase from a baseline risk of 4/70 women to 6/70 (i.e. 2 extra cases in 70
women)
For estrogen only MHT
Increase from a baseline risk of 13/200 women to 15/200 (i.e. 2 extra cases in
200 women)
The Joint Statement from the British Menopause Society (BMS), European
Menopause and Andropause Society (EMAS), Royal College of Obstetrician
and Gynaecologists (RCOG) and Australasian Menopause Society (AMS)
in 2021, has strongly encouraged that the results of the CGHFBC metaanalysis not be taken in isolation and that the decision to take MHT should be
individualised based on the woman’s benefits and risks and improved quality
of life with MHT. There was also no arbitrary limit to be placed on the dose or
duration of usage of MHT.217(Level1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
78
Natural progestogens in the form of micronized progesterone and
dydrogesterone are now seen to be the safer progestogens as they are
associated with lower risk of breast cancer as compared to other synthetic
progestogen.218, 219 (Level II-2) MHT use in the following women do not further
increase the risk of breast cancer.
•
Women with family history of breast cancer.220 (Level I)
•
Women who are BRCA positive without breast cancer.221 (Level I)
In women who have undergone surgical menopause prematurely (bilateral
oophorectomy), estrogen should be considered to decrease health risks
without the fear of increased risk of breast cancer.222 (Level I)
The WHI study showed an increase in breast cancer in the EPT arm of the
study. This risk was higher in previous users of menopausal hormone therapy
and was not increased with family history of breast cancer. However, there was
no increased risk of breast cancer for up to 7.2 years of estrogen only use in
the ET arm of the WHI.98 (Level I)
In the 13 years follow up of the WHI data, hysterectomised women who
received estrogen only in the form of CEE showed a non-significant reduction
in breast cancer risk.174 (Level I)
The latest 18 year follow up of the WHI cohort showed that breast cancer
mortality was not increased in both the EPT (HR 1.44, 95% CI, 0.97 -2.15) and
ET users (HR 0.55, 95% CI, 0.33 – 0.92).223 (Level I)
In Malaysia, the risk of breast cancer is highest in the 40-to-60-year age group.
224 (Level II-2)
A combination of a breast ultrasound and mammogram is ideal as a screening
tool as breast tissue can be denser in younger women. Women on hormone
replacement therapy should have their breast ultrasound repeated yearly and
their mammogram every 2 years if the preceding results were normal.
MHT after breast cancer
The use of MHT after breast cancer is not advised. The results of various studies
have been controversial, reporting either a neutral effect or an increased risk
of breast cancer recurrence. 22(Level I), 226(Level lII)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
79
MHT treatment for vasomotor symptoms may only be considered after a
failed trial of non-hormonal therapy. A multidisciplinary team consisting of a
menopause specialist, oncologist and gynaecologist should be present in the
decision making and the benefits and risks individualised to that particular
individual. The dose should be the lowest and for the shortest possible time.
226(Level lII)
Breast cancer survivors with problems of GSM can safely use low dose vaginal
ET without any fear of breast cancer recurrence, due to its minimal systemic
absorption. 227(Level II-2) Local use of vaginal estriol and lactobacillus has also been
studied in breast cancer survivors and has shown good safety profile. It is
clinically effective in women with breast cancer on aromatase inhibitors.228 (Level
II-1)
1.
The risk of breast cancer may vary with different doses and
combinations of estrogen therapy and estrogen-progestogen
therapy.20 (Level I)
2.
Hysterectomised women (women without a uterus) who received
estrogen only therapy showed either a non-significant reduction or
a very minimal increased risk of breast cancer which is relative to
duration of use.174, 216 (Level I)
3.
Non-hysterectomised
women
who
received
the
estrogenprogestogen combination showed a small increased risk which is
relative to duration of use and type of progestogen used.174,216 (Level I)
4.
Current use, but not past user is associated with increased risk of
ER positive breast cancer and ER and PR positive breast cancer.214
(Level II-2)
5.
Micronized progesterone and dydrogesterone when used as
progestogen therapy in menopausal hormone therapy is associated
with lowered risk of breast cancer.218, 219 (Level II-2)
6.
Menopausal hormone therapy does not alter the risk of breast
cancer in women with family history of breast cancer or carry a
positive BRCA gene mutation.220,221 (Level I)
7.
Use of menopausal hormone therapy after breast cancer is not
advised, however low dose vaginal estrogen creams for symptoms
of genitourinary syndrome of menopause, are permitted in breast
cancer survivors.227(Level II-2)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
80
Recommendations 27
1.
Hysterectomised
women
(women
without
a
uterus)
with
menopausal symptoms are treated with estrogen only therapy.
There is a non-significant risk reduction or a very minimal increased
risk of breast cancer which is relative to duration of hormone
use.174,216 (Level I)
2.
Non-hysterectomised women (women with a uterus) with
menopausal
symptoms
require
an
estrogen-progestogen
combination. There is a small increased risk of breast cancer which
is relative to duration of hormone use and type of progestogen
used.174,216 (Level I)
3.
Menopausal
hormone
therapy
may
be
recommended
for
symptomatic menopausal women who have a family history of
breast cancer or carry a positive BRCA mutation.220,221 (Level I)
4.
Menopausal hormone therapy is not advised for breast cancer
survivors.22(Level I), 226(Level lII)
6.15 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Other Cancers
6.15.1 Cervical Cancer
MHT use is not associated with an increased risk of cervical cancer. Posthysterectomy, ET may be used for menopausal symptoms and does not
increase the risk of cancer recurrence.229 (Level II-2), 230(Level I)
Menopausal hormone therapy use does not increase the risk of cervical
cancer or recurrence of cervical cancer.229 (Level II-2), 230(Level I)
Recommendation 28
Women with menopausal symptoms may use menopausal hormone
therapy (estrogen only) after a hysterectomy for treatment of
cervical cancer.229 (Level II-2), 230(Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
81
6.15.3 Lung Cancer
MHT use (either ET or EPT) is not associated with lung cancer. There is limited
data that shows a reduction in lung cancer incidence; however this reduction
is absent in smokers.234, 235, 236, 237 (Level I)
6.15.2 Endometrial Cancer
In women with an intact uterus on MHT, addition of progestogen at an adequate
dose (see Table 9) and duration is required for endometrial protection with no
increased risk of endometrial cancer.231, 232 (Level I)
There is minimal evidence in the use of MHT after surgery for endometrial
cancer due to its potential to stimulate any cells left behind at surgery. The
benefits and risks of MHT use in such women should be individualised and
weighed carefully.233 (Level I)
Menopausal hormone therapy is not advised after surgery for
endometrial cancer as it has the potential of stimulating any cells that
are left after surgery.233 (Level I)
Menopausal hormone therapy does not increase the risk of lung cancer.
234, 235, 236, 237 (Level I)
Recommendation 29
Women with menopausal symptoms are not advised menopausal
hormone therapy after endometrial cancer surgery due to fears of
stimulating any remnant cancer cells.233 (Level I)
Recommendation 30
Women with menopausal symptoms may use menopausal hormone
therapy after lung cancer treatment.234, 235, 236, 237 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
82
6.15.4 Ovarian Cancer
The risk of ovarian cancer with long term MHT use has remained inconsistent
across many studies.238,239,240,241 (Level I)
A significant association between combined MHT and ovarian cancer was not
observed in the EPT arm of the WHI study (5.6 years follow up). In the estrogen
only arm, there was an absolute risk of 4 cases with CEE alone versus 3 cases
with placebo per 10000 person-years; this risk remained nonsignificant after a
median 13 years follow up.174 (Level I)
A large meta-analysis of 52 epidemiological studies revealed one extra case
of ovarian cancer per 1000 users and one extra ovarian cancer death per 1700
users who used MHT for 5 years from 50 years of age.240 (Level I)
Though data is limited, MHT use does not increase the risk of ovarian cancer
in women with family history of ovarian cancer or in women with a BRCA
mutation.242 (Level I)
There was no increased risk of recurrence or death in women receiving MHT
after treatment of ovarian cancer.243,244,245 (Level I)
The risk of ovarian cancer with long term menopausal hormone therapy
use has remained inconclusive.238,239,240,241 (Level I)
Recommendation 31
Menopausal hormone therapy (either estrogen only or estrogen
progestogen combination) may be used for treatment of menopausal
symptoms in women who have completed treatment for ovarian
cancer.174 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
83
6.16 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Quality of Life (QoL)
MHT has the following effects on QoL:
•
A significant improvement in menopause-specific quality of life scores
(MsQoL), mainly through relief of menopausal symptoms.246, 247 (Level I)
•
An increase in sense of well-being in global quality of life scores
(GQoL).247, 248 (Level I)
•
MHT significantly relieves exhaustion, irritability, joint and muscle pain
and vaginal dryness.248 (Level I)
Menopausal hormone therapy improves menopause-specific quality of life
scores (MsQOL) and global quality of life scores (GQol).246, 247, 247, 248 (Level I)
Recommendation 32
Menopausal hormone therapy treatment for post-menopausal
symptoms in women less than 60 years of age and within 10 years
of menopause improves menopausal-specific quality of life scores
(MsQOL) and global quality of life scores (GQol).246, 247,247,248 (Level I)
6.17 Menopausal Hormone Therapy, All-Cause Mortality and Global Index
In a cumulative 18 year follow up from WHI, use of menopausal hormone
therapy for 5 – 7 years was not associated with risk of long-term all-cause
mortality.224 (Level I)
The Global Health Index (an index of health status that combines all aspects of
public health into a single number) has also shown to be favourable towards
MHT use between 50 – 59 years.175 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
84
Table 21: Age specific risks for All-Cause Mortality with MHT use.
Combined analysis of the two WHI trials.175 (Level I)
Age
Hazard Ratio (HR) for Death
(All-causes) (95% CI)
50 - 59 years
0.70 (0.51 – 0.96)
60 - 69 years
1.05 (0.87 – 1.26)
70 – 79 years
1.14 (0.94 – 1.37)
Table 22: Age specific risks for Global Health Index with MHT use175 (Level I)
Age
Hazard Ratio (HR) for
Global Index (95% CI)
50-59 years
0.96 (0.97 – 1.2)
60- 69 years
1.08 (0.89 – 1.13)
70 – 79 years
1.14 (0.02 – 1.29)
Recommendation 33
Menopausal hormone therapy treatment for post-menopausal
symptoms results in a more favourable global health index and a
lesser all-cause mortality in women between the ages of 50 – 59
years.175, 224 (Level I)
1.
The use of menopausal hormone therapy for 5 – 7 years was not
associated with risk of long-term all-cause mortality.224 (Level I)
2.
The Global Health Index is favourable towards the use of menopausal
hormone therapy in women between the ages of 50 – 59 years.175 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
85
Section 7: Menopausal Hormone Therapy (MHT) in Women with
Special Problems
7.1 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Endometriosis
Pre-menopausal women who have undergone bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
(removal of both tubes and ovaries) with or without a hysterectomy for
endometriosis may experience exaggerated vasomotor symptoms due to the
sudden decline in estrogen levels.
As endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent disease, the use of MHT in these
women should be used with caution, as there can be reactivation of the
endometriotic foci with a potential for malignancy. EPT is preferred rather
than ET and can be considered if moderate to severe VMS is present.249,250 (Level I)
Treatment should be individualised based on age, disease severity, family
history, co-morbidities and severity of symptoms. Evaluation of the risks
and benefits of MHT use is carried out taking into consideration the possible
resurgence of endometriosis and the small possibility of endometriosis related
malignancy.251 (Level I)
Women with endometriosis who go on MHT after menopause should be
regularly monitored with yearly pelvic ultrasounds. A biopsy is necessary in
case of any suspicious recurrence.250, 251 (Level I)
Tibolone may be used as an alternative to estrogen progestogen therapy for
treatment of menopausal symptoms.256 (Level I)
1.
Endometriosis is an estrogen dependent disease; menopausal
hormone therapy should be used with caution in women with
endometriosis due to possible reactivation of the endometriotic foci
and the small possibility of endometriosis related malignancy.251 (Level I)
2.
Estrogen-progestogen treatment is preferred over estrogen only
treatment for women who have had surgical menopause due to
endometriosis.249,250 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
86
7.2 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Fibroids
MHT is not contraindicated in menopausal women with fibroids. Annual
pelvic ultrasounds are advised as MHT may increase the volume and size of
asymptomatic fibroids. A low resistance pulsatility index (PI) in the uterine
arteries in women with asymptomatic fibroids is associated with increased
fibroid growth and can be used as a screening tool prior to initiating MHT.
252(Level II-3)
Tibolone may be used as an alternative in women with fibroids who require
menopausal therapy.252 (Level II-3)
Recommendation 35
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy is not contraindicated in women
with fibroids; however annual pelvic ultrasound examinations are
advised to monitor the volume and size of fibroids.252(Level II-3)
2.
Women with fibroids who experience menopausal symptoms may
be offered tibolone as an alternative to menopausal hormone
therapy.253 (Level I)
Recommendation 34
1.
Women experiencing menopausal symptoms after surgical
menopause due to endometriosis are advised an estrogenprogestogen combination due to fear of reactivation of
endometriotic foci with estrogen only therapy.251 (Level I)
2.
Tibolone may be used as an alternative to estrogen progestogen
therapy for treatment of menopausal symptoms.256 (Level I)
1.
Menopausal hormone therapy is not contraindicated in women
with fibroids, however it may increase the volume and size of
asymptomatic fibroids.252(Level II-3)
2.
Tibolone can be used as an alternative in women with fibroids who
require menopausal hormone therapy.253 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
87
7.3 Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Hypertension
Menopause by itself is a risk factor for hypertension and cardiovascular
disease.254 (Level I)
ET and EPT is not contraindicated in women with well-controlled blood
pressure.255 (Level I)
Section 8: Tibolone
Tibolone is classified as a selective tissue estrogenic activity regulator (STEAR)
as it activates hormonal receptors in a tissue specific manner. It acts similarly
to a combined EPT preparation in treating menopausal symptoms.256 (Level I)
The tissue specific effects of tibolone are:256 (Level I)
•
Estrogenic effects which relieve vasomotor symptoms. It has been shown
to be favourable on the bone, brain and vagina.
•
Progestogenic
effects
on
the
uterine
endometrium
preventing
endometrial activity and hyperplasia.
•
Androgenic effects by decreasing sex hormone binding globulin and
increasing free testosterone. This improves libido and sexual activity.
Tibolone is used as follows:256 (Level I)
•
Women with an intact uterus with absence of periods for one year. If
started earlier, unscheduled bleeding may occur.
Recommendation 36
Menopausal hormone therapy can be recommended for treatment of
menopausal symptoms in women with well controlled blood pressure.255
(Level I)
Menopausal hormone therapy is not contraindicated in women with
well controlled blood pressure.255 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
88
•
Women may transition from continuous combined MHT into tibolone
therapy.
•
Hysterectomised women may go on tibolone, or if the various estrogen
preparations do not suit them.
•
Women with special problems such as endometriosis or fibroids as it has
been shown to have less effect on estrogen dependent growths.
Tibolone has been shown to be more effective than placebo and less effective
than standard dose MHT in controlling vasomotor symptoms, in the Cochrane
review involving 7 RCTs and 1657 women with moderate-quality evidence.253 (Level I)
Tibolone decreases bone turnover and significantly improves bone mineral
density. Over a period of 24 months, tibolone has been shown to decrease
the risk of both vertebral fractures (HR 0.55, 95% CI, 0.41 to 0.74) and nonvertebral fractures (HR 0.74, 95% CI, 0.58 to 0.93). It also decreases the risk
of invasive breast cancer (HR 0.32, 95% CI, 0.13 to 0.80) and colon cancer (HR
0.31, (95% CI, 0.10 to 0.96).257 (Level I)
Women on tibolone may have unscheduled bleeding in the first 3 months of
use which settles with time.258 (Level I)
There is no evidence that tibolone increases the risk of endometrial cancer,
VTE, cardiovascular events and mortality from any cause.254, 258 (Level I)
Initiating tibolone after the age of 60 years is not advised as it can increase the
risk of stroke. The LIFT study of tibolone for the prevention of bone loss and
osteoporotic fractures showed an increase of 4 cases of stroke per 100 women
in their fifties to 13 extra cases of stroke in women in their sixties.258 (Level I)
Tibolone and its metabolites inhibit the formation of active estrogenic
substances and promote the formation of inactive estrogen; it is thus
associated with lesser breast density than conventional MHT preparations.
Although tibolone does not increase breast mammographic density, regular
breast surveillance is still recommended.259 (Level I)
Tibolone is not advised in breast cancer survivors. The Liberate study which
studied the effect of Tibolone on breast cancer survivors showed an increase
in breast cancer recurrence.259 (Level Ib)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
89
Recommendations 37
1.
Post-menopausal women with menopausal symptoms may
be offered tibolone as an alternative to estrogen or estrogen
progestogen therapy.256 (Level I)
2.
Tibolone may also be advised in post-menopausal women:
• who are unable to tolerate menopausal hormone therapy and
for whom sexual health issues and libido are the main areas of
concern.256 (Level I)
• on continuous combined menopausal hormone therapy and
want to transition into tibolone for long term use.256 (Level I)
• with endometriosis or fibroids who need menopausal treatment,
as tibolone has less effect on estrogen stimulated growths.256 (Level I)

1.
Tibolone has estrogenic, progestogenic and androgenic effects and
is similar to a combined estrogen-progestogen preparation.256 (Level I)
2.
Tibolone is effective in controlling vasomotor symptoms, decreases
bone turnover and improves bone mineral density.257 (Level I)
3.
Initiating tibolone after the age of 60 years is not advised as it can
increase the risk of stroke.258 (Level I)
4.
Tibolone is not advised in breast cancer survivors as it has been
shown to increase breast cancer recurrence.259 (Level Ib)
Section 9: Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs)
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) are compounds that exhibit
tissue-specific estrogen receptor (ER) agonist or antagonist activity. SERMs
work on estrogen receptors to either stimulate or negate the effect of estrogen.
SERMs comes under the umbrella of menopausal hormone therapy as it is used
to treat post-menopausal osteoporosis. It is also used as an adjunct therapy
by estrogen positive breast cancer patients due to its receptor antagonistic
action. However, it may exacerbate vasomotor symptoms.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
90
Common SERMs are:
•
Tamoxifen is taken by breast cancer survivors to reduce breast cancer
recurrence. Though it does help improve bone mineral density in postmenopausal women, it may stimulate the uterine endometrium due to its
estrogen receptor (ER) agonist activity, increasing the risk of endometrial
hyperplasia and malignancy.260 (Level III)
•
Raloxifene (RLX) Hydrochloride (HCL) is a second generation SERM
that was developed as an alternative to tamoxifen for the treatment and
prevention of breast cancer.
The multicenter randomised placebo controlled, double blinded Multiple
Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation (MORE) study was a three year study that
looked at the use of raloxifene hydrochloride on the reduction in fractures in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. With 60 mg of Raloxifene HCL, a
55% (95%CI, 0.3-0.7) reduction in new vertebral fractures in women without
prior fractures and a 31% (RR 0.7, 95% CI 06,0.9) reduction in women with
prior fractures was seen.261 (Level I)
Raloxifene decreased the risk of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer by
90% (RR 0.10; 95% CI, 0.04-0.24), but not estrogen receptor-negative invasive
breast cancer (RR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.26-3.0). Among postmenopausal women
with osteoporosis, the risk of invasive breast cancer was decreased by 76%
during 3 years of treatment with raloxifene.262,263 (Level I)
Raloxifene HCL is associated with a 3-fold increase in thromboembolic
phenomenon. Other side effects include hot flashes, leg cramps, and peripheral
edema.263 (Level I)
In 2002, Malaysia was part of the randomized, double-blinded, placebocontrolled study of the “Efficacy and Safety of Raloxifene 60 mg/day in
Postmenopausal Asian Women” with its results published in 2003.264 (Level I) It
was found that after six months of treatment with RLX HCL there was a:
•
Significant decrease in bone markers (osteocalcin, N-telopeptide)
•
Increase in lumbar spine BMD by 1.9%
•
Significant decrease in total cholesterol by 5.3%
•
A significant decrease in LDL by 7.7%
•
Decrease in triglyceride levels by 1.56%
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
91
Recommendations 38
1.
Raloxifene hydrochloride is recommended for women with postmenopausal osteoporosis as it causes a 55% reduction in new
vertebral fractures in women without prior fractures and a 31%
reduction in women with prior fractures, when given over 3 years.261
(Level I)
2.
Raloxifene hydrochloride may be recommended for women with
post-menopausal osteoporosis who are at a higher risk for breast
cancer as it has been shown to decrease estrogen receptor breast
cancer by 90% when given over 3 years.262,263 (Level I)
1.
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) come under the
umbrella of menopausal hormone therapy as it is used to treat postmenopausal osteoporosis.260 (Level III)
2.
Raloxifene hydrochloride over 3 years causes a 55% (95%CI, 0.30.7) reduction in new vertebral fractures in women without prior
fractures and a 31% (RR 0.7, 95% CI 06,0.9) reduction in women with
prior fractures.261 (Level I)
3.
Raloxifene hydrocholoride over 3 years also decreased the risk of
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer by 90% but did not have
an effect on estrogen receptor-negative invasive breast cancer.262,263
(Level I)
The incidence of adverse events like hot flashes and leg cramps were not
significantly different from the placebo group.264 (Level I)
In Malaysia, RLX HCL is mainly indicated for the treatment of postmenopausal
osteoporosis and breast cancer recurrence.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
92
Section 10: Non-hormonal Management of Menopause
Women often explore alternative therapy for the treatment of menopausal
symptoms due to the unwarranted fears of MHT use. The data supporting
alternative therapy for treatment of menopausal symptoms is limited and
remains inconclusive.
However, alternative treatment may be required for patients with a history of
breast cancer and other medical disorders such as coronary artery disease,
liver disease and previous thromboembolic episodes who suffer from specific
symptoms of VMS and GSM.130 (Level I)
10.1 Pharmacological Therapy
Various pharmacological therapies have been used for vasomotor symptoms.
265 (Level I),266 (Level II-1)
•
Clonidine is an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist and an antihypertensive. It
is the only licensed non-hormonal therapy in the United Kingdom for
vasomotor symptoms. Clonidine and venlafaxine were found to be more
effective than placebo when given to breast cancer survivors with hot
flushes for over a period of twelve weeks.266 (Level II-1)
•
Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake receptor inhibitors (SNRIs) such
as venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine.
Venlafaxine at 100 mg / day given for a period of 52 weeks has been
found to be an effective therapy for hot flushes when compared to
placebo.267(Level II-1)
In a short term 8 week study comparing venlafaxine with 17 beta estradiol;
268 (Level II-2)
•
There was significant improvement in vasomotor symptoms with
venlafaxine
•
17 beta estradiol was superior in improving quality of life.
•
Both venlafaxine and 17 beta estradiol improved sleep quality.
•
Serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as paroxetine,
fluoxetine, citalopram and escitalopram.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
93
SSRIs and SNRIs have been shown reduce the frequency and severity of
menopause-associated vasomotor symptoms by 10% to 64%. SSRIs like
fluoxetine and paroxetine should be avoided in breast cancer patients
taking tamoxifen as it diminishes its efficacy.269 (Level I)
•
Antiepileptics such as gabapentin and pregabalin.
Gabapentin is an antiepileptic and used for neuropathic pain. A systematic
review of 13 RCTs revealed that at a dose of 300 mg three times a day,
it reduced the severity and frequency of vasomotor symptoms.270 (Level II-1) At
higher doses of 2400 mg daily, gabapentin was found to be as effective
as conjugated equine estrogen in reducing VMS.270 (Level II-1)
Pregabalin, another anti-epileptic medication at 75 mg twice daily
has also shown to significantly reduce the frequency and severity of
vasomotor symptoms.271 (Level II-1)
Recommendation 39
Symptomatic women with contraindications to the use of
menopausal hormone therapy such as breast cancer and other
medical diseases such as coronary heart disease, liver disease
and previous thromboembolic episodes should be offered
pharmacological therapy such as clonidine, serotonin and
noradrenaline reuptake receptor inhibitors (SNRIs), serotonin
selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and antiepileptics for the
treatment of vasomotor symptoms.130 (Level I)
1.
Alternative therapy is offered to women with a history of breast
cancer and other medical disorders such as coronary artery disease,
liver disease and previous thromboembolic episodes who suffer
from vasomotor symptoms but are unable to take menopausal
hormone therapy.130 (Level I)
2.
Alternative therapy such as clonidine, serotonin and noradrenaline
reuptake receptor inhibitors (SNRIs), serotonin selective reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) and antiepileptics have been shown to improve
frequency and severity of vasomotor symptoms to a varying degree.
266,267,271 (Level II-1), 268 (Level II-2), 269 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
94
10.2 Herbal Products
Isoflavones and phytoestrogen (nonsteroidal compounds that occur naturally
in many plants, fruits, and vegetables that are structurally and functionally
similar to estrogen) have not been found to be more efficacious than placebo
in the treatment of VMS.
A systematic review of RCTs concluded that dietary and supplementary
phytoestrogen may improve hot flushes and vaginal dryness but not night
sweats. However, the quality of this evidence was poor.272 (Level I)
Common isoflavones and phytoestrogen that have had well designed studies
carried out on its effect on menopausal symptoms:
•
Black cohosh. It has not been found to be useful in the treatment of
menopausal symptoms.273 (Level I) A potential safety concern would be its
effect on breast cancer cells and possible hepatotoxicity if ingested in
large volumes.274, 275 (Level I)
•
Red clover. Taking a probiotic together with red clover has been shown
to reduce VMS when compared to placebo.276 (Level I)
•
Soy containing dietary supplements was associated with lower likelihood
of VMS, (OR 0.63, 95% CI, 0.45–0.89), however it should be avoided in
women with ER positive breast cancer.277 (Level I)
•
Chinese herbal therapy is ineffective for the treatment of menopausal
hot flushes.278 (Level I)
•
Evening primrose oil (EPO) is believed to help treat hot flushes. In a placebocontrolled trial on 56 women for 6 months at 500mg per day there was no
significant difference noted when compared to placebo.279 (Level II-1)
Herbal supplements such as isoflavones and phytoestrogens have not
been found to be more efficacious than placebo in the treatment of
vasomotor symptoms.272 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
95
10.3 Supplements
Supplements and their role in the menopause.
•
Vitamin B. Deficiencies in any of the B vitamins can disturb the complex
regulatory network and contribute to adverse health outcomes in the
menopause such as cardiovascular disease, stroke, and dementia.
Inadequate intake, malabsorption, interaction with medication and
alcohol abuse may interfere with vitamin B absorption.280 (Level I), 281 (Level II-3)
•
Vitamin E. 800 IU/day of Vitamin E has very little effect in reducing
hot flushes.282 (Level II-1) When studied alongside gabapentin, Vitamin E was
found to be less effective for hot flushes.283 (Level II-1)
•
Calcium and Vitamin D supplementation is usually recommended for
bone health. The requirements of calcium and vitamin D vary with age
and gender.284 (Level I)
Women above the age of 51 years may need up to 1200 mgs of calcium daily
(combination of dietary calcium and supplements). This had a positive effect
on BMD as well as a modest effect on fracture risk reduction (RR 0.88; 95% CI,
0.83 – 0.95). 284 (Level II-3)
Calcium carbonate absorption is better when taken with meals. However,
absorption may be affected and side effects may be increased in women
with gastric issues. In these patients, calcium citrate is better tolerated and
absorped.285, 286 (Level I)
Calcium intake of 1000 mg daily (combination of dietary calcium and
supplements) and Vitamin D, supplements have not been shown to increase
all-cause or cardiovascular mortality.287, 288 (Level I)
One of the best sources of Vitamin D is through 15 – 30 minutes of direct
sunlight exposure on the skin daily. Adequate supplementation of Vitamin
D is recommended to reduce the risk of fractures and falls. Women below
Recommendation 40
Menopausal women experiencing vasomotor symptoms, are
advised that the use of herbal supplements such as isoflavones
and phytoestrogens for relief of symptoms may not be more
efficacious than placebo.274, 275 (Level I), 276 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
96
the age of 70 years are recommended 600 IU of Vitamin D, whilst 800 IU is
recommended for women over 70 years. Dark skin pigmentation can hamper
the absorption of Vitamin D.284,285 (Level I)
The Institute of Medicine guidelines (2010) has stated that that the optimal
serum 25(OH) vitamin D concentration to maintain skeletal health and reduce
the risk of fractures and falls is 50 ng/mL Patients are at a risk for vitamin D
deficiency at levels of less than 30 ng/mL.285 (Level I)
Recommendations 41
1.
1200 mgs of calcium (a combination of dietary sources and
supplements) is recommended daily for its positive effect on bone
mineral density and fracture risk reduction.284 (Level II-3)
2.
Adequate Vitamin D supplementation to achieve Vitamin D levels
of more than 50 ng/mL is advised in order to maintain skeletal
health and reduce the risk of fractures and falls.285 (Level I)
1.
Vitamin B deficiencies can contribute to adverse health outcomes
in the menopause such as cardiovascular disease, stroke, and
dementia.280 (Level I), 281 (Level II-3)
2.
In post-menopausal women, 1200 mgs of calcium (a combination
of dietary sources and supplements) has a positive effect on bone
mineral density and fracture risk reduction.284 (Level II-3)
3.
Adequate Vitamin D supplementation (600 IU in women below 70
years and 800IU after 70 years) reduces the risk of fracture and
falls.285 (Level I)
4.
The optimum serum 25(OH) vitamin D concentration to maintain
skeletal health with lesser risk of fractures and falls is 50 ng/mL.
Risk of falls are higher with Vitamin D levels of less than 30 ng/mL.
285 (Level 1)
5.
Calcium intake of 1000 mgs daily (combination of dietary calcium
and supplements and Vitamin D supplements have not been shown
to increases all-cause or cardiovascular mortality.287, 288 (Level 1)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
97
10.4 Alternative Therapy
Cognitive behavioural therapy is a goal-oriented psychotherapy that takes a
hands-on practical approach to change patterns of behaviour and thinking.
It can be used for anxiety, sleep issues and to improve mood in menopausal
women. Relaxation techniques, sleep hygiene and enforcing a positive attitude
is recommended to help ease VMS.289 (Level I)
Hypnotherapy is often practised by menopausal women and has been shown
to be useful.289 (Level I)
There are no significant well conducted RCT’s to show that stellate ganglion
block, acupuncture, yoga, or exercise works for vasomotor symptoms.94, 289,
290(Level I), 291 (Level II-1)
Recommendation 42
Women experiencing menopausal symptoms may consider
alternative therapy such as hypnotherapy, cognitive behavioral
therapy, relaxation techniques, sleep hygiene and enforcing positive
attitudes to help ease anxiety, sleep and vasomotor symptoms.289
(Level I)
Alternative therapy such as hypnotherapy, cognitive behavioral therapy,
relaxation techniques, sleep hygiene and enforcing positive attitudes
have shown some beneficial on vasomotor symptoms, anxiety, sleep
and mood.289 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
98
Recommendation 43
Compounded hormones are not recommended for treatment of
menopausal symptoms due to lack of safety and efficacy data.292 (Level I)
Section 11: Compounded Hormones
There is a clear distinction between compounded hormones and bioidentical
hormones.
“Compounded hormones” are hormones which are custom made by a
pharmacist based on a doctor’s order. These hormones are not tested and
approved by the Ministry of Health (MOH) and National Pharmaceutical
Regulatory Agency (NPRA).
The term “bioidentical hormones” should be correctly used on hormones that
are identical in molecular structure to endogenous hormones. Estradiol that
is used in MHT is “bioidentical” while most compounded hormones are not
“bioidentical”.
Compounded hormones are not regulated and lacks standardization and
quality control. There is lack of efficacy studies and labelling which should
provide information on benefits and risks. This leads to concerns about safety,
possibility of overdosing or under dosing.292 (Level I)
There is currently no scientific evidence for prescribing compounded hormones
over conventional menopausal hormone therapy.
There is currently no scientific evidence for prescribing compounded
hormones over conventional menopausal hormone therapy due to the
lack of safety and efficacy data.292 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
99
Section 12: Body Identical Hormones
The word “body identical hormones” has been introduced to define exact
duplicates of hormones which are usually synthesized by the human ovary
and adrenal glands i.e., estradiol, estriol, estrone, progesterone, DHEA and
testosterone. These hormones are seen as relatively safer hormones due its
similarity of structure and behaviour to our own body hormones. Of these
hormones, the progesterone body identical hormone is the most important.
Micronised progesterone has been shown not to have an effect on the lipid
and glucose metabolism and on vascular tone, fluid retention, weight gain and
acne.293 (Level I)
Recent studies on the use of MHT in younger menopausal women have used
body identical hormones such as the oral and transdermal estradiol and oral
micronised progesterone. In these women, the risk of cardiovascular disease,
stroke, VTE and breast cancer was not increased.146(Level I), 217 (Level I)
These hormones are considered safe and FDA approved.
Recommendation 44
Body-identical hormones are safe hormones due its similarity of
structure and behavior to own body hormones. The use of oral and
transdermal estradiol and oral micronised progesterone has not
been shown to increase the risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke,
venous thromboembolism and breast cancer.146, 217(Level I)
1.
The word “body identical hormones” are precise duplicates of
estradiol, estriol, estrone, progesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone
acetate (DHEA) and testosterone hormones which are usually
synthesized by the human ovary and adrenal glands.293 (Level I)
2.
The use of body identical hormones such as the oral and transdermal
estradiol and oral micronised progesterone does not increase the
risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke, VTE and breast cancer.146, 217(Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
100
Section 13: Religious Perspectives
Malaysia is a multi–ethnic and a multicultural country. Many ethnic groups in
Malaysia maintain separate cultural identities. This section will briefly deal with
Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, and Hinduism. All religions welcome menopause
positively and this section is to share the views of the various religions with
regards to menopause.
Christianity
Christianity understands that the process of menopause is part of God’s
design and that the postmenopausal woman should emerge stronger, more
assured, and content. Being older allows time for freedom for service. During
the menopause transition period (which can be challenging), the Christian
woman can turn to God’s words for wisdom to help her and her family. The
Christian woman can be assured that God will never leave her or forsake her.
If she is married, the Christian woman should confide in her husband and
communicate about her menopausal symptoms especially if she is not able to
cope. In God’s teachings, husbands are to love their wives and to cherish them
always. Menopausal women should stay healthy and focus on overall health
and not on body shape. She should exercise, not overeat, be in regular contact
with her doctor and consider treatment like hormone therapy if she so needs
it.294 (Level II-3)
Hinduism
Hinduism views the begininng and the end of menstrual cycles positively.
When a girl gets her first menses, a celebration would be held by worshipping
the Fertility Gods, and the girl be given gifts. Unfortunately the monthly
menses is considered a taboo and she is not allowed to enter temples and
to participate in any religious acts.295 (Level II-3) Many women in the reproductive
age group take hormones to delay their periods if they need to attend temple
ceremonies. Thus, menopause is a welcome sign for Hindu women. Women can
now enter temples and are able to perform religious rituals. The menopause is
celebrated as a period of freedom, experience, and wisdom. Taking MHT is not
a contraindication as overall health is paramount.
Buddhism
In Buddhism, menopause represents a new phase of life. The menopausal
woman undergoes an energetic, psychological and spiritual shift and is born
as a “wise woman”. During this period, Buddhism teaches women to revisit
earlier parts of their lives that were left unexamined, or any wounds which
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
101
were left unattended. Buddhist women are taught that as the reproductive
aspect of their physical body winds down, the spiritual aspects increase and
would could continue to deepen for the rest of their lives. Menopause is much
awaited for by the Buddhist woman.296 (Level II-3)
Islam
Menopause is welcomed by the Muslim woman. The lack of monthly menstrual
bleeding gives them the freedom to perform religious activities (BAK).
Aishah, the wife of the Prophet, once said that when women reached 50 years
of age, they would be out of the menstrual age and would not deliver babies
anymore.
In the Al-Quran, from Surah An-Nur states, “Such elderly women are past the
prospect of marriage, there is no blame on them if they lay aside their (outer)
garments, provided they make not wanton display of their beauty; but it is
best for them to be modest; and Allah is One Who sees and knows all things.”
This verse from the Quran refers to the older woman and menopause. They
are free to perform their religious responsibilities for Allah knows and sees
everything.
On 14th June 1998, the National Fatwa Council concluded on the following
issues regarding MHT for menopausal women:297 (Level III)
What is the Islamic perspective on menopause and HT?
•
It is permissible to use MHT derived from the urine of pregnant horses.
Characteristics of najis (colour, taste and smell) are removed after
hormonal extraction.
•
The transdermal method will prevent water from passing onto skin
and must be removed before the bath cleaning from hadas (menstrual
bleeding or after sex).
•
Bleeding while on MHT is considered as hayd (menses) and thus all rules
regarding menses apply.
Can women pray (and/or perform other religious activities) when there is
vaginal bleeding (due to MHT)?
MHT is taken with the intention of taking care of their health so that they
can perform their duties towards the husbands and families.298 (Level III) Just like
women with monthly menses before menopause, Muslim women cannot
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
102
perform religious activities like the solat or read the Quran if they have cylical
bleeds while on MHT. The above religious rulings would apply.
“And they (women) have rights (over their husbands as regards living expenses)
similar (to their husbands) over them (as regards obedience and respect) to
what is reasonable.” (Al-Baqarah: 228)299 (Level III)
Permission from the husband is a must before starting on MHT. This is to avoid
suspicion from the husband.
During the perimenopausal period, women sometimes face the problem of
prolonged periods due to dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB). If a muslim
woman continues to bleed beyond two weeks (14 days), they are allowed
to perform the solat. They have to clean the vaginal area and cover it with
a sanitary pad or cloth. They would then take the wudhuk (ablution) and
perform the solat as soon as possible. They should do this everytime before
solat. The doctor should be consulted to determine the cause of the abnormal
bleeding so that the woman may receive the appropriate treatment.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
103
List of Tables
Number
Title
1.
The Perimenopause Symptoms
6
2.
Causes of POI
10
3.
Risk Factors for Osteoporosis
17
4.
Detailed History
23
5.
General Examination
24
6.
Recommended Investigations
24
7.
Lifestyle Changes that are Important in the Menopause
26
8.
Different types and doses of estrogen and
32
progestogen in various MHT in Malaysia
9.
Menopausal Hormone Therapy Preparations
35
Available in Malaysia
10.
Possible side effects of estrogen and progestogen
43
preparations
11.
Management of Breakthrough Bleeding (BTB)
46
12.
Progestogens in Menopausal Hormone Therapy
49
13.
During the follow up visit of patients on MHT
52
14.
Reasons for earlier follow up of patients on MHT
53
15.
Factors to be considered if a patient remains
53
symptomatic whilst on MHT
16.
Reasons for stopping / continuing MHT
55
17.
Age Specific Risks for Cardiovascular Disease.
64
The Estrogen Window. A combined analysis of
two WHI trials
18.
Age specific risks for Stroke with MHT use
65
19.
Age specific risks for VTE with MHT use
66
20.
Risk factors for breast cancer
75
21.
Age specific risks for All-Cause Mortality with MHT use
84
22.
Age specific risks for Global Health Index with MHT use
84
Page
Number
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
104
Appendix 1
Example of Search Strategy
1.
MENOPAUSE/
2.
menopaus*.tw.
3.
premenopaus*.tw.
4.
PERIMENOPAUSE/
5.
POSTMENOPAUSE/
6.
(premature ovarian insufficiency).tw.
7.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8.
VASOMOTOR/
9.
(hot flush).tw.
10. (climacteric symptom*).tw.
11.
(genitourinary syndrom*).tw.
12.
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES/
13. thromboembolism.tw.
14. (venous thromboembolism).tw.
15.
osteoporosis.tw.
16. sarcopenia.tw.
17.
mood.tw.
18. stroke.tw
19. metabolic.tw.
20. cognitive.tw.
21.
skin.tw.
22. hair.tw.
23. dentition.tw.
24. t$$th.tw.
25. (special sense*).tw.
26. QOL/
27. (quality of life).tw.
28. 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or
23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27
29. 7 and 28
30. lifestyle.tw.
31. 7 and 30
32. HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY/
33. (menopaus* hormon* therapy).tw.
34. (hormon* replace* therapy).tw.
35. (hormon* therapy).tw.
36. MHT.tw.
37. HRT.tw.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
105
38. 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 35 or 37
39. 7 and 38
40. 28 and 38
41. breast.tw.
42. cancer.tw.
43. ovarian.tw.
44. lung.tw.
45. colon.tw.
46. cervix.tw.
47. endometrium.tw.
48. 41 or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45 or 46 or 47
49. 38 and 48
50. endometriosis.tw.
51.
fibroid.tw.
52. hypertension.tw.
53. 50 or 51 or 52
54. 38 and 53
55. tibolone.tw.
56. (selective $estrogen receptor modulator).tw.
57. serms.tw.
58. 55 or 56 or 57
59. 7 and 58
60. THERAPEUTICS/
61. therap*.tw.
62. treatment*.tw.
63. herbal.tw
64. supplement*.tw.
65. (alternative therap*).tw.
66. (compound hormon*).tw.
67. 60 or 61 or 62 or 63 or 64 or 65 or 66
68. 7 and 67
69. religio*.tw.
70. 7 and 69
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
106
Appendix 2
Questions for Search Strategy Table
1.
How is irregular bleeding during the perimenopause managed?
•
local examination
•
blood investigations
•
radiological tests
•
hormonal therapy
2.
What would be the best treatment for women with premature ovarian
insufficiency to prevent long term sequelae?
3.
What is the most effective treatment for symptomatic menopausal
women with the following problems?
•
perimenopausal symptoms
•
vasomotor symptoms
•
mood disturbances
•
genitourinary syndrome of the menopause
•
osteoporosis and sarcopenia
•
metabolic disorders
•
skin
•
cognition
4.
What are the risks of menopausal hormone therapy to the following
areas?
•
cardiovascular disease
•
venous thromboembolism
•
stroke
•
breast cancer
•
other cancers
5.
In which group of women should the following be used?
•
oral menopausal hormone therapy
•
non-oral menopausal hormone therapy
•
vaginal estrogen therapy
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
107
6.
What is the ideal menopausal hormone therapy for the following
symptomatic women?
•
women who have had a hysterectomy
•
women with an intact uterus
•
women who are perimenopausal and within 1 year of menopause
•
women who are after 1 year of menopause
•
obese women
•
women with hypertriglyceridemia and active gall bladder disease
•
women with known thrombophilia such as Factor V Leiden mutation
•
women with higher risk of venous thromboembolism
7.
What is the association of menopausal hormone therapy and breast
cancer?
•
With estrogen only use
•
With estrogen and progestogen use
•
In women with breast cancer
•
In women with family history of cancer
8.
Is there a mandatory time limit for menopausal hormone therapy use?
9.
What is the role of the following in treating menopausal symptoms?
•
Tibolone
•
SERMs
•
Non-hormonal management
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
108
Appendix 3
Menopause Questionnaire
Developed by the Working Committee of the Clinical Practice Guidelines for
Menopause Management in Malaysia
This simple guideline is aimed to help health care workers to evaluate a woman
going through the menopausal change and to track their progress with lifestyle
changes, non-hormonal therapies and menopausal hormone therapy.
Symptoms vary in every woman. The symptomatology chart serves to
objectively evaluate a woman during hormonal or non-hormonal treatment.
Date:_____________________
Name: ________________________________________ Age: _____________
NRIC / Passport: _________________________________________________
Height: ____________Weight: _______________ BMI: ___________________
Last known period:_____________________Period cycles: regular / irregular
Number of children:______ Last child birth:________ Miscarriages:________
1.
Have you had any gynaecological problems before?
o
Fibroids
o
Adenomyosis
o
Ovarian cysts
o
Heavy periods
o
Others: If yes, please specify ____________________
2.
Have you had any surgery on your uterus or ovaries? _______________
If yes, please specify __________________________________________
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
109
3.
Do you have any of these medical problems?
o
High blood pressure
o
Diabetes
o
High cholesterol levels
o
Coronary heart disease
o
Cancer
o
Blood clotting problems
o
Others: If yes please specify____________________________________
4.
Are you on any medication?
If yes, please specify_______________________________________________
5.
Is there a family history of the following?
o
High blood pressure
o
Diabetes
o
High cholesterol levels
o
Coronary heart disease
o
Cancer
o
Blood clotting problems
o
Others: If yes, please specify ___________________________________
6.
Are you on any of the following supplements?
o
Multivitamins
o
Fish Oil
o
Calcium
o
Vitamin D
o
Herbal supplements for menopause
o
Others: If yes, please specify____________________________________
7.
Would you be willing to consider menopausal hormone therapy if needed?
_______________________________________________________________
Please indicate if you are bothered by any of these symptoms and to what extent.
0 = Not at all
1 = It bothers me a little
2 = I am bothered by these symptoms
3 = These symptoms are interfering with my quality of life
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
110
Symptoms
0
1
2
3
Irregular periods (period intervals which
are shorter or longer)
Hot flushes
Night sweats (sweating at night)
Weight gain (especially at midriff)
Abdominal bloating
Sleeping problems
Palpitations (stronger & loud heart beat)
Tiredness
(unable to do normal daily activity)
Loss of head hair
More hair over the face
Change in skin texture
Joint and muscle pains
Heaviness in the head
Headaches
Breathing difficulties
Moody and feeling down
Anxiety
Fogginess (forgetfulness)
Concentration problems
Feeling tense and nervous
Loss of interest in many things
Crying spells
Irritability
Dry skin
Vaginal dryness or irritation
Loss of interest in sex
Bleeding with sexual activity
Increase in urinary tract or
vaginal infections
Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool for Asians (OSTA)
Age
(Yr)
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69
70-74
75-79
80-84
85-89
Weight (kg)
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69
70-74
75-79
Low Risk
Moderate Risk
High Risk
Appendix 4
OSTA Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool for Asians 89 (Level I)
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
112
Appendix 5
Benefits and Risks of MHT use in women aged 50 – 59 years
Updated summary of the effects of orally administered CEE alone or combined
with MPA in women ages 50 to 59 years during intervention phase of WHI. In
women between 50 – 59 years of age.131 (Level I)
E: estrogen; E+P: estrogen-progestin;
Section 5.6 (Benefits and Risks) refers to the above chart with detailed
explanation of the effect of MHT on various parameters in Section 6.
Number of women per 1000 per 5 years of use
Coronary heart disease
a
b
c
d
e
f
h
k
j
i
p
u
t
q
v
w
r
n
s
l
g
Invasive breast cancer
Deep vein thrombosis
Colo-rectal cancer
All fractures
Hip fractures
All-cause mortality
Risks
Benefits
Postmenopausal women (50-59 years of age)
Diabetes
Lung cancer
Pulmonary embolism
Stroke
15
12.5
10
7.5
5
2.5
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
E
E+P
m
Endometrial cancer
o
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
113
Appendix 6
The Types of MHT preparations
(Source: de Villiers, T.J. et al. (2013). Updated 2013 International Menopause
Society recommendations on menopausal hormone therapy and preventive
strategies for midlife health. Climacteric.16(3), 316-37) 97 (Level Ib)
Combined therapy without tablet break
No bleeding at end of cycle
Day 14
Day 14
Sequential therapy without tablet break
Regular bleeding at end of cycle
Sequential HRT
Continuous Combined HRT
Progestogen
Progestogen
Estrogen
Estrogen
No tablet break
No bleeding as no uterus
Continuous Estrogen
Estrogen
Uterus
Uterus
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
114
D. Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
AD
Alzheimer’s Disease
AFC
Antral Follicle Count
AMH
Anti-Müllerian Hormone
AUB
Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
AMS
Australasian Menopause Society
BMD
Bone Mineral Density
BMI
Body Mass Index
BMT
Bone Turnover Markers
BMS
British Menopause Society
BTB
Breakthrough Bleeding
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CEE
Conjugated Equine Estrogen
CHD
Coronary Heart Disease
CI
Confidence Interval
CLEAR
New South Wales Cancer Lifestyle and Evaluation of Risk
COC
Combined Oral Contraceptives
CGHFBC
Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer
CVD
Cardiovascular Disease
DES
Diethylstilbestrol
DHEA
Dehydroepiandrosterone Acetate
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
115
Abbreviation
Description
DG
Developmental Group
DM
Diabetes Mellitus
DOPS
Danish Osteoporosis Prevention Study
DVT
Deep Vein Thrombosis
DUB
Dysfunctional Uterine Bleeding
EMA
European Medicines Agency
EMAS
European Menopause and Andropause Society
EPO
Evening Primrose Oil
ER
Estrogen Receptor
ET
Estrogen Therapy
EPT
Estrogen and Progestogen therapy
FIGO
International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics
FSFI
Female Sexual Function Index
FSH
Follicular Stimulating Hormone
GCP
Good Clinical Practice
GQoL
Global Quality of Life
gm
gram (s)
GSM
Genitourinary Syndrome of the Menopause
HABITS
Hormonal Replacement Therapy After Breast Cancer-
Is It Safe?
HCL
Hydrochloride
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
116
Abbreviation
Description
HDL
High Density Lipoprotein
HMB
Heavy Menstrual Bleeding
HOMA-IR
Homeostatic Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance
HR
Hazard Ratio
HRQoL
Health-Related Quality of Life
HT
Hormone Therapy
i.e.
That is
IMS
International Menopause Society
IU
International Units
KEEPS-Cog
Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Cognitive and
Affective Study
LDL
Low Density Lipoprotein
LNG-IUS
Levonorgestrel Intrauterine System
Lp(a)
Lipoprotein A
MetS
Metabolic Syndrome
mg
milligram(s)
mcg
microgram (s)
MHT
Menopausal Hormone Therapy
MOH
Ministry of Health
MORE
Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation
MPA
Medroxy Progesterone Acetate
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
117
Abbreviation
Description
MsQoL
Menopause-Specific Quality of Life
ng/ml
nanograms per milli litres
nmol/L
nanomoles per Litre
NHMS
Malaysian National Health and Morbidity Survey
25 (OH)
25 hydroxy
NPRA
National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency
PAI-1
Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1
PALM-COEIN
Polyps, adenomyosis, leiomyoma, malignancy, coagulation
disorders, ovulatory dysfunction, endometrial causes,
iatrogenic cause and not otherwise classified.
PE
Pulmonary Embolism
PI
Pulsatality Index
PMS
Pre Menstrual Symptoms
POI
Premature Ovarian Insufficiency
QoL
Quality of Life
RC
Review Committee
RCOG
Royal College of Obstetrician and Gynecologists
RCT
Randomised Control Trial
RLX
Raloxifene
RG
Review Group
RR
Relative Risk
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
118
Abbreviation
Description
SERMs
Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators
SSRIs
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
SNRIs
Serotonin and Noradrenaline Reuptake Receptors
STEAR
Selective Tissue Estrogenic Activity Regulator
STRAW
Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop
Tab
Tablet (s)
TIA
Transient Ischemic Attack
T1DM
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
T2DM
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
VHIS
Vaginal Health Index Score
VMI
Vaginal Maturation Index
VMS
Vasomotor Symptoms
VTE
Venous ThromboEmbolism
WHI
Women’s Health Initiative
WHO
World Health Organisation
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
119
E.
References
1.
Abdridged Life Tables Malaysia 2019-2021. Department of Statistics Malaysia,
Official Portal. 2021 (Accessed at: https://www.dosm.gov.my).
2.
Ismael, NN. A study on the menopause in Malaysia. Maturitas. 1994;19(3):205209.
3.
National Strategic Plan for Non-Communicable Disease. 2010-2014.
(Accessed at: https://www.iccp-portal.org/malaysia-national-strategic-plannon-communicable-disease-2010-2014).
4.
Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Osteoporosis 2012. Ministry
of Health Malaysia. Revised 2015.
5.
Malaysia Mental Health Association (MMHA) 2019. (Accessed at: http://
mmha.org.my).
6.
Azizah, Ab M, Nor Saleha IT, Noor Hashimah A, et al. Malaysian National
Cancer Registry Report 2007-2011, Malaysia Cancer Statistics, Data and
Figure. 2016. (Accessed at: https://www.crc.gov.my/wp-content/uploads/
documents/report/MNCRRrepor2007-2011.pdf).
7.
Damodaran P, Subramaniam R, Omar SZ, et al. Profile of a Menopause Clinic
in an urban population in Malaysia. Singapore Med J. 2000;4(9):431-435.
8.
Abdullah B, Moize B, Ismail BA, et al. Prevalence of menopausal symptoms in
Malaysian menopause women. Med J Malaysia. 2017;72:94-99.
9.
Wong LP, Liyana AH. A survey of knowledge and perceptions of menopause
among young to middle-aged women in Federal Territory, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. JUMNEC. 2007;10(2):25-30.
10.
WHO Scientific Group. Research on the Menopause in the 1990s: report of
a WHO scientific group. World Health Organization. 1996. (Accessed at:
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/41841).
11.
Harlow SD, Gass M, Hall JE, et al. Executive summary of the Stages of
Reproductive Aging Workshop + 10: addressing the unfinished agenda of
staging reproductive aging. Menopause. 2012;19(4):387-395.
12.
Robertson DM, Lee CH, Baerwald A. Interrelationships among reproductive
hormones and antral follicle count in human menstrual cycles. Endocr
Connect. 2016;5(6):98–107.
13.
Mishra GD, Kuh D. Health symptoms during midlife in relation to menopausal
transition: British prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2012;344:e402.
14.
Goldstein SR, Lumsden MA. Abnormal uterine bleeding in perimenopause.
Climacteric 2017;20(5):414-420.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
120
15.
Khrouf M, Terras K. Diagnosis and management of formerly called
“dysfunctional
uterine
bleeding”
according
to
PALM-COEIN
FIGO
Classification and the new guidelines.2014;64(6):388-393.
16.
Depypere H, Inki P. The levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system for
endometrial protection during estrogen replacement therapy: a clinical
review. Climacteric. 2015;18(4):470-482.
17.
Coulam CB, Adamson SC, Annegers JF. Incidence of premature ovarian
failure. Obstet. Gynecol. 1986;67:604.
18.
Nguyen HH, Milat F, Vincent A. Premature ovarian insufficiency in general
practice: Meeting the needs of women. AFP. 2017;46(6):360-366.
19.
De Vos M, Devroey P, Fauser BCJM. Primary ovarian insuﬃciency. Lancet.
2010;376:911-912.
20.
Baber RJ, Panay N, Fenton A. IMS Recommendations on women’s midlife
health and menopause hormone therapy. Climacteric. 2016;19(2):109-150.
21.
Iwase A, Nakamura T, Osuka S et al. Anti- Mullerian hormone as a marker of
ovarian reserve: What have we learned and what should we know? Reprod
Med Biol. 2015;15(3): 127 -136.
22.
Webber L, Davies M, Anderson R, et al. ESHRE guideline: Management of
women with premature ovarian insufficiency. Hum Reprod. 2016;31(5):926–
937.
23.
Herber-Gast GCM, Brown WJ, Mishra GD. Hot flushes and night sweats are
associated with coronary heart disease risk in midlife: a longitudinal study.
BJOG. 2015;122:1560-1567.
24.
Thurston RC, Kuller LH, Edmundowicz D, et al. History of hot flashes and aortic
calcification among post-menopausal women. Menopause. 2010;17:256-261.
25.
Crandall CJ, Aragaki A, Cauley JA, et al. Associations of menopausal
vasomotor symptoms with fracture incidence. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2015;100:524-534.
26.
Maki PM. Verbal memory and menopause. Maturitas. 2015;82:288-290.
27.
Freeman EW, Samuel MD, Liu L, et al. Hormones and Menopausal Status as
Predictors of Depression in Women in Transition to Menopause. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2004;63(4):385-390.
28.
Nur Zuraida Zainal. Depressive Symptoms in Middle Aged Women in
Peninsula Malaysia. Asia-Pacific J of Public Health. 2008;20(4):360-369.
29.
Portman DJ, Gass MLS. Genitourinary syndrome of the menopause: new
terminology for vulvovaginal atrophy from the International Society for
the study of Women’s Sexual Health and the North American Menopause
Society. Menopause. 2014;21:1-6.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
121
30.
Dennerstein L, Dudley EC, Hopper JL, et al. A prospective population-based
study of menopausal symptoms. Obstet Gynecol. 2000;96(3):351-358.
31.
Chua Y, Limpaphayom KK, Cheng B, et al. Genitourinary syndrome of
menopause in five Asian countries: results from the Pan-Asian REVIVE
survey. Climacteric. 2017;20(4):367-373.
32.
Rajadurai J, Lopez EA, Rahajoe AU, et al. Women’s cardiovascular health:
perspectives from South East Asia. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2012;9:464-477.
33.
Di Carlo A, Lamassa M, Baldereschi M, et al. Sex differences in the Clinical
Presentation, Resource Use, and 3-Month Outcome of Acute Stroke in
Europe. Data from a Multicenter Multinational Hospital-Based Registry.
Stroke. 2003;34:1114-1119.
34.
Hou TL, Nordin R, Wan Ahmad WA, et al. Sex Differences in Acute Coronary
Syndrome in a Multi-Ethnic Asian Population. Results of the Malaysian
National Cardiovascular Disease Database-Acute Coronary Syndrome
(NCVD-ACS) Registry. Global Heart. 2014;9(4):381-390.
35.
Lerner DJ, Kannel WB. Patterns of coronary heart disease morbidity and
mortality in the sexes: a 26-year follow-up of the Framingham population.
Am Heart J. 1986;111(2), 383-390.
36.
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Women
2016 (2nd Edition). Ministry of Health Malaysia, Academy of Medicine of
Malaysia, National Heart Association of Malaysia. (Accessed at: http://www.
moh.gov.my).
37.
Newson L. Menopause and cardiovascular disease. Post Reproductive Health.
2018;24(1):44-49.
38.
Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual
blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for
one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903-1913.
39.
Ridker PM, Rifai N, Cook NR, et al. Non-HDL cholesterol, apolipoproteins A-I
and B100, standard lipid measures, lipid ratios, and CRP as risk factors for
cardiovascular disease in women. JAMA. 2005;294(3):326-333.
40.
Mack WJ, Slater CC, Xiang M, et al. Elevated subclinical atherosclerosis
associated with oophorectomy is related to time since menopause rather
than type of menopause. Fertil Steril. 2004;82(2):391-397.
41.
Harvey RE, Coffman KE, Miller VM. Women-specific factors to consider in
risk, diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular disease. Women’s Health
(Lond). 2015;11(2):239–257.
42.
Agrawal S, Mehta PK, Bairey Merz CN. Cardiac Syndrome X – Update. Cardiol
Clin. 2014;32(3):463-478.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
122
43.
Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al. Effect of potentially modifiable risk factors
associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART
study): a case control study. Lancet. 2004;364(9438)937-952.
44.
Reeves MJ, Bushnell CD, Howard G, et al. Sex differences in stroke:
epidemiology, clinical presentation, medical care and outcomes. Lancet
Neurol. 2008;7(10):915-926.
45.
Lisabeth L, Bushnell C. Menopause and Stroke: An epidemiological review.
Lancet Neurol. 2012;11(1):82-91.
46.
Alkayed NJ, Murphy SJ, Traystman RJ, et al. Neuroprotective effects of
female gonadal steroids in reproductively senescent female rats. Stroke.
2000;31(1):161-168.
47.
Feigin VL, Lawes CM, Bennett DA, et al. Stroke epidemiology: a review of
population-based studies of incidence, prevalence, and case-fatality in the
late 20th century. Lancet Neurol. 2003;2(1):43-53.
48.
Annual Report of the Malaysian Stroke Registry. 2009 – 2016. Zariah A
A,Norsima NS (ed) Assessed at http://www.macr.org.my/nneur.
49.
Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, et al. Risks and benefits of estrogen
plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results
from the Women’s Health Initiative randomised controlled trial. JAMA.
2002;288(3):321-333.
50.
Canonico M, Plu-Bureau G, O’Sullivan MJ, et al. Age at menopause, reproductive
history, and venous thromboembolism risk among postmenopausal women:
the Women’s Health Initiative hormone therapy clinical trials. Menopause.
2014;21(3):214-220.
51.
Clinical
Practice
Guidelines.
Prevention
and
treatment
of
Venous
Thromboembolism 2013. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Malaysian Society Of
Haematology, National Heart Association of Malaysia, Academy of Medicine
Malaysia. (Accessed at: http://www.moh.gov.my).
52.
Lutsey PL, Virnig BA, Durham SB, et al. Correlates and consequences of
venous thromboembolism: The Iowa Women’s Health Study. Am J Public
Health. 2010; 100(8):1506–1513.
53.
Simon T, Beau Yon de Jonage-Canonico M, Oger E, et al. Indicators of lifetime
endogenous estrogen exposure and risk of venous thromboembolism. J
Thrombosis & Hemostasis. 2006;4(1):71-76.
54.
Finkelstein JS. Osteoporosis. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil textbook of
medicine. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2004;pp1547–1555.
55.
Riggs BL, Melton III LJ. The prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. N Engl
J Med. 1992;327(9):620–627.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
123
56.
Finkelstein JS, Brockwell SE, et al. Bone Mineral Density Changes during the
Menopause Transition in a Multiethnic Cohort of Women. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2008;93(3):861–868.
57.
Marshall D, Johnell O, Wedel H. Meta-analysis of how well measures of
bone mineral density predict occurrence of osteoporotic fractures. BMJ.
1996;312(7041):1254–1259.
58.
Physician’s Guide to Prevention and Treatment of Osteoporosis: National
Osteoporosis Foundation 1999.
59.
Metter EJ, Conwit R, Tobin J, et al. Age-associated loss of power and strength
in the upper extremities in women and men. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
1997;52(5):B267–B276.
60.
Taaffe DR, Henwood TR, Nalls MA, et al. Alterations in muscle attenuation
following detraining and retraining in resistance-trained older adults.
Gerontology. 2009;55(2):217-23.
61.
Lexell J. Human aging, muscle mass, and fiber type composition. J Gerontolol
A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1995;50:11-16.
62.
Carr MC. The emergence of the metabolic syndrome with menopause. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88(6):2404–2411.
63.
Grundy SM, Brewer HB Jr., Cleeman JI, et al. Definition of metabolic
syndrome: report of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute/American
Heart Association Conference on Scientific Issues Related to Definition.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004;24(2):e13–e18.
64.
Davies SR, Castelo-Branco C, Chedraui P, et al. Writing group of the
International Menopause Society for World Menopause Day 2012.
Understanding weight gain at menopause. Climacteric. 2012;15(5):419-29.
65.
Sternfeld B, Wang H, Quesenberry CP Jr., et al. Physical activity and changes
in weight and waist circumference in midlife women: findings from the study
of women’s health across the nation. Am J Epidemiol. 2004;160(9):912-22.
66.
Lobo RA. Metabolic syndrome after menopause and the role of hormones.
Maturitas. 2008;60(1):10-18.
67.
Kuh D, Cooper R, Moore A, et al. Age at menopause and lifetime cognition:
Findings from a British birth cohort study. Neurology. 2018;90(19):e1673-e1681.
68.
Ryan J, Scali J, Carriere I, et al. Impact of a premature menopause on cognitive
function in later life. BJOG. 2014;121(13):1729-1739.
69.
Whitner RA, Sidney S, Selby J, et al. A 15-year-old longitudinal study of blood
pressure and risk of dementia in late life. Neurology. 2005;64(2):277-281.
70.
Brincat MP, Baron YM, Galea R. Estrogen and the skin. Climacteric.
2005;8(2):110-123.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
124
71.
Thornton MJ. Estrogen and the aging skin. Dermatoendocrinol. 2013;5(2):264270.
72.
Riedel-Baima B, Reidel A. Female pattern hair loss may be triggered by low
estrogen to androgen ratio. Maturitas. 2009;42(1):13-16.
73.
Dutt P, Chaudhary S, Kular P. Oral Health and menopause: a comprehensive
review on current knowledge and associated dental management. Ann Med
Health Sci Res. 2013;3(3):320-323.
74.
Forabosco A, Criscuolo M, Coukos G, et al. Efficacy of hormone replacement
therapy in postmenopausal women with oral discomfort. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol. 1992;73(5):570–574.
75.
Suri V, Suri V. Menopause and oral health. J Midlife Health:2014 July –
Sept;5(3):115-120.
76.
Truong S, Cole N, Stapleton F. Sex Hormones and the dry eyes. Clin Exp
Optom. 2014;97(4):324-336.
77.
Zetterberg M. Age-related eye disease and gender. Maturitas. 2016;83:19-26.
78.
Vingerling JR, Dielemans I, Witteman JCM, et al. Macular degeneration and
early menopause: a case-control study. BMJ. 1995;310(6994):1570-1571.
79.
Hamdan AL, Ziade G, Tabet G, et al. Vocal Symptoms and Acoustic Findings
in Menopausal Women in Comparison to Pre-Menopause Women with Body
Mass Index as a Confounding Variable. Menopausal Med. 2017;23(2):117-123.
80.
Svedbrant J, Bark R, Hultcrantz M, et al. Hearing decline in menopausal
women – a-10 year follow-up. Acta Otolaryngol. 2015;135(8):807-813.
81.
Temmel AF, Quint C, Schickinger-Fischer B, et al. Characteristics of olfactory
disorders in relation to major causes of olfactory loss. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2002;128(6):35-41.
82.
Delilbasi C, Cehiz T, Akal UK et al. Evaluation of gustatory function in
postmenopausal women. Br Dent J. 2003;194(8):447-449.
83.
Karacam Z, Seker E. Factors associated with menopausal symptoms and
their relationship with quality of life among Turkish women. Maturitas.
2007;58:75-82.
84.
Avis NE, Ory M, Mathews KA. Health related quality of life in a multi-ethnic
sample of middle aged women: Study of Women’s Health across the Nation
(SWAN). Med Care. 2003;41(11):1262-1276.
85.
Avis NE, Colvin A, Bromberger JT. Change in health-related quality of life
over the menopausal transition in a multi-ethnic cohort of middle aged
women: Study of Women’s health Across the Nation (SWAN). Menopause.
2009;16(5):860-869.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
125
86.
Whitely J, DiBonaventura MC, Wagner JS, et al. The impact of Menopausal
Symptoms on Quality of Life, Productivity and Economic Outcomes. J
Women’s Health. 2013;22(11):983-990.
87.
Kaur K. Menopausal Hormone Therapy: Practice essentials, overview and
effects of menopause. Medscape. 2018. (Accessed at: http://emedicine.
medscape.com/article/276104).
88.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Menopause Full
Guideline – Clinical Guideline Methods, Evidence and Recommendations.
2015. (Accessed at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng23/evidence/fullguideline-pdf-559549261).
89.
Koh LK, Sedrine WB, Torralba TP, et al. Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool
for Asians (OSTA) Research Group. Osteoporosis Int. 2001;12(8):699-705.
90.
Dubnov-Raz G, Pines A, Berry, EM. Diet and lifestyle in managing
postmenopausal obesity. Climacteric. 2007;10(2):38-41.
91.
Sturdee DW, Pines A. Updated IMS recommendations on postmenopausal
hormone therapy and preventive strategies for midlife health. Climacteric.
2011;14(1):302-320.
92.
Sternfeld B, Guthrie KA, Ensrud KE, et al. Efficacy of Exercise for Menopausal
Symptoms: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Menopause. 2014;21(4):330-338.
93.
Skrzypulec V, Dabrowska J, Drosdzo A. The influence of physical activity level
on climacteric symptoms in menopausal women. Climacteric. 2010;13(4):355361.
94.
Daley A, Stokes-Lampard H, Thomas A, et al. Exercise for vasomotor
menopausal symptoms. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;11:CD006108.
95.
Hirshkowitz M, Albert SM, Alessi C, et al. Foundation’s updated sleep duration
recommendations: final report. Sleep Health. 2015;1(4):233-243.
96.
Yazdkhasti M, Simbar M, Abdi F. Empowerment and Coping Strategies in
Menopause Women: A Review. Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2015;17(3):e18944.
97.
de Villiers TJ, Hall JE, Pinkerton JV, et al. Revised Global Consensus Statement
on Menopausal Hormone Therapy. Climacteric. 2016;19(4):313-315.
98.
The Women’s Health Initiative Steering Committee. Effects of Conjugated
Equine Estrogen in Postmenopausal Women with Hysterectomy. JAMA.
2004;291(14):1701-1714.
99.
Manson JE, Aragaki AK, Rossaouw JE, et al. Menopause hormone therapy
and long-term all-cause and cause-specific mortality: the Women’s Health
Initiative randomized trials. JAMA. 2017;318(10):927-938.
100. Ensari TA, Pal L. Update on menopausal hormone therapy. Curr Opin
Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2015; 22(6).
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
126
101.
The NAMS 2017 Hormone Therapy Position Statement Advisory Panel. The
2017 hormone therapy position statement of The North American Menopause
Society. Menopause. 2017;24(7):728-753.
102. MacLennan AH, Broadbent JL, Lester S, et al. Oral estrogen and combined
oestrogen/progestogen therapy versus placebo for hot flushes. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2004;4:CD002978.
103. Torgerson DJ, Bell-Syer SE. Hormone replacement therapy and prevention
of nonvertebral fractures: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. JAMA.
2001;285(22)2891-2897.
104. Cauley JA, Robbins J, Chen Z, et al. Effects of estrogen plus progestin on
risk of fracture and bone mineral density: the Women’s Health Initiative
randomized trial. JAMA. 2003;290(13):1729-1738.
105. Faubion SS, Kuhle CL, Shuster LT, et al. Long-term health consequences
of premature or early menopause and considerations for management.
Climateric. 2015;18(4):483-491.
106. Tao XY, Zuo AZ, Wang JQ et al. Effects of primary ovarian insufficiency and
early natural menopause on mortality: a meta-analysis. Climateric. 2016;19:2736.
107.
Kovanci E, Schutt AK. Premature ovarian failure: clinical presentation and
treatment. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2015;42(1):153-161.
108. Sullivan SD, Sarrel PM, Nelson LM. Hormone replacement therapy in young
women with primary ovarian insufficiency and early menopause. Fertil Steril.
2016;106(7):1588-1599.
109. Sarrel PM, Sullivan SD, Nelson LM. Hormone replacement therapy in
young women with surgical primary ovarian insufficiency. Fertil Steril.
2016;106(7)1580-1587.
110.
Lethaby A, Ayeleke RO, Roberts H. Local estrogen for vaginal atrophy in
postmenopausal women. Cochrane Database Sys Rev. 2016;8:CD001500.
111.
Bank NK. Menopausal Hormone Replacement Therapy. Medscape. 2019.
(Accessed at: https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/276104-overview).
112.
S. Mirkin Evidence on the use of progesterone in menopausal hormone
therapy, Climacteric, 2018; 21:4, 346-354.
113.
Hiroi R, Weyrich G, Koebele SV, et al. Benefits of hormone therapy estrogen
depend on estrogen type: 17β-estradiol and conjugated equine estrogen have
differential effects on cognitive, anxiety-like, and depressive-like behaviours
and increase tryptophan hydroxylase-2 mRNA levels in dorsal raphe nucleus
subregions. Front Neurosci. 2016;10:517.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
127
114.
Vinogradova Y, Coupland C, Hippisley-Cox J. Use of hormone replacement
therapy and risk of venous thromboembolism: nested case control studies
using the QResearch and CPRD databases. BMJ 2019;364:k4810.
115.
Anderson GL, Judd HL, Kaunitz AM, et al. Women’s Health Initiative
Investigators. Effects of estrogen plus progestin on gynecologic cancers and
associated diagnostic procedures: the Women’s Health Initiative randomized
trial. JAMA. 2003;290(13):1739-1748.
116.
Bachmann G, Bouchard C, Hoppe D, et al. Efficacy and safety of low-dose
regimens of conjugated estrogen cream administered vaginally. Menopause.
2009;16(4):719-727.
117.
MIMS Obstetrics & Gynaecology Malaysia. 2019. (Accessed at: www.mims.
com).
118.
Canonico M, Carcaillon L, Plu-Bureau G, et al. Postmenopausal hormone
therapy and risk of stroke: impact of the route of estrogen administration
and type of progestogen. Stroke. 2016;47(7):1734-1741.
119.
Wildemeersch D. Why perimenopausal women should consider to use a
levonorgestrel intrauterine system. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2016;32(8):659-661.
120. Sitruk-Ware R. The levonorgestrel intrauterine system for use in peri- and
postmenopausal women. Contraception. 2007;75(6):S155-160.
121.
Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Menarche,
menopause, and breast cancer risk: individual participant meta-analysis,
including 118,964 women with breast cancer from 117 epidemiological studies.
Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(11):1141-1151.
122. Boardman HM, Hartley L, Eisinga A, et al. Hormone therapy for preventing
cardiovascular disease in postenopausal women. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2015;(3):CD002229.
123. Modena MG. Estrogen and the Heart. Do they help or hurt? How estrogen
impacts the cardiovascular system. SOJ Gynecol Obstet Women’s Health.
2016;2(1).
124. Dey M, Lyttle CR, Pickar JH. Recent insights into the varying activity of
estrogen. Maturitas. 2000;34:S25-S33.
125. Brunner RL, Aragaki A, Barnabei V, et al. Menopausal symptom experience
before and after stopping estrogen therapy in the Women’s Health Initiative
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Menopause. 2010;17(5):946-954.
126. Karim R, Dell RM, Greene DF, et al. Hip fracture in postmenopausal women
after cessation of hormone therapy: results from a prospective study in a
large health management organization. Menopause. 2011;18(11):1172-1177.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
128
127.
Banks E, Beral V, Reeves G, et al. Fracture incidence in relation to the
pattern of use of hormone therapy in postmenopausal women. JAMA.
2004;291(18):2212-2220.
128. Haentjens P, Magaziner J, Colon-Emeric CS, et al. Meta-analysis: excess
mortality after hip fracture among older women and men. Ann Intern Med.
2010;152(6):380-390.
129. Barnabei VM, Cochrane BB, Aragaki AK, et al. Menopausal symptoms and
treatment-related effects of estrogen and progestin in the Women’s Health
Initiative. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;105:1063-1073.
130. Martin KA, Barbieri RL. Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone
therapy. June 2020. UpToDate (Assessed at: https:/www.uptodate.com/
contents/treatment-of-menopausal-symptoms-with-hormone-therapy).
131.
Stuenkel CA, Davis SR, Gompel A, et al. Treatment of Symptoms of the
Menopause: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. The Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2015;100(11):3975-4011.
132. de Medeiros SF, Yamamoto MMW, Barbosa JS. Abnormal Bleeding During
Menopause Hormone Therapy: Insights for Clinical Management. Clin Med
Insights Women’s Health. 2013;6:13-24.
133. Norman RJ, Flight I, Rees MC. Oestrogen and Progesterone Hormone
Replacement Therapy for Perimenopausal and Postmenopausal Women:
Weight and Body Fat Distribution. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2000;2(2000):381-387.
134. Coppin RJ, Wicke DM, Little PS. Managing nocturnal leg cramps - calfstretching exercises and cessation of quinine treatment: a factorial
randomised controlled trial. Br J Gen Pract. 2005;55(512):186-191.
135. MacGregor EA. Migraine, menopause and hormone replacement therapy.
Post Reproductive Health. 2017;24(1):11-18.
136. Girdler SS, O’Briant C, Steege J, et al. A comparison of the effect of
estrogen with or without progesterone on mood and physical symptoms in
postmenopausal women. J Womens Health Gend Based Med. 1999;8(5):63746.
137.
Gajjar F, Adedipe T, Disu S, et al. Unscheduled bleeding with hormone
replacement therapy. The Obstetrician and Gynaecologist. 2019;25(2):95-101.
138. Bińkowska M, Woroń J. Progestogens in menopausal hormone therapy.
Menopause Review. 2015;14(2):134-143.
139. Mueck AO, Seeger H, Bühling K. Use of dydrogesterone in hormone
replacement therapy. Maturitas. 2009;65 Suppl 1:S51-60.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
129
140. Webber L, Anderson RA, Davies M, et al. HRT for women with premature
ovarian insufficiency: a comprehensive review. Hum Reprod Open.
2017;(2):hox007.
141.
Grady D, Ettinger B, Tosteson ANA, et al. Predictors of Difficulty When
Discontinuing
Postmenopausal
Hormone
Therapy.
Obstetrics
and
Gynecology. 2004;102(6):1233-1239.
142. Laufer N, Simon A, Samueloff A, et al. Successful spontaneous pregnancies
in women older than 45 years. Fertil Steril. 2004;81(5):1328-1332.
143. Ettinger B. Rationale for use for use of lower estrogen doses for postmenopausal hormone therapy. Maturitas. 2007;57(1):81-84.
144. Hitchcock CL, Prior JC. Oral micronised progesterone for vasomotor
symptoms – a placebo controlled randomized trial in healthy postmenopausal
women. Menopause. 2012;19(8):886-893.
145. Rasgon NL, Dunkin J, Fairbanks L, et al. Estrogen and response to sertraline
in postmenopausal women with major depressive disorder: a pilot study. J
Psychiatr Res. 2007;41(3-4):338-343.
146. Gleason CE, Dowling NM, Wharton W, et al. Effects of Hormone Therapy on
Cognition and Mood in Recently Postmenopausal Women: Findings from the
Randomized, Controlled KEEPS–Cognitive and Affective Study. 2015;PLOS
Medicine 12(6): e1001833.
147.
Schmidt PJ, Ben Dor, R, Martinez PE, et al. Effects of estradiol withdrawal
on mood on women with past perimenopausal depression: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015;72(7):714-726.
148. Biehl C, Plotsker O, Mirkin S. A systematic review of the efficacy and safety
of vaginal estrogen product for the treatment of genitourinary syndrome of
menopause. Menopause. 2018;26(4):431-453.
149. Pitsouni E, Grigoriadis T, Douskos A, et al. Efficacy of vaginal therapies
alternative to vaginal estrogen on sexual function and orgasm of menopausal
women: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2018;229:45-56.
150. Palacios S, Mejia A, Neyro JL. Treatment of the genitourinary syndrome of
menopause. Climateric. 2015;18(suppl 1):23-29.
151.
Santen RJ. Vaginal administration of estradiol: effects of dose, preparation
and timing on plasma estradiol levels. Climateric. 2015;18(2):121-134.
152. Rueda C, Osorio AM, Avellaneda AC, et al. The efficacy and safety of estriol
to treat vulvovaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women: a systematic
literature review. Climateric. 2017;20(4):321-330.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
130
153. Sturdee DW, Panay N; International Menopause Society Writing Group.
Recommendations for the management of postmenopausal vaginal atrophy.
Climateric. 2010;13(6):509-522.
154. Al-Baghdadi O, Ewies AA. Topical estrogen therapy in the management
of postmenopausal vaginal atrophy: an up-to-date overview. Climateric.
2009;12(2):91-105.
155. Jaisamram U, Triratanachat S, Chaikittisilpa S, et al. Ultra-low-dose estriol
and lactobacilli in the local treatment of postmenopausal vaginal atrophy.
Climateric. 2013;16(3):347-355.
156. Constantine G, Graham S, Portman DJ, et al. Female sexual function improved
with ospemifene in postmenopausal women with vulvar and vaginal atrophy:
results of a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Climacteric. 2015;18:226232.
157.
Goldstein SW, Winter AG, Goldstein I. Improvements to the vulva, vestibule,
urethral meatus, and vagina in women treated with Ospemifene for moderate
to severe dyspareunia: A prospective vulvoscopic pilot study. Sex Med.
2018;6(2):154-161.
158. Simon JA, Altomare C, Cort S, et al. Overall safety of Ospemifene in postmenopausal women from placebo-controlled Phase 2 and 3 trials. J Womens
Health. 2018;27(1):14-23.
159. Portman D, Palacios S, Nappi RE, et al. Ospemifene, a non-oestrogen
selective oestrogen receptor modulator for the treatment of vaginal dryness
associated with postmenopausal vulvar and vaginal atrophy: a randomised,
placebo-controlled, phase III trial. Maturitas. 2014;78:91–98.
160. Panjani M, Bell RJ, Jane F, et al. A randomized trial of oral DHEA treatment for
sexual function, well-being, and menopausal symptoms in postmenopausal
women with low libido. J Sex Med. 2009;6:2579–2590.
161.
Labrie
F,
Archer
D,
Bouchard
C,
et
al.
Effect
of
intravaginal
dehydroepiandrosterone (Prasterone) on libido and sexual function in
postmenopausal women. Menopause. 2009;16:923–931.
162. Labrie F, Archer DF, Koltun W, et al; members of the VVA Prasterone
Research Group. Efficacy of intravaginal dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
on moderate to severe dyspareunia and vaginal dryness, symptoms of
vulvovaginal atrophy, and of the genitourinary syndrome of menopause.
Menopause. 2018;25(11):1339-1353.
163. Simon JA, Goldstein I, Kim NN, et al. The role of androgens in the treatment of
genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM): International Society for the
study of Women’s Sexual Health (ISSWSH) expert consensus panel review.
Menopause. 2018;25(7):837-847.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
131
164. Gambacciani M, Palacios S. Laser therapy for the restoration of vaginal
function. Maturitas. 2017;99:10-15.
165. Salvatore S, Leone Roberti Maggiore U, Athanasiou S, et al. Histological
study on the effects of microablative fractional CO2 laser on atrophic vaginal
tissue: an ex vivo study. Menopause. 2015;22(8):845-849.
166. Salvatore S, Nappi RE, Zerbinati N, et al. A 12-week treatment with fractional
CO2 laser for vulvovaginal atrophy: a pilot study. Climateric. 2014;17(4):363-369.
167.
Pitsouni E, Grigoriadis T, Falagas ME, et al. Laser therapy for the genitourinary
syndrome of menopause. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Maturitas.
2017;103:78-88.
168. Martin KA, Rosensen RS. Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cardiovascular
Risk. April 2021 Uptodate. www.uptodate.com@2021.
169. Hulley S, Grady D, Bush T, et al. Randomized trials of estrogen plus progestin
for secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in postmenopausal
women. Heart Estrogen/progestin Replacement Therapy (HERS) Research
Group. JAMA. 1998;280(7):605-613.
170. Hodis HN, Collins P, Mack WJ, et al. The timing hypothesis for coronary
heart disease prevention with hormone therapy: past, present and future in
perspective. Climateric. 2012;15(3):217-228.
171.
Keck C, Taylor M. Emerging research on the implications of Hormone
Replacement Therapy on Coronary Heart Disease. Curr Atheroscler Rep.
2018;20(12):57.
172.
Cobin RH, Godman NF. AACE Reproductive Endocrinology Scientific
Committee. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American
College of Endocrinology Position Statement on Menopause - 2017 Update.
Endor Pract. 2017;23(7):869-880.
173. Mikkola TS, Tuomikoski P, Lyytinen H, et al. Estradiol-based postmenopausal
hormone therapy and risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.
Menopause. 2015;22(9):976-983.
174.
Manson JE, Chlebowski RT, Stefanick ML, et al. Menopausal hormone
therapy and health outcome during the intervention and extended post
stopping phase of the Women’s Health Initiative randomized trials. JAMA.
2013;310(13):1353-1368.
175.
Rossouw JE, Prentice RL, Manson JE, et al. Postmenopausal hormone therapy
and risk of cardiovascular disease by age and years since menopause. JAMA
2007; 297:1465.
176. Scarabin PY, Alhenc-Gelas M, Plu-Bureau G, et al. Effects of oral and
transdermal estrogen/progesterone regimens on blood coagulation and
fibrinolysis in postmenopausal women. A randomized controlled trial.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1997; 17:3071.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
132
177.
Henderson VW, Lobo RA. Hormone therapy and the risk of stroke. Perspectives
10 years after Women’s Health Initiative trials. Clmacteric 2012;15(3):229-234.
178. Santen RJ, Allred DC, Ardoin SP, et al. Postmenopausal hormone therapy: an
Endocrine Society scientific statement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95.
179. Grodstein F, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Rexrode K. Postmenopausal hormone
therapy and stroke: role of time since menopause and age at initiation of
hormone therapy.
Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(8):861.
180. Renoux C, Dell’Aniello S, Suissa S. Hormone replacement therapy and the
risk of venous thromboembolism: A population- based study. J Thombo
Haemost. 2010;8(5):979-986.
181.
Canonico M. Hormone therapy and risk of venous thromboembolism among
postmenopausal women. Maturitas. 2015;82(3):304-307.
182. Rovinski D, Ramos RB, Fighera TM, et al. Risk of venous thromboembolism
events in postmenopausal using oral versus non-oral hormone therapy: A
systematic review and meat analysis. Thromb Res. 2018;168:83-95.
183. Bjarnason NH, Hassager C, Christiansen C. Postmenopausal bone remodelling
and hormone replacement. Climacteric. 1998;1(1):72-79.
184. Gambacciani M, Cappagli B, Ciaponi M, et al. Ultra low-dose hormone
replacement therapy & bone protection in postmenopausal women.
Maturitas. 2008;59(1):2-6.
185.
Lindsay R, Gallagher JC, Kleerekoper M, et al. Bone response to treatment with
lower doses of conjugated estrogen with and without medroxyprogesterone
acetate in early postmenopausal women. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16(4):372-379.
186. Schneider DL, Barrett-Connor EL, Morton DJ. Timing of postmenopausal
estrogen for optimal bone mineral density. The Rancho Bernado study.
JAMA. 1997; 277(7):542-547.
187.
Heiss G, Wallace R, Anderson GL, et al. Health Risks and benefits 3 years
after stopping randomised treatment with estrogen and progestin. JAMA.
2008;299(9):1036-1045.
188. Clinical Guidance on Management of Osteoporosis 2012, Malaysia. Revised
2015. (Accessed at: http://www.acadmed.org.my).
189. Javed AA, Mayhew AJ, Shea AK, et al. Association Between Hormone
Therapy and Muscle Mass in Postmenopausal Women: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis. JAMA Network Open. 2019;2(8):e1910154.
190. Salpeter SS, Walsh JME, Ormiston TM et al. Meta-analysis: effect of hormonereplacement therapy on components of the metabolic syndrome in
postmenopausal women. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. 2006;8(5):538–554.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
133
191.
Xu Y, Lin Y, Wang S, et al. Combined estrogen replacement therapy on
metabolic control in postmenopausal women with diabetes mellitus.
Kaohsiung J Med Soc. 2014;30(7):350-361.
192. Pereira RI, Casey BA, Swibas TA et al. Timing of estradiol treatment after
menopause ay determine benefit or harm to insulin action. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2015;100(12):4456-4462.
193. Fran Grodstein. Estrogen and Cognitive function. March 2018. Uptodate.
(Accessed at: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/estrogen-and-cognitivefunction).
194. Jaffe AB, Toran-Allerand CD, Greengard P, et al. Estrogen regulates
metabolism of Alzheimer amyloid beta precursor protein. J Biol Chem.
1994;269(18):13065-13068.
195. Shumaker SA, Legault C, Rapp SR, et al. Estrogen plus progestin and the
incidence of dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal
women: the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;289:2651.
196. Gava G, Orsili I, Alvisi s et al. Cognition, mood and sleep in Menopausal
transition: The role of Menopausal Hormone Therapy. Medicina(Kaunas)
2019;55:(10)68.
197.
Cognitive effects of estradiol after menopause. A randomized trial of the
timing hypothesis.
Victor W. Henderson, Jan A. St. John, Howard N. Hodis ET AL. Neurology
2016; 87 (7) 699-708;
198. Emerson E, Hardman MJ. The role of estrogen deficiency in skin ageing and
wound healing. Biogerontology. 2012;13:3-20.
199. Wolff EF, Narayan D, Taylor HS. Long term effects of hormone therapy on
skin rigidity and wrinkles. Fertil Steril. 2005;84:285-288.
200. Creidi P, Faivre B, Agache P, et al. Effect of conjugated oestrogen (Premarin)
cream on ageing facial skin. A comparative study with a placebo cream.
Maturitas. 1994;219:211-223.
201. Georgala S, Katoulis AC, Georgala C, et al. Topical estrogen therapy for
androgenetic alopecia in menopausal females. Dermatology. 2004;208:178179.
202. Blume-Pevtayi U, Kunte C, Krisp A, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety
of topical minoxidil and topical alfatradiol in the treatment of androgenetic
alopecia in women. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2007;5:391-395.
203. Passos-Soares JS, Vianna MIP, Gomes-Filho IS et al. Association between
osteoporosis treatment and severe periodontitis in postmenopausal women.
Menopause. 2017;24(7):789-795.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
134
204. Grodstein F, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ. Tooth loss and hormone use in
postmenopausal women. Compend Contin Educ Dent Suppl. 1998;(22):S916.
205. Dewundara SS, Wiggs JL, Sullivan DA, et al. Is estrogen a therapeutic target
for glaucoma? Semin Opthalmol. 2016;31:140-146.
206. Golebiowski B, Badarudin N, Eden J et al. The effects of transdermal
testosterone and oestrogen therapy on dry eye in post-menopausal women: a
randomized, placebo controlled, pilot study. Br J Opthalmol. 2017;101(7):926932.
207. D’haeseleer E, Depypere H, Claeys S, et al. The impact of hormone therapy
on vocal quality in postmenopausal women. J Voice. 2012;26(5):671.e1-7.
208. Doty RL, Tourbier I, Ng V et al. Influences of hormone replacement therapy
on olfactory and cognitive function in postmenopausal women. Neurobiol
Aging. 2015;36:2053-2059.
209. Coksuer H, Koplay M, Oghan F, et al. Effects of estradiol – drospirenone
hormone treatment on carotid artery intima media thickness and vertigo /
dizziness in post-menopausal women. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2011;283:10451051.
210. Naessen T, Lindmark B, Lagerstrom C, et al. Early postmenopausal hormone
therapy improves postural balance. Menopause. 2007; 14:14-19.
211.
Caruso S, Grillo C, Agnello C, et al. Olfactometric and rhinomanometric
outcomes in post-menopausal women treated with hormone therapy: a
prospective study. Human Reproduction. 2004;19(12):2959-2964.
212. Panay N, Briggs P, Kovacs G. Managing the Menopause: 21st Century
Solutions. Cambridge University Press 2015. ISBN: 9781107451827.
213. Breast Cancer. Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention. 2018. (Accessed at: www.cdc.gov/cancer/breast).
214. Salagame U, Banks E, O’Connell DL, et al. Menopausal hormone therapy use
and breast cancer risk by receptor subtypes: Results from the New South
Wales Cancer Lifestyle and Evaluation of Risk (CLEAR) Study. PLos One.
2018;13(11):e0205034.
215. Chlebowski RT, Hendrix SL, Langer RD, et al; WHI Investigators. Influence
of estrogen plus progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy
postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative Randomized Trial.
JAMA. 2003;289(24):3243-3253.
216. Type and timing of menopausal hormone therapy and breast cancer risk:
individual participant meta-analysis of the worldwide epidemiological
evidence. Collaborative group on Hormonal factors in Breast Cancer. Lancet
2020;394(10204):1159-1168.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
135
217.
Hamoda H, Davis SR, Cano A et al. BMS, IMS, EMAS, RCOG and AMS Joint
Statement on menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) and breast cancer
risk in response to EMA Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee
recommendations in May 2020. Post Repr Health. 2021;27(1):49-55.
218. Fournier A, Berrino F, Clavel-Chapelon F. Unequal risk for breast cancer
associated with different hormone therapies: result from the E3N cohort
study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008;107(1):103-111.
219. Cordina-Duverger E, Truong T, Anger A, et al. Risk of breast cancer by
type of menopausal hormone therapy: a case-control study among postmenopausal women in France. PLoS One. 2013;8(11):e78016.
220. Reid RL. Hormone therapy in breast cancer survivors and those at high risk
of breast cancer. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2018;61(3):480-487.
221. Marchetti C, De Felice F, Boccia S, et al. Hormone replacement therapy after
prophylactic risk reducing salpingo-oophorectomy and breast cancer risk
in BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 mutation carriers: A meta-analysis. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol. 2018;132:111-115.
222. Chai X, Domchek S, Kauff N, et al. Breast cancer risk after salpingooophorectomy in healthy BRCA ½ mutation carriers: Revisiting the evidence
for risk reduction. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015;107(9). pii:djv217.
223. Haelle T. Hormone Therapy: No Excess Mortality in 18 year WHI Follow Up.
Medscape Medical News. Medscape September 12, 2017.
224. Hisham NA, Yip CH. Overview of breast cancer in Malaysian women: a
problem of late diagnosis. Asian Journal of Surgery. 2004;27(2):129-133.
225. Oy Holmberg L, Anderson H; HABITS steering and data monitoring
committees. HABITS (hormonal replacement therapy after breast cancer-
-is it safe?), a randomised comparison: trial stopped. Lancet. 2004 Feb
7;363(9407).
226. Rees M. MHT in cancer survivors. Maturitas 2019;124:128.
227. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists committee on
Gynecologic Practice, Farrell R. ACOG Committee Opinion No.659: The use
of vaginal estrogen in women with a history of estrogen-dependent breast
cancer. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;127(3):e93-6.
228. Donders G, Neven P, Moegele M, et al. Ultra-low-dose estriol and lactobacillus
acidophilus vaginal tablets (Gynoflor®) for vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal
breast cancer patients on aromatase inhibitors: phamarcokinetic, safety, and
efficacy phase I clinical study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014;145(2):371-379.
229. Kuhle CL, Kapoor E, Sood R, et al. Menopausal hormone therapy in cancer
survivors: A narrative review of the literature. Maturitas. 2016;92:86-96.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
136
230. O’Donnell RL, Clement KM, Edmondson RJ. Hormone replacement therapy
after treatment for a gynaecological malignancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol.
2016;28(1):32-41.
231. Furness S, Roberts H, Marjoribanks J, et al. Hormone therapy in
postmenopausal women and risk of endometrial hyperplasia. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD000402.
232. Deli T, Orosz M, Jakab A. Hormone replacement therapy in cancer survivors
– Review of the literature. Pathol Oncol Res. 2019; doi: 10.1007/s12253-01800569-x. [Epub ahead of print].
233. Edey KA, Rundle S, Hickey M. Hormone replacement therapy for women
previously treated for endometrial cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Review
218;5::CC08830.
234. Chlebowski RT, Wakelee H, Pettinger M, et al. Estrogen plus progestin and
lung cancer: Follow-up of the Women’s Health Initiative randomized trial.
Clin Lung Cancer. 2016;17(1):10-7.e1.
235. Schwartz AG, Ray RM, Cote ML, et al. Hormone use, reproductive history,
and risk of lung cancer: The Women Health Initiative Studies. J Thorac Oncol.
2015;10(7):1004-1013.
236. Yao Y, Giu X, Zhu J, et al. Hormone replacement therapy in females can
decrease the risk of lung cancer; a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2013;8(8):e71236.
237. Pesatori AC, Carugno M, Consonni D, et al. Hormone use and risk for lung
cancer: a pooled analysis from the international Lung Cancer Consortium
(ILCCO). Br J Cancer. 2013;109(7):1954-1964.
238. Temkin SM, Mallen A, Bellavance E, et al. The role of menopausal hormone
therapy in women with or at risk of ovarian and breast cancers: Misconceptions
and current directions. Cancer. 2018;125(4):499-514.
239. Greiser CM, Greiser EM, Dören M. Menopausal hormone therapy and risk of
ovarian cancer: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update.
2007;13(5):453-463.
240. Beral V, Gaitskell K, Hermon C, et al. Collaborative Group On Epidemiological
Studies of Ovarian Cancer. Menopausal hormone use and ovarian cancer risk:
individual participants meta-analysis of 52 epidemiological studies. Lancet.
2015;385(9980):1835-1842.
241. Zhou B, Sun Q, Cong R, et al. Hormone replacement therapy and ovarian
cancer risk: a meta-anlaysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2008;108(3):641-651.
242. Gabriel CA, Tiggers-Cardwell J, Stopfer J, et al. Use of total abdominal
hysterectomy and hormone replacement therapy in BRCA 1 and BRCA 2
mutation carriers undergoing risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy. Fam
Cancer. 2009;8(1):23-28.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
137
243. Li D, Ding CY, Qiu LH. Postoperative hormone replacement therapy for
epithelial ovarian cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Gynecol Oncol. 2015;139(2):355-362.
244. Del Carmen MG, Rice LW. Management of menopausal symptoms in women
with gynecologic cancers. Gynecol Oncol. 2017;146(2):427-435.
245. Mascarenhas C, Lambe M, Bellocco R, et al. Use of hormone replacement
therapy before and after ovarian cancer diagnosis and ovarian cancer
survival. Int J Cancer. 2006;119(12):2907-2915.
246. Utian WH, Woods NF. Impact of hormone therapy on quality of life after
menopause. Menopause. 2013;20(10):1098-105.
247. Smith AJ, Hall DR, Grove D. Postmenopausal hormone therapy and quality of
life, International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics. 2006;95:267-271.
248. Reid RL, Fortier MP. Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Quality of Life: Too
Many Pyjamas. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2014;36(11):953-954.
249. Gemmel LC, Webster KE, Kirtley S, et al. The management of menopause in
women with a history of endometriosis: a systematic review. Hum Reprod
Update. 2017;23(4):481-500.
250. Al Kadri H, Hassan S, Al-Fozan, et al. Hormone therapy for endometriosis
and surgical menopause. Obstet Gynecol. 1995;86(3):330-334.
251. Rozenberg S, Antoine C, Vandromme J, et al. Should we abstain from treating
women with endometriosis using menopausal hormone therapy, for fear of
an increased ovarian cancer risk? Climacteric. 2015;18:448-452.
252. Srinivasan V, Martens M. Hormone therapy in menopausal women with
fibroids. Is it safe? Menopause 2018;25(8):930-936.
253. Formoso G, Perrone E, Maltoni S, et al. Short-term and long-term effects
of tibolone in postmenopausal women. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev.
2016;10:CD008536.
254. The Writing Group for the PEPI Trial. Effects of estrogen or estrogen/
progestin regimens on heart disease risk factors in postmenopausal women.
The Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) Trial. JAMA.
1995;273(3):199-208.
255. Lima R, Wofford M, Reckelhoff JF. Hypertension in Postmenopausal Women.
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2012;14(3):254–260.
256. Subramaniam R, Thillainayagam B, Papadopoulos K. Is there a role for
Selective Tissue Estrogenic Activity Regulator in the management of
menopause? JPOG 2006 Jul/Aug; pp156-159.
257. Modelsa K, Cummings S. Tibolone for postmenopausal women: Systematic
review of randomized trials. The J Clin Endocrin & Metab. 2002;87(1):16-23.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
138
258. Cummings SR, Ettinger B, Delmas PD, et al for the LIFT Trial Investigators.
The Effects of Tibolone in Older Postmenopausal Women. N Engl J Med.
2008;359:697-708.
259. Speroff L. The LIBERATE tibolone trial in breast cancer survivors. Maturitas.
2009; 63(1):1-3.
260. Maximov PY, Lee TM, Jordan VC. The discovery and development of selective
estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) for clinical practice. Curr Clin
Pharmacol. 2013;8(2):135-155.
261. Ettinger B, Black DM, Mitlak BH, et al. Reduction of vertebral fracture risk in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis treated with raloxifene: results
from a 3-year randomized clinical trial. Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene
Evaluation (MORE) Investigators. JAMA. 1999 Aug 18;282(7):637-45.
262. Martino S, Cauley S, Barrett-Connor E, et al. Continuing outcomes relevant
to EVISTA (RLX): breast cancer incidence in postmenopausal women in a
randomized trial of Raloxifene. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96(23):1751-1761.
263. Cummings SR, Eckert S, Krueger KA, et al. The Effect of Raloxifene on
Risk of Breast Cancer in Postmenopausal Women: Results from the MORE
Randomized Trial. JAMA. 1999;281(23):2189–2197.
264. Kung AWC, Chao HT, Huang KE, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Raloxifene 60
Milligrams/Day in Postmenopausal Asian Women. J Clin Endocrinol Metabol.
2003;88(7): 3130–3136.
265. Drewe J, Bucher KA, Zahner C. A systematic review of non-hormonal
treatments of vasomotor symptoms in climacteric and cancer patients.
Springer Plus. 2015;359:65.
266. Boekhout AH, Vincent AD, Dalesio OB et al. Management of hot flashes in
patients who have breast cancer with venlafaxine and clonidine: a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;359:3862-3868.
267. Speroff L, Gass M, Constantine G, et al; Study 315 Investigators. Efficacy and
tolerability of desvenlafaxine succinate treatment for menopausal vasomotor
symptoms: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2008;111(1):77-87.
268. Caan B, La Croix AZ, Jofle H, et al. Effects of estrogen and venlafaxine on
menopause-related quality of life in healthy postmenopausal women with hot
flushes: a placebo controlled randomized trial. Menopause. 2015;359:607-615.
269. Johns C, Seav SM, Dominick SA et al. Informing hot flush treatment decisions
for breast cancer survivors: a systematic review of randomized trials
comparing active interventions. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2016;359:415-426.
270. Reddy SY, Warner H, Guttuso T, et al. Gabapentin, estrogen & placebo
for treating hot flushes: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol.
2006;108(1):41-48.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
139
271. Loprinzi CL, Qin R, Balcueva EP, et al. Phase III, randomized, double-blind
placebo-controlled evaluation of pregabalin for alleviating hot flushes. J Clin
Oncol. 2010;28(4):641-647.
272. Franco OH, Chowdhury R, Troup J, et al. Use of plant-based therapies and
menopausal symptoms: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA.
2016;359:2554-2563.
273. Leach MJ, Moore V. Black cohosh for menopausal symptoms. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2012;(9):CD007244.
274. L’Espérance S, Frenette S, Dionne A, et al. Pharmacological and nonhormonal treatment of hot flashes in breast cancer survivors: CEPO review
and recommendations. Support Care Cancer. 2013;21:1461.
275. Joy D, Joy J, Duane P. Black cohosh: a cause of abnormal postmenopausal
liver function tests. Climacteric. 2008;11:84.
276. Lambert MNT, Thorup AC, Hansen ESS et al. Combined Red Clover isoflavones
and probiotics positively reduce menopausal vasomotor symptoms. PLOS
One. 2017;359:e0176590.
277. Dunneram Y, Chung HF, Cade JE et al. Soy intake and vasomotor menopausal
symptoms among midlife women: a pooled analysis of five studies from the
InterLACE Consortium. Eur J Clin Nutr 2019:731501–1511.
278. Zhu X, Liew Y, Liu ZL. Chinese herbal medicine for menopausal symptoms.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;3:CD009023.
279. Chenoy R, Hussain S, Tayon Y, et al. Effect of oral gamolenic acid from evening
primrose oil on menopausal flushing. BMJ. 1994;308:501-503.
280. Brachet P, Chanson A, Demigne C et al. Age-associated B vitamin deficiency
as a determinant of chronic diseases. Nutr Res Rev. 2004;17:55-68.
281. Milart P, Wozniakowska E, Wrona W. Selected vitamins and quality of life in
menopausal women. Menoapuse Rev. 2018;17(4):175-179.
282. Barton Dl, Loprinzi Cl, Quella SK, et al. Prospective evaluation of vitamin E for
hot flushes in breast cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. 1998;359:495-500.
283. Biglia N, Sgandura P, Peano E, et al. Non-hormonal treatment of hot flushes
in breast cancer survivors: gabapentin vs Vit E. Climacteric. 2009;359:310318.
284. Tang BM, Eslick GD, Nowson C et al. Use of calcium or calcium in combination
with vitamin D supplementation to prevent fractures and bone loss in people
aged 50 years and older; a meta analysis. Lancet. 370 (9588):657-66.
285. Rosen CJ, Abrams SA, Aloia JF et al. IOM CommitteeMembers Respond
to the Endocrine Scoeity Vitamin D Guideline.J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2012;97(4):1146-1152.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
140
286. Heaney RP, Dowell MS, Barger-Lux MJ. Absorption of calcium as the
carbonate and citrate salts, with some observations on method. Osteoporos
Int. 1999;9:19.
287. Cosman F, de Beur SJ, LeBoff MS, et al. Clinician’s Guide to Prevention and
Treatment of Osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int. 2014;25:2359.
288. Chung M, Tang AM, Fu Z, et al. Calcium Intake and Cardiovascular Disease
Risk: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med.
2016;165:856.
289. The NAMS position statement of NAMS Non hormonal management of
menopause associated vasomotor symptoms. Menopause. 2015;22:1155-1172.
290. Guirguis M, Abdelmalak J, Jusino E, et al. Stellate ganglion block for the
treatment of hot flushes in patients with breast cancer: a literature review.
2015;15:162-169.
291. Newton KM, Reed SD, Guthrie KA et al. Efficacy of yoga for vasomotor
symptoms: a randomized controlled trial. Menopause. 2014;359:339-346.
292. Santoro N, Braunstein GD, Butts CL, et al. Compounded Bioidentical Hormones
in Endocrinology Practice: An Endocrine Society Scientific Statement. J Clin
Endocrinol Metabol. 2016;101(4):1318-1343.
293. Panay N. Body identical hormone replacement. Post Reprod Health. 2014.
20(2):69-72.
294. Steffen PR, Soto M. Spirituality and severity of menopausal symptoms in a
sample of religious women. J Relig Health. 2011 Sep;50(3):721-9.
295. Garg S, Anand T. Menstruation related myths in India: strategies for combating
it. J Family Med Prim Care. 2015;4(2):184-186.
296. Cheung NTC. Women’s Ritual in China: Jiezhu (Receiving Buddhist Prayer
Beads) Performed by Menopausal Women in Ninghua, Western Fujian. Edwin
Mellen Press, 2008.
297. http://piswi.islam.gov.my/index.php/himpunan-fatwa/30-himpunan-fatwa/
sosial/48-fatwa-mengenai-rawatan-hormon-bagi-wanita-yang-telah-putushaid.
298. https://islamqa.info/en/answers/70438/rulings-on-menstruation.
299. Al-Quran: Al Baqarah: 228.
M A N A G E M E N T O F M E N O PA U S E I N M A L AY S I A
141
F. Acknowledgments
The CPG Working Committee would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions
•
Panel of internal and external reviewers who reviewed the draft.
•
Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback. A special thanks to Dr. Mohd Aminuddin.
•
Ms. Prema, at the Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society of Malaysia
offices for always being there to open and close the office for us during
our Sunday meetings. Not forgetting the administrative work associated
with the CPG
•
Dr. Shereen Kaur Manocha, who helped proof read the initial version of this
CPG.
•
Dr. Anis Syahirah Far’ain binti Mohd Lukman, Research Officer, Women’s
Health Development Unit, Universiti Sains Malaysia for her help with search
engines and retrieval of evidence.
•
Associate Professor Dr. Norhayati Mohd Noor, Department of Family
Medicine, Universiti Sains Malaysia with her help with the search engines.
•
Datuk Professor Dr. Siti Zawiah Omar, President of the College of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Academy of Medicine, Malaysia who took over from
Dr. Micheal J Samy.
•
All those who contributed directly or indirectly to the development of the
CPG.
G. Disclosure Statement
All members of the CPG developmental group had completed the disclosure
forms. None held shares or acted as consultants to pharmaceutical firms.
Details are available upon request from the CPG secretariat.
H. Source of Funding
The development of the CPG on Management of Menopause in Malaysia was
supported by both the Obstetrical and Gynaecological Society of Malaysia
and the Malaysian Menopause Society along with relevant pharmaceuticals
companies. Their presence or representation was not present at any meeting
and there was no undue external influence in the writing of this CPG.
The full list of these pharmaceuticals is available upon request from the CPG
secretariat.