MOH/P/PAK/423.19(GU)-e
2019
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
2019 MOH/P/PAK/423.19(GU)-e
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-2173-83-0
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.psychiatry-malaysia.org/
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2019 and will be reviewed in a minimum period of four years (2023) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope
of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this document,
which is the definitive version at all times. This version can be found on
the websites mentioned above.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development
vi
Objectives
viii
Development Group
ix
Review Committee
x
External Reviewers
xi
Algorithm 1. Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder
xii
Algorithm 2. Pharmacotherapy for Major Depressive
xiii
Disorder
Algorithm 3. Treatment of Pre-Existing Major Depressive
xiv
Disorder in Pregnancy and Postpartum
Algorithm 4. Treatment of Newly Diagnosed Major
xv
Depressive Disorder in Pregnancy and
Postpartum
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
3
2.1 Screening
3
2.2 Assessment
4
2.3 Diagnosis and Assessment of Severity
5
2.4 Suicide Risk Assessment
6
2.5 Referral and Admission
7
3.
PHASES OF TREATMENT
8
4.
TREATMENT
9
4.1 Acute Phase
9
4.1.1 Mild to Moderate
9
4.1.2 Moderate to Severe
18
4.2 Continuation and Maintenance Phase
25
4.2.1 Psychosocial intervention and psychotherapy
25
4.2.2 Pharmacotherapy
26
4.3 Discontinuation of Pharmacotherapy
27
4.4 Major Depressive Disorder with Psychosis
27
4.4.1 Pharmacotherapy
27
4.4.2 Physical treatment
28
4.5 Failed Response to Initial Treatment
28
4.6 Next-Step Treatment/Treatment-Resistant Depression 29
4.6.1 Switching
30
4.6.2 Combination
30
4.6.3 Augmentation
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
4.6.4 Physical treatment
31
4.6.5 Psychotherapy
31
5.
PHYSICAL TREATMENT
32
5.1 Electroconvulsive Therapy
32
5.2 Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
33
5.3 Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
34
6.
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE
35
TREATMENT
7.
COLLABORATIVE CARE MODEL
38
8.
SPECIAL POPULATION
39
8.1 Major Depressive Disorder in Pregnant and
39
Postpartum Women
8.2 Major Depressive Disorder in the Elderly
47
8.3 Major Depressive Disorder in Patients with
52
Chronic Medical Illness
9.
FOLLOW-UP AND MONITORING
57
10.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
58
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
58
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
58
REFERENCES
59
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
70
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
71
Appendix 3 American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic 73
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
Major Depressive Disorder
Appendix 4 10th Revision of The International Statistical
75
Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD-10)
Appendix 5 Possible Organic Causes of Depression in
77
Elderly & Laboratory Investigations for
Depression in Elderly
Appendix 6A Whooley Questions (Malay Version)
78
Appendix 6B Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2)
78
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 7 Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) 79
Appendix 8 Suggested Antidepressant Dosages and
81
Adverse Effects & United States Food and
Drug Administration Pregnancy Categories
List of Abbreviations
85
Acknowledgement
86
Disclosure Statement
86
Source of Funding
86
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
SCREENING
• Screening for depression using Whooley Questions in primary care
may be considered in people at risk.
ASSESSMENT
• The severity of major depressive disorder should be assessed to
determine the mode of treatment.
TREATMENT
PSYCHOEDUCATION
• Psychoeducation should be offered early and continuously
throughout the management of major depressive disorder.
ACUTE PHASE
• MILD TO MODERATE
• In mild to moderate major depressive disorder, psychosocial
intervention and psychotherapy should be offered, based on resource
availability, but not restricted to the following:
 cognitive behavioural therapy
 interpersonal therapy
 problem-solving therapy
 behavioural therapy
 internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy
• MODERATE TO SEVERE
• In moderate to severe major depressive disorder, a combination of
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy should be offered.
• In moderate to severe major depressive disorder, exercise may be
offered as an adjunct treatment.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
• In moderate to severe major depressive disorder, one of the secondgeneration antidepressants should be prescribed:
 selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
 serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
 noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressants
 melatonergic agonist and serotonergic antagonist
 multimodal serotonin modulator
 noradrenaline/dopamine-reuptake inhibitor
MAINTENANCE AND CONTINUATION PHASE
• Antidepressants should be continued for at least six to nine months
after remission, and at least two years if there is a high risk of relapse
or recurrence.
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER WITH PSYCHOSIS
• Combination of antidepressant and antipsychotic should be
considered in major depressive disorder with psychotic features.
FAILED RESPONSE TO INITIAL TREATMENT
• Optimisation of antidepressant should be considered in patients who
fail to show response to initial treatment in major depressive disorder.
 If optimisation fails, refer to a psychiatrist for switching/
combination/augmentation options.
TREATMENT-RESISTANT DEPRESSION
• In treatment-resistant depression, the following strategies may be
considered:
 switching antidepressants to a different class
 combination of antidepressants
 augmentation with atypical antipsychotics, lithium or antiepileptic
agents
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
PHYSICAL TREATMENT
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be considered in major depressive
disorder with:
 life-threatening conditions e.g. refusal to eat and high suicidality
 moderate to severe symptoms for rapid improvement in the acute
treatment
 treatment-resistant depression
COLLABORATIVE CARE
• Collaborative care may be considered in acute and continuation
phase treatment of major depressive disorder.
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER IN PERINATAL WOMEN
• Screening for perinatal depression may be done in a two-stage
approach.
 Use brief screening tools e.g. Patient Health Questionnaire-2 or
Whooley Questions in the first stage.
 If there is positive response to the brief screening tools, Edinburgh
Postnatal Depression Scale should be used for further screening
• For mild to moderate perinatal depression, psychotherapy, e.g.
interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive behavioural therapy,
should be considered as initial treatment.
• Psychosocial interventions, i.e. peer support and non-directive
counselling, may be considered in mild to moderate postpartum
depression.
• For severe perinatal depression, pharmacotherapy should be
considered and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are the
preferred choice. Once medications have become effective,
psychotherapy may be offered as an adjunct.
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER IN THE ELDERLY
• Antidepressants should be considered with caution on tolerability
issues for major depressive disorder in the elderly.
• Psychotherapy should be offered for major depressive disorder in
the elderly.
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be offered in elderly with major
depressive disorder after assessment of possible co-morbidities.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC
MEDICAL ILLNESS
• Screening for depression should be done in patients with chronic
medical illness (CMI) with related functional impairment.
• Psychosocial intervention and psychotherapy should be considered
in patients with major depressive disorder and CMI.
• If pharmacotherapy is required for patients with major depressive
disorder and CMI, consider antidepressants with the least drug-drug
interactions.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the development group (DG) for this CPG were from
the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Education. There was an
active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during
the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The inclusion criteria are all adult patients with major
depressive disorder (MDD) regardless of study design. The search
was limited to literature published from 2006 and on humans and in
English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched further to look for relevant studies. Experts in
the field were also contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches
were conducted from 6 March 2016 to 15 August 2018. Literature
searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG
development process allowing any relevant papers published before
22 February 2019 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider
evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of the search
strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were made to other CPGs on MDD e.g.
• Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Mood Disorders (Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists, 2015)
• Mental Health Care in the Perinatal Period [Centre of Perinatal
Excellence (COPE) 2017]
• Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Adults with Major
Depressive Disorder [Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
Treatments (CANMAT), 2016]
• Depression, The Treatment and Management of Depression in
Adults (Updated Edition) (National Collaborating Centre for Mental
Health, 2010)
• MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines: Depression (MoH Singapore,
2012)
• Depression in Adults with a Chronic Physical Health Problem
(National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2010)
The CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to being used as references.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
A total of 11 main clinical questions were developed under three
different sections (screening, treatment and monitoring). Members
of the DG were assigned individual questions within these sections
(refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG members met
21 times throughout the development of these guidelines. All literature
retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using the Critical
Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence tables and
further discussed in DG meetings. All statements and recommendations
subsequently formulated were agreed upon by both the DG and RC.
Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations were made
by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG is based largely on the
findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical trials, with
local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG strictly
follows the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG, and the Health Technology Assessment
(HTA) and CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details
on the CPG development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained
from Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based
Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.
moh.gov.my/penerbitan/mymahtas/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of MDD in the following aspects:
a) diagnosis
b) treatment
c) monitoring
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
a. Inclusion Criteria
Adult patients with MDD
b. Exclusion Criteria
•
Persistent depressive disorder
•
Depressive episodes in patients with bipolar disorder or
adjustment disorder with depressed mood
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care in the management
of MDD including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. policymakers
v. patients and their advocates
vi. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Uma Visvalingam
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Members (in alphabetical order)
ix
Ms. Aida Farhana Suhaimi
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Aida Syarinaz Ahmad Adlan
Senior Lecturer & Psychiatrist
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Firdaus Abdul Gani
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Sultan Haji Ahmad Shah
Temerloh, Pahang
Dr. Masseni Abd Aziz
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Umbai, Melaka
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health
Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr. Muhammad
Muhsin Ahmad Zahari
Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
University Malaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Noor Izuana Redzuan
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Noormazita Misran
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar
Seremban, Negeri Sembilan
Ms. Nurul Syakilah Embok Raub
Principal Assistant Director
Pharmacy Practice & Development
Division Ministry of Health, Selangor
Dr. Peter Low Kuan Hoe
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Ms. Siti Mariam Mohtar
Senior Assistant Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr. Suzaily Wahab
Lecturer & Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Tan Sing Yee
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jenjarom, Selangor
Dr. Umi Adzlin Silim
Consultant for Consultation-Liaison
Psychiatry
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr Toh Chin Lee
National Advisor for Psychiatry
Head of Department & Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Azizul Awaluddin
Head of Department & Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Baizury Bashah
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Lim Chong Hum
Consultant Psychiatrist & Clinical Epidemiologist
Ramsay Sime Darby/ParkCity Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Norhayati Nordin
Hospital Director & Consultant Psychiatrist (Child & Adolescents)
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Associate Professor Dr. Normala Ibrahim
Deputy Dean (Research and Internationalization) & Consultant Psychiatrist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Ms. Noor Ratna Naharuddin
Pharmacist
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Professor Dr. Nor Zuraida Zainal
Consultant for Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry
University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Raynuha Mahadevan
Lecturer & Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Ang Jin Kiat
Senior Lecturer & Psychiatrist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Professor Dr. Anne Buist
Professor of Women’s Mental Health
University of Melbourne, Austin Health
Australia
Dr. Cheah Yee Chuang
Consultant Community &
Rehabilitation Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Professor Dr. David J. Kupfer
Professor Emeritus of Psychiatry
University of Pittsburgh
United States of America
Professor Dr. Firdaus Mukhtar
Head of Department & Clinical
Psychologist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Professor Dr. Hatta Sidi
Senior Lecturer & Senior Consultant
Psychiatrist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Idayu Maarof
Registered Medical Practitioner
(General Practitioner) &
Patient Advocate
Shah Alam, Selangor
Professor Dr. Mohamad Hussain Habil
Senior Lecturer & Senior Consultant
Psychiatrist
MAHSA University, Selangor
Dr. Muniswaran a/l Ganesham @
Ganeshan
Maternal-Fetal Medicine Specialist &
Ostetrician and Gynaecologist
Hospital Wanita & Kanak-kanak
Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rozita Mat Zin
General Practitioner & Patient Advocate
Klinik Wong Singh
Bandar Country Homes, Selangor
Dr. Salmah Noordin
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Batu 9, Cheras,
Selangor
Dr. Sarfraz Manzoor Hussain
Consultant Psychiatrist
Nilai Medical Centre, Negeri Sembilan
Mr. Syahrir Zaini
Lecturer & Pharmacist
International Islamic University Malaysia
Pahang
Dr. Zanariah Mat Saher
Consultant Geriatric Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 1. TREATMENT OF MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
TREATMENT
To achieve
remission
ACUTE
Mild to
moderate
Psychosocial
intervention
Psychosocial
intervention
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacotherapy
ECT
Moderate
to severe
Psychotic
features
Pharmacotherapy
Psychosocial
intervention
ECT
CONTINUATION
AND
MAINTENANCE
Pharmacotherapy
+
Psychosocial
intervention
Psychotherapy
+
Psychosocial
intervention
To prevent
relapse,
recurrence
and
development
of chronicity
Phases of
treatment
DIAGNOSIS
±
+
±
+
±
+
+
AND/OR
xii
ECT = electroconvulsive therapy
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
xiii
ALGORITHM 2. PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
Diagnosis of MDD
Consider factors for choice of antidepressant [refer to Chapter 4.1.2 (B)]
Start second-generation antidepressant*
***Consider factors for
initial treatment failure
and manage accordingly
Optimise by titrating dose of
medication as tolerated
Adequate response
after 2 weeks
of optimisation
Response** after
2 - 4 weeks
Other strategies:
• switching antidepressants to a different class
• combination of antidepressants
• augmentation with AAP/lithium/AED
Remission
Continuation/
maintenance
phase treatment
• 6 - 9 months
after onset of
remission
• ≥2 years if there
is a high risk of
relapse and
recurrence
*Second-generation antidepressants: SSRIs, SNRIs,
NaSSAs, melatonergic agonist and serotonergic antagonist,
multimodal antidepressants and NDRIs
**Refer to Chapter 3
***Consider:
• Incorrect diagnosis (e.g. failure to diagnose bipolar disorder)
• Psychotic depression
• Organic conditions e.g. anaemia or hypothyroidism
• Co-morbid psychiatric disorder e.g. substance abuse or
dependence, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder
and personality disorder
• Adverse psychosocial factors
• Non/poor compliance
****Consider referral to psychiatrist
MDD
= major depressive disorder
AAP
= atypical antipsychotics
AED
= antiepilectic drugs
SSRIs = selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
SNRIs = serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
NaSSAs = noradrenergic and specific serotonergic
antidepressants
NDRI
= noradrenaline/dopamine-reuptake inhibitors
No****
No
Yes
Yes
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
xiv
ALGORITHM 3. TREATMENT OF PRE-EXISTING
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER IN
PRE-PREGNANCY, PREGNANCY & POSTPARTUM PERIOD
Pre-existing Major Depressive Disorder (MDD)
in Pre-Pregnancy, Pregnancy and
Postpartum Period
Mild MDD
not on antidepressant
Moderate - Severe MDD
Expedite psychosocial
intervention and
psychotherapy with
close monitoring of
symptoms
On antidepressant
Not on antidepressant
Assess risk and benefit
of starting antidepressant
treatment and
consequences of
no treatment
Assess risk and benefit of
continuing antidepressant
treatment and
consequences of
stopping abruptly or
changing treatment
Continue
antidepressant
Switch
antidepressant
Stop
antidepressant
Start
antidepressant
No
antidepressant
Consider
combination
with
psychotherapy
Consider
antidepressant
with lower risk
to pregnancy
and
breastfeeding
with close
monitoring of
symptoms
Consider
combination
with
psychotherapy
with monitoring
of symptoms
Expedite
psychotherapy
with close
monitoring of
symptoms
Expedite
psychotherapy
with close
monitoring of
symptoms
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 4. TREATMENT OF NEWLY DIAGNOSED MAJOR
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER IN PREGNANCY AND POSTPARTUM
Newly Diagnosed Major Depressive Disorder (MDD),
Peripartum Onset
Mild - Moderate MDD
Moderate - Severe MDD
Assess risk and benefit of
antidepressant treatment and
consequences of no treatment
Start psychosocial
intervention and
psychotherapy
Start
antidepressant
No
antidepressant
Consider
combination with
psychosocial
intervention and
psychotherapy
Expedite
psychosocial
intervention and
psychotherapy
with close
monitoring
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
1
1. INTRODUCTION
Mental health is a state of well-being in which every individual realises
his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can
work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to the
community.1 It includes emotional, psychological and social well-being.
However, unhealthy mental health can lead someone to develop mental
disorder including MDD. Mental disorder is defined as “a syndrome
characterised by clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s
cognition, emotion regulation or behaviour that reflects a dysfunction
in the psychological, biological or developmental processes underlying
mental functioning”.2
MDD, a common but complex illness, can present with a variety of
unique symptom combinations. This disorder is characterised by
persistent low mood, loss of interest, difficulty in concentrating, sleep
disturbances, fatigue and in more severe form, functional impairment
and suicidal ideations. Functional impairment is defined as loss of
functional capacity affecting a person’s ability to work resulting from the
person’s medical condition.3
It is estimated that MDD will contribute to highest burden of disease in
2030.4 The adverse outcomes related to MDD varies from significant
difficulties in role transitions, decreased role functioning, increased
risk of onset, severity and persistence of several secondary disorders.
There is higher risk of early mortality resulting from physical disorders
and suicide.5, level III The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that
suicide is the second leading cause of death among the 15 to 29 years
age group.6
A review of depression studies in Malaysia showed the prevalence of
MDD in Malaysia to be between 8 - 12%.7, level III A meta-analysis showed
a global prevalence of MDD at 4.7% (95% CI 4.4 to 5.0%).8, level III
A systematic review of 27 studies showed that MDD (especially in
specialised mental health care) often has a chronic and/or recurrent
course with consequences over the entire lifespan.9, level III WHO Global
Health Estimates 2015 found that depressive disorders contribute to
7.5% of total Years Living with Disability (YLD) worldwide and this
translates as the single largest contributor to global disability. According
to this report, MDD contributes to 6.9% of total YLD in Malaysia.10
To ensure full functional recovery and prevention of relapse, the targeted
outcome for treatment of MDD is treatment to remission. Remission can
be defined as a minimum of 80% reduction in symptoms of MDD or
as an absolute cut-off score in any one validated rating scales.11, level
III Non-remission of depressive symptoms in MDD has implications on
functionality12, level II-2 and can add to the economic burden of the illness.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
This CPG is a full review of the previous edition of guidelines on the
Management of MDD published in 2007. In order to preserve the
validity of these guidelines, new evidence in the management of MDD
was searched and critically appraised prior to being accepted. This
CPG also minimises variation in clinical practices to adapt appropriate
management in MDD.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
3
2. ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
2.1 Screening
In a systematic review of local studies in Malaysia, prevalence of
depression in primary care ranged from 6.7% to 14.4%. Among the
elderly in the general community, the prevalence was between 6.3%
and 18%. In most of the studies, women had higher rates of depression
than men. Studies in a clinical setting found a prevalence of depression
to be 20.7% in post-partum women, 36% in post-stroke patients and
19.1% in breast cancer patients. However, different instrument were
used in these studies.13, level III
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) guidelines
recommend screening for depression in adults, including perinatal
women. It should be implemented when there are adequate systems in
place to ensure accurate diagnosis, effective treatment and appropriate
follow-up.14 However, in the absence of benefit in screening and
presence of potential harms, the Canadian Preventive Task Force
guidelines do not recommend routine screening for depression in
primary care settings, either in adults at average risk or in those with
characteristics that may increase their risk of depression.15
The CPG DG suggests screening for depression in high risk individuals
with following history:16, level III
• first-degree relative with a history of depression
• chronic diseases
• obesity
• chronic pain (e.g. backache, headache)
• impoverished home environment
• financial constraint
• experiencing major life changes
• pregnant or postpartum period
• socially-isolated
• multiple vague symptoms
• sleep disturbance
• substance abuse (e.g. alcohol, illicit drugs)
• loss of interest in sexual activity
• old age
• There is insufficient evidence to perform screening for depression in
the general population.
The common tools used in Malaysia for screening of depression are
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Depression, Anxiety and Stress
Scale (DASS), Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), and Hospital
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Anxiety Depression Scale (HADS). All these screening tools have
validated Malay version.17, level III Besides that, Whooley Questions is a
shorter tool which has been validated locally.18, level III
• Whooley Questions on depression:
○ "During the past month, have you often been bothered by feeling
down, depressed or hopeless?"
○ "During the past month, have you often been bothered by having
little interest or pleasure in doing things?"
The screening of depression with the Whooley Questions in the primary
care shows a sensitivity of 96% to 99% and a specificity of 70% to
78%. The addition of the help question (Do you need help?) increases
the specificity to 95%.18 - 19, level III The Whooley Questions may be
considered in people who may have depression particularly in those
with a past history of depression or a chronic physical health problem
with associated functional impairment.20
Recommendation 1
• Screening for depression using Whooley Questions in primary care
may be considered in people at risk*.
*Refer to preceding text.
Refer to Appendix 6A for Malay version of Whooley Questions.
2.2 Assessment
Assessment of depression consists of detailed history taking, mental
state examination, physical examination and investigations where
indicated:21
History taking include:
• presenting symptoms
• mode of onset
• duration and severity of symptoms
• number and severity of past episodes
• response to treatment
• previous hospitalisations
• psychosocial stressors
• family history
• suicide attempts
• past history of manic or hypomanic episodes
• substance abuse or other psychiatric illnesses
• social history and social support
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
5
• social and occupational impairment
• relevant medical history
• drugs history (prescribed and over-the-counter medications)
Mental state examination include:
• evaluation of depressive symptom severity
• presence of psychotic symptoms
• risk of harm to self and others
Physical examination should be done accordingly to rule out any
medical or surgical causes for depressive symptoms. Laboratory
tests may be required, particularly if the presentation is atypical e.g.
symptoms suggesting a medical cause, elderly patients, first major
depressive episode after the age of 40, absence of precipitating factors
and depression not responding fully to the standard treatment.21
2.3 Diagnosis and Assessment of Severity
The diagnosis of MDD is made using internationally accepted diagnostic
criteria i.e. either the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5) or
the ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorder: Clinical
Description & Diagnostic Guidelines.
Based on the DSM-5 criteria, a minimum of five symptoms is required
to diagnose MDD (refer to Appendix 3).
Assessment of MDD severity is important to determine the mode of
treatment. The assessment is determined by the total number of
symptoms criteria, the severity of symptoms and the extent of functional
disability.
According to DSM-5, the severity of MDD can be divided into mild,
moderate and severe. For mild depression, five or more symptoms
are present which cause distress but they are manageable and result
in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning. For severe
depression, most of the symptoms are present with marked impairment
in functioning. It can present with or without psychotic symptoms.
For moderate depression, both symptom presentation and functional
impairment lies between the above two severities.
Another classification of the depression severity is based on ICD-10
criteria (refer to Appendix 4).
The DSM-5 is widely used in clinical practice and research in local
setting.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 2
• The severity of major depressive disorder should be assessed to
determine the mode of treatment.
2.4 Suicide Risk Assessment
A recent systematic review found that the suicide rate in Malaysia is
approximately 6 - 8/100,000 population/year with a rising trend in the
means of suicide and self-harm.22, level III The risk of suicide among
hospitalised patients with severe MDD can be as high as 15%.21
Thus, thorough suicide risk assessment should be emphasised in a
comprehensive management of MDD. Locally, the Malaysian Guidelines
on Suicide Prevention & Management and Guidelines on Suicide Risk
Management in Hospitals were developed to assist practitioners in
suicide preventive measures.
A systematic review of 21 studies evaluating 15 suicide risk assessment
instruments on a group of suicide attempters, showed that none
fulfilled requirements for diagnostic accuracy and there was insufficient
evidence to support its use in predicting suicidal acts.23, level II-2 A recent
multicentre, population-level cohort study on individuals with self-harm
episodes, suggested that suicide risk assessment scales should not
be used alone to determine treatment options or predict future risk of
further self-harm or suicide.24, level II-2 Therefore, suicide risk assessment
instruments should only be used to complement a detailed clinical
assessment and a structured follow-up management plan, while
building a good therapeutic alliance with the patients.
Assessment of suicide intent is a vital measurement to evaluate
future suicide risk among patients who self-harm.25, level II-2 Hence,
measurement of this risk should be included during the risk assessment
and can be done using specific tools (e.g. Beck Suicide Intent Scale).
The suicide risk factors are:21
• loss of relationship
• financial or occupational difficulties
• poor social support
• past suicide attempt
• family history of suicide
• alcohol abuse/dependence
• other medical co-mordibities
• suicidal ideations
• severity of depression
• psychomotor agitation
• low self-esteem
• hopelessness
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
7
2.5 Referral and Admission
2.5.1 Criteria for referral to psychiatric services
There is no new retrievable primary paper on referral of MDD. The
previous MoH CPG is used for this section.21 Communication between
healthcare personnel and patients has to be clear in explaining the
needs and benefits of psychiatric interventions.
• In a local setting, referral to the psychiatric services may be done
through the emergency and trauma department or directly to the
psychiatric clinic. Indications for referral to psychiatric services
include:21
○ unsure of diagnosis
○ attempted suicide
○ active suicidal ideas
○ failure of treatment
○ advice on further treatment
○ clinical deterioration
○ recurrent episode within one year
○ psychotic symptoms
○ severe agitation
○ self-neglect
2.5.2 Criteria for admission
Admission of patients with MDD may be required if outpatient care
alone is insufficient. Locally, admission to the psychiatric ward can be
voluntary or involuntary according to the Mental Health Act (2001).26
Indications for admission are as follows:21
• risk of harm to self
• psychotic symptoms
• inability to care for self
• lack of impulse control
• danger to others
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
3. PHASES OF TREATMENT
General principles of MDD treatment are:
• to relieve symptoms
• to reduce the morbidity and disability
• to limit risks of self-harm and fatality
Treatment of MDD can be divided into three phases - acute,
continuation and maintenance (refer to Figure 1). For the purpose of
discussion in this CPG, the continuation phase is considered as part of
the maintenance phase.
Figure 1. Phases of treatment of major depression
Adapted: Kupfer DJ. Long-term treatment of depression. J Clin Psychiatry
1991:52 (Suppl):28-34
*Refer to Subchapter 4.2.1 B on Pharmacotherapy.
• The acute phase is a period aiming to achieve remission.21
• The maintenance phase is a period to prevent relapse and recurrence
and, development of chronicity.27
• Response is a ≥50% reduction in depressive symptoms and at least
a moderate degree of global improvement.21
○ Non-response - ≤25% decrease in baseline symptom severity
○ Partial response - >25% and <50% decrease in baseline symptom
severity
• Remission is the absence of signs and symptoms in the current
episode of depression and restoration of function.21
• Relapse is the return of symptoms of the current episode within six
months following remission.28
• Recovery is when an individual is fully functional and has returned to
premorbid functioning.29
• Recurrence is a new episode of depression after recovery.
Continuation and maintenance*
Acute
(<12 weeks)
Symptoms
“Normalcy”
Treatment Phases
Syndrome
Response
Remission
Relapse
Recovery Recurrence
Progression to Disorder
X
X
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
9
4. TREATMENT
The modalities of treatment in MDD are:
• pharmacotherapy
• psychotherapy
• psychosocial intervention
• physical
• others
These are offered based on the severity of the disease (mild,
moderate and severe) in both acute and maintenance phases. Refer to
Appendix 8 on Suggested Antidepressant Dosages and Adverse
Effects.
4.1 Acute Phase
4.1.1 Mild to Moderate
A.
Psychosocial Interventions and Psychotherapy
Evidence on the effectiveness of psychological and psychosocial
interventions have mainly been found in the acute treatment of MDD,
and mostly between mild to moderate severity. The general aim of
these interventions is to alleviate core depressive symptoms or prevent
symptoms recurring.
There are psychological and psychosocial interventions of lower
intensity that are less dependent on trained professionals and can
be self-guided (e.g. internet- and mobile-based intervention, exercise
programme, etc.).20, 29
The types of interventions offered depends on patient’s preferences and
attitudes, therapist competence, therapeutic alliance and availability of
the intervention.20, 30
Psychosocial Interventions
i.
Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation is given by delivering information on pharmacotherapy
and psychological measures which consist of topics on:
• symptoms and course of depression
• the biopsychosocial model of aetiology
• pharmacotherapy for acute phase and maintenance
• drug side effects and complications
• importance of medication adherence
• early signs of recurrence
• management of relapse and recurrence
Psychoeducation is an important component in the treatment of
depression. It is provided early and continuously throughout the
management of the condition.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
In patients with <5 episodes, there was no difference between
manualised psychoeducation as an adjunct to an antidepressant in
preventing relapse than maintenance cognitive behavioural therapy
(CBT). However, in those with ≥5 previous major depressive episodes,
manualised psychoeducation is significantly less effective in similar
comparison.31, level I
A randomised controlled trial (RCT) showed that adding a family
intervention to inpatient treatment of MDD over TAU improved BDI
scores (p<0.005). It was also more effective in improving subjective
emotional health in patients’ partners at three months follow-up
(p=0.029).32, level I
Recommendation 3
• Psychoeducation should be offered early and continuously
throughout the management of major depressive disorder.
ii.
Counselling/Non-directive Supportive Therapy
The British Association for Counseling and Psychotherapy defines
counselling as ‘a systematic process which gives individuals an
opportunity to explore, discover and clarify ways of living more
resourcefully, with a greater sense of well-being’.20 It is commonly
described in the literature as either non-directive supportive therapy
(NDST) or supportive therapy.
An RCT of primary care patients found that there was no significant
difference between counselling and CBT in reducing BDI score at four
months in MDD.33, level I A meta-analysis of 31 RCTs of moderate quality
primary papers found that NDST was more effective than waiting list
or usual care (Hedges’ g=0.58, 95% CI 0.45 to 0.72; NNT=3) but less
effective than other psychotherapies (Hedges’ g= -0.20, 95% CI -0.32
to -0.08) in mild to moderate MDD.34, level I
iii.
Peer Intervention
Peer intervention, which includes peer support and self-help groups,
is often used as a complement to clinical care. CANMAT recommends
peer intervention as a second-line adjunctive treatment for MDD.30
A meta-analysis of seven RCTs found that peer support interventions
were more effective compared with usual care in reducing depressive
symptoms in adults with depression (SMD= -0.59, 95% CI -0.98 to
-0.21). However there was no significant difference between peer
intervention and group CBT in MDD for the same outcome.35, level I
iv.
Exercise
Exercise is defined as the ‘planned, structured and repetitive bodily
movement done to improve or maintain one or more components of
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
11
physical fitness’.36 Exercise therapy generally consists of activity of 45
- 60 minutes per session, up to three times per week and prescribed for
10 - 12 weeks.21
The mechanism of exercise includes positive feedback from other
people, increased sense of self-worth, diversion from negative
thoughts, increased social contact and changes in endorphin and
monoamine concentrations.20
In a Cochrane systematic review of 39 RCTs with moderate quality,
exercise was more effective than control in all severity of MDD (SMD=
-0.62, 95% CI -0.81 to -0.42).37, level I This is supported by another metaanalysis on 13 RCTs of moderate quality (Hedge’s g= -0.97, 95% CI
-1.40 to -0.54).38, level I
Adverse effects of exercise varies which included musculoskeletal pain,
chest pain and falls.37, level I
v.
Relaxation
Relaxation technique is a method to help a person attain a state of
calmness.
In a Cochrane systematic review of 15 RCTs, relaxation techniques
addressed were progressive muscle relaxation, relaxation imagery,
autogenic training, combined or enhanced versions of these, as well
as relaxation adjunctive to other treatments. Relaxation reduced selfreported depression (SMD= -0.59, 95% CI -0.94 to -0.24) compared
with wait-list, no treatment or minimal treatment post-intervention in
MDD. However, when compared with psychological treatment (mainly
CBT), it was less effective in reducing self-reported depression (SMD=
0.38, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.62) and showed no difference on clinician-rated
depression (SMD=0.29, 95% CI -0.18 to 0.75).39, level I The limitation
of this review is that the quality of majority of primary papers was not
assessed due to inadequate methodological details.
vi.
Psychospiritual Intervention
It is crucial to be culturally sensitive in providing mental health care.
WHO has declared that spirituality is an important dimension of quality
of life.40 The biopsychosocial and spiritual model41 is currently being
widely used.
Definition of spirituality refers to ‘a dimension of human experience
related to the transcendent, the sacred, or to ultimate reality and is
closely related to values, meaning and purpose in life’. Religion is
usually defined as ‘systems of beliefs and practices related to the
sacred or divine, as held by a community or social group’.42
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
There is no retrievable evidence on psychospiritual intervention
specifically on MDD. However, it has been shown to reduce the
depressive symptoms in a diverse population.
In a systematic review, all included studies were significantly in
favour of faith-adapted CBT in depression outcomes compared with
control (range of SMD= -1.20 to -3.07). Faith-adapted CBT is defined
as 'integrated faith into established evidence-based treatments by
components of discussion of religious or scriptural teachings as
supportive evidence to counter irrational thoughts or to support
cognitive or behavioural change; use of positive religious and spiritual
coping techniques; promotion of helpful belief or value systems or use
of shared value systems to strengthen therapeutic relationships and
incorporation of religious practices e.g. prayer’.43, level I
Another systematic review showed beneficial effects of religious and
spiritual interventions in reduction of depressive symptoms between
one and six months compared with control (SMD= -0.24 95% CI -0.48
to 0.00). The interventions included religious affiliation of Christians,
Muslims, Buddhists and Hindus. The spiritual components included
‘teaching spiritual religious principles, client prayer, reading sacred texts
and religious imagery or spiritual meditation based on cognitive therapy
or CBT, humanistic therapy, non-psychological religious teachings and
a combination of these approaches’.44, level I
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy for the treatment of MDD has been shown to reduce
psychological distress and improving recovery through the therapeutic
relationship between the therapist and the patient.
There is a wide range of psychotherapy available with considerable
variation in the robustness of the evidence.45, level I
Psychotherapy requires:20, 30
• a competent practitioner trained in an evidence-based approach
• a specific method of therapy delivery (e.g. through a manual)
• psychoeducation as an important element of treatment
These interventions are generally time-limited.
A systematic review of 23 RCTs examined the effectiveness of
psychotherapy
(i.e. behavioural activation, CBT,
interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT), problem-solving therapy (PST), psychodynamic
therapy, social skills training and supportive counselling) and
antidepressants in the treatment of acute MDD. There was no significant
difference in response to treatment for combined psychotherapy and
antidepressants compared with psychotherapy alone at six months and
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
13
≥1 year. However, the combination yielded better treatment response
compared with antidepressants alone at:46, level I
• ≥6 months (OR=2.93, 95% CI 2.15 to 3.99)
• >1 year (OR=2.23, 95% CI 1.43 to 3.41)
The primary papers in the review were generally of moderate quality
with no significant heterogeneity. However, there were possible
publication bias noted.
A meta-analysis showed that psychotherapies were more effective than
control conditions in:47, level I
• after therapy (p=0.002)
• response (p<0.001)
• remission (p=0.011)
The quality of the included primary papers was of low to moderate
quality.
In a network meta-analysis, seven psychotherapies (i.e. IPT, behavioural
activation, CBT, PST, psychodynamic therapy, social skills therapy
and supportive counseling) were more effective than wait-list control
condition and showed moderate to large effect sizes (range of Cohen’s
d= -0.62 to -0.92). In a stepwise restriction of analyses of the same
study, there were robust effects for CBT, IPT and PST (Cohen’s d=0.46)
compared with wait-list. The primary papers included in this review
were of moderate quality.45, level I
A meta-analysis studied on group psychotherapies which was defined
as group intervention based on any form of psychotherapy conducted
on ≥3 participants. Group-CBT and TAU was more effective in reducing
depressive symptoms in immediate post-treatment (within one week)
and medium- to long-term (>3 months) compared with TAU alone
with SMD of -0.55 (95% CI -0.78 to -0.32) and -0.47 (95% CI -0.87 to
-0.08) respectively. In another analysis, seven RCTs showed individualCBT was more effective than group CBT immediately post-treatment
(SMD=0.38, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.66), but not significant at short-term or
medium- to long-term follow-up. No firm conclusion can be made on
three other types of group psychotherapy (dialectic behavioural therapy,
IPT and self-controlled therapy). However, the primary papers included
were of poor quality.48, level I
i.
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
CBT focuses on the impact a person’s unhelpful thoughts have on the
current behavior and functioning, through cognitive restructuring and
behavioral approach.
Four meta-analyses of moderate quality primary papers looked at the
effectiveness of CBT compared with other treatment in mild to moderate
MDD.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
• CBT was more effective in reducing depressive symptoms than
control (Hedges’ g=0.71, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.79; NNT=2).49, level I
• CBT combined with pharmacotherapy was more effective in
reducing depressive symptoms than pharmacotherapy alone
(Hedges’ g=0.49, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.69; NNT=3).49, level I
• CBT was as effective as pharmacotherapy in reducing depressive
symptoms.49, level I Similarly, there was no significant difference
between CBT and second-generation antidepressants in response
and remission.50, level I
• CBT was as effective as other psychotherapies (i.e. Supportive
Therapy, Behavioural Therapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy,
IPT, PST and other psychotherapies) in reducing depressive
symptoms.49, level I
• CBT combined with antidepressants was as effective as other
psychotherapies combined with antidepressants (sub-group
analysis).46, level I
• Brief CBT (i.e. ≤8 sessions) was more effective than control in
reducing symptoms of depression (ES= -0.42, 95%, CI -0.74 to
-0.10).51, level I
A meta-analysis of 14 RCTs of moderate quality on group psychological
therapies plus usual care for MDD was more effective than usual care
alone in reducing depressive symptoms at immediate post-treatment
and more than three months [SMD= -0.55 (95% CI -0.78 to -0.32) and
SMD= -0.47 (95% CI -0.87 to -0.08) respectively]. However, there was
no significant difference at short-term follow-up (more than one week to
three months).48, level I
ii.
Interpersonal Psychotherapy
IPT focuses on interpersonal relationship in assisting patients to
improve social support network and manage interpersonal distress that
may be associated with the depression.
A meta-analysis of 31 studies of moderate quality found that IPT was
more effective than control in the treatment of acute MDD (Hedges’
g=0.60, 95% CI 0.45 to 0.75; NNT=3). However, there was no
significant difference between IPT and antidepressant medication or
other psychotherapies.52, level I
In the same meta-analysis, combined IPT and antidepressant was
more effective than IPT alone (Hedges’ g=0.24, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.46;
NNT=7). There was no significant difference between combined IPT
and antidepressant compared with antidepressant alone.52, level I
In a meta-analysis on seven psychotherapeutic interventions for
patients with MDD, IPT was significantly more effective than supportive
therapy (d= -0.30, 95% CrI -0.54 to -0.05).45, level I
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
15
iii.
Problem-solving Therapy
PST focuses on identifying personal problems, implementing the most
adaptive solutions to the problems and evaluating chosen solutions.
In one meta-analysis of 13 RCTs, PST was more effective than control
group (waiting list/usual care) in reducing depressive symptoms in
MDD (d=0.83, 95% CI 0.45 to 1.21).53, level I This is supported by a
systematic review of 22 RCTs with similar comparison.54, level I Both
reviews included moderate quality primary papers.
iv.
Behavioural Therapy
Behavioural therapy aims at increasing pleasant and socially reinforcing
activities, which can include social skills training, assertiveness training
and relaxation therapy.
A Cochrane review of 25 studies of low to moderate quality showed
no difference between behavioural therapy and other psychological
interventions
(i.e.
cognitive-behavioural,
third
wave
cognitivebehavioural, psychodynamic, humanistic and integrative therapies) in
response rate or drop-out rate in acute MDD.55, level I
Behavioural therapy also focuses on behavioural activation (i.e. a
behavioural component of CBT). A meta-analysis of 26 RCTs of low to
moderate quality primary papers found behavioural therapy to be more
effective in reducing depressive symptoms in acute MDD compared
with:56, level I
• control (Hedges’ g= -0.74, 95% CI -0.91 to -0.56; NNT=2)
• antidepressant medication (Hedges’ g= -0.42, 95% CI -0.83 to
-0.00; NNT=4)
Another meta-analysis found no significant difference between extended
behavioural activation and treatment as usual (TAU) in response rate
and drop-out rates for acute MDD.57, level I
v.
Third-wave Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
Two Cochrane systematic reviews compared third wave CBT therapies
(i.e. extended behavioural activation, acceptance and commitment
therapy and competitive memory training) for acute MDD with
control57, level I and other psychological therapies.58, level I
Third-wave CBT showed better response rate than control (RR=0.51,
95% CI 0.27 to 0.95). There was no significant difference in drop-out
rates.57, level I In another comparison, there was no significant difference
between third-wave CBT and other psychological therapies in response
rate and drop-out rates.58, level I
The primary papers included in the two reviews were of very low
quality.57 - 58, level I
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
vi.
Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Psychodynamic psychotherapy focuses on past unresolved conflicts and
relationships, and the impact they have on current situation. The active
exploration of the patient’s life and emotions distinguish psychodynamic
psychotherapy from psychoanalytic psychotherapy. The main element
distinguishing short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy (STPP) from
long-term psychodynamic treatment is time-restriction.
In a subgroup analysis from a Cochrane systematic review, STPP
reduced depressive symptoms compared with TAU or wait-list at shortterm follow-up in MDD (SMD= -0.47, 95% CI -0.67 to -0.28). The effect
did not reach statistical significance at medium- and long-term follow-up.
59, level I This is supported by another meta-analysis when STPP was
more effective than control condition at post-treatment of MDD (d=0.61,
95% CI 0.33 to 0.88, NNT=2).60, level I
An RCT of CBT vs STPP showed no significant difference in remission
rate.215, level I
vii. Marital Therapy
Marital therapy aims at modifying negative interactional patterns and
increasing mutually supportive aspects of couple relationships.
A Cochrane systematic review on eight trials of moderate quality found
marital therapy was more effective in reducing marital distress (SMD=
-0.94, 95% CI -1.38 to -0.50) compared with individual psychotherapy in
outpatients and community patients with MDD. Marital therapy showed
no significant difference compared with individual psychotherapy
in improving depressive symptoms or reducing persistence of
depression.61, level I
viii. Internet- and Mobile/Computer-based Interventions
Internet-
and
mobile/computer-based
interventions
are
any
psychotherapeutic programmes provided in an online or mobile/
computer setting. These interventions are considered as low intensity
psychotherapy as it can be self-guided and may be facilitated by a
competent practitioner.20 A meta-analysis of moderate quality primary
papers showed such interventions reduced depressive symptoms
compared with wait-list conditions at 4 - 12 weeks (Hedges’ g= -0.90,
95% CI -1.07 to -0.73) in MDD. Anxiety symptoms were also reduced
(Hedges’ g= -0.41, 95% CI -0.69 to -0.12).62, level I
Based on another meta-analysis of 14 studies, internet-based CBT
(iCBT) was effective in reducing symptoms of depression posttreatment compared with control up to six months follow-up only (SMD=
-0.48, 95% IC -0.63 to -0.33). Nonetheless, iCBT had significantly
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
17
higher drop-out rate in MDD. In this meta-analysis, there was no quality
assessment reported but publication bias was significant.63, level I
In a meta-analysis of individual participant data of 3876 participants
(high methodological quality primary papers), self-guided iCBT was
more effective than control on depressive symptoms severity (Hedges’
g=0.27, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.37) and treatment response (OR=1.95, 95%
CI 1.52 to 2.50) in mild to moderate MDD. It yielded a corresponding
NNT of 8. Adherence to the treatment was significantly associated with
lower depressive symptoms and better response to treatment.214, level I
Recommendation 4
• In mild to moderate major depressive disorder, psychosocial
intervention and psychotherapy should be offered, based on resource
availability, but not restricted to the following:
○ cognitive behavioural therapy
○ interpersonal therapy
○ problem-solving therapy
○ behavioural therapy
○ internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy
• The type of psychotherapy offered to patients will depend on various
factors including:
○ patient preference and attitude
○ nature of depression and its complexities
○ availability of trained therapist
○ therapeutic alliance
○ availability of therapy
B.
Pharmacotherapy
The aim of pharmacotherapy in the acute phase of MDD is to achieve
symptom remission between 8 - 12 weeks. Early improvement (defined
as >20% - 30% improvement from baseline depression scores at 2 - 4
weeks) predicts response and remission at 6 to 12 weeks.27
In mild to moderate MDD, patients should be offered psychosocial/
psychological interventions. However, the doctor may choose to start
antidepressant medication as an initial measure in situations e.g.:
• past history of moderate to severe depression21
• patient’s preference27
• previous response to antidepressants27
• lack of response to non-pharmacotherapy interventions27
Patients should be closely monitored and given a follow-up appointment
within two weeks.21
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
4.1.2
Moderate to Severe
A.
Psychological and Psychosocial Interventions
In a meta-analysis of 22 RCTs of moderate quality, combined
pharmacotherapy with psychotherapy had higher probability of
remission at 2, 3, 4, 6 and 12 months, with the highest effect shown
at four months (OR=2.36, 95% CI 1.58 to 3.55), compared with
pharmacotherapy alone in moderate to severe MDD. This combination
also showed lower risk of relapse if continued into the continuation
phase (OR=3.28, 95% CI 1.76 to 6.09).64, level I
Recommendation 5
• In moderate to severe major depressive disorder, a combination of
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy should be offered.
Exercise was shown to be more effective than control across severity
in MDD.37, level I
Recommendation 6
• In moderate to severe major depressive disorder, exercise may be
offered as an adjunct treatment.
B.
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacotherapy is the mainstay of treatment for moderate to severe
depression. There are many classes of antidepressants available
e.g. selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), noradrenergic and specific
serotonergic antidepressants (NaSSAs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs), noradrenaline and dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs)
and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). The newer ones are multimodal
antidepressant and melatonergic agonist and serotonergic antagonist.
There are other agents that have shown emerging evidence in special
conditions related to depression.
Choice of Antidepressant Medication
• The choice of antidepressant medication will depend on various
factors including efficacy and tolerability, patient profile and
comorbidities, concomitant medications and drug-drug interactions,
cost and availability, as well as patients’ preference.
• Taking into account efficacy and side-effect profiles, most secondgeneration antidepressants namely SSRIs, SNRIs, NaSSAs,
melatonergic agonist & serotonergic antogonist, NDRIs and
multimodal antidepressant may be considered as the initial treatment
medication, while the older antidepressants such as TCAs and
MAOIs are considered for subsequent choice later.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
19
i.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
There are six meta-analyses on the effectiveness of SSRIs in treating
moderate to severe depression. However, the risk of bias in primary
papers of some of the meta-analyses resulted in caution in interpretation
of the results.
In a recent meta-analysis, SSRIs were more effective than placebo
in reducing HDRS scores (MD= -1.94, 95% CI -2.50 to -1.37) and
decreasing risk of no remission (RR=0.88, 95% CI 0.84 to 0.91) in
MDD.65, level I
Other meta-analyses on treatment response with SSRIs in acute MDD
showed that:
• sertraline was more effective than fluoxetine (OR=0.73, 95% CI
0.59 to 0.92)66, level I
• escitalopram was more effective than citalopram (OR=0.67, 95%
CI 0.50 to 0.89)67, level I
• fluoxetine and paroxetine were equally effective (OR=1.03, 95%
CI 0.88 to 1.20) and tolerable (OR=0.95, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.12)
68, level I
A meta-analysis demonstrated that SSRIs as a group were less effective
than SNRIs for remission in MDD (OR= 1.27, 95%CI 1.06 to 1.52).
69, level I However, sertraline and escitalopram individually was as
effective as SNRIs.66 - 67, level I
In another meta-analysis, although SSRIs had lower rates of remission
in MDD compared with mirtazapine (p=0.0006), it had lower overall
drop-out rates (p=0.0265) after six weeks of treatment.70, level I
In terms of adverse event, SSRIs:
• had increased risk of adverse events compared with placebo
65, level I
• lower dropout rates due to ADRs compared with SNRIs (p<0.001)
69, level I
Apart from that, sertraline in MDD had:66, level I
• less side effects compared with paroxetine (OR=0.28, 95% CI 0.08
to 0.96)
• less adverse events compared with amitriptyline (OR=0.59, 95%
CI 0.39 to 0.89) and imipramine (OR=0.17, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.32)
• higher adverse events compared with escitalopram (OR 1.76, 95%
CI 1.06 to 2.94)
In a cohort study, SSRI-treated patients did not have higher suicide
attempts compared with untreated patients (HR=0.65, 95% CI 0.14 to
3.02), and with SNRI-treated patients (HR=0.76, 95% CI 0.36 to 1.63)
in MDD.71, level II-2
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
ii.
Serotonin Noradrenaline Reuptake Inhibitors
In a meta-analysis of high quality RCTs, venlafaxine was more effective
in response rate than SSRIs (citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline), but showed no difference
with duloxetine and TCAs (amitriptyline, clomipramine, dosulepine,
imipramine, maprotiline and nortriptyline) in moderate to severe MDD.
However, duloxetine had no difference in response rate compared with
SSRI.72, level I
In the same meta-analysis, there was no significant difference between
duloxetine or venlafaxine and SSRIs in remission rate based on
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) and Montgomery-Asberg
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS). There was also no significant
difference between venlafaxine and TCAs.72, level I Another metaanalysis found, SNRIs as a group (venlafaxine and duloxetine) were
more effective than SSRIs (fluoxetine, paroxetine and sertraline) in
achieving remission in moderate to severe MDD at 8 - 12 weeks (OR=
1.27, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.52).69, level I
In another meta-analysis, desvenlafaxine was significantly more
effective in both response and remission rate compared with placebo
and antidepressants in general (i.e. venlafaxine, duloxetine or
escitalopram).73, level I
Adverse events were:
• higher in duloxetine compared with venlafaxine (OR=1.79, 95% CI
1.16 to 2.78)72, level I
• higher in duloxetine and venlafaxine compared with SSRIs
[OR=1.38 (95% CI 1.15 to 1.66) and OR=1.53 (95% CI 1.10 to
2.13) respectively]69, level I; 72, level I
• non-significantly
differed
between
venlafaxine
and
TCAs
(OR=0.97, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.41)72, level I
There was high discontinuation rate in desvenlafaxine compared with
placebo (RR=1.98, 95 % CI 1.45 to 2.69).73, level I
iii.
Noradrenergic & Specific Serotonergic Antidepressants
In a large Cochrane systematic review of 29 RCTs, mirtazapine was
significantly more effective than SSRIs and SNRIs in term of response
and remission at two weeks, and response at 6 - 12 weeks. When
compared with TCAs, there was no difference in term of response at
two weeks and 6 - 12 weeks.74, level I
Mirtazapine is one of the first-line antidepressants and more effective
compared with duloxetine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine,
sertraline and venlafaxine. It has minimal or low potential for drug-drug
interaction. It is also one of the antidepressants that can be used for
MDD with sleep disturbances.27
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
21
In the same review, mirtazapine was significantly less likely than SSRI
to cause gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, sweating, sexual dysfunction,
tremor and sleep disturbances. It was also significantly less likely than
SNRI to cause sleep disturbance, sweating and constipation. Apart from
this, it was significantly less likely than TCAs to cause hypertension/
tachycardia and tremor.75, level I
Mirtazapine was significantly more likely than SSRIs to cause more
weight gain, increase salivation, fatigue and sleepiness. It was
significantly more likely than SNRIs to cause fatigue.75, level I
iv.
Melatonergic Agonist & Serotonergic Antagonist
At present, agomelatine is a melatonin MT1 and MT2 agonist, and
a 5HT2c antagonist used in depression. It had higher response rate
compared with placebo (RR=1.25, 95% CI 1.11 to1.41) and sertraline
(SMD=0.23, 95%, CI 0.01 to 0.46) in MDD.77, level I In a Cochrane
systematic review of 13 RCTs, agomelatine showed no significant
difference in response and remission rates in MDD when compared
with SSRIs (paroxetine, ﬂuoxetine, sertraline, escitalopram) and SNRI
(venlafaxine).78, level I
Agomelatine in MDD had less side effects including sexual dysfunction
compared with other SSRIs (paroxetine, ﬂuoxetine, sertraline,
escitalopram) (RR=0.91, 95% CI 0.84 to 0.98).78, level I
Agomelatine showed lower drop-out rate due to side effects compared
with other antidepressants agents (escitalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline,
paroxetine and venlafaxine) (RR = 0.61, 95% CI 0.48 to 0.78) in MDD.
77, level I
Agomelatine were reported to cause elevated liver enzymes but
serious hepatic reactions were rare. Liver function test is required at
approximate three, six, 12 and 24 weeks after initiation dosage, after
dosage increment or when clinically indicated.79, level I
v.
Multimodal Serotonin Modulator
Vortioxetine is a multimodal serotonin modulator. Three meta-analyses
showed that vortioxetine was significantly more effective than placebo
in terms of response and remission for acute treatment of MDD.
80 - 82, level I This is supported by a recent network meta-analysis which
found that vortioxetine was more effective in response compared with
placebo for acute MDD (OR=1.66, 95% CI 1.45 to 1.92).83, level I
In a Cochrane systematic review, vortioxetine was less effective
compared with duloxetine for response (RR=0.86, 95% CI 0.79 to 0.94)
and reduction of depressive symptoms (MD=1.99, 95% CI 1.15 to 2.83)
in adults with acute MDD. The same systematic review showed no
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
significant differences between vortioxetine and venlafaxine for similar
outcomes.80, level I An earlier meta-analysis showed that vortioxetine
was less effective at doses of 5 mg (RR=0.88, 95% CI 0.80 to 0.98),
15 mg (RR=0.78, 95% CI 0.68 to 0.90) and 20 mg (RR=0.82, 95%
CI 0.72 to 0.94) for response, but had no significant differences for
remission compared with SNRIs in adults with acute MDD.81, level I
Although vortioxetine caused more adverse events (e.g. nausea,
vomiting and hyperhidrosis) compared with placebo, it had less adverse
events compared with venlafaxine or duloxetine.80 - 81, level I
CANMAT recommends vortioxetine for MDD with cognitive dysfunction.27
vi.
Tricyclic Antidepressants
TCAs have been used for long time compared with other classes of
antidepressants. There is scarcity of new evidence of TCAs since the
previous edition of the CPG. A Cochrane systematic review in 2012
showed that amitriptyline was more effective than placebo in the
acute phase of MDD (OR=2.64, 95%CI 2.28 to 3.06). The side effects
e.g. sexual dysfunction, weight gain, urination problems, dyspepsia,
tremor, sedation, tachycardia, dizziness, nervousness and fatigue
were significantly higher in amitriptyline. Apart from that, amitriptyline
had also significantly higher anticholinergic side effects e.g. dry mouth,
constipation and visual disturbances.84, level I
vii. Noradrenaline/Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitor
Bupropion is a noradrenaline/dopamine-reuptake inhibitor. A metaanalysis of five RCTs showed that bupropion was more effective than
placebo in reducing depression scores in acute phase MDD in adults
(Hedge’s g= -2.02, 95% CI -2.93 to -1.11).85, level I However, quality
assessment of primary papers was not addressed and there was
significant heterogeneity among the papers. A recent network metaanalysis showed that bupropion was more effective than placebo for
response in acute MDD (OR=1.58, 95% CI 1.35 to 1.86).83, level I
A meta-analysis found that bupropion was as effective as venlafaxine
for response, remission, and reduction of depression scores in MDD.
There was no significant difference between bupropion and venlafaxine
in terms of Changes in Sexual Functioning Questionnaire scores and
adverse events.86, level I
viii. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Although MAOIs are efficacious in treatment of MDD, they are not
recommended as first-line treatment due to their poor tolerability profile,
increased side-effects, and serious drug interactions.27, 29
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
23
• Based on a recent network meta-analysis on moderate to severe
acute MDD in adults:83, level I
○ all antidepressants were more effective than placebo in response
○ agomelatine, amitriptyline, escitalopram, mirtazapine, paroxetine,
venlafaxine and vortioxetine were more effective than other
antidepressants whereas fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, reboxetine and
trazodone were the least effective drugs
○ as for acceptability, agomelatine, citalopram, escitalopram,
fluoxetine, sertraline and vortioxetine were more tolerable than
other antidepressants whereas amitriptyline, clomipramine,
duloxetine, fluvoxamine, reboxetine, trazodone and venlafaxine
had the highest dropout rates
Recommendation 7
• In moderate to severe major depressive disorder, one of the secondgeneration antidepressants should be prescribed:
○ selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
○ serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
○ noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressants
○ melatonergic agonist and serotonergic antagonist
○ multimodal serotonin modulator
○ noradrenaline/dopamine-reuptake inhibitor
ix.
Benzodiazepines
In the management of MDD, combination of certain class of drugs
may be required. In a Cochrane systematic review of 10 RCTs, a
combination of benzodiazepines and antidepressants was significantly
more effective only at 1 - 4 weeks compared with antidepressants alone
based on HAM-D and Comprehensive Psychiatric Rating Scale Visual
Analog Scale.87, level I
However, the combination therapies significantly caused more side
effects e.g. drowsiness/sedation compared with antidepressant alone
(RR=0.56, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.91).87, level I
Existing guidelines recommend benzodiazepines may be considered
for patients with anxiety, insomnia and/or agitation problem in MDD but
may be used no longer than 2 - 4 weeks to avoid dependency.20, 21, 88
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 8
• Benzodiazepines may be used as an adjunct to antidepressant
treatment in major depressive disorder with anxiety, agitation or
insomnia.
○ Avoid prescribing for more than 2 - 4 weeks due to risk of
dependency.
x.
Non-benzodiazepine Hypnotics
A
group
of
selective
gamma-aminobutyric
acid
agonist/nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (i.e. zolpidem and eszopiclone) might be
useful for short-term treatment of sleep disturbance in patients with
MDD.
A meta-analysis of six RCTs found that non-benzodiazepines as
an adjunctive therapy with antidepressants was significantly more
effective in achieving remission rates compared with placebo and
antidepressants alone, but showed no significant difference in response
rate. There was no significant difference in adverse events between the
two groups.89, level I
xi.
Emerging Pharmacotherapy Interventions
•
Psychostimulants
Psychostimulants have been used as part of the treatment in MDD due
to their mood elevating effects. However, a Cochrane systematic review
showed no difference in it reducing depressive symptoms when used as
adjunctive treatment to antidepressants compared with placebo. There
was also no difference between psychostimulants as monotherapy or
adjunct therapy compared with placebo for response rate in MDD. The
limitation of this paper was the primary papers used in this review were
old and of poor quality.90, level I
Existing guidelines do not recommend the use of psychostimulants in
MDD.20; 29 It may be used as adjunct therapy based on poor evidence.27
In a recent systematic review of 22 RCTs where risk of bias was not
reported, psychostimulants were more effective in terms of response
compared with placebo in MDD (OR=1.41, 95% CI 1.13 to 1.78).91, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to suggest the use of psychostimulants
in MDD.
•
Ketamine
In a Cochrane systematic review of nine RCTs, patients with mainly
moderate to severe MDD in acute phase who received intravenous (IV)
ketamine had significantly greater improvement in both response and
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
25
remission rate compared with placebo within 24 hours, 72 hours and
one week but not at two weeks of administration.92, level I
The main adverse events of IV ketamine were confusion and emotional
blunting.92, level I Meanwhile, a recent systematic review of high quality
RCTs had categorised the side effects of mainly IV ketamine into
common, less common and major groups (refer to Table 1).93, level I
Table 1. Category of side effects of ketamine
There was no significant difference in drop-out rate between ketamine
and placebo in MDD.92, level I
Recommendation 9
• Intravenous ketamine maybe considered for short-term (not more
than two weeks) in acute phase of moderate to severe major
depressive disorder.
4.2 Continuation and Maintenance Phase
4.2.1 Psychosocial Intervention and Psychotherapy
A meta-analysis showed that psychological interventions reduced the
risk of relapse or recurrence in MDD compared with:94, level I
• TAU (RR=0.64, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.76; NNT=5). The effect during the
continuation and maintenance phase was better when it included
treatment during acute phase (p=0.005)
• antidepressants with/without TAU (RR=0.83, 95% CI 0.70 to 0.97;
NNT=13)
However, the primary papers included were of low quality.
• Anxiety
• Agitation or irritability
• Euphoria or mood elevation
• Delusion or unusual thought
• Panic
• Apathy
• Urological side effects e.g. cystitis, bladder dysfunction
• Hepatic side effects
• Craving or dependence
• Cognitive changes
• Feeling of detachment
• Emotional blunting
• Psychosis
• Emotional lability
• Craving attention
• Formal thought disorder
Common
Less
common
Major
Categories
Side Effects
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
i.
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
In MDD, CBT was effective in reducing the risk of relapse or recurrence
compared with TAU (RR=0.68, 95% CI 0.54 to 0.87; NNT of 5) but showed
no significant difference when compared with antidepressants.94, level I
ii.
Mindfulness-based Cognitive Therapy
In MDD, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) was effective
in reducing the risk of relapse or recurrence compared with TAU
(RR=0.66, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.82; NNT of 4) but showed no significant
difference when compared with antidepressants.94, level I
A good RCT found no significant difference between MBCT with
support to taper or discontinue antidepressants and maintenance
antidepressants alone over 24 months in maintenance phase of
MDD.95, level I
In an RCT on treatment resistant depression (TRD), as an adjunct to
pharmacotherapy, MBCT was more effective than Health Education
Programme in reducing depressive symptoms (p=0.01) and improving
treatment responders (p=0.03) at eight weeks. However, no difference
was found on rates of remission (p=0.15).96, level I
iii.
Interpersonal Therapy
IPT was effective in reducing the risk of relapse or recurrence in MDD
compared with TAU (RR=0.41, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.63; NNT of 6) but showed
no significant difference when compared with antidepressants.94, level I
4.2.2 Pharmacotherapy
The aim of pharmacotherapy in maintenance phase is to prevent
relapse and recurrence. The duration of maintenance phase treatment
is between six to nine months after remission. However, consider
maintenance treatment for ≥2 years if there is a high risk of relapse and
recurrence as shown below.27
The risks of relapse and recurrence of MDD are as follows:27
• frequent, recurrent episodes
• severe episodes (psychosis, severe impairment, suicidality)
• chronic episodes
• presence of comorbid psychiatric or other medical conditions
• presence of residual symptoms
• difficult-to-treat episodes
A meta-analysis of 23 RCTs of moderate quality demonstrated that
second-generation antidepressants were more effective than placebo
in continuation/maintenance phase of MDD in preventing:97, level I
• relapse over eight months (NNT=5, 95% CI 4 to 6)
• recurrence over 16 months (NNT=5, 95% CI 4 to 6)
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
27
There was no significant difference in adverse events between
antidepressants and placebo during the continuation/maintenance
phase treatment of MDD.97, level I
Recommendation 10
• Antidepressants should be continued for at least six to nine months
after remission and at least two years if there is a high risk of relapse
and recurrence.
4.3 Discontinuation of Pharmacotherapy
Discontinuation of antidepressants may be initiated by the doctor or the
patient. The patient may experience discomfort when discontinuation
is not properly done. The more common discontinuation symptoms
in SSRIs include flu-like symptoms, insomnia, nausea, imbalance,
sensory disturbances and hyperarousal (FINISH acronym). These
symptoms could be misunderstood as symptoms of the relapse of
MDD. It is estimated that 40% of those who undergo sudden termination
of antidepressant develop these symptoms which are self-limiting in
1 - 2 weeks. Discontinuation symptoms are more closely associated
with antidepressant of shorter half-life e.g. paroxetine and least likely
associated with those of long half-life e.g. fluoxetine.27 Therefore,
discontinuation of antidepressant should be done gradually within
weeks or even months unless there is urgency to do it e.g. intolerable
side effects.
4.4 Major Depressive Disorder with Psychosis
4.4.1 Pharmacotherapy
MDD with psychotic features or psychotic depression is a serious
condition that requires immediate treatment and close monitoring
intervention.
A Cochrane systematic review of 12 RCTs of moderate quality showed
that the combination of antidepressant and antipsychotic, mostly
atypical antipsychotics (AAPs), in response were more effective than
placebo, antidepressant or antipsychotic monotherapy:98, level I
• combination vs placebo (RR=1.86, 95% CI 1.23 to 2.82)
• combination vs antipsychotic (RR=1.83, 95% CI 1.40 to 2.38)
• combination vs antidepressant (RR=1.70, 95% CI 1.19 to 12.43)
Existing guidelines recommend combination treatment of an
antipsychotic
and
an
antidepressant
medication
than
either
monotherapies for better response.20, 99
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 11
• Combination of antidepressant and antipsychotic should be
considered in major depressive disorder with psychotic features.
4.4.2 Physical Treatment
A Cochrane systematic review of 16 RCTs showed electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT) was more effective than repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) in MDD with psychosis after two weeks of treatment
(SMD=7.90, 95% CI 1.98 to 13.82).100, level I
ECT may be considered in psychotic depression.21
Recommendation 12
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be considered in major depressive
disorder with psychotic features.
4.5 Failed Response to Initial Treatment
Approximately 20 - 30% of people with MDD do not respond satisfactorily
to the usual recommended dose of antidepressants and approximately
15% may develop chronic depression. Treatment failure can be due to
a number of factors:21
• incorrect diagnosis (e.g. failure to diagnose bipolar disorder)
• psychotic depression
• organic conditions e.g. anaemia or hypothyroidism
• co-morbid psychiatric disorder e.g. substance abuse or
dependence, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and
personality disorder
• adverse psychosocial factors
• non/poor compliance
These strategies can be used in cases of failure or inadequate response
to initial treatment:
• optimisation (refers to increasing the dose of antidepressant to the
standard maximum dose for 6 - 12 weeks)101, level III
• switching (refers to a change from one antidepressant to another)
• combination
• augmentation
In patients who fail to show response to initial treatment, optimisation is
recommended rather than switching as because of wide inter-individual
variation in dosage and there was no clear dose-response relationship
for most antidepressants.21 CANMAT guidelines for MDD also
recommends optimising the antidepressant dose for patients who do
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
29
not improve at week two to week four if the medication can be tolerated.
However, if tolerability is an issue, switching to another antidepressant
should be done.27
An RCT on chronic or recurrent MDD showed no significant difference
in response and remission between escitalopram (up to 20 mg/day)
plus placebo, sustained-release bupropion (up to 400 mg/day) plus
escitalopram (up to 20 mg/day), and extended-release venlafaxine (up
to 300 mg/day) plus mirtazapine (up to 45 mg/day) at 12 weeks and
seven months treatment.102, level I
NICE does not recommend augmentation with thyroid hormones as a
routine strategy due to inconsistent evidence of effectiveness in MDD
patients with inadequate response.20
Recommendation 13
• Optimisation of antidepressant should be considered in patients who
show inadequate response to initial treatment in major depressive
disorder.
○ If optimisation fails, refer to a psychiatrist for switching/combination/
augmentation options.
4.6 Next-Step Treatment/Treatment-Resistant Depression
There is a lack of consensus on the concept and definition of TRD.27 TRD
has been defined as failure to respond to two or more antidepressants
at an adequate dose for an adequate duration, given sequentially.21
Adequate duration refers to at least four weeks and adequate dose
refers to at least 150 mg/day of imipramine equivalent. However, the use
of this criteria has been debated because the definition does not take
into account adjunctive strategies and differentiate partial responders
with non-responders.27 The updated NICE guidelines for MDD has also
combined their previous sections on acute-phase non-responders and
TRD under ‘next-step treatments’.20 Due to these reasons, the DG CPG
considers similar approach.
The following strategies can be used in the next-step treatments:
• switching
• augmentation (refers to the addition of a non-antidepressant to an
ongoing antidepressant)
• combination therapy (refers to the addition of another
antidepressant to the ongoing antidepressant)
• physical treatment
• psychotherapy as an adjunct
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
4.6.1 Switching
In a meta-analysis comparing within vs across-class switches in SSRIresistant depression, a higher remission rates were observed when
the SSRI antidepressant was switched to a non-SSRI (bupropion,
mirtazapine, venlafaxine) than an SSRI antidepressant (citalopram,
paroxetine, sertraline) with the pooled RR for remission of 1.29 (95% CI
1.07 to 1.56).103, level I
4.6.2 Combination
There has been lack of research on combination of antidepressants
for TRD. In a phase III RCT of mirtazapine added to SSRIs or SNRIs
for TRD, there were no significant differences observed in depressive
symptoms at 24 weeks and 52 weeks between the combination and
placebo added to SSRIs or SNRIs. There was also no significant
difference in side effects at 12 weeks between the two groups.104, level I
In the previous edition of CPG on MDD, combination of an antidepressant
with another antidepressant may be considered in patients with TRD.
Particular care should be taken to monitor for adverse events.21
4.6.3 Augmentation
•
Augmentation with Atypical Antipsychotics
A meta-analysis on TRD showed that AAPs (olanzapine, risperidone,
quetiapine and aripiprazole) augmentation had higher overall response
and remission rates compared with placebo [OR=1.69 (95% CI 1.46
to 1.95) and OR=2.00 (95% CI 1.69 to 2.37) respectively]. Mean
ORs did not differ among the AAPs and were not affected by trial
duration or method of establishing treatment resistance. However,
quality assessment of primary studies was not reported.105, level I This
is supported by a network meta-analysis where the same adjunctive
AAPs were significantly more effective in remission rates compared
with placebo in TRD (OR ranged from 1.79 to 2.17).106, level I
Discontinuation rates for adverse events were higher for AAPs than for
placebo (OR=3.91, 95% CI2.68 to 5.72).105, level I
•
Augmentation with Lithium
A meta-analysis showed lithium augmentation with any antidepressants
were more effective in response compared with placebo augmentation
in TRD (OR=2.89, 95% CI 1.65 to 5.05). Discontinuation due to adverse
events did not differ between the two groups.107, level I In another metaanalysis on TRD, lithium augmentation with SSRI showed no significant
difference with AAP augmentation with SSRI.108, level I
•
Augmentation with Antiepileptic Agents
A network meta-analysis of seven augmentation agents found no
significant difference in effectiveness between antiepileptic agents
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
31
(valproate, lamotrigine and carbamazepine) and others (lithium, TCAs,
AAPs, buspirone, CBT and tri-iodothyronine).109, level I
•
Augmentation with Esketamine
An RCT showed that antidepressant plus intranasal esketamine was
significantly more effective in reducing symptoms of MDD at 4 - 24 hours
and improvement of suicidal thought up to 4 hours of administration
compared with standard care treatment plus placebo.110, level I In
2019, the United States Food and Drug Administration has approved
esketamine nasal spray in conjunction with an oral antidepressant as a
therapy for patients with TRD.
At the time of writing, there is an on-going multicentre RCT on intranasal
esketamine in TRD.
4.6.4 Physical Treatment
In a meta-analysis, ECT plus antidepressant (RR=1.82, 95% CI 1.55
to 2.14) and ECT alone (RR=2.24, 95% CI 1.51 to 3.33) was more
effective in response rate compared with antidepressant alone.
However, an indirect comparison found no significant difference in the
response rate between ECT plus antidepressant and ECT alone. ECT
plus antidepressant increased the incidence of memory deterioration
relative to ECT alone in the fourth week of treatment.111, level I
A recent HTA found that ECT was more effective for both response
(RR=1.72, 95% CI 0.95 to 3.11) and remission (RR=1.44, 95% CI
0.64 to 3.23) compared with rTMS in TRD. However, it caused more
cognitive impairment compared with rTMS in TRD (p= 0.07).112, level I
4.6.5 Psychotherapy
There is limited evidence on psychotherapy for TRD. In an RCT, CBT as
an adjunct to pharmacotherapy reduced depressive symptoms in TRD
patients in primary care (not responded to at least six weeks treatment
with an antidepressant) with a NNT of 4 (95% CI 3 to 6).113, level I
In another RCT, there was no significant difference in improvement of
depressive symptoms between brief supportive psychotherapy plus
medication, cognitive behavioural analysis system of psychotherapy
plus medication compared with medication alone in TRD patients.114, level I
Recommendation 14
• In treatment resistant depression, the following strategies may be
considered:
○ switching antidepressants to a different class
○ combination of antidepressants
○ augmentation with atypical antipsychotics, lithium or antiepileptic
agents
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
5. PHYSICAL TREATMENT
Physical treatments are non-invasive techniques using electrical or
magnetic stimulation targeting specific regions of the brain. Most of
these treatments have been studied and are used in patients with TRD
who have failed to respond to standard treatments.115
There are several types of physical treatments e.g. ECT, rTMS and
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS).
5.1 Electroconvulsive Therapy
ECT is a therapeutic procedure that induces seizure by applying an
electrical stimulus to the brain.
ECT is an established physical treatment in MDD. It is significantly
more effective than sham/simulated ECT or placebo in MDD.20
In a cohort study, 84.21% of pregnant patients with MDD achieved a
complete response (CGI-S score ≤2) with ECT.116, level II-2
Compared with rTMS,
• ECT is more effective in response (ARR=36%, 95% CI 14% to
58%) and remission (HAM-D ≤8, p=0.006) in acute treatment of
MDD.117, level I
• ECT is more effective in MDD with psychosis after two weeks of
treatment (SMD=7.90, 95% CI 1.98 to 13.82).100, level I
• ECT is significantly more effective for both response (RR=1.72,
95% CI 0.95 to 3.11) and remission (RR=1.44, 95% CI 0.64 to
3.23) in treatment-resistant MDD.112, level I
There is no absolute contraindication for ECT.21 However, the relative
contraindications are:115
• cerebral space-occupying lesion
• increased intracranial pressure
• recent cerebral haemorrhage
• recent myocardial infarction
• vascular aneurysm or malformation
• pheochromocytoma
• class four or five anaesthesia risk
The side-effects of ECT are mainly cognitive impairments that include
short-term retrograde amnesia and anterograde amnesia, and a
transient postictal confusional state. Risk of cognitive impairment is
lesser in:
• unilateral ECT vs bilateral ECT
• lower dose vs higher dose ECT
• twice a week vs thrice a week ECT
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
33
Other side-effects of ECT include headache, muscle soreness and
nausea. Serious complications like status epilepticus and laryngospasm
can occur.21
ECT has lesser side effects in acute treatment (p=0.02)117, level I but
causes more cognitive impairment compared with rTMS in MDD (p=
0.07).112, level I
Although maintenance ECT helps to sustain symptom reduction and
reduce hospitalisation rates in chronic TRD, there is little evidence to
show that it is more beneficial than pharmacotherapy.21
• ECT is indicated in MDD with:21, 115
○ acute suicidal ideation
○ high degree of symptom severity and functional impairment
○ psychotic symptoms/features
○ catatonic features
○ rapidly deteriorating physical status e.g. refusal to eat
○ TRD
○ repeated medication intolerance
○ previous favourable response to ECT
○ pregnancy, for any of the above indications
○ patient’s preference
Recommendation 15
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be considered in major depressive
disorder with*:
○ life-threatening conditions e.g. refusal to eat and high suicidality
○ moderate to severe symptoms for rapid improvement in the acute
treatment
○ treatment-resistant depression
*Refer to clinical indications in preceding yellow box.
5.2 Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
rTMS uses powerful and focused magnetic field pulses to induce
electrical currents in neural tissue through an inductor coil placed
against the scalp. No anaesthesia is required for this procedure.
According to standard protocols, rTMS is delivered once daily, five
days/week. Thrice weekly stimulation has been reported as effective as
five days/week but with slower improvement and require similar number
of sessions.115
A Cochrane systematic review of 16 RCTs showed no difference
between rTMS and sham rTMS in severe MDD except for one time
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
period (after two weeks of treatment).100, level I A recent HTA found that
rTMS was more significantly effective in response and remission than
sham rTMS in treatment-resistant MDD.112, level I
rTMS caused more adverse events e.g. headache, scalp discomfort, GI
problems and vertigo than sham.112, level I
For comparison with ECT, refer to Subchapter 5.1 on ECT.
5.3 Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
tDCS delivers a continuous low-amplitude electrical current to a
specified cortical region of the brain using scalp electrodes. Repeated
use of tDCS may lead to neuroplasticity effects which are mediated via
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanisms.115
Two meta-analyses demonstrated that tDCS was significantly more
effective in treating moderate to severe MDD than sham. However,
those with history of treatment resistance had poorer response to
tDCS.118 - 119, level I
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
35
6. COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is broadly defined
as ‘‘a group of diverse medical and health care systems, practices
and products that are not generally considered part of conventional
medicine”. Although 10% to 30% of depressed patients are thought
to use CAM treatments, there is generally no medical supervision
and these treatments are often used in combination with existing
medications without considering possible interactions.120
i.
St John’s wort (Hypericum extracts)
In a Cochrane systematic review of 29 trials, hypericum was significantly
more effective than placebo in the treatment of moderate to severe
MDD. It was found to be as effective as tri- or tetracyclic antidepressants
and SSRIs in MDD.121, level I
In terms of adverse effects, there was no significant difference in the
number of patients dropping out for adverse effects between hypericum
extracts and placebo. It also significantly caused less adverse effects
compared with older antidepressants or SSRIs.121, level I The main side
effects of hypericum extracts are headache, dryness of mouth, nausea,
GI symptoms and sleepiness.21
Although there is evidence that hypericum is more effective than placebo
and better tolerated than standard antidepressant for the treatment of
major depressive disorder, there are uncertainty about appropriate
doses, variation in the nature of preparations and potentially serious
drug interactions.21
• The issues on appropriate doses, variation in the nature of
preparations and potentially serious drug interactions of hypericum
is yet to be established before it can be recommended.
ii.
Acupuncture
A large Cochrane systematic review of 30 trials showed insufficient
evidence of a consistent beneficial effect of acupuncture compared
with a wait-list control, sham acupuncture control or medication in
mild to severe MDD. A subgroup analysis showed patients with stroke
experienced a reduction in depression with manual acupuncture
compared with SSRIs (RR=1.66, 95% CI 1.03 to 2.68).122, level I
In terms of adverse events, there was no significant difference between
acupuncture and wait-list control or sham acupuncture control.
However, acupuncture had less adverse event compared with tricyclic
antidepressants.122, level I
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
iii.
Omega-3
In a Cochrane systematic review of 26 trials, there was small to modest
benefit of omega-3 compared with placebo in mild to severe MDD
(SMD= -0.30, 95% CI -0.10 to -0.50) but this effect was unlikely to
be clinically meaningful. There was no significant difference between
omega-3 and antidepressants in moderate to severe MDD.123, level I
iv.
Folate
A Cochrane systematic review of three trials showed folate was more
effective than placebo in MDD (WMD= -2.65, 95% CI -4.93 to -0.38).
However, there was bias in the folate level of the participants and
variation of dosage prescribed in the study.124, level I
• There is insufficient evidence on the effectiveness and safety of
acupuncture, omega-3 and folate in MDD.
v.
Other Treatments
•
Yoga
Yoga is a physical activity that involves mind-body medical intervention
focusing on interactions of the brain, body, mind and behaviour.125, level I
A meta-analysis of nine RCTs of moderate quality found that yoga
reduced symptoms of mild to moderate depression over usual care
(SMD= -0.69, 95% CI -0.99 to -0.39), relaxation (SMD= -0.69, 95%
CI -1.03 to -0.22) and aerobic exercise (SMD= -0.59, 95% CI -0.99 to
-0.18) in 12 weeks only.125, level I
•
Music Therapy
Music therapy, an intervention that involves regular meetings with a
qualified music therapist, may help in modulating and improving mood
through emotional expression.
A Cochrane systematic review of nine RCTs assessing music therapy
in MDD showed that music therapy added to TAU was more effective
than TAU alone in:126, level I
• clinician-rated depressive symptoms (SMD= -0.98, 95% CI -1.69
to -0.27)
• patient-reported depressive symptoms (SMD= -0.85, 95% CI -1.37
to -0.34)
•
Dance Therapy
Dance Movement Therapy (DMT) uses bodily movement for exploration
and expression of emotions. It can be done in groups or individually.
A Cochrane systematic review with low quality small studies showed no
reliable effect of DMT on MDD. At the time of writing, DMT cannot be
concluded to be effective for the treatment of MDD.127, level I
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
37
•
Hypnosis
Hypnosis is a healing technique using the verbal hypnotic to bring
the conscious mind to rest and the subconscious mind active to be
receptive for positive suggestion to achieve a desired outcome.
There is no retrievable evidence on hypnosis in the treatment of MDD.
A meta-analysis of six studies involving heterogeneous population
(cancer patients, first time mothers and undergraduate students with
depressive symptoms but unclear levels of severity) suggested that
hypnosis can improve depressive symptoms (ES=0.57, 95% CI 0.319
to 0.813).128, level I However, the quality of the included studies was poor.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
7. COLLABORATIVE CARE MODEL
Collaborative care model is an integrated treatment approach
between different health care providers working together with patients
in a primary care setting aimed at achieving MDD recovery. The
collaborative care involved enhanced collaborations among physicians,
mental health specialists and care managers paired with depressionspecific treatment guidelines, patients education and scheduled patient
follow-up.129 - 130, level I
In a systematic review of 79 RCTs of adults with MDD, collaborative care
was significantly more effective than usual care in improving depressive
outcomes in acute phase of treatment (RR=1.32, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.43)
and up to two years (RR=1.29, 95% CI 1.18 to 1.41). It also increased
rates of antidepressant use up to 24 months (RR=1.22, 95% CI 1.03 to
1.45). This approach also showed improvement in mental health quality
of life and patient satisfaction but not in physical health quality of life.129,
level I
In an RCT of 581 patients with MDD, collaborative care improved
depressive symptoms in acute (NNT=8) and continuation phase
(NNT=6) compared with usual care.131, level I
NICE guidelines recommend collaborative care for moderate to severe
depression in patients with CMI.20
A good quality RCT on patients with MDD and CMI showed that
collaborative care were four times more likely to show response to
treatment at six months compared with usual care (OR=4.04, 95% CI
2.01 to 8.31). The collaborative care involved enhanced collaborations
among physicians, mental health specialists and care managers paired
with depression-specific treatment guidelines, patients education and
follow-up.130, level I
Recommendation 16
• Collaborative care may be considered in the acute and continuation
phase treatment of major depressive disorder.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
39
8. SPECIAL POPULATION
8.1 Major Depressive Disorder in Pregnant and Postpartum Women
Depression is the most highly prevalent mental health problem in
perinatal population. Around 1 in 10 women suffer from perinatal
depression worldwide as shown in a recent meta-analysis.132, level III
In Malaysia, using self-report measures by validated Malay version of
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) in health clinics, the
prevalence of:
• antenatal depression ranges from 10.3% to 13.8%133 - 134, level III
• postnatal depression ranges from 3.9% to 21.08%135 - 138, level III
In hospital setting, the prevalence of postnatal depressions is:
• 6.8% in postnatal clinic using diagnostic assessment (MINI)139, level III
• 31.7% in postnatal ward using self-report (EPDS)140, level III
The national prevalence for postnatal depression from two large nationwide surveys using EPDS ranges from 4.4% in health clinics141, level III to
12.7% in community setting.142, level III
Treating perinatal depression is essential in reducing symptomatology
and preventing detrimental complications to women, children and the
family. The most devastating consequences of perinatal depression
and other mental disorders are a higher risk of suicidal ideation,
suicidal attempt or suicide.143, level III In many developed countries,
suicide is now one of the leading causes of maternal mortality; while
the incidence of maternal death due to medical and obstetric factors are
all decreasing.144 - 145, level III
Untreated depression in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk
to the offsprings':
• fetal hyperactivity and irregular fetal heart rate146, level III
• premature delivery146, level III
• low birth weight146, level III
• increased rates of premature deaths and increased neonatal
intensive care unit admission147, level II-2
Postnatal depression may impair the mother-infant relationship, which
can lead to poor infant development and outcomes.148, level II-2 Perinatal
depression can also lead to difficult temperament, attentional, emotional
and behavioral problems in children and adolescence.149, level III
In a naturalistic study of pregnant women with MDD, those who
discontinued their medication showed significant increased risk of
relapse (68%) compared with those continuing medication (26%).
150, level III
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
8.1.1
Clinical Presentation
According to DSM-5, perinatal depression is MDD with peripartum
onset i.e. when symptoms onset occurs during pregnancy or in the
four weeks following delivery.2 In clinical practice and in many research
studies, however, postpartum period is defined up to one year, and selfreport measures are used to identify perinatal depression.151
There is overlapping between MDD symptoms and normal pregnancy/
postpartum e.g. fatigue, sleep disturbances and appetite changes. In
a review on Asian population, some mothers tend to somatise and
present with physical symptoms e.g. pain, body ache or headache
rather than emotional symptoms.152, level III
A systematic review showed that risk factors for perinatal depression
were:153, level III
• socioeconomic disadvantage (OR range=2.1 to 13.2)
• unintended pregnancy (OR range=1.6 to 8.8)
• younger age (OR range=2.1 to 5.4)
• unmarried (OR range=3.4 to 5.8)
• lack of intimate partner empathy and support (OR range=2.0 to
9.4)
• hostile in-laws (OR range=2.1 to 4.4)
• intimate partner violence (OR range=2.11 to 6.75)
• insufficient emotional and practical support (OR range=2.8 to 6.1)
• history of mental health problems (OR range=5.1 to 5.6)
Protective factors were:
• longer education (RR=0.5, p=0.03)
• being of the ethnic majority (OR=0.2, 95% CI 0.1 to 0.8)
• having a kind, trustworthy intimate partner (OR=0.52, 95% CI 0.30
to 0.90)
In a local nationwide study of 5,727 postnatal women, the risks for
postnatal depression were:141, level III
• intimate partner violence (OR=2.34, 95% CI 1.12 to 4.87)
• emotional violence (OR=3.79, 95% CI 1.93 to 7.45)
• unplanned pregnancy (OR=3.32, 95% CI 2.35 to 4.69)
• lack of family support during confinement (OR=1.79, 95% CI 1.12
to 2.87)
• partner’s use of alcohol (OR=1.59, 95% CI 1.07 to 2.35)
• low income household (OR=2.99, 95% CI 1.63 to 5.49)
8.1.2
Screening
Depression among perinatal women are not readily recognised and
mostly underdiagnosed due to multiple help-seeking barriers.154, level III
A systematic review of six RCTs showed that screening programmes
for perinatal women with or without additional treatment components
reduced risk of depression at 3 - 5 months follow-up by 18% to 59%
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
41
compared with no screening. The most widely used screening tool
was EPDS. At the cut-off 13 of the English-version, its sensitivity and
specificity ranged from 0.67 to 1.00 and 0.87 to 0.99 respectively.155, level III
Brief screening tools e.g. PHQ-2 and Whooley Questions may be
useful in a two-stage screening. Whooley is 2-questions interview
requiring health professionals to be trained to ask question
sensitively. PHQ-2 is a self-report screening with Likert-response
format. The sensitivity and specificity of PHQ-2 in perinatal
women are 0.62 to 0.77 and 0.59 to 0.88 respectively.155, level III The
sensitivity and specificity of Whooley questionnaire in antenatal
women are 0.23 and 0.94 respectively,156, level III while the same
measurements in postpartum are 1.00 and 0.44 respectively.
157, level III In a 2-stage screening, PHQ-2 may be used followed by EPDS.
The suggested time-frame for EPDS screening is shown below:
Table 2. Time-frame for EPDS screening
Adapted: Austin M-P, Highet N and the Expert Working Group (2017) Mental
Health Care in the Perinatal Period: Australian Clinical Practice
Guideline. Melbourne: Centre of Perinatal Excellence; 2017
NICE recommends to consider asking Whooley Questions at a woman's
first contact at primary care or her booking visit, and during the early
postnatal period. If she responds positively to either questions or there
is clinical concern, consider using EPDS or PHQ-9 or refer to her GP or
mental health professional according to severity.158
Malay language PHQ-2 has been validated as part of PHQ-9.While
Malay-language EPDS has been validated with a sensitivity of 0.727
and specificity of 0.92 at the cut-off 12.136, level III The CPG DG opines
that a two-stage screening is appropriate in perinatal women in local
context. Refer to Appendix 6B and 7 for Malay version of PHQ-2 and
EPDS.
Period
First Screening
Repeat
Within four weeks of
booking or as early
as practical in
pregnancy
• At least once in third trimester of
pregnancy
• At any time in pregnancy if clinically
indicated
Antenatal
6 - 12 weeks after
birth
• At least once in the first postnatal year
• At any time in the first postnatal year if
clinically indicated
Postnatal
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 17
• Screening for perinatal depression may be done in a two-stage
approach.
○ Use brief screening tools e.g. Patient Health Questionnaire-2 or
Whooley Questions in the first stage.
○ If there is positive response to the brief screening tools, Edinburgh
Postnatal Depression Scale should be used for further screening.
8.1.3
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of perinatal depression is made using DSM-5 Criteria for
MDD, with peripartum onset, and can be categorised to mild, moderate
or severe.2
8.1.4
Assessment
Besides assessing clinical symptoms, psychosocial risks and risk
of suicide (refer to Subchapter 2.4), other assessment that should
be done in perinatal women are risk of infanticide and mother-infant
interaction.159
8.1.5
Treatment
The principles of treatment for perinatal depression must be based on
risk-benefit analysis and shared decision making. The clinician should
discuss potential harms and benefits of antidepressants with the patient
so that she can make well-informed decisions on preferred treatment.160
• Clinicians must discuss with the women and, where possible, their
significant other(s) on the following:158, 159
○ benefits and potential risks of treatment to mother and foetus/
breastfed baby in both short- and long-term; and possible
consequences of no treatment or if treatment is changed or
stopped abruptly
○ uncertainty of benefits and risks in perinatal period
○ patient’s preference
• Increased level of maternal and foetal/baby monitoring and support
is crucial in perinatal period.
Pre-pregnancy Care
Women in their reproductive age with mental health problems (including
MDD) should receive pre-pregnancy care (PPC) in a nearby health
clinic or an obstetric and gynaecology clinic in a hospital, at least three
months prior to conception.161, level III
PPC is the provision of biomedical, behavioural and social health
interventions to women and couples before conception occurs, aimed
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
43
at improving their health status, and reducing behaviours and individual
and environmental factors that could contribute to poor maternal and
child health outcomes.162, level III
In PPC, treatment of pre-existing MDD must be optimised and
contraception may be provided. Ideally, whenever possible, the aim
of optimisation of treatment is to achieve remission of MDD with
completion of maintenance and continuance therapy. Otherwise, risks
and benefits of continuing antidepressant treatment and consequences
of stopping abruptly or changing treatment must be discussed, taking
into consideration the severity of MDD and risk of relapse or recurrence.
A.
Pharmacotherapy
i.
Efficacy
In general, antidepressants are effective for perinatal depression based
on extrapolation of evidence on general adults.20 SSRIs are more
effective than placebo at 4 - 8 weeks for postpartum depression:163, level I
• RR for response=1.43 (95% CI 1.01 to 2.03)
• RR for remission=1.79 (95%CI 1.08 to 2.98)
ii.
Safety Profile in Pregnancy
Second-generation antidepressants including SSRI for depression
in pregnancy may be associated with increased risk of some serious
harms although the absolute risks of harm appear to be small.
155, level III; 158; 159
SSRIs are the most well-studied antidepressant compared to other
antidepressants. When counselling the benefit and risks of treatment,
use absolute risk values based on a common denominator (i.e. numbers
out of 100 or 1000) than RR values to reflect risks more accurately to the
woman.158 Increase in absolute risks of adverse outcome associated
with medications during pregnancy compared with pregnancy without
medications are as below (refer to Table 3).159
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Table 3. Absolute risks of adverse outcome associated with
medications during pregnancy
Adapted:
1. Austin M-P, Highet N and the Expert Working Group (2017) Mental
Health Care in the Perinatal Period: Australian Clinical Practice Guideline.
Melbourne: Centre of Perinatal Excellence; 2017
2. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. Antenatal and postnatal
mental health Clinical management and service guidance. United Kingdom:
The British Psychological Society and The Royal Collage of Psychiatrists;
2014
Medications
Outcome
Absolute
risk in
pregnant
women
not taking
medications
per 1000
Absolute
risk in
pregnant
women
taking
medications
per 1000
Absolute
risk
difference
per 1000
Possible
association
(Absolute
risk difference
per 1000)
Respiratory
distress1
Long-acting
Benzodiazepines
(repeated
prescription around
the time of birth)
32
72
40
Respiratory
distress2
36
128
90
Cardiac
malformation2
11
13
2
Cardiac
malformation2
34
46
12
Respiratory
distress1
32
45
13
Neonatal
convulsions1
3
4 - 15
1 - 12
Persistent
pulmonary
hypertension1
3
4
1
Poor neonatal
adaptation
syndromes2
86
366
280
Premature
birth2
53
100
47
Premature
birth1
60
161
99
Miscarriages1
81
107
26
TCA
Miscarriages1
81
138
57
Tremors2
92
444
352
Miscarriages1
81
109
28
SNRI
SSRI
Any antidepressant
Citalopram (2)
Escitalopram(10)
Fluoxetine (4)
Paroxetine (3)
Citalopram (35)
Escitalopram (4)
Fluoxetine (7)
Paroxetine (7)
Paroxetine (107)
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
45
In a cohort study, there was no significant difference in major birth
defects between mirtazapine and SSRIs. In another analysis, there
was a higher rate of birth defects in mirtazapine compared with general
control after exclusion of chromosomal or genetic anomalies (OR=3.3,
95% CI 1.04 to 10.3). However, if first trimester exposure were excluded,
the difference was not significant.76, level II-2
A systematic review showed that antidepressants were associated with
maternal adverse outcomes in pregnancy:155, level III
• preeclampsia
○ venlafaxine (RR=1.57, 95% CI 1.29 to 1.91)
• vaginal bleeding during pregnancy or postpartum hemorrhage
○ SSRI + venlafaxine (RR=1.46, 95% CI 1.29 to 1.65)
There is lack of strong evidence indicating detrimental effects of
antidepressants on low birth weight and, neurodevelopmental and
neurobehavioural outcomes.164, level II-2
• Extreme caution is needed in interpreting the data on antidepressant
in pregnancy due to the small absolute risks in most cases and the
uncertainty of whether effects due to the medications, depression
itself or other confounding factors.158
Refer to Appendix 8 on FDA Pregnancy Categories.
iii.
Safety Profile in Breastfeeding
In general, a relative infant dose (RID) below 10% of the average
maternal level of an antidepressant is considered safe.165, level III
A systematic review on SSRIs and SNRIs which largely represented
by case reports and small studies found the following medications with
their range of RID:166, level I
• escitalopram: 4.50 - 6.40%
• fluoxetine: 2.40 - 6.80%
• fluvoxamine: 0.20 - 0.62%
• paroxetine: 0.30 - 2.9%
• sertraline: 0.50 - 3.70%
• duloxetine: 0.14 - 0.82%
• venlafaxine: 3.20 - 8.10%
In another review, safety of mirtazapine during lactation was
inconclusive.167, level III
The effects of antidepressants on breastfed babies were occasional,
mild-moderate and short-term with inadequate data on long term
effects. Sertraline and paroxetine had better neonatal safety profile
during breastfeeding compared with other SSRIs/SNRIs.166, level I Both
systematic reviews did not report on quality assessment.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
• Breastfeeding is encouraged regardless of types of antidepressant
taken by mothers with infant monitoring of adverse effects e.g. oversedation.160
B.
Psychosocial Intervention and Psychotherapy
Four meta-analyses showed that psychosocial interventions (e.g. peer
support and non-directive counseling) and psychotherapy (e.g. IPT, CBT
and psychodynamic therapy) were significantly effective in reducing
depressive symptoms compared to control in perinatal depression.
168 - 171, level I
Other interventions that have shown some benefits in perinatal
depression include mindfulness-based intervention and web-based
intervention.172 - 173, level I
A Cochrane systematic review showed that psychosocial or
psychological interventions (i.e. intensive, individualised postpartum
home visits provided by public health nurses or midwives; lay (peer)-
based telephone support and IPT) significantly prevented postpartum
depression compared with standard care.174, level I
Besides treating mother’s depression, treatment must also aim to
prevent or reduce the effects of postpartum depression on the children.
Women with depression and mother-infant interaction difficulties may
benefit from individual mother–infant interventions that will improve
mother–infant attachment problems and mother-infant behaviour
management problems.158, 159
C.
Electroconvulsive Therapy
NICE guidelines recommend considering ECT for pregnant women with
severe depression, severe mixed affective states or mania, or catatonia,
whose physical health or that of the foetus is at serious risk.158
COPE guidelines recommend considering ECT when a postnatal
woman with severe depression:159
• has not responded to one or more trials of antidepressants of
adequate dose and duration or where there is a high risk of suicide
or high level of distress
• when food or fluid intake is poor
• in the presence of psychotic or melancholic symptoms
D.
Other Therapy
Evidence is too inconclusive for depression-specific acupuncture,
maternal massage, bright light therapy and omega-3 fatty acids for
antenatal depression.174, level I
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
47
E.
Choice of Treatment
Given the uncertainty on risk-benefit ratio of antidepressants in perinatal
women, the threshold for pharmacotherapy intervention should be
higher while psychological interventions should always be strongly
considered.
i.
Mild-moderate
Most guidelines recommend on psychotherapy as the initial treatment
for mild to moderate perinatal depression.160
ii. Severe
Most guidelines recommend pharmacotherapy intervention as the initial
treatment for severe perinatal depression.160
• Prescribing medications in perinatal women is complex and there
are preference to non-pharmacological intervention among this
population.154, level III
• Most guidelines acknowledge the importance of individually-tailored
medicine in perinatal depression. Decision-making process should
take into consideration:160
○ psychiatric history and indication for antidepressant medication
○ current psychiatric symptoms
○ previous attempts of tapering medication
○ availability of alternative treatment options such as psychotherapy
and the presence of a social support
Recommendation 18
• For mild to moderate perinatal depression, psychotherapy, e.g.
interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive behavioural therapy,
should be considered as initial treatment.
• Psychosocial interventions i.e. peer support and non-directive
counseling may be considered in mild to moderate postpartum
depression.
• For severe perinatal depression, pharmacotherapy intervention
should be considered and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
are the preferred choice. Once medications have become effective,
psychotherapy may be recommended as an adjunct.
8.2 Major Depressive Disorder in the Elderly
It is estimated that the proportion of the world’s population of elderly
aged over 60 years old will increase from 12% in 2015 to 22% in 2050.
Unipolar depression in elderly occurs in 7% of the general elderly
population and accounts for 5.7% of YLD.213
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
A meta-analysis of 74 studies showed a median prevalence rate of
depression in the elderly at at 10.3% (IQR of 4.7% - 16.0%).175, level III
Local studies showed different prevalence of depression according to
setting; 20.9% among Malay elderly in Klang Valley,176, level III and 30.1%
among Malay elderly residing in rural area.177, level III
8.2.1
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
Depression in elderly population can present in many ways; either as a
new onset depression, recurrent MDD that started earlier in life, a mood
disorder that is related to other medical problems or mood symptoms
related to substance or medication use.178, level III
MDD in elderly can be diagnosed based on ICD or DSM criteria.
However, some diagnostic criteria may overlap with symptoms of major
neurocognitive disorder or physical illness especially neurological
disorder in the elderly.179, level III A meta-analysis of 11 observational
studies showed that depressed elderly presented with more agitation
(OR=1.84, 95% CI 1.39 to 4.45), general somatic symptoms (OR=2.01,
95% CI 1.38 to 2.92), GI somatic symptoms (OR=1.58, 95% CI 1.27
to 1.97) and hypochondriasis (OR=3.13, 95% CI 2.24 to 4.38) than
younger adults with depression.180, level III
The following symptoms may suggest MDD in elderly:21
• psychomotor retardation
• poor concentration
• constipation
• poor perceived health
• prominent anxiety symptoms
• cognitive deficits
• prominent somatic symptoms
In a cohort study among elderly (mean age of 70.6 years) in Netherlands,
depressed elderly had significantly lower education level, divorced
or widowed and lower Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score
compared with those who were non-depressed. Only 33.1% of the
patients were in their first episode of depressive disorder and 41% had
co-morbid anxiety disorder over the past six months.181, level II-2
Depression in elderly population was also associated with higher
morbidity and mortality. In a population-based cohort study, high levels
of depressive symptoms (≥16 on 20-item Center for Epidemiologic
Studies Depression Scale) was significantly associated with increased
risk of developing coronary heart disease, stroke and combination of
both diseases.182, level III A cohort study of elderly men aged ≥75 years
in Australia showed a HR for mortality of 1.66 (95% CI 1.08 to 2.56) for
depressed elderly men compared with non-depressed elderly men at
baseline.183, level II-2
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
49
8.2.2
Assessment
Assessment of MDD in elderly population is similar to the assessment
in general adults. Organic causes of depression need to be ruled out
and appropriate laboratory investigations to be done when necessary.
Refer to Appendix 5.
8.2.3
Screening
A systematic review of 133 studies involving 46651 participants identified
16 screening instruments for depression in elderly population. Majority
of the studies used self-rating scales; the most common were various
versions of Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). The pooled sensitivity
and specificity are shown in Table 4.212, level III
Table 4. Sensitivity and specificity of self-rating scale instruments
• Awareness needs to be created at community and primary health
care level to screen for and identify depression, particularly in those
identified as high risk given the higher morbidity and mortality among
the depressed elderly.
• There is no evidence on targeted screening among the elderly.
However, healthcare providers may screen them for depression if
they present with the symptoms mentioned above. Both GDS184, level III
and Whooley Questions has been validated locally.
8.2.4
Treatment
A. Psychotherapy
A Cochrane systematic review found that IPT combined with
antidepressant reduced recurrence of MDD in elderly at 12 months
compared with placebo (RR= 0.42, 95% CI 0.23 to 0.77). No significant
difference in overall drop-out rate was noted between the two groups.188, level I
Another systematic review showed that PST reduced depressive
symptoms in older adults with MDD compared to control conditions
Cohen's d=1.15 (p=0.00006). There were no significant differences in
drop-out rates between PST and control.191, level I
In the latest systematic review that focused on non-pharmacotherapy
treatment for depressed elderly in primary care, CBT reduced depressive
symptoms compared with control condition at long-term follow-up but
the effect size was small (SMD= -0.21, 95% CI -0.40 to -0.03).192, level I
Instrument
Sensitivity
Specificity
GDS-30
GDS-15
Whooley Questions
82.8% (95% CI 80.7 to 87.4)
84.4% (95% CI 80.5 to 87.4)
91.8% (95% CI 85.2 to 95.6)
72.2% (95% CI 63.1 to 80.8)
77.4% (95% CI 72.1 to 82.0)
67.7% (95% Cl 58.1 to 76.0)
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
The primary papers used in the three meta-analyses were of moderate
quality.
Recommendation 19
• Psychotherapy should be offered for major depressive disorder in
the elderly.
B. Pharmacotherapy
There are four meta-analyses with moderate risk of bias of primary
papers and one RCT on the effectiveness of antidepressants in treating
depression in elderly population.
In a Cochrane systematic review on depression in elderly, TCAs, SSRIs
(fluoxetine) and MAOIs were significantly more effective in preventing
persistence of symptoms compared with placebo with NNT of 3.97
(95% CI 3.88 to 4.05), 8.45 (95% CI 8.38 to 8.53) and 3.14 (95% CI 2.99
to 3.29) respectively.185, level I However, in a recent meta-analysis using
different RCTs on several SSRIs (fluoxetine, escitalopram, citalopram)
in depressed elderly, there was no significant difference in effectiveness
between the SSRIs and placebo in both response and remission. On
the other hand, duloxetine was more effective than placebo in response
(OR=2.83, 95% CI 1.96 to 4.08) and remission (OR=1.78, 95% CI 1.20
to 2.65).186, level I
In another Cochrane review, there was no difference in effectiveness
between TCAs and SSRIs, MAOIs and ‘atypical antidepressants’
(buspirone, buproprion, milnacipran, venlafaxine, reboxetine and
mirtazapine) on depression in elderly.187, level I
A recent Cochrane systematic review on three RCTs showed that
antidepressants (SSRIs and TCAs) in continuation and maintenance
phase in elderly with MDD reduced recurrence at 12 months compared
with placebo (RR=0.67, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.82; NNTB=5). However, the
trials included were of low quality with marked heterogeneity among
them.188, level I
An RCT showed no significant difference between sertraline and
nortriptyline in response and remission rates of older adults with
melancholia or non-melancholia depression.189, level I
SSRIs were less likely to cause withdrawal due to side effects compared
with TCAs (RR=1.36, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.70) in elderly with depression.
There was no significant difference in other comparison i.e. between
TCAs and MAOIs or ‘atypical antidepressants’.187, level I
Citalopram had larger proportion of adverse events (fatigue, sweating
and tremors) compared with placebo in depressed elderly. There was
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
51
no significant difference in frequency of AEs between other SSRIs in
similar comparison. On the other hand, duloxetine was significantly
associated with increased risk of dry mouth, constipation, diarrhoea
and dizziness compared with placebo.186, level I
A cohort study of 60,746 elderly patients diagnosed with MDD showed
that SSRIs were associated with the highest risk for falls (HR=1.66, 95%
CI 1.58 to 1.73) and hyponatraemia (HR=1.52, 95% CI 1.33 to 1.75)
compared with when the antidepressants were not being used. While
other antidepressants group (duloxetine, flupentixol, L-tryptophan,
mirtazepine, nefazodone, reboxetine, tryptophan and venlafaxine) was
associated with the highest risks for all-cause mortality (HR=1.66, 95%
CI 1.56 to 1.77), attempted suicide/self-harm (HR=5.16, 95% CI 3.90
to 6.83), stroke/transient ischaemic attack (HR=1.37, 95% CI 1.22 to
1.55), fracture (HR=1.63, 95% CI 1.45 to 1.83) and epilepsy/seizures
(HR=2.24, 95% CI 1.60 to 3.15) in similar comparison.190, level II-2
Recommendation 20
• Antidepressants should be considered with caution on tolerability
issues for major depressive disorder in the elderly.
C. Electroconvulsive Therapy
An updated Cochrane systematic review found that unilateral and
bilateral ECT (six treatments) reduced depressive symptoms measured
with MADRS compared with simulated group in depressed elderly
(p<0.05). There was no significant difference between unilateral and
bilateral ECT in reduction of depression symptoms after five treatments
or three weeks of treatment. Three-times weekly ECT was shown to
have lower depressive symptoms compared with once-weekly ECT at
week 4 (p<0.001). In one of the included RCT, in terms of cognitive side
effects, bilateral ECT had significantly lower mean MMSE scores after
8, 12 and 16 ECT sessions compared with right unilateral ECT.193, level I
A systematic review of maintenance ECT with nortriptyline for MDD
with psychosis in elderly showed that mean survival time to relapse
or recurrence was longer (23 months) compared with continuing
nortriptyline only (16 months) with HR=8.12 (95% CI 1.5 to 44.7).
However, there was no quality assessment of the RCTs.194, level I
The elderly with MDD have an increased likelihood of having co-morbid
medical illness thus consultation with other specialty is recommended
during pre ECT assessment. Patients with co-morbid dementia are at
risk of developing post-ECT delirium and should be monitored closely.195
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 21
• Electroconvulsive therapy may be offered in elderly with major
depressive disorder after assessment of possible co-morbidities.
D. Exercise Therapy
In a systematic review on depressed elderly patients, exercise as an
adjunct to antidepressants showed some effectiveness in reducing
depressive symptoms compared with control.196, level I
Another systematic review of eight RCTs on elderly participants with
depressive symptoms supported the finding when it showed that exercise
improved depressive symptoms compared with controlled conditions
(SMD=0.90, 95% CI 0.28 to 1.51). All studies were considered to be of
low quality with significant heterogeneity.197, level I
8.2.5
Treatment-resistant Depression
There are limited RCTs on the management of TRD among elderly
population.
In a small RCT on elderly with TRD, venlafaxine was more effective than
paroxetine on CGI (p<0.000002) and HAM-D measures (p<0.0003).
198, level I In another RCT, the use of aripiprazole as augmentation to
venlafaxine in the same population had higher percentage of remission
compared with placebo (OR=2.0, 95% CI 1.1 to 3.7).199, level I
8.3 Major Depressive Disorder in Patients with Chronic Medical
Illness
Presence of chronic medical illness (CMI) together with depression
are common and has bidirectional relationship. This CPG addresses
common CMI i.e. diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, cancer,
end-stage kidney disease and post-stroke in MDD. Adverse health risk
behaviours and psychobiological changes in depression increases the
risk of CMI while biological changes and complications of CMI may
precipitate depression.200, level III
A meta-analysis of 83 cross-sectional studies of outpatients having
CMI from different clinical specialties found overall pooled prevalence
of depression or depressive symptoms at 27.0% (95% CI 24.0 to 29.0).
There was a higher prevalence of depression or depressive symptoms
in outpatients with CMI with an OR of 3.16 (95% CI 2.66 to 3.76)
compared with healthy controls.201, level III
A population-based study found that acute life stress, number of CMI
and family support satisfaction were the three strongest predictors of
depressive symptoms in CMI.202, level III
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
53
8.3.1
Screening
For CMI-associated functional impairment, NICE guidelines recommend
the use of Whooley 2-Questions to screen for depression.216
Following ‘Yes’ to either question, proceed with these:216
○ During the last month, have you often been bothered by feelings of
worthlessness?
○ During the last month, have you often been bothered by poor
concentration?
○ During the last month, have you often been bothered by thoughts
of death?
8.3.2
Assessment
In addition to assessment of depression in Subchapter 2.3, include
following assessment for patients with CMI:216
a. role of CMI and any prescribed medication in the development or
maintenance of depression
b. provision and compliance to optimal treatment for CMI, with proper
referral to other specialities if there are issues
8.3.3
Diagnosis and Classification
There is overlapping of somatic symptoms in depression and CMI e.g.
fatigue, changes in appetite, psychomotor disturbances and sleep
disturbances.
In a community-based study on MDD, the agreement of five nonsomatic DSM IV criteria (low mood, loss of interest or pleasure, guilt/
worthlessness, impaired concentration/indecisiveness and suicidal
ideation) and full DSM IV criteria for MDD was 93.7%.203, level III Therefore,
in diagnosing MDD in patients with CMI, emphasis must be given to the
non-somatic criteria.
In managing MDD in chronic medically ill patients, it will be useful to
classify cases based on severity of symptoms. NICE guidelines classify
depression in patients with CMI into the following:216
○ subthreshold depressive symptoms: fewer than five symptoms of
depression
○ mild depression: few, if any, in excess of the five required to make
the diagnosis of MDD, and the symptoms result in only minor
functional impairment
○ moderate depression: symptoms or functional impairment between
mild and severe
○ severe depression: most symptoms, and the symptoms markedly
interfere with functioning; can occur with or without psychotic
symptoms
For the purpose of this CPG, evidence on mild to severe MDD with CMI
is addressed.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
8.3.4
Treatment
A.
Psychosocial Interventions and Psychotherapy
Generally, psychosocial interventions and psychotherapy for MDD in
patients with CMI are based on severity of depression as recommended
in Chapter 4. In addition, NICE guidelines also recommend a structured
group physical activity and a group-based peer support (self-help)
programme for mild to moderate depression in CMI.216
i.
Depression with Diabetes Mellitus
A Cochrane systematic review of eight RCTs on patients diagnosed with
diabetes mellitus (DM) found that psychotherapy comprised with CBT,
web-based CBT, telephone CBT plus walking programme, minimal
psychological intervention and psychodynamic supportive therapy was
beneficial in depression remission both at short-term (OR=2.88, 95%
CI 1.58 to 5.25) and medium-term follow-up (OR=2.49, 95% CI 1.44 to
4.32).204, level I
In another systematic review that involved 31 RCTs, psychosocial
interventions were effective in reducing depressive symptoms (SMD=
-1.50, 95% CI -1.83 to -1.18) in acute treatment phase of depression in
patients diagnosed with type 2 DM.205, level I
Both SR included moderate quality papers.
ii. Depression with Coronary Heart Disease
A systematic review by Cochrane of 19 RCTs showed that psychosocial
interventions and psychotherapy (group and individual-based therapy
based on CBT components, counselling, stress reduction, telephonebased counselling, home-based intervention, telephone-based CBT
and transcendental meditation technique) either alone or with other
cardiac rehabilitation reduced depressive symptoms compared with
usual care or other types of rehabilitation (SMD= -0.27 95% CI -0.39
to -0.15).206, level I
Another Cochrane review revealed that CBT improved depression
score at short-term with SMD of -0.81 (95% CI -1.26 to -0.36) and longterm with SMD of -0.75 (95% CI -1.20 to -0.30).207, level I
The primary papers included in both reviews were of moderate quality.
B.
Pharmacotherapy
When an antidepressant is prescribed for a patient with depression and
underlying CMI, the following must be taken into consideration:216
• presence of additional medical problems
• side effects of antidepressants, which may affect the underlying
medical illness (in particular, SSRIs may result in or exacerbate
hyponatraemia, especially in older patients)
• interactions with other medications prescribed for underlying CMI
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
55
i.
Depression with Diabetes Mellitus
In a Cochrane SR that included eight RCTs on depression and DM,
when compared with placebo:204, level I
○ antidepressants reduced depressive score at short-term (SMD=
-0.61, 95% CI -0.94 to -0.27)
○ antidepressants had beneficial effect in depression remission at
short-term (OR=2.50, 95% CI 1.21 to 5.15)
○ SSRIs (sertraline, paroxetine and fluoxetine) showed improvement
in glycaemic control at short-term with MD for HbA1c of -0.4%
(95% CI -0.6 to -0.1)
Studies included were mostly of moderate quality with low heterogeneity.
ii. Depression with Coronary Heart Disease
A Cochrane systematic review of eight trials showed that SSRIs
(sertraline, fluoxetine or citalopram) reduced short-term depression
score (SMD= -0.24, 95% CI -0.38 to -0.09) compared with placebo
in depression with coronary artery disease. There was no significant
difference in recurrent non-fatal myocardial infarction, congestive heart
failure, recurrent angina pectoris or reduction of cardiac procedures in
similar comparison.207, level I
iii. Depression with Cancer
A Cochrane systematic review of nine RCTs found no significant
difference in effectiveness between antidepressant (fluoxetine and
mianserin) and placebo at 6 to 12 weeks in patients with cancer.
There was also no significant difference between SSRIs (paroxetine or
fluoxetine) and TCAs (amitriptyline or desipramine) in similar outcome
and in dropouts due to ineffectiveness and side effects.208, level I
In a meta-analysis of eight RCTs, antidepressant reduced depressive
symptoms in cancer patients with MDD compared with placebo (SMD=
-0.596, 95% CI -1.041 to -0.150).209, level I
iv. Depression with End-stage Renal Disease
An updated Cochrane SR on depression with end-stage kidney disease
treated with dialysis found that when compared with placebo:210, level I
○ sertraline reduced depressive symptoms (MD for BDI score=
-7.50, 95% CI -11.94 to -3.06)
○ escitalopram reduced depressive symptoms (p=0.001)
○ SSRIs (fluoxetine, sertraline and escitalopram) increased nausea
(RR=2.67, 95% CI 1.26 to 5.68)
There were no significant risk of antidepressant causing hypotension,
headache, and sexual dysfunction compared with placebo. However,
the four studies included in the review were of low quality.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
v. Depression in Post-Stroke
An updated Cochrane SR found that antidepressants were more
effective in achieving remission with OR of 0.47 (95% CI 0.22 to 0.98)
compared with placebo in patients who developed depression after
stroke.211, level I
The most common adverse events reported involved:211, level I
○ central nervous system e.g. confusion, sedation and tremors
(OR=1.96, 95% CI 1.19 to 3.24)
○ GI system e.g. constipation and diarrhoea (OR=2.37, 95% CI 1.38
to 4.06)
The studies included in the review were of moderate quality.
Recommendation 22
• Screening for depression should be done in patients with chronic
medical illness (CMI) with related functional impairment.
• Psychosocial intervention and psychotherapy should be considered
in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) and CMI.
• If pharmacotherapy is required for patients with MDD and CMI,
consider antidepressants with the least drug-drug interactions.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
57
9. FOLLOW-UP AND MONITORING
Pre-treatment screening and monitoring of treatment in MDD are
proposed in Table 5.
Table 5. Ongoing monitoring during treatment of MDD
*previous history of antidepressant-induced hyponatremia, advanced age, low
body weight, thiazide and carbamazepine use
**based on Fracture Risk Assessment Tool Score
Adapted: Dodd S, Malhi GS, Tiller J, et al. A consensus statement for safety
monitoring guidelines of treatments for major depressive disorder.
Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2011;45(9):712-725
NASSAs
MAOIs
TCAs
Body Mass Index
and waist
circumference
Baseline and at
6-monthly
Blood pressure
Venlafaxine
TCAs
MAOIs
At Baseline, with
significant dose
increase and 3 to
6-monthly after
stabilisation
Closer monitoring of
MAOIs in first weeks until
tolerance occurs
Electrocardiogramme for
QT prolongation
TCAs
At baseline, after initial
dose titration and at
change of dose
In individuals over 45 years
of age or with cardiovascular
(CV) disorders
SNRIs
SSRIs
At baseline
In individuals with CV risk
Liver function test Agomelatine
Mirtazapine
Mianserin
If clinically indicated
At baseline 3, 6, 12
and 24 weeks after
initiation dosage, after
dosage increment or
when clinically indicated
Treatment should be
discontinued if
transaminases exceed three
times upper limit of normal
At baseline and one
month after treatment
initiation or if clinically
indicated in high risk
groups*
• More frequent monitoring
in elderly or those with
existing hyponatraemia
• Need to monitor together
with urine and serum
osmolality since SSRIs
can induced hypovolemic
hyponatremia via
Syndrome of Inappropriate
Antidiuretic Hormone
Secretion
Electrolytes
SSRIs
Mirtazapine
SNRIs
TCAs
Full blood count
To detect blood dyscrasia
(e.g. neutropenia and
thrombocytopaenia)
SSRIs
If clinically indicated in
high risk groups for
osteoporosis**
Refer to Fracture Risk
Assessment Tool Score in
MoH CPG Management
of Osteoporosis, 2012
Bone mineral
density
Parameter
Agent
Frequency of the
monitoring parameter
Comments
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of MDD should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
a. wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hard- and
soft-copies)
b. regular topic update for healthcare providers via continuous
medical education (seminar/conference/course)
c. involvement of governmental/NGOs e.g. World Mental Health Day,
Suicide Prevention Day etc.
d. accessibility to relevant multidisciplinary teams
Existing barriers for application are:
a. low mental health literacy
b. insufficient resources in terms of budget, expertise, medications,
access to psychotherapy
c. no national registry
d. variation in clinical management and preferences
e. low priority on the issue by the stakeholders
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:
a. ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to health care personnel
via printed copies, electronic websites, etc.
b. reinforce training of health care personnel by regular seminars or
workshops to ensure information is made available
c. develop multidisciplinary teams at hospital and community level
to include involvement of specialists, medical/dental officers,
pharmacists, allied health professional and nurses
The following is proposed as a clinical audit indicator for quality
management of MDD:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage of moderate
to severe MDD prescribed
with SSRIs/SNRIs/ NaSSA
=
X 100%
Number of moderate to severe MDD
In the same period
Number of moderate to severe MDD
prescribed with second-generation
antidepressants in a period
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
59
References
1. World Health Organization. Mental Health: a state of well-being. 2014. (Available
at: https://www.who.int/features/factfiles/mental_health/en/).
2. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington: APA; 2013.
3. Australian Government. Social Security Guide. 2019. (Available at: http://guides.
dss.gov.au/guide-social-security-law/1/1/f/270).
4. World
Health
Organization.
The
global
burden
of
disease:
2004
updated.
2008.
(Available
at:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/
handle/10665/43942/9789241563710_eng.pdf).
5. Kessler RC, Bromet EJ. The epidemiology of depression across cultures. Annu
Rev Public Health. 2013;34:119-138.
6. World Health Organization. National suicide prevention strategies: progress,
examples,and indicators. Geneva: WHO; 2018.
7. Ng CG. A review of depression research in Malaysia. Med J Malaysia. 2014;69
Suppl A:42-45.
8. Ferrari AJ, Somerville AJ, Baxter AJ, et al. Global variation in the prevalence and
incidence of major depressive disorder: a systematic review of the epidemiological
literature. Psychol Med. 2013;43(3):471-481.
9. Hardeveld F, Spijker J, De Graaf R, et al. Prevalence and predictors of recurrence
of major depressive disorder in the adult population. Acta Psychiatr Scand.
2010;122(3):184-91.
10. World Health Organization. Depression and Other Common Mental Disorder
Global Health Estimates Geneva: WHO; 2017.
11. Culpepper L, Muskin PR, Stahl SM. Major Depressive Disorder: Understanding
the Significance of Residual Symptoms and Balancing Efficacy with Tolerability.
Am J Med. 2015;128(9 Suppl):S1-s15.
12. Judd LL, Akiskal HS, Zeller PJ, et al. Psychosocial disability during the long-term
course of unipolar major depressive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry.
2000;57(4):375-380.
13. Mukhtar F OTP. Review on the Prevalence of Depression in Malaysia. Current
Psychiatry Reviews. 2011;7(3):1-5.
14. Siu AL, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al. Screening for Depression in
Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Jama.
2016;315(4):380-387.
15. Joffres M, Jaramillo A, Dickinson J, et al. Recommendations on screening for
depression in adults. Cmaj. 2013;185(9):775-782.
16. Sharp LK, Lipsky MS. Screening for depression across the lifespan: a review of
measures for use in primary care settings. Am Fam Physician. 2002;66(6):10011008.
17. Mukhtar F, Oei TP. A review on assessment and treatment for depression in
Malaysia. Depress Res Treat.;2011:123642.
18. Mohd-Sidik S, Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F, et al. Screening for depression with a
brief questionnaire in a primary care setting: validation of the two questions with
help question (Malay version). Int J Psychiatry Med. 2011;41(2):143-154.
19. Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F, Kerse N, et al. Effect of the addition of a "help"
question to two screening questions on specificity for diagnosis of depression in
general practice: diagnostic validity study. Bmj. 2005;331(7521):884.
20. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence: Guidance. Depression: The Treatment and Management of
Depression in Adults (Updated Edition). Leicester (UK): The British Psychological
Society & The Royal College of Psychiatrists; 2010.
21. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of Major Depressive Disorder.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2007.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
22. Armitage CJ, Panagioti M, Abdul Rahim W, et al. Completed suicides and selfharm in Malaysia: a systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2015;37(2):153165.
23. Runeson B, Odeberg J, Pettersson A, et al. Instruments for the assessment of
suicide risk: A systematic review evaluating the certainty of the evidence. PLoS
One. 2017;12(7):e0180292.
24. Steeg S, Quinlivan L, Nowland R, et al. Accuracy of risk scales for predicting
repeat self-harm and suicide: a multicentre, population-level cohort study using
routine clinical data. BMC Psychiatry. 2018;18(1):113.
25. Harriss L, Hawton K, Zahl D. Value of measuring suicidal intent in the assessment
of people attending hospital following self-poisoning or self-injury. Br J Psychiatry.
2005;186:60-66.
26. Mental Health Act 2001. (Available at: http://medicalprac.moh.gov.my/v2/uploads/
mental%20health%20act%202001.pdf).
27. Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management of
Adults with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 3. Pharmacological Treatments.
Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):540-560.
28. Ministry of Health, Singapore. Depression. Clinical Practice Guidelines 1/2012:
Singapore: MoH; 2012.
29. Malhi GS, Bassett D, Boyce P, et al. Royal Australian and New Zealand College
of Psychiatrists clinical practice guidelines for mood disorders. Aust N Z J
Psychiatry. 2015;49(12):1087-1206.
30. Parikh SV, Quilty LC, Ravitz P, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Adults
with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 2. Psychological Treatments. Can J
Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):524-539.
31. Stangier U, Hilling C, Heidenreich T, et al. Maintenance cognitive-behavioral
therapy and manualized psychoeducation in the treatment of recurrent
depression: a multicenter prospective randomized controlled trial. Am J
Psychiatry. 2013;170(6):624-632.
32. Lemmens GM, Eisler I, Buysse A, et al. The effects on mood of adjunctive singlefamily and multi-family group therapy in the treatment of hospitalized patients
with major depression. A 15-month follow-up study. Psychother Psychosom.
2009;78(2):98-105.
33. King M, Marston L, Bower P. Comparison of non-directive counselling and
cognitive behaviour therapy for patients presenting in general practice with
an ICD-10 depressive episode: a randomized control trial. Psychol Med.
2014;44(9):1835-1844.
34. Cuijpers P, Driessen E, Hollon SD, et al. The efficacy of non-directive supportive
therapy for adult depression: a meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev. 2012;32(4):280291.
35. Pfeiffer PN, Heisler M, Piette JD, et al. Efficacy of peer support interventions for
depression: a meta-analysis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2011;33(1):29-36.
36. Guidelines for Exercise Testing (Available at: https://www.acsm.org/docs/defaultsource/publications-files/acsm-guidelines-download-10th-edabf32a97415a400e
9b3be594a6cd7fbf.pdf?sfvrsn=aaa6d2b2_0).
37. Cooney GM, Dwan K, Greig CA, et al. Exercise for depression. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2013(9):Cd004366.
38. Josefsson T, Lindwall M, Archer T. Physical exercise intervention in depressive
disorders: meta-analysis and systematic review. Scandinavian Journal of
Medicine & Science in Sports. 2013;24(2):259-272.
39. Jorm AF, Morgan AJ, Hetrick SE. Relaxation for depression. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2008(4):CD007142.
40. The World Health Organization Quality of Life assessment (WHOQOL): position
paper from the World Health Organization. Soc Sci Med. 1995;41(10):1403-1409.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
61
41. Sulmasy DP. A biopsychosocial-spiritual model for the care of patients at the end
of life. Gerontologist. 2002;42 Spec No 3:24-33.
42. Moreira-Almeida A, Sharma A, van Rensburg BJ, et al. WPA Position Statement
on Spirituality and Religion in Psychiatry. World psychiatry : official journal of the
World Psychiatric Association (WPA). 2016;15(1):87-88.
43. Anderson N, Heywood-Everett S, Siddiqi N, et al. Faith-adapted psychological
therapies for depression and anxiety: Systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Affect Disord. 2015;176:183-196.
44. Goncalves JP, Lucchetti G, Menezes PR, et al. Religious and spiritual interventions
in mental health care: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled clinical trials. Psychol Med. 2015;45(14):2937-2949.
45. Barth J, Munder T, Gerger H, et al. Comparative efficacy of seven psychotherapeutic
interventions for patients with depression: a network meta-analysis. PLoS Med.
2013;10(5):e1001454.
46. Karyotaki E, Smit Y, Holdt Henningsen K, et al. Combining pharmacotherapy and
psychotherapy or monotherapy for major depression? A meta-analysis on the
long-term effects. J Affect Disord. 2016;194:144-152.
47. Cuijpers P, Karyotaki E, Weitz E, et al. The effects of psychotherapies for major
depression in adults on remission, recovery and improvement: a meta-analysis. J
Affect Disord. 2014;159:118-126.
48. Huntley AL, Araya R, Salisbury C. Group psychological therapies for depression
in the community: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry.
2012;200(3):184-190.
49. Cuijpers P, Berking M, Andersson G, et al. A meta-analysis of cognitivebehavioural therapy for adult depression, alone and in comparison with other
treatments. Can J Psychiatry. 2013;58(7):376-385.
50. Amick HR, Gartlehner G, Gaynes BN, et al. Comparative benefits and harms of
second generation antidepressants and cognitive behavioral therapies in initial
treatment of major depressive disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Bmj. 2015;351:h6019.
51. Nieuwsma JA, Trivedi RB, McDuffie J, et al. Brief psychotherapy for depression: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Psychiatry Med. 2012;43(2):129-151.
52. Cuijpers P, Donker T, Weissman MM, et al. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for
Mental Health Problems: A Comprehensive Meta-Analysis. Am J Psychiatry.
2016;173(7):680-687.
53. Cuijpers P, van Straten A, Warmerdam L. Problem solving therapies for
depression: a meta-analysis. Eur Psychiatry. 2007;22(1):9-15.
54. Gellis ZD, Kenaley B. Problem-solving therapy for depression in adults: a
systematic review. Research on Social Work Practice. 2008;18(2):117-131.
55. Shinohara K, Honyashiki M, Imai H, et al. Behavioural therapies versus
other psychological therapies for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2013(10):CD008696.
56. Ekers D, Webster L, Van Straten A, et al. Behavioural activation for depression;
an update of meta-analysis of effectiveness and sub group analysis. PLoS One.
2014;9(6):e100100.
57. Churchill R, Moore TH, Furukawa TA, et al. 'Third wave' cognitive and behavioural
therapies versus treatment as usual for depression. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2013(10):CD008705.
58. Hunot V, Moore TH, Caldwell DM, et al. 'Third wave' cognitive and behavioural
therapies versus other psychological therapies for depression. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2013(10):Cd008704.
59. Abbass AA, Kisely SR, Town JM, et al. Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapies
for common mental disorders. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2014(7):CD004687.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
60. Driessen E, Hegelmaier LM, Abbass AA, et al. The efficacy of short-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis update. Clin
Psychol Rev. 2015;42:1-15.
61. Barbato A, D'Avanzo B. Marital therapy for depression. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2006(2):Cd004188.
62. Josephine K, Josefine L, Philipp D, et al. Internet- and mobile-based depression
interventions for people with diagnosed depression: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Affect Disord. 2017;223:28-40.
63. So M, Yamaguchi S, Hashimoto S, et al. Is computerised CBT really helpful for
adult depression? A meta-analytic re-evaluation of CCBT for adult depression
in terms of clinical implementation and methodological validity. BMC Psychiatry.
2013;13:113.
64. Oestergaard S, Moldrup C. Optimal duration of combined psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy for patients with moderate and severe depression: a metaanalysis. J Affect Disord. 2011;131(1-3):24-36.
65. Jakobsen JC, Katakam KK, Schou A, et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
versus placebo in patients with major depressive disorder. A systematic review
with meta-analysis and Trial Sequential Analysis. BMC Psychiatry. 2017;17(1):58.
66. Cipriani A, La Ferla T, Furukawa TA, et al. Sertraline versus other antidepressive
agents for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010(4):Cd006117.
67. Cipriani A, Santilli C, Furukawa TA, et al. Escitalopram versus other antidepressive
agents for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009(2):Cd006532.
68. Wang Y, Yu L, Xie J, et al. Comparative efficacies of fluoxetine and paroxetine in
major depression across varying acute-phase treatment periods: a meta-analysis.
Asia Pac Psychiatry. 2014;6(4):353-362.
69. Machado M, Einarson TR. Comparison of SSRIs and SNRIs in major depressive
disorder: a meta-analysis of head-to-head randomized clinical trials. J Clin Pharm
Ther. 2010;35(2):177-188.
70. Thase ME, Nierenberg AA, Vrijland P, et al. Remission with mirtazapine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: a meta-analysis of individual patient data
from 15 controlled trials of acute phase treatment of major depression. Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2010;25(4):189-198.
71. Valuck RJ, Libby AM, Anderson HD, et al. Comparison of antidepressant classes
and the risk and time course of suicide attempts in adults: propensity matched,
retrospective cohort study. Br J Psychiatry. 2016;208(3):271-279.
72. Schueler YB, Koesters M, Wieseler B, et al. A systematic review of duloxetine
and venlafaxine in major depression, including unpublished data. Acta Psychiatr
Scand. 2011;123(4):247-265.
73. Laoutidis ZG, Kioulos KT. Desvenlafaxine for the acute treatment of depression: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2015;48(6):187-199.
74. Watanabe N, Omori IM, Nakagawa A, et al. Mirtazapine versus other antidepressive
agents for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(12):Cd006528.
75. Watanabe N, Omori IM, Nakagawa A, et al. Safety reporting and adverse-event
profile of mirtazapine described in randomized controlled trials in comparison
with other classes of antidepressants in the acute-phase treatment of adults with
depression: systematic review and meta-analysis. CNS Drugs. 2010;24(1):35-53.
76. Winterfeld U, Klinger G, Panchaud A, et al. Pregnancy outcome following
maternal exposure to mirtazapine: a multicenter, prospective study. J Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2015;35(3):250-259.
77. Taylor D, Sparshatt A, Varma S, et al. Antidepressant efficacy of agomelatine:
meta-analysis of published and unpublished studies. Bmj. 2014;348:g1888.
78. Guaiana G, Gupta S, Chiodo D, et al. Agomelatine versus other antidepressive
agents for major depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013(12):Cd008851.
79. Freiesleben SD, Furczyk K. A systematic review of agomelatine-induced liver
injury. J Mol Psychiatry. 2015;3(1):4.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
63
80. Koesters M, Ostuzzi G, Guaiana G, et al. Vortioxetine for depression in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;7:Cd011520.
81. Meeker AS, Herink MC, Haxby DG, et al. The safety and efficacy of vortioxetine
for acute treatment of major depressive disorder: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Systematic reviews. 2015;4:21.
82. Berhan A, Barker A. Vortioxetine in the treatment of adult patients with major
depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of randomized double-blind controlled trials.
BMC Psychiatry. 2014;14:276.
83. Cipriani A, Furukawa TA, Salanti G, et al. Comparative efficacy and acceptability
of 21 antidepressant drugs for the acute treatment of adults with major
depressive disorder: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet.
2018;391(10128):1357-1366.
84. Leucht C, Huhn M, Leucht S. Amitriptyline versus placebo for major depressive
disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;12:Cd009138.
85. Patel K, Allen S, Haque MN, et al. Bupropion: a systematic review and metaanalysis of effectiveness as an antidepressant. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol.
2016;6(2):99-144.
86. Maneeton N, Maneeton B, Eurviriyanukul K, et al. Efficacy, tolerability, and
acceptability of bupropion for major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of
randomized-controlled trials comparison with venlafaxine. Drug Des Devel Ther.
2013;7:1053-1062.
87. Furukawa TA, Streiner DL, Young LT. Antidepressant and benzodiazepine for
major depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002(1):Cd001026.
88. Ministry of Health, Social Services and Equality. Clinical Practice Guideline on
the Management of Depression in Adults. Galicia. Galician Agency for Health
Technology Assessment (avalia-t); 2014.
89. Kishi T, Matsunaga S, Iwata N. Efficacy and tolerability of Z-drug adjunction to
antidepressant treatment for major depressive disorder: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci.
2017;267(2):149-161.
90. Candy M, Jones L, Williams R, et al. Psychostimulants for depression. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2008(2):Cd006722.
91. McIntyre RS, Lee Y, Zhou AJ, et al. The Efficacy of Psychostimulants in
Major Depressive Episodes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2017;37(4):412-418.
92. Caddy C, Amit BH, McCloud TL, et al. Ketamine and other glutamate
receptor modulators for depression in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015(9):CD011612.
93. Short B, Fong J, Galvez V, et al. Side-effects associated with ketamine use in
depression: a systematic review. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(1):65-78.
94. Biesheuvel-Leliefeld KE, Kok GD, Bockting CL, et al. Effectiveness of psychological
interventions in preventing recurrence of depressive disorder: meta-analysis and
meta-regression. J Affect Disord. 2015;174:400-410.
95. Kuyken W, Hayes R, Barrett B, et al. The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy compared with maintenance antidepressant
treatment in the prevention of depressive relapse/recurrence: results of a
randomised controlled trial (the PREVENT study). Health Technol Assess.
2015;19(73):1-124.
96. Eisendrath SJ, Gillung E, Delucchi KL, et al. A Randomized Controlled Trial of
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Treatment-Resistant Depression.
Psychother Psychosom. 2016;85(2):99-110.
97. Hansen R, Gaynes B, Thieda P, et al. Meta-analysis of major depressive disorder
relapse and recurrence with second-generation antidepressants. Psychiatr Serv.
2008;59(10):1121-1130.
98. Wijkstra J, Lijmer J, Burger H, et al. Pharmacological treatment for psychotic
depression. [Review]. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(7) Art. No.: CD004044.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
99.
American Psychiatric Association. Practice Guideline for Treatment of Patients
With Major Depressive Disorder Third Edition: APA; 2010.
100. Martin JL, Barbanoj MJ, Schlaepfer TE, et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation
for treating depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009(2):CD003493.
101. Fava M. Diagnosis and definition of treatment-resistant depression. Biol
Psychiatry. 2003;53(8):649-659.
102. Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Stewart JW, et al. Combining medications to enhance
depression outcomes (CO-MED): acute and long-term outcomes of a singleblind randomized study. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(7):689-701.
103. Papakostas GI, Fava M, Thase ME. Treatment of SSRI-resistant depression: a
meta-analysis comparing within- versus across-class switches. Biol Psychiatry.
2008;63(7):699-704.
104. Kessler DS, MacNeill SJ, Tallon D, et al. Mirtazapine added to SSRIs or SNRIs
for treatment resistant depression in primary care: phase III randomised placebo
controlled trial (MIR). Bmj. 2018;363:k4218.
105. Nelson JC, Papakostas GI. Atypical antipsychotic augmentation in major
depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of placebo-controlled randomized trials.
Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166(9):980-991.
106. Zhou X, Ravindran AV, Qin B, et al. Comparative efficacy, acceptability, and
tolerability of augmentation agents in treatment-resistant depression: systematic
review and network meta-analysis. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
2015;17(4):e487-498.
107. Nelson JC, Baumann P, Delucchi K, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of lithium augmentation of tricyclic and second generation antidepressants in
major depression. J Affect Disord. 2014;168:269-75.
108. Edwards SJ, Hamilton V, Nherera L, et al. Lithium or an atypical antipsychotic
drug in the management of treatment-resistant depression: a systematic review
and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2013;17(54):1-190.
109. Wang X, Huang S, Qi HB. Comparative efficacy and acceptability of seven
augmentation agents for treatment-resistant depression: A multiple-treatments
meta-analysis. South African Journal of Psychiatry. 2014;20:71-6.
110. Canuso CM, Singh JB, Fedgchin M, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Intranasal
Esketamine for the Rapid Reduction of Symptoms of Depression and Suicidality
in Patients at Imminent Risk for Suicide: Results of a Double-Blind, Randomized,
Placebo-Controlled Study. Am J Psychiatry. 2018;175(7):620-30.
111. Song GM, Tian X, Shuai T, et al. Treatment of Adults With TreatmentResistant Depression: Electroconvulsive Therapy Plus Antidepressant or
Electroconvulsive Therapy Alone? Evidence From an Indirect Comparison
Meta-Analysis. Medicine. 2015;94(26):e1052-e.
112. Repetitive
Transcranial
Magnetic
Stimulation
for
Treatment-Resistant
Depression: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled
Trials. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser. 2016;16(5):1-66.
113. Wiles N, Thomas L, Abel A, et al. Cognitive behavioural therapy as an adjunct
to pharmacotherapy for primary care based patients with treatment resistant
depression: results of the CoBalT randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2013;381(9864):375-384.
114. Kocsis JH, Gelenberg AJ, Rothbaum BO, et al. Cognitive behavioral analysis
system of psychotherapy and brief supportive psychotherapy for augmentation
of antidepressant nonresponse in chronic depression: the REVAMP Trial. Arch
Gen Psychiatry. 2009;66(11):1178-1188.
115. Milev RV, Giacobbe P, Kennedy SH, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management of
Adults with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 4. Neurostimulation Treatments.
Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):561-575.
116. Bulbul F, Copoglu US, Alpak G, et al. Electroconvulsive therapy in pregnant
patients. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2013;35(6):636-639.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
65
117. Eranti S, Mogg A, Pluck G, et al. A randomized, controlled trial with 6-month
follow-up of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and electroconvulsive
therapy for severe depression. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(1):73-81.
118. Brunoni AR, Moffa AH, Fregni F, et al. Transcranial direct current stimulation for
acute major depressive episodes: meta-analysis of individual patient data. Br J
Psychiatry. 2016;208(6):522-531.
119. Meron D, Hedger N, Garner M, et al. Transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) in the treatment of depression: Systematic review and meta-analysis of
efficacy and tolerability. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015;57:46-62.
120. Ravindran AV, Balneaves LG, Faulkner G, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management
of Adults with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 5. Complementary and
Alternative Medicine Treatments. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):576-587.
121. Linde K, Berner MM, Kriston L. St John's wort for major depression. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2008(4):Cd000448.
122. Smith CA, Hay PP, Macpherson H. Acupuncture for depression. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2010(1):Cd004046.
123. Appleton KM, Sallis HM, Perry R, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for depression in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(11):CD004692.
124. Taylor MJ, Carney S, Geddes J, et al. Folate for depressive disorders. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2003(2):CD003390.
125. Cramer H, Lauche R, Langhorst J, et al. Yoga for depression: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Depress Anxiety. 2013;30(11):1068-1083.
126. Aalbers S, Fusar-Poli L, Freeman RE, et al. Music therapy for depression.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017(11).CD004517
127. Meekums B, Karkou V, Nelson EA. Dance movement therapy for depression.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(2):CD009895.
128. Shih M, Yang YH, Koo M. A meta-analysis of hypnosis in the treatment
of depressive symptoms: a brief communication. Int J Clin Exp Hypn.
2009;57(4):431-442.
129. Archer J, Bower P, Gilbody S, et al. Collaborative care for depression and
anxiety problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD006525.
130. Vera M, Perez-Pedrogo C, Huertas SE, et al. Collaborative care for depressed
patients with chronic medical conditions: a randomized trial in Puerto Rico.
Psychiatr Serv. 2010;61(2):144-150.
131. Richards DA, Hill JJ, Gask L, et al. Clinical effectiveness of collaborative care
for depression in UK primary care (CADET): cluster randomised controlled trial.
Bmj. 2013;347:f4913.
132. Woody CA, Ferrari AJ, Siskind DJ, et al. A systematic review and metaregression of the prevalence and incidence of perinatal depression. J Affect
Disord. 2017;219:86-92.
133. Mohamad Yusuff AS, Tang L, Binns CW, et al. Prevalence of antenatal
depressive symptoms among women in Sabah, Malaysia. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med. 2016;29(7):1170-1174.
134. Fadzil A, Balakrishnan K, Razali R, et al. Risk factors for depression and anxiety
among pregnant women in Hospital Tuanku Bainun, Ipoh, Malaysia. Asia Pac
Psychiatry. 2013;5 Suppl 1:7-13.
135. Mohamad Yusuff AS, Tang L, Binns CW, et al. Prevalence and risk factors
for postnatal depression in Sabah, Malaysia: a cohort study. Women Birth.
2015;28(1):25-29.
136. Abdul Kadir A, Nordin R, Ismail S, et al. Validation of the Malay Version of
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale for Postnatal Women in Kelantan,
Malaysia. Asia Pac Fam Med 2004;3(1-2): 9-18.
137. Wan Mahmud WMR, Shariff S, Yaacob MJ. Postpartum depression: a survey
of the incidence and associated risk factors among malay women in Beris
Kubor Besar, Bachok, Kelantan. The Malaysian Malays J Med Sci : MJMS.
2002;9(1):41-48.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
138. Kit LK, Janet G, Jegasothy R. Incidence of postnatal depression in Malaysian
women. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 1997;23(1):85-89.
139. Zainal NZ, Kaka AS, Ng CG, et al. Prevalence of postpartum depression in a
hospital setting among Malaysian mothers. Asia Pac Psychiatry. 2012;4(2):144149.
140. Binti Mohd Arifin SR, Ahmad A, Abdul Rahman R, et al. Postpartum depression
in Malaysian women: the association with the timing of pregnancy and sense of
personal control during childbirth. Int. J. Acad. Res. 2014;6(3):143-149.
141. Ahmad N, Silim U, A R, et al. Postnatal depression and intimate partner
violence: a nationwide clinic-based cross-sectional study in Malaysia. BMJ
Open. 2018;8(5):e020649.
142. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. National Health and Morbidity Survey 2016:
Maternal and Child Health. Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2016.
143. Orsolini L, Valchera A, Vecchiotti R, et al. Suicide during Perinatal Period:
Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and Clinical Correlates. Front Psychiatry.
2016;7:138.
144. Bradley N Manktelow LKS, Sarah E et al. MBRRACE-UK Perinatal Mortality
Surveillance Report. Leicester; 2016.
145. Maternal Deaths in Australia 2016. (Available at: https://www.aihw.gov.au/
reports/mothers-babies/maternal-deaths-in-australia-2016/contents/report).
146. Jarde A, Morais M, Kingston D, et al. Neonatal Outcomes in Women With
Untreated Antenatal Depression Compared With Women Without Depression:
A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;73(8):826837.
147. Gentile S. Untreated depression during pregnancy: Short- and long-term effects
in offspring. A systematic review. Neuroscience. 2017;342:154-166.
148. Goodman SH, Rouse MH, Connell AM, et al. Maternal depression and child
psychopathology: a meta-analytic review. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev.
2011;14(1):1-27.
149. Field T. Postpartum depression effects on early interactions, parenting, and
safety practices: a review. Infant Behav Dev. 2010;33(1):1-6.
150. Cohen LS, Altshuler LL, Harlow BL, et al. Relapse of major depression during
pregnancy in women who maintain or discontinue antidepressant treatment.
JAMA. 2006;295(5):499-507.
151. O'Hara MW, McCabe JE. Postpartum depression: current status and future
directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2013;9:379-407.
152. Klainin P, Arthur DG. Postpartum depression in Asian cultures: a literature
review. Int J Nurs Stud. 2009;46(10):1355-1373.
153. Fisher J, Cabral de Mello M, Patel V, et al. Prevalence and determinants of
common perinatal mental disorders in women in low- and lower-middle-income
countries: a systematic review. Bull World Health Organ. 2012;90(2):139g-149g.
154. Dennis CL, Chung-Lee L. Postpartum depression help-seeking barriers
and maternal treatment preferences: a qualitative systematic review. Birth.
2006;33(4):323-331.
155. O'Connor E, Rossom RC, Henninger M, et al. Primary Care Screening for
and Treatment of Depression in Pregnant and Postpartum Women: Evidence
Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
JAMA. 2016;315(4):388-406.
156. Howard LM, Ryan EG, Trevillion K, et al. Accuracy of the Whooley questions
and the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale in identifying depression and
other mental disorders in early pregnancy. Br J Psychiatry. 2018;212(1):50-56.
157. Gjerdingen D, Crow S, McGovern P, et al. Postpartum depression screening at
well-child visits: validity of a 2-question screen and the PHQ-9. Ann Fam Med.
2009;7(1):63-70.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
67
158. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. Antenatal and Postnatal
Mental Health: Clinical Management and Service Guidance: Updated edition.
Leicester (UK): British Psychological Society; 2014.
159. Austin MP, Highet N, the Expert Working Group. Mental Health Care in the
Perinatal Period: Australian Clinical Practice Guideline. Melbourne: Centre of
Perinatal Excellence; 2017.
160. Molenaar NM, Kamperman AM, Boyce P, et al. Guidelines on treatment of
perinatal depression with antidepressants: An international review. Aust N Z J
Psychiatry. 2018;52(4):320-327.
161. Garispanduan Perkhidmatan Prakehamilan di Penjagaan Kesihatan Primer,
Bahagian Pembangunan Kesihatan Keluarga. 2019. (Available at: http://www.
myhealth.gov.my/en/pre-pregnancy-care-ppc/).
162. Reconception Care to Reduce Maternal and Childhood Mortality and Morbidity
Meeting report and packages of Interventions. 2012. (Available at: https://www.
who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/concensus_preconception_
care/en/).
163. Molyneaux E, Howard LM, McGeown HR, et al. Antidepressant treatment for
postnatal depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(9):CD002018.
164. Prady SL, Hanlon I, Fraser LK, et al. A systematic review of maternal
antidepressant use in pregnancy and short- and long-term offspring's outcomes.
Arch Womens Ment Health. 2018;21(2):127-140.
165. Wang J, Johnson T, Sahin L, et al. Evaluation of the Safety of Drugs and
Biological Products Used During Lactation: Workshop Summary. Clinical
pharmacology and therapeutics. 2017;101(6):736-744.
166. Orsolini L, Bellantuono C. Serotonin reuptake inhibitors and breastfeeding: a
systematic review. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2015;30(1):4-20.
167. Smit M, Dolman KM, Honig A. Mirtazapine in pregnancy and lactation - A
systematic review. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016;26(1):126-135.
168. Sockol LE. A systematic review and meta-analysis of interpersonal
psychotherapy for perinatal women. J Affect Disord. 2018;232:316-328.
169. Van Ravesteyn LM, Lambregtse-van den Berg MP, Hoogendijk WJ, et al.
Interventions to treat mental disorders during pregnancy: A systematic review
and multiple treatment meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2017;12(3):e0173397.
170. Sockol LE. A systematic review of the efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy
for treating and preventing perinatal depression. J Affect Disord. 2015;177:7-21.
171. Dennis CL, Hodnett E. Psychosocial and psychological interventions for treating
postpartum depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007(4):CD006116.
172. Lever Taylor B, Cavanagh K, Strauss C. The Effectiveness of MindfulnessBased Interventions in the Perinatal Period: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. PLoS One. 2016;11(5):e0155720.
173. Ashford MT, Olander EK, Ayers S. Computer- or web-based interventions for
perinatal mental health: A systematic review. J Affect Disord. 2016;197:134146.
174. Dennis CL, Dowswell T. Psychosocial and psychological interventions
for preventing postpartum depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2013(2):CD001134.
175. Barua A, Ghosh MK, Kar N, et al. Prevalence of depressive disorders in the
elderly. Ann Saudi Med. 2011;31(6):620-624.
176. Verma R, Sia Guen Lin R, Chakravarthy S, et al. Socio-Demographic Correlates
of Unipolar Major Depression Among the Malay Elderly In Klang Valley,
Malaysia: An Intensive Study Int J Pharm Pharm Sci.2014;6(4):158-164.
177. Rashid A, Manan A, Rohana S. Depression Among the Elderly Malays Living in
Rural Malaysia. The Internet Journal of Public Health. 2010;1(2).
178. Aziz R, Steffens DC. What are the causes of late-life depression? Psychiatr Clin
North Am. 2013;36(4):497-516.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
179. Blackburn P W-HM, Wiese B. Blackburn P, Wilkins-Ho M, et al. Depression In
Older Adults: Diagnosis And Management. BCMJ. 2017;59(3):171- 177.
180. Hegeman JM, Kok RM, van der Mast RC, et al. Phenomenology of depression
in older compared with younger adults: meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry.
2012;200(4):275-281.
181. Comijs HC, van Marwijk HW, van der Mast RC, et al. The Netherlands study of
depression in older persons (NESDO); a prospective cohort study. BMC Res
Notes. 2011;4:524.
182. Pequignot R, Dufouil C, Prugger C, et al. High Level of Depressive Symptoms at
Repeated Study Visits and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease and Stroke over 10
Years in Older Adults: The Three-City Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64(1):118125.
183. Almeida OP, Hankey GJ, Yeap BB, et al. Depression, frailty, and all-cause
mortality: a cohort study of men older than 75 years. J Am Med Dir Assoc.
2015;16(4):296-300.
184. Teh EE CIH. Validation of Malay Version of Geriatric Depression Scale among
Elderly Inpatients 2004. (Available at: http://www.priory.com/psych/MalayGDS.
htm).
185. Wilson K, Mottram P, Sivanranthan A, et al. Antidepressant versus placebo for
depressed elderly. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001(2):CD000561.
186. Tham A, Jonsson U, Andersson G, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of
antidepressants in people aged 65 years or older with major depressive disorder
- A systematic review and a meta-analysis. J Affect Disord. 2016;205:1-12.
187. Mottram P, Wilson K, Strobl J. Antidepressants for depressed elderly. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2006(1):Cd003491.
188. Wilkinson P, Izmeth Z. Continuation and maintenance treatments for depression
in older people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(11):CD006727.
189. Sneed JR, Reinlieb ME, Rutherford BR, et al. Antidepressant treatment of
melancholia in older adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;22(1):46-52.
190. Coupland CA, Dhiman P, Barton G, et al. A study of the safety and harms of
antidepressant drugs for older people: a cohort study using a large primary care
database. Health Technol Assess. 2011;15(28):1-202, iii-iv.
191. Kirkham JG, Choi N, Seitz DP. Meta-analysis of problem solving therapy for the
treatment of major depressive disorder in older adults. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2016;31(5):526-535.
192. Holvast F, Massoudi B, Oude Voshaar RC, et al. Non-pharmacological
treatment for depressed older patients in primary care: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2017;12(9):e0184666.
193. Stek ML, Wurff van der FFB, Hoogendijk WJG, et al. Electroconvulsive therapy
for the depressed elderly. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev. 2003(2).CD003593.
194. van Schaik AM, Comijs HC, Sonnenberg CM, et al. Efficacy and safety of
continuation and maintenance electroconvulsive therapy in depressed elderly
patients: a systematic review. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012;20(1):5-17.
195. State
of
Queensland
(Queensland
Health).
The
Administration
of
Electroconvulsive Therapy. Brisbane: Queensland Health; 2018.
196. Mura G, Carta MG. Physical activity in depressed elderly. A systematic review.
Clin Pract Epidemiol Ment Health. 2013;9:125-135.
197. Schuch FB, Vancampfort D, Rosenbaum S, et al. Exercise for depression in
older adults: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials adjusting for
publication bias. Braz J Psychiatry. 2016;38(3):247-254.
198. Mazeh D, Shahal B, Aviv A, et al. A randomized, single-blind, comparison
of venlafaxine with paroxetine in elderly patients suffering from resistant
depression. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;22(6):371-375.
199. Lenze EJ, Mulsant BH, Blumberger DM, et al. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability
of augmentation pharmacotherapy with aripiprazole for treatment-resistant
depression in late life: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet. 2015;386(10011):2404-2412.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
69
200. Katon WJ. Epidemiology and treatment of depression in patients with chronic
medical illness. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience. 2011;13(1):7-23.
201. Wang J, Wu X, Lai W, et al. Prevalence of depression and depressive
symptoms among outpatients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ
Open. 2017;7(8):e017173.
202. Nan H, Lee PH, McDowell I, et al. Depressive symptoms in people with chronic
physical conditions: prevalence and risk factors in a Hong Kong community
sample. BMC Psychiatry. 2012;12:198.
203. Zimmerman M, McGlinchey JB, Young D, et al. Diagnosing major depressive
disorder I: A psychometric evaluation of the DSM-IV symptom criteria. J Nerv
Ment Dis. 2006;194(3):158-63.
204. Baumeister H, Hutter N, Bengel J. Psychological and pharmacological
interventions for depression in patients with diabetes mellitus and depression.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(12):CD008381.
205. Xie J, Deng W. Psychosocial intervention for patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus and comorbid depression: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment. 2017;13:2681-2690.
206. Richards SH, Anderson L, Jenkinson CE, et al. Psychological interventions for
coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;(4):CD002902.
207. Baumeister H, Hutter N, Bengel J. Psychological and pharmacological
interventions for depression in patients with coronary artery disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2011(9):CD008012.
208. Ostuzzi G, Matcham F, Dauchy S, et al. Antidepressants for the treatment
of depression in people with cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015(6):CD011006.
209. Ostuzzi G, Benda L, Costa E, et al. Efficacy and acceptability of antidepressants
on the continuum of depressive experiences in patients with cancer: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Cancer Treat Rev. 2015;41(8):714-724.
210. Palmer SC, Natale P, Ruospo M, et al. Antidepressants for treating depression in
adults with end-stage kidney disease treated with dialysis. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2016(5):CDq004541.
211. Hackett ML, Anderson CS, House A, et al. Interventions for treating depression
after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008(4):CD003437.
212. Tsoi KK, Chan JY, Hirai HW, et al. Comparison of diagnostic performance of
Two-Question Screen and 15 depression screening instruments for older adults:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2017;210(4):255-260.
213. Mental health of older adults. (Available at: https://www.who.int/newsroom/
factsheets/detail/mental-health-of-older-adults).
214. Karyotaki E, Riper H, Twisk J, et al. Efficacy of Self-guided Internet-Based
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in the Treatment of Depressive Symptoms: A Metaanalysis of Individual Participant Data. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017:1;74(4):351-359.
215. Driessen E, Van HL, Don FJ, et al. The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy
and psychodynamic therapy in the outpatient treatment of major depression: a
randomized clinical trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2013 Sep;170(9):1041-1050.
216. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. National Institute for Health
and Clinical Excellence: Guidance. Depression in Adults with a Chronic Physical
Health Problem. Leicester (UK): The British Psychological Society & The Royal
college of Psychiatrists; 2010.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective treatments in MDD?
1.
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER, MAJOR/
2.
(major depress* adj1 disorder*).tw.
3.
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER/
4.
((neuro* or endogenous or syndrome or disorder or unipolar or
psycho*) adj1 depress*).tw.
5.
melancholia*.tw.
6.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5
7.
COGNITIVE THERAPY/
8.
(cogniti* adj1 (therap* or psychotherap*)).tw.
9.
behavio* therap*, cognitive.tw.
10. therap*, cognitive behavio*.tw.
11. computerised cognitive behavio* therap*.tw.
12. internet-based cognitive behavio* therap*.tw.
13. brief cognitive behavio* therap*.tw.
14. 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13
15. 6 and 14
16. limit 15 to (yr="2006 -Current" and "all adult (19 plus years)" and
english and humans)
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
71
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the accurate screening tools in population at-risk of MDD?
2. What are the accurate diagnostic tools in MDD?
3. What are the safe and effective pharmacotherapy treatments in
MDD?
• Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
• Serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
• Noradrenergic
and
specific
serotonergic
antidepressants
(NaSSAs)
• Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
• Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
• melatonergic agonist & serotonergic antagonist (agomelatine)
• Multi-modal antidepressants
• Psychostimulants
• Benzodiazepines
• Ketamine
4. What are the effective and safe optimisation/switching/augmentation/
combination strategies of pharmacotherapy treatment in MDD?
5. What are the safe and effective non-pharmacotherapy treatments in
MDD?
• Psychological/Behavioural interventions
○ Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
○ Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
○ Problem-solving therapy (PST)
○ Behavioural therapy
○ Third-wave CBT
○ Psychodynamic psychotherapy
○ Marital therapy
○ Internet- and mobile/computer-based interventions
• Psychosocial interventions
○ Psycho-education
○ Counselling
○ Non-directive supportive therapy
○ Exercise
○ Relaxation
○ Psychospiritual
• Physical treatments
○ Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
○ Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
6. What are the safe and effective traditional, complementary and
alternative treatments in MDD?
7. What are the safe and effective treatments for treatment-resistant
MDD?
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
8. How effective are collaborative care models in the management of
MDD?
9. What are the safe and effective treatments in special populations
with MDD?
• Elderly
• Pre- and post-natal women
• Patients with co-morbid chronic medical illnesses
10. What are the criteria for referral and admission of patients with
MDD?
11. What are the parameters to be monitored in patients with MDD on
treatment?
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
73
Appendix 3
AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION’S
DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF
MENTAL DISORDERS, FIFTH EDITION (DSM-5)
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during
the same 2-week period and represent a change from previous
functioning; at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood
or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another
medical condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated
by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or
observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In
children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either
subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a
change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or
increase in appetite nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider
failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable
by others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being
slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which
may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or
guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly
every day (either by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent
suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a
specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance or to another medical condition.
Note: Criteria A–C represent a major depressive episode.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin,
losses from a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability)
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
may include the feelings of intense sadness, rumination about the loss,
insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion A, which
may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may
be understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence
of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal response to
a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision
inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the
individual’s history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress
in the context of loss.
D. The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better
explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform
disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
Note: This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or
hypomanic-like episodes are substance-induced or are attributable to
the physiological effects of another medical condition.
Source: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington: American
Psychiatiric Association; 2013
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
75
Appendix 4
10th REVISION OF THE INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL
CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES AND
RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS (ICD-10)
Typical symptoms of depressive episodes
• Depressed mood
• Loss of interest and enjoyment
• Reduced energy
Common symptoms of depressive episodes
• Reduced concentration and attention
• Reduced self-esteem and self-confidence
• Ideas of guilt and unworthiness
• Bleak and pessimistic views of the future
• Ideas or acts of self-harm or suicide
• Disturbed sleep
• Diminished appetite
Mild depressive episode
• At least 2 typical symptoms plus 2 common symptoms
• No symptom should be present to an intense degree
• Minimum duration of whole episode is at least 2 weeks
• The person has some difficulty in continuing ordinary work and
activities
Moderate depressive episode
• At least 2 typical symptoms plus 3 common symptoms
• Some symptoms may be present to a marked degree
• Minimum duration of whole episode is at least 2 weeks
• The person has considerable difficulty in continuing social, work
or domestic activities
Severe depressive episode without psychotic symptoms
• All 3 typical symptoms plus at least 4 common symptoms
• Some of the symptoms are of severe intensity
• Minimum duration of whole episode is at least 2 weeks (may be
<2 weeks if symptoms are very severe and of very rapid onset)
• The person is very unlikely to continue with social, work or
domestic activities
Severe depressive episode with psychotic symptoms
• A severe depressive episode
• Delusions, hallucinations or depressive stupor are present
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Recurrent depressive disorder
• Repeated depressive episodes (mild, moderate or severe)
• No history of independent manic episodes
Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode mild
• Fulfils criteria for recurrent depressive disorder
• Current episode fulfils criteria for mild depressive episode
• At least 2 episodes lasted a minimum of 2 weeks, and were
separated by several months without significant mood disturbance
Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode moderate
• Fulfils criteria for recurrent depressive disorder
• Current episode fulfils criteria for moderate depressive episode
• At least 2 episodes lasted a minimum of 2 weeks, and were
separated by several months without significant mood disturbance
Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode severe with/without
psychotic symptoms
• Fulfils criteria for recurrent depressive disorder
• Current episode fulfils criteria for severe depressive episode
with/without psychotic symptoms
• At least 2 episodes lasted a minimum of 2 weeks, and were
separated by several months without significant mood disturbance
Recurrent depressive disorder, currently in remission
• Criteria for recurrent depressive disorder were fulfilled in the past
• Current state does not fulfill the criteria for a depressive episode
of any severity, or of any other mood disorder
• At least 2 episodes lasted a minimum of 2 weeks, and were
separated by several months without significant mood disturbance
Adapted: World Health Organization, ICD-10 Classification of Mental and
Behavioural Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic
Guidelines. Geneva: WHO; 1992
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
77
Appendix 5
POSSIBLE ORGANIC CAUSES OF DEPRESSION IN ELDERLY
LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS FOR DEPRESSION IN ELDERLY
Laboratory investigations for an elderly presented with depressive
symptoms must be emphasised. The following laboratory investigations
are recommended for patients presented with late life depression.
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of Major Depressive
Disorder. Putrajaya: MoH; 2007
Possible causes
Examples
Carcinomas of lung or pancreas
Hypothyroidism, hypercalcaemia,
Cushing’s disease
Steroids, beta-blockers, methyldopa,
clonidine, nifedipine, digoxin, L-dopa,
tetrabenazine
Post-viral, myalgic encephalomyelitis,
brucellosis, neurosyphilis
Space occupying lesion, dementia,
Parkinson’s disease
Occult carcinoma
Metabolic/endocrine causes
Drugs
Infection
Organic brain disease
Investigation
First episode
Recurrence
Full blood count
Urea and electrolytes
Calcium
Thyroid Function
B12
Folate
Liver Function
Syphilitic serology
CT Brain
Electroencephalogram
(EEG)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
If clinically indicated
If clinically indicated
If clinically indicated
Yes
Yes
If indicated
If indicated or more than 12 months
If indicated or more than 2 years
If indicated by nutritional state
If indicated (e.g. alcohol abuse)
If indicated, if not done
Only if neurologically indicated
Only if neurologically indicated
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 6A
WHOOLEY QUESTIONS (Malay Version)
Dalam sebulan yang lepas, adakah anda terganggu oleh masalah berikut?
Over the past one month, have you been bothered by the following
problems?
Source:
1. Whooley MA, Avins AL, Miranda J, Browner WS. Case finding instruments
for depression: Two questions are as good as many. J Gen Int Med.
1997;12(7):439–445
2. Mohd-Sidik S, Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F, et al. Screening for depression
with a brief questionnaire in a primary care setting: validation of the two
questions with help question (Malay version). Int J Psychiatry Med.
2011;41(2):143-154
Appendix 6B
PATIENT HEALTH QUESTIONNAIRE-2 (PHQ-2)
Dalam tempoh 2 minggu yang lepas, berapa kerapkali anda terganggu
oleh masalah berikut?
Over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been bothered by the
following problems?
Source: Sherina MS, Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F. Criterion validity of the PHQ9 (Malay version) in a primary care clinic in Malaysia. Med J Malaysia.
2012;67(3):309-315
No
Soalan/Questions
Jawapan/ Answer
Merasa murung, sedih atau tiada
harapan?
Feeling down, depressed or
hopeless?
Ya/Tidak
Yes/No
1.
Kurang minat atau keseronokan
dalam melakukan kerja-kerja?
Having little interest or pleasure in
doing things?
Ya/Tidak
Yes/No
2.
No
Soalan/Questions
Skor/Score
Sedikit minat atau keseronokan
dalam melakukan kerja-kerja
Little interest or pleasure in
doing things
Tidak pernah sama sekali/Not at all 0
Beberapa hari/Several days 1
Lebih dari
seminggu/More than half the days 2
Hampir setiap hari/Nearly everyday 3
Tidak pernah sama sekali/Not at all 0
Beberapa hari/Several days 1
Lebih dari
seminggu/More than half the days 2
Hampir setiap hari/Nearly everyday 3
1.
Kurang minat atau keseronokan
dalam melakukan kerja-kerja
Having little interest or pleasure in
doing things?"
2.
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
79
Appendix 7
EDINBURGH POSTNATAL DEPRESSION SCALE (EPDS)
Sila tandakan jawapan yang paling hampir bagi menggambarkan apa
yang telah anda rasa anda rasakan DALAM MASA TUJUH HARI yang
lalu dan bukan sekadar hari ini sahaja.
Please check the answer that comes closest to how you have felt IN
THE PAST 7 DAYS, not just how you feel today.
No
Soalan/Questions
Skor
Saya dapat ketawa dan
melihat kelucuan pada
sesuatu perkara
I have been able to laugh and
see the funny sides of things
 Sebanyak mana biasa/As much as I
always could
 Kurang daripada biasa/Not quite so
much now
 Sangat kurang daripada biasa/Definitely
not so much now
 Tiada langsung/Not at all
1.
Saya menanti dengan penuh
harapan bagi mendapat
kenikmatan apabila melakukan
sesuatu perkara
I have look forward with
enjoyments to things
 Sebanyak mana biasa/As much as I
ever did
 Kurang daripada biasa/Rather less than
what I used to do
 Sangat kurang daripada biasa/Definitely
less than I used to do
 Tiada langsung/Hardly at all
2.
Saya berasa risau atau
bimbang tanpa sebab
I have been anxious or
worried for no good reason
 Tidak langsung/No, no at all
 Amat jarang sekali/Hardly ever
 Ya, kadangkala/Yes, sometimes
 Ya, sangat kerap/Yes, very often
4.
Saya menyalahkan diri sendiri
secara tidak sepatutnya
apabila sesuatu yang tidak
kena terjadi
I have blamed myself
unnecessarily when things
went wrong
 Ya, sepanjang masa/Yes, most of the time
 Ya, kadangkala/Yes, some of the time
 Jarang sekali/Not very often
 Tiada pernah/No, never
3.*
Saya berasa takut atau panik
tanpa sebab
I have felt scared pr panicky
for no good reason
 Ya, sangat kerap/Yes, quite a lot
 Ya, kadangkala/Yes, sometimes
 Jarang sekali/No, not so much
 Tidak pernah/No, not at all
5.*
Saya dibebani oleh terlalu
banyak masalah
Things have been getting on
top of me
 Ya, kebanyakan masa saya tidak berupaya
menanganinya langsung/Yes, most of the
time I haven’t been able to cope at all
 Ya, kadangkala saya tidak berupaya
menanganinya seperti biasa/Yes,
somestimes I haven’t been coping as
well as usual
 Tidak, kebanyakan masa saya berupaya
menanganinya dengan baik/No, most of
the time I have coped quite well
 Tiada, saya berupaya menangani semua
masalah dengan baik pada setiap masa/
No, I have been coping as well as ever
6.*
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Source:
1. Cox JL, Holden JM, Sagovsky R. Detection of postnatal depression:
Development of the 10-item Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. British
Journal of Psychiatry. 1987;150:782-786
2. Wisner KL, Parry BL, Piontek CM. Postpartum Depression N Engl J Med.
2002;347(3):194-199
3. Abdul Kadir A, Nordin R, Ismail S, et al. Validation of the Malay Version of
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale for Postnatal Women in Kelantan,
Malaysia. Asia Pac. Fam. Med. 2004;3 (1-2):9-18
No
Soalan/Questions
Skor
Saya berasa sungguh sedih
sehingga saya mengalami
kesukaran untuk tidur
I have been so unhappy that
I have had difficulty sleeping
7.*
Saya berasa sangat sedih
sehingga saya menangis
I have been so unhappy that
I have been crying
9.*
Saya berasa sedih atau serabut
I have felt sad or miserable
8.*
Pernah terlintas di fikiran saya
keinginan untuk mencederakan
diri sendiri
The thought of harming myself
has occured to me
10.*
 Kebanyakan masa/Yes, most of the time
 Kadang-kadang/Yes, sometimes
 Jarang-jarang sekali/Not very often
 Tidak pernah/No, not at all
 Ya, kebanyakan masa/Yes, quite often
 Ya, agak kerap/Sometimes
 Amat jarang sekali/Hardly ever
 Tidak pernah/Never
 Ya, kebanyakan masa/Yes, most of the
time
 Ya, agak kerap/Yes, quite often
 Jarang-jarang sekali/Not very often
 Tidak pernah No, never
 Ya, kebanyakan masa/Yes, most of the time
 Ya, agak kerap/Yes, quite often
 Hanya sekali sekala/Only occasionally
 Tidak pernah/No, never
PEMARKAHAN
SCORING
SOALAN 1, 2 & 4 (tanpa *) diberi skor 0, 1, 2 atau 3 di mana kotak paling atas
adalah 0 dan kotak paling bawah adalah 3.
QUESTIONS 1, 2, & 4 (without an *) Are scored 0, 1, 2 or 3 with top box scored as
0 and the bottom box scored as 3.
SOALAN 3, 5-10 (dengan *) diberi skor terbalik di mana kotak paling atas adalah 3
dan kotak paling bawah adalah 0.
QUESTIONS 3, 5-¬10 (marked with an *) Are reverse scored, with the top box
scored as a 3 and the bottom box scored as 0.
Markah tertinggi: 30
Maximum score: 30
Cut-off EPDS versi Bahasa Melayu: ≥ 12
Cut-off for Malay version of EPDS: ≥ 12
Sila buat penilaian risiko bunuh diri jika soalan 10 > 0
Please assess suicidal risks if question 10 > 0
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
81
Appendix 8
SUGGESTED ANTIDEPRESSANT DOSAGES AND ADVERSE EFFECTS
Citalopram
20
20 - 40
Nausea, vomiting, headache, constipation, insomnia, dry mouth, somnolence,
sweating, hip fracture, dizziness, tremor, hyponatraemia, haemorrhage or
bleeding, prolonged QT interval
Escitalopram
10
C
Fluvoxamine
50 - 100
50 - 300
Nausea, diarrhoea, dry mouth, insomnia, somnolence, agitation, sweating,
anorexia
C
Paroxetine
20
20 - 50
Nausea, diarrhoea, headache, constipation, somnolence, insomnia,
dizziness, blurred vision
D
Sertraline
50
50 - 200
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache, constipation, insomnia, dry mouth,
somnolence, dizziness, tremor, fatigue, GI haemorrhage, hyponatremia,
male sexual dysfunction
C
C
C
10 - 20
Nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, headache, constipation, insomnia,
somnolence, tremor, haemorrhage, sexual dysfunction (male and female),
hyponatraemia, prolonged QT interval
Fluoxetine
20
20 - 60
Nausea, diarrhoea, headache, constipation, dry mouth, insomnia,
somnolence, vomiting, tremor, anxiety, GI haemorrhage, rash,
anorexia, hyponatremia
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Name
Starting
dose
(mg/day)
Usual dose range
(mg/day)
Main adverse effects
Pregnancy
Category
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
Duloxetine
20 - 60
60 - 120
Hypertension, dizziness, constipation, dry mouth, insomnia, somnolence,
nausea, anorexia, sexual dysfunction, hyponatraemia, hepatic failure with
or without jaundice
Venlafaxine
37.5 - 75
C
Agomelatine
25
25 - 50
Increased liver enzymes, constipation, nausea, diarrhoea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, dry mouth, headache, dizziness, insomnia, somnolence,
fatigue, jaundice, tremor, agitation, blurred vision
B
Vortioxetine
10
10 - 20
Constipation, nausea, diarrhoea, vomiting, dry mouth, night sweating,
dizziness, sexual dysfunction
B
Bupropion
150
150 - 400
Constipation, abdominal pain, nausea, headache, dizziness, somnolence dry
mouth, insomnia, tachycardia, rash, tinnitus, tremor
C
C
C
75 - 225
(up to 375 mg for
in-patients)
Hypertension, headache, dizziness, constipation, dry mouth, insomnia,
somnolence, nausea, anorexia, sexual dysfunction, hyponatremia, sweating,
blurred vision, anxiety, elevation of blood pressure at higher doses
Mirtazapine
15
15 - 45
Constipation, weight gain, dry mouth, oedema, dizziness, increased liver
enzyme levels, jaundice, somnolence, hyponatraemia
C
Desvenlafaxine
50
50 - 400
Hypertension, dizziness, constipation, dry mouth, insomnia, somnolence, nausea,
sexual dysfunction, hyponatraemia, sweating, decreased appetite, anxiety
Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
Name
Starting
dose
(mg/day)
Usual dose range
(mg/day)
Main adverse effects
Pregnancy
Category
Noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant (NaSSA)
Melatonergic agonist and serotonergic antagonist
Multimodal serotonin modulator
Noradrenaline and dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs)
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
83
Amitriptyline
50 - 75
75 - 150
(up to 300 mg for
in-patients)
Constipation, hypotension, tachycardia, arrhythmias, dizziness, drowsiness,
tremor, dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, weight gain, fatigue,
prolonged QT interval
Clomipramine
10 - 75
C
Dothiepin
50 - 75
75 - 225
Constipation, hypotension, postural hypotension, drowsiness, dizziness,
tremor, dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, tachycardia, increased or
decreased libido
C
Moclobemide
150
150 - 600
Hypertensive crisis, tachycardia, dizziness, headache, abdominal pain,
nausea, diarrhoea, vomiting, sleep disturbances, constipation, somnolence,
agitation, anxiety, increased appetite, blurred vision
B
B
C
B
30 - 150
(up to 250 in
severe cases)
Constipation, postural hypotension, dizziness, headache, tremor, dry mouth,
nausea, fatigue, somnolence, sexual dysfunction, prolonged QT interval
Phenelzine
15
30
Hypertensive crisis which has been associated with intracranial bleeding,
postural hypotension, arrhythmias, headache, abdominal discomfort,
constipation, weight gain, dry mouth, somnolence, erectile dysfunction
C
Imipramine
25 - 50
50 - 200
(up to 300 mg for
in-patients)
Constipation, postural hypotension, dizziness, headache, dry mouth, blurred
vision, urinary retention, prolonged QT interval, cardiac conduction disturbance
Tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
Name
Starting
dose
(mg/day)
Usual dose range
(mg/day)
Main adverse effects
Pregnancy
Category
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
Mianserin
30
30 - 90
Tachycardia, dizziness, drowsiness, vomiting, gynaecomastia, convulsions
C
Nortriptyline
75 - 100
75 - 150
Constipation, postural hypotension, dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary
retention, elevation or reduction of blood sugar levels, prolonged QT interval,
cardiac conduction disturbance
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
UNITED STATES FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) PREGNANCY RISK CATEGORIES
Adapted:
1. Taylor D, Paton C, Kapur S. The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines In Psychiatry Eleventh Edition. West Sussex; Wiley Blackwell: 2012
2. Micromedex® Solution (Available at: http://www.micromedexsolutions.com/micromedex2/4.24.0/WebHelp/MICROMEDEX_2.htm)
3. Mims Online (Available at: https://www.mims.com/)
4. Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS, et al. CANMAT Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Adults with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 3. Pharmacological Treatments. Can J Psychiatry.
2016;61(9):540-560
5. Moore RA, Derry S, Aldington D, et al. Amitriptyline for neuropathic pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(7):CD008242
6. Plesničar BK. Efficacy and tolerability of agomelatine in the treatment of depression. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2014;8:603–612
Category
Description
Adequate and well-controlled studies have failed to demonstrate a risk to the foetus in the first trimester of pregnancy (and there is
no evidence of risk in later trimesters).
Animal reproduction studies have failed to demonstrate a risk to the foetus and there are no adequate and well-controlled studies
in pregnant women.
Animal reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect on the foetus and there are no adequate and well-controlled studies in
humans, but potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks.
There is positive evidence of human foetal risk based on adverse reaction data from investigational or marketing experience or studies
in humans, but potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks.
Studies in animals or humans have demonstrated foetal abnormalities and/or there is positive evidence of human foetal risk based on
adverse reaction data from investigational or marketing experience, and the risks involved in use of the drug in pregnant women
clearly outweigh potential benefits.
A
B
C
D
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
85
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAP(s)
atypical antipsychotic(s)
AED(s)
antiepileptic drug(s)
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
BDI
Beck Depression Inventory
BT
Behavioural Therapy
CBT
cognitive behavioural therapy
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CI
confidence interval
CV
cardiovascular
DASS
Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale
DG
development group
DMT
dance movement therapy
DSM
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
ECT
electroconvulsive therapy
ES
effect size
EPDS
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale
GDS
Geriatric Depression Scale
GI
gastrointestinal
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluation
HADS
Hospital Anxiety Depression Scale
HAM-D
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
HR
hazard ratio
iCBT
internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy
ICD
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems
IPT
interpersonal therapy
IQR
interquartile range
IV
intravenous
MADRS
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
MAOI(s)
monoamine oxidase inhibitors
MBCT
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
MDD
major depressive disorder
MD
mean difference
MMSE
Mini Mental State Examination
NNT
number needed to treat
OR
odds ratio
p
p value
PHQ-9
Patient Health Questionnaire-9
PST
problem-solving therapy
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RR
relative risk
rTMS
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
SMD
standardized mean difference
SNRIs
serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
SR
systematic review
SSRIs
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
STPP
short-term pychodynamic psychotherapy
TAU
treatment as usual
Management of Major Depressive Disorder (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Mr. Mohd. Tholib Ibrahim on retrieval of evidence and Dr.
Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali on critical appraisal in the CPG
development
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Major Depressive
Disorder (Second Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by
the MoH, Malaysia.
TCAs
tricyclic antidepressants
tDCS
transcranial direct current stimulation
TRD
treatment-resistant depression
USPSTF
US Preventive Services Task Force
YLD
Years Lived with Disability
5HT2c
5HT2c receptor
WHO
World Health Organization