CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
MOHLPIPAK3E.I6;GU)
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0769-63-9
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.msohns.com
Also available as an apps for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2016 and will be reviewed in 2020 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available. When it is due for updating,
the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of the related specialty
will be informed about it. A discussion will be done on the need for
a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary
team will be formed and the latest systematic review methodology used
by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
 DIAGNOSIS
•
Anterior rhinoscopy should be performed as part of clinical
assessment of suspected acute rhinosinusitis in primary care
setting.
•
Nasal endoscopy should be performed to diagnose rhinosinusitis at
otorhinolaringology centre.
 LABORATORY TESTS
•
Nasal swab should not be performed in rhinosinusitis.
•
In otorhinolaryngology centres, culture and susceptibility test may
be considered in patients who do not respond to antibiotic treatment
after 72 hours in acute rhinosinusitis.
•
Endoscopically-directed middle meatal culture may be used to
obtain specimen for culture and susceptibility tests in diagnosing
unresolved bacterial rhinosinusitis by otorhinolaryngologists.
 ANTIBIOTICS
•
Antibiotic may be prescribed in acute bacterial rhinosinusitis after
weighing benefits against potential side effects.
•
Antibiotic should not be used routinely in chronic rhinosinusitis.
 CORTICOSTEROIDS
•
Intranasal corticosteroids:
○ should be considered for 2 - 3 weeks in acute rhinosinusitis
○ should be given for 16 - 52 weeks in chronic rhinosinusitis
 NASAL SALINE IRRIGATION
•
Saline irrigation should be used as an adjunct therapy in patients
with rhinosinusitis.
 SURGERY
•
Surgery should be considered in acute rhinosinusitis with orbital or
intracranial complications.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Guidelines Development and Objectives
ii
Development Group
iv
Review Committee
v
External Reviewers
vi
Algorithm 1 Management of Acute Rhinosinusitis for
vii
Primary Care and Non-Otorhinolaryngology
(ORL) Centre
Algorithm 2 Management of Chronic Rhinosinusitis for
viii
Primary Care and Non-ORL Centre
Algorithm 3 Indications of Referral to ORL Centre
ix
Algorithm 4 Management of ARS for ORL Centre
x
Algorithm 5 Management of CRS for ORL Centre
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
1
3.
PREDISPOSING/RISK FACTORS
1
4.
DIAGNOSIS
3
4.1 Clinical Diagnosis
3
4.1.1 Acute vs Chronic RS
3
4.1.2 Viral vs Bacterial RS
4
4.2 Anterior Rhinoscopy and Nasal Endoscopy
5
4.2.1 Anterior Rhinoscopy
5
4.2.2 Nasal Endoscopy
5
4.3 Imaging
9
4.4 Laboratory Tests
9
5.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
12
6.
REFERRAL
12
6.1 Acute Rhinosinusitis
12
6.2 Chronic Rhinosinusitis
13
7.
MANAGEMENT
14
7.1 Pharmacological Treatment
14
7.1.1 Antibiotic
14
7.1.2 Corticosteroids
16
7.1.3 Saline Irrigation
17
7.1.4 Antihistamine
18
7.1.5 Other Medications
18
7.2 Surgical Interventions
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
No.
Title
Page
8.
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINES
21
9.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
21
9.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
21
9.2 Resource Implications
21
REFERENCES 19
Appendix 1 Examples of Search Strategy
23
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
26
Appendix 3 Sino-Nasal Outcome Test (Snot-22)
27
Appendix 4 Proper Use of Nasal Spray
28
Appendix 5 Medication Dosage, Indications and
27
Special Precautions in RS
List of Abbreviations
33
Acknowledgement
34
Disclosure Statement
34
Source of Funding
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
In line with the current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit
of MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group. In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
•
overall quality of evidence
•
balance of benefits versus harms
•
values and preferences
•
resource implications
•
equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these CPG were
from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and Ministry of Education (MoE).
There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee
(RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platform: Guidelines International Network
(G-I-N), Medline via Ovid, Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews
(CDSR) and PubMed (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The inclusion criteria are all adolescents and adults (age
more than 12 years) with rhinosinusitis regardless of study design.
The search was limited to literature published in the last ten years
and on humans and in English. In addition, the reference lists of all
retrieved literature and guidelines were searched and experts in the
field contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted
from 12 May 2014 to 12 June 2014. Literature search was repeated
for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process
allowing any relevant papers published before 28 February 2015 to be
included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after
this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to European Position Paper on Rhinosinusitis
and Nasal Polyps developed by International Rhinology Society in 2012.
The CPG was evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research
and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to it being used as reference.
A total of 24 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 25 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literatures retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was based
largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
iii
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page).
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG Council MoH
Malaysia for review and approval.
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the following:
a) early diagnosis
b) treatment
c) prevention
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
All adolescents and adults (patients aged >12 years old) with
rhinosinusitis (RS)
TARGET GROUP/USER
This CPG is intended to guide those involved in the management of RS
in adolescents and adults either in primary or secondary/tertiary care
namely:
i.
Medical officers and specialists
ii. Allied health professionals
iii. Trainees and medical students
iv. Patients and their advocates
v. Professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Associate Professor Dr. Salina Husain
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
iv
Dr. Amilia Hazreena Hamidon
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Greentown, Perak
Dr. Ana Fizalinda Abdullah Sani
Senior Principal Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Farah Dayana Zahedi
Lecturer & Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ida Sadja’ah Sachlin
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Lailatul Akmar Mat Nor
Clinical Microbiologist
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Mr. Leow Wooi Leong
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Nurhayati Mohd Marzuki
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Institute of Respiratory Medicine
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rosdi Ramli
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Dr. Rosli Mohd Noor
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Dr. Siti Aishah Johari
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Alor Setar
Kedah
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Datin Dr. Siti Sabzah Hashim
Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist &
National Head of Otorhinolaryngology Services
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Alor Setar, Kedah
Members (alphabetical order)
v
Dato’ Dr. Hj Abdul Razak Muttalif
Senior Consultant Respiratory Physician
Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dato’ Dr. Balwant Singh Gendeh
Senior Lecturer & Senior Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist - Head and Neck Surgeon
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hanisah Arshad
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bakri, Johor
Dr. Irmi Zarina Ismail
Senior Lecturer & Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Dr. Junainah Sabirin
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr. Mohd Zulkiflee Abu Bakar
Lecturer & Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Narizan Ariffin
Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist
KPJ Ampang Puteri Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Primuharsa Putra Sabir Husin Athar
Lecturer & Consultant Otorhinolaryngologist – Head and Neck Surgeon
KPJ - Seremban Specialist Hospital
KPJ Healthcare University College, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Zubaidah Abdul Wahab
Senior Consultant Clinical Microbiologist
Hospital Sg Buloh, Selangor
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Mastura Ismail
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Seremban 2, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Mat Zuki Mat Jaeb
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kelantan
Professor Dr. Richard R. Orlandi
Director, Rhinology and Skull Base Surgery Program
Professor, Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery
University of Utah, United States of America
Associate Professor Dr. Rina A/P N. Karunakaran
Consultant Microbiologist
University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sri Wahyu Taher
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Simpang Kuala, Kedah
Professor Dr. Valerie Lund CBE
Professor of Rhinology, Ear Institute, University of London
Honorary Consultant ENT Surgeon, Royal National Throat
Nose and Ear Hospital & Imperial College
London, United Kingdom
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
vii
ALGORITHM 1
Management of Acute Rhinosinusitis for
Primary Care and Non-Otorhinolaryngology (ORL) Centre
Modified: Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position
paper on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. A summary for
otorhinolaryngologists. Rhinology. 2012 Mar;50(1):1-12
No
Yes
Presence of ≥2 symptoms one of which should
be nasal obstruction or purulent/greenish nasal discharge
± facial pain, headache
± smell disturbance
Examination: anterior rhinoscopy
Symptoms increasing after 5 days or
persistent after 10 days
Common cold
Treat
accordingly
Mild* ARS
VAS = 0 to 3
Moderate* ARS
VAS >3 to 7
Symptomatic relief
medication**
+ topical steroid
Severe* ARS
VAS >7 to 10
Symptomatic relief
medication**
+ topical steroid
+ consider antibiotic***
Symptomatic relief
medication**
Topical steroid
No improvement
after 14 days treatment
No improvement
after 10 days or worsening
after 5 days
Improvement
within 3 days
Consider
referral to
specialist
Refer to
specialist
*based on visual
analogue score (VAS)
**may include
analgesics, nasal
saline irrigation &
decongestants
***at least 3 of:
• purulent/greenish
nasal discharge
• severe local pain
• fever
• elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate/
C-reactive protein
• “double sickening”
Symptoms <5 days or improving
thereafter
Continue
treatment
7 - 14 days
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
viii
ALGORITHM 2
Management of Chronic Rhinosinusitis for
Primary Care and Non-ORL Centre
Modified: Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position
paper on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. A summary for
otorhinolaryngologists. Rhinology. 2012 Mar;50(1):1-12
Presence of ≥2 symptoms (duration ≥12 weeks):
One of which should be nasal obstruction or
purulent/greenish nasal discharge
± facial pain, headache
± smell disturbance
Examination: anterior rhinoscopy
(plain X-ray is NOT recommended)
Topical steroids
Nasal irrigation
Re-evaluation after four weeks
Improvement
of symptom(s)
Continue therapy
Refer to ORL specialist
Yes
No
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
ix
ALGORITHM 3
Indications of Referral to ORL Centre
Indication of Referral
ACUTE RHINOSINUSITIS
CHRONIC RHINOSINUSITIS
Early referral*:
Ø persistent of
symptoms despite
optimal therapy
Ø frequent recurrence
(≥4 per year)
Ø suspected malignancy
Ø immunodeficiencies
Early referral*:
Ø failed a course of
optimal medical
therapy
Ø >3 sinus
infections/year
Ø suspected fungal
infections,
granulomatous disease
or malignancy
Ø immunodeficiencies
Urgent referral**:
Ø periorbital oedema/
erythema
Ø displaced globe
Ø double vision
Ø ophtalmoplegia/
restricted eye
movement
Ø reduced visual acuity
Ø severe frontal
headache
Ø forehead swelling
Ø neurological
manifestation e.g.
meningitis, altered
consciousness,
seizure
Ø septicaemia
Urgent referral**:
Ø severe pain or
swelling of the sinus
areas (lower
threshold for
immunecompromised
patients e.g.
uncontrolled
diabetes, end stage
renal failure, HIV)
*Early referral : within 2 weeks
**Urgent referral : within 24 hours
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
x
ALGORITHM 4
Management of ARS for ORL Centre
Modified: Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position
paper on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. A summary for
otorhinolaryngologists. Rhinology. 2012 Mar;50(1):1-12
Referral from primary care and
non-ORL centre
Moderate ARS with
no improvement of
symptoms after 14 days
of treatment
Severe ARS with
no improvement of
symptoms within 3 days
ARS with orbital or
intracranial
complications
1. Nasal endoscopy
2. Culture and sensitivity
3. Symptomatic relief
4. Topical corticosteroids
5. Oral antibiotics
1. Hospital admission
2. Nasal endoscopy
3. CT and/or MRI scan
4. Culture and sensitivity
5. Symptomatic relief
6. Topical corticosteroids
7. Intravenous antibiotics
8. Consider surgery if
medical therapy fails
after 48 hours
1. Hospital admission
2. Nasal endoscopy
3. CT and/or MRI scan
4. Culture and sensitivity
5. Symptomatic relief
6. Topical steroids
7. Intravenous antibiotics
and/or surgery
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
ALGORITHM 5
Management of CRS for ORL Centre
Referral from primary care and non-ORL centre
History and investigations
• Nasal endoscopy
• Skin Prick Test (if indicated)
• Consider other diagnosis and predisposing factors e.g.
bronchial asthma, smoking
Treatments
• Topical steroids
• Nasal irrigation
• Short-term oral corticosteroids
• Consider oral antibiotic as immunomodulator (if serum IgE
is low or normal)
Improvement of symptoms
Continue follow-up with ORL centres:
Topical steroids
Nasal irrigation
Short-term oral corticosteroids
CT scan of paranasal
sinuses
Consider endoscopic sinus
surgery
Continue follow-up with ORL centres:
Topical steroids
Nasal irrigation
Short-term oral corticosteroids
Yes
No
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
1
1. INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITION
Sinusitis is a common health problem characterised by mucosal
inflammation of the paranasal sinuses. However, it often coexists with
rhinitis in most patients. Hence the current accepted terminology is
rhinosinusitis.
Rhinosinusitis (RS) can be divided into two subtypes: acute and chronic
based on the duration of the symptoms. The clinical presentation
includes nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, headache, decreased sense of
smell, postnasal drip, facial pressure or pain, fever, sore throat and
cough. Predisposing factors for RS are multifactorial, which includes
infection, allergies, and air pollution.
RS poses a major health problem. The disease and its effect on
quality of life, productivity, and finances are substantial. Although it is a
common illness, RS presents a number of diagnostic and management
challenges to the practicing clinician.
The aim of this guideline is to help the healthcare providers in both
government and private practice to manage RS and its subtypes,
including acute rhinosinusitis (ARS) and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS)
with or without nasal polyposis.
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY
ARS is common disease worldwide with a reported prevalence rate
ranging from 6 - 15%.1, level III
The prevalence rate of CRS, in Europe, United States of America and
Brazil is between 5 - 15%.1, level III Meanwhile in the Asian region the
prevalence rate reported in Korea, China and Singapore are 7%, 8%
and 2.7% respectively.2, level III
3. PREDISPOSING/RISK FACTORS
Active smokers with concurrent allergic inflammation have an increased
susceptibility to ARS compared to non-smokers. Both exposure to
cigarette smoke and allergic inflammation has been shown to impair
ciliary function.1, level III
There is a higher risk of CRS in patients with current and past exposure
to second hand smoke (SHS) compared with no exposure (OR=2.33,
95% CI 1.02 to 5.34).4, level II-2 A dose-response relationship is also
demonstrated in SHS (OR=2.03, 95% CI 1.55 to 2.66).3, level II-2
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Other significant risk or associated factors for CRS are:
• positive family history4, level II-2
• asthma (OR=3.47, 95% CI 3.20 to 3.76)5, level III especially with the
presence of CRS with nasal polyps (CRSwNP)6, level II-2
• allergies, chronic bronchitis and emphysema4, level II-2
• ARS6, level II-2
• chronic rhinitis6, level II-2
• gastroesophageal reflux disease6, level II-2
• sleep apnoea6, level II-2
• adenotonsillitis6, level II-2
There is no evidence for a causal correlation between nasal anatomic
variations in general and the incidence of CRS.1, level III
Smoking (active and passive), family history of chronic rhinosinusitis,
asthma and gastroesophageal reflux disease are important risk factors for
rhinosinusitis.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
3
4. DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of RS is usually based on clinical symptoms supported
by diagnostic imaging or nasal endoscopy.1, level III
4.1 Clinical Diagnosis
• Clinical definition of rhinosinusitis in adults is defined as:
 Inflammation of the nose and the paranasal sinuses characterised
by two or more symptoms, one of which should be either nasal
blockage/obstruction/congestion or nasal discharge (anterior/
posterior nasal drip):
- ± facial pain/pressure
- ± reduction or loss of smell
AND at least one of the following:
• Endoscopic signs of:
- nasal polyps, and/or
- mucopurulent discharge primarily from middle meatus and/or
- oedema/mucosal obstruction primarily in middle meatus
• CT changes:
- mucosal changes within the ostiomeatal complex and/or
sinuses
• Past medical history of CRS (medically diagnosed)
Modified: Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position paper on
rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. A summary for otorhinolaryngologists.
Rhinology. 2012 Mar;50(1):1-12
4.1.1 Acute vs Chronic RS
ARS is defined as worsening of symptoms after five days or symptoms
persist after 10 days and less than 12 weeks. If the duration of symptoms
is less than five days, it is diagnosed as acute viral RS or commonly
known as common cold (Figure 1).1, level III
Severity of RS can be divided into the following based on total severity
visual analogue scale (VAS) score (0-10) cm:1, level III
• mild = 0 - 3
• moderate = >3 - 7
• severe = >7 - 10
In contrast, CRS is defined as symptoms persisting for more than 12
weeks.8, level III
Nasal endoscopy or computed tomography (CT) scan is one the
requirement to diagnose RS, however both are not readily available in
most primary healthcare (PHC) setting. Therefore, in PHC, obtaining a
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
past medical history of CRS is sufficient to make a diagnosis based on
the following evidence:
• When symptoms criteria alone (mucopurulent drainage, nasal
obstruction, facial pain and decreased sense of smell) are used
to diagnose CRS with CT scan as the gold standard, the overall
accuracy is only 42.8%. The accuracy improves to 69.1% when
these criteria are combined with nasal endoscopic findings
(clinical-based CRS diagnosis).9, level III
• Adding past medical history of CRS (medically-treated or doctordiagnosed) to symptoms criteria of European Position Paper
on Rhinosinusitis and Nasal Polyps (EPOS212) improves the
agreement between symptoms criteria and clinical-based CRS
diagnosis (ĸ increases from 47.08 to 57.65).10, level II-2 Most symptoms
considered to be typical for CRS are non-specific.11, level III
• In acute rhinosinusitis, the duration is <12 weeks with complete
resolution of symptoms while in chronic rhinosinusitis, the duration
take ≥12 weeks without complete resolution of symptoms.1, level III
Figure 1. Definition of Acute Rhinosinusitis
Modified from: Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J et al. European Position Paper on
Rhinosinusitis and Nasal Polyps 2012. Rhinol Suppl. 2012 Mar (23):
1-298
4.1.2 Viral vs Bacterial RS
Majority of ARS cases are viral in origin with only 0.5 - 2.0%
complicated by bacterial infection.1, level III In clinical practice, it is
difficult to differentiate whether RS is bacterial or viral in origin. This
may lead to unnecessary antibiotic use for patients and increase the
incidence of antibiotic resistance. Symptoms such as fever, facial pain,
purulent nasal discharge and durations of symptoms have been used
to differentiate bacterial from viral RS.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
5
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCT) found that most
common signs and symptoms (such as previous common cold, purulent
nasal discharge, unilateral facial pain, toothache, pain on bending or
chewing, purulent discharge in the pharynx) do not help to distinguish a
bacterial from a viral infection. Duration of symptoms of >10 days were
not significantly associated with bacterial RS.12, level I
A systematic review assessing symptoms of fever and dental pain in
RS also showed non-significant association with bacterial infection.
Although the risk of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) in patients
presenting with purulent nasal discharge was increased in one study
(OR=2.69, 95% CI 1.39 to 5.18), there was insufficient evidence to
support purulent nasal discharge in distinguishing a viral from bacterial
infection.13, level III
Despite the lack of evidence, the CPG DG and RC have adapted
the clinical features of ABRS from European Position Paper on
Rhinosinusitis and Nasal Polyps developed by International Rhinology
Society as shown in the following box.1, level III
• Acute bacterial rhinosinusitis is suggested when there are at least
three symptoms/signs of:
 discoloured discharge (with unilateral predominance) and purulent
secretion in the nasal cavity
 severe local pain (with unilateral predominance)
 fever (>38ºC)
 elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate/C-reactive protein
 deterioration of symptoms and signs
4.2 Anterior Rhinoscopy and Nasal Endoscopy
4.2.1 Anterior Rhinoscopy
Anterior rhinoscopy should be performed as part of clinical assessment
of suspected ARS in primary care setting, albeit a rather limited role.
It may reveal findings such as mucosal oedema, nasal inflammation,
purulent nasal discharge, polyps and anatomical abnormalities.1, level III
Anterior rhinoscopy has a limited value in diagnosing CRS as opposed
to nasal endoscopy which provides better visualisation of nasal
pathologies including anatomical variations, mucosal inflammation,
polyps and nasal discharge.1, level III
4.2.2 Nasal Endoscopy
Two types of nasal endoscope are available, rigid and flexible nasal
endoscope (Figure 2 and 3). There is no current evidence comparing
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
the two types of endoscope. However the rigid nasal endoscope is
preferred by local otorhinolaringologists because it provides superior
image clarity and better patients’ comfort. In addition, it facilitates
culture and tissues sampling and enables the endoscopist to perform
procedures such as nasal toileting.
Nasal endoscopy is not required in diagnosing ARS in primary care.1, level III
However it is necessary to be performed in ORL setting as part of clinical
examination of RS.
In the diagnosis of ABRS, the sensitivity and specificity of flexible nasal
endoscopy in reference of sinus radiograph are 97.7% (95% CI 72.41
to 92.97) and 67.3% (95% CI 54.56 to 80.06) respectively.14, level III
The diagnostic values of nasal endoscopy in CRS compared with CT
scan as a gold standard are:
• sensitivity and specificity of 29 to 38% and 93 to 95% respectively15, level III
• accuracy of positive symptoms at 69.1%9, level III
• PPV ranging from 0.56 to 0.89 and NPV ranging from 0.30 to
0.7615, level III; 16, level I
Nasal endoscopy is an operator dependant procedure (Figure 4). The
agreement between different endoscopists is substantial for nasal
polyps (κ=0.693, p<0.001) and fair to moderate for the other signs.
17, level III
Types of endoscope and its use
Figure 2. Rigid Nasal Endoscope
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
7
Figure 3. Flexible Nasal Endoscope
Figure 4. Nasal Endoscopic Examination
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Endoscopic Findings
Figure 5. Acute Rhinosinusitis
Endoscopic view of right nasal cavity shows mucopurulent discharge
trickling down from middle meatus.
Figure 6. Chronic Rhinosinusits without Nasal Polyposis (CRSsNP)
Endoscopic view of left nasal cavity shows mucopurulent discharge
in the middle meatus.
Figure 7. Chronic Rhinosinusitis with Nasal Polyposis (CRSwNP)
Endoscopic view of right nasal cavity shows nasal polyps arising from
middle meatus extending to the floor of the nose (Grade III nasal polyps).
Mucopurulent
discharge
Mucopurulent
discharge
Nasal polyp
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
9
Recommendation 1
• Anterior rhinoscopy should be performed as part of clinical
assessment of suspected acute rhinosinusitis in primary care setting.
• Nasal endoscopy should be performed to diagnose rhinosinusitis at
otorhinolaringology centre.
4.3 Imaging
Imaging modalities for the paranasal sinuses include plain radiography,
CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Plain radiography has no role in the routine management of
rhinosinusitis.18, level III
CT scan is the gold standard for radiographic evaluation of the paranasal
sinuses19, level III and had been used in many studies as a reference in
diagnosing bacterial rhinosinusitis.20 - 21, level III It can quantify the extent of
inflammatory disease based on opacification of the paranasal sinuses.
Indications for CT scan in RS are:18, level III
• failed medical therapy
• planned for surgery
• atypical or severe disease, i.e. unilateral symptoms, blood-stained
discharge, displacement of the eye and severe pain
MRI may be useful in cases of diagnostic uncertainty or when intracranial
complications are suspected.1, level III
Recommendation 2
• Plain radiography is not recommended in the management of
rhinosinusitis.
• Computed tomography scan of the paranasal sinuses should be
considered in rhinosinusitis when:
 medical therapy fails
 surgery is planned
 complications are suspected
4.4 Laboratory Tests
Laboratory culture and antibiotic susceptibility (C&S) tests aim to
document bacterial infection and resistance pattern in bacterial RS.
It is important to ensure these tests have appropriate indications and
sampling methods.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
In ABRS, patients who do not respond to first- and second-line
antibiotics, sinus or meatal culture for pathogen-specific therapy is
recommended.22, level III
Nasal swab cultures are of little predictive value in diagnosing ABRS and
CRS. When necessary, bacterial cultures in CRS should be performed
either via endoscopic culture of the middle meatus or maxillary tap but
not by simple nasal swab.23, level III
Maxillary Sinus Taps (MST) for sinus puncture and aspiration is the
goal standard method in determining the aetiology of ABRS but is rarely
performed due to its invasive nature. Endoscopically-directed middle
meatal culture (EDMMC) is less invasive in obtaining specimen when
compared with MST. In two meta-analyses, EDMMC was as accurate
as MST:
• The pooled accuracy calculated per culture and per isolate was
comparable at 73%, (95% CI 50 to 88) and 82% (95% CI 65 to 92)
respectively in acute and chronic RS.24,level III
• An accuracy of 87.0% (95% CI 81.3 to 92.8) was obtained when
detecting main pathogenic bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis) in ABRS.
However, the accuracy reduced in the detection of all bacteria
(76.3%, 95% CI 69.1 to 83.6).25, level III
EDMMC has comparable performance with sinus CT scan as gold
standard in the diagnosis of bacterial RS (sensitivity of 92.8%, specificity
of 80.0% and accuracy of 90.2%).21, level III
• In rhinosinusitis,23, level lll
 two main causative infectious bacteria implicated in acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) are Streptococcus pneumoniae
and Haemophilus influenzae.
 Moraxella catarrhalis is infrequently isolated from the adult
population, but is more common in children.
 bacteriology of chronic rhinosinusitis is different from that of
ABRS.
 the main pathogens recovered in chronic sinusitis include
Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacteriaceae spp and Pseudomonas
spp.
 anaerobic organisms are predominant in acute sinusitis with
dental origin.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
11
Recommendation 3
• Nasal swab should not be performed in rhinosinusitis.
• Culture and susceptibility test may be considered in patients who
do not respond to antibiotic treatment after 72 hours in acute
rhinosinusitis.
• Endoscopically-directed middle meatal culture may be used to
obtain specimen for culture and susceptibility tests in diagnosing
unresolved bacterial rhinosinusitis by otorhinolaryngologists.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
5. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The following are clinical features to differentiate between rhinosinusitis
with other ORL condition with similar presentation.
(+) yes
(-) no
(±) possible
6. REFERRAL
There is no specific criteria for referral based on current available
evidence. This chapter is written based on other guidelines and expert
opinion of the CPG DG and RC.
6.1 Acute Rhinosinusitis
Indications for early referral (within one week) are:1, level lll; 23, level III
• persistent symptoms despite optimal therapy in particular
immunocompromised patients such as uncontrolled diabetes, endstage renal failure, patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
• frequent recurrence (≥4 episodes per year)
• anatomical defects causing obstruction
• suspected malignancy
Urgent referral (within 24 hours) is required in the presence of:1, level lll; 23, level III
• orbital complications (Figure 8)
 periorbital oedema/erythema
 displaced globe
 double vision
 ophtalmoplegia/restricted eye movement
 reduced visual acuity
• severe frontal/retro-orbital headache
• forehead swelling (subperiosteal abscess)
• neurological manifestations e.g. meningitis, altered consciousness,
seizure
• septicaemia
Allergic Rhinitis
Rhinosinusitis
Allergic Fungal
Rhinosinusitis
Nasal discharge
clear
mucopurulent
mucin
Facial pain
-
+ (acute)
±
Nasal itchiness
+
-
±
Sneezing
+
-
±
Nasal obstruction
+
+
+
Smell
disturbance
±
±
±
Fever
-
+ (acute)
-
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
13
Figure 8. ARS with Orbital Complication
6.2 Chronic Rhinosinusitis
Indications for early referral (within one week) are:1, level lll; 23, level III
• failed a course of optimal medical therapy
• >3 sinus infections/year
• suspected fungal infections, granulomatous disease or malignancy
Indications for urgent referral (within 24 hours):1, level lll; 23, level III
• severe pain or swelling of the sinus areas in particular
immunocompromised patients such as uncontrolled diabetes, endstage renal failure, patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
7. MANAGEMENT
Acute RS, either viral or bacterial in origin, is usually treated medically.
Viral RS is a self-limiting disease that is managed symptomatically with
analgesic or antipyretic. The use of antibiotic in ABRS will be discussed
in the next section.
Surgical options may be offered in the following conditions:
• ARS with complications such as orbital or intracranial involvement
• failed optimal medical treatment in acute and chronic rhinosinusitis
7.1 Pharmacological Treatment
The aims of pharmacotherapy in RS are to reduce severity of symptoms
and to prevent complications. Medications used among others may
include antibiotics, corticosteroids and nasal saline irrigation.
7.1.1 Antibiotics
a. ARS
The use of antibiotics in ARS provide minimal to moderate benefits:
• A 2009 Cochrane meta-analysis reported a reduced risk of
treatment failure in antibiotics comparing to placebo by 34% within
7 to 15 days (RR=0.66, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.98). However 80% of
cases resolved without antibiotics.26, level I
• In a more recent Cochrane meta-analysis, a favourable overall
treatment effect of antibiotics against placebo was shown
(OR=1.25, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.53; NNT=18).27, level I
• A large prospective cohort study also demonstrated a reduced risk
of treatment failure in patients treated with antibiotics vs without
antibiotics (HR=0.3, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.42). Patients with poor orodental condition and those with previous use of antibiotics in the
past two months benefited most from this (HR of 0.04 and 0.09
respectively).28, level II-2
Antibiotics have higher incidence of adverse events compared with
placebo; gastrointestinal upsets being the most common (OR=2.10,
95% CI 1.60 to 2.77; NNH=9).27, level I
In Europe, antibiotics overuse has been reported to have directly
resulted in an increased prevalence of antimicrobial resistance in the
region.1, level III Although there are no available data for the Asian region,
antimicrobial resistance due to overuse of antibiotics is an international
health issue.
Based on the National Surveillance of Antibiotic Resistance (NSAR)
Report by Ministry of Health, Malaysia, both Streptococcus pneumoniae
and Haemophilus influenzae (two of the most common causative
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
15
pathogens of ARS have shown an increase in antibiotic resistance from
2010 to 2014 (Table 1 and 2).
Table 1. Antibiotic Resistance for Streptococcus pneumoniae
from 2010 to 2014
Source:
i. National Surveillance of Antibiotic Resistance (NSAR) Report, MoH Malaysia, 2010
29
ii. NSAR Report, MoH Malaysia, 2014
30
Table 2. Antibiotic Resistance for Haemophilus influenzae
from 2011 to 2014
Source:
ii. NSAR Report, MoH Malaysia, 2014
30
iii. NSAR Report, MoH Malaysia, 2011
31
There is no significant difference in efficacy between different antibiotics
in ARS.26, level I In National Antibiotics Guidelines Second Edition 2014,
the preferred antibiotics are amoxicillin and amoxicillin/clavulanate.30, level lll
Duration of antibiotic therapy should be as short as possible to reduce
possible side effects. A meta-analysis showed that a shorter course of
antibiotics (three to seven days) was as efficacious as a longer one (six
to 10 days).32, level I
b. CRS
A 2011 Cochrane systematic review of one study reported improvement
in subjective and objective outcomes in patients with CRS on antibiotic
(i.e. roxithromycin, a macrolide) compared with those on placebo.33, level I
• Mean reduction of patient response scale score at 12 weeks=0.73
points; 95% CI 0.32 to 1.14.
• Mean change in SNOT-20* score from baseline at 12 weeks=0.46
points; 95% CI 0.36 to 0.56.
Antibiotic
Percentage of Resistance
2010i
2014ii
Erythromycin
30.9
35.7
Tetracycline
35.1
39.3
Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole
39.3
40.7
Chloramphenicol
6.1
12.0
Clindamycin
15.5
17.5
Penicillin
N/A
1.4
Antibiotic
Percentage of Resistance
2011iii
2014ii
Ampicillin
18.4
23.2
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
12.2
9.6
Cefotaxime
3.8
2.8
Cefuroxime
8.0
2.5
Chloramphenicol
5.4
14.7
Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole
41.7
45.5
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
• Mean change at three months post-treatment, both groups were
not statistically significant=0.27 points; 95% CI -0.24 to 0.78.
However, this systematic review used only one small RCT with high
risk of bias.
*Refer to Appendix 3 for Sino-Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT-22).
There are some studies which report improvement in symptoms and
reduction in inflammatory markers using long-term macrolides such as
azithromycin, clarithromycin and erythromycin at low doses in CRS.
However, those studies are not placebo-controlled.1, level III
There is insufficient strong evidence to support the routine use of
antibiotics in CRS. However macrolides have been prescribed by ORL
specialists in CRS for its anti-inflammatory properties.
Recommendations 4
• Antibiotics may be prescribed in acute bacterial rhinosinusitis after
weighing benefits against potential side effects.
 The preferred antibiotics is amoxicillin 500 mg 8-hourly for five to
seven days or amoxicillin/clavulanate 625 mg 8-hourly for five to
seven days.
• Antibiotics should not be used routinely in chronic rhinosinusitis.
7.1.2 Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids
especially
intranasal
corticosteroids
(INS)
are
commonly used in RS. It reduces the inflammation and oedema of the
nasal mucous membrane rendering resolution of RS symptoms.
a. Intranasal Corticosteroids
ARS
Two good meta-analyses showed that INS significantly improved
symptoms of acute rhinosinusitis compared with placebo in 14 - 21
days. However, the effects were small. Higher doses of mometasone
furoate led to better improvement of symptoms. The side effects were
mild to moderate.34 - 35, level I
CRS
Two meta-analyses found that INS given between 16 and 52 weeks
duration was more efficacious than placebo in CRS with the following
outcomes:
• reduction in polyp size with a mean difference of 0.43 (95% CI
0.25 to 0.61)36, level I
• improvement of symptoms, SMD= - 0.37 (95% CI - 0.60 to - 0.13)37, level I
• there was no difference in side effect between the INS group and
placebo37, level I
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
17
However, there was no difference in endoscopic score between the two
groups (SMD= -0.37, 95% CI -0.84 to 0.11).37, level I
b. Oral Corticosteroids
ARS
In ARS, oral steroids (30 mg/day for seven days) is significantly more
effective than placebo in improvement of symptoms up to 12 days. Side
effects of oral steroids are limited and mild.38 - 39, level I In local practice,
oral steroids are not given due to the possibility of exacerbation of
bacterial infection.
CRS
Short-term oral steroids (25mg/day for two weeks) are significantly more
effective than placebo in reduction of nasal polyp size and hyposmia
score up to 10 weeks. Oral steroid caused transient suppression of
adrenal function and increase bone turnover.40, level I In local practice,
oral steroids are only prescribed in ORL centres.
Recommendation 5
• Intranasal corticosteroids:
 should be considered for 14 - 21 days in acute rhinosinusitis
 should be given for 16 - 52 weeks in chronic rhinosinusitis
• Short-term oral corticosteroids should ONLY be given in chronic
rhinosinusitis at Otorhinolaryngology centre.
Refer to Appendix 4 on Proper Use of Nasal Spray.
7.1.3 Nasal Saline Irrigation
Buffered saline irrigation facilitates mechanical removal of mucus,
infective agents and inflammatory mediators. It also decreases crusting
in the nasal cavity and increases mucociliary clearance (MCC).
Nasal saline irrigation is recommended to be used in ARS.1, level III Refer
to Figure 9 on its application.
A recent Cochrane systematic review reported that saline irrigation was
efficacious as a treatment adjunct for managing the symptoms of CRS
(SMD=1.42, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.84). There was no difference in the
efficacy between isotonic and hypertonic saline irrigation (p= 0.14).41, level I
Adverse events of saline irrigation are minor. These include nasal
burning, irritation and nausea.41, level I
Recommendation 6
• Saline irrigation should be used as an adjunct therapy in patients
with rhinosinusitis.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Figure 9. Nasal Saline Irrigation
7.1.4 Anti-histamine
There is an increase prevalence of allergic rhinitis (AR) in patients with
CRS, although the role of allergy in the development of CRS remains
unclear.23, level III Antihistamine controls sinusitis symptoms in AR.
There is improvement in sneezing after 14 days (p=0.003) and nasal
obstruction after 28 days of treatment (p=0.002).42, level I
Current data yields insufficient evidence to recommend antihistamines
for treatment of CRS in non-allergic rhinitis patients.1, level III; 23, level III; 42, level I
Recommendation 7
• Antihistamines should be prescribed in rhinosinusitis with associated
symptoms suggestive of allergic rhinitis (sneezing, nasal itchiness,
nasal obstruction and rhinorrhoea).
7.1.5 Other Medications
There is insufficient recent evidence on the following treatment in
rhinosinusitis described below.
a. Analgesics
Analgesics like paracetamol or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
may provide symptomatic relief in both viral and bacterial infections
of the upper respiratory passages in RS.23, level III The selection of
analgesics should be based on the severity of pain.43, level III
b. Decongestants
The nasal MCC is significantly slower in patients with ABRS than normal
subjects (p<0.05). MCC improves significantly with oxymetazoline
after 20 minutes.44, level II-2 Topical or systemic decongestants may offer
additional symptomatic relief in VRS. However their ability to prevent
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
19
ABRS is unproven.19, level III In local context, decongestants is prescribed
in ARS.
• Topical decongestants should not be prescribed for more than two
weeks due to rebound phenomenon. Oral decongestants should
be cautiously prescribed in those with medical conditions such as
diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, glaucoma and benign
prostate hyperplasia.
c. Mucolytics
There is no evidence to support the use of mucolytics in RS.1, level III
d. Antiviral Agents
There is no evidence of antiviral agents in treating patients with RS.
Pharmacological treatment for patients with RS is summarised in Table
3 below.
Table 3. Treatment and Recommendations for Adults with RS
Modified: Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position paper on
rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. A summary for otorhinolaryngologists.
Rhinology. 2012 Mar; 50(1):1-12
Refer to Appendix 5 for Medication Dosage, Indications and Special
Precautions in RS.
Therapy
Relevance
ARS
CRS
Antibiotic
Yes
Consider in low or
normal IgE level
Topical corticosteroids
Yes
Yes
Addition of topical corticosteroids to
antibiotics
Yes
Yes
Addition of oral corticosteroids to
antibiotics
Yes
Yes
Saline irrigation
Yes
Yes
Antihistamine, analgesic &
decongestant combination
Yes
No
Oral antihistamine added in allergic
patients
Yes
Yes
Paracetamol
Yes
No
Decongestants
Yes
No
Mucolytics
No
No
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
7.2 Surgical Interventions
Functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is the most common
surgical treatment in CRS. It is a minimally invasive technique that
uses an endoscope to enlarge the drainage pathways resulting in
improvement of ventilation and restoration of nasal cavity and paranasal
sinuses physiological function.
Surgical intervention is considered when optimum medical therapy fails
in CRS or ARS with orbital or intracranial complications, despite the
absence of high level evidence due to ethical concerns in RCTs on
surgical procedures.
Indications for surgery in ARS are presence of orbital or intracranial
abscess on CT scan or no clinical improvement after 24 - 48 hours of
intravenous antibiotics.1, level III
A high quality Health Technology Assessment (HTA) found that clinical
symptoms improve following FESS compared with conventional
procedures (simple polypectomy, intranasal ethmoidectomy and
Caldwell-Luc procedure) in CRS. There were relatively few complications
with FESS. However, there were some methodological limitations in the
evidence. There is a clear need for quality-controlled trials to assess the
effectiveness of FESS.45, level I
FESS significantly reduces nasal obstruction, loss of smell and polyp
size compared with medical treatment in CRSwNP.46, level I Apart from
nasal obstruction, FESS also improves postnasal drip and headache
significantly in CRSwNP.47, level II-3 Patients with CRSwNP have better
quality of life post-operatively compared with those without polyps
(p=0.044).48, level II-3
Optimal medical therapy is as equally effective as FESS in CRSsNP.49, level I
A Cochrane systematic review and a HTA showed that FESS is a
safe surgical procedure with minor complications ranging from 1.1 to
20.8%.45, level I; 49, level I
Recommendation 8
• Surgery should be considered in acute rhinosinusitis with orbital or
intracranial complications.
• Functional endoscopic sinus surgery should be offered in patients
with chronic rhinosinusitis who fail optimal medical treatment.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
21
8. COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINES
There is limited evidence of herbal medications use as adjunct treatment
in ARS.50, level I
Acupuncture shows no significant improvement in symptoms score,
quality of life and CT scan findings compared with conventional
treatment in chronic rhinosinusitis.51, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to support the use of complementary
alternative medicines in rhinosinusitis.
9. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of CPG is important as it helps in providing quality
healthcare services based on best available evidence applied to local
scenario and expertise. Various factors and resource implications
should be considered for the success of the uptake in the CPG
recommendations.
9.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing the CPG are:
• availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and
softcopies)
• conferences and updates on management of RS
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
• limited awareness in managing and referrals of RS among
healthcare providers
• inadequate RS training at all levels of healthcare providers
• variation in RS treatment at different levels of care due to
administrative and financial constraints
• lacking continuum of RS care at all levels of healthcare, both in
public and private settings
9.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitments to:
• ensure widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare providers via
printed copies and easy online accessibility
• reinforce training of healthcare providers via regular seminars and
workshops
• develop a multidisciplinary team in all levels of health care
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage of
CRS patients
treated with
corticosteroids
(intranasal or
oral)
Number of CRS patients treated with
corticosteroids in a period
Number of patients diagnosed with CRS
in the same period
=
x 100%
Percentage of
RS patients
treated with
saline irrigation
as an adjunct
therapy
Number of RS patients treated with saline
irrigation as an adjunct therapy in a period
Number of patients diagnosed with RS
in the same period
=
x 100%
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
23
REFERENCES
1.
Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position paper on rhinosinusitis and
nasal polyps 2012. Rhinology. 2012 Mar;50(23):1-305
2.
Shi JB, Fu QL, Zhang H, et al. Epidemiology of chronic rhinosinusitis: results from a crosssectional survey in seven Chinese cities. Allergy. 2015;70(5):533–9
3.
Tammemagi CM, Davis RM, Benninger MS, et al. Secondhand Smoke as a Potential Cause of
Chronic Rhinosinusitis A Case-Control Study. Arch Surg. 2010;145(4):327–34
4.
Reh DD, Lin SY, Clipp SL, et al. Secondhand tobacco smoke exposure and chronic rhinosinusitis:
A population-based case-control study. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2009;23(6):562–7
5.
Jarvis D, Newson R, Lotvall J, et al. Asthma in adults and its association with chronic rhinosinusitis:
The GA2LEN survey in Europe. Allergy Eur J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;67(1):91–8
6.
Tan BK, Chandra RK, Pollak J, et al. Incidence and associated premorbid diagnoses of patients
with chronic rhinosinusitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol; 2013;131(5):1350–60
7.
Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position paper on rhinosinusitis and
nasal polyps 2012. A summary for otorhinolaryngologists. Rhinology. 2012 Mar;50(1):1-12
8.
Thomas M, Yawn B, Price D, et al. EPOS primary care guidelines: European Position Paper
on the primary care diagnosis and management of Rhinosinusitis and Nasal Polyps 2007 - A
summary. Prim Care Respir J. General Practice Airways Group; 2008;17(2):79–89
9.
Bhattacharyya N, Lee LN. Symptom Outcomes After Endoscopic Sinus Surgery for Chronic
Rhinosinusitis. Arch Otolaryngol Neck Surg. 2004;130(3):329
10. Lange B, Thilsing T, Baelum J, et al. Diagnosing chronic rhinosinusitis: Comparing questionnairebased and clinical-based diagnosis. Rhinology. 2013;51(2):128–36
11. Ferguson BJ, Narita M, Yu VL, et al. Prospective observational study of chronic rhinosinusitis:
Environmental triggers and antibiotic implications. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;54(1):62–8
12. Young J, De Sutter A, Merenstein D, et al. Antibiotics for adults with clinically diagnosed acute
rhinosinusitis: a meta-analysis of individual patient data. Lancet. 2008;371(9616):908–14
13. Hauer AJ, Luiten EL, Erp NF Van, et al. No Evidence for Distinguishing Bacterial from Viral Acute
Rhinosinusitis Using Fever and Facial/Dental Pain A Systematic Review of the Evidence Base.
Otolaryngol -- Head Neck Surg 2014;150(1):28–33
14. Berger G, Berger RL. The contribution of flexible endoscopy for diagnosis of acute bacterial
rhinosinusitis. Eur Arch Oto-Rhino-Laryngology. 2011;268(2):235–40
15. Amine M, Lininger L, Fargo KN, et al. Outcomes of endoscopy and computed tomography in
patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2012;00(0):1–7
16. Wuister AMH, Goto N a, Oostveen EJ, et al. Nasal Endoscopy Is Recommended for Diagnosing
Adults with Chronic Rhinosinusitis. Otolaryngol -- Head Neck Surg 2014;150(3):359–64
17. Raithatha R, Anand VK, Mace JC, et al. Interrater agreement of nasal endoscopy for chronic
rhinosinusitis. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2012;2(2):144–50
18. Scadding GK, Durham SR, Mirakian R, et al. BSACI guidelines for the management of
rhinosinusitis and nasal polyposis. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008;38(2):260–75
19. Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update): Adult
sinusitis. Otolaryngol - Head Neck Surg (United States) 2015;152:S1–39
20. Kenny TJ, Duncavage J, Bracikowski J, et al. Prospective analysis of sinus symptoms and
correlation with paranasal computed tomography scan. Otolaryngol - Head Neck Surg.
2001;125(1):40–3
21. Elwany S, Helmy SAS, El-Reweny EM, et al. Endoscopically directed middle meatal cultures vs
computed tomographic scans in the diagnosis of bacterial sinusitis in intensive care units. J Crit
Care Elsevier Inc.; 2012;27(3):315.e1–315.e5
22. Chow AW, Benninger MS BI et al. IDSA Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Bacterial
Rhinosinusitis in Children and Adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;54(8):e72–112
23. Desrosiers M, Evans G a., Keith PK, et al. Canadian Clinical Practice Guidelines for Acute and
Chronic Rhinosinusitis. J Otolaryngol - Head Neck Surg BioMed Central Ltd; 2011;40(SUPPL.
2):99–142
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
24. Dubin MG, Ebert CS CC et al. Concordance of middle meatal swab and maxillary sinus aspirate
in acute and chronic sinusitis: a meta-analysis. Am J Rhinol. 2005;19(5):462–70
25. Benninger MS, Payne SC FB et al. Endoscopically directed middle meatal cultures versus
maxillary sinus taps in acute bacterial maxillary rhinosinusitis: a meta-analysis. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2006;134(1):3–9
26. Ahovuo-Saloranta A, Borisenko OV, Kovanen N, et al. Antibiotics for acute maxillary sinusitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008; 2014 Feb 11;2:CD000243
27. Lemiengre MB, van Driel ML, Merenstein D, et al. Antibiotics for clinically diagnosed acute
rhinosinusitis in adults. Cochrane database Syst Rev 2012;10(10):CD006089
28. Blin P, Blazejewski S, Lignot S, et al. Effectiveness of antibiotics for acute sinusitis in real-life
medical practice. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;70(3):418–28
29. Ministry of Health M. National Surveillance of Antibiotic Resistance (NSAR). 2010
30. Ministry of Health M. National Surveillance of Antibiotic Resistance (NSAR) Report. 2014
31. Ministry of Health M. National Surveillance of Antibiotic Resistance (NSAR) Report. 2011
32. Falagas ME, Karageorgopoulos DE, Grammatikos AP, et al. Effectiveness and safety of short
vs. long duration of antibiotic therapy for acute bacterial sinusitis: A meta-analysis of randomized
trials. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2009;67(2):161–71
33. Piromchai P, Thanaviratananich S, Laopaiboon M. Systemic antibiotics for chronic rhinosinusitis
without nasal polyps in adults ( Review ) Summary Of Findings For The Main Comparison.
2011;(5):CD008233
34. Zalmanovici Trestioreanu A YJ. Steroids for acute sinusitis ( Review ). Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2013;(4):CD005149
35. Hayward G, Heneghan C, Perera R, et al. Intranasal corticosteroids in management of acute
sinusitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Fam Med. 2012;10(3):241–9
36. Joe SA, Thambi R, Huang J. A systematic review of the use of intranasal steroids in the treatment
of chronic rhinosinusitis. Otolaryngol - Head Neck Surg. 2008;139(3):340–7
37. Snidvongs K, Kalish L, Sacks R, et al. Topical steroid for chronic rhinosinusitis without polyps
(Review ) Topical steroid for chronic rhinosinusitis without polyps. 2011;(8) :CD009274
38. Venekamp RP, Rovers MM, Verheij TJM, et al. Treatment of acute rhinosinusitis: Discrepancy
between guideline recommendations and clinical practice. Fam Pract. 2012;29(6):706–12
39. Venekamp RP, Bonten MJM, Rovers MM, et al. Systemic corticosteroid monotherapy for clinically
diagnosed acute rhinosinusitis: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ 2012;184(14):E751–7
40. Trial AR, Lipworth B. Original Research Treatment of Chronic Rhinosinusitis With Nasal
Polyposis With Oral Steroids Followed by Topical Steroids. 2011
41. Harvey R, Hannan S, Badia L, et al. Cochrane review: Nasal saline irrigations for the symptoms
of chronic rhinosinusitis. Evidence-Based Child Heal A Cochrane Rev J 2008;3(3):459–
95:CD006394
42. Braun JJ, Alabert JP, Michel FB, et al. Adjunct effect of loratadine in the treatment of acute
sinusitis in patients with allergic rhinitis. Allergy. 1997;52(6):650–5
43. Aring AM, Chan MM. Acute rhinosinusitis in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2011;83(9):1057–63
44. Inanli S, Oztürk O, Korkmaz M, et al. The effects of topical agents of fluticasone propionate,
oxymetazoline, and 3% and 0.9% sodium chloride solutions on mucociliary clearance in the
therapy of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in vivo. Laryngoscope. 2002;112(2):320–5
45.
Dalziel K, Stein K, Round A, et al. Systematic review of endoscopic sinus surgery for
nasal polyps. Health Technol Assess. 2003;7(17):iii, 1-159
46. Smith TL, Mendolia-Loffredo S, et al. Predictive factors and outcomes in endoscopic sinus
surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis. Laryngoscope. 2005;115(12):2199–205
47. Damm M, Quante G, Jungehuelsing M, et al. Impact of functional endoscopic sinus surgery on
symptoms and quality of life in chronic rhinosinusitis. Laryngoscope. 2002;112(2):310–5
48. Smith TL, Batra PS, Seiden AM, et al. Evidence supporting endoscopic sinus surgery in the
management of adult chronic rhinosinusitis: a systematic review. Am J Rhinol 2011;19(6):537–43
49. Khalil HS, Nunez DA. Functional endoscopic sinus surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis. Cochrane
database Syst Rev 2006;(3):CD004458
50. Guo R, Canter PH, Ernst E. Herbal medicines for the treatment of rhinosinusitis: A systematic
review. Otolaryngol - Head Neck Surg. 2006;135(4):496–506
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
25
51. Rössberg E, Larsson PG, Birkeflet O, et al. Comparison of traditional Chinese acupuncture,
minimal acupuncture at non-acupoints and conventional treatment for chronic sinusitis.
Complement Ther Med. 2005;13(1):4–10
52.
Ministry of Health Medicines Formulary - 3/2015 (available at http://www.pharmacy.gov.my/v2/
sites/default/files/document-upload/ministry-health-medicines-formulary-1-2015.pdf
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly or
in combination, search was limit to English, human and last 10 years:
1.
Sinusitis/
2.
sinusiti*.tw.
3.
Ethmoid Sinusitis/
4.
(ethmoid* adj1 rhiniti*).tw.
5.
Frontal Sinusitis/
6.
(frontal adj1 sinusiti*).tw.
7.
Maxillary Sinusitis/
8.
(maxillary adj1 sinusiti*).tw.
9.
Sphenoid Sinusitis/
10. (sphenoid* adj1 sinusiti*).tw.
11. Rhinitis/
12. rhiniti*.tw.
13. (nasal adj1 catarrh*).tw.
14. Rhinitis, Allergic, Perennial/
15. (rhinitis, allergic adj (perennial or nonseasonal)).tw.
16. Rhinitis, Allergic, Seasonal/
17. (seasonal adj1 (allergic rhiniti* or rhinit* allergic)).tw.
18. (seasonal allergic adj rhiniti*).tw.
19. (pollen adj1 allerg*).tw.
20. pollinos*.tw.
21. (hay adj1 fever).tw.
22. hayfever.tw.
23. Rhinitis, Atrophic/
24. (atrophic adj1 rhiniti*).tw.
25. ozena*.tw.
26. Rhinitis, Vasomotor/
27. (vasomotor adj1 rhiniti*).tw.
28. /or 1 - 27
29. Anti-Bacterial Agents/
30. (agent* adj1 (anti-bacterial or antibacterial or anti bacterial or
anti-mycobacterial or antimycobacterial or anti mycobacterial or
bacteriocidal)).tw.
31. antibiotic*.tw.
32. bacteriocides.tw.
33. 29 or 30 or 31 or 32
34. 28 and 33
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
27
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the diagnostic criteria for acute/chronic rhinosinusitis?
2.
What are the diagnostic criteria to differentiate between acute viral
and bacterial rhinosinusitis?
3.
What are the risk/predisposing factors in diagnosing rhinosinusitis?
4.
Is anterior rhinoscopy/nasal endoscopic examination accurate in
diagnosing rhinosinusitis?
5.
What are the indications for culture and sensitivity in diagnosing
rhinosinusitis?
6.
What are the reliable methods in obtaining specimens for culture
and sensitivity in diagnosing rhinosinusitis?
7.
What are the accurate imaging modalities in diagnosing
rhinosinusitis?
8.
What are the indications for referral to ORL service in rhinosinusitis?
9.
When is antibiotic indicated in treating acute rhinosinusitis?
10. Is empirical or second-line antibiotic safe and effective in treating
acute rhinosinusitis?
11. What is the duration of antibiotic in acute rhinosinusitis?
12. When is antibiotic is indicated in chronic rhinosinusitis?
13. Is antibiotic safe and effective in chronic rhinosinusitis?
14. What is the duration of antibiotic in chronic rhinosinusitis?
15. Is intranasal/oral corticosteroid safe and effective in rhinosinusitis?
16. Is analgesic safe and effective in rhinosinusitis?
17. Is decongestant safe and effective in rhinosinusitis?
18. Is mucolytic safe and effective in rhinosinusitis?
19. Is antihistamine safe and effective in rhinosinusitis?
20. Is saline irrigation safe and effective in rhinosinusitis?
21. Is anti-viral safe and effective in acute rhinosinusitis?
22. When is surgery indicated for rhinosinusitis?
23. Is surgery safe and effective in chronic rhinosinusitis?
24. Is traditional complementary medicine/alternative safe and
effective in rhinosinusitis?
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Appendix 3
SINO-NASAL OUTCOME TEST (SNOT-22)
I.D :_______________ DATE: ________________
Below you will find a list of symptoms and social/emotional
consequences of your rhinosinusitis. We would like to know more about
these problems and would appreciate your answering the following
questions to the best your ability. There is no right or wrong answers,
and only you can provide us with this information. Please rate your
problems as they have been over the past two weeks. Thank you for
your participation. Do not hesitate to ask for assistance if necessary.
2. Please mark the most important items affecting your
health (maximum of 5 items)_____
SNOT-20 Copyright © 1996 by Jay F. Piccirillo, MD., Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
SNOT-22 Developed from modification of SNOT-20 by National Comparative Audit
of Surgery for Nasal Polyposis and Rhinosinusitis
Source: Reproduced with permission from Washington University (available at
http://www.canvasc.ca/pdf/SNOT22.pdf)
1. Considering how severe the problem is
when you experience it and how often it
happens, please rate each item below
on how “bad” it is by circling the
number that corresponds with how you
feel using this scale :
No Problem
Very Mild Problem
Mild or slight Problem
Moderate Problem
Severe Problem
Problem as bad as it
can be
5 Most Important
Items
1. Need to blow nose
0
1
2
3
4
5
2. Nasal Blockage
0
1
2
3
4
5
3. Sneezing
0
1
2
3
4
5
4. Runny nose
0
1
2
3
4
5
5. Cough
0
1
2
3
4
5
6. Post-nasal discharge
0
1
2
3
5
7. Thick nasal discharge
0
1
2
3
4
5
8. Ear fullness
0
1
2
3
4
5
9. Dizziness
0
1
2
3
4
5
10. Ear pain
0
1
2
3
4
5
11. Facial pain/pressure
0
1
2
3
4
5
12. Decreased Sense of Smell/Taste
0
1
2
3
4
5
13. Difficulty falling asleep
0
1
2
3
4
5
14. Wake up at night
0
1
2
3
4
5
15. Lack of a good night’s sleep
0
1
2
3
4
5
16. Wake up tired
0
1
2
3
4
5
17. Fatigue
0
1
2
3
4
5
18. Reduced productivity
0
1
2
3
4
5
19. Reduced concentration
0
1
2
3
4
5
20. Frustrated/restless/irritable
0
1
2
3
4
5
21. Sad
0
1
2
3
4
5
22. Embarrassed
0
1
2
3
4
5
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
29
Appendix 4
PROPER USE OF NASAL SPRAY
Introduction
Nasal spray is used to treat symptoms rhinosinusitis and allergic rhinitis.
A correct technique is essential for effective delivery of the medicines.
Different nasal spray requires slightly different techniques (for example,
priming technique or holding position). Hence, it is very important to
follow the instructions from your healthcare providers and refer to the
product labels.
Nasal sprays are only intended for use in the nose. Do not spray it into
any other parts of the body.
Usage of Nasal Spray for the First Time (Priming)
1. Remove the dust cap (Picture A).
2. Shake the nasal spray bottle.
3. Picture B shows how to hold nasal spray correctly. Press down a
few times until you see a fine mist of spray comes out (You might
need to press 3 - 5 times depending on the nasal spray). This
process is called Priming.
4. Priming is only done once for every nasal spray. However, if the
nasal spray has not been used for more than 1 - 2 weeks, the
priming step has to be repeated.
Dust Cap
Applicator
Applicator Tip
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
Usage of Nasal Spray after Priming
1. Gently blow your nose to clear the mucous (Picture C).
2. Remove the dust cap.
3. Close one nostril with your finger. Bend your head slightly forward.
Carefully insert the applicator tip ¼ or ½ inch into the other nostril
(point the applicator tip slightly outwards, away from the centre of
the nose) (Picture D).
4. Press down the nasal spray once and at the same time breathe in
slowly through your nostril. (Picture E)
5. Repeat step 4 in the other nostril.
6. Do not tilt your head backwards to prevent backflow into your
throat.
7. If the medicine drips into your throat, you will feel a slightly bitter
sensation in your mouth. This is normal.
8. Once you are done using the nasal spray, wipe the applicator tip
with a clean tissue or cloth and put on the dust cap.
9. Try not to sneeze or blow your nose immediately after using the
nasal spray.
Tips While Using the Nasal Spray
1. Do not breathe in strongly and quickly to prevent the medication
from going into your throat.
2. If the nasal spray is used correctly, the medicine will not drip from
your nose nor will it drip into your oral cavity.
3. Please use the nasal spray as directed by your healthcare
providers.
4. If you experience any nosebleed following the used of nasal sprays,
stop using the nasal spray and seek medical attention.
Keep the nasal spray away from direct sunlight and children.
Source: Adapted from Malaysian Official Portal MyHealth, available at: http://www.
myhealth.gov.my/en/how-to-use-nasal-spray/
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
31
Appendix 5
MEDICATION DOSAGE, INDICATIONS AND SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS IN ARS
a. Antibiotics
Generic Drug Name
Recommended Dosage
Special precautions
Amoxicillin
250 - 500 mg PO q8hr x 5 - 10 days or
500 - 875 mg PO q12hr x 5 - 10 days
• Preferred antibiotics in ABRS
• Penicillin allergy, infectious mononucleosis, renal impairment, pregnancy and lactation
Amoxicillin and
Clavulanic acid
500/125 mg PO q8hr x 5 - 7 days or
875/125 mg PO q12hr x 5 - 7 days
• Preferred antibiotics in ABRS
• Allergy to beta-lactam antibiotics, mononucleosis, renal and hepatic impairment, pregnancy and lactation
Cefuroxime axetil
250 - 500 mg PO q12hr x 5 - 10 days
• Penicillin allergy, gastrointestinal disease (particularly colitis), renal impairment, pregnancy and lactation
Azithromycin
500 mg PO q24hr x 3 days
•
May increase the risk of torsades de pointes and fatal heart arrhythmias in patients with prolonged QT interval,
low K or Mg blood levels, slow heart rate and medication treating abnormal heart rhythms. Impaired hepatic
and renal function. Pregnancy and lactation
Clarithromycin
250 - 500 mg PO q12hr x 7 - 14 days
• Patient with coronary artery disease, severe cardiac insufficiency, hypomagnesaemia, bradycardia (<50 bpm).
May exacerbate symptoms of myasthenia gravis. Renal and hepatic impairment. Pregnancy and lactation.
Ciprofloxacin
(Use with caution)
500 - 750 mg PO q12hr x 7 - 14 days
• Patient with epilepsy, history of CNS disorders, G6PD deficiency, known prolongation of QT interval, with risk
factors for QT interval prolongation or torsades de pointes (e.g. congenital long QT syndrome, uncorrected
electrolyte imbalance, cardiac disease). May exacerbate myasthenia gravis symptoms. Kidney, heart or lung
transplant recipients. Hepatic and renal impairment. Pregnancy and lactation.
Levofloxacin
(Use with caution)
500 mg PO q24hr x 10 - 14 days
•
Patient with known or suspected CNS disorders (e.g. severe cerebral arteriosclerosis, epilepsy) or other risk
factors that predispose to seizures or lower the seizure threshold, history of psychiatric disease and tendon
disorder, history of prolonged QT interval, uncorrected electrolyte disorders (e.g. hypokalaemia), latent or
actual defects in G6PD, DM. Kidney, heart or lung transplant recipients. May exacerbate myasthenia gravis.
Renal impairment. Pregnancy and lactation.
Moxifloxacin
(Use with caution)
400 mg PO q24hr x 5 - 21 days
• Patient with previous tendon disorders (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis), significant bradycardia or acute myocardial
ischaemia, heart failure with reduced LVEF, known history of symptomatic arrhythmias, known or suspected
CNS disorders (e.g. severe cerebral arteriosclerosis, epilepsy) or other risk factors that predispose to
seizures; diabetes. Kidney, heart or lung transplant recipients. Hepatic impairment. Pregnancy and lactation.
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
b. Corticosteroids
Oral steroids (prednisolone): 30 mg daily for 7 days in ARS and 25 mg daily for 14 days in CRS
Intranasal corticosteroids:
Generic Drug Name
Indications
Dosage
Budesonide
64 mcg/dose
nasal spray
• Seasonal and perennial allergic
rhinitis and nasal polyposis
• Treatment and prevention of
nasal polyps
Adults and children 6 years and older:
• Rhinitis: 2 sprays into each nostril once daily in the morning or 1 spray into each nostril twice daily
• Nasal polyps: 2 sprays twice daily
Fluticasone propionate
50 mcg/dose nasal spray
•
Prophylaxis and treatment of
seasonal and perennial allergic
rhinitis
•
Management of associated sinus
pain and pressure
•
Adults/adolescents ( 12 years): 2 sprays in each nostril once daily
•
Maximum daily dose 4 sprays in each nostril
Mometasone furoate
50 mcg/dose
aqueous nasal spray
•
Symptomatic treatment
associated with acute
rhinosinusitis and treatment of
nasal polyps
Allergic Rhinitis
Adults and children over 12 years:
• 100 mcg/day (2 sprays) to each nostril once daily
• Maximum 200 mcg (4 sprays) once daily
• Reduce to 50 mcg (1 spray) once daily when control achieved
Acute Rhinosinusitis
•
2 sprays in each nostril twice daily (total 400 mcg/day)
Nasal polyphosis
•
2 sprays in each nostril twice daily (total 400 mcg/day), reduced to 2 sprays each nostril once daily
when symptoms are adequately controlled
Source: Ministry of Health Medicines Formulary - 3/2015
(available at http://www.pharmacy.gov.my/v2/sites/default/files/document-upload/ministry-health-medicinesformulary-1-2015.pdf)
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
33
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ABRS
acute bacterial rhinosinusitis
AR
allergy rhinitis
ARS
acute rhinosinusitis
C&S
culture and susceptibility
CAM
complementary and alternative medicine
CI
confidence interval
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CRP
c-reactive protein
CRS
chronic rhinosinusitis
CRSsNP
chronic rhinosinusitis without nasal polyps
CRSwNP
chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps
CT
computerised tomography
DG
development group
EDMMC
endoscopically-directed middle meatal cultures
ESR
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
EPOS
European Position Paper on Rhinosinusitis and Nasal Polyps
FESS
functional endoscopic sinus surgery
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HR
hazard ratio
HTA
health technology assessment
Ig
immunoglobulin
INS
intranasal corticosteroids
MaHTAS
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section
MCC
mucociliary clearance
MoE
Ministry of Education
MoH
Ministry of Health
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MSA
maxillary sinus aspirate
MST
maxillary sinus taps
NSAR
National Surveillance of Antibiotic Resistance
NNT
number to treat
NPV
negative predictive value
NSAIDs
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug(s)
OR
odds ratio
PHC
primary healthcare
PPV
positive predictive value
RC
review committee
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RR
relative risk
RS
rhinosinusitis
SMD
standardised mean difference
SHS
second-hand smoke
VAS
visual analogue score
VRS
viral rhinosinusitis
vs
versus
Management of Rhinosinusitis in Adolescents and Adults
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Dato’ Dr. Abdul Majid Md Nasir, former Chairman of Review
Committee
• Dato' Dr. Narizan Ariffin, Consultant Otorhinolaringologist, KPJ
Ampang Puteri Specialist Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
• Datin Dr. Rugayah Bakri, former Deputy Director, MaHTAS
• Dr. Aneeza Khairiyah Wan Hamizan, Lecturer and Otorhinolaringologist,
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
• Dr. Muventhiran a/l Ruthranesan, former Respiratory Physician at
Institute of Respiratory Medicine
• Panel of external reviewers who have reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Rhinosinusitis In
Adolescent and Adults was supported financially in its entirety by the
Ministry of Health Malaysia.