CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
MANAGEMENT OF ANTERIOR
CROSSBITE IN THE
MIXED DENTITION
2" Edition
June 2013
MOHIPIPAK/265.13(GU)
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
MANAGEMENT OF ANTERIOR
CROSSBITE IN THE
MIXED DENTITION
2" Edition
June 2013
STATEMENT OF INTENT
The following guidelines update and supplant the original guidelines
developed in 2002 and is based on the best available contemporary
evidence. It is intended as a guide for the best clinical practice in the
management of anterior crossbite in children. However, it must be noted
that adherence to this guidelines does not necessarily lead to the best
clinical outcome in individual patient care. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of their patient based on the clinical
presentation and management options.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
‘The guidelines had been issued in 2013 and will be reviewed in 2017 or
earlier if new evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
Dental Technology Section
Oral Health Division
Level 5, Block E10, Parcel E
Government Offices Complex
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Electronic version available on the following websites:
http/www.moh.gov.my
http://www.ohd.gov.my
http:/Iwww.acadmed.org.my
TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
‘GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT ww
OBJECTIVE, SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES, CLINICAL QUESTIONS, | wi
TARGET POPULATION, TARGET USER, HEALTHCARE
SETTINGS ORGANISATIONAL BARRIERS AND COsT| Wi
IMPLICATIONS,
‘PROPOSED CLINICAL AUDIT INDICATORS FOR QUALITY
MANAGEMENT
TEVELS OF EVIDENCE AND GRADES OF
RECOMMENDATIONS
EMBERS OF THE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP. ca
EMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE eT
INTRODUCTION
2_| TYPES OF ANTERIOR CROSSBITE
2A Dental crossbite
22 Fundlional crossbite
23 Skeletal crossbite
| AETIOLOGY
Bot Skeletal
32 Dental
3S Local factors
‘3a Pathological conditions
@_| EARLY INTERVENTION
3 | CONTRAINDIGATIONS
© | EXAMINATION
611 Patient assessment
62 History
63 Exira-oral examination
‘6a inira-oral examination
‘65 Radiographic examination
66 Study models
7 Gimnical photographs THz
vil
a} af | | o o| @| S| 3) of of | a] of 0} =| | 4
DIAGNOSIS Tee
TREATMENT 5
‘8:4 Treaiment principles 6
‘82 Factors to consider prior to selection of treatment modalities 6
‘3 Upper removable appliance eT
9 | DESIGNING REMOVABLE APPLIANCE 8
‘Ot General Principle we
‘32 Active Components 8
‘3 Retentive Components 19:20
‘Sa Anchorage 20
‘BS Baseplate Ey
70 | MANAGEMENT OF REMOVABLE APPLIANCE Ey
10-1 iting Removable Appliance a
0:2 Review Appointments, Wee
11] FIXED APPLIANCE B
72_| INCLINED BITE PLANE Ey
73_| FUNCTIONAL APPLIANCE 2
14 | FACE MASK/ PROTRACTION HEADGEAR 28
75 | CHIN CUP OR CHIN GAP a
REFERENCES WERE
‘APPENDIX a
‘APPENDIX Ey
‘ALGORITHM FOR MANAGEMENT OF ANTERIOR GROSSBITE |
IN THE MIXED DENTITION
"ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS, DISCLOSURE STATEMENT, e
‘SOURCES OF FUNDING
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The Development Group for this Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG)
consisted of Orthodontic Specialists, Dental Paediatric Specialists,
Dental Public Health Specialists and Dental Officers. The review
committee was actively involved in the development process of the
guidelines.
The previous edition of the CPG on Management of Anterior Crossbite in
the Mixed Dentition (2002) was used as the basis for the development of
the current guidelines.
Several improvements have been introduced in this edition. In addition to
the general text and photographic updates, new and updated information
has been included. Clinical audit indicators have also been identified for
the purpose of monitoring and evaluating outcomes.
Evidence was retrieved from publications from the year 2002 onwards.
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: PUBMED/MEDLINE; Cochrane Database of Systemic
Reviews (CDSR); ISI Web of Knowledge; and full text journal articles via
OVID search engine. In addition, the reference lists of all relevant articles
retrieved were searched to identify further studies. The search process
was conducted between May 2012 and May 2013 and only literature in
English was included.
Articles retrieved were appraised by at least two members, and graded
according to the levels of evidence presented in the form of evidence
tables and discussed during group meetings. The levels of evidence was
adopted from the modified version of the United States (U.S) / Canadian
Preventive Services Task Force, while the grading of recommendations
was based on the modified version of the Scottish Intercollegiate
Guidelines Network (SIGN). The CPG was based on the findings of
relevant published evidence.
Ideally, the patients’ views and preferences need to be considered in the
development of CPGs. However, it was not feasible at present for this
CPG. Nevertheless, patient information leaflets will be developed in the
future to facilitate the dissemination of relevant and important information
to the public on anterior crossbite in the mixed dentition
The draft was reviewed by a team of internal / external reviewers and
made available on the websites of the Ministry of Health, Malaysia and
‘Academy of Medicine, Malaysia for comments and feedback.
Recommendations were presented to the Technical Advisory Committee
for CPGs, and finally to the Health Technology Assesment and CPG
Council, Ministry of Health, Malaysia for approval.
OBJECTIVE
To provide evidence-based guidance in the management of anterior
crossbite in the mixed dentition.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
i. To disseminate and reinforce knowledge on the management of
anterior crossbite among dental healthcare professionals
ll, To provide timely and appropriate management of anterior crossbite
by dental healthcare professionals
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
The clinical questions addressed by the guidelines are:
i. How to recognize and diagnose the different types of anterior
crossbite?
What are the types of crossbite that can be treated successfully by
early intervention?
ii, What is the importance of timely intervention of anterior crossbite
in children?
iv. How can early treatment of anterior crossbite in children be
managed successfully?
TARGET POPULATION
The primary target group is children in mixed dentition with dental or
functional crossbite which affects one or more permanent teeth.
i, Inclusion criteria
© Children with anterior crossbite of dental origin and functional
crossbite.
li, Exclusion criteria
* Children with anterior crossbite associated with skeletal
discrepancies.
TARGET USER
The guideline is applicable to dental healthcare providers involved in the
‘management of anterior crossbite in children.
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
All dental departments and clinics are the common areas of use.
ORGANISATIONAL BARRIERS AND COST IMPLICATIONS
‘One of the major responsibilities of dental healthcare providers is to
intercept a developing malocclusion in children. Anterior crossbite is
‘often observed in the mixed dentition and there is a universal
agreement that the condition should be treated early. Some general
dental practitioners are unfamiliar with treating anterior crossbite in
children.
Delaying such interceptive treatment may worsen the malocclusion, is
detrimental to dental health and may cause functional problems. In some
instances, it may lead to unfavourable jaw growth. Success in treatment
is mostly dependent on the timely and appropriate management of the
anterior crossbite. Hence, it is important to disseminate the knowledge
among healthcare providers, as well as to lay people, to actively seek
treatment as an interceptive measure. This can be facilitated through the
development of appropriate training modules, quick references and
Patient information leaflets.
Cost implications on management of anterior crossbite in children may
vary depending on several factors, such as patient's age and
cooperation, operator's experience and appliances used. Successful
treatment and stability following correction would depend on adequate
overbite, a good interincisal angle and favourable growth.
PROPOSED CLINICAL AUDIT INDICATORS FOR QUALITY
MANAGEMENT
Number of anterior crossbite cases
treated successfully
Success rate of anterior
crossbite treatment * caaanbect aoe
Total number of anterior crossbite
cases treated
(‘successful treatment is defined as correction of anterior crossbite within ® months)
Management of Anterior Crossbite in the Mixed Dentition 2013
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE AND GRADES OF
RECOMMENDATIONS
LEVEL STUDY DESIGN
Evidence obtained from at least one property designed randomised
controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controled trials without
na
randomization
na Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic,
studios, proferably from more than one centre oF research group
Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the
intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as
the results of the introduction of penicilin treatment in the 1940s)
‘could also be regarded as this type of evidence
us
Opinions or respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert committees
‘Source: Adapted from U.S Canadian Preventive Services Task Force.
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
Atleast one meta analysis, systematic review or RCT or evidence rated
{as good or directly applicable to the target population
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable to the target
B__ population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; or evidence
extrapolated from meta analysis, systematic reviews or RCT
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and or clinical
© experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence of directly
applicable clinical studies of good quality
‘Source: Modified from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN)
MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Dr. Ruslan bin Sulaiman
Senior Consultant Orthodontist
Klinik Pergigian Sg Chua
Selangor
Dr. Asma Ashari
Dental Officer
Klinik Pergigian Tanjong Karang
Selangor
Dr. Rozaimah bt. Mat Shafiei
Orthodonti
Klinik Pergigian Taiping
Taiping, Perak
Dr. Nik Fatihah Nik Fauzi
Dental Officer
Klinik Pergigian Selayang Baru
Batu Caves, Selangor
Dr. Evelyn Lee Gaik Lyn
Orthodontist
Kinik Pergigian Cahaya Suria
Jalan Tun Perak, Kuala Lumpur
Datin Dr. Nooral Zeila bt Junid
Dental Public Health Specialist
Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Dr. Lillybia@Emily Ebin
Orthodontist
Klinik Pergigian Sandakan
Sandakan, Sabah
Dr. Ong Siang Ching
Orthodontist
Klinik Pergigian Pasir Puteh
Pasir Puteh, Kelantan
Dr. Lim Lay Yong
Orthodontist
Klinik Pergigian Bandar Botanic
Klang, Selangor
Dr. Saravanan all Alagu
Orthodontist
Hospital Queen Elizabeth I
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah
Lt Kol (Dr) Mumtaj Nisah Abd Rahim
Orthodontist
‘Armed Forces Dental Centre
Ministry of Defence
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Tan Ying Ying
Orthodontist
Klinik Pergigian Mak Mandin
Butterworth, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Murshida Marizan Nor Dr. Yeoh Chiew Kit
Orthodontist and Lecturer Orthodontist
Orthodontic Department Klinik Pergigian Pakar
Faculty of Dentistry Ortodontik
Universiti Kebangsaan Teluk Wanjah
Malaysia(UKM) Alor Setar, Kedah
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nazatul Sabariah Ahmad Dr. Zainab Shamdol
Paediatric Dental Specialist and Dental Public Health Specialist
Lecturer Oral Health Division
Faculty of Dentistry Ministry of Health Malaysia
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
(usm)
Pandan Indah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr Azizah Mat Zabidah bt Othman
Dental Public Health Specialist Dental Nurse
Oral Health Division Oral Health Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia Ministry of Health Malaysia
MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
The guideline was reviewed by a panel of independent reviewers from
both local and international experts. They were asked to comment
primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy of interpretation of
the evidence supporting the recommendations in the guideline,
Dr Rashidah bt Dato’ Burhanuddin
Senior Consultant Orthodontist,
Head of Orthodontic Specialty,
Kuala Lumpur
Wilayah Persekutuan
Dr Bahruddin bin Saripudin
Paediatric Dental Specialist
‘Serdang Hospital
Selangor
Dr Khairil Aznan Mohd Khan
Head of Orthodontic Department
Faculty of Dentistry
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
The following extemal reviewers provided comments and feedback on
the proposed draft.
Major General Dato’ Dr Sukri bin Hussin
Director of Dental Services
Malaysian Armed Forces
Ministry of Defence Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Prof Dato’ Dr Wan Mohamad Nasir bin Wan Othman
Foundation Dean
Faculty of Dentistry
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Dr Ama Johal
‘Senior Clinical Lecturer/Consultant Orthodontist
Bart's & The London Queen Mary School of Medicine & Dentistry
Prof Ferranti Wong
Professor / Honorary Consultant and Head of Paediatric Dentistry
Department
Bart's & The London Queen Mary School of Medicine & Dentistry
4. INTRODUCTION
Anterior crossbite occurs when the upper anterior teeth occlude lingual
to the lower anterior teeth. This may involve one or more anterior teeth
either in the deciduous or permanent dentition. There is a presence of
an abnormal relationship of a tooth or teeth to the opposing teeth, in
which normal labiolingual relationship is reversed.
Prevalence of anterior crossbite varies significantly from one ethnic
group to another. According to Lin JJ,“ "
crossbite was 13.83% in a Taiwanese sample of 7,090 elementary and
junior high school students, aged 9 to 15 years old.
the prevalence of anterior
2. TYPES OF ANTERIOR CROSSBITE
There are three types of anterior crossbite:
2.1 Dental crossbite
Patients presented with Class | skeletal relationship (straight facial
profile in centric occlusion) with one or more teeth in crossbite. (Figure
Figure 1. Dental cossbite
2.2 Functional crossbite (Pseudo Class III)
Functional crossbite is a positional malrelationship with an acquired
neuro-muscular reflex." " The malocclusion is caused by an
occlusal interference that leads to mandibular displacement either
anteriorly or laterally in order to achieve maximum intercuspation. The
incidence is 2-3%, which is one and a half times that of skeletal Class
III malocclusion in the same Chinese population.*'**""*
Diagnostic characteristics of pseudo Class II|:
© Majority showed no family history.
© Class | molar and canine relationships at centric occlusion
and Class Il or end to end relationship at centric relation
(mandibular displacement).
© Decreased midface length.
© Forward position of the mandible with normal mandibular
length.
© Retroclined upper incisors.
Average inclination of lower incisors."
2.3. Skeletal crossbite
This is a malocclusion with maxillary posterior teeth occluding lingual to
the mandibular counterparts due to the discrepancy of the underlying
skeletal relationship (Figure 2). Early treatment may not be successful
due to the unpredictability of the growth pattem; hence referral to a
specialist for management is necessary.
Figure 2. Skeletal crossbte
3. AETIOLOGY
The possible causes of anterior crossbite include:
3.1. Skeletal °°"
‘© Anterior posterior skeletal discrepancy is one of the main
causes of anterior crossbites.
It can be manifested as either a maxillary deficiency,
mandibular excess or a combination of both usually
associated with family history of Class III skeletal origin.
3.2. Dental >”!
Crowding. *¥"""
Occlusal interferences which result in mandibular
displacement to achieve maximum intercuspation.
3.3 Local Factors*”*"""
3.4 Pathological conditions’
Palatal eruption path of maxillary incisors.
‘Trauma to permanent teeth resulting in the incisors
being displaced by luxation.
Delayed shedding of deciduous teeth.
Trauma to deciduous teeth resulting in displacement of
deciduous or permanent tooth germs.
5-7 ove
A cleft lip and palate patient may present with both
anterior and posterior crossbites (Figure 3). Scar tissue
of the cleft repair can restrain the growth of the maxilla,
resulting in a narrow maxilla °!@**"?
‘Trauma or pathology of the temporomandibular joint can
lead to restriction of the growth of mandible on one side
leading to asymmetry.
Athritis, acromegaly, Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy,
condylar hyperplasia and osteochondroma.
Figure 3. Anterior Crossbite in relation to Cleft Lip and Palate,
4. EARLY INTERVENTION
Early intervention is defined as orthodontic treatment before the
definitive phase and should be limited to less than 9 months so that
future compliance of the patient is not compromised.
Rationale for early intervention:
© Little possibility for self-correction.
© — Crossbite in the primary dentition is believed to be transfered to the
permanent dentition, ‘22%! #21 vl eve
© Postponing treatment results in prolonged treatment of greater
complexity,"
© Functional crossbite can develop from cuspal_ interference,
resulting in a mandibular shift.
© Improve maxillary lip posture and facial appearance if corrected in
the mixed dentition."
© Provide space for eruption of canines. Lack of space in the arch
could be caused by retroclined upper incisors, "*!ev"!"2:17evell"
If anterior crossbite is left untreated, it may lead to:
sBlovel 2
© Damage to the teeth in crossbite through attrition.
© — Gingival recession and lass of alveolar hone support to the lower
incisors,"
© — Mobility of the lower incisors affected by the crossbite."*'"""'"
ses ten in
© Temporomandibular dysfunction, which has been associated with
childhood anterior crossbite. "6/°¥"!"?19/eve
© Potential adverse growth influences on the mandible and the
anterior portion on the maxilla," "220224 " involving not just the
teeth and alveolar processes, but also skeletals structures of the
mandible and maxilla. 2°"
RECOMMENDATION
Anterior functional crossbite should be treated early due to little
Possibility of self-correction and to prevent damage to oral structures.
(Grade C)
5. CONTRAINDICATIONS
Patients who present with skeletal discrepancy, which may require
joint orthodontic- surgical management.
© Where dento-alveolar compensation has taken place (proclined
Upper incisors, retroclined lower incisor).
Minimal or no overbite.
Non-compliant patient.
6. EXAMINATION
A thorough clinical examination and diagnosis of the anterior crossbite
should be done to ascertain the aetiology of the crossbite.
6.1 Patient assessment
‘© Some of the common concems regarding anterior crossbite
are:
© irregularity/ crowding of upper front teeth.
© little/ no exposure of upper front teeth on smiling.
of lower incisors.
© gingival recession.
© Some patients may be unaware of their crossbite and have
been referred by their general dental practitioner.
6.2 History
‘© Relevant medical / dental history should be noted.
Family history of a Class II! skeletal pattern.
© Social history.
6.3 Extra-oral examination
Skeletal pattern: A-P, Vertical and Transversrelationships
TM: tenderness, clicking, crepitus, mobility.
‘Any symptoms should be recorded.
‘© Soft tissue profile: straight, convex, concave.
6.4 Intra-oral examination
General condition of the oral cavity should be assessed: oral
hygiene, gingival health and DMF status.
‘Assessment of the arches: crowding, spacing, inclination of
incisors.
Number of teeth involved in the anterior crossbite, overjet,
overbite, buccal segment relationship and center line
discrepancy.
Signs of attrition and periodontal breakdown due to traumatic
occlusion if present.
Presence of mandibular displacement due to premature
contact and the ability to achieve an edge-to-edge incisor
relationship.
6.5 Radiographic examination
OPG: To assess skeletal and dental tissues to detect any
abnormalities. For dental tissue assessment, it is used to
confirm the presence/absence of teeth, condition of teeth and
the periodontal status; or
Standard upper anterior occlusal: To detect any
supernumerary teeth in the anterior region and if pathology is
suspected in the anterior region.
6.6 Study models
© Study model and wax bite registration in maximum
intercuspation must be taken for diagnosis and treatment
planning. The study model may also be used for space
analysis for the purpose of a detailed treatment planning.
© For medico-legal and research purposes.
6.7 Clinical photographs
Clinical photographs taken both extraorally and intraorally with
standardized settings for pre and post-treatment records are
advisable. An example of clinical photographs is shown in (Figure
4a and 4b).
Figure 4. Extra oral photographs.
u
Figure 4b. Intraoral photographs.
RECOMMENDATION
Pretreatment diagnostic records.
© Panoramic radiograph.
© Study casts.
© Photographs.
(Grade C)
iA
DIAGNOSIS
Correct diagnosis of the type of anterior crossbite is essential
for successful treatment.
In order to determine the cause of anterior crossbite, it is
important to differentiate between skeletal or of dental origin.
Dental crossbite can be managed early using simple
orthodontic appliances.
Functional and skeletal anterior crossbite require more
‘complex treatment modalities and should be managed by
Orthodontic Specialists.
‘Skeletal Anterior
Types of crossbite Dental Anterior Crossbite
Crossbite
Clinical presentation |
|@ Genetic or hereditary in| @ Lack of space, crowding
Aetiology most cases (© No maxilla and mandible
|@ Naxila and mandible size | size ciserepancy
discrepancy
Maxillary inciso :
Mame incisors I rogined Upright or retried
Mandibular incisors : ,
wend Retroined Procined or upright
© {Not present
Aeteroposed or | © present cant associated
resent mandibular
CEE ‘displacement (functional
‘rossbte)
Nat posont
Transverse ‘Can be associated with Present can be
Bad aseociated wth mandibular
oy Loris displacement (Lunctonal
crossbite)
Mandibular growth | Unfavourable growth ne
pattern patterns
‘Number offeoth in
Segments crossbite One or more teeth
‘Table 1. Skeletal and Dental Anterior Crossbite Indicator 280448
TREATMENT
8.1 TREATMENT PRINCIPLES
Anterior crossbite is corrected by:
‘a. Dento-alveolar compensation i.e. proclination of upper teeth
alone or combination of prociination of upper teeth and
retroclination of lower teeth.
b. Maxillary protrusion.
c. Backward rotation of mandible.
4d. Combination of a,b & c (Surgery - Orthognathic).
8.2
FACTORS TO CONSIDER PRIOR TO SELECTION OF
TREATMENT MODALITIES
@ Adequate space in the arch to reposition the tooth."
© Sufficient overbite to hold the tooth in position following
correction. 20!"
‘© Incisors inclination before treatment (An apical position of
the tooth in crossbite that is the same as it would be in
normal position. 2%")
‘A.Class | occlusion. 2!!!"
Patient compliance.
Timing of treatment.
Periodontal breakdown.
Growth potential.
Level of operators knowledge and training.
UPPER REMOVABLE APPLIANCE
Upper removable appliances have been widely used in the
treatment of anterior crossbite (Figure 7). Removable appliances act
by applying tipping forces to the crowns of the teeth. Tooth
movement occurs solely by tipping as only single-point contact is
possible.
‘Management of Anterior Crossbite in the Mixed Dentition 2013
ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES
Simple Highly dependent on patient's
compliance
Can be removed for oral hygiene Needs good laboratory support
Purposes:
Reduced chairside time. ‘Only allows tipping movement.
Cost-effective
Coasp |-+}
ja]
al
Figure 7. An example of a design of URA
9. DESIGNING REMOVABLE APPLIANCE
9.1 General Principle
The success of removable appliance treatment depends on the
design. The design should be simple for patients to use (Refer
‘Appendix 1).
Components of Removable Appliances
Active components.
Retentive components.
Anchorage.
Baseplate.
9.2 Active Components
The active components provide force to move teeth. Examples of
active components are springs, bows, expansion screw and elastics.
The commonly used active components for anterior crossbite
correction are Z- spring and expansion screw.
© = Z-springs
A z-spring made of 0.5mm hard stainless stee! wire is sufficient to
correct a simple crossbite involving one tooth. The spring has an arm
and two activation coils. The coils are of 3.0mm in diameter. The arm
of the spring is placed on the palatal surface of the tooth.
Activation of spring is either by opening of the coils or pulling the
outer arm of the spring forward and away from acrylic base plate.
The recommended force is approximately 30g. The direction of
activation is perpendicular to the tangent of the palatal surface of the
tooth. This may need anterior retention as it may displace the
appliance downward.
© Expansion Screws
‘Screws are used to prociine two or more teeth. A screw applied large
intermittent force to the teeth. It is placed parallel to the intended
tooth movement. One of the advantages of the screw is a clasp can
be placed on the teeth to be moved. It is very useful in cases where
there is inadequate number of teeth for retention.
‘Screw is activated in the base plate by the patient at home according
to the direction showed by the clinician. The activation is done
‘one-quarter turn once weekly which separates the acrylic by about
0.25mm. More frequent adjustments, up to twice a week are
possible but care must be taken not to overdo it as this can cause the
appliance to be ill-fitting,
9.3 Retentive Components
‘Adequate retention is important for compliance and efficiency of the
appliance. If the appliance is loose, the patient may have difficulty
wearing it. Furthermore, the active components will not work
effectively in a loose appliance. Common retentive components
used are the Adams and Southend clasps.
© Adams Clasp
The clasp is commonly constructed on the first permanent molars
using 0.7mm stainless steel wire. It can also be made on premolars
using 0.6mm hard stainless steel wire.
The arrowhead is angled at 30° - 45° to engage the undercuts
present at the junction of the mesial and distal surfaces of the buccal
aspects of the tooth.
Clasps should be adjusted only when necessary. The clasps can be
adjusted in two places, i.e. bend in the middle of the flyover and
adjustment near the arrowhead.
© Southend Clasp
This clasp is preferred where incisors are to be used for retention. It
is less obstructive and easily adaptable. The wire used for its
construction is 0.7mm stainless steel. Retention is increased by
bending the arrowhead towards the teeth.
9.4 Anchorage
‘Anchorage is a source of resistance to the reaction from the active
‘components. Anchorage in removable appliance is provided by the
baseplate and the retentive components.
9.5 Baseplate
The acrylic baseplate serves to hold together the other components
of the appliance. A posterior bite plane should be incorporated to
free the occlusion and allow the tooth in crossbite to move
effectively. The posterior bite plane should be appropriate in thickness.
MANAGEMENT OF REMOVABLE APPLIANCE
10.1 Fitting Removable Appliance
Before fitting the removable appliance in patient's mouth,
ensure that it is the correct appliance for the patient and
the design has been followed.
© Explain to the patient how the appliance works.
© Ensure there is no roughness on the fitting surface.
Try in the appliance and adjust the active and retentive
components where necessary.
Demonstrate to the patient how to insert and remove the
appliance and get the patient to practice doing it
Give clear instructions to the patient and parents/guardian,
stressing on the importance of full time wear (refer
Appendix 2).
Arrange for review appointments.
al
10.2 Review appointments.
Ideally patients wearing removable appliance should be
seen every 4-6 weeks.
During the review appointment, the most important thing is
to assess the patient's compliance. The clues for lack of
compliance include:
© Patient's lisp."
© Pooling of saliva.
‘© The appliances looks very new and absence of wear
and tear marks,"
‘© No mark in the mouth. 7"
seve mt
‘© Frequent breakage.
If the compliance is good, check:
© Oral hygiene.
© Overjet and overbite,
© If the crossbite has improved or corrected.
If the crossbite is not corrected, continue to activate the
active components.
Successful correction of anterior crossbite should be
achieved within 6-9 months, If there is no improvement
after 9 months, patient should be referred to a specialist for
further management.
The positive overbite is essential to maintain stable result.
No retainer is required if positive overbite is
achieved."*/"""
Figure 8a. Prtreatmont photos.
Figure 8. Mid-reatment photos.
Figure 8c. Post treatment photos : Anterior crossbite crossbite with
posslive overbte and overt.
THE FOLLOWING TREATMENT OPTIONS SHOULD BE CARRIED
OUT BY THE ORTHODONTIC SPECIALISTS ONLY
41. FIXED APPLIANCE
Most incisors in crossbite are managed with removable appliances if
purely tipping movement is required. However, a simple fixed appliance
such as the 2 X 4 appliance is preferred when complex movement is
needed." "19" ''? Fixed appliance is capable of three dimensional
tooth movement including bodily movement, root torquing, derotation
and movement of multiple teeth.
RECOMMENDATION
Fixed appliance is advocated as the best treatment modality for
anterior crossbite.
(Grade A)
12. _ INCLINED BITE PLANE
Inclined bite plane used to treat anterior crossbite can be fixed or
removable. Composite resin has been used as fixed inclined bite plane
and is suitable when the anterior crossbite is not more than 1/3 crown
length, with no tooth rotation and presence of sufficient space for labial
movement. The crossbite should be solely of dental origin."
13. FUNCTIONAL APPLIANCE
Functional appliance utilizes the forces of the orofacial musculature to
move teeth and modify growth to correct a malocclusion. The aim of
functional appliance treatment in the correction of anterior crossbite is to
stimulate forward maxillary growth and restrain mandibular growth.
However, the major effect of functional appliance is mostly
dento-alveolar. 7"? Function Regulator 3 (FR3), Reverse Twin
Block *"*""" and Reverse Bionator*”*" "" appliances have been used
in the treatment of anterior crossbite with Class III skeletal base.
14. FACE MASK / PROTRACTION HEADGEAR
The preferred treatment for skeletal maxillary retrusion is anterior
movement of the maxilla using a protraction headgear.*"**""' "it has
been suggested that for maximum skeletal effect, treatment should
commence before the age of 8 years (in early mixed dentition
stage).°*2%!*' " tn older children, the changes are more likely to be
due to dental rather than skeletal. Protraction headgear treatment
results in the advancement of maxilla along with a backward and
downward rotation of mandible and correction of anterior crossbite.*'""
™ Associated use of rapid palatal expansion with protraction headgear
provides more skeletal effect and less dental change.**"*"*'""? However,
long-term results are dependent on further growth pattems. The
direction of force should be slightly below the occlusal plane.
The recommended force is 350-450g per side and the headgear worn at
least 12 hours per day.
15. CHIN CUP OR CHIN CAP
Chin cup or chin cap treatment can be used to treat mandibular
prognathism in early mixed dentition. This treatment produces a
backward rotation of mandible giving the appearance that the mandible
has been restrained. The positive changes are lost once treatment is
‘stopped and patient passes through puberty.°7""""
REFERENCES
1. Lin JJ. Differential diagnosis and management of anterior crossbite
(Il) - definitions. in: Chang Ho-Hua., editor. Creative Orthodontics
Blending the Damon System & TADs to manage difficult
malocclusions. 1. Taipei: Yong Chiem; (2007). pp. 17-26.
2. Moyers RE. Handbook of orthodontics, 4th edition. Chicago: Year
Book; (1988). p. 410-5.
3. Lin JJ. Prevalence of malocclusion in Chinese children age 9-15. Clin
Dent-Taiwan.(1985);5:57-65.
4, Rabie AB. Diagnostic criteria for pseudo-Class Ill malocclusion. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2000;117:1-9. doi: 10.1016/S08895406(00)70241-1.
5. Mitchell L. An introduction to Orthodontics. Oxford University Press.
Third Edition (2007) ;Page 140-141.
6. Proffit WR, Fields JR HW, Sarver DM. Contemporary Orthodontics.
Mosby. Fourth Exition (2000); Page 113-144.
7. Proffit WR. On the aetiology of malocclusion. The Northcroft lecture.
Br J Orthod 1986; 13:1-11
8. Ngan P, Hu AM, Fields Hw Jr. Treatment of Class Ill problems begins
with differential diagnosis of anterior crossbites. Pediatr Dent 1997
sept-oct; 19(6):386-95
9. Long RE, Semb G, Shaw WC. Orthodontic treatment of the patient
with complete Cleft of li, alveolus and palate; Lessons of the past 60,
years. Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal 2000:37;533,
10. Harrison JE,Ashby D. Orthodontic treatment for posterior crossbites.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev.2001;1:CD000979.
14. McNamara JA Jr. Early intervention in the transverse dimension: is it
worth the effort? Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.2002;121:572-574
12. Thilander B,Lennartsson B.A study of children with unilateral, treated
and untreated, in the deciduous dentition-occlusal and skeletal
characteristics of significance in predicting the long-term outcome. J
Orofac Orthop.2002;63:371-383
13, Ramirez G. Treatment of anterior crossbite in the primary dentition
with esthetic crowns: Report of 3 cases. Journal of Pediatric Dentistry
2011;33:339-42
14. Chow MH. Treatment of anterior crossbite caused by occlusal
Interference Quintessence Int 1979:10:57-60
15. Croll TP, Riesenberger RE. Anterior crossbite correction in the
primary dentition using fixed inclinced planes. |. Technique and
examples. Quintessence Int 1987;18:847-53.
16. Borrie F, Bearn D. Early correction of anterior crossbites: a systematic
review. Journal of Orthodontics 2011;38:175-184
17. Negi KS, Sharma KR. Treatment of pseudo Class Ill malocclusion by
modified Hawley appliance with inverted labial bow. J Indian Soc
Pedod Prev Dent 2011;29(1):57-61.
18. Jones JW , O'Neill PD. Anterior crossbite correction and mobile lower
central incisors in a 7 year old patient: case report. Dent Update 1996;
23:271-74
19. Thilander B, Rubio G, Pena L, de Mayorga C. Prevalence of
temporomandibular dysfunction and its association with malocclusion
in children and adolescents: an epidemiologic study related to specific
stages of dental development. Angle Orthodont 2002;72:146-54
20. Lee BD. Correction of crossbite. Dent Clin North Am 1978;22:647-68
21. Sextent T, Croll TP. Anterior Crossbite correction in the primary
dentition using reversed stainless steel crowns. ASDC J Dent Child
1983; 50:117-20
22. Valentine F, Howitt JW. Implications of early anterior crossbite
correction. ASDC J Dent Child 1970;37:420-27
23. Clifford FO. Crossbite correction in the deciduous dentition: principles
and procedures. Am J Orthod 1971;59:343-49
(24. Proffit WR, Fields Jr. HW and Sarver DM. Contemporary
Orthodontics . Fourth Edition, St.Louis, MO (2007); Page 431-443.
25. Mitchell (2007). An Introduction to Orthodontics. Chapter17: 178-187
26. Kaplan H. The logic of modem retention procedures. American
Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopaedics 1988;93:325340
27. Sari S, Gokalp H, Aras S. Correction of anterior dental crossbite with
composite as an inclined plane. International Journal of Paediatric
Dentistry 2001;11:201-208.
28. Bacceti T, Tollaro E. Sagittal changes after maxillary protraction with
expansion in Class Ill patients in the primary, mixed, and late mixed
dentition: a longitudinal retrospective study. Am J Orthod Dentofcial
Orthop 2000 Jun;117(6):669-80
29. Clark WJ. Twin Block Functional Therapy. Applications in Dentofacial
Orthodontics 1995;179-181
30. Giancotti A, Maselli A, Mampieri G, Spano E. Pseudo-Class Ill
‘malocclusion treatment with Balters’ Bionator. Journal of Orhodontics
2003;30:203-215
31. Kajlyama K, Murakami T, Suzuki A. Evaluation of the modified
‘maxillary protractor applied to Class Il! malocclusion with retruded
maxilla in early mixed dentition. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthops
2000 Nov;118(5):549-559
32. Saadia M, Torres E. Sagittal changes after maxillary protraction with
expansion in Class III patients in the primary, mixed, and late mixed
dentitions: a longitudinal retrospective study.Am J Orthod Dentofacial
‘Orthops 2000 Jun;117(6):669-680
33. Gu, Rabie AB, Hagg U. Treatment effects of simple fixed appliance
and reverse headgear in correction of anterior crossbites. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthops 2000 Jun;117(6):691-699
34. Nakamura S, Miyajima K, Nagahara K, Killiany DM, Tsuchiya.
Cephalometric changes during self-correction of primary anterior
crossbite. ASDC J Dent Child 1999 May-Jun;66(3):175-179
35. Deguchi T, Kanimi R, Ashijawa Y and Rosenstein SW. Very early
Face Mask Therapy in Class Ill children. The Angle Orthodontist
1999;69:349-355
36. Kim JH, Viana MAG, Graber TM, Omerza FF and BeGole EA. The
effectiveness of Face Mask Therapy: a Meta-Analysis. Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthops 1999;115:675-685
37. Sugawar J, Asano T, Endo N and Mitani H. Long-term effects of
Chincap Therapy on skeletal profile in mandibular prognathism. Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthops 1990;114:492-502
APPENDIX 4
Design of Upper Removable Appliance
‘Components Specifications
Double adam’s clasps 16-55,65-26 ‘0.7mm sis wire
C-claps 17 ‘0.7mm sis wire
Z-spring 21 ‘0.5mm sis wire
Posterior bite plane 54-16,64-26 2-3mm thickness
APPENDIX 2
Instruction for Removable Appliance
1. The appliance should be worn at all times; including
meals and in bed at night.
2. The appliance should only be removed during tooth
brushing and playing contact sports. It must then be
replaced in the mouth at the earliest opportunity.
3. It is very common to feel discomfort, pooling of saliva
and altered speech initially, but it should pass in few
days once you get used to the appliance.
4. It is important to take care of oral hygiene during the
treatment.
Avoid hard, sticky and sweet foods.
If there is any problem with the appliance, please contact
the Orthodontic department as soon as possible. The
contact no...
Algorithm for Management of Anterior Crossbite in the
Mixed Dentition
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
‘The members of the development group of these guidelines would like to
express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributor
- Panel of external reviewers
= Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, Health Technology
Assessment Section, Medical Development Division, Ministry of
Health, Malaysia for their valuable input and feedback
= All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
The clinical photographs contained in these guidelines have been
provided by Dr. Khairil Aznan Mohamed Khan, Dr. Evelyn Lee, Dr.
Murshida Marizan Nor and Dr. Alizae Marny Fadzlin Syed Mohammed,
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None held shares
in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are
available upon request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on “Management of Anterior Crossbite
in the Mixed Dentition* was supported financially in its entirety by the
Ministry of Health’ Malaysia and was developed without any
involvement of the pharmaceutical industry.