MANAGEMENT OF
DEMENTIA
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e-ISBN: 978-967-2887-16-4
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.psychiatry-malaysia.org
https://msgm.com.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every health care provider
is responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based
on the clinical picture presented by the patient and the management
options available locally.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2021 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2025) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed, and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which will be the definitive version at all time. This version
can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
v
Development Group
viii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm 1. Early Detection of Dementia
xi
Algorithm 2. Diagnosis of Dementia
xii
Algorithm 3. Treatment of Dementia
xiii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS AND RISK REDUCTION STRATEGIES
3
2.1 Risk Factors
3
2.2 Risk Reduction Strategies
5
3.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS 9
3.1 Assessment
10
3.1.1 Clinical Assessment
10
3.1.2 Imaging and Biomarkers
12
3.2 Diagnostic Criteria
14
3.3 Stages
15
4.
TREATMENT
16
4.1 Non-pharmacological Interventions
16
4.2 Pharmacological Interventions
19
4.2.1 Alzheimer’s Disease
20
4.2.2 Vascular Dementia
23
4.2.3 Lewy Body Disease (Dementia with Lewy Body/
25
Parkinson’s Disease Dementia)
4.2.4 Frontotemporal Dementia
26
4.2.5 Behavioural and Psychological Symptoms
26
4.2.6 Potentially Inappropriate Prescription
29
5.
TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICATION
31
6.
MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT
32
7.
SPECIAL POPULATION
34
7.1 Acquired Brain Injury
34
7.2 Alcohol-related Dementia
34
7.3 HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
CAREGIVER SUPPORT
37
9.
LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES
39
10. PALLIATIVE AND END-OF-LIFE CARE
41
11. REFERRAL
44
12. IMPLEMENTINGTHE GUIDELINES
45
12.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
45
12.2 Potential Resource Implications
45
REFERENCES
47
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy 55
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions 57
Appendix 3 10 Warning Signs of Dementia
58
Appendix 4 Initial Assessment Tools
59
Appendix 5 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
61
Mental Disorder Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
Appendix 6 International Statistical Classification of 63
Diseases and Related Health Problems,
10th Revision (ICD-10)
Appendix 7 a. The Global Deterioration Scale for 65
Assessment of Primary Degenerative
Dementia
b. Functional Assessment Staging (FAST) 68
Appendix 8 Medications Used for the Treatment of 70
Dementia
Appendix 9 Anticholinergic Burden Scores 75
Appendix 10 Suggested Guide to Review and Deprescribe 76
(Potentially Inappropriate Prescription/
Psychotropic) in Dementia
Appendix 11 Important Points for Caregiver of People with 77
Dementia
Appendix 12 Useful Resources
80
Appendix 13 Advance Care Planning
81
List of Abbreviations 82
Acknowledgement 85
Disclosure Statement
85
Source of Funding
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Risk Reduction
• Risk reduction strategies should be advocated to reduce the risk of
developing cognitive decline and/or dementia. These include:
 physical activity
 tobacco cessation
 interventions for alcohol use disorders
 management of hypertension
 management of diabetes
Assessment and Diagnosis
• The diagnosis of dementia should be based on detailed history and
physical examination, and supported by cognitive, functional and
behavioural evaluation.
• Structural neuroimaging (computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging) should be done in evaluation of dementia to
exclude reversible causes of cognitive decline and other intracranial
pathology.
• Electroencephalogram should be considered in rapidly progressive
cognitive decline and atypical features of dementia.
• Diagnosis of dementia should be made based on Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) or the
International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10).
Non-Pharmacological Treatment
• To improve cognitive function in mild to moderate dementia, cognitive
stimulation therapy and physical activity should be offered.
• In people with dementia having behavioural and psychological
symptoms:
 explore and address possible clinical or environmental causes/
triggering factors
 offer psychosocial and environmental interventions as initial and
ongoing treatment:
- psychological intervention for depressive symptoms and/or
anxiety
- personalised and tailored activities for agitation and aggression
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Pharmacological Treatment
• Donepezil should be offered in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) of all
severity.
 Rivastigmine is an option in mild to moderate AD.
• Memantine may be considered in moderate to severe AD as
monotherapy or in combination with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
(AChEI).
• AChEI or memantine may be considered in vascular dementia.
• Rivastigmine or donepezil may be considered for dementia with
Lewy body and Parkinson’s disease dementia.
• Antipsychotics may be considered for behavioural and psychological
symptoms in people with dementia (PWD) where there is a risk of
harming themselves or others.
• Antidepressants:
 may be considered for PWD who have agitation
 may be prescribed for PWD with pre-existing severe mental
health problem
• The use of anticholinergic medications in dementia should be
done cautiously with regular review of indication and deprescribed
whenever possible.
Caregiver Support
• Caregivers should be actively involved and supported in the
management of dementia.
 This includes assessment of the burden of caregivers.
Legal and Ethical Issues
• If there is any doubt regarding people with dementia (PWD)’s
decision-making capacity, a formal assessment of decision-making
capacity should be carried out.
• A doctor should comply with a patient’s unequivocal written directive
to refuse a particular treatment if that decision was made while the
patient had mental capacity.
• PWD (particularly moderate to severe) should be assessed for their
driving ability if they still wish to drive.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Palliative and End-of-Life Care
• Physical restraints should be avoided in dementia.
• Advance care planning should be considered in the management of
dementia once the diagnosis is established.
Referral
• All patients with suspected dementia should be referred to a geriatric
psychiatrist/psychiatrist, geriatrician or neurologist for assessment,
diagnosis and management.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans,
“all adults (19 plus years)”, publication from year “2009 to Current”
and English language. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved
literature and guidelines were searched and, experts in the field
contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were conducted
from 19 Nov 2018 to 26 Feb 2019. Literature searches were repeated
for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process
allowing any relevant papers published before 31 January 2021 to be
included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after
this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on Dementia e.g.:
• Dementia: assessment, management and support for people living
with dementia and their carers [National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE), 2018]
• Clinical Practice Guidelines and Principles of Care for People with
Dementia [National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC),
2016]
• Risk Reduction of Cognitive Decline and Dementia WHO Guidelines
[World Health Organization (WHO), 2019]
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 14 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 26 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG was developed
largely based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634).
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of dementia in the following
aspects:
a. risk factors
b. assessment and diagnosis
c. treatment
d. referral and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
Adults with:
• dementia
• mild cognitive impairment
Exclusion Criteria
Adults with:
• learning disabilities who develop dementia
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide those involved in the management
of dementia at any healthcare level including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients and their caregivers/advocates
v. professional organisations
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Chan Yee Fai
Consultant Geriatric Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Ian Lloyd Anthony
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Dr. Hor Jyh Yung
Consultant Neurologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Public Health Physician & Head of CPG Unit
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Noor Ayuni Bazura Muhamad
Senior Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor ‘izzati Saedon
Consultant Geriatrician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kenny Ong Kheng Yee
Consultant Neuropsychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Rajesweran Ramalingam
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Rosita Abd Rahman
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar, Negeri
Sembilan
Dr. Suhaila Mohamad Zahir
Consultant Geriatric Psychiatrist
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Teh Hoon Lang
Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Valarmathi Masilamani
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Batu, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zaleha Jusoh
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Marang, Terengganu
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Hjh. Salina Abdul Aziz
Psychiatry Head of Service & Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health
Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Associate Prof. Dr. Ng Chong Guan
Consultant Psychaitrist
Malaysian Psychiatric Association
Dr Nurashikin Ibrahim
Public Health Physician
Mental Health Sector, Disease Control
Division, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Ms. Rosmaliah Alias
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ruziaton Hasim
Consultant Family Physician Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Pandamaran,
Selangor
Dr. Santhi Datuk Puvanarajah
Head of Neurology Department &
Senior Consultant Neurologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Shahrul Bahyah Kamaruzzaman
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Geriatrician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Thillainathan Krishnan
Occupational Therapist
Family Health Development Division
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Yau Weng Keong
Head of Medical Department &
Senior Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Datuk Dr. Yim Khai Kee
Patient Advocate
Alzheimer’s Disease Foundation Malaysia
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Alan Pok Wen Kin
Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Andrew CK Law
Vice Dean (International Student
Services) &
Head, Department of Psychiatry
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland &
University College Dublin (Malaysia
Campus), Pulau Pinang
Dr. Emma Fazilah Zulkifli
Family Physician Specialist
Klinik Famili Emma
Subang Jaya, Selangor
Professor Dr. Hj. Ismail Drahman
Senior Consultant Geriatric Psychiatrist
Hospital Sentosa, Sarawak
Dr. Jeffrey Kirwan
Consultant Old Age Psychiatrist
Eastern Health, Melbourne, Australia
Associate Prof. Dr. Lim Wee Shiong
Senior Consultant Geriatrician
Institute of Geriatrics and Active Aging
Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore
Mahmud Abu Bakar
Patient Advocate
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mark Tan Kiak Min
Coordinator, Clinical Ethics
Consultation
Service, Hospital UiTM & Lecturer
Universiti Teknologi Mara, Selangor
Dato’ Dr. Md. Hanip Rafia
Senior Consultant Neurologist
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Noraliza Noordin Merican
Public Health Physician
Elderly Health Sector, Family Health
Section, Family Health Development
Division, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Soraya Kunanayagam
Consultant Geriatrician
Gleneagles Hospital, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Suraya Yusoff
Consultant Geriatric Psychiatrist
Johor
YTM Dato’ Dr. Tunku Muzafar Shah
Tunku
Jaafar Laksmana
Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Professor Dr. Wendy Burn
Consultant in Old Age Psychiatry
Leeds and York Partnership NHS
Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Dr. Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru
Kuala Lumpur
Associate Prof. Dr. Zainol Akbar Zainal
Clinical Pharmacist
University of Cyberjaya, Selangor
Dr. Zanariah Mat Saher
Consultant Geriatric Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
ALGORITHM 1: EARLY DETECTION OF DEMENTIA
*Refer to Chapter 3 on Diagnosis and Assessment
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
Presence of symptoms suggestive of dementia (including subjective memory
complaint, changes in activity of daily living and/or caregivers concerns), clinician
suspicion and patients at increased risk of dementia
Perform clinical assessment:
• History from patients and/or caregivers
• Examination
 Physical including cardiovascular and neurological systems
 Mental state and cognition (e.g. mini-Cog/AMTS/MMSE)
Abnormalities
detected on clinical
assessment
Any
abnormalities
present
Provide reassurance
Treat and reassess
Refer to specialist
services/memory clinic
Findings
meet criteria for
dementia
Symptoms
remain
Patient is
cognitively impaired
but criteria for dementia
not fulfilled
Consider referral to
a specialist and or
reassess in six months
Provide
reassurance
Provide reassurance or
referral as appropriate
AMTS = Abbreviated Mental Test Score
MMSE = Mini Mental State Examination
Perform laboratory tests*
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
ALGORITHM 2: DIAGNOSIS OF DEMENTIA
Referral on possible diagnosis of dementia
Perform clinical assessment:
• history from patients and/or caregivers
• examination
 physical
 cognition (e.g. MMSE, MoCA)
 mental state (e.g. GDS, CSDD, NPI)
 function (e.g. IADL/ADL)
 others - caregivers burden (e.g. ZBI)
Reassess after 6 months
Consider other diagnosis
Patient is cognitively
impaired
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
• Laboratory tests for dementia screening to
exclude potentially reversible causes (full
blood count, biochemistry tests, thyroid
function test, serum vitamin B12 and folate
levels, VDRL and HIV tests)
Dementia or mild
cognitive impairment
• Perform MRI/CT brain
• EEG if indicated
DEMENTIA
Determine type of dementia
MCI
Alzheimer’s
disease
Vascular
Dementia
Dementia with Lewy
Body/Parkinson’s
Disease Dementia
Frontotemporal
Dementia
Other types of dementia
• Mixed dementia
• Related to medical
conditions
• HIV/TBI/alcohol-related
dementia
MMSE = Mini Mental State Examination
MoCA = Montreal Cognitive Assessment
CSDD = Cornell Scale for Depression
in Dementia
GDS = Geriatric Depression Scale
NPI
= Neuropsychiatric Inventory
IADL = Instrumental Activity of Daily Living
ZBI
= Zarit Burden Interview
VDRL = Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory test
HIV
= Human Immunodeficiency Virus
MRI = Magnetic Resonance Imaging
CT
= Computed Tomography
EEG = Electroencephalogram
TBI
= Traumatic Brain Injury
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
ALGORITHM 3: TREATMENT OF DEMENTIA
Non-pharmacological intervention
Psychosocial Intervention
(tailored to individual’s needs)
Multidisciplinary team Involvement
(multicomponent intervention for
patients and care givers)
Maintenance of cognitive function and
encouragement of independence
Improvement of quality of life
AChEI = acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
DEMENTIA
Pharmacological Intervention
Alzheimer’s disease
Vascular dementia
Dementia with Lewy
Body/Parkinson’s
Disease Dementia
Frontotemporal
Dementia
Consider
rivastigmine
or donepezil
Treat vascular risk factors
Consider AChEI
or memantine
Moderate
to severe
Mild
AChEI
Donepezil
and/or memantine
Behavioural and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia
Co-morbid emotional disorders
• Depression
• Anxiety
• Agitation
• Aggression
• Psychosis
• Assess and address clinical or environmental causes
• Offer psychosocial and environmental intervention
• Consider antipsychotics or antidepressants
• Assess and address clinical or environmental causes
• Offer psychosocial and environmental intervention
• Consider antidepressant in pre-existing condition
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Dementia is a syndrome in which cognitive function (i.e. ability to
process thought) deteriorates progressively. It is not part of a normal
ageing process. It affects memory, thinking, orientation, calculation,
learning capacity, language, judgement, emotional control, social
behaviour, or motivation (refer to Appendix 3 on 10 Warning Signs
of Dementia). However, consciousness is not affected. Dementia
can lead to disability and dependency among people with dementia
(PWD). It is commonly associated with behavioural and psychological
symptoms which can lead to increased dependency on caregivers
and subsequent nursing home admission. The lack of awareness and
understanding of dementia can lead to stigmatisation and, delay in
diagnosis and care. The physical, psychological, social and economic
impact of dementia on caregivers, family and society is tremendous
and often overlooked.
There are estimated 50 million PWD worldwide and 60% of them live
in low- or middle-income countries. There are nearly 10 million new
cases every year.1 According to Alzheimer’s Disease International,
the estimated number of PWD in Malaysia was 123,000 in 2015. This
number was projected to be 261,000 by 2030 and further increased
to 590,000 by 2050.2 Based on the Malaysian National Health and
Morbidity Survey 2018: Elderly Health, the overall prevalence of
probable dementia was 8.5% (95% CI 6.97 to 10.22).3
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the commonest type of dementia (60
- 70%), followed by vascular dementia (VaD), mixed dementia,
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB),
Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) and others. People with AD often
present initially with gradual episodic memory impairment. However,
in early-onset AD (less than 65 years old), patients may present with
behavioural (frontal), visual (posterior cortical atrophy) or language
(logopenic) variants with relatively well-preserved memory until the
later stages of the disease.4 VaD is associated with cardiovascular
risk factors, and often present with impaired executive function, slowed
processing speed and memory retrieval difficulties.5 Mixed dementia
is a combination of two or more dementia types, most frequently AD
with vascular pathology.6 In cases of behavioural variant frontotemporal
dementia, the early manifestations tend to be changes in the personality
with executive dysfunction prior to memory issues.7 People with DLB
often experience fluctuating cognitive decline with prominent visual
hallucinations and spontaneous motor parkinsonism. Dementia occurs
at least a year after the onset of motor symptoms in people with PDD.8
As Malaysia is moving towards an ageing nation, the country must
prepare itself to address health issues pertaining to the older people
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
e.g. non-communicable diseases (NCDs) including dementia. The
second edition of Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on Management
of Dementia was published in 2009. Since then, diagnostic criteria on
dementia have been revised and become more comprehensive. There
have been minor advancements in the treatment of PWD. These are
addressed in the new edition of the CPG. Apart from that, new sections
on risk reduction strategies and special populations are added. This
third edition aims to update on the management of dementia and
eventually improve the quality of care for PWD.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
2. RISK FACTORS AND RISK REDUCTION STRATEGIES
2.1 Risk Factors
Dementia is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental
factors.9
•
Advancing age: age ≥ 65 years is a risk factor for any dementia10
•
Gender: Female has higher risk of dementia especially in AD10
•
Genetic:
 Early-onset AD accounts for 6 - 7% of all AD cases. Of this
group, only 13% exhibit autosomal dominant transmission. Three
precursor on chromosome 21, presenilin 1 on chromosome 14
and presenilin 2 on chromosome 1.10
 Late-onset AD (aged 65 years and older) is considered to be
multifactorial but involves a strong genetic predisposition.11, level III
The genetic component itself is complex and heterogeneous.10
 The presence of the ε4 variant of the APOE gene (APOE4) may
contribute to the development of late-onset AD and sporadic
early-onset AD. However, presence of APOE ε4 itself is neither
is thought to have a protective effect. Large-scale genome-wide
disease risk. None of these risk loci has an effect comparable to
APOE ε4, with OR ranging from 1.1 to 2.0.11, level III
a. Cardiovascular
Major cardiovascular risk factors e.g. hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
hyperlipidaemia, obesity and smoking are independent risk factors for
the development of atherosclerosis VaD.
•
Hypertension occurring at mid-life (40 to 60 years old) is a risk factor
for dementia and should be appropriately treated.10 A systematic
review showed that treatment of elderly patients with hypertension
improved cognitive function especially for those on angiotensin II
receptor blockers (ARB).12, level I
•
of dementia and should be appropriately treated.10 A meta-analysis
showed DM was a risk factor for all types of dementia (RR=1.73,
95% CI 1.65 to 1.82), AD (RR=1.56, 95% CI 1.41 to 1.73) and VaD
(RR=2.27, 95% CI 1.94 to 2.66). However, there were methodological
issues noted in the primary papers.13, level II-2
•
High total serum cholesterol (TC) is a risk factor for developing latelife dementia:14, level II-2
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
 High TC in mid-life compared with non-high TC is associated with
risk of late-life AD (RR=2.14, 95% CI 1.33 to 3.44).
 High TC in late-life is not associated with any cognitive or
dementia outcome in late-life (RR=1.02, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.87).
•
In a meta-analysis, serum LDL-C level was higher in AD patients
compared with healthy control (OR=2.55, 95% CI 1.25 to 5.22).
The quality of primary papers was good although there was high
heterogeneity and confounders were not fully explained.15, level II-2
•
Obesity is a modifiable risk factor and maintenance of normal body
mass index (BMI) is recommended.10 This is supported by two
meta-analyses showing that:
 mid-life (aged 35 to 65 years) BMI ≥30 and BMI ≤18.5 were
associated with late-life dementia with risk of 1.33 (95% CI 1.08
to 1.63) and 1.39 (95% CI 1.13 to 1.70) respectively.16, level II-2
 obesity (BMI ≥30) in mid-life was associated with risk of developing
AD (RR=2.04, 95% CI 1.59 to 2.62) and any dementia (RR=1.64,
95% CI 1.34 to 2.00) compared with normal BMI.17, level II-2
b. Psychiatric illness
Late-life depression is associated with a two-fold increased risk of
dementia (RR=1.98, 95% CI 1.50 to 2.63) and AD (RR=2.04, 95% CI
1.40 to 2.98).18, level II-2
c. Lifestyle
•
Smoking
Tobacco smoking is a risk factor for cognitive impairment and
dementia.19
•
Excessive alcohol consumption
Heavy (>12 and ≤24 g/d) and very heavy (>24 g/d) alcohol consumption
is a risk factor for incident dementia with HR of 1.10 (95% CI 1.01 to
1.19) and 1.18 (95% CI 1.01 to 1.36) respectively.20, level II-2 One unit is
equivalent to 8 g of alcohol.
•
Physical inactivity
A meta-analysis showed that physical inactivity measured <10 years
before dementia diagnosis was associated with increased incidence of
all-cause dementia (HR=1.40, 95% CI 1.23 to 1.71) and AD (HR=1.36,
95% CI 1.12 to 1.65). When reverse causation was minimised by
assessing physical activity ≥10 years before all-cause dementia and
AD onset, no difference in dementia risk between physically active and
inactive participants was found for the two outcomes.21, level II-2 However,
there was no standard definition of self-reported physical inactivity and
quality assessment in the primary papers used in the meta-analysis.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
•
Social relationship
A meta-analysis of 19 cohort studies showed that low social participation
(RR=1.41, 95% CI 1.13 to 1.75), less frequent social contact (RR=1.57,
95% CI 1.32 to 1.85) and more loneliness (RR=1.58, 95% CI 1.19 to 2.09)
were associated with incident dementia. However, there were variations
in social relationship factor measurements, adjustment of potential
confounders and substantial dropout in the primary studies.22, level II-2
d. Environment
A systematic review showed different strengths of evidence on the
association between environmental elements and dementia.23, level II-2
•
Strong evidence (reported association with dementia in the
majority of published papers) was seen in nitrogen oxide, ozone
and particulate matter in the air.
•
Environmental tobacco smoke showed dose-response based
on cumulative dose score (calculated as level years of exposure
based on setting, level and duration of exposure) as shown
below.
e. Others
The Lancet Commission (2020) found several risk factors associated
with dementia e.g.:24, level III
•
lower early life education level (RR=1.6, 95% CI 1.3 to 2.0)
•
mid-life hearing impairment (RR=1.9, 95% CI 1.4 to 2.7)
•
mid-life traumatic brain injury (TBI) (RR=1.8, 95% CI 1.5 to 2.2)
f. Co-occurrence of modifiable risk factors
Exposure to additional modifiable risk factors of dementia should be
kept to the minimum. A meta-analysis on dementia outcomes revealed
a pooled RR for dementia of 1.20 (95% CI 1.04 to 1.39) for one risk
factor, 1.65 (95% CI 1.40 to 1.94) for two risk factors and 2.21 (95%
CI 1.78 to 2.73) for three or more compared with no risk factor.25, level II-2
2.2 Risk Reduction Strategies
WHO recommends strategies to reduce the risk of cognitive decline
and/or dementia in adults with normal cognition which include:19
•
physical activity
•
tobacco cessation
•
interventions for alcohol use disorders
•
management of hypertension
•
management of diabetes
Level years of exposure
aHR
>0 - 24
0.99, 95% CI 0.76 to 1.28
25 - 49
1.15, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.42
50 - 74
1.18, 95% CI 0.87 to 1.59
75 - 99
1.39, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.84
100
1.95, 95% CI 1.34 to 2.83
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Other interventions that may be considered are:19; 24, level III
•
weight management
•
management of dyslipidaemia
•
nutritional interventions
•
social activities
•
cognitive interventions
•
management of depression
•
management of hearing loss
Tobacco cessation
•
Smoking of tobacco and tobacco products (cigarette, electronic
cigarette/vape, shisha, pipe, cigar etc.) can lead to various noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). Worldwide, more than eight
million people die every year because of this habit.26
•
Hence, the decision to integrate smoking treatment with NCDs
is important to reduce the prevalence of NCDs and their
complications. This decision was made during the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO
FCTC) Steering Committee Meeting in December 2019 chaired
by the Honourable Health Minister of Malaysia.
•
The treatment for smoking should be initiated by the treating
doctor based on the assessment and treatment of tobacco use
disorder as in Table 1. Details on this can be found in the CPG
on Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder 2016, available at:
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/
Respiratory/CPG_TobacoDisorder.pdf
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Table 1: Assessment and treatment of tobacco use disorder
Medication and Supplement
In a Cochrane systematic review of 28 RCTs with low risk of bias,
vitamins [folic acid, vitamin B6 and B12, antioxidant vitamins (vitamin A,
C and E) and vitamin D] and mineral supplementation (zinc and copper)
did not maintain cognitive function in cognitively healthy people in mid
(<70 years old) and late life at 5 - 10 years follow-up.27, level I
Another three Cochrane systematic review studying on the association
of supplements and medication with dementia found:
•
no benefits or harms from vitamin E supplements in dementia28, level I
•
no evidence to support the use of either aspirin or other NSAIDs for
prevention of dementia29, level I
•
statins given to people at risk of vascular disease did not prevent
cognitive decline or dementia compared with placebo30, level I
•
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of medication
(aspirin and statins), vitamins and supplements to prevent dementia.
1.
Ask and document smoking status for all patients.
2.
Provide brief advice on quit smoking at every visit to all smokers.
3.
Assess level of nicotine addiction using Modified Fagerström Test
for Cigarette Dependence Questionnaire (COMPULSORY) and
verify smoking status using carbon monoxide breath analyser (IF
AVAILABLE).
4.
Offer pharmacotherapy to all smokers who are attempting to quit,
unless contraindicated.
5.
If selected, use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) for at least
eight to twelve weeks, whereas varenicline should be used for at
least twelve weeks.
6.
Combination therapy (e.g. two NRTs, a non-NRT, e.g. bupropion
with an NRT) is better than monotherapy in smoking cessation
treatment and may be most useful for those smokers at highest risk
of relapse.
7.
Use smoking cessation medications with caution in special populations (e.g. children and adolescents, pregnant, breastfeeding
women, psychiatric and substance abuse disorder patients).
8.
Arrange a minimum of six to eight face to face follow-up sessions for
smoking cessation interventions in six months through counselling
support team (health education officer, pharmacists or any officer
trained for quit smoking services).
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Recommendation 1
•
Risk reduction strategies should be advocated to reduce the risk of
developing cognitive decline and/or dementia. These include:
 physical activity
 tobacco cessation
 interventions for alcohol use disorders
 management of hypertension
 management of diabetes
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
3. ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS
The evaluation of dementia should be targeted at patients who present
with memory complaints (by patients themselves and/or carer), have
clinical suspicion of cognitive impairment or are at increased risk for
dementia as well as elderly patients who have questionable mental
capacity.31 The evidence on routine screening for cognitive impairment
among asymptomatic community-dwelling adults age 65 and older is
insufficient to determine the balance of its benefits and harms.32
Initial assessment may be performed using various cognitive assessment
tools. If dementia is suspected on clinical assessment, laboratory tests
for basic dementia screening should be performed that include full
blood count, biochemistry tests (glucose, lipid, electrolytes, renal and
liver function tests, and calcium level), thyroid function test and, serum
vitamin B12 and folate levels, to exclude potentially reversible causes
as shown in Table 2 and to identify risk factors for dementia. When the
initial evaluation is suggestive of dementia, patients need to be referred
to specialist services (e.g. geriatrics/psychiatry/neurology) for further
assessment and confirmation of diagnosis. Refer to Algorithm 1 on
Early Detection of Dementia.
Table 2: Some dementia-mimicking conditions
•
Laboratory tests for basic dementia screening are indicated to
exclude dementia-mimicking conditions.
Conditions that can be excluded by laboratory tests
Hypothyroidism
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Folate deficiency
Hypercalcaemia
Neurosyphilis
HIV-related dementia
Conditions that can be excluded by imaging/EEG
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Subdural haemorrhage
Brain tumour
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Autoimmune/limbic encephalitis
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
3.1 Assessment
3.1.1 Clinical Assessment
A detailed history from patient and reliable informants, and a
comprehensive physical examination are the basis of clinical evaluation
for dementia. Clinical assessment should include cognitive domain and
non-cognitive domain as well. During clinical assessment, clinicians
should exclude delirium and other mental disorders before diagnosing
dementia.
•
Cognitive domain
There are many cognitive assessment tools available to support the
diagnosis of dementia. It can be divided into informant-rated instruments
and direct patient assessment instruments. Summary of the commonly
used cognitive assessment tools are shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Common cognitive assessment tools in clinical practice
*copyrighted
Cognitive assessment
tools
Accuracy
Validation in
local languages
Sensitivity
(95% CI)
Specificity
(95% CI)
Informant-rated
1.
Cut-off point of 2:
Direct patient assessment
AD8 Dementia
Screening
Interview33, level II-2
2.
1.
2.
0.92 (0.86 - 0.96) 0.64 (0.39 - 0.82)
0.91 (0.80 - 0.96) 0.86 (0.74 - 0.93)
Cut-off point of 3:
0.91 (0.80 - 0.96) 0.76 (0.57 - 0.89)
Range 0.75 - 0.86 Range 0.38 - 0.90
Cut-off point >3.0 - 3.3:
Informant Questionnaire
on Cognitive Decline
in the Elderly
(IQCODE)34, level III
Yes: Malay
Yes: Malay,
Mandarin
Yes: Malay,
Mandarin
Yes: Malay,
Mandarin
No
No
No
Mini-Cog35, level I
Cut-off point <7:
Abbreviated Mental
Test Score
(AMTS)36, level III
3.
Mini–Mental State
Examination
(MMSE)*35, level I
4.
Montreal Cognitive
Assessment
(MoCA)37, level III
0.81 (0.76 - 0.86) 0.84 (0.83–0.85)
0.81 (0.78 - 0.84) 0.89 (0.87 - 0.91)
5.
6.
Addenbrooke's Cognitive
Examination-III
(ACE-III)*38, level III
0.96 0.68
Yes
No language bias
0.92 0.74
Cut-off points 18 - 26:
Range
0.77 - 1.00
Range
0.51 - 0.87
Visual Cognitive
Assessment Test
(VCAT)39, level II-2
7.
No
0.93 0.96
Saint Louis University
Mental Status
(SLUMS)40, level III
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
A systematic review on Cognitive Assessment Tools in Asia showed
that educational bias was present in 74% of the studies with wide
range of sensitivity and specificity which may lead to over estimation of
dementia prevalence.41, level II-3 Hence, diagnosis of dementia should not
be made based on cognitive assessment score solely. The assessment
score can be used to support the diagnosis of dementia and to monitor
the disease progress. The choice of cognitive assessment tool depends
on the clinical setting and the experience of the clinician. Refer to
Appendix 4 on Initial Assessment Tools in Dementia.
Further evaluation with detailed neuropsychological tests can be
considered if the diagnosis of dementia is still doubtful after initial
assessment or to determine the subtype of dementia.42
•
Non-cognitive domain
Two systematic reviews on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI)
showed that:
 it was able to identify behavioural and psychological symptoms
in persons with Alzheimer’s dementia43, level III
 the items on irritability, agitation, anxiety, apathy, sleep
disturbances and delusion exerted the most impact on caregiver
for PWD44, level III
The NPI and Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease Rating Scale
(BEHAVE-AD) were utilised:
 to
assess
the
presence
and
severity
of
behavioural
and psychological symptoms in PWD with proven good
psychometric properties, sensitivity to pharmacological and
non-pharmacological interventions, and applicability to various
institutional, outpatient and community settings45, level III
 in particular, to identify delusions and hallucinations in PWD
among the nursing home residents46, level III
A cut-off score ≤5 and ≤7 for Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia
(CSDD) and Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)
respectively give a 100% sensitivity in the screening of depression in
nursing home residents with dementia when the source of information
is from the professional caregivers.47, level III Geriatric Depression Scale
(GDS) is also an effective screening tool for depression in the older
people.10
A systematic review on instrumental activities of daily living (IADL)
showed that Disability Assessment for Dementia (DAD) and Bristol
Activities of Daily Living Scale (Bristol ADL) had the best ratings among
12 questionnaires despite lack of psychometric properties.48, level III
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
In another systematic review on caregiver burden, the Zarit Burden
Interview (ZBI, 22-item version) had strong psychometric properties
[reliability (Cronbach’s alpha ranging from 0.70 to 0.93) and validity]
and had been used for caregivers in the care of PWD.49, level III
Recommendation 2
•
The diagnosis of dementia should be based on detailed history and
physical examination, and supported by cognitive, functional and
behavioural evaluation.
3.1.2 Imaging and Biomarkers
•
Structural neuroimaging
Structural neuroimaging with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is usually offered in the assessment of people
with suspected dementia to exclude reversible causes of cognitive
decline and other cerebral pathologies, and to assist in subtype
diagnosis.42; 50 The second edition of this CPG recommends structural
neuroimaging e.g. CT and MRI brain to be done where available in the
evaluation of dementia to exclude intracranial pathology.10
Some conditions that mimic dementia can be detected and excluded by
structural neuroimaging are listed in Table 2.
A narrative review of structural MRI on patients with AD revealed cerebral
atrophy. The progression of atrophy follows Braak staging and is first
observed at medial temporal lobe structures, including hippocampus
and entorhinal cortex with a reduction of 26% and 40% respectively
compared with controls. Other limbic structures including amygdala,
olfactory bulb tract, cingulate gyrus, and thalamus are involved later. As
the disease progresses, the atrophy spreads to cortical regions causing
volume reduction.51, level III Visual rating scales for medial temporal lobe
may be useful to grade the degree of medial temporal atrophy on CT
or MRI.52, level III
MRI is recommended if dementia subtype is uncertain and VaD is
suspected. CT can be used if MRI is unavailable or contraindicated. It
is readily available and better tolerated. However, VaD should not be
diagnosed based solely on vascular lesion burden on imaging because
the extent of vascular damage required to impair a person’s cognitive
function is still unclear.42
•
Functional neuroimaging
NICE recommends further testing with functional neuroimaging should
only be considered if it helps to diagnose a dementia subtype and
change the patient’s subsequent management.42
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron
emission
tomography
(FDGPET) or perfusion single-photon emission CT (SPECT) can be
considered if the dementia diagnosis is uncertain and AD or FTD
is
suspected.
Iodine
123-radiolabeled
2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane (123I-FP-CIT) SPECT or
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) cardiac scintigraphy can
be considered if the dementia diagnosis is uncertain and DLB is
suspected.42 A Cochrane systematic review showed that dopamine
transporter (DAT) imaging is a promising test for diagnosing DLB,
though the evidence was derived from only one small study. A normal
DAT imaging may be an accurate means to exclude the diagnosis of
DLB.53, level III
Two Cochrane systematic reviews did not support routine use of
FDG-PET and 11C-labeled Pittsburgh compound B-positron emission
tomography (11C-PIB-PET) scans for the early diagnosis of AD and other
dementia subtypes in people with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI).54-55,
level III In fact, an Australian guideline recommends that SPECT should
not be used to differentiate MCI from dementia.50
•
Electroencephalogram
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is not routinely used in the investigation
of dementia.42; 50 It should be considered when there is rapidly
progressive cognitive decline and atypical features of dementia e.g.
CJD, autoimmune/limbic encephalitis.
A systematic review of dementia subtypes showed that a normal EEG
result rendered a diagnosis of DLB very unlikely. Non-specific slowing
of background rhythm on EEG was seen in >90% of DLB cases as
opposed to an estimated 10% of AD cases.56, level III
•
Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers
After clinical assessment and structural neuroimaging, if the diagnosis
remains uncertain and AD is suspected, lumbar puncture may be
considered to examine the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for total tau or total
tau and phosphorylated-tau 181, and amyloid beta 1-42 or amyloid beta
1-42 and amyloid beta 1-40.42
In view of insufficient and heterogeneity of evidence, a Cochrane
systematic review did not recommend the use of CSF tau and CSF
tau/amyloid beta ratio to identify people with MCI who would clinically
convert to AD later.57, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Recommendation 3
•
Structural neuroimaging (computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging) should be done in evaluation of dementia to
exclude reversible causes of cognitive decline and other intracranial
pathology.
•
Functional neuroimaging may be considered if the diagnosis of
dementia is uncertain.
•
Electroencephalogram should be considered in rapidly progressive
cognitive decline and atypical features of dementia.
3.2 Diagnostic Criteria
There are a few diagnostic criteria available for each subtype of
dementia, the majority are for clinical use and some are for research
purpose (refer to Table 4). Major changes have been made to diagnostic
criteria for dementia in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) published in 2013. Major neurocognitive
disorder is used to replace dementia while mild neurocognitive disorder
is introduced for MCI. It only requires decline in one or more of the
cognitive domains, which is severe enough to interfere with daily
activities, to diagnose major neurocognitive disorder. The latest edition
of DSM-5 helps clinicians to diagnose different types of dementia more
easily. Another diagnostic criteria that can be used in the diagnosis of
dementia is the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision
(ICD-10). Refer to Appendix 5 on DSM-5 and Appendix 6 on ICD-10
Table 4. Diagnostic Criteria for Subtypes of Dementia
Alzheimer’s Disease
Vascular Dementia
Mixed Dementia
Parkinson’s Disease
Dementia (PDD)
Dementia of Lewy
Body (DLB)
Frontotemporal
Dementia (FTD)
• National Institute on Aging and
Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA)
• National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke and
Association Internationale pour la
Recherche et l'Enseignement en
Neurosciences (NINDS-AIREN)
• Alzheimer's Disease Diagnostic and
Treatment Centers (ADDTC)
-
• Movement Disorder Society (MDS)
guidelines for diagnosis of PDD
• Fourth consensus report of the
DLB Consortium
• International consensus criteria for
behavioural variant FTD
DSM-5
or
ICD-10
Dementia Subtypes
Diagnostic Criteria
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Recommendation 4
•
Diagnosis of dementia should be made based on Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) or the
International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10)
Refer to Algorithm 2 on Diagnosis of Dementia.
3.3 Stages
The severity of dementia can be staged according to functional status
as stated in DSM-5 as shown below.58
In addition, severity of dementia can also be assessed using the Global
Deterioration Scale for Assessment of Primary Degenerative Dementia
and Functional Assessment Staging (FAST). FAST is especially useful
for grading severity in more advanced stages of dementia (FAST stage
6 and 7). Refer to Appendix 7a and 7b for the mentioned scales.
Severity
Functional status
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living
(e.g. housework, managing money).
Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g. feeding,
dressing).
Fully dependent
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
4. TREATMENT
Specialists in the care of dementia (psychiatrists/geriatric-psychiatrists/
neuropsychiatrists, neurologists/geriatricians and physicians or family
medicine specialists with special interest training in geriatric care)
should initiate treatment in PWD. Once treatment is initiated, PWD
should be regularly reviewed to assess cognition, behavioural and
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), global functioning and
potential side effects. Management of dementia can be divided into nonpharmacological and pharmacological approach. Non-pharmacological
interventions should be the mainstay of treatment in PWD throughout
all stages of the condition.
4.1 Non-pharmacological Interventions
Non-pharmacological interventions attempt to promote positive
effects on cognition, quality of life, mood and, other behavioural and
psychological symptoms of dementia. They have shown to have
potential benefits in the management of dementia.
•
Cognition and Quality of life
A meta-analysis showed that physical activity interventions improved
cognitive function (SMD=0.42, 95% 0.23 to 0.62) compared with control
in PWD. In terms of type of intervention, positive results were seen in
combined exercise interventions (SMD=0.59, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.86) and
aerobic-only exercise interventions (SMD=0.41, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.76)
only. Both high and low frequency interventions were also effective.59, level I
There are three major types of cognitive approaches:
 cognitive stimulation - entails exposure to and engagement
with activities and materials involving some degree of cognitive
processing
 cognitive training - a specific training exercise geared to specific
cognitive functions and, includes practice and repetition which
may be computer-assisted
 cognitive rehabilitation - include working on personal goals,
often using external cognitive aids and with some use of learning
strategies
In two Cochrane systematic reviews on mild to moderate dementia:
 moderate quality evidence showed that cognitive stimulation
therapy given either through specific manual or general activities
improved cognitive function (SMD=0.41, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.57); it
can be carried out at patient’s own home, day care, outpatient or
at residential setting by caregiver with minimal training60, level I
 low to moderate quality evidence demonstrated that cognitive
training was not associated with improvement in global measure
of cognition (SMD=0.10, 95% CI -0.21 to 0.40)61, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
NICE recommends group cognitive stimulation therapy to people with
mild to moderate dementia. It also recommends cognitive rehabilitation
or occupational therapy to support functional ability in the same group
of PWD.42
In a Cochrane systematic review, reminiscence therapy (RT) showed
no improvement in self-rated quality of life (QoL) compared with no
treatment in PWD (SMD=0.11, 95% CI -0.12 to 0.33). The quality of
evidence was moderate based on GRADE.62, level I However, NICE
recommends group RT to promote cognition, independence and wellbeing of PWD.42
In another systematic review on cognition and quality of life, spirituality
and religious activities delayed cognitive decline and improve QoL of
PWD.63, level II-2
Recommendation 5
•
To improve cognitive function in mild to moderate dementia, cognitive
stimulation therapy and physical activity can be offered
•
Behaviour and Psychological symptoms
Before starting non-pharmacological or pharmacological treatment for
distress or BPSD in PWD, NICE recommends structured assessment
exploring and addressing possible reasons for their distress including
clinical or environmental causes e.g. pain, delirium or inappropriate
care. Psychosocial and environmental interventions should be offered
as initial and ongoing management, to reduce distress in PWD.42
Anxiety and depression are very common in PWD. Psychological
interventions have been suggested as a potential treatment for this
population.
In a Cochrane systematic review, psychological interventions, e.g.
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and, multifaceted and semi-tailored
interventions (e.g. counselling sessions, education and outreach
support to patients and carers) reduced depressive symptoms (SMD=
-0.22, 95% CI -0.41 to -0.03) and clinician-rated anxiety (MD= -4.57,
95% CI -7.81 to -1.32) compared with treatment as usual in dementia.
The primary papers were of low to moderate quality.64, level I
PWD who are being cared in long-term care settings are often not
involved in meaningful activities. Offering them activities may improve
their quality of life and reduce challenging behaviour. Nevertheless, in
a Cochrane systematic review, personally-tailored activities showed
no significant reduction in challenging behaviour and improvement in
self-rated QoL among PWD in long-term care setting. However, the
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
evidence is of low quality.65, level I On the other hand, NICE recommends
to offer personalised activities in PWD with agitation or aggression to
promote engagement, pleasure and interest.42
In a meta-analysis of three high-quality RCTs, multicomponent
interventions for caregivers showed 33% less institutionalisation after
6 - 12 months (RR=0.67, 95% CI 0.49 to 0.92) compared with minimal
support or usual care in mild to moderately severe AD. The intervention
were long-term programmes comprised of education and support for
caregivers plus other components e.g. respite care and support groups,
tailored to the needs of PWD.66, level I
Other non-pharmacological interventions on PWD addressed in
systematic reviews/meta-analysis are shown in Table 5.
Table 5: Other non-pharmacological interventions on PWD
Interventions
Effectiveness
Quality of evidence
Music-based
therapy vs usual
care67, level I
• Reduced depressive symptoms
(SMD= -0.27, 95% CI -0.45 to -0.09)
• Reduced overall behaviour problems
(SMD= -0.23, 95% CI -0.46 to -0.01)
Moderate
Massage and
touch vs daily
routine care
or being
accompanied69, level I
Improved:
• behavioural problems (SMD= -0.39, 95%
CI -0.53 to -0.25)
• negative emotions (SMD= -0.60, 95%
CI -1.14 to -0.06)
Low to moderate
(GRADE)
Aromatherapy vs
placebo68, level I
• Equivocal findings on agitation and
behavioural symptoms
Very low (GRADE)
Validation
therapy vs usual
care70, level I
• Insufficient evidence on behaviour and
emotional state
Low
Light therapy vs
usual care71, level I
• No effect on sleep, challenging
behaviour or psychiatric symptoms
Moderate
Simulated
presence therapy
vs usual
care72, level I
• Inconclusive efficacy on behavioural
and psychological symptoms, and QoL
Very low (GRADE)
Snoezelen vs
control73, level I
• No effect on mood, behaviour,
communication and cognition
Low
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Recommendation 6
•
In people with dementia having behavioural and psychological
symptoms:
 explore and address possible clinical or environmental causes/
triggering factors
 offer psychosocial and environmental interventions as initial and
ongoing treatment:
-
psychological intervention for depressive symptoms and/or
anxiety
-
personalised and tailored activities for agitation and
aggression
Refer to Algorithm 3 on Treatment of Dementia
4.2 Pharmacological Interventions
No new drug has been licensed for the treatment of dementia since the
previous edition of the CPG published in 2009.
The
three
acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors
(AChEI)
(donepezil,
galantamine and rivastigmine) as well as the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor antagonist (memantine) are still the mainstay
treatment in managing PWD.
AChEI works by augmenting the levels of acetylcholine in the brain
to compensate for the losses of cholinergic function. Additionally,
galantamine also modulates activity at nicotinic receptors.
Memantine is a voltage-dependent, moderate-affinity, uncompetitive
NMDA receptor antagonist that inhibits the effects of pathologically
elevated tonic levels of glutamate that may lead to neuronal
dysfunction.74
•
Available pharmacological treatment for dementia is not curative;
however they are aimed at managing symptoms (cognitive, noncognitive and behavioural), improve independence and preserve
function.42
Currently
under
the
MoH
Medicines
Formulary,
donepezil,
rivastigmine and memantine are listed and indicated for use in AD
while only rivastigmine is indicated for PDD. Refer to Appendix 8 on
Pharmacological Treatment of Dementia.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
•
For those who require regular medication, the ‘3T’ approach is a
good practice:10
 treatments should have a specific target symptom
 the starting dose should be low and then titrated upwards
 treatments should be time limited
4.2.1 Alzheimer’s Disease
Donepezil
a. Cognition
i. All disease severity
In a Cochrane systematic review of moderate quality RCTs, donepezil
10 mg was more effective than placebo at 24 - 26 weeks in AD across
all severity based on MMSE (MD=1.05, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.37).75, level I
ii. Mild to moderate severity
Donepezil 10 mg/day was more effective than placebo in mild
to moderate AD at 24 - 26 weeks based on Alzheimer’s Disease
Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog) (MD= -2.67, 95% CI -3.31
to -2.02).75, level I
Donepezil 5 mg/day was more effective than placebo in moderate AD at
12 - 24 weeks based on MMSE (MD=1.22, 95% CI 0.54 to 1.90).75, level I
iii. Severe
Benefit in cognitive function was seen with donepezil 10 mg/day
compared with placebo in severe AD based on Severe Impairment
Battery (SIB) (MD=5.92, 95% CI 4.53 to 7.31).75, level I
There was no difference in the outcome between donepezil 5 mg/day
and 10 mg/day at 24 weeks based on MMSE or SIB. However, the
outcome was in favour for 10 mg/day for ADAS-Cog at 24 weeks (MD=
-1.05, 95% CI -1.80 to -0.30).75, level I
b. Safety
Mild adverse events (AEs), namely nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea,
were higher in PWD on donepezil 10 mg/day:75, level I
•
compared with 5 mg/day at 26 weeks (OR=1.56, 95% CI 1.07 to
2.28)
•
compared with placebo at 24 weeks (OR=1.59, 95% CI 1.23 to
2.05)
There was no difference seen between donepezil 5 mg/day and placebo
at 24 weeks.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Rivastigmine
a. Cognition
In another Cochrane systematic review of moderate quality evidence,
rivastigmine 6 to 12 mg/day twice daily or 9.5 mg/day patch improved
cognition in mild to moderate AD at 26 weeks compared with placebo
based on:76, level I
•
MMSE (WMD=0.74, 95% CI 0.52 to 0.97)
•
ADAS-Cog test score (WMD= -1.79, 95%CI -2.21 to -1.37)
MMSE results were in favour of rivastigmine (twice daily capsules)
compared with placebo at 26 weeks at the following dosages:76, level I
•
1 - 4 mg/day (WMD=0.43, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.78)
•
6 - 12 mg/day (WMD=0.82, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.08)
Benefit was also seen in MMSE for rivastigmine patch compared with
placebo in AD at 24 weeks for different dosages:76, level I
•
20 cm2 (17.4 mg/day) patch (MD=0.90, 95% CI 0.32 to 1.48)
•
10 cm2 (9.5 mg/day) patch (WMD=0.64, 95% CI 0.26 to 1.02)
However, no difference was seen in MMSE in similar comparison using
rivastigmine 5 cm2 (4.6 mg/day) patch.
Rivastigmine 10 cm2 (9.5 mg/day) patch vs 6 to 12 mg/day twice daily
capsules showed no difference in MMSE for AD at 24 weeks.76, level I
In an RCT comparing rivastigmine 13.3 mg/ 24 h patch vs 4.6 mg/24 h
patch in severe AD, the higher dose patch was superior to lower dose
in terms of:77, level I
•
cognition by SIB at 16 weeks (p<0.0001) and 24 weeks
(p<0.0001)
•
global function by Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study –
Clinical Global Impression of Change (ADCS-CGIC) (p=0.0023)
However, there was no difference in behaviour using NPI-12.
b. Safety
In terms of tolerability, rivastigmine 6 to 12 mg/day twice daily capsules
or 9.5 mg/day patch had at least one AE compared with placebo at 26
weeks (OR=2.16, 95% CI 1.82 to 2.57). At these doses, the transdermal
patch may have fewer side effects than the capsules but comparable
effectiveness.76, level I
Apart from that, 20 cm2 (17.4 mg/24 h) patch had higher incidence of at
least one AE (OR=2.28, 95% CI 1.64, 3.16) than 10 cm2 (9.5 mg/24 h)
patch (OR=1.63, 95% CI 1.29 to 2.06) when they were compared with
placebo.76, level I
The incidence of AEs is greater with 13.3 mg/24 h (15 cm2) patch than
9.5 mg/24 h (10 cm2) patch (75.0% vs 68.2% respectively). Most of the
AEs are mild and decrease over time.78, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Galantamine
An HTA of variable quality evidence showed a benefit in ADAS-Cog
from galantamine compared with placebo at:74, level I
•
12 - 16 weeks (WMD= -2.39, 95% CI -2.80 to -1.97)
•
21 - 26 weeks (WMD= -2.96, 95% CI -3.41 to -2.51)
Benefit was also seen in behaviour based on NPI at 21 - 26 weeks
(WMD= -1.46, 95% CI -2.59 to -0.34). There were higher percentage
of AEs in galantamine compared with placebo which were mainly
gastrointestinal.
A network meta-analysis of moderate quality studies found superior
effectiveness of galantamine 24 mg daily compared with placebo in
mild to moderate AD (SMD= -0.50, 95% CI -0.61 to -0.40).79, level I
NICE recommends the three AChEIs (donepezil, galantamine and
rivastigmine) as monotherapy options for managing mild to moderate
AD.42
Memantine
a. Cognition
i.
Mild
A Cochrane systematic review found no difference between memantine
and placebo based on ADAS-Cog (SMD= -0.03, 95% CI -0.19 to 0.13)
and Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Change (CIBIC+) (SMD=
-0.08, 95% CI -0.27 to 0.12).80, level I
ii. Moderate to Severe
In the same review as above, moderate- to low-certainty evidence
showed that memantine was more effective than placebo based on SIB
(SMD= -0.27, 95% CI -0.34 to -0.21) and CIBIC+ (SMD= -0.20, 95% CI
-0.28 to -0.13).80, level I
iii. Moderate to Severe ± AChEI
Sub-analysis based on AChEI use showed that memantine was also
effective against placebo based on:80, level I
•
SIB
 with AChEI (SMD= -0.24, 95% CI -0.33 to -0.14)
 without AChEI (SMD= -0.33, 95% CI -0.43 to -0.23)
•
CIBIC+
 with AChEI (SMD= -0.21, 95% CI -0.32 to -0.09)
 without AChEI (SMD= -0.20, 95% CI -0.30 to -0.10)
b. Safety
The same Cochrane systematic review found no difference between
memantine and placebo in the number of people with at least one AE,
regardless of dementia aetiology or severity (RR=1.03, 95% CI 1.00 to
1.06).80, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Another meta-analysis showed no difference between memantine and
placebo in AD based on:81, level I
•
AEs (OR=1.05, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.25)
•
serious AEs (OR=0.89, 95% CI 0.70 to 1.13)
•
mortality (OR=1.03, 95% CI 0.74 to 1.44)
NICE recommends memantine monotherapy as an option in:
•
moderate AD where there is intolerance or contraindication to
AChEI
•
severe AD
Recommendation 7
•
Donepezil should be offered in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) of all
severity.
 Rivastigmine is an option in mild to moderate AD.
•
Memantine may be considered in moderate to severe AD as
monotherapy or in combination with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.
Recently, novel therapy for management of Alzheimer’s dementia
which is anti-amyloid monoclonal antibody has garnered attention. It
reduces amyloid beta plaques in the brain, the accumulation of which
is a defining pathophysiological feature of Alzheimer disease. However,
strong evidence is needed before it can be recommended.
4.2.2 Vascular Dementia
Donepezil
a. Cognition
In vascular dementia, donepezil is significantly more effective than
placebo based on:82, level I
•
V-ADAS-cog at 12, 18 and 24 weeks (p<0.05)
•
MMSE at 24 weeks (p=0.0301)
c. Safety
Donepezil is well tolerated; most adverse events are transient and mild
to moderate in severity.82, level I
Rivastigmine
a. Cognition
A Cochrane systematic review found benefit in MMSE (MD=0.60, 95%
CI 0.11 to 1.09) with rivastigmine (3 - 12 mg/day) compared with placebo
in probable vascular dementia at 24 weeks. There was no significant
difference between:83, level I
•
rivastigmine 6 mg/day and placebo in MMSE for subcortical
vascular dementia
•
rivastigmine 3 - 9 mg/day and placebo in ADAS-Cog for MCI and
cognitive impairment no dementia (CIND)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
b. Safety
There were significantly higher rates of vomiting, nausea, diarrhoea
and anorexia in rivastigmine compared with placebo.83, level I
Memantine
a. Cognition
A Cochrane systematic review found probable small benefit favouring
memantine against placebo based on ADAS-Cog (MD= -2.15, 95% CI
-3.25 to -1.05).80, level I
b. Behaviour
The same review showed low certainty evidence favouring memantine
against placebo based on Nurses’ Observation Scale for Geriatric
Patients (NOSGER) (SMD= -0.20, 95% CI -0.37 to -0.03).80, level I
c. Safety
Refer to Subchapter 4.2.1 (Memantine - Safety).
Donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine and memantine comparison
a. Cognition
In a network meta-analysis on vascular cognitive impairment, donepezil
10 mg/day and rivastigmine 6 mg/day were superior than placebo based
on MMSE with MD of 0.84 (95% CI 0.14 to 1.57) and 1.37 (95% CI 0.22
to 2.53) respectively. The derived dose-based hierarchy of the cognitive
enhancers’ efficacy was as follows: rivastigmine 6 mg > donepezil 10 mg
> donepezil 5 mg > rivastigmine 12 mg > memantine 20 mg > placebo.
Meanwhile the derived dose-based hierarchy based on ADAS-cog were:
memantine 20 mg > galantamine 24 mg > donepezil 10 mg > donepezil 5
mg > rivastigmine 12 mg > placebo > rivastigmine 9 mg.84, level I
b. Safety
The derived hierarchy of the risk of total AEs was donepezil 10 mg >
galantamine > donepezil 5 mg > memantine > placebo > rivastigmine.84, level I
NICE recommends only to consider AChEI or memantine for people
with vascular dementia if they have suspected co-morbid Alzheimer’s
disease, Parkinson’s disease dementia or dementia with Lewy bodies.42
•
Patients with vascular dementia with concurrent vascular risk factors
should be treated with recommended drugs for the management of
the medical problems.10
Recommendation 8
•
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or memantine may be considered in
vascular dementia.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
4.2.3 Lewy Body Disease (Dementia with Lewy Body/Parkinson’s
Disease Dementia)
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
a. Cognition
A Cochrane systematic review of six moderate quality RCTs showed an
improvement in the MMSE favouring treatment with AChEI (rivastigmine
and donepezil) compared with control in DLB, PDD and cognitive
impairment in Parkinson’s disease (CIND-PD) (WMD=1.08, 95% CI
0.50 to 1.66). However, subgroup analysis showed:85, level I
•
positive effect in PDD (WMD=1.09, 95% CI 0.45 to 1.73) and,
PDD and CIND-PD (WMD=1.05, 95% CI 0.42 to 1.68)
•
no difference in DLB (WMD=1.24, 95% CI 0.28 to 2.76)
A recent meta-analysis found that results on MMSE and MoCA favoured
AChEI (rivastigmine and donepezil) and memantine compared with
control in PDD and DLB (SMD=0.46, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.55).86, level I The
15 studies used in the meta-analysis were small and short duration but
of good quality.
b. Behaviour
Two meta-analyses showed improvement in behaviour outcomes with:
•
AChEI compared with control in DLB, PDD and CIND-PD
(SMD=-0.20, 95%CI -0.36 to -0.04); the effect was only seen in
RCTs using rivastigmine and lasting ≥18 weeks85, level I
•
AChEI and memantine compared with control in PDD and DLB
(MD= 1.73, 95% CI 2.84 to -0.62)86, level I
c. Safety
In the two meta-analyses mentioned above, treatment groups
experienced more adverse events than control groups with:
•
OR=1.64, 95% CI 1.26 to 2.15; there was no difference in severe
adverse events85, level I
•
RR=1.09, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.1686, level I
Rivastigmine was also found to be less tolerable than donepezil and
memantine.
Memantine
a. Cognition
A Cochrane systematic review found very low certainty evidence that
memantine had no difference with placebo based on MMSE.80, level I
b. Behaviour
There was no difference between memantine with placebo based on
NPI in the same review.80, level I
c. Safety
Refer to Subchapter 4.2.1 (Memantine - Safety).
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Recommendation 9
•
Rivastigmine or donepezil may be considered for dementia with
Lewy body and Parkinson’s disease dementia.
4.2.4 Frontotemporal Dementia
Donepezil
A systematic review found low level evidence on discontinuation of
donepezil resulting in reduction in NPI total and ZBI scores after two
weeks of the discontinuation in FTD.87, level I
Rivastigmine
In the same review as above, an open-label study demonstrated
amelioration of behavioural changes after 12 months treatment with
rivastigmine in patients with a probable diagnosis of FTD.87, level I
Galantamine
A systematic review found that galantamine was not effective based
on Frontal Behavioural Inventory (FBI), Western Aphasia Battery
(WAB), Clinical Global Impressions-severity (CGI-S) and Clinical
Global Impressions-improvement (CGI-I) in behavioural variant of FTD
(bvFTD).88, level I Another systematic review showed that it was also not
associated with improvement of psychiatric symptoms in FTD.87, level I
However, galantamine was found to be well tolerated.88, level I
Memantine
A meta-analysis and two systematic review of RCTs showed that
memantine had no significant difference with placebo based on:
•
CGI, MMSE, NPI and ZBI89, level I
•
CGIC, CIBIC+, MMSE, NPI, MDRS, ZBI and DAD88, level I
•
NPI87, level I
Memantine was also found to be well tolerated.80, level I; 89, level I; 88, level I
The lack of effectiveness of memantine discussed above were
supported by a later Cochrane systematic review based on MMSE and
NPI.80, level I
•
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of AChEI or
memantine to patients with FTD.
4.2.5 Behavioural and Psychological Symptoms
a. Effectiveness
Antipsychotics
A systematic review found that antipsychotics (APs) had small but
significant effect in reducing BPSD in PWD compared to placebo
(SMD= -0.13, 95% CI -0.21 to -0.06).90, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
A network meta-analysis found that risperidone was more effective than
placebo in reducing agitation based on agitation rating scale of CohenMansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI), NPI-A, BEHAVE-AD-A and
Neurobehavioral Rating Scale-Agitation (NBRS-A) in PWD (OR=1.96,
95% CI 1.49 to 2.59) but haloperidol appeared less effective compared
with nearly all comparators.91, level I
Another network meta-analysis on PWD with BPSD compared APs with
placebo and showed:92, level I
•
aripiprazole improved outcomes on NPI (SMD= -0.17, 95% CI
-0.31 to -0.02)
•
risperidone improved outcomes on CMAI (SMD= -0.26, 95% CI
-0.37 to -0.15)
There were no significant differences on effectiveness between the
APs.
Two RCTs assessed the effectiveness and safety of brexpiprazole
(fixed and flexible doses) compared with placebo on agitation in
patients with AD. The first RCT (NCT01862640) showed brexpiprazole
2 mg/day had greater improvement in CMAI Total score at week 12 than
placebo (adjusted MD= -3.77, 95% CI -7.38 to -0.17). The second RCT
(NCT01922258) on brexpiprazole 0.5 - 2 mg showed no difference in
the CMAI Total score at week 12 (adjusted MD= -2.34, 95% CI -5.49
to 0.82). However post-hoc analysis on patients titrated to maximum
brexpiprazole dose (2 mg) at week 4 showed improvement in in the
score at week 12 (adjusted MD= -5.06, 95% CI -8.99 to -1.13).93, level I
Antidepressants
A systematic review found very low-quality evidence that sertraline did
not have significant effect on global BPSD outcomes based on NPI
compared with placebo in PWD and concomitant depression.90, level I
The above network meta-analysis also showed that selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors as a class reduced BPSD in PWD who developed
agitation based on CMAI, NPI-A, BEHAVE-AD-A and NBRS-A
(OR=1.61, 95% CI 1.02 to 2.53) compared with placebo.91, level I
NICE recommends not to offer antidepressants in mild to moderate
depression for people with mild to moderate dementia unless they have
pre-existing severe mental health problem.42
Mood stabilisers
A meta-analysis on mood stabilisers as an adjunct to conventional antidementia drugs on BPSD in AD suggested a significant effect in favour
of placebo over valproate on NPI total (WMD=3.71, 95% CIs 0.15 to
7.26).94, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
A Cochrane meta-analysis of moderate-quality evidence of two studies
showed no difference between valproate and placebo in total Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) (measuring agitation) in PWD after
six weeks of treatment.95, level I
Others
In a systematic review, a low quality RCT showed that pain management
with analgesics reduced global BPSD in PWD (SMD= -0.24, 95% CI
-0.47 to -0.01).90, level I
A Cochrane systematic review of small trials found some beneficial
effects on sleep from trazodone and orexin antagonists with no harmful
effects.96, level I
A systematic review concluded that benzodiazepine use to be avoided
in the elderly based on results from a meta-analysis of 45 RCTs and
review of 24 RCTs.97, level I
b. Safety
Non-significant differences in treatment acceptability were observed
for nearly all medications when compared with placebo except for
oxcarbazepine.91, level I
The network meta-analysis which used SUCRAs in its analysis
showed:92, level I
•
for somnolence or sedation: placebo was ranked as the safest,
followed by risperidone, aripiprazole and olanzapine while
quetiapine was the least safe
•
for EPSs: quetiapine and aripiprazole ranked as the safest
agents, followed by olanzapine while risperidone was ranked the
worst
•
for cerebrovascular adverse event: aripiprazole had highest
probability of safety among the drugs, followed by quetiapine,
risperidone and olanzapine
•
for falls, fracture or injury: risperidone and quetiapine ranked in
the top two positions for safety, followed by aripiprazole, placebo
and olanzapine
The Cochrane meta-analysis of low-quality evidence showed a higher
rate of adverse effects among valproate-treated participants compared
with controls (OR=2.02, 95% CI 1.30 to 3.14).95, level I
Two RCTs found no notable difference in the treatment-emergent
adverse events (TEAEs) between brexipiprazole and placebo. The
majority of the TEAE were mild or moderate in severity.93, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
•
United States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) issued a
warning regarding increased mortality associated with the use of AP
in elderly patients with dementia-related psychosis in response to
emerging evidence since 2005.98, level III
•
NICE recommends AP to be offered to PWD who are either at risk of
harming themselves or others, or experiencing symptoms that are
causing them severe distress.42
•
NICE recommends on AP in PWD:42
 the lowest effective dose should be used and for the shortest
possible duration
 should be reassessed regularly and wean off if it is not needed
Recommendation 10
•
Antipsychotics may be considered for behavioural and psychological
symptoms in people with dementia (PWD) where there is a risk of
harming themselves or others.
•
Antidepressants:
 may be considered for PWD who have agitation
 may be prescribed for PWD with pre-existing severe mental
health problem
•
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of mood stabilisers
to treat agitation in PWD
4.2.6 Potentially Inappropriate Prescriptions
PWD often have multiple co-morbidities and require multiple
pharmacotherapies. Examples of commonly used medications include
benzodiazepines, APs and antihistamines. These medications have
high anticholinergic burden (ACB) which causes negative outcomes in
the patients. Therefore, careful consideration is needed before initiating
such medications and, active monitoring and deprescribing should be
carried out whenever possible. Refer to Appendix 9 on Anticholinergic
Burden Score.
American Geriatric Society on Beer’s criteria consider potentially
inappropriate prescription (PIP) as an explicit list of drugs that are
best avoided by older adults in most circumstances or under specific
situations e.g. in certain diseases or conditions.99, level III
Examples of PIP/psychotropics are:
•
first-generation
antihistamines
(e.g.
chlorpheniramine,
hydroxyzine)
•
antispasmodics (e.g. atropine, hyoscine)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
•
antipsychotics
•
antidepressants
•
benzodiazepines
•
gastrointestinal medication (e.g. metoclopramide, proton pump
inhibitors)
•
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
A systematic review of 26 studies found prevalence of PIP in the range
of 13 - 74% for PWD.100, level II-2
In a meta-analysis, the prevalence of PIP was lower in PWD living in
the community compared with those in nursing homes and specialised
care homes [31% (95% CI 9 to 52) vs 42% (95% CI 30 to 55)].101, level II-2
A cross-sectional study showed that an average ACB score >3 during
the first three months initiation of AChEI in PWD increased the risk
of:102, level III
•
treatment modification at one year (HR=1.12, 95% CI 1.02 to
1.24)
•
delirium at one year (HR=1.52, CI 1.17 to 1.96)
•
mortality at two years (HR=1.23, CI 1.06 to 1.41)
NICE recommends to consider minimising the use of medicines
associated with increased ACB and look for alternatives wherever
possible.42
Recommendation 11
•
The use of anticholinergic medications in dementia should be
done cautiously with regular review of indication and deprescribed
whenever possible.
Refer to Algorithm 3 on Treatment of Dementia.
Refer to Appendix 10 on Suggested Guide to Review and
Deprescribe (PIP/Psychotropic) in Dementia.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
5. TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
There is no strong evidence on the effectiveness and safety of Traditional
and Complementary Medicine (TCM) in the treatment of dementia.
In a meta-analysis on PWD, extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb761) of 240
mg/day improved:103, level I
•
cognitive function (WMD= -3.19, 95% CI -3.56 to -2.83)
•
ADL (SMD= -0.45, 95% CI -0.55 to -0.36)
•
global assessment of change (OR=2.47, 95% CI 1.91 to 3.20)
•
behavioural symptoms (WMD= -4.82, 95% CI -5.44 to -4.20)
However, there was significant heterogeneity among the primary
papers. On safety, there were no significant differences between
EGb761 and placebo in the proportion of participants experiencing
any adverse events or serious adverse events for whole group and
subgroup analysis.
Another meta-analysis did not indicate a higher bleeding risk associated
with standardised ginkgo biloba extract compared with placebo.
However, the study population was not entirely on dementia and the
primary papers were mostly of moderate/high risk of bias.104, level I
A Cochrane systematic review found low-certainty evidence that
melatonin doses up to 10 mg may have little or no effect on any major
sleep outcome over eight to 10 weeks in people with AD and sleep
disturbances.96, level I Another meta-analysis of seven RCTs (mainly
moderate quality primary papers) showed melatonin prolonged total
sleep time at night (SMD=0.26, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.51) compared with
placebo in AD patients. However, there was no significant difference
in sleep efficacy between melatonin and placebo (SMD= 0.14, 95% CI
-0.17 to 0.44).105, level I
A Cochrane review could not conclude on the effectiveness and safety
of traditional Chinese herbal medicine for VaD due to poor reporting
and trial methodology of the primary papers.106, level I
There is insufficient evidence to support curcumin supplementation
as an effective means of both preventing and treating dementia and
symptoms of cognitive decline.107, level I
•
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of TCM in the
treatment of dementia.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
6. MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a condition in which individuals
present with cognitive impairment but minimal impairment of
instrumental activities of daily living (IADL). Those with MCI/CIND have
greater risk of developing all types of dementia (RR=3.3, 95% CI 2.5
to 4.5) compared with age-matched participants with no MCI after 2 - 5
years of follow-up.108
a. Diagnostic Criteria
DSM-5 recognises the predementia stage of cognitive impairment.
The condition, which has many features of MCI, is termed mild
neurocognitive disorder. Mild neurocognitive disorder recognises subtle
features of cognitive impairment that are distinct from ageing but do not
represent dementia.58
b. Assessment Tools
It is important to have a baseline cognitive measurement on MMSE
or any cognitive assessment tools for patients with MCI. Majority of
the tools available have cultural, religious or educational biases.
Thus, the interpretation of the result is individually tailored to each
patient. When initial assessment is normal, clinicians can proceed
to neuropsychological test to confirm the diagnosis of MCI. If both
assessments are normal, the subject is recognised as having subjective
memory complaints.
c. Investigation
In MCI, the investigations required are similar as in dementia in order
to rule out other conditions. Refer to Chapter 3 on Diagnosis and
Assessment.
d. Non-pharmacological Interventions
MCI is a subjective complaint of deteriorating memory. After managing
the modifiable risk factors and deprescribing cognitive suppression
medication, it is advisable for patients to undergo non-pharmacological
therapy.
•
Cognitive enhancing therapy
Multimodal Enhancing Cognitive Therapy involved multiple nonpharmacological interventions that support the ability to maintain
cognitive function. It is an intervention to improve cognitive function
in cognitively normal person. These interventions improve and
maintain cognitive function, thus reducing the progression of cognitive
deterioration.109, level I
Although cognitive enhancing therapy has been accepted in the
management of MCI, a systematic review failed to show significant
objective improvement with it.110, level I
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
•
Exercise
Aerobic exercise is known to have cognition-enhancing effects. A
small RCT on adults with amnestic MCI showed that high-intensity
aerobic exercise improved performance of multiple test of executive
function in women, while favourable effects were seen only on Trails B
performance in men.111, level I
•
Diet and supplement
In a systematic review of heterogenous evidence, there were some
improvements in performance, particularly in memory, with the most
consistent results shown by B vitamins in MCI. However, there was no
signiﬁcant effect on progression from MCI to dementia and/or AD with
supplementation of vitamin E, ginkgo biloba or Fortasyn Connect.112, level I
e. Pharmacological Interventions
There is no recent evidence supporting the use of pharmacological
treatment in managing MCI.108
•
Follow-up of patients with MCI is done with serial assessment to
monitor their cognitive status.
•
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of
pharmacological intervention in MCI.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
7. SPECIAL POPULATION
The management of certain populations with early-onset cognitive
impairment is aimed at preventing further deterioration or sequelae of the
cognitive function. This is done with AChEI or specific pharmacological
intervention specific to the causes as well as non-pharmacological
measures. These populations include those with acquired brain injury,
alcohol-related dementia (ARD) and HIV-associated neurocognitive
disorders (HANDs).
7.1 Acquired Brain Injury
In a Cochrane systematic review on chronic cognitive impairment
(≥12 months post-injury) in traumatic brain injury (TBI), rivastigmine
significantly improved only one primary measure i.e. verbal memory
functioning compared with placebo. There was no significant difference
in safety profile.113, level I
Two Cochrane systematic reviews on non-pharmacological interventions
in acquired brain injury showed:
•
cognitive rehabilitation was not effective compared to no
intervention or conventional rehabilitation in improving return to
work, independence in activities of daily living (ADL), community
integration or quality of life for adults with TBI.114, level I
•
music interventions may be beneficial on communication
(SMD=0.75, 95% CI 0.11 to 1.39), naming (MD=9.79, 95% CI
1.37 to 18.21) and speech repetition (MD=8.90, 95% CI 3.25
to 14.55) in persons with post-stroke aphasia compared with
control. However, these findings were based on a small number
of studies with small sample sizes.115, level I
7.2 Alcohol-related Dementia
The prevalence of ARD ranges from 0.12% to 25.6% with more males
being affected. It occurs more consistently at approximately 10% in
early-onset dementia compared with the more scarce data in late-onset
dementia.116, level II-2
Heavy alcohol use could cause ARD from:117, level II-2
•
direct neurotoxic effect with permanent structural and functional
brain damage
•
thiamine deficiency leading to Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
•
risk factor for other conditions that could also damage the brain
(e.g. hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhotic liver
disease)
•
cardiovascular diseases resulting indirectly in vascular dementia
Two systematic reviews on the treatment of ARD showed:
•
for persons with alcohol dependence and Wernicke-Korsakoff
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
syndrome with no triad of acute symptoms, intramuscular (IM)
thiamine at 200 mg/day for two consecutive days was more
effective than 5 mg/day on working memory performance using
the delayed alternation test (MD= -17.90, 95% CI -35.4 to
-0.40)118, level I
•
with the use of extra processing time, explicit encouragement
to generate associations and extra retrieval time, persons with
Korsakoff’s syndrome performed similarly to healthy population
on associative verbal learning procedure119, level II-1
However, the primary papers used in the two reviews had some
methodological limitations.
7.3 HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders
There are different diagnostic approaches for HANDs e.g. 2007 Frascati
criteria, Global Deficit Score and Clinical Mental State Examinations.
Among all, the 2007 Frascati criteria is the most widely used diagnostic
criteria for HANDs120, level II-2 and it consists of three categories:121, level III
•
Asymptomatic
Neurocognitive
Impairment
(ANI)
–
mild
neurocognitive impairment in at least two cognitive domains but
not affecting daily functions
•
Mild Neurocognitive Disorder (MND) – mild neurocognitive
impairment in at least two cognitive domains and has mild
interference with daily functions
•
HIV-associated Dementia (HAD) – severe neurocognitive
impairment in at least two cognitive domains and has marked
difficulty with daily functions
The prevalence of HANDs ranged from 39.1% to 44.4% according to
a meta-analysis on global disease burden of it. MND and HAD were
shown to be lower in patients with higher level of income, current CD4
count and proportion on Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART). These findings
suggested that early ART initiation to maintain a high level of CD4 cell
count and prevent severe immunosuppression was likely to reduce the
prevalence and severity of HANDs.120, level II-2
A meta-analysis on cognitive screening tools to diagnose HANDs
showed that HIV Dementia Scale and International HIV Dementia Scale
had generally poor (0.48) and moderate (0.62) pooled sensitivities.
Thus, both were not ideal tools for identifying a range of neurocognitive
impairment in HIV patients.122, level III Apart from that, the primary papers
were of moderate quality and the heterogeneity was significant.
Every ART agent has different CPE (Central Nervous System [CNS]
Penetration Effectiveness) score and use of combined agents with
higher CPE score may be associated with better neurocognitive
outcome. An RCT showed that one unit increase in the CPE score
was associated with an increase in the Composite Neuropsychology
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Z (NPZ3) score among HANDs patients with >3 antiretroviral
drugs in the regimen (change in NPZ3 score=0.07, 95% CI 0.02
to 0.12).123, level I
•
In the above special populations, the causes of cognitive impairment
should be managed accordingly to prevent further complications. As
such cases occur more often in those younger than 65 years old,
apart from addressing the cognitive issues, greater psychological
and social support are needed for them in terms of employment,
finances and social life.
•
There is insufficient evidence on the effectiveness of AChEI or
memantine in these special populations.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
8. CAREGIVER SUPPORT
Caring for PWD can be emotionally and physically challenging. The
role of caregiver is a central and integral part of dementia management.
Caregivers should be involved in the management of PWD from the
beginning.10 NICE recognises the important role of caregivers and
discusses their involvement in the management of PWD in detail.42
•
The ZBI has good reliability and validity to assess burden of
caregivers for PWD.49
A few interventions to reduce the burden/strain of caregivers have been
studied and are discussed below.
a. Respite care
Respite care is any intervention designed to give rest or relief to
caregivers. A Cochrane review showed no significant difference in
caregiver burden between respite care and control. However, polarity
therapy reduced caregivers perceived stress compared with respite
care (MD=5.80, 95% CI 1.43 to 10.17).124, level I
An Australian guidelines on dementia recommends that PWD, their
carers and family should be offered respite appropriate to their needs
which include in-home respite, day respite, planned activity groups and
residential respite.50
b. Carer training
A meta-analysis showed that multicomponent interventions for
caregivers significantly delayed institutionalisation after 6 - 12 months
post-intervention compared with minimal support or usual care in mild
to moderately severe AD. The intervention among others comprised of
education and support for caregivers.66, level I
NICE also recommends psychoeducation and skills training to carers of
PWD. These include:42
•
education about dementia on its symptomatology and natural
progression
•
development of personalised strategies and carer skills
•
training on care of PWD, including understanding and responding
to changes in behaviour
•
training in communication skills
•
advice on carers’ own physical, mental health and spiritual
wellbeing
•
information on relevant services and their access
•
advice on planning for the future
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
c. Spirituality and religious support
Spiritual and religious support may be useful for caregivers to improve
their coping strategy and reduce emotional distress. However,
some caregivers might experience negative effect with this
intervention.125, level II-2 Therefore, it should be individualised according
to the caregivers preference and acceptance.
Recommendation 12
•
Caregivers should be actively involved and supported in the
management of dementia.
 This includes assessment of the burden of caregivers.
There are various community health and support services that are
available in the country to assist PWD and their caregivers. Social and
Welfare Department are involved in some of these services. Relevant
information can be obtained from the Ministry of Women, Family and
Community Development of Malaysia and related non-governmental
organisations (NGOs).
Stigmatisation, lack of awareness and perceived lack of credibility of
health care workers are among factors that discourage caregivers from
reaching out to available services and supports.126, level III
Hence, collaborative efforts should be made by the government
and respective stakeholders, including the MoH, Social and Welfare
Department and NGOs to provide better support and service for the
PWDs in Malaysia.
Refer to Appendix 11 on Important Points for Caregiver of People
with Dementia and Appendix 12 on Useful Resources.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
9. LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES
The key to a person’s right of autonomy is adequate decision-making
capacity. In Malaysia, when a person is deemed to be mentally
disordered and is incapable of managing oneself and one’s affairs, the
provisions of the Mental Health Act 2001 (Part X: Section 51-Section
75) can be applied.127 The Act aims to protect the person from his or her
own harmful decisions or actions.
a. Decision-making capacity
The key to a person’s right of autonomy is possessing adequate
decision-making capacity. If a PWD’s decision-making capacity is
intact, doctors need to respect the autonomy of the PWD to decide
on treatment options. If a PWD lacks decision-making capacity, then
a surrogate decision-maker will need to make decisions for the PWD
based on his/her best interest. The following points need to be taken
into account:
•
Decision-making capacity is determined with regard to specific
tasks and decisions that need to be made. PWD can be judged
to have capacity to make certain decisions, and not having
capacity for other decisions at the same time.128
•
If there is any doubt regarding a PWD’s decision-making capacity,
a formal assessment of decision-making capacity should be
carried out. The assessment should be properly documented in
the patient’s notes.
•
Where appropriate, efforts should be taken to restore the patient’s
decision-making capacity or encourage the PWD’s involvement
in the decision-making process.
•
If the Mental Health Act 2001 is used, Section 77 is applicable
when obtaining consent.
b. Advance directives
Although there is no law in Malaysia to govern advance directives in
respect of healthcare matters, the common law right to refuse treatment
is applicable.129, level III Making advance decisions can be immensely
valuable as it can help health care providers in Malaysia to understand
better the preferences and wishes of their patients.130, level III PWD may
decide to make advance decisions regarding treatment while they still
possess the mental capacity to do so by way of an advance directive
or an advance care plan (Section 10d). Advance directives serve to
guarantee the right of mentally competent individuals to continue
exercising their autonomy in the event of future incapacity. These
include the following:131
•
A doctor should comply with a patient’s unequivocal written
directive to refuse a particular treatment.
•
Doctors are advised to consult the next of kin or seek legal advice
if there is doubt on the validity of an advance directive, and these
discussions need to be documented.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
c. Fitness to drive
Driving ability involves multiple cognitive domains and requires
visuospatial, executive function, memory, attention and motor skills.
Other factors important in determining driving safety are vision,
mobility, head-turning and day-time somnolence. In mild dementia,
some patients may retain the skills needed for driving. Patients with
moderate-severe dementia are unlikely to be fit to drive. Driving risk
may be greater in certain subtypes of dementia e.g. FTD (due to lack of
cortical insight) and DLB (due to fluctuating consciousness and visual
hallucinations).132, level III
For patients who decide to stop driving or who are forced to stop,
clinicians must discuss practical alternatives, the impact on psychosocial
benefits and the loss of autonomy with patients and their
caregivers.132, level III
•
Assessment of fitness to drive involves composite cognitive test
batteries in combination with other types of assessments e.g. driving
simulator test132, level III or on-road test.133, level III
•
Locally, an assessment of fitness to drive can be done by referring
the patient to an occupational therapist with the prescribed form
(Borang Pemeriksaan Kesihatan Permohonan Lesen Memandu
Orang Kurang Upaya) as provided in the Medical Examination
Standards for Disabled Driver’s Licensing.134
It is the responsibility of a PWD to report his/her disability to the
authorities for licensing purposes.135 However, medical practitioners
may voluntarily report new cases of disability to the Road Transport
Department.134 It is good medical practice to seek the PWD’s consent for
such reporting. However, if the PWD does not consent to the disclosure,
medical practitioners may still permissibly breach the confidentiality
of the PWD utilising reasons for disclosure in the patient’s medical
interests and/or disclosure in the public interest if they judge that doing
so will provide important benefits to the patient or prevent serious harm
to third parties.131 Such disclosures should be limited only to essential
information for the intended purpose and only to those persons who
need to be notified.128
Recommendation 13
•
If there is any doubt regarding people with dementia (PWD)’s
decision-making capacity, a formal assessment of decision-making
capacity should be carried out.
•
A doctor should comply with a patient’s unequivocal written directive
to refuse a particular treatment if that decision was made while the
patient had mental capacity.
•
PWD (particularly moderate to severe) should be assessed for their
driving ability if they still wish to drive.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
10. PALLIATIVE AND END-OF-LIFE CARE
There has been no major breakthrough in curative treatment for
dementia over the past few decades. As dementia is a progressive
and irreversible illness which can affect the QoL for PWD and their
caregivers, palliative care should be initiated at the time of diagnosis
throughout different stages of illness. As the disease progressed and
the PWD become more dependent, the palliative care components
should be more emphasised in their management to achieve the best
quality of life.
Continuous communication with the PWD and caregivers is important
to assist them to establish the advance care planning especially during
early stage of disease where the PWD are still capable to make their
own decision. Education, spiritual and psychological support should be
offered to improve QoL and reduce burden of the caregivers.
Evidence for best practice during end-of-life care for PWD is limited and
heterogenous. Nevertheless, best supportive care should be offered
to them based on their preference and the principles of basic medical
ethics.
a. Artificial nutrition and hydration
Dysphagia is a common problem in advance dementia. In a systematic
review, dysphagia diagnostic assessment e.g. clinical swallowing
examination, video fluoroscopy swallowing study and flexible
endoscopic examination of swallowing can be used to determine the
type of deficits in oropharyngeal dysphagia. However, there was limited
evidence on the benefits of postural change, diet and liquid modification,
and medication in management of this condition.136, level I
In another systematic review, there was moderate quality of evidence
on the use of high-calorie supplements to improve weight gain in person
with advance dementia and not on function and survival.137, level I There
was limited evidence to show that enteral tube feeding may prolong the
survival rate and reduce aspiration pneumonia in advanced dementia
based on a systematic review. On the other hand, percutaneous
enterogastrostomy tube was associated with increased risk of pressure
ulcer development or aggravation.138, level I
NICE does not recommend routine use of enteral feeding in people
with severe dementia, unless indicated for a potentially reversible comorbidity.42
•
There was insufficient evidence to recommend enteral feeding in
patients with severe dementia.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
b. Pain management
Pain is another prevalent and distressing issue for person with
advance dementia. However, the affected person is not able to express
themselves accurately on the pain they experience and very often it is
manifested as behavioural problems.
An RCT examining on the impact of a stepwise protocol for treating
pain on PWD in nursing home showed that pain medication significantly
improved pain control in the intervention group.139, level I However a
systematic review showed that evidence on pain management for
advance dementia was limited and heterogenous. Despite increased
use of analgesia, pain was still prevalent in PWD.140, level I
c. Restraints
Restraints are used to protect people with severe dementia from
harming themselves. These can be physical, chemical or psychological
restraints.
A multinational cohort study on PWD in nursing homes showed that
physical restraint was associated with a higher risk of both functional
(RR=2.30, 95% CI 1.52 to 3.49) and cognitive decline (RR=1.93, 95%
CI 1.44 to 2.58) compared with AP alone. These risks were even
higher among residents receiving both AP and physical restraints
with RR of 2.49 (95% CI 1.89 to 3.27) and 2.31 (95% CI 1.54 to 3.48)
respectively.141, level II-2
A Belgian evidence-based guidelines on older adults in home care
recommend that physical restraints should be avoided as much as
possible due to the negative physical and psychosocial consequences
to the patient.142
d. Advance care planning
Every PWD has the right to plan ahead for their future when they still
have the capability to make decision. Hence, advance care planning
should be discussed with PWD and their family members as early
as possible after the diagnosis is established. The discussion should
include lasting power of attorney (for decisions unrelated to healthcare
as permitted under the Power of Attorney Act 1949) and future medical
care direction based on their own preference, value and goals of life.
PWD and their family members are allowed to review and change any
advance statements they have made as the disease progresses.42
A systematic review showed that intervention with advance care
planning significantly reduced inappropriate hospital admissions
and healthcare costs for PWD compared with control group.143, level I
Therefore, attending clinicians should actively offer advance care
planning to PWD and their family members when they are ready for it.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Refer to Appendix 13 on Advance Care Planning for more details.
Recommendation 14
•
Physical restraints should be avoided in dementia.
•
Advance care planning should be considered in the management of
dementia once the diagnosis is established.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
11. REFERRAL
Patients suspected of dementia should be referred to specialist care
centres (e.g. geriatrics/psychiatry/neurology) for confirmation of
diagnosis and management of complexities. This is because of the need
for comprehensive assessments and investigations. At the moment,
medication for dementia is not available at primary care locally.
Once a diagnosis is made, stable PWD can be co-managed in both
primary and secondary/tertiary care as an integrated care system.
Management aspect than can be offered in primary care include
management of medical co-morbidities and non-pharmacological
treatment (e.g. cognitive stimulation and designing meaningful
activities). However, these cases should be referred back to secondary/
tertiary care when there is difficult behaviour problem, psychiatric comorbidity, rapid deterioration in clinical condition, etc.
Recommendation 15
•
All patients with suspected dementia should be referred to a geriatric
psychiatrist/psychiatrist, geriatrician or neurologist for assessment,
diagnosis and management
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
12. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of dementia should be guided by an evidence-based
approach, in order to provide quality care to the PWD. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
12.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
•
wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to health
care providers
•
training and updates in relation to dementia
•
public awareness campaigns related to cognitive impairment
including dementia
•
inter-ministerial
collaboration
and
involvement
of
nongovernmental organisations to support the PWD and their
caregivers
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
•
limited exposure and training among health care providers on
management of dementia
•
variation in availability of expertise and access to service
provision
•
lack of awareness among patients, families, community and
health care workers
•
lack of local data on dementia, e.g. research, registry, etc., for
planning on services
12.2 Potential Resource Implications
In local setting, dementia is very much underdiagnosed due to lack of
awareness and misconception that it is normal part of ageing among
the public and health care providers. Besides that, PWD always present
late with behavioural issues.
In terms of pharmacotherapy, AChEI is strongly recommended in the
treatment of dementia. However, it is not readily available in the primary/
secondary/tertiary care due to financial constraints. Apart from that,
many non-pharmacological interventions may not be easily available
due to lack of manpower/expertise to conduct it.
The CPG recommends early detection and referral, comprehensive
assessment and treatment of the disorder. This requires increased
awareness among public, caregivers and health care providers to
establish diagnosis and early intervention to PWD as well as support
to the caregivers.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Thus, the implementation of this CPG requires resources to provide:
•
training of health care providers and caregivers
•
better access to referral centres
•
better caregiver support network
•
access to policy makers e.g. National Dementia Action Plan
Based on the key recommendations, the following are proposed as
clinical audit indicators for quality management of dementia:
*geriatric psychiatrist/psychiatrist, geriatrician or neurologist
**all severity
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage of
patients with
suspected dementia
referred to a relevant
specialist* for
assessment and
diagnosis
Percentage of
newly diagnosed
Alzheimer’s
Disease** offered
donepezil or
rivastigmine
=
X 100%
Number of patients with suspected
dementia in the same period
Number of patients with suspected dementia
referred to a relevant specialist* for
assessment and diagnosis in a period
=
X 100%
Number of newly diagnosed Alzheimer’s
Disease** in the same period
Number of newly diagnosed Alzheimer’s
Disease** offered donepezil or rivastigmine
in a period
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
World Health Organization. Dementia Fact Sheet. 2020.
2.
Alzheimers Disease International. World Alzheimer Report 2014: Dementia and
Risk Reduction an Analysis of Protective and Modifiable Factors. London; 2014.
3.
Sooryanarayana R, Sazlina SG. The Malaysian National Health and Morbidity
Survey (NHMS) 2018: Older Persons’ Health in Malaysia. Geriatrics &
gerontology international. 2020;20 Suppl 2:5-6.
4.
Ryan NS, Rossor MN. Correlating familial Alzheimer’s disease gene mutations
with clinical phenotype. Biomarkers in medicine. 2010;4(1):99-112.
5.
Karantzoulis S, Galvin JE. Distinguishing Alzheimer’s disease from other major
forms of dementia. Expert review of neurotherapeutics. 2011;11(11):1579-91.
6.
Boyle PA, Yu L, Wilson RS, et al. Person-specific contribution of neuropathologies
to cognitive loss in old age. Annals of neurology. 2018;83(1):74-83.
7.
Warren JD, Rohrer JD, Rossor MN. Clinical review. Frontotemporal dementia.
BMJ (Clinical research ed). 2013;347:f4827.
8.
Jellinger KA. Dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease-dementia:
current concepts and controversies. Journal of neural transmission (Vienna,
Austria : 1996). 2018;125(4):615-50.
9.
Husain M, Schott JM. Oxford Textbook of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia:
Oxford University Press; 2016.
10. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Dementia (Second Edition).
Putrajaya: Ministry of Health Malaysia; 2009.
11. Van Cauwenberghe C, Van Broeckhoven C, Sleegers K. The genetic landscape
of Alzheimer disease: Clinical implications and perspectives. Genetics in
medicine: official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics. 2015;18.
12. Stuhec M, Keuschler J, Serra-Mestres J, et al. Effects of different antihypertensive
medication groups on cognitive function in older patients: A systematic review.
European psychiatry: the journal of the Association of European Psychiatrists.
2017;46:1-15.
13. Gudala K, Bansal D, Schifano F, et al. Diabetes mellitus and risk of dementia:
A meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Journal of diabetes
investigation. 2013;4(6):640-50.
14. Anstey KJ, Ashby-Mitchell K, Peters R. Updating the Evidence on the Association
between Serum Cholesterol and Risk of Late-Life Dementia: Review and MetaAnalysis. Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD. 2017;56(1):215-28.
15. Sáiz-Vazquez O, Puente-Martínez A, Ubillos-Landa S, et al. Cholesterol and
Alzheimer’s Disease Risk: A Meta-Meta-Analysis. Brain sciences. 2020;10(6).
16. Albanese E, Launer LJ, Egger M, et al. Body mass index in midlife and
dementia: Systematic review and meta-regression analysis of 589,649 men and
women followed in longitudinal studies. Alzheimer’s & dementia (Amsterdam,
Netherlands). 2017;8:165-78.
17. Anstey KJ, Cherbuin N, Budge M, et al. Body mass index in midlife and late-life
as a risk factor for dementia: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Obesity
reviews : an official journal of the International Association for the Study of
Obesity. 2011;12(5):e426-37.
18. Cherbuin N, Kim S, Anstey KJ. Dementia risk estimates associated with
measures of depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ open.
2015;5(12):e008853.
19. World Health Organization. Risk Reduction of Cognitive Decline and Dementia:
WHO Guidelines. Geneva: World Health Organization;2019.
20. Handing EP, Andel R, Kadlecova P, et al. Midlife Alcohol Consumption and
Risk of Dementia Over 43 Years of Follow-Up: A Population-Based Study From
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
the Swedish Twin Registry. The journals of gerontology Series A, Biological
sciences and medical sciences. 2015;70(10):1248-54.
21. Kivimäki M, Singh-Manoux A, Pentti J, et al. Physical inactivity, cardiometabolic
disease, and risk of dementia: an individual-participant meta-analysis. BMJ
(Clinical research ed). 2019;365:l1495.
22. Kuiper JS, Zuidersma M, Oude Voshaar RC, et al. Social relationships and
risk of dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal cohort
studies. Ageing research reviews. 2015;22:39-57.
23. Killin LO, Starr JM, Shiue IJ, et al. Environmental risk factors for dementia: a
systematic review. BMC geriatrics. 2016;16(1):175.
24. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, et al. Dementia prevention, intervention,
and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet (London, England).
2020;396(10248):413-46.
25. Peters R, Booth A, Rockwood K, et al. Combining modifiable risk factors
and risk of dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ open.
2019;9(1):e022846.
26. World Health Organization. Tobacco Fact Sheet 2020. (Available at https://www.
who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco)
27. Rutjes AW, Denton DA, Di Nisio M, et al. Vitamin and mineral supplementation
for maintaining cognitive function in cognitively healthy people in mid and late
life. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2018;12(12):Cd011906.
28. Farina N, Llewellyn D, Isaac M, et al. Vitamin E for Alzheimer’s dementia and
mild cognitive impairment. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2017;4(4):Cd002854.
29. Jordan F, Quinn TJ, McGuinness B, et al. Aspirin and other non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs for the prevention of dementia. The Cochrane database of
systematic reviews. 2020;4(4):Cd011459.
30. McGuinness B, Craig D, Bullock R, et al. Statins for the prevention of dementia.
The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2016(1):Cd003160.
31. Ministry of Health Singapore. Dementia: MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines
1/2013. Singapore: Ministry of Health; 2013.
32. Owens DK, Davidson KW, Krist AH, et al. Screening for Cognitive Impairment in
Older Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.
Jama. 2020;323(8):757-63.
33. Hendry K, Green C, McShane R, et al. AD-8 for detection of dementia across
a variety of healthcare settings. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2019;3(3):Cd011121.
34. Harrison JK, Stott DJ, McShane R, et al. Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive
Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE) for the early diagnosis of dementia across a
variety of healthcare settings. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2016;11(11):Cd011333.
35. Tsoi KK, Chan JY, Hirai HW, et al. Cognitive Tests to Detect Dementia:
A
Systematic
Review
and
Meta-analysis.
JAMA
internal
medicine.
2015;175(9):1450-8.
36. Jackson TA, Naqvi SH, Sheehan B. Screening for dementia in general hospital
inpatients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of available instruments. Age
and ageing. 2013;42(6):689-95.
37. Davis DH, Creavin ST, Yip JL, et al. Montreal Cognitive Assessment for the
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. The Cochrane database
of systematic reviews. 2015;2015(10):Cd010775.
38. Matías-Guiu JA, Valles-Salgado M, Rognoni T, et al. Comparative Diagnostic
Accuracy of the ACE-III, MIS, MMSE, MoCA, and RUDAS for Screening of
Alzheimer Disease. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders. 2017;43(56):237-46.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
39. Lim L, Ng TP, Ong AP, et al. A novel language-neutral Visual Cognitive
Assessment Test (VCAT): validation in four Southeast Asian countries.
Alzheimer’s research & therapy. 2018;10(1):6.
40. Cummings-Vaughn LA, Chavakula NN, Malmstrom TK, et al. Veterans Affairs
Saint Louis University Mental Status examination compared with the Montreal
Cognitive Assessment and the Short Test of Mental Status. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society. 2014;62(7):1341-6.
41. Rosli R, Tan MP, Gray WK, et al. Cognitive assessment tools in Asia: a
systematic review. International psychogeriatrics. 2016;28(2):189-210.
42. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Dementia: assessment,
management and support for people living with dementia and their carers.
London: NICE; 2018.
43. Canevelli M, Adali N, Voisin T, et al. Behavioral and psychological subsyndromes
in Alzheimer’s disease using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. International
journal of geriatric psychiatry. 2013;28(8):795-803.
44. Terum TM, Andersen JR, Rongve A, et al. The relationship of specific items on
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory to caregiver burden in dementia: a systematic
review. International journal of geriatric psychiatry. 2017;32(7):703-17.
45. Jeon YH, Sansoni J, Low LF, et al. Recommended measures for the assessment
of behavioral disturbances associated with dementia. The American journal of
geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric
Psychiatry. 2011;19(5):403-15.
46. Cohen-Mansfield J, Golander H. The measurement of psychosis in dementia: a
comparison of assessment tools. Alzheimer disease and associated disorders.
2011;25(2):101-8.
47. Leontjevas R, Gerritsen DL, Vernooij-Dassen MJ, et al. Comparative validation
of proxy-based Montgomery-Åsberg depression rating scale and cornell scale for
depression in dementia in nursing home residents with dementia. The American
journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for
Geriatric Psychiatry. 2012;20(11):985-93.
48. Sikkes SA, de Lange-de Klerk ES, Pijnenburg YA, et al. A systematic review of
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scales in dementia: room for improvement.
Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry. 2009;80(1):7-12.
49. Whalen KJ, Buchholz SW. The reliability, validity and feasibility of tools used
to screen for caregiver burden: a systematic review. JBI library of systematic
reviews. 2009;7(32):1373-430.
50. Guideline Adaptation Committee. Clinical Practice Guidelines and Principles of
Care for People with Dementia. Sydney: Guideline Adaptation Committee; 2016.
51. Chandra A, Dervenoulas G, Politis M. Magnetic resonance imaging in Alzheimer’s
disease and mild cognitive impairment. Journal of neurology. 2019;266(6):1293302.
52. Harper L, Barkhof F, Fox NC, et al. Using visual rating to diagnose dementia:
a critical evaluation of MRI atrophy scales. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery,
and psychiatry. 2015;86(11):1225-33.
53. McCleery J, Morgan S, Bradley KM, et al. Dopamine transporter imaging for the
diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies. The Cochrane database of systematic
reviews. 2015;1(1):Cd010633.
54. Smailagic N, Vacante M, Hyde C, et al. ¹⁸F-FDG PET for the early diagnosis
of Alzheimer’s disease dementia and other dementias in people with mild
cognitive impairment (MCI). The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2015;1(1):Cd010632.
55. Zhang S, Smailagic N, Hyde C, et al. (11)C-PIB-PET for the early diagnosis
of Alzheimer’s disease dementia and other dementias in people with mild
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
cognitive impairment (MCI). The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2014;2014(7):Cd010386.
56. Law ZK, Todd C, Mehraram R, et al. The Role of EEG in the Diagnosis, Prognosis
and Clinical Correlations of Dementia with Lewy Bodies-A Systematic Review.
Diagnostics (Basel, Switzerland). 2020;10(9).
57. Ritchie C, Smailagic N, Noel-Storr AH, et al. CSF tau and the CSF tau/ABeta
ratio for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease dementia and other dementias
in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The Cochrane database of
systematic reviews. 2017;3(3):Cd010803.
58. American Psychiatric Association (APA). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-5. Arlington, VA: APA; 2013.
59. Groot C, Hooghiemstra AM, Raijmakers PG, et al. The effect of physical activity
on cognitive function in patients with dementia: A meta-analysis of randomized
control trials. Ageing research reviews. 2016;25:13-23.
60. Woods B, Aguirre E, Spector AE, et al. Cognitive stimulation to improve cognitive
functioning in people with dementia. The Cochrane database of systematic
reviews. 2012(2):Cd005562.
61. Bahar-Fuchs A, Clare L, Woods B. Cognitive training and cognitive rehabilitation
for mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. The Cochrane
database of systematic reviews. 2013;2013(6):Cd003260.
62. Woods B, O’Philbin L, Farrell EM, et al. Reminiscence therapy for dementia. The
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2018;3(3):Cd001120.
63. Agli O, Bailly N, Ferrand C. Spirituality and religion in older adults with dementia:
a systematic review. International psychogeriatrics. 2015;27(5):715-25.
64. Orgeta V, Qazi A, Spector A, et al. Psychological treatments for depression
and anxiety in dementia and mild cognitive impairment: systematic review and
meta-analysis. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science.
2015;207(4):293-8.
65. Möhler R, Renom A, Renom H, et al. Personally tailored activities for improving
psychosocial outcomes for people with dementia in long-term care. The
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2018;2(2):Cd009812.
66. Olazarán J, Reisberg B, Clare L, et al. Nonpharmacological therapies in
Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review of efficacy. Dementia and geriatric
cognitive disorders. 2010;30(2):161-78.
67. van der Steen JT, Smaling HJ, van der Wouden JC, et al. Music-based
therapeutic interventions for people with dementia. The Cochrane database of
systematic reviews. 2018;7(7):Cd003477.
68. Forrester LT, Maayan N, Orrell M, et al. Aromatherapy for dementia. The
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2014(2):Cd003150.
69. Wu J, Wang Y, Wang Z. The effectiveness of massage and touch on behavioural
and psychological symptoms of dementia: A quantitative systematic review and
meta-analysis. Journal of advanced nursing. 2017;73(10):2283-95.
70. Neal M, Barton Wright P. Validation therapy for dementia. The Cochrane
database of systematic reviews. 2003(3):Cd001394.
71. Forbes D, Blake CM, Thiessen EJ, et al. Light therapy for improving cognition,
activities of daily living, sleep, challenging behaviour, and psychiatric disturbances
in dementia. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2014(2):Cd003946.
72. Abraha I, Rimland JM, Lozano-Montoya I, et al. Simulated presence therapy for
dementia. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2017;4(4):Cd011882.
73. Vilela VC, Pacheco RL, Latorraca COC, et al. What do Cochrane systematic
reviews say about non-pharmacological interventions for treating cognitive
decline and dementia? Sao Paulo medical journal = Revista paulista de
medicina. 2017;135(3):309-20.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
74. Bond M, Rogers G, Peters J, et al. The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine and memantine for the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease (review of Technology Appraisal No. 111): a systematic
review and economic model. Health technology assessment (Winchester,
England). 2012;16(21):1-470.
75. Birks JS, Harvey RJ. Donepezil for dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease. The
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2018;6(6):Cd001190.
76. Birks JS, Grimley Evans J. Rivastigmine for Alzheimer’s disease. The Cochrane
database of systematic reviews. 2015(4):Cd001191.
77. Farlow MR, Grossberg GT, Sadowsky CH, et al. A 24-week, randomized,
controlled trial of rivastigmine patch 13.3 mg/24 h versus 4.6 mg/24 h in severe
Alzheimer’s dementia. CNS neuroscience & therapeutics. 2013;19(10):745-52.
78. Grossberg G, Cummings J, Frölich L, et al. Efficacy of higher dose 13.3 mg/24 h
rivastigmine patch on instrumental activities of daily living in patients with mildto-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. American journal of Alzheimer’s disease and
other dementias. 2013;28(6):583-91.
79. Dou KX, Tan MS, Tan CC, et al. Comparative safety and effectiveness of
cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for Alzheimer’s disease: a network
meta-analysis of 41 randomized controlled trials. Alzheimer’s research &
therapy. 2018;10(1):126.
80. McShane R, Westby MJ, Roberts E, et al. Memantine for dementia. The
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2019;3(3):Cd003154.
81. Blanco-Silvente L, Capellà D, Garre-Olmo J, et al. Predictors of discontinuation,
efficacy, and safety of memantine treatment for Alzheimer’s disease: metaanalysis and meta-regression of 18 randomized clinical trials involving 5004
patients. BMC geriatrics. 2018;18(1):168.
82. Román GC, Salloway S, Black SE, et al. Randomized, placebo-controlled,
clinical trial of donepezil in vascular dementia: differential effects by hippocampal
size. Stroke. 2010;41(6):1213-21.
83. Birks J, McGuinness B, Craig D. Rivastigmine for vascular cognitive impairment.
The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2013(5):Cd004744.
84. Jin BR, Liu HY. Comparative efficacy and safety of cognitive enhancers for
treating vascular cognitive impairment: systematic review and Bayesian network
meta-analysis. Neural regeneration research. 2019;14(5):805-16.
85. Rolinski M, Fox C, Maidment I, et al. Cholinesterase inhibitors for dementia
with Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s disease dementia and cognitive impairment
in Parkinson’s disease. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2012(3):Cd006504.
86. Meng YH, Wang PP, Song YX, et al. Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine
for Parkinson’s disease dementia and Lewy body dementia: A meta-analysis.
Experimental and therapeutic medicine. 2019;17(3):1611-24.
87. Buoli M, Serati M, Caldiroli A, et al. Pharmacological Management of Psychiatric
Symptoms in Frontotemporal Dementia: A Systematic Review. Journal of
geriatric psychiatry and neurology. 2017;30(3):162-9.
88. Nardell M, Tampi RR. Pharmacological treatments for frontotemporal dementias:
a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. American journal of
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. 2014;29(2):123-32.
89. Kishi T, Matsunaga S, Iwata N. Memantine for the treatment of frontotemporal
dementia:
a
meta-analysis.
Neuropsychiatric
disease
and
treatment.
2015;11:2883-5.
90. Dyer SM, Harrison SL, Laver K, et al. An overview of systematic reviews of
pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions for the treatment
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. International
psychogeriatrics. 2018;30(3):295-309.
91. Kongpakwattana K, Sawangjit R, Tawankanjanachot I, et al. Pharmacological
treatments for alleviating agitation in dementia: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis. British journal of clinical pharmacology. 2018;84(7):1445-56.
92. Yunusa I, Alsumali A, Garba AE, et al. Assessment of Reported Comparative
Effectiveness and Safety of Atypical Antipsychotics in the Treatment of
Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia: A Network Meta-analysis.
JAMA network open. 2019;2(3):e190828.
93. Grossberg GT, Kohegyi E, Mergel V, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Brexpiprazole
for the Treatment of Agitation in Alzheimer’s Dementia: Two 12-Week,
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trials. The American journal
of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric
Psychiatry. 2020;28(4):383-400.
94. Xiao H, Su Y, Cao X, et al. A meta-analysis of mood stabilizers for Alzheimer’s
disease. Journal of Huazhong University of Science and Technology Medical
sciences = Hua zhong ke ji da xue xue bao Yi xue Ying De wen ban = Huazhong
keji daxue xuebao Yixue Yingdewen ban. 2010;30(5):652-8.
95. Baillon SF, Narayana U, Luxenberg JS, et al. Valproate preparations for
agitation in dementia. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2018;10(10):Cd003945.
96. McCleery J, Sharpley AL. Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in dementia.
The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2020;11(11):Cd009178.
97. Schroeck JL, Ford J, Conway EL, et al. Review of Safety and Efficacy of Sleep
Medicines in Older Adults. Clinical therapeutics. 2016;38(11):2340-72.
98. Rubino A, Sanon M, Ganz ML, et al. Association of the US Food and Drug
Administration Antipsychotic Drug Boxed Warning With Medication Use and
Health Outcomes in Elderly Patients With Dementia. JAMA network open.
2020;3(4):e203630.
99. American Geriatrics Society. American Geriatrics Society 2019 Updated AGS
Beers Criteria® for Potentially Inappropriate Medication Use in Older Adults.
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2019;67(4):674-94.
100. Hukins D, Macleod U, Boland JW. Identifying potentially inappropriate prescribing
in older people with dementia: a systematic review. European journal of clinical
pharmacology. 2019;75(4):467-81.
101. Delgado J, Bowman K, Clare L. Potentially inappropriate prescribing in dementia:
a state-of-the-art review since 2007. BMJ open. 2020;10:e029172.
102. Ah YM, Suh Y, Jun K, et al. Effect of anticholinergic burden on treatment
modification, delirium and mortality in newly diagnosed dementia patients
starting a cholinesterase inhibitor: A population-based study. Basic & clinical
pharmacology & toxicology. 2019;124(6):741-8.
103. Tan MS, Yu JT, Tan CC, et al. Efficacy and adverse effects of ginkgo biloba
for cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of Alzheimer’s disease: JAD. 2015;43(2):589-603.
104. Kellermann AJ, Kloft C. Is there a risk of bleeding associated with standardized
Ginkgo biloba extract therapy? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Pharmacotherapy. 2011;31(5):490-502.
105. Wang YY, Zheng W, Ng CH, et al. Meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials of melatonin in Alzheimer’s disease. International
journal of geriatric psychiatry. 2017;32(1):50-7.
106. Chan ES, Bautista DT, Zhu Y, et al. Traditional Chinese herbal medicine
for vascular dementia. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews.
2018;12(12):Cd010284.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
107. Seddon N, D’Cunha N, Mellor D, et al. Effects of Curcumin on Cognitive
Function—A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials. 2019;4:1-11.
108. Petersen RC, Lopez O, Armstrong MJ, et al. Practice guideline update summary:
Mild cognitive impairment: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination,
and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2018;90(3):126-35.
109. Han JW, Lee H, Hong JW, et al. Multimodal Cognitive Enhancement Therapy
for Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Mild Dementia: A Multi- Center,
Randomized, Controlled, Double-Blind, Crossover Trial. Journal of Alzheimer’s
disease : JAD. 2017;55(2):787-96.
110. Huckans M, Hutson L, Twamley E, et al. Efficacy of cognitive rehabilitation
therapies for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in older adults: working toward a
theoretical model and evidence-based interventions. Neuropsychology review.
2013;23(1):63-80.
111. Baker LD, Frank LL, Foster-Schubert K, et al. Effects of aerobic exercise on mild
cognitive impairment: a controlled trial. Archives of neurology. 2010;67(1):71-9.
112. McGrattan AM, McEvoy CT, McGuinness B, et al. Effect of dietary interventions
in mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review. The British journal of nutrition.
2018;120(12):1388-405.
113. Dougall D, Poole N, Agrawal N. Pharmacotherapy for chronic cognitive
impairment in traumatic brain injury. The Cochrane database of systematic
reviews. 2015(12):Cd009221.
114. Kumar KS, Samuelkamaleshkumar S, Viswanathan A, et al. Cognitive
rehabilitation for adults with traumatic brain injury to improve occupational
outcomes. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2017;6(6):Cd007935.
115. Magee WL, Clark I, Tamplin J, et al. Music interventions for acquired brain injury.
The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2017;1(1):Cd006787.
116. Cheng C, Huang CL, Tsai CJ, et al. Alcohol-Related Dementia: A Systemic
Review of Epidemiological Studies. Psychosomatics. 2017;58(4):331-42.
117. Rehm J, Hasan OSM, Black SE, et al. Alcohol use and dementia: a systematic
scoping review. Alzheimer’s research & therapy. 2019;11(1):1.
118. Day E, Bentham PW, Callaghan R, et al. Thiamine for prevention and treatment
of Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome in people who abuse alcohol. The Cochrane
database of systematic reviews. 2013;2013(7):Cd004033.
119. Svanberg J, Evans JJ. Neuropsychological rehabilitation in alcohol-related brain
damage: a systematic review. Alcohol and alcoholism (Oxford, Oxfordshire).
2013;48(6):704-11.
120. Wang Y, Liu M, Lu Q, et al. Global prevalence and burden of HIV-associated
neurocognitive disorder: A meta-analysis. Neurology. 2020;95(19):e2610-e21.
121. Antinori A, Arendt G, Becker JT, et al. Updated research nosology for HIVassociated neurocognitive disorders. Neurology. 2007;69(18):1789-99.
122. Zipursky AR, Gogolishvili D, Rueda S, et al. Evaluation of brief screening tools
for neurocognitive impairment in HIV/AIDS: a systematic review of the literature.
AIDS (London, England). 2013;27(15):2385-401.
123. Smurzynski M, Wu K, Letendre S, et al. Effects of central nervous system
antiretroviral penetration on cognitive functioning in the ALLRT cohort. AIDS
(London, England). 2011;25(3):357-65.
124. Maayan N, Soares-Weiser K, Lee H. Respite care for people with dementia and
their carers. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2014(1):Cd004396.
125. Giannouli V, Giannoulis K. Gazing at Medusa: Alzheimer’s dementia through the
lenses of spirituality and religion. Health psychology research. 2020;8(1):8833.
126. Nikmat Aw. dementia in malaysia: issues and challenges. Asian Journal of
Psychiatry. 2011;12:1-7.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
127. Mental Health Act 2001. Part X - Proceedings in Inquiries into Mental Disorder
(Section 51 - Section 75). (Available at: https://www.moh.gov.my/index.php/
pages/view/381)
128. Lo B. Resolving Ethical Dilemmas: A Guide for Clinicians (5th Edition): Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2015.
129. Chan HY. Regulating advance decision-making: potential and challenges for
Malaysia. Asian Bioethics Review. 2019;11:111-22.
130. Tan Kiak Min M. Considerations for Introducing Legislation on Advance
Decisions in Malaysia. Asian Bioeth Rev. 2018;10(1):87-92.
131. Malaysian Medical Council. Malaysian Medical Council Guideline: Consent
for Treatment of Patients by Registered Medical Practitioners. Kuala Lumpur:
Malaysian Medical Council 2017.
132. Allan CL, Behrman S, Baruch N, et al. Driving and dementia: a clinical update for
mental health professionals. Evidence Based Mental Health. 2016;19(4):110.
133. Martin AJ, Marottoli R, O’Neill D. Driving assessment for maintaining mobility
and safety in drivers with dementia. The Cochrane database of systematic
reviews. 2013;2013(8):Cd006222.
134. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Medical Examination Standards For Disabled
Driver’s Licensing. Putrajaya: Ministry of Health Malaysia; 2011.
135. Laws of Malaysia Act 333 Road Transport Act 1987. (Available at: http://www.
agc.gov.my/agcportal/uploads/files/Publications/LOM/EN/Act%20333%20-%20
Road%20Transport%20Act%201987.pdf)
136. Alagiakrishnan K, Bhanji RA, Kurian M. Evaluation and management of
oropharyngeal dysphagia in different types of dementia: a systematic review.
Archives of gerontology and geriatrics. 2013;56(1):1-9.
137. Hanson LC, Ersek M, Gilliam R, et al. Oral feeding options for people with
dementia: a systematic review. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society.
2011;59(3):463-72.
138. Ribeiro Salomon AL, Carvalho Garbi Novaes MR. Outcomes of enteral nutrition
for patients with advanced dementia: a systematic review. The journal of
nutrition, health & aging. 2015;19(2):169-77.
139. Sandvik RK, Selbaek G, Seifert R, et al. Impact of a stepwise protocol for
treating pain on pain intensity in nursing home patients with dementia: a cluster
randomized trial. European journal of pain (London, England). 2014;18(10):1490500.
140. Husebo BS, Achterberg W, Flo E. Identifying and Managing Pain in People with
Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Types of Dementia: A Systematic Review. CNS
drugs. 2016;30(6):481-97.
141. Foebel AD, Onder G, Finne-Soveri H, et al. Physical Restraint and Antipsychotic
Medication Use Among Nursing Home Residents With Dementia. Journal of the
American Medical Directors Association. 2016;17(2):184.e9-14.
142. Scheepmans K, Dierckx de Casterlé B, Paquay L, et al. Reducing physical
restraints by older adults in home care: development of an evidence-based
guideline. BMC geriatrics. 2020;20(1):169.
143. Robinson L, Dickinson C, Rousseau N, et al. A systematic review of the
effectiveness of advance care planning interventions for people with cognitive
impairment and dementia. Age and ageing. 2012;41(2):263-9.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective pharmacological
treatments for dementia? - Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (rivastigmine,
donepezil, galantamine) & NMDA antagonists (memantine)
1. DEMENTIA/
2. dementia*.tw.
3. (familial adj1 dementia*).tw.
4. (senile adj2 paranoid dementia*).tw.
5. DEMENTIA, VASCULAR/
6. (acute onset adj3 vascular dementia*).tw.
7. ((arteriosclerotic or vascular) adj1 dementia*).tw.
8. (subcortical adj2 arteriosclerotic encephalopathy*).tw.
9. (binswanger* adj2 (encephalopath* or disease*)).tw.
10. chronic progressive subcortical encephalopathy.tw.
11. (subcortical adj2 vascular dementia*).tw.
12. (subcortical arteriosclerotic adj2 encephalopath*).tw.
13. (chronic progressive adj3 subcortical encephalopath*).tw.
14. (subcortical adj1 leukoencephalopath*).tw.
15. FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA/
16. ((frontotemporal or frontotemporal lobe) adj2 dementia*).tw.
17. (frontotemporal dementia adj4 (parkinsonism or parkinsonism 17
or parkinsonism-17)).tw.
18. ((grn-related or grn related) adj3 frontotemporal dementia*).tw.
19. ((ubiquitin positive or ubiquitin-positive) adj3 frontotemporal
dementia*).tw.
20. (frontotemporal lobar degeneration adj6 (ubiquitin positive inclusion
or ubiquitin-positive inclusion)).tw.
21. (semantic adj1 dementia*).tw.
22. familial pick* disease*.tw.
23. ftd-grn.tw.
24. ftd-pgrn.tw.
25. ftdp-17.tw.
26. ftld-17 grn.tw.
27. ftld with tdp 43 pathology.tw.
28. ftld with tdp-43 pathology.tw.
29. ftld-tdp.tw.
30. DEMENTIA, MULTI-INFARCT/
31. (lacunar adj1 dementia*).tw.
32. ((multiinfarct or multi infarct or multi-infarct) adj2 dementia*).tw.
33. ALZHEIMER DISEASE/
34. alzheimer* dementia*.tw.
35. (alzheimer* disease adj2 (early onset or late onset or focal onset)).
tw.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
36. (familial adj2 alzheimer* disease).tw.
37. ((Alzheimer* type or Alzheimer-type) adj3 (dementia* or senile
dementia*)).tw.
38. ((senile or presenile) adj1 dementia*).tw.
39. (primary senile degenerative adj3 dementia*).tw.
40. presenile alzheimer dementia.tw.
41. Mixed dementia*.tw.
42. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14
or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or
26 or 27 or 28 or 29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 36 or 37
or 38 or 39 or 40 or 41
43. CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS/
44. (anticholinesterase* or anti cholinesterase* or anti-cholinesterase*).
tw.
45. ((acetylcholinesterase or cholinesterase) adj1 inhibitor*).tw.
46. (irreversible adj2 cholinesterase inhibitor*).tw.
47. ((reversible or irreversible) adj2 cholinesterase inhibitor*).tw.
48. RIVASTIGMINE/
49. Exelon.tw.
50. (rivastigmine adj2 hydrogen tartrate).tw.
51. rivastigmine tartrate.tw.
52. Rivastigmine.tw.
53. GALANTAMINE/
54. galanthamine hydrobromide.tw.
55. donepezil.tw.
56. aricept.tw.
57. MEMANTINE/
58. ebixa.tw.
59. memantin*.tw.
60. or/43-59
61. 42 and 60
62. limit 61 to (yr=”2009 -Current” and “all adult (19 plus years)” and
English and humans)
63. limit 62 to systematic reviews
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the risk factors for dementia?
2. What are the risk reduction interventions/strategies for dementia?
3. What are the diagnostic criteria for dementia?
4. What are the accurate assessment tools for dementia?
5. What are the accurate assessment tools for non-cognitive domains
in dementia?
6. What are the safe and effective pharmacological treatments for
dementia?
• Acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors
(rivastigmine,
donepezil,
galantamine) & NMDA antagonists (memantine)
• Antipsychotics/antidepressants/mood stabilisers for BPSD
• Drugs to use with caution (anticholinergic burden)
7. What are the safe and effective non-pharmacological treatments
for dementia?
8. What are the safe and effective TCM for dementia?
9. What are the safe and effective treatment in mild cognitive
impairment?
10. What are the safe and effective palliative care for dementia?
11. What are the basic social, legal and ethical issues in dementia?
12. What are the safe and effective interventions for caregivers of
dementia?
13. What are the safe and effective management in the following
special groups of dementia?
• Acquired brain injury
• Alcohol-related dementia
• HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder
14. When should patients with dementia be referred to a tertiary
specialist service?
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 3
10 WARNING SIGNS OF DEMENTIA
Source: Alzheimer’s Disease Foundation Malaysia (Available at: http://adfm.org.my/10-warning-signs/)
Dementia is not a part of normal ageing
Talk to a doctor or contact Alzheimer’s Disease Foundation Malaysia (ADFM) for more information
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 4
INITIAL ASSESSMENT TOOLS
a. Abbreviated Mental Test Score (AMTS)
The following questions are put to the patient. Each question
correctly answered scores one point:
A score of 6 or less suggests delirium or dementia, although further
tests are necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
What is your age? (1 point)
What is the time to the nearest hour? (1 point)
Give the patient an address, and ask him or her to
repeat it at the end of the test. (1 point)
e.g. 42 West Street
What is the year? (1 point)
What is the name of the hospital or number of the
residence where the patient is situated? (1 point)
Can the patient recognize two persons (the doctor,
nurse, home help, etc.)? (1 point)
What is your date of birth? (day and month sufficient)
(1 point)
In what year did World War 1 begin? (1 point)
(other dates can be used, with preference for dates
some time in the past)
Name the present monarch/prime minister/president.
(1 point)
Count backwards from 20 down to 1. (1 point)
Question
Score
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
b. Mini-Cog
The Mini-Cog
1. Instruct the patient to listen carefully and repeat the following:
APPLE
WATCH
PENNY
2. Administer the Clock Drawing Test (CDT)
3. Ask the patient to repeat the three words given previously.
__________
__________
__________
Scoring:
Number of correct items recalled _______ [if 3 then negative screen.
STOP]
If answer is 1-2
Is CDT Abnormal? No Yes
If No, then negative screen
If Yes, then screen positive for cognitive impairment.
Instructions for CDT:
Inside the circle draw the hours of a clock as if a child would draw them.
Place the hands of the clock to represent the time “forty-five minutes
past ten o’clock”
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 5
DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL
DISORDER FIFTH EDITION (DSM-5)
Diagnostic criteria for major neurocognitive disorder (or dementia)
A. Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of
performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention,
executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptualmotor or social cognition) based on:
1. Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant or the
clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive
function; and
2. A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably
documented by standardised neuropsychological testing or in its
absence, another quantified clinical assessment.
B. The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday
activities (that is, at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex
instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing
medications).
C. The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a
delirium.
D. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental
disorder. Specify:
•
Without behavioural disturbance: if the cognitive disturbance
is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioural
disturbance.
•
With behavioural disturbance (specify disturbance): if the
cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant
behavioural disturbance (for example, psychotic symptoms, mood
disturbance, agitation, apathy or other behavioural symptoms).
For example, major depressive disorder or schizophrenia.
Diagnostic criteria for mild neurocognitive disorder
A. Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of
performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention,
executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptualmotor or social cognition) based on:
1. Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant or the
clinician that there has been a mild decline in cognitive function;
and
2. A modest impairment in cognitive performance, preferably
documented by standardised neuropsychological testing or in its
absence, another quantified clinical assessment.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
B. The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence
in everyday activities (that is complex instrumental activities of daily
living such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved,
but greater effort, compensatory strategies or accommodation may
be required).
C. The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a
delirium.
D. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental
disorder (for example, major Depressive Disorder or Schizophrenia).
Source: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-5. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association,
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 6
INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
AND RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS, 10TH REVISION (ICD-10)
Dementia
F00 Dementia in Alzheimer’s disease
F00.0 Dementia in Alzheimer’s disease with early onset
F00.1 Dementia in Alzheimer’s disease with late onset
F00.2 Dementia in Alzheimer’s disease, atypical or mixed type
F00.9 Dementia in Alzheimer’s disease, unspecified
F01 Vascular dementia
F01.0 Vascular dementia of acute onset
F01.1 Multi-infarct dementia
F01.2 Subcortical vascular dementia
F01.3 Mixed cortical and subcortical vascular dementia
F01.8 Other vascular dementia
F01.9 Vascular dementia, unspecified
F02 Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere
F02.0 Dementia in Pick’s disease
F02.1 Dementia in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
F02.2 Dementia in Huntington’s disease
F02.3 Dementia in Parkinson’s disease
F02.4 Dementia in human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
F02.8 Dementia in other specified diseases classified elsewhere
F03 Unspecified dementia
A fifth character may be added to specify dementia in F00-F03, as
follows:
.x0 Without additional symptoms
.x1 Other symptoms, predominantly delusional
.x2 Other symptoms, predominantly hallucinatory
.x3 Other symptoms, predominantly depressive
.x4 Other mixed symptoms
Dementia
A general description of dementia is given here, to indicate the minimum
requirement for the diagnosis of dementia of any type, and is followed
by the criteria that govern the diagnosis of more specific types.
Dementia is a syndrome due to disease of the brain, usually of a
chronic or progressive nature, in which there is disturbance of multiple
higher cortical functions, including memory, thinking, orientation,
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
comprehension,
calculation,
learning
capacity,
language
and
judgement. Consciousness is not clouded. Impairments of cognitive
function are commonly accompanied and occasionally preceded by
deterioration in emotional control, social behaviour or motivation. This
syndrome occurs in Alzheimer’s disease, in cerebrovascular disease
and in other conditions primarily or secondarily affecting the brain.
In assessing the presence or absence of dementia, special care should
be taken to avoid false-positive identification: motivational or emotional
factors, particularly depression, in addition to motor slowness and
general physical frailty, rather than loss of intellectual capacity, may
account for failure to perform.
Dementia produces an appreciable decline in intellectual functioning
and usually some interference with personal activities of daily living,
such as washing, dressing, eating, personal hygiene, excretory and
toilet activities. How such a decline manifests itself will depend largely
on the social and cultural setting in which the patient lives. Changes in
role performance, such as lowered ability to keep or find a job, should
not be used as criteria for dementia because of the large cross-cultural
differences that exist in what is appropriate and because there may be
frequent, externally imposed changes in the availability of work within
a particular culture.
If depressive symptoms are present but the criteria for depressive
episode (F32.0-F32.3) are not fulfilled, they can be recorded by means
of a fifth character. The presence of hallucinations or delusions may be
treated similarly.
.x0 Without additional symptoms
.x1 Other symptoms, predominantly delusional
.x2 Other symptoms, predominantly hallucinatory
.x3 Other symptoms, predominantly depressive
.x4 Other mixed symptoms
Source: World Health Organisation. ICD-10 Classifications of Mental and Behavioural
Disorder: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva. 2016.
(Available at: https://icd.who.int/browse10/2016/en#/F90.0)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 7a
THE GLOBAL DETERIORATION SCALE FOR ASSESSMENT OF
PRIMARY DEGENERATIVE DEMENTIA
The Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), developed by Dr. Barry
Reisberg, provides caregivers an overview of the stages of cognitive
function for those suffering from primary degenerative dementia e.g.
AD. It is broken down into seven different stages. Stages 1 - 3 are
the pre-dementia stages while Stages 4 - 7 are the dementia stages.
Beginning in stage 5, an individual can no longer survive without
assistance. Within the GDS, each stage is numbered (1 - 7), given a
short title (i.e., forgetfulness, early confusional, etc. followed by a brief
listing of the characteristics for that stage. Caregivers can get a rough
idea of where an individual is at in the disease process by observing
that individual’s behavioural characteristics and comparing them to the
GDS. For more specific assessments, use the accompanying Brief
Cognitive Rating Scale (BCRS) and the FAST measures.
Clinical Characteristics
Level
No subjective complaints of memory deficit.
No memory deficit evident on clinical
interview.
Subjective complaints of memory deficit,
most frequently in the following areas: (a)
forgetting where one has placed familiar
objects; (b) forgetting names one formerly
knew well. No objective evidence of
memory deficit on clinical interview. No
objective deficits in employment or social
situations. Appropriate concern with respect
to symptomatology.
Earliest clear-cut deficits. Manifestations
in more than one of the following areas:
(a) patient may have gotten lost when
traveling to an unfamiliar location; (b)
co-workers become aware of patient’s
relatively poor performance; (c) word and
name finding deficit becomes evident to
intimates; (d) patient may read a passage
or a book and retain relatively little material;
(e) patient may demonstrate decreased
facility
in
remembering
names
upon
introduction to new people; (f) patient may
1
No cognitive
decline
2
Very mild cognitive
decline
(Age Associated
Memory
Impairment)
3
Mild cognitive
decline
(Mild Cognitive
Impairment)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Clinical Characteristics
Level
have lost or misplaced an object of value; (g)
concentration deficit may be evident on clinical
testing. Objective evidence of memory deficit
obtained only with an intensive interview.
Decreased
performance
in
demanding
employment and social settings. Denial
begins to become manifest in patient. Mild to
moderate anxiety accompanies symptoms.
Clear-cut deficit on careful clinical interview.
Deficit manifest in the following areas: (a)
decreased knowledge of current and recent
events; (b) may exhibit some deficit in memory
of one’s personal history; (c) concentration
deficit elicited on serial subtractions; (d)
decreased ability to travel, handle finances,
etc. Frequently no deficit in the following
areas: (a) orientation to time and place; (b)
recognition of familiar persons and faces; (c)
ability to travel to familiar locations. Inability
to perform complex tasks. Denial is dominant
defense mechanism. Flattening of affect
and withdrawal from challenging situations
frequently occur.
Patient can no longer survive without some
assistance. Patient is unable during interview
to recall a major relevant aspect of their
current lives, e.g. an address or telephone
number of many years, the names of close
family members (e.g. grandchildren), the
name of the high school or college from
which they graduated. Frequently some
disorientation to time (date, day of week,
season, etc.) or to place. An educated
person may have difficulty counting back
from 40 by 4s or from 20 by 2s. Persons at
this stage retain knowledge of many major
facts regarding themselves and others.
They invariably know their own names and
generally know their spouses’ and children’s
names. They require no assistance with
toileting and eating, but may have some
difficulty choosing the proper clothing to
wear.
4
Moderate cognitive
decline
(Mild Dementia)
5
Moderately severe
cognitive decline
(Moderate
Dementia)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Clinical Characteristics
Level
May occasionally forget the name of the
spouse upon whom they are entirely dependent
for survival. Will be largely unaware of all
recent events and experiences in their lives.
Retain some knowledge of their past lives
but this is very sketchy. Generally unaware
of their surroundings, the year, the season,
etc. May have difficulty counting from 10,
both backward and sometimes forward. Will
require some assistance with activities of
daily living, e.g. may become incontinent, will
require travel assistance but occasionally will
be able to travel to familiar locations. Diurnal
rhythm frequently disturbed. Almost always
recall their own name. Frequently continue to
be able to distinguish familiar from unfamiliar
persons in their environment. Personality
and emotional changes occur. These are
quite variable and include: (a) delusional
behaviour, e.g. patients may accuse their
spouse of being an impostor, may talk to
imaginary figures in the environment or
to their own reflection in the mirror; (b)
obsessive symptoms, e.g. person may
continually repeat simple cleaning activities;
(c) anxiety symptoms, agitation and even
previously non-existent violent behaviour
may occur; (d) cognitive abulia, i.e. loss
of willpower because an individual cannot
carry a thought long enough to determine a
purposeful course of action.
All verbal abilities are lost over the course
of this stage. Frequently there is no speech
at all, only unintelligible utterances and rare
emergence of seemingly forgotten words
and phrases. Incontinent of urine, requires
assistance toileting and feeding. Basic
psychomotor skills, e.g., ability to walk, are
lost with the progression of this stage. The
brain appears to no longer be able to tell
the body what to do. Generalised rigidity
and developmental neurologic reflexes are
frequently present.
6
Severe cognitive
decline
(Moderately Severe
Dementia)
7
Very severe
cognitive
decline
(Severe Dementia)
Source: Reisberg B, Ferris SH, de Leon MJ, et al. The Global Deterioration Scale
for assessment of primary degenerative dementia. Am J Psychiatry.
1982;139(9):1136-9
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 7b
FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT STAGING (FAST)
Level of Functioning
Stage
1
2
3
4
5
6a
6b
6c
6d
6e
7a
7b
7c
No difficulty, either subjectively or objectively.
Complains of forgetting location of objects. Subjective work
difficulties.
Decreased job functioning evident to co-workers. Difficulty in
traveling to new locations. Decreased organisational capacity.
Decreased ability to perform complex tasks, e.g. planning
dinner for guests, handling personal finances (e.g. forgetting to
pay bills), difficulty in marketing, etc.*
Requires assistance in choosing proper clothing to wear for
the day, season or occasion, e.g. patient may wear the same
clothing repeatedly unless supervised.*
Improperly putting on clothes without assistance or cuing
(e.g. may put street clothes on overnight clothes or shoes on
wrong feet or have difficulty buttoning clothing) occasionally or
more frequently over the past weeks.*
Unable to bathe (shower) properly (e.g. difficulty adjusting
bath-water (shower) temperature) occasionally or more
frequently over the past weeks.*
Inability to handle mechanics of toileting (e.g. forgets to flush
the toilet, does not wipe properly or properly dispose of toilet
tissue) occasionally or more frequently over the past weeks.*
Urinary incontinence (occasionally or more frequently over the
past weeks).*
Faecal incontinence (occasionally or more frequently over the
past weeks).*
Ability to speak limited to approximately a half a dozen
intelligible different words or fewer, in the course of an
average day or in the course of an intensive interview.
Speech ability limited to the use of a single intelligible word in
an average day or in the course of an interview (the person
may repeat the word over and over).
Ambulatory ability lost (cannot walk without personal
assistance).
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
*Scored primarily on the basis of information obtained from a
knowledgeable informant and/or caregiver.
FAST scoring instructions:
The FAST Stage is the highest consecutive level of disability. For
clinical purposes, in addition to staging the level of disability, additional
non-ordinal (non-consecutive) deficits should be noted since these
additional deficits are of clear clinical relevance.
Source: Reisberg B. Functional assessment staging (FAST). Psychopharmacol Bull.
1988;24(4):653-9
Cannot sit up without assistance (e.g., the individual will fall
over if there are no lateral rests [arms] on the chair).
Loss of ability to smile.
Loss of ability to hold up head independently.
7d
7e
7f
Level of Functioning
Stage
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 8
MEDICATIONS USED FOR THE TREATMENT OF DEMENTIA
Name
Dosing (mg/day)
Liver impairment
Renal impairment
Common adverse effects
Precautions
Initial: 5 mg once
daily, may increase to
10 mg once daily after
4 - 6 weeks
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Gastrointestinal (GI): diarrhoea,
nausea, vomiting
Central nervous system (CNS):
insomnia, fatigue, drowsiness
Cardiovascular: chest pain,
hypertension, syncope
Miscellaneous: accidental injury
Use with caution in patients:
1. at risk of prolonged cardiac
repolarisation.
2. sick-sinus syndrome,
bradycardia or conduction
abnormalities.
3. with risk factors for
rhabdomyolysis
4. at risk of peptic ulcer disease
5. with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD)
and/or asthma
6. with history of seizure disorder
7. with bladder outlet
obstruction/prostatic
hyperplasia
Oral
Initial: 1.5 mg twice
daily; may increase by
3 mg daily every 2
weeks (based on
tolerability)
Maximum dose: 6 mg
twice daily
Rivastigmine
Oral: No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Transdermal:
Child-Pugh class A
and B:
Initial and maximum
Oral: No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Transdermal: No
dosage adjustment
necessary
Gl: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea
CNS: dizziness, headache, falls
Endocrine and metabolic: weight
loss
Local: application site erythema
(transdermal)
Neuromuscular and skeletal: tremor
Cardiovascular: hypertension,
syncope
Use with caution in patients with:
1. CNS depression
2. allergic dermatitis
3. extrapyramidal effects
4. sick-sinus syndrome,
bradycardia or other
supraventricular conduction
abnormalities (Vagotonic effects)
Donepezil
Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors (AChEI)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Transdermal patch
Initial: Apply 4.6
mg/24 hours patch
once daily. If well
tolerated, may titrate
(no sooner than every
4 weeks) to 9.5 mg/24
hours and then to 13.3
mg/24 hours
(maximum dose)
Galantamine
dose of 4.6 mg/24
hours
Transdermal: No
dosage adjustment
necessary
Gl: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea
CNS: dizziness, headache, falls
Endocrine and metabolic: weight
loss
Local: application site erythema
(transdermal)
Neuromuscular and skeletal: tremor
Cardiovascular: hypertension,
syncope
5. at risk of peptic ulcer disease
6. COPD
7. history of seizure disorder
8. bladder outlet obstruction/
prostatic hyperplasia
Use with caution in patients with:
1. sick-sinus syndrome,
bradycardia or conduction
abnormalities
2. risk of peptic ulcer disease
3. chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and/or asthma
4. history of seizure disorder
5. bladder outlet obstruction/
prostatic hyperplasia
Initial: 4 mg twice daily
for 4 weeks
Maintenance:
If tolerated, increased
to 8 mg twice daily for
more than 4 weeks
If tolerated, increase to
12 mg twice daily
*If treatment interrupted
>3 days, to restart at
lowest dose
Moderate: Max dose
16 mg/day
Severe: Use not
recommended
Creatinine clearance
(CrClr) 9 - 59 ml/min:
Max dose 16 mg/day
CrClr <9 ml/min:
Max dose 8mg/day
GI: diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting,
decreased appetite, abdominal
pain/distress, dyspepsia
CNS: dizziness, fatigue,
drowsiness, depression, falling
Cardiovascular: bradycardia,
syncope
Neuromuscular: tremors
Others: weight loss
Memantine
Hypersensitivity have been reported.
Advise patients to report skin
reactions immediately.
Use with caution in patients with:
1. cardiovascular disease
2. hepatic impairment
3. ophthalmic disease
Initial: 5 mg once daily;
increase dose by 5 mg
every week as
tolerated to a target
maximum dose of
20 mg/day
Dose may be
Mild to moderate
impairment: No dosage
adjustment necessary
Severe impairment:
Use with caution
Mild impairment: No
dosage adjustment
necessary
CrCL 30 - 49 ml/min:
Initial 5 mg once daily;
after at least 1 week
of therapy and if
Cardiovascular: hypertension
CNS: dizziness, confusion,
headache, fatigue
GI: diarrhoea, constipation, vomiting
Genitourinary: urinary incontinence
Neuromuscular and skeletal: back pain
Respiratory: cough, dyspnoea
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Name
Dosing (mg/day)
Liver impairment
Renal impairment
Common adverse effects
Precautions
Agitation/aggression
and psychosis
associated with
dementia, severe or
refractory:
Initial: 2 - 5 mg once
daily; may increase
dose based on
response and
tolerability in 5 mg
increments at intervals
≥1 week up to 15 mg
once daily
In severe agitation
associated with
dementia with Lewy
bodies, antipsychotics
are generally avoided;
if use is required,
titrating above
2 - 5 mg/day is not
recommended
Aripiprazole
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Increased serum glucose, weight
gain, constipation, nausea,
vomiting, agitation, akathisia,
anxiety, drowsiness
extrapyramidal reaction,
fatigue, headache, sedation,
insomnia, tremor
1. Suicidal thinking/behaviour
2. Cardiovascular disease
3. Dementia
4. Parkinson’s Disease
5. Seizures
Agitation/aggression
and psychosis
Olanzapine
Use with caution
(cases of hepatitis
No dosage
adjustment necessary
Orthostatic hypotension, Increased
LDL, triglyceride & serum
1. Cardiovascular disease
2. Hepatic impairment
4. renal impairment
5. seizure disorder
administered once daily
or two divided doses
tolerated, may titrate
up to a target dose of
5 mg twice daily
Antipsychotics
NOTE: All these medications are currently OFF-LABEL based on MoH National Formulary and National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency (NPRA)
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
associated with
dementia, severe or
refractory:
Initial: 2.5 mg once
daily, may increase
dose based on
response and
tolerability in
increments of
2.5 - 5 mg/day at
intervals ≥1 week up
to 10 mg/day
and liver injury have
been reported with
olanzapine use).
No dosage adjustment
except when used in
combination with
fluoxetine (as separate
components) when
initial olanzapine
dose should be
limited to 2.5 - 5 mg
daily.
cholesterol, increased serum
glucose, increased serum
prolactin, weight gain, constipation,
dyspepsia, increased appetite,
xerostomia, decreased serum
bilirubin, increased serum alanine
aminotransferase, increased serum
aspartate aminotransferase,
akathisia, dizziness, drowsiness,
extrapyramidal reaction, fatigue,
headache, insomnia, parkinsonism,
asthenia
3. Dementia
4. Parkinson’s Disease
5. Seizures
6. Renal Impairment
Agitation/aggression
and psychosis
associated with
dementia, severe or
refractory:
Initial: 25 mg at
bedtime; may increase
dose gradually
(e.g. weekly) based on
response and
tolerability up to 75 mg
twice daily
Quetiapine
IR tablet: Initial: 25 mg
once daily; increase
dose by 25 to 50 mg/
day to effective dose,
based on individual
clinical response and
tolerability
ER tablet: Initial: 50 mg
once daily; increase
dose by 50 mg once
daily to effective dose,
based on individual
clinical response and
tolerability
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Removal by dialysis
unlikely.
Increased diastolic blood pressure,
increased systolic blood pressure,
orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia,
decreased HDL cholesterol,
increased serum cholesterol,
increased serum triglycerides,
weight gain, increased appetite,
xerostomia, decreased haemoglobin,
agitation, dizziness, drowsiness,
extrapyramidal reaction, fatigue,
headache, withdrawal syndrome
1. Cancer
2. Impaired gastrointestinal motility
3. Hepatic impairment
4. Seizures
5. Urinary retention
Agitation/aggression
and psychosis
associated with
dementia, severe or
Risperidone
Severe impairment
(Child-Pugh class C):
Initial: 0.5 mg twice
daily; titration should
Severe impairment
(CrCl <30 ml/minute):
initial: 0.5 mg twice
daily; titrate slowly in
Hyperprolactinaemia, weight gain,
increased appetite, nausea, upper
abdominal pain, urinary incontinence,
akathisia, anxiety, dizziness,
1. Cardiovascular disease
2. Hepatic impairment
3. Dementia
4. Seizures
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
refractory:
Initial: 0.5 mg/day in
two divided doses;
may increase dose
based on response
and tolerability in
increments of 0.5 mg/
day at intervals ≥2
days up to 1 mg/day
progress slowly in
increments of no more
than 0.5 mg twice daily;
increases to dosages
>1.5 mg twice daily
should occur at
intervals of ≥1 week
increments of no more
than 0.5 mg twice daily;
increases to dosages
>1.5 mg twice daily
should occur at
intervals of ≥1 week
drooling, drowsiness, drug-induced
extrapyramidal reaction, fatigue,
headache, insomnia, parkinsonism,
sedation, tremor, cough,
nasopharyngitis, rhinorrhea, fever
5. Renal Impairment
mg=milligramme, GI=gastrointestinal, CNS=central nervous system, IR=immediate release, ER=extended release, CrCl=creatinine clearance, LDL=low density
lipoprotein, HDL=high density lipoprotein
Source:
1. Ministry of Health Medicines Formulary (Updated April 2019) (Available https://www.pharmacy.gov.my/v2/en/apps/fukkm)
2. Lexicomp. Memantine: Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved March 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/memantine-drug-information?search=mema
ntine&source=panel_search_result&selectedTitle=1~44&usage_type=panel&kp_tab=drug_general&display_rank=1
3. Lexicomp. Donepezil: Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved Maech 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/donepezil-drug-information?search=donepezi
l&source=panel_search_result&selectedTitle=1~46&usage_type=panel&kp_tab=drug_general&display_rank=1
4. Lexicomp. Rivastigmine: Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved March 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/rivastigmine-drug-information?search=riva
stigmine&source=panel_search_result&selectedTitle=1~26&usage_type=panel&kp_tab=drug_general&display_rank=1
5. Lexicomp. Aripiprazole (oral and long-acting injectable [Abilify Maintena]): Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved March 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/
contents/aripiprazole-oral-and-long-acting-injectable-abilify-maintena-drug-information?search=aripiprazole&selectedTitle=1~76&usage_type=panel&display_
rank=1&kp_tab=drug_general&source=panel_search_result
6. Lexicomp. Olanzapine: Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved March 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/olanzapine-drug-information?search=olanza
pine&source=panel_search_result&selectedTitle=1~148&usage_type=panel&kp_tab=drug_general&display_rank=1
7. Lexicomp. Risperidone: Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved March 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/risperidone-drug-information?search=risperi
done&source=panel_search_result&selectedTitle=1~122&usage_type=panel&kp_tab=drug_general&display_rank=1
8. Lexicomp. Quetiapine: Drug information. UpToDate. Retrieved March 18, 2021 from https://www.uptodate.com/contents/quetiapine-drug-information?search=quetiapi
ne&source=panel_search_result&selectedTitle=1~132&usage_type=panel&kp_tab=drug_general&display_rank=1
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 9
ANTICHOLINERGIC BURDEN SCORE
Source: Aging Brain Care. Anticholinergic Cognitive Burden Scale 2012 Update.
(Available
at:
http://www.idhca.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DESAI_
ACB_scale_-_Legal_size_paper.pdf)
Drugs with ACB Score of 1
Alimemazine
Alverine
Alprazolam
Aripiprazole
Asenapine
Atenolol
Bupropion
Captopril
Cetirizine
Chlorthalidone
Cimetidine
Clidinium
Clorazepate
Codeine
Colchicine
Desloratadine
Diazepam
Digoxin
Dipyridamole
Disopyramide
Fentanyl
Furosemide
Fluvoxamine
Haloperidol
Hydralazine
Hydrocortisone
Iloperidone
Isosorbide
Levocetirizine
Loperamide
Loratadine
Metoprolol
Morphine
Nifedipine
Paliperidone
Prednisone
Quinidine
Ranitidine
Risperidone
Theophylline
Trazodone
Triamterene
Venlafaxine
Warfarin
Amitriptyline
Amoxapine
Atropine
Benztropine
Brompheniramine
Carbinoxamine
Chlorpheniramine
Chlorpromazine
Clemastine
Clomipramine
Clozapine
Darifenacin
Desipramine
Dicyclomine
Dimenhydrinate
Diphenhydramine
Doxepin
Doxylamine
Fesoterodine
Flavoxate
Hydroxyzine
Hyoscyamine
Imipramine
Meclizine
Methocarbamol
Nortriptyline
Olanzapine
Orphenadrine
Oxybutynin
Paroxetine
Perphenazine
Promethazine
Propantheline
Propiverine
Quetiapine
Scopolamine
Solifenacin
Thioridazine
Tolterodine
Trifluoperazine
Trihexyphenidyl
Trimipramine
Trospium
Amantadine
Belladonna
Carbamazepine
Cyclobenzaprine
Cyproheptadine
Loxapine
Meperidine
Methotrimeprazine
Molindone
Nefopam
Oxcarbazepine
Pimozide
Drugs with ACB Score of 2
Drugs with ACB Score of 3
Categorical Scoring
• Possible anticholinergics include those listed with a score of 1
• Definite anticholinergics include those listed with a score of 2 or 3
Numerical Scoring
• Add the score contributed to each selected medication in each scoring category.
• Add the number of possible or definite anticholinergic medications.
Notes
Criteria for Categorisation
Score of 1: Evidence from in vitro data that chemical entity has antagonist activity at
muscarinic receptor
Score of 2: Evidence from literature, prescriber’s information or expert opinion of
clinical anticholinergic effect
Score of 3: Evidence from literature, expert opinion, or prescriber’s information that
medication may cause delirium
• Each definite anticholinergic may increase the risk of cognitive impairment by 46%
over six years.
• For each on point increase in the ACB total score, a decline in MMSE score of 0.33
points over two years has been suggested.
• Additionally, each one-point increase in the ACB total score has been correlated
with a 26% increase in the risk of death.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 10
SUGGESTED GUIDE TO REVIEW AND DEPRESCRIBE (POTENTIALLY
INAPPROPRIATE PRESCRIPTION/PSYCHOTROPIC)
IN DEMENTIA
Step 1: Evaluation
• If YES for at least one of the above, kindly proceed to Step 2.
Step 2: PIP/Pyschotropic Review
• If YES for any one of the above, kindly proceed to Step 3.
Step 3: PIP/psychotropic Reconciliation
Kindly consider the following actions for this patient:
1. Deprescribing PIP/psychotropic
2. Substituting to a better alternative
3. Modify the regime (dose, frequency and duration, etc.)
4. Consider potential for managing all symptoms with a single PIP/
psychotropic
Does the patient have more than one (PIP/psychotropic)?
No
Yes
Has the patient been on (PIP/psychotropic) >3 months?
No
Yes
Parameter Description
Review
Indication
Is there a justified reason?
No
Yes
Effectiveness
Has it been effective for the indication?
No
Yes
Is it the recommended choice for the indication?
No
Yes
Safety
Is there therapeutic duplication?
No
Yes
Is there any contraindication(s) to the patient?
No
Yes
Is there a potential or actual and significant
No
drug interaction?
Yes
Is this regime a result of prescribing cascade?
No
Yes
Pharmacother- Is the dose appropriate?
No
apy
Yes
Is the frequency appropriate?
No
Yes
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 11
IMPORTANT POINTS FOR THE CAREGIVER OF PEOPLE
WITH DEMENTIA
1. UNDERSTANDING DEMENTIA
2. SUPPORT FOR CAREGIVERS/CARERS
b. Learn to engage with PWD
3. RECOGNISE FUNDAMENTAL NEEDS OF CARE FOR PWD
• The caregivers need to understand about dementia and the importance
of early detection and early diagnosis.
• PWD feel stressed when they are unable to recall what has just
happened. They may also be disorientated to time, place and person.
Though their memory, understanding and judgement are declining,
their emotion may still be intact.
a. Recognise the stress and challenges faced by PWD and
suggested carer responses
• Caring for PWD may cause stress to family and caregivers. Build-up
of stress may lead to emotional problems and poor health of the
caregivers. One of the ways to relieve the stress is to have someone
to talk to, e.g. using telephone counselling service or participating in
support group events which are tailored to their needs. The support
group should also involve other family members as well.
• Caregivers should be aware of their own physical and mental health
issues e.g. increased risk of depression and over tiredness.
Therefore, respite care should be offered for adequate support to
help caregivers in coping with caring for PWD.
i. Forgetfulness:
PWD do not recall what they
talked about and with whom
they talked.
ii. Disorientated to time, place
and person:
PWD may repeatedly ask the
day, date, where they are and
who the persons around them.
iii. Impaired understanding and
judgement:
For instance, PWD may become
unable to cook, use remote
control for television or operate
the washing machine.
Helpful tips:
Courteously answer the questions
because PWD have difficulty to
recall and may be repeatedly
asking question for confirmation as
a result of being anxious.
Helpful tips:
PWD may have problems organising and making plans and, executing tasks correctly. Confirm with
them the actions that they are
doing and ask what they want to
do next step by step.
Helpful Tips:
Engage in the activity together with
PWD. For example, instead of
allowing person with dementia to
cook, let them do simple things like
washing vegetables or peeling
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
iv. Delusion:
A false belief that is beyond
challenge. For instance, PWD
may have delusion of theft, that
is the false belief that their
valuable thing, e.g. money or
purse, has been stolen by
someone
despite
being
reassured that this does not
occur.
v. Wandering:
PWD may also try to leave the
house to go somewhere but
loses his or her way before
reaching the destination.
vi. Anger:
PWD may suddenly get upset
and
become
verbally
or
physically agitated. They can
be
sensitive
to
certain
conversations and may become
angry and restless as they are
unable to express their feelings
and difficulties.
i. Eating:
PWD often forget they have
eaten
and
may
also
not
recognise edible/food items
from nonedible items.
ii. Bathing:
PWD may not be co-operative
to take bath; they may refuse
onions and, at the same time
ensuring their safety.
Helpful tips:
Caregiver should show interest in
looking for the item together with
the PWD. Once search is done,
distract the activity by saying for
e.g. ‘We have tried searching for
the item, but can’t find it, let’s have
a cup of tea and look again later’.
Helpful tips:
Person with dementia may have
their own reason to go out. The
carer can try to engage by asking
“where are you going” and “why
are you going?” Carer may then
help them to achieve their purpose.
It is also useful to put a name tag
with their name, address and
contact details on their clothes so
that others can assist them in
finding their way home.
Helpful tips:
Carers will need to be more
accommodating and avoid triggers
or
situations
that
hurt
their
feelings.
Helpful tips:
Explain regarding timing of meals
by mentioning actual time. Avoid
having nonedible items within
reach for those who cannot tell
the difference.
Helpful tips:
When a PWD who usually takes
bath refuses to do so, it may be
c. Understand important daily life activities of PWD
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
Source:
1. Division for Dementia and Community Care Promotion. Living together with
people with dementia; Key points for the care of people with dementia at home.
Kumamoto Prefecture; Department of Health and Social Services; 2013.
2. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Dementia: assessment,
management and support for people living with dementia and their carers. London:
NICE; 2018.
to undress, wash themselves
or dress after their bath.
iii. Excretion:
PWD may urinate in inappropriate
places, repeatedly go to the
bathroom or do not understand
the need to urinate or defecate.
due to being unwell. Hence,
caregiver need to ask about their
physical condition.
During the bathing process:
• talk to them gently and be
careful not to hurt their pride.
During the dressing process:
• replace their clothes fasteners
or buttons with Velcro tape
• put signs on their clothes to
distinguish the front and back
• prepare their clothes in the
correct order of putting on
Helpful tips:
Caregiver may put a large sign on
the bathroom door, keep the
doorways bright and switch on the
lights in the bathroom at night.
Another tip is to bring the PWD to
the toilet at frequent interval.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 12
USEFUL RESOURCES
Organisation Information
State
Alzheimer's Disease Foundation Malaysia
Tel: +603-79562008 / +603-79583008 (Mon - Fri: 9am to 5pm)
Email: office.adfm@gmail.com
Website: https://adfm.org.my
ADFM National Caregivers Support Network: admalaysia.ning.com
Penang Dementia Association
Tel: +6016-6745429
Facebook: Penang Dementia Association
Dementia Society Perak
Ipoh AD Support Group
Tel: +605-2411691 / +6019-5712738
Email: tdsperak@gmail.com
Facebook: The Dementia Society Perak
Alzheimer's Disease Foundation Malaysia
National Helpline: +603-79315850 (Mon - Fri: 9am to 5pm)
Putrajaya Email: office.adfm@gmail.com
Facebook: Alzheimer's Disease Foundation Malaysia-ADFM
ADFM National Caregivers Support Network: admalaysia.ning.com
Alzheimer's Disease Foundation Malaysia
Atria ADFM Community Corner
Tel: +6017-8867703 (Mon - Sun & PH: 11am to 7pm)
Email: office.adfm@gmail.com
Facebook: Alzheimer's Disease Foundation Malaysia-ADFM
ADFM National Caregivers Support Network: admalaysia.ning.com
Kumpulan Sokongan Dementia Negeri Sembilan (KUSDeNS)
Email: wecaredementian9@gmail.com
Tel: +606-7684804
Johor Bahru Alzheimer's Disease Support Association (JOBADA)
Tel: +607-2222016 (JOBADA office)/ +6012-7091277
Email: jobadajohor@gmail.com
Facebook: Jobada Johor
Sabah Alzheimer’ Disease Association (Sabah AZ)
Tel: +6088-231030 / +6088-270730
Email: kjchau88@hotmail.com
Facebook: Sabah Alzheimer's Disease Support Association
Trinity ElderCare Centre (TEC)
Tel/Fax: +6082-255758
Email: tmceldercare@gmail.com
Facebook: Trinity ElderCare Centre
National
Penang
Perak
Selangor, Wilayah
Persekutuan
Kuala Lumpur &
Putrajaya
Selangor
Negeri Sembilan
Johor
Sabah
Sarawak
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
APPENDIX 13
ADVANCE CARE PLANNING
Source:
1. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Dementia: assessment,
management and support for people living with dementia and their carers. London:
NICE; 2018.
2. Harrison Dening K, Sampson EL, De Vries K. Advance care planning in
dementia: recommendations for healthcare professionals. Palliat Care.
2019;12:1178224219826579.
Advance care planning (ACP) is a process of discussing and recording
PWD’s wishes, values and preferences of future care together with their
family members and health care providers (HCP) which will take effect
once the PWD lose their capacity to make decision.
The discussion of ACP should include:
• benefits of planning ahead
• PWD’s proxy or substitute decision-maker when the PWD lacks
capacity to make decisions
• advance statement about their wishes, values, preferences and
beliefs regarding their future care
• advance decisions to refuse certain treatments e.g. intubation,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, enteral feeding, etc.
• their preferences for place of care and place of death
Recommendations for HCP during ACP discussion.
• Start ACP as early as possible when the PWD and family members
are ready.
• ACP conversations are not one-off occurrence and it should be
revised from time to time especially when changes of clinical
condition occur.
• Try to understand the PWD from their perspectives before initiation of
discussion on ACP - explore their life stories, important values,
norms, beliefs and preferences.
• Use the language which is familiar to the PWD.
• Adjust conversation style and content to the PWD’s level and rhythm.
• Obtain the PWD’s permit to invite family members to join the
conversation.
• Evaluate their disease awareness and inform them about the
expected disease trajectory and possible end-of-life decisions.
• Explore the PWD’s current experiences, their fears and concerns for
the future and end-of-life.
• Lead the conversation but do not force it or dominate the discussion.
• Keep connected with the PWD to ensure their maximum
participation, respond to their emotions, attend to non-verbal
communication and observe their behaviour.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
11C-PIB-PET 11C-labeled Pittsburgh compound B-positron emission tomography
123I-FP-CIT
Iodine 123-radiolabeled 2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-
fluoropropyl) nortropane
123I-MIBG
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine
ACB
anticholinergic burden
ACE-III
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III
AChEI
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
ACP
advance care planning
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
AD-8
Eight-item Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia
ADAS-Cog
Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale
ADCS-CGIC Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study - Clinical Global Impression
of Change
ADDTC
Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnostic and Treatment Centres
ADL
activity of daily living
AE
adverse event
AGREE II
Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation II
aHR
adjusted hazard ratio
AMTS
Abbreviated Mental Test Score
ANI
Asymptomatic Neurocognitive Impairment
AP
antipsychotic
APOE4
apolipoprotein E4
ARB
angiotensin II receptor blockers
ARD
alcohol-related dementia
ART
antiretroviral therapy
BEHAVE-AD Behavioural Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease Rating Scale
BMI
body mass index
BPRS
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale
BPSD
behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
bvFTD
behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia
CBT
cognitive behavioural therapy
CGI
Clinical Global Impression
CGI-C
CGI-Corrections
CGI-I
CGI-Improvement
CGI-S
CGI-Severity
CI
confidence interval
CIBIC+
Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Change
CIND
cognitive impairment no dementia
CIND-PD
cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s Disease
cm2
centimetre square
CMAI
Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory
CNS
central nervous system
CPE
CNS penetration effectiveness
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CQ
clinical question
CrCl
creatinine clearance
CSDD
Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
CT
computed tomography
DAD
Disability Assessment for Dementia
DAT
dopamine transporter
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
DG
development group
DLB
dementia with Lewy Body
DM
diabetes mellitus
DSM-5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th Edition
EEG
electroencephalogram
ER
extended release
EGb761
ginkgo biloba extract 761
FAST
Functional Assessment Staging
FBI
Frontal Behavioural Inventory
FDG-PET
fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography
FTD
frontotemporal dementia
GDS
Global Deterioration Scale
GI
gastrointestinal
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluations
h
hour
HAD
HIV-associated Dementia
HANDs
HIV-associated Neurocognitive Disorders
HCP
health care providers
HDS
HIV Dementia Scale
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HR
hazard ratio
HTA
health technology assessment
IADL
Instrumental Activity of Daily Living
ICD-10
International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision
IHDS
International HIV Dementia Scale
IM
intramuscular
IQCODE
Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly
IR
immediate release
MADRS
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale
MCI
mild cognitive impairment
MD
mean difference
MDS
Movement Disorder Society
mg
milligramme
MMSE
Mini Mental State Examination
MND
Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
MoCA
Montreal Cognitive Assessment
MoH
Ministry of Health
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NBRS-A
Neurobehavioral Rating Scale-Agitation
NCDs
non-communicable diseases
NGOs
non-governmental organisations
NIA-AA
National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer’s Association
NICE
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NINDS-AIREN National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and
Association Internationale pour la Recherche et l’Enseignement en
Neurosciences
NMDA
N-methyl-D-aspartate
NOSGER
Nurses’ Observation Scale for Geriatric Patients
NPI
Neuropsychiatric Inventory
NPI-A
Neuropsychiatric Inventory-agitation
NPZ3
neuropsychological z-score 3
NRT
nicotine replacement therapy
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
OR
odds ratio
p
p value
PIP
potentially inappropriate prescription
PDD
Parkinson’s Disease Dementia
PWD
people with dementia
QoL
quality of life
RC
review committee
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RR
relative risk
RT
reminiscence therapy
SIB
Severe Impairment Battery
SLUMS
Saint Louis University Mental Status
SMD
standardised mean difference
SPECT
single-photon emission CT
SUCRA
surface under cumulative ranking
TBI
traumatic brain injury
TC
total serum cholesterol
TCM
traditional and complementary medicine
TEAEs
treatment-emergent adverse events/effects
US FDA
United States Food and Drug Administration
VaD
vascular dementia
V-ADAS-cog Vascular Dementia Assessment Scale Cognitive Subscale
VCAT
Visual Cognitive Assessment Test
VDRL
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test
vs
versus
WAB
Western Aphasia Battery
WHO
World Health Organization
WMD
weighted mean difference
ZBI
Zarit Burden Interview
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The CPG DG members would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Dr Toh Chin Lee, Senior Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist
on the development of the CPG
• Dr Junainah Sabirin, Consultant Public Health Physician on the
development of the CPG
• Mr. Mohd Tholib Ibrahim and Ms. Norharlina Che Zakaria on retrieval
of evidence
• Alzheimer’s Disease Foundation Malaysia on support and materials
for the CPG
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure forms.
None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants to such
firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Dementia (Third
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
Management of Dementia (Third Edition)