MANAGEMENT OF
NOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, not sold, or used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN: 978-967-2887-65-2
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platforms: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2023 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2027) or sooner if there is a need to do so. When
it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of
the related specialty will be informed about it. A discussion will be done
on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A
multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review
methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed. Every care is taken
to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of
publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections
will be published in the web version of this document, which is the
definitive version at all times. This version can be found on the websites
mentioned above.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iii
Development Group
vi
Review Committee
vii
External Reviewers
viii
Algorithm 1. Screening and Treatment of Retinopathy
ix
of Prematurity
Algorithm 2. Follow-Up of Retinopathy of Prematurity
x
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
2
3.
IDENTIFICATION AND SCREENING OF INFANTS AT RISK
4
3.1 Screening Criteria
4
3.2 Counselling
5
3.3 Preparation for Screening
6
3.4 Screening Methods
7
4.
CLASSIFICATION
9
5
NATURAL COURSE OF DISEASE 10
6.
TREATMENT
12
6.1
Indication of Treatment
12
6.2
Optimum Timing for Treatment
12
6.3
Options for Treatment
13
6.3.1 Laser photocoagulation
13
6.3.2 Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial
14
growth factor
6.3.3 Cryotherapy
17
6.3.4 Vitreoretinal surgery
17
6.3.5 Adjunctive treatment
18
6.4 Treatment in Aggressive Retinopathy of Prematurity
19
6.5 Rescue Treatment
20
7.
MONITORING AND DISCHARGE CRITERIA FOR
21
RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY SCREENING
8.
FOLLOW-UP 23
9.
REHABILITATION 25
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
26
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
26
10.2 Potential Resource Implication
26
REFERENCES
28
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
32
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
33
Appendix 3 Optimum Timing for First Retinopathy of
35
Prematurity Screening
Appendix 4 Alternative Dilating Regimes
36
Appendix 5 Summary of Key Components of
39
International Classification
Appendix 6 Features of Retinopathy of Prematurity
42
Appendix 7 Indications of Treatment
46
Appendix 8 Laser Photocoagulation in Retinopathy of
47
Prematurity
Appendix 9 Types and Properties of Anti-Vascular
49
Endothelial Growth Factor
Appendix 10 Procedure for Intravitreal Anti-VEGF Injection
51
Appendix 11 Special Educational Schools and Intergration
53
Programmes for People with Visual Problems
List of Abbreviations
56
Acknowledgement
57
Disclosure Statement
57
Source of Funding
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Source: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force Procedure Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work
process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size
is carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group.
In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical
experience; descriptive studies or case reports; reports of
expert committees
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the CPG
Development Group (DG) as the key clinical recommendations that
should be recognised for implementation.
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
• Screening for retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) should be done for
infants with either one of the following criteria:
 birth weight <1750 g
 gestational age <34 weeks
 infants with an unstable clinical course who are at high risk (as
determined by the neonatologist or paediatrician)
• First examination to detect ROP should be done based on postmenstrual age and post-natal age.
• Counselling on timely screening and treatment should be given to
parents/carers of infants at risk and diagnosed with retinopathy of
prematurity.
TREATMENT
• Type 1 prethreshold retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) should be
treated within 48 hours of diagnosis.
• Laser photocoagulation should be considered in the treatment of
zone II (except posterior zone II) ROP.
• Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth (anti-VEGF) factor
should be considered in zone I ROP and aggressive ROP.
FOLLOW-UP AND REHABILITATION
• Follow-up of infants with or without retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)
should be done accordingly with complete eye examination, based
on staging and treatment given.
• Visual rehabilitation should be provided to all visually-impaired
children.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
iii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the DG for these CPG were from the Ministry of Health
(MoH), the Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) and private sector.
There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee
during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platforms: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane
databases. Refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy.
The inclusion criteria are all infants with risk of developing ROP and
those with the established disease regardless of study design. The first
search was limited to literature published over the last 18 years (2005
- 2023) since the first CPG edition. The search was based on inclusion
criteria and all studies were in English. In addition, the reference lists of
all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to further identify
relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted for studies
related to the issues addressed. All searches were conducted from
8 March 2022 to 23 March 2022. The literature search was repeated
for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process
allowing any relevant papers published before 17 March 2023 to be
included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after
this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained
upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other guidelines on ROP as listed below:
• Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health. UK Screening of
Retinopathy of Prematurity Guideline, 2022
• Royal College of Ophthalmologist, Clinical Practice Guideline on
Treating Retinopathy of Prematurity in the UK, 2022
A total of 13 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions. The DG
members met 18 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meeting. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and Review Committee (RC). Where evidence was insufficient,
the recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC.
Any differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
iv
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE II).
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG and the Health Technology Assessment
(HTA) and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia, for review and approval. Details
on the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at http://www.moh.
gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf?mid=634)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
v
OBJECTIVES
The objective of the CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of ROP on the following aspects:
a) screening and referral
b) diagnosis
c) treatment and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
All infants with risk of developing ROP and those with the established
disease
TARGET GROUP/USER
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders involved in the management of ROP. These
include:
i. healthcare professionals (doctors, pharmacists and allied health
professionals)
ii. medical students and trainees
iii. policy makers
iv. professional organisations
v. patients, caregivers and their advocates
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
vi
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Norhafizah Hamzah
Head of Department & Paediatric Ophthalmologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah
Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Ms. Arifah Nur Yahya
Optometrist
Hospital Queen Elizabeth
Sabah
Professor Dr. Choo May May
Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist &
Academic Professor
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Affiliated with Save Sight Institute,
University of Sydney, Australia
Dr. Farah Inaz Syed Abdullah
Consultant Neonatologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Karen Sharmini Sandanasamy
Public Health Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor Akmal Bahari
Paediatric Ophthalmologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Norazah Abdul Rahman
Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist &
Strabismus
Ramsay Sime Darby Medical Centre
Selangor
Dr. Nurfahzura Mohd Jamil
Comprehensive Ophthalmologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh
Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Safinaz Mohd
Khialdin
Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist &
Medical Lecturer
Hospital Pakar Kanak-kanak Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sakinah Sulong
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Masai
Masai, Johor
Dr. Siti Norzalehawati Sepian
Paediatric Ophthalmologist
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah
Terengganu
Dr. Wendy See Yen Nee
Ophthalmologist
Hospital Umum
Sarawak
Dr. Widad Md Yusof @ Mohd Yusof
Consultant Vitreoretinal Surgeon
Hospital Selayang
Selangor
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
vii
Datuk Dr. Hajjah Nor Fariza Ngah
Head of Service &
Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Shah Alam
Selangor
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Manoharan Shunmugam
Consultant Ophthalmologist, Adult &
Paediatric Vitreoretinal Surgeon
OasisEye Specialists, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Neoh Siew Hong
Senior Consultant Neonatologist
Ms. Najihah Mohamad Shukri
Pharmacist
Hospital Tunku Azizah
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nor Higrayati Ahmad Kasah
Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah
Terengganu
Ms. Nor Aishah A Wahab
Optometrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Jamalia Rahmat
Senior Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
viii
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Professor Dr. Chen Ai Hong
Professor of Optometry
University Teknologi MARA
Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Christopher Tinley
Head of Clinical Research Unit &
Postgraduate Program Director
University of Cape Town, Cape Town
South Africa
Professor Dr. Frank Martin
Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist
Sydney Eye Hospital, University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Dr. Jafanita Jamaludin
Senior Principal Assistant Director
& Head of O&G & Paediatric Services Unit
Medical Services Development Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Ms. Lynne Speedwell
Head of Optometry
Clinical & Academic Department of
Ophthalmology
Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children
NHS Foundation Trust
London, United Kingdom
Dr. Norshireen Nazli Abdul Razak
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Tunku Azizah
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Nurliza Khaliddin
Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist
Department of Ophthalmology
Faculty of Medicine
University of Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Saharuddin
Ahmad
Family Medicine Consultant
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Dr. Hajah Shatriah Ismail
Head of Department &
Consultant Paediatric Ophthalmologist &
Strabismus
School of Medical Sciences
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Siti Hazury Zaulkifli
General Practitioner
Canon In-House Clinic
Canon Opto (M) Sdn. Bhd.
Shah Alam, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Shuaibah Ab
Ghani
Lecturer & Consultant Paediatric
Ophthalmologist & Strabismus
Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Sabah
Ms. Tiffany Savitri
Patient Advocate
Dr. Zainora Mohammed
Senior Lecturer
Program of Optometry & Vision Science
Faculty of Health Science
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
ix
ALGORITHM 1. SCREENING AND TREATMENT OF RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
FFA : Fundus fluorescein
angiography
GA : Gestational age
PMA: Post-menstrual age
ROP: Retinopathy of prematurity
VR : Vitreoretinal
FIRST OPHTHALMIC
EXAMINATION
•GA ≤27 weeks to perform at 31 weeks PMA
•GA 28 to 32 weeks to perform at 4 weeks after birth
•GA ≥32 weeks to perform at 36 weeks PMA
IMMATURE RETINA,
NO ROP OR ZONE 3 ROP
TYPE 2
PRETHRESHOLD ROP
TYPE 1
PRETHRESHOLD ROP
THRESHOLD ROP
AGGRESSIVE ROP
SCREEN 2-WEEKLY
SCREEN WEEKLY
TREAT WITHIN 48 HOURS
TREAT URGENTLY
LASER PHOTOCOAGULATION/
ANTI-VEGF
ANTI-VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL
GROWTH FACTOR (VEGF)
SCREEN WEEKLY TILL SIGNS OF REGRESSION
DISEASE NOT REGRESSED/PROGRESSIVE
RESCUE
TREATMENT
No response
Response
PROGRESSION
REGRESSION
FULLY VASCULARISED
PERSISTENT
AVASCULAR RETINA
STAGE 4 OR 5
MONITOR/FFA ± LASER
PHOTOCOAGULATION
VR SURGERY
REGRESSION OF ROP AND
FULLY VASCULARISED RETINA
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
NO ROP
ROP
FULLY VASCULARISED RETINA
SPONTANEOUS
REGRESSION
TREATMENT
REQUIRED
COMPLETE EYE
EXAMINATION AT 6 MONTHS
THEN VISUAL ACUITY AT
4 YEARS OF AGE
LASER PHOTOCOAGULATION/
ANTI-VEGF
REGRESSION WITH
COMPLETE
VASCULARISATION
PAR
PROGRESSION
RESCUE TREATMENT*
REGULAR
FOLLOW-UP
± FFA/LASER
PHOTOCOAGULATION
WITH
COMPREHENSIVE EYE
EXAMINATION
COMPREHENSIVE
EYE EXAMINATION
AT 6 MONTHS THEN
YEARLY UNTIL
5 YEARS OF AGE
x
ALGORITHM 2. FOLLOW-UP OF RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
FFA
: Fundus fluorescein
angiography
PAR : Persistent avascular
retina
ROP : Retinopathy of
prematurity
VEGF : Vascular endothelial
growth factor
*refer to Algorithm 1 on
Screening and Treatment
of ROP
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a vasoproliferative disease in
the developing retinal vessels of premature infants. This potentially
blinding condition is largely preventable if appropriate, adequate and
accessible screening programme are available. However, the preexisting ROP screening protocol needs to be updated based on the
latest development in neonatal care.
A 2019 report by the Malaysian National Neonatal Registry reviewed
the screening for ROP of 2,145 inborn infants at gestational age <32
weeks who survived to six weeks of age before discharged from
neonatal care. A total of 87.1% infants did not have ROP, 10.7% had
ROP stage 1 or 2, 1.6% stage 3 and 0.4% stage 4 or 5. The incidence
rate of severe ROP (stage 3, 4 and 5) were 20%, 7% and 0.7% in
infants with gestational age of 22 - 24 weeks, 25 - 27 weeks and 28 -
31 weeks respectively. A total of 38 infants had laser therapy and one
infant underwent cryotherapy.1, level III
The first local edition of the clinical practice guidelines (CPG) on the
management of ROP was published in 2005. With the advances
in research and technology, there is a great shift in the paradigm of
classification and treatment of the disease. This current edition intends
to update the recommendations in the management which includes
International Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity Third Edition
(ICROP-3) classification, intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor (anti-VEGF) treatment and vitrectomy techniques.
It is hoped that this latest edition of the CPG will improve the management
of ROP and thus prevent visual impairment (VI) and blindness in the
affected children.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
2. RISK FACTORS
There are various systemic risk factors that influence the development
and progression of ROP. Among these, low gestational age (GA) and
low birth weight (BW) are the strongest and most established risk
factors.
a. Prematurity
Gestational age is the most predictive risk factor for the development
of ROP.2
b. Low birth weight
The incidence of ROP was 68% among infants weighing <1251 g.3, level I
c. Small for gestational age
Intrauterine growth restriction is significantly associated with
development of Aggressive ROP (AROP).4, level II-2
In a meta-analysis of 20 cohort studies, small for gestational age (SGA)
in preterm infants was associated with severe ROP (OR=1.92, 95% CI
1.57 to 2.34) and treated ROP (OR=1.39, 95% CI 1.18 to 1.65). Based
on Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS),14 studies had low risk of bias and
seven studies had moderate risk.5, level I
d. Supplemental oxygen
In a secondary analysis of the Surfactant Positive Airway Pressure
and Pulse Oximetry Trial (SUPPORT) trial on survived premature
infants of 24 - 27 weeks’ gestational age, total duration of supplemental
oxygen (SpO2 of 91% - 96%) between two and five weeks was
associated with risk of severe ROP and this showed a dose-response
relationship.6, level I
A meta-analysis of five randomised controlled trials (RCTs) looked into
the effect of targeting a lower oxygen saturation range in extremely
preterm infants from birth or soon after. Although the lower SpO2 target
group had a lower risk of treatment for ROP (RR=0.74, 95% CI 0.63
to 0.86) than higher SpO2 target group, it had a higher risk of death
(RR=1.17, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.31). Using Cochrane Risk of Bias, the trials
were assessed as being at low risk of bias for all domains.7, level I These
findings were supported by an earlier Cochrane systematic review on
the same five RCTs but based on an analysis using aggregated data.7,
level I
e. Blood transfusion
In another meta-analysis, 13 cohort studies on preterm infants with
a GA of ≤32 weeks showed that red blood cell transfusion was an
independent risk factor for the development of ROP (OR=1.77, 95%
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
CI 1.29 to 2.43). However, there was no evidence to support its effect
of red blood cell transfusion on ROP in the older GA groups. The
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) score of the included studies ranged
from 6 to 8.8, level I
f. Sepsis
A meta-analysis of 16 studies demonstrated that sepsis being strongly
associated with severe ROP (OR=2.33, 95% CI 1.21 to 4.51). However,
the primary studies had high heterogeneity and were rated as low in
quality.9, level I
Chorioamnionitis was significantly associated with development of
AROP.4, level II-2
g. Necrotising enterocolitis
A multicentre cohort study determined the association of surgical
necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) and its timing with the development
of ROP. The findings supported the association of ROP with
NEC:10, level II-2
• infants with surgical NEC had higher risk of any ROP and severe
ROP than those without [OR of 2.7 (95% CI 1.9 to 3.7) and 2.5
(95% CI 1.9 to 3.3) respectively]
• subgroup analysis showed that infants with early surgical NEC
were at higher ROP risk than late surgical NEC
There was no significant difference in co-morbidities [chronic
lung disease, severe intraventricular haemorrhage (Grades III or
IV), hydrocephalus, patent ductus arteriosus and periventricular
leukomalacia] between the early and late surgical NEC groups.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
3. IDENTIFICATION AND SCREENING OF INFANTS AT RISK
3.1 Screening Criteria
Screening for ROP has been recommended to be carried out for infants
with either:2
• BW <1500 g
• GA <32 weeks
• infants with an unstable clinical course who are at high risk (as
determined by the neonatologist or paediatrician)
In the United Kingdom (UK), the screening criteria for ROP is GA <31
weeks (up to and including 30 weeks and six days) and/or BW <1501
g11 whereas in the United States of America (USA), the criteria is set at
GA ≤30 weeks and/or BW ≤1500 g.12
In a systematic review of 18 studies on screening for ROP in premature
infants, the risk of ROP was 30.7% in those born at GA ≤30 weeks or
BW ≤1500 g. The risk increased to 62.9% among those who were ≤27
weeks of GA and/or ≤750 g BW. The odds of developing ROP was 1.4
times for every week decrease in GA and 1.8 times for every 100 g
decrease in BW.13, level II-2
In a cross-sectional study on severe ROP, 13% of infants in moderate/
low developed countries had BW and GA exceeding the UK screening
criteria.14, level III
A prospective study using USA and UK screening criteria for ROP in
more mature and larger premature infants, the findings were:15, level III
• premature infants with BW >1500 g had 34.6% ROP and 25.9%
of them required treatment
• 25.8% of premature infants with GA >32 weeks had ROP and
10.8% of them needed treatment
• 14.7% treatment-requiring ROP would have been missed based
on the USA screening criteria
• 9.4% with severe ROP would have been missed based on the UK
screening criteria
Based on the evidence discussed above, the CPG DG has decided to
revise the screening criteria using the BW <1750 g and GA <34 weeks.
Recommendation 1
• Screening for retinopathy of prematurity should be done for infants
with either one of the following criteria:
 birth weight <1750 g
 gestational age <34 weeks
 infants with an unstable clinical course who are at high risk (as
determined by the neonatologist or paediatrician)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Timing to screen ROP is important as well. As ROP takes the longest
to develop in the most immature infants, too early a screening may not
detect any abnormalities. If it is done late, there is a risk of development
of poor outcomes due to late detection of prethreshold ROP that require
treatment.
In a five years retrospective cohort study on the optimisation of
screening guidelines on ROP in premature infants, the findings
were:16, level II-2
a. median postnatal age (PNA) at developing ROP was inversely
associated with GA at birth for premature infants i.e. -
• for GA <25 weeks, PNA was 8.57 weeks (range of 6.00 - 11.71)
• for GA between 25 to 34 weeks, PNA were between 4.29 and
7.71 weeks
• for GA >34 weeks, PNA was 4.71 weeks (range of 1.71 - 11.43)
b. no infant developed Type 1 ROP or other ROP needing treatment:
• before reaching a post-menstrual age (PMA) <32 weeks
regardless of GA
• before reaching a PNA of four weeks for premature infant with
a GA of <32 weeks
Timing of the initial examination is based on both PMA and PNA
where 99% of infants at risk of a poor visual outcome can be detected.
The recommended optimum timing for first screening is shown in
Appendix 3.
Recommendation 2
• First examination to detect retinopathy of prematurity should be
done based on post-menstrual age and post-natal age.
3.2 Counselling
Counselling is an important component in the management of ROP.
It has to be done in a safe, timely and coordinated manner to prevent
delays in management and alleviate uncertainties in parents’/carers’
mind. These can help them in the overall care of their infants including
regular check-ups through positive communications with the healthcare
providers.17, level III
There are a few aspects to be considered when delivering the
counselling to parents/carers of the infants. They are:
• Who need to be screened?
Infants delivered <34 weeks of gestation or BW <1750 g
• Why screening and treatment is needed?
ROP can cause blindness and permanent damage to the retina if
timely screening and treatment is not carried out.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
• What are the available options for treatment?
Laser photocoagulation for severe ROP (stage 3 and above).
Anti-VEGF injection can also be offered in some severe ROP.
• What are the adverse events (AEs) of treatment?
Infant’s eye may look red and swollen. Low incidence of eye
infection, cataract and life-long risk of retinal detachment (RD)
have been reported.
• What are the monitoring criteria for treated infants?
Infants are reviewed between two days to a week after treatment.
Up to 10% of treated infants may require retreatment.
Counselling should be given prior to screening and initiation of
treatment.18
• The counselling on screening can be given by paediatric doctors
and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) nurses while counselling
on treatment is only to be delivered by the treating ophthalmologists.
Recommendation 3
• Counselling on timely screening and treatment should be given to
parents/carers of infants at risk and diagnosed with retinopathy of
prematurity.
3.3 Preparation for Screening
For effective screening purposes, the eyes need to be fully dilated. In
local clinical practice, the infants are usually kept fasted from the time of
dilatation. Excess drops are needed to be wiped off to reduce systemic
absorption and side effects.
a.
Dilating regime
A systematic review showed that heterogeneous combinations of
mydriatic eye drops (cyclopentolate, tropicamide and phenylephrine)
were generally effective and safe to be used for ROP examination.
The lowest concentration regimen to provide adequate dilatation was a
combination of phenylephrine 1% and cyclopentolate 0.2% (one drop
each). Systemic absorption of mydriatics had been associated with
clinically significant and sometimes life-threatening cardiovascular,
respiratory and gastrointestinal AEs.19, level I The quality of the primary
papers was low to moderate.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
• Combination of Gutt cyclopentolate 0.2% and Gutt phenylephrine
1% (e.g. Gutt cyclomydril) may be used as the preferred dilating
regime.
• Monitoring for AEs are strongly advised in the use of mydriatic eye
drops.
Alternative
dilating
regimes
and
their
pharmacokinetics
and
pharmacodynamics are shown in Appendix 4.
b.
Pain relief
A meta-analysis of four RCTs found that sucrose was significantly
more effective than placebo to reduce pain during ROP examination
in preterm infants. The concentration of sucrose used in these studies
ranged at 24% to 33%. However, there may be a combined effect of
topical anaesthesia as it was used in three of the RCTs. Apart from that,
topical anaesthetic eye drops alone showed mixed results in reducing
pain while non-pharmacological interventions e.g. swaddling, sucking
and adjusting the environment (dim lighting with reduced sound and
activity level) did not significantly reduced pain. Overall, the quality of
the studies included was good.20, level I
A large RCT demonstrated that 1 ml of oral sucrose 25% given for
two minutes along with topical anaesthesia before ROP examination
significantly reduced clinically-observed pain based on Neonatal Infant
Pain Scale.21, level I
• Oral sucrose should be considered to be used with topical
anaesthesia in retinopathy of prematurity examination.
3.4 Screening Methods
a.
Conventional gold standard
The conventional screening methods for ROP is performed by the
ophthalmologist using a gold standard which is the Binocular Indirect
Ophthalmoscopy (BIO) in fully dilated eyes. Through technological
evolution, new screening methods using imaging techniques have been
introduced e.g. digital retinal photography and smart phone-assisted
imaging techniques.
b.
Digital retinal photography
In a systematic review, ROP screening by non-ophthalmologists using
digital retinal photography was shown to be a potentially useful tool
to diagnose treatment-warranted ROP (TW-ROP) or referral-warranted
ROP compared with BIO.22, level II-2
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
A diagnostic study supported the use of wide-field digital retinal imaging
in the diagnosis of severe and TW-ROP with 100% sensitivity and
specificity. However, BIO remained superior in detection of mild ROP in
the peripheral fundus.23, level III
In a cross-sectional study, wide-field digital retinal photography by
neonatal nurses was effective for diagnosing referral-warranting ROP
with a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 94.5%.24, level III
c.
Telemedicine
A multicentre diagnostic study showed that remote interpretation of
digital fundus images was a useful adjunct for ROP screening with BIO
as a reference standard. The sensitivities were high at 92% for both
clinically significant ROP and prethreshold Type I ROP.25, level III
The Stanford University Network for Diagnosis of ROP (SUNDROP)
study on 6-year telemedicine initiative reported high diagnostic accuracy
of retinal images done by trained nurses remotely and interpreted by a
ROP specialist in a centre. All images were compared with the gold
standard of BIO results by a paediatric retinal specialist. The sensitivity
was 100%, specificity 99.8%, positive predictive value (PPV) 95.5%
and negative predictive value (NPV) 100% for the detection of TWROP. There were no adverse anatomical outcomes observed.26, level III
On the other hand, the Karnataka Internet Assisted Diagnosis of
ROP (KIDROP) tele-ROP model required trained technicians to
identify patients with TW-ROP and send images to the ROP expert
for verification. Once ROP were confirmed, the patient underwent BIO
before treatment was instituted. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and
NPV of image grading by the technician were 95.7% (95% CI 85.1 to
99.3), 93.2% (95% CI 87.7 to 96.7), 81.5% (95% CI 68.6 to 90.7) and
98.6% (95% CI 94.9 to 99.8) respectively.27, level III
Recommendation 5
• Binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy (BIO) should be used for
screening retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) and performed by the
ophthalmologist.
• Wide-field retinal imaging should be considered to detect treatmentwarranted or referral-warranted ROP.
 This may be done by non-ophthalmologists with remote
interpretation via telemedicine.
 The findings should be confirmed by BIO prior to treatment.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
4. CLASSIFICATION
The ICROP-3 has been published in 2021. It retains current definitions
e.g. zone (location of disease), stage (appearance of disease at the
avascular and vascular junction) and circumferential extent of disease.
The major updates include:28, level III
• refined classification metrics (e.g. posterior zone II, notch,
subcategorisation of stage 5 and recognition of continuous
spectrum of plus disease)
• definition
of
AROP
replacing
aggressive-posterior
ROP
(APROP) because of increasing recognition that aggressive
disease may occur in larger preterm infants and beyond the
posterior retina
Figure 1: Updates of Retinal Zones for ROP
Source: Chiang MF, Quinn GE, Fielder AR, et al. International Classification
of
Retinopathy
of
Prematurity,
Third
Edition.
Ophthalmology.
2021;128(10):e51-e68
Figure 1 illustrates the updates of the retinal zones in ICROP-3 which
shows schema of right eye (RE) and left eye (LE) zone borders and
clock hour sectors. It describes the location of vascularisation and
extent of retinopathy. Refer to:
• Appendix 5 on Summary of Key Components of International
Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity Third Edition
• Appendix 6 for visual illustration of ROP
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
5. NATURAL COURSE OF DISEASE
There are a few landmark studies on ROP. One of them is the Early
Treatment for ROP (ETROP), a large multicentre RCT which was
published in 2005. It recruited infants with BWs <1,251 g and at highrisk bilateral prethreshold ROP. The study population had one eye
randomised to early retinal ablative treatment (laser photocoagulation
or cryotherapy) and the fellow eye managed conventionally (control
eye).29, level I A few publications were produced from this main study.
A study, part of ETROP, addressed on the natural progression of Type 2
to Type 1 ROP. A total of 22% Type 2 ROP cases progressed to Type 1
with a mean interval of 9.0±6.6 day while 11.5% progressed in less than
seven days. In the latter, the risk of progression was greatest between
33- and 36-weeks’ PMA regardless of zone of retinopathy. It was shown
that Type 1 ROP can be identified with weekly examinations in most
eyes with an initial diagnosis of Type 2 ROP.30, level I
In a national population-based study on preterm infants born before
27 weeks’ gestation, the natural history of ROP was analysed and
showed:31, level II-2
• a total of 72.7% of infants developed ROP
• symmetrical stages of ROP in both eyes were at 83.8% and the
correlation for the maximal stage of ROP was significant
• ROP was first localised temporally in 48.7% eyes, nasal retina in
27.6% eyes and, both temporally and nasally in 23.7% eyes
• nasal onset was significantly associated with severe ROP, even
after adjusting for gestational age at birth
• time from onset of ROP to stage 3 was shorter in infants who met
criteria for treatment* compared with those who did not (median
14 vs 20.5 days; p<0.05)
*refer to Appendix 7.
In a cross-sectional study on the clinical features of untreated ROP with
spontaneous regression, the following were noted:32, level III
• onset of regression was at a median of 40 weeks PMA for acute
ROP and completely regressed by a median of 49 weeks of PMA
• average duration for regression was 8.5 weeks
• zone II ROP and stage 3 ROP had a longer duration of regression
with a later time for onset and completion of regression
• anaemia and retinal haemorrhage were independent risk factors
for delayed regression
• among the abnormalities seen in spontaneously regressed ROP
were avascular retina in temporal periphery (19.0%), increased
vascular branching (6.8%), retinal pigmentary changes (6.8%)
and, smaller angle between upper and lower temporal retinal
vessel trunks (3.0%)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
In another cross-sectional study of acute ROP not requiring treatment,
the natural involution (regression) and risk factors of delayed involution
were identified:33, level III
• involution began at a mean of 40.4 weeks PMA and completed
at a mean of 50.6 weeks PMA with an earlier completion seen in
zone III compared with zone II (p<0.01)
• mildest disease (stage 1 at 38.1 weeks PMA) involuted earlier
and latest with most serious disease (stage 3 at 42.3 weeks PMA)
(p<0.01)
• time taken to complete involution was longer in zone II than zone
III (16.04±12.35 weeks vs 8.30±7.3 weeks) and stage 3 than stage
1 and stage 2 disease (23.88±10.58 weeks, 2.03±0.96 weeks and
7.69±4.75 weeks respectively; p<0.01)
• significant risk factors for delayed involution were continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP), active stage 3 disease and
anaemia
• Nasal onset is significantly associated with severe ROP.
• Risk of ROP progression is greatest between 33 and 36 weeks of
PMA.
• In Type 2 ROP, weekly follow-up may identify progression to Type 1
ROP.
• Regression of ROP occurs between 40 and 50 weeks of PMA.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
6. TREATMENT
The principle of treatment in ROP is to remove the stimulus for
growth of abnormal blood vessels. For acute proliferative phase, the
treatment is targeted to decrease angiogenic activity of VEGF. It can
be attained through ablation of the peripheral avascular retina by laser
photocoagulation and intravitreal anti-VEGF. This will in turn reduce the
incidence of RD and consequent blindness.
6.1 Indication of Treatment
Indication of treatment for Type 1 ROP according to the ETROP
study:3, level I
• zone I ROP: any stage with plus disease
• zone I ROP: stage 3 without plus disease
• zone II ROP: stage 2 or 3 with plus disease
Refer to Appendix 7 on features of ROP that require treatment.
6.2 Optimum Timing for Treatment
The ETROP study on infants with Type 1 prethreshold ROP and treated
within 48 hours showed:3, level I
• significant improvement in visual acuity (VA) outcomes and
structural outcomes at nine months of PMA
• support for retinal ablative therapy for Type 1 ROP and a waitand-watch (minimum of 2-weekly) approach to Type 2 ROP
The clinical guidelines on treating ROP in UK recommends the
following:34
• Infants with AROP or zone I stage 3 with plus ROP should be
treated as soon as possible and within 48 hours.
• Infants with zone I stage 1 or 2 ROP with plus disease, zone I
stage 3 ROP without plus disease zone II stage 2 or 3 with plus
disease should be treated within 48 - 72 hours.
• The CPG RC and DG opine that weekly examination is required for
monitoring Type 2 prethreshold ROP.
Recommendation 6
• Type 1 prethreshold retinopathy of prematurity should be treated
within 48 hours* of diagnosis.
*subject to infant’s stability
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
6.3 Options of Treatment
Treatment options for ROP can be divided into pharmacotherapies,
ablative therapies and surgical interventions.
6.3.1 Laser photocoagulation
ROP can be treated with laser photocoagulation which targets the
avascular retina. The laser application aims to reduce the high
levels of VEGF produced in ROP and inhibit neovascularisation. The
effectiveness and safety of transpupillary diode and argon laser are
discussed below.
The landmark study of ETROP supported significantly the use of laser
photocoagulation in the reduction of unfavourable VA outcomes from
19.8% to 14.3% and structural outcomes from 15.6% to 9.0% at 6 and
9 months corrected age.3, level I
A non-randomised clinical trial comparing the effectiveness and safety
between transscleral and transpupillary diode laser photocoagulation
found no significant difference in the rate of regression of new vessel
and plus, refractive error, axial length and unfavourable structural
outcome (macular dragging and progression to stage 4 and 5). However,
transscleral laser generated larger areas of scarring and 2.8% of vitreal
haemorrhage.35, level II-1
In a cohort study on the effectiveness and safety of diode laser
photocoagulation, the findings were:36, level II-2
• a significant reduction in the plasma VEGF-A, vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-2 and endothelium-specific
receptor tyrosine kinase levels at one day and one week after
laser photocoagulation with resolution of active retinopathy within
a week and no recurrence within a year
• AE reported were bradycardia and/or oxygen desaturation along
with minor preretinal bleeding during the treatment
Two follow-up studies from the ETROP study looked into the AEs
occurring after laser photocoagulation and cryotherapy. In the first
study of six years follow-up, the incidence of glaucoma was 1.67% and
this was noted in the first five years. All affected patients had poor visual
outcomes. Glaucoma in ROP is often described as a narrow angle
with a shallow anterior chamber associated with a retrolental
membrane pushing the iris-lens diaphragm forward or a swollen
lens.37, level I However, the intraocular pressure measurement is not
routinely performed.
The second study reported the incidence of cataract of 1.9% at 6
months follow-up regardless of laser treatment status. Among the
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
possible causes proposed for cataract formation were lens changes
due to heat transferred from laser energy being absorbed by vessels on
the lens capsule and anterior segment ischaemia.38, level I
The clinical guidelines on treating ROP in UK recommends:34
• treatment-requiring ROP in zone II (except posterior zone II)
should be treated with laser photocoagulation
• the first examination post-laser photocoagulation should take
place 5 - 9 days after treatment and continue weekly till regression
occurs
• from 7 - 14 days, re-treatment with laser should be considered if
disease regression is inadequate and untreated retinal areas are
identified
• rescue treatment with an anti-VEGF agent should be considered
from 14 days if regression is inadequate despite optimal laser
treatment being delivered
Recommendation 7
• Laser photocoagulation should be considered in the treatment of
zone II (except posterior zone II) retinopathy of prematurity.
Refer to Appendix 8 for Laser Photocoagulation in ROP.
6.3.2 Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
Anti-VEGF agents have been used as therapeutic agents for zone 1 ROP
and AROP due to their ability to impede pathologic neovascularisation.
Currently, the available drugs in Malaysia that inhibit VEGF are
bevacizumab, ranibizumab and aflibercept. In MoH, ranibizumab is the
only anti-VEGF authorised to be used for ROP. There were four metaanalyses comparing intravitreal anti-VEGF and laser photocoagulation
in ROP. They found no difference in treatment outcomes and three
studies showed reduction in risk of myopia in the anti-VEGF treated
group. The details are described below.
In the first meta-analysis of ten clinical trials on Type 1 and threshold
ROP, anti-VEGF had higher retreatment incidence compared with
laser photocoagulation (OR=2.52, 95% CI 1.37 to 4.66). However,
there were no significant differences in terms of time between treatment
and retreatment, recurrence and eye complications (e.g. corneal opacity,
cataract, preretinal or intravitreal haemorrhage and RD). On the other
hand, Spherical Equivalent (SE) (degree of myopia) was higher in laser
photocoagulation (WMD=3.03 D, 95% CI 1.48 to 4.59). The quality of
the primary papers in the meta-analysis was moderate.39, level I
In a later meta-analysis of seven RCTs on ROP, there were no significant
differences between anti-VEGF monotherapy (e.g. bevacizumab,
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
ranibizumab, aflibercept and pegaptanib) and laser photocoagulation in
the rates of recurrence, treatment switching, retreatment and mortality.
However, there was less AEs (myopic changes and unfavourable
structural outcomes e.g. macular ectopia, retinal folds, vitreous and
retinal haemorrhages, and RD) in anti-VEGF (RR=0.17, 95% CI 0.07 to
0.44). GRADE showed low to high quality assessment of the outcomes
in the RCTs.40, level I
A Cochrane systematic review revealed no differences between
anti-VEGF
(bevacizumab/ranibizumab)
monotherapy
and
laser
photocoagulation in preterm infants with Type 1 pretreshold ROP in the
following outcomes:41, level I
• risk of complete or partial RD
• mortality before discharge
• lens opacity requiring cataract removal
• risk of recurrence of ROP requiring retreatment
GRADE showed very low to low quality assessment of the outcomes
in the trials.
In the fourth meta-analysis, refractive error development in preterm
children with severe ROP treated with anti-VEGF agents and laser
photocoagulation was investigated. A total of two RCTs showed that the
use of intravitreal bevacizumab was associated with less occurrence of
refractive errors based on the following outcomes:42, level I
• SE with mean difference (MD) of 4.65 (95% CI 2.02 to 7.29)
• prevalence of high myopia with RR of 0.22 (95% CI 0.06 to 0.88)
The risk of bias in both RCTs was reported as low and high.
A multicentre cohort study analysed infants with ROP treated with
bevacizumab or laser photocoagulation. The findings showed
no association of ROP treatment modality in death or severe
neurodevelopmental impairment. The higher mortality and poor
cognitive outcomes in early childhood for bevacizumab group were
due to lower BW, prolonged duration of conventional ventilation and
supplemental oxygen.43, level II-2
The ranibizumab vs laser therapy for the treatment of very low
birthweight infants with ROP (RAINBOW) core trial compared the
effectiveness and safety of intravitreal ranibizumab (0.2 mg and 0.1
mg) with laser photocoagulation for very low birthweight infants (<1500
g) with ROP found:44, level I
• both 0.2 and 0.1 mg ranibizumab had greater treatment success
although non-significant [OR of 2.19 (95% CI 0.99 to 4.82) and
1.57 (95% Cl 0.76 to 3.26) respectively]; treatment success was
defined by survival without active ROP, unfavourable structural
outcomes or the need for a treatment modality other than that
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
assigned (treatment switch) in both eyes up to 24 weeks after
starting investigational treatment
• both systemic and ocular AEs were similarly distributed between
the three intervention groups
In an extension study of two years of RAINBOW trial, the following
outcomes were documented:45, level I
• rate of structural abnormalities ranged from 2 to 9% in the study
subjects; however, there was no significant difference in risk
between ranibizumab 0.2 mg, ranibizumab 0.1 mg and laser
photocoagulation groups
• prevalence of high myopia per eye was lower in the 0.2 mg
ranibizumab group than in the laser photocoagulation group (OR=
0.19,95% CI 0.05 to 0.69) but there was no significant difference
between ranibizumab 0.1 mg and laser or ranibizumab 0.2 mg
and 0.1 mg groups
• no significant difference in composite vision-related quality of life
scores between ranibizumab 0.2 mg, ranibizumab 0.1 mg and
laser photocoagulation groups
• similar proportion of infants with neuro-development and growth
between the three groups
• no AEs related to the study intervention
In post anti-VEGF, clinical guidelines on treating ROP in UK
recommends the first examinations should take place 1 - 2 days and
5 - 7 days after treatment to detect adverse effects of treatment. Regular
examinations must be maintained to detect disease reactivation: weekly
for 4 weeks, 2-weekly for a further 12 weeks and then 4-weekly for a
further 8 weeks (total of 24 weeks) and up to 32 weeks in eyes treated
for A-ROP with bevacizumab after treatment. Disease reactivation in
the form of plus disease and / or extraretinal new vessels should be
treated with transpupillary laser, to produce near-confluent ablation of
the entire avascular retina.34
Artificial intelligence based on vascular severity score (VSS) has been
shown to detect disease regression and reactivation of ROP after antiVEGF. This tool can be potentially used in the monitoring of ROP after
treatment.46, level I
In the clinical guidelines on treating ROP in UK, treatment-requiring
ROP in zone I should be treated with an intravitreous injection of an
anti-VEGF agent.34
• Anti-VEGF treatment should be avoided when any signs of fibrosis is
present.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Recommendation 8
• Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF)
should be considered in the treatment of retinopathy of prematurity
(ROP).
 Zone I ROP should be treated with an anti-VEGF agent.
The CPG DG opines that intravitreal anti-VEGF should be administered
by paediatric ophthalmologist/retinal specialist/ophthalmologist who
have been privileged by their healthcare facility. Refer to Appendix 9
on Types and Properties of Anti-Vascular Endothelium Growth Factor and
Appendix 10 for Procedure for Intravitreat Anti-VEGF Injection.
6.3.3 Cryotherapy
In the extension (15 years) cryotherapy for ROP (CRYO-ROP) study
on threshold ROP treated with cryotherapy, the visual and structural
outcomes were:47, level I
• unfavourable VA (20/200 or worse) outcomes were found in
44.7% of treated eyes and 64.3% of control eyes (p<0.001)
• unfavourable structural outcomes structural outcomes e.g. RDs
were found in 30% of treated eyes and 51.9% of control eyes
(p<0.001)
• new RDs developed at age 10 years even in eyes with relatively
good structural findings, suggesting value in long-term, regular
follow-up of eyes with threshold ROP
• among the group of eyes with favourable outcomes between 10year and 15-year examinations, there were 4.5% treated eyes
and 7.7% control eyes that developed a retinal fold, RD or the
posterior pole was obscured by an ROP-related abnormality (band
keratopathy and moderate corneal stromal opacity, with posterior
vitreous abnormalities on ultrasonography and all fundus view
obstructed)
• Cryotherapy causes unfavourable structural and functional outcomes
which rendered it not to be recommended in the treatment of ROP.
6.3.4 Vitreoretinal surgery
Effective screening and prompt treatment of acute ROP is important
to minimise the number of infants that require vitrectomy surgery.
Vitrectomy has been shown to show some effectiveness and safety in
the treatment of ROP. These are mainly based on four case series. All
showed the treatment was effective in ROP with anatomical success
ranging between 61.7% and 100% in stage 4 and less in stage 5. Less
than 10% of those who had vitrectomy for stage 4 ROP progressed to
stage 5. Complications reported were glaucoma, vitreous haemorrhage,
etc.48- 51, level III
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
In one case series, factors significantly associated with favourable
anatomical
outcomes
were
stage
4,
prior
treatment
(laser
photocoagulation ± anti-VEGF), surgery with 25G in comparison
with 23G micro incision vitrectomy surgery (MIVS) and lens sparing
vitrectomy (LSV). On the other hand, retinal break was significantly
associated with poor anatomical outcomes.49, level III
There was low level of evidence on scleral buckling in ROP. In a small
case series of ROP stage 4, scleral buckling achieved:50, level III
• 100% anatomical success in stage 4A and 50% in stage 4B
• 50% favourable visual outcome in stage 4A and 12.5% in stage
4B
In another case series of ROP stage 4A, scleral buckling combined with
anti-VEGF achieved 44.4% retinal reattachment while 55.6% required
subsequent vitrectomy.51, level III
• As soon as peripheral retinal traction has been detected, the infant
should be referred for early vitreoretinal surgery.
6.3.5 Adjunctive treatment
In a Cochrane systematic review of three RCTs on the use of topical
and systemic beta-blockers for prevention and treatment of ROP in
preterm infants, the findings were:52, level I
• beta-blockers prevented rescue treatment with anti-VEGF agents
by 68% (RR=0.32, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.86)
• beta-blockers prevented treatment with laser photocoagulation or
cryotherapy by 46% (RR=0.54, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.89)
• beta-blockers prevented progression to stage 2 ROP with
plus disease, stage 3 to 5 but only progression to stage 3 was
significant (RR=0.60, 95% CI 0.37 to 0.96)
• AEs reported by one RCT were hypotension, bradycardia,
bronchospasm and apnoea but they were not significant
Based on the GRADE assessment, the primary papers were of
moderate to low quality.
• Beta-blockers have been shown to be an effective and safe new
adjunctive treatment in ROP. AEs should be monitored in its use.
In a systematic review of nine RCTs, the effectiveness of Enteral LongChain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (LCPUFA) was reviewed in the
prevention of ROP and related outcomes. The primary studies were
graded very low to low on various outcomes based on GRADE. The
findings revealed LCPUFA was not effective in preventing any type
of ROP (RR=0.95, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.12). However, there was a trend
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
toward benefit in mitigating severe form of ROP (stage ≥3) with an RR
of 0.59 (95% CI 0.35 to 0.99).53, level I
6.4
Treatment of Aggressive Retinopathy of Prematurity
AROP is a rapidly progressive form of ROP. If not treated, the disease
can progress to stage 5 ROP.
A multicentre cohort study evaluated the preference of the treating
ophthalmologist and treatment outcomes between anti-VEGF and laser
photocoagulation as primary and additional treatment in AROP and
Type 1 ROP. The findings showed:54, level II-2
• anti-VEGF was selected when the ROP was located in zone I
or posterior zone II, while laser photocoagulation when it was
located in zone II
• infants with AROP were twice more likely to require additional
treatment than those with Type 1 ROP
• when ROP reactivation occurred, laser photocoagulation was
preferred as an additional treatment
• eyes receiving additional treatment were due to inadequate
treatment and reactivation of ROP
An RCT reported the treatment outcomes of early (1-week post-
intravitreal ranibizumab) vs deferred (6-weeks post-intravitreal
ranibizumab) laser photocoagulation in infants of AROP after initial
treatment with intravitreal ranibizumab. The findings were:55, level I
• no significant difference in favourable structural outcomes
(complete regression) between the two groups at six weeks
• eyes undergoing deferred laser had significantly fewer number of
laser spots and less myopia at six months after laser treatment
However, there was no blinding and intention-to-treat analysis
mentioned in the paper.
In a small cross-sectional study on APROP treated with intravitreal
ranibizumab
injection,
there
was
100%
success
in
retinal
attachment
and
disappearance
of
neovascularisation.56,
level
III
In the clinical guidelines on treating ROP in UK, treatment-requiring APROP and ROP in zone I should be treated with an intravitreous injection
of an anti-VEGF agent.34
Recommendation 9
• Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) is the preferred
choice in treating aggressive retinopathy of prematurity.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
6.5
Rescue Treatment
Based on the evidence discussed above, treatment of ROP depends
on ROP subtypes, location and reactivation. Laser therapy is the
gold standard treatment for ROP located in zone II. Anti-VEGFs are
preferred primary treatment in AROP and posterior disease. If rescue
treatment is required, either laser photocoagulation or anti-VEGF may
be selected.44 level I; 55, level I
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
7. MONITORING AND DISCHARGE CRITERIA FOR RETINOPATHY
OF PREMATURITY SCREENING
The follow-up of ROP screened infants forms a crucial burden on the
healthcare system as well as time consuming for parents in bringing
their infants for frequent follow-up. Thus, it is important to identify the
subgroup of ROP screened infants who require long-term follow-up and
those who can be safely discharged to existing healthcare system.
In a prospective cohort study done prior to ETROP on infants with BW
≤1500 g who underwent ROP screening until the subjects reached 10
years of age, 25% had visual dysfunction. Neurological complications,
cryotreated ROP and anisometropia were risk factors for predicting
visual dysfunction.57, level II-2
Another prospective cohort study with seven years follow-up showed
that patients with severe ROP rapidly progressed toward myopia,
particularly during the first 1.3 years, compared with those with mild/
no ROP.26, level II-2
In a case-control study which compared spontaneously regressed
ROP (zone II and III) and no ROP, the mean PMA at first cycloplegic
refraction was 7.5±4.0 months. The main findings were:58, level II-2
• 21.9% of spontaneously-regressed ROP developed myopia
compared with 8.8% eyes without ROP
• among
those
with
spontaneously
regressed
ROP
with
vascularisation halted at zone II, 44% had myopia
• SE differed by zone of retinal vascularisation (p<0.0001)
Thus, infants with halted vascular growth in zone II should be closely
monitored for myopia.
In another case-control study comparing ROP cases which had
resolved by 50 weeks vs those resolved beyond 50 weeks, significant
factors associated with delayed resolution were:59, level II-2
• increasing severity of ROP (higher stage, lower zone, plus/preplus disease)
• Type 2 ROP
• <28 weeks gestational age
• third percentile BW on Fenton preterm birth chart
• positive blood culture sepsis
• NEC
• intraventricular haemorrhage
• bronchopulmonary dysplasia
No infant developed Type 1 ROP after 50 weeks PMA.
Two retrospective cohort studies looked into the outcomes of treated
ROP. In the first study on 115 babies with stage-3 ROP persisting
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
beyond 40-weeks of PMA, a vast majority of 80.8% eyes with ROP
resolved spontaneously while 19.2% eyes were treated with laserphotocoagulation. Apart from that, majority of eyes with stage 3 ROP
(89.5%) resolved by 50 weeks while the remainder resolved by 61
weeks PMA.60, level II-2
The second smaller study on 28 eyes of Type 1 ROP treated with
intravitreal bevacizumab showed that all completely regressed by four
weeks. Within the first three months, 60.7% eyes developed recurrence
to stage 1 or 2 after regression. At a mean of 24 months, 39% of eyes
were not vascularised into zone III as seen on fluorescein angiography
with scleral indentation.61, level II-2
The UK Screening of ROP guideline recommends that infants without
ROP should have continued examinations until vascularisation has
extended into zone III.11 The CPG DG opines that screening should be
done until the retina is completely vascularised.
Recommendation 10
• Discharge from retinopathy of prematurity screening should be done
when retina is completely vascularised.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
8. FOLLOW-UP
An RCT, which is part of ETROP, examined the prevalence of myopia
and high myopia at 6- and 9-month post-term and, 2- and 3-year
postnatal findings. It showed:62, level I
• prevalence of myopia at 6- and 9-month post-term were
significantly higher in conventional management eyes than in early
treated eyes; however, there was no difference in the prevalence
of high myopia
• prevalence of myopia and high myopia were similar at 2- and
3-year postnatal
• in both treatment groups, there was an increase in prevalence
of myopia over time, occurring mostly between 6- and 9-month
post-term while in contrast, prevalence of high myopia increased
at each successive age up to three years
A prospective cohort study evaluated the extent to which refractive
morbidity at six and 24 months of PMA is correlated to preterm birth or
ROP compared with full-term infants. Those with laser-treated severe
ROP had the highest prevalence of refractive errors during the first two
years of life. The refractive errors increased significantly across the
ages and these findings indicated that monitoring on it was required for
at least two years. Furthermore, SE in eyes with regressed ROP and
those without ROP was significantly lower than eyes of full-term infants
at the first refraction (six months). However, there was no difference
in the prevalence of refractive errors at age of two years among those
without ROP, with regressed ROP and full-term infants. The study also
suggested that spontaneously regressed ROP and no ROP should not
be used as a criterion for follow-up examinations of refractive errors
during the first two years of life.63, level II-2
In a retrospective observational study on changes in refractive errors
in preterm infants with and without ROP in the first six years of life,
significant increase in myopia values was noted only between first and
third-year examinations in the severe ROP (treated) group. However,
no significant trend was observed in the mild/no ROP groups. There
was also no significant trend in astigmatism and anisometropia seen in
both mild/no and severe ROP groups.64, level III
A recent retrospective study in Taiwan showed that approximately onethird of ROP eyes with spontaneous regression or anti-VEGF injection
exhibited persistent avascular retina when the children reached school
age.65, level II-2 Thus, this indicates that patients with regressed ROP have
long-term risk for ROP-related complications. Parental counselling with
regard to this complication is essential.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Based on the above evidence and expert opinion, the CPG DG proposes
the following follow-up schedule as shown in the following table.
*consists of VA, alignment, nystagmus, cycloplegic refraction and
dilated fundoscopy
Recommendation 11
• Follow-up of infants with or without retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)
should be done accordingly with complete eye examination* based
on staging and treatment given
*Refer to the above table
• Complete eye examination* at 6
months of age:
○ if normal - VA at 4 years of age
○ if abnormal - consult ophthalmologist
Infants with PAR
Infants with no ROP
• Complete eye examination* at 6
months of age:
○ if normal - yearly examination until 5
years of age
○ if abnormal - consult ophthalmologist
○ for laser treated infants, baseline
visual field assessment may be
performed based on the discretion
of the treating ophthalmologist
• Complete eye examination* at 6
months of age:
○ if normal - VA at 4 years of age
○ if abnormal - consult ophthalmologist
Outcomes of ROP
Follow-up and Assessment
• Regular follow-up at the discretion of
the ophthalmologist with the possibility
of fundus fluoresceine angiography
(FFA) and laser photocoagulation
Infants
treated
with
laser
photocoagulation or anti-VEGF
and fully vascularised
Infants
with
spontaneous
regression and fully vascularised
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
9. REHABILITATION
ROP is a globally important cause of childhood severe VI/blindness.
Paediatricians and other paediatric professionals have a key role in
its early detection and multidisciplinary management to minimise the
impact of VI in childhood. These include:66, level III
• Certification and registration of childhood visual impairment
Certification of VI by the ophthalmologist will enable registration
of the child at the social services or an equivalent governmental
body for educational and welfare support.
• Educational support
Early referral/notification of children with severe VI/blindness
allows involvement of specialised educational support. Assessment
and prescription of optical and non-optical low vision aid could be
provided.
Low vision rehabilitation in children with VI including those with ROP
improves significantly:67, level II-3
• VA for distance and near vision
• functional vision in relation to studying/reading lifestyle, reading
textbook at arm’s length, writing along a straight line and other
generalised activities
A recent RCT showed that early visual training (along with environmental
adaptations and high social engagement) improved vision-related
performance and specific aspects of neurological development
outcomes in infants with both peripheral and cerebral VI.68, level I
In the local setting, infants with low vision/blindness should be referred
to occupational therapy for an early intervention programme in the
respective healthcare facility. Older children should have access to all
relevant rehabilitation services. They should also be registered with
the Jabatan Kebajikan Masyarakat (Department of Social Welfare)
for placement in special education. Refer to Appendix 11. Malaysian
Association for the Blind and other relevant non-governmental
organisations providing training/support for these children.
Recommendation 12
• Visual rehabilitation should be provided to all visually-impaired
children.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of ROP should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
10.1
Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to
healthcare providers and institutions
• training and updates on the management of ROP in relevant
scientific and professional meeting, seminar, conference etc.
• Malaysian National Neonatal Registry which includes data on
ROP by MoH hospitals and Vermont Oxford Network by MoHE
hospitals
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited awareness and knowledge among healthcare providers on
ROP and its management
• lack of awareness and understanding among parents/carers on
the importance of prematurity and risk of ROP
• lack of expertise and facilities in diagnosing ROP and delivering
its treatment
10.2
Potential Resource Implications
Although ROP is uncommon, it is a treatable condition. Early
identification is crucial as early treatment will provide favourable visual
outcomes including prevention of blindness.
Screening on preterm infants at risk of ROP is strongly advocated.
Trained
ophthalmologists,
other
healthcare
professionals
(neonatologists/paediatricians) and nurses are required in the screening.
BIO is currently the gold standard method of screening, however there
is emerging evidence on the potential use of digital imaging techniques
and telemedicine which require financial and infrastructural support.
Regular screening is essential until the retina has matured and no
complications developed.
The main options for treatment of ROP is laser photocoagulation
and anti-VEGF. The latter requires skilled ophthalmologist and the
availability of the medications. Apart from that, patient may need to be
referred to a secondary or tertiary centre for further treatment. Visual
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
rehabilitation is an important component in the long-term management
of ROP. In summary, screening, diagnosis, treatment, follow-up and
rehabilitation in ROP has resource implications in their implementation.
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of ROP:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include quick reference, launching of the CPG
and, Training Module and training of healthcare providers in using it.
• Percentage of
infants at risk
of ROP* having
first examination
to detect ROP
based on PMA
and PNA
=
Number of infants at risk of ROP having
first examination to detect ROP
in the same period
Number of infants at risk of ROP having
first examination to detect ROP based on
PMA and PNA in a period
x100%
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
References
1.
Malaysian National Neonatal Registry and Clinical Research Centre, Ministry of
Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur 2019.
2.
Ministry of Health. Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity. Kuala Lumpur:
MoH; 2005
3.
Good WV. Final results of the Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity
(ETROP) randomized trial. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2004;102:233-48;
discussion 48-50.
4.
Ahn YJ, Hong KE, Yum HR, et al. Characteristic clinical features associated with
aggressive posterior retinopathy of prematurity. Eye (Lond). 2017;31(6):924-30.
5.
Razak A, Faden M. Association of small for gestational age with retinopathy
of prematurity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Dis Child Fetal
Neonatal Ed. 2020;105(3):270-8.
6.
Gantz MG, Carlo WA, Finer NN, et al. Achieved oxygen saturations and
retinopathy of prematurity in extreme preterms. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal
Ed. 2020;105(2):138-144.
7.
Askie LM, Darlow BA, Finer N, et al. Association Between Oxygen Saturation
Targeting and Death or Disability in Extremely Preterm Infants in the
Neonatal Oxygenation Prospective Meta-analysis Collaboration. Jama.
2018;319(21):2190-201.
8.
Zhu Z, Hua X, Yu Y, et al. Effect of red blood cell transfusion on the development
of retinopathy of prematurity: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2020;15(6):e0234266.
9.
Wang X, Tang K, Chen L, et al. Association between sepsis and retinopathy
of prematurity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open.
2019;9(5):e025440.
10. Fundora JB, Binenbaum G, Tomlinson L, et al. Association of Surgical Necrotizing
Enterocolitis and its Timing with Retinopathy of Prematurity. Am J Perinatol.
2023;40(11):1178-1184
11. The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (RCPCH) and the Royal
College of Ophthalmologists (RCOphth). UK screening and treatment of
retinopathy of prematurity. Updated 2022 Guidelines. Early Hum Dev. 2023;177178:105715
12. Section on Ophthalmology American Academy of Pediatrics; American Academy
of Ophthalmology; American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and
Strabismus. Screening examination of premature infants for retinopathy of
prematurity. Pediatrics. 2006;117(2):572-6
13. Yu CW, Popovic MM, Dhoot AS, et al. Demographic Risk Factors of Retinopathy
of Prematurity: A Systematic Review of Population-Based Studies. Neonatology.
2022;119(2):151-63.
14. Gilbert C, Fielder A, Gordillo L, et al. Characteristics of infants with severe
retinopathy of prematurity in countries with low, moderate, and high levels of
development: implications for screening programs. Pediatrics. 2005;115(5):e518-25.
15. Xu Y, Zhou X, Zhang Q, et al. Screening for retinopathy of prematurity in
China: a neonatal units-based prospective study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.
2013;54(13):8229-36.
16. Yang Q, Zhou X, Ni Y, et al. Optimised retinopathy of prematurity screening
guideline in China based on a 5-year cohort study. Br J Ophthalmol.
2021;105(6):819-23.
17. Jalali S, Krishnan DB. Counselling and co-opting parents to get best outcomes.
Community Eye Health. 2018;31(101):S29-S31.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
18. The Royal College of Ophthalmologists. Information leaflet for parents and
guardians - Treatment-for-Retinopathy of Prematurity (Available at: www.
rcophth.ac.uk)
19. Kremer LJ, Reith DM, Medlicott N, et al. Systematic review of mydriatics
used for screening of retinopathy in premature infants. BMJ Paediatr Open.
2019;3(1):e000448.
20. Sun X, Lemyre B, Barrowman N, et al. Pain management during eye
examinations for retinopathy of prematurity in preterm infants: a systematic
review. Acta Paediatr. 2010;99(3):329-34.
21. Costa MC, Eckert GU, Fortes BG, et al. Oral glucose for pain relief during
examination for retinopathy of prematurity: a masked randomized clinical trial.
Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2013;68(2):199-204.
22. Athikarisamy SE, Patole S, Lam GC, et al. Screening for retinopathy of
prematurity (ROP) using wide-angle digital retinal photography by nonophthalmologists: a systematic review. Br J Ophthalmol. 2015;99(3):281-8.
23. Sekeroglu MA, Hekimoglu E, Sekeroglu HT, et al. Alternative methods for the
screening of retinopathy of prematurity: binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy vs
wide-field digital retinal imaging. Eye (Lond). 2013;27(9):1053-7.
24. Athikarisamy SE, Lam GC, Ross S, et al. Comparison of wide field imaging
by nurses with indirect ophthalmoscopy by ophthalmologists for retinopathy of
prematurity: a diagnostic accuracy study. BMJ Open. 2020;10(8):e036483.
25. Photographic
Screening
for
Retinopathy
of
Prematurity
(Photo-ROP)
Cooperative Group. The photographic screening for retinopathy of prematurity
study (photo-ROP). Primary outcomes. Retina. 2008;28(3 Suppl):S47-54.
26. Wang J, Ren X, Shen L, et al. Development of refractive error in individual
children with regressed retinopathy of prematurity. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.
2013;54(9):6018-24.
27. Vinekar A, Gilbert C, Dogra M, et al. The KIDROP model of combining strategies
for providing retinopathy of prematurity screening in underserved areas in India
using wide-field imaging, tele-medicine, non-physician graders and smart phone
reporting. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2014;62(1):41-9.
28. Chiang MF, Quinn GE, Fielder AR, et al. International Classification of Retinopathy
of Prematurity, Third Edition. Ophthalmology. 2021;128(10):e51-e68.
29. Good WV, Hardy RJ, Dobson V, et al. The incidence and course of retinopathy
of prematurity: findings from the early treatment for retinopathy of prematurity
study. Pediatrics. 2005;116(1):15-23.
30. Christiansen SP, Dobson V, Quinn GE, et al. Progression of type 2 to type 1
retinopathy of prematurity in the Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity
Study. Arch Ophthalmol. 2010;128(4):461-5.
31. Austeng D, Källen KB, Hellström A, et al. Natural history of retinopathy of
prematurity in infants born before 27 weeks’ gestation in Sweden. Arch
Ophthalmol. 2010;128(10):1289-94.
32. Wang L, Li M, Zhu J, et al. Clinical Features of Spontaneous Regression of
Retinopathy of Prematurity in China: A 5-Year Retrospective Case Series. Front
Med (Lausanne). 2021;8:731421.
33. Ni YQ, Huang X, Xue K, et al. Natural involution of acute retinopathy of
prematurity not requiring treatment: factors associated with the time course of
involution. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014;55(5):3165-70.
34. The Royal College of Ophthalmologists. Treating Retinopathy of Prematurity in
the UK. London: RCOPHTH; 2022.
35. Roohipourmoallai R, Faghihi S, Faghihi H, et al. Transscleral vs transpupillary
diode laser photocoagulation for the treatment of zone II type 1 retinopathy
of prematurity: Anatomical and refractive outcomes. Indian J Ophthalmol.
2022;70(1):189-93.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
36. Yalin Imamoglu E, Gunay M, Gursoy T, et al. Effect of laser photocoagulation
on plasma levels of VEGF-A, VEGFR-2, and Tie2 in infants with retinopathy of
prematurity. J AAPOS. 2014;18(5):466-70.
37. Bremer DL, Rogers DL, Good WV, et al. Glaucoma in the Early Treatment for
Retinopathy of Prematurity (ETROP) study. J AAPOS. 2012;16(5):449-52.
38. Davitt BV, Christiansen SP, Hardy RJ, et al. Incidence of cataract development
by 6 months’ corrected age in the Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity
study. J AAPOS. 2013;17(1):49-53.
39. Li Z, Zhang Y, Liao Y, et al. Comparison of efficacy between anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and laser treatment in Type-1 and threshold
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). BMC Ophthalmol. 2018;18(1):19.
40. Taher NO, Ghaddaf AA, Al-Ghamdi SA, et al. Intravitreal Anti-vascular
Endothelial
Growth
Factor
Injection
for
Retinopathy
of
Prematurity:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022;9:884608.
41. Sankar MJ, Sankar J, Chandra P. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
drugs for treatment of retinopathy of prematurity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2018;1(1):CD009734.
42. Tan QQ, Christiansen SP, Wang J. Development of refractive error in children
treated for retinopathy of prematurity with anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor (anti-VEGF) agents: A meta-analysis and systematic review. PLoS One.
2019;14(12):e0225643.
43. Natarajan G, Shankaran S, Nolen TL, et al. Neurodevelopmental Outcomes
of Preterm Infants With Retinopathy of Prematurity by Treatment. Pediatrics.
2019;144(2):2018-3537
44. Stahl A, Lepore D, Fielder A, et al. Ranibizumab versus laser therapy
for the treatment of very low birthweight infants with retinopathy of
prematurity (RAINBOW): an open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2019;394(10208):1551-9.
45. Marlow N, Stahl A, Lepore D, et al. 2-year outcomes of ranibizumab versus
laser therapy for the treatment of very low birthweight infants with retinopathy of
prematurity (RAINBOW extension study): prospective follow-up of an open label,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2021;5(10):698-707.
46. Eilts SK, Pfeil JM, Poschkamp B, et al. Assessment of Retinopathy of Prematurity
Regression and Reactivation Using an Artificial Intelligence-Based Vascular
Severity Score. JAMA Netw Open. 2023;6(1):e2251512.
47. Palmer EA, Hardy RJ, Dobson V, et al. 15-year outcomes following threshold
retinopathy of prematurity: final results from the multicenter trial of cryotherapy
for retinopathy of prematurity. Arch Ophthalmol. 2005;123(3):311-8.
48. Macor S, Pignatto S, Capone A, Jr., et al. Lens-sparing vitrectomy for stage 4A
retinopathy of prematurity in infants with aggressive-posterior ROP: Anatomic
and functional results. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2021;31(4):2020-6.
49. Sen P, Bhende P, Sharma T, et al. Surgical outcomes of microincision vitrectomy
surgery in eyes with retinal detachment secondary to retinopathy of prematurity
in Indian population. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2019;67(6):889-95.
50. Ratanasukon M, Visaetsilpanonta S, Tengtrisorn S, et al. Outcomes of scleral
buckling for stage 4 retinopathy of prematurity in Thai children. J Med Assoc
Thai. 2006;89(10):1659-64.
51. Shah RJ, Garcia-Gonzalez JM, Blair MP, et al. Concurrent Scleral Buckle and
Intravitreal Bevacizumab for Advanced Retinopathy of Prematurity- Related
Retinal Detachment. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2016;10(2):183-6.
52. Kaempfen S, Neumann RP, Jost K, et al. Beta-blockers for prevention and
treatment of retinopathy of prematurity in preterm infants. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2018;3(3):CD011893.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
53. Diggikar S, Aradhya AS, Swamy RS, et al. Effect of Enteral Long-Chain
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Neonatology. 2022;119(5):547-57.
54. Jang JH, Kang YK, Park HS, et al. Primary and additional treatment preference
in aggressive retinopathy of prematurity and type 1 retinopathy of prematurity.
BMJ Open Ophthalmology. 2023;8(1):e001166.
55. Gangwe AB, Agrawal D, Gangrade AK, et al. Outcomes of early versus deferred
laser after intravitreal ranibizumab in aggressive posterior retinopathy of
prematurity. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2021;69(8):2171-6.
56. Sahinoglu-Keskek N, Akkoyun I, Torer B. Favorable outcomes in the treatment
of aggressive posterior retinopathy of prematurity. Eur J Ophthalmol.
2021;31(1):179-83.
57. Holmström G, Larsson E. Long-term follow-up of visual functions in prematurely
born children--a prospective population-based study up to 10 years of age. J
AAPOS. 2008;12(2):157-62.
58. Dikopf MS, Machen LA, Hallak JA, et al. Zone of retinal vascularization and
refractive error in premature eyes with and without spontaneously regressed
retinopathy of prematurity. J AAPOS. 2019;23(4):211.e1–211.e6.
59. Ahmad M, Patnaik J, Thevarajah T, et al. Delayed resolution of retinopathy of
prematurity. J AAPOS. 2019;23(2):90.e1-90.e6
60. Koucheki R, Isaac M, N NT, et al. Natural history and outcomes of stage 3
retinopathy of prematurity persisting beyond 40 weeks of post-menstrual age:
Dilemma for treatment and follow up. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2020;48(7):956-63.
61. Isaac M, Tehrani N, Mireskandari K. Involution patterns of retinopathy of
prematurity after treatment with intravitreal bevacizumab: implications for followup. Eye (Lond). 2016;30(3):333-41.
62. Quinn GE, Dobson V, Davitt BV, et al. Progression of myopia and high myopia
in the early treatment for retinopathy of prematurity study: findings to 3 years of
age. Ophthalmology. 2008;115(6):1058-64.e1.
63. Hsieh CJ, Liu JW, Huang JS, et al. Refractive outcome of premature infants with
or without retinopathy of prematurity at 2 years of age: a prospective controlled
cohort study. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2012;28(4):204-11.
64. Kaya M, Berk AT, Yaman A. Long-term evaluation of refractive changes in eyes
of preterm children: a 6-year follow-up study. Int Ophthalmol. 2018;38(4):1681-8.
65. Ling XC, Kang EY, Huang JL, et al. Persistent Vascular Anomalies in Retinopathy
of Prematurity Children: Ultrawide-field Fluorescein Angiography Findings until
School Age. Ophthalmol Sci. 2023;3(3):100281.
66. Solebo AL, Rahi J. Epidemiology, aetiology and management of visual
impairment in children. Arch Dis Child. 2014;99(4):375-9.
67. Ganesh S, Sethi S, Srivastav S, et al. Impact of low vision rehabilitation on
functional vision performance of children with visual impairment. Oman J
Ophthalmol. 2013;6(3):170-4.
68. Fazzi E, Micheletti S, Calza S, et al. Early visual training and environmental
adaptation for infants with visual impairment. Dev Med Child Neurol.
2021;63(10):1180-93.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effectiveness and safety of laser
therapy in retinopathy of prematurity?
1.
RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY/
2.
(Retrolental adj1 fibroplasia*).tw.
3.
(Prematurity adj1 retinopath*).tw.
4.
LASER COAGULATION/
5.
(laser adj1 coagulation*).tw.
6.
(laser adj1 thermocoagulation*).tw.
7.
1 or 2 or 3
8.
4 or 5 or 6
9.
7 and 8
10. limit 9 to (english language and humans and “all infant (birth to 23
months)” and last 18 years)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
Who should be screened for retinopathy of prematurity?
2.
What is the optimum timing for screening retinopathy of prematurity?
3.
What is the accuracy of screening methods for retinopathy of
prematurity?
• clinical
• imaging
4.
What is the classification for retinopathy of prematurity?
5.
What are the risk factors for severe retinopathy of prematurity?
6.
What are the natural course of the disease in retinopathy of
prematurity?
7.
What are the indications for treatment of retinopathy of prematurity?
8.
What is the optimum timing for treatment of retinopathy of
prematurity?
9.
What are the effectiveness and safety of the following treatment in
retinopathy of prematurity?
• laser therapy
• intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
• cryotherapy
• vitreoretinal surgery - vitrectomy and scleral buckle
• adjunctive treatment
 orbital floor corticosteroids
 topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
 topical corticosteroids
10. What are the discharged and monitoring criteria in retinopathy of
prematurity with the following features?
• premature babies
 prematurity less than 30 weeks
 without retinopathy of prematurity
- fully vascularised retina
- incomplete vascularised retina
• babies with BW less than 1.5 kg
11. What is the effective follow-up schedule in retinopathy of prematurity
with the following features?
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
• treated
• non-treated
• parameters at follow-up
• reactivation and regression
• use of artificial intelligence/imaging
12. What are the effective/components of counselling for retinopathy of
prematurity with the following features to parents/caregivers?
• all babies at risk
• infants that require treatment
• on long term follow–up
13. What are the effective rehabilitation methods of different period in
retinopathy of prematurity?
• short-term (vision)
• long-term (special vocational training)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
OPTIMUM TIMING FOR FIRST RETINOPATHY OF
PREMATURITY SCREENING
GA: gestational age, PMA: postmenstrual age, PNA: postnatal age, BW: birth weight,
g; gram
Source: Wilkinson AR, Adams GGW, Fleck BW, et al. UK screening and treatment
of retinopathy of prematurity Updated 2022 Guidelines. Early Hum Dev.
2023;177-178:105715.
22
31
9
23
31
8
24
31
7
25
31
6
26
31
5
27
31
4
28
32
4
29
33
4
30
34
4
31
35
4
>32
36
-
GA (weeks)
PMA (weeks)
PNA (weeks)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
ALTERNATIVE DILATING REGIMES
The dilating regime stated here is adopted from local practice of
Paediatric Ophthalmology Department of Hospital Tunku Azizah (Kuala
Lumpur Women and Children Hospital), the national’s main tertiary
referral centre.
In local clinical practice, the infants are usually kept fasted from the
time of dilatation. Excess drops are needed to be wiped off to reduce
systemic absorption and side effects.
*vital signs monitoring is required for in-patient during dilating process
(pre-ROP examinations) as well as during ROP examination
**consider giving oral sucrose for supplementary pain relief
0 min
10 min
20 min
30 min
40 min
Once fully
dilated**
Gutt proparacaine 0.5% one drop
Gutt tropicamide 1% one drop
Gutt phenylephrine 2.5% one drop
If eye(s) not fully dilated, top up with: Gutt tropicamide
1% one drop
If eye(s) not fully dilated, top up with: Gutt phenylephrine
2.5% one drop
If eye(s) not fully dilated, top up with: Gutt tropicamide
1% one drop
If eye(s) still not fully dilated, to rule out causes of poor
pupillary dilatation
Gutt proparacaine 0.5% prior to ROP examination
Time interval
Suggested eyedrops regime*
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS OF DILATING AGENTS
NO.
DILATING AGENTS
PHARMACOKINETICS
PHARMACODYNAMICS (MECHANISM OF ACTION)
Cyclopentolate 1%
Ophthalmic Solution
Rapid onset, maximal cycloplegia occurs within 25 - 75
minutes after instillation. Complete recovery of
accommodation usually takes 6 - 24 hours. Complete
recovery from mydriasis in some individuals may
require several days. Heavily pigmented irides may
require more doses than lightly pigmented irides.
Mydriasis occur in 15 - 30 minutes and the duration of
activity is approximately 3 - 8 hours. Complete recovery
from mydriasis in some individuals may require 24
hours.
Cyclopentolate hydrochloride is an anticholinergic
ophthalmic preparation that blocks the responses of the
sphincter muscle of the iris and the stimulation of the
ciliary
body
muscle
achieving
mydriasis
and
cycloplegia.
Ophthalmic: Tropicamide is an anticholinergic agent
that blocks the responses of the sphincter muscle of the
iris and the accommodative muscle of the ciliary body to
stimulation by acetylcholine. The 1% solution produces
paralysis of accommodation (cycloplegia) as well as
mydriasis.
Tropicamide 1%
Ophthalmic Solution
1.
2.
Maximal mydriasis occurs in 20 - 90 minutes with
recovery after 3 - 8 hours. Systemic absorption of
sufficient quantities of phenylephrine may lead to
systemic α-adrenergic effects, such as rise in blood
pressure which may be accompanied by a reflex
atropine-sensitive bradycardia.
Phenylephrine hydrochloride is an α-1 adrenergic
agonist drug that is used in ophthalmology mainly for its
mydriatic effect. After topical application to the
conjunctiva,
phenylephrine
acts
directly
on
α-adrenergic
receptors
in
the
eye,
producing
contraction of the dilator muscle of the pupil and
constriction of the arterioles in the conjunctiva.
Phenylephrine 2.5%
Ophthalmic Solution
3.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
NO.
DILATING AGENTS
PHARMACOKINETICS
PHARMACODYNAMICS (MECHANISM OF ACTION)
Absorption
• Following
topical
ocular
administration,
cyclopentolate is absorbed into the eye as well as the
systemic
circulation.
Peak
plasma
drug
concentrations range from 3.3 to 15.5 ng/mL (mean:
8.3±4.1 ng/mL) and are achieved within 5 - 15
minutes following the second dose.
• Following
topical
ocular
administration,
phenylephrine is absorbed into the eye as well as the
systemic circulation.
Distribution
• Ocular and systemic distribution of cyclopentolate
has not been reported.
Biotransformation
• The metabolic pathways of cyclopentolate have not
been reported in the literature.
• Phenylephrine
is
primarily
metabolised
by
conjugation, primarily as the sulfate with smaller
amounts of glucuronide also formed.
Elimination
• The elimination mechanisms of cyclopentolate have
not been reported in the literature.
• Phenylephrine is primarily eliminated in the urine,
primarily as the sulfate conjugate with smaller
amounts of the glucuronide. Virtually no free parent
drug is found in urine.
Cyclopentolate
is
an
anticholinergic
drug
and
phenylephrine is an adrenergic drug. This combination
induces mydriasis that is greater than that of either drug
alone
at
its
respective
concentrations.
The
concentrations of cyclopentolate hydrochloride and
phenylephrine hydrochloride have been selected to
induce mydriasis with little accompanying cycloplegia.
Heavily pigmented irides may require more doses than
lightly pigmented irides.
CYCLOMYDRIL
(Cyclopentolate
hydrochloride 0.2%
and phenylephrine
hydrochloride 1.0%)
Ophthalmic Solution
4.
Source: Product Insert of the respective dilating agents.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
SUMMARY OF KEY COMPONENTS OF INTERNATIONAL
CLASSIFICATION OF RETINOPATHY OFPREMATURITY
THIRD EDITION
The figure above illustrates retinal zones for ROP of right (RE) and left
eye (LE) showing zone borders and clock hour sectors used to describe
the location of vascularisation and extent of retinopathy. Solid circles
represent borders of zones I through III, and dotted circles represent
borders of posterior zone II (2 disc diameters beyond zone I).
An example of examination findings is shown in LE, representing
approximately 3 clock hours of stage 1 disease in zone II (note single
line on drawing to document presence of stage 1 disease).
The description of the zones for classification of ROP are as follows:
• Zone I extends from the optic disc to a point double the distance
from the disc to the fovea, a radius of 30˚.
• Zone II is a circle surrounding the zone I circle with the nasal ora
serrata as its nasal border.
• Zone III is the residual crescent anterior to zone II.
a. Definition of 3 retinal zones centred on
the optic disc. The location of the most
posterior retinal vascularisation or ROP
lesion denotes the zone for the eye.
b. Definition of a posterior zone II region
that begins at the margin between zone I
and zone II and extends into zone II for 2
disc diameters.*
c. The term notch is used to describe an
incursion by the ROP lesion of 1 - 2 clock
hours into a more posterior zone. The
1. Zone (additional
description)
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
ROP zone for such eyes should be noted
by the most posterior zone of retinal
vascularisation with the qualifier “notch”
(e.g., “zone I secondary to notch”).*
1. Plus and Preplus Disease
Plus disease is defined by the appearance
of dilation and tortuosity of retinal vessels,
and
Pre-plus disease is defined by abnormal
vascular dilation, tortuosity insufficient for
plus disease, or both.
Recognition that retinal vascular changes
in ROP represent a continuous spectrum
from normal to pre-plus to plus disease,
with sample images demonstrating this
range.* These changes should be assessed
by vessels within zone I, rather than from
only vessels within the field of narrowangle photographs and rather than from the
number of quadrants of abnormality.*
2. Stage of
Acute Disease
(Stages 1 - 3)
Stage 1: Demarcation line
Stage 2: Ridge
Stage 3: Extraretinal neovascular
proliferation or flat neovascularisation
If more than 1 ROP stage is present, the
eye is classified by the most severe stage.
3. Retinal
Detachment
(Stages 4 and 5)
Stages of RD are defined as
a. Stage 4 (partial RD)
4A: with fovea attached
4B: with fovea detached
b. Definition of stage 5 (total RD):
Stage 5A: in which the optic disc is visible
by ophthalmoscopy (open- funnel
detachment);
Stage 5B: in which the optic disc is not
visible because of retrolental
fibrovascular tissue or closedfunnel detachment;
Stage 5C: in which stage 5B is accompanied
by anterior segment changes (e.g.
marked anterior chamber shallowing,
iridocorneolenticular adhesions,
corneal opacification), suggestin
closed-funnel configuration.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Each eye should be classified based on zone, plus disease, stage and
extent. If aggressive ROP is present, it should be noted.
*Key changes compared with previous ICROP publications.
Source:
1. Chiang MF, Quinn GE, Fielder AR, et al. International Classification of Retinopathy
of Prematurity, Third Edition. Ophthalmology. 2021;128(10):e51-e68
2. Ministry of Health. Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity. Kuala Lumpur:
MoH; 2005
* Additional descriptors of funnel configuration
(e.g. open-closed) may be applied if
clinically useful.
The term aggressive-posterior ROP was
used previously to describe a severe,
rapidly progressive form of ROP located
in posterior zones I or II. Because of
increasing recognition that this may occur
beyond the posterior retina and in larger
preterm infants, particularly in regions of the
world with limited resources, the Committee
recommends the new term aggressive
ROP.*
4. Aggressive ROP
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
FEATURES OF RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
a) Stage 1
b) Stage 2
Demarcation Line
Ridge
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
c) Stage 3
d) Stage 4a
e) Stage 4b
Extra-retinal fibrovascular
proliferation with haemorrhage
Partial retinal detachment
without fovea involvement
Thick extra-retinal
fibrovascular proliferation
Partial retinal detachment
with fovea involvement
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
f) Stage 5
g) AROP
Total retinal detachment
Posterior pole
Mid-peripheral retina
Peripheral retina
AROP with notch
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
h) Additional Features as described in ICROP 2021
Presence of notch as indicated by the arrows
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
INDICATIONS OF TREATMENT
High Risk PreThreshold ROP
Defined into Type 1 and Type 2 to guide the treatment of infants before
the development of threshold ROP.
Recommended Indications for ROP Treatment
*Subject to stability of the infant
Source:
1. Good WV; Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity Cooperative Group.
Final results of the Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity (ETROP)
randomized trial. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2004;102:233-48
2. The Royal College of Ophthalmologists. Treating Retinopathy of Prematurity in the
UK. London: RCOphth; 2022
PRETRESHOLD ROP
Type 1 (High Risk)
Type 2 (Low Risk)
AROP
Severe, rapidly
progressive form of
ROP
Zone I
• Any stage with plus
• Stage 3 without plus
Zone II
• Stage 2 or 3 with plus
Zone I
• Stage 1 or 2 without
plus
Zone II
• Stage 3 without plus
Treat within 48 hours*
Urgent Treatment
Weekly observation
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
LASER PHOTOCOAGULATION IN ROP
Preparations:
A. Laser indirect ophthalmoscope (LIO)
B. 30D or 28D condensing lens
C. Infant lid speculum
D. Scleral indentor/squint hook
E. Subconjunctival
mydriacaine
(atropine,
adrenaline
and
lignocaine at 1:1:1 ratio) - optional
F. Topical dilating drops
G. Topical anaesthesia
H. Balance salt solution (BSS)
I.
Dexamethasone
J. Triamcinolone - optional
K. Cotton buds, cotton balls
Steps:
1. Obtain consent from parents/caretakers.
2. Sedate the infant and preferably intubate to ensure no struggling
movements during procedure.
3. Treatment must be given in a conducive environment either in
NICU or OT.
4. Dilate the pupils even before intubation.
5. Ideally, give subconjunctival mydriacaine 0.05 ml to each eye
after the infant is sedated to maintain good pupil dilatation
throughout the procedure.
6. Re-examine each eye before starting laser treatment.
7. Set LIO machine at 150 - 200 mW with pulse duration of 100-
200 ms and interval of 200 ms.
8. Instil topical anaesthesia into each eye prior to and during the
procedure.
9. Start lasering the worse eye first at the avascular area close to
ridge at 0.5 - 1.0 spot size spacing with moderate intensity to
achieve greyish white (rather than white) burns.
10. Use lower laser parameters and titrate accordingly. Less energy
laser power must be used for more anterior retina.
11. Place LIO at arm’s length to keep the aiming beam focused.
12. Use BSS to lubricate the cornea. The use of normal saline may
cause temporary haziness of the cornea.
13. The laser treatment should cover the entire avascular retina
between the ridge and the ora serrata.
14. Do not leave any untreated areas. Some areas are slightly
difficult to get access e.g. nasal, superonasal, inferonasal,
superotemporal and inferotemporal quadrants. Stand opposite
to each quadrant while lasering to gain access to these areas.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
15. If there is presence of notching, avoid coming inwards too near
to macula as the laser scar might expand and affect the macula
region.
16. By the end of treatment session, the laser burns should expand
to a near confluent pattern.
17. Always check both eyes again after completion of laser
photocoagulation to look out for skip areas.
18. Estimated laser spots at the end of the treatment depends on the
zone of ROP (1500 - 2000 laser spots in zone II and ≤1000 laser
spots in zone III for each eye).
19. For post-laser treatment:
a. Give orbital floor triamcinolone 10 mg/0.25 ml (optional)
b. Start topical corticosteroids and topical antibiotic every four
hours for a week
c. Review anterior segment of both eyes at day 1 post-laser
treatment to look for any epithelial defect, etc.
d. Review fundus of both eyes at one-week post-laser treatment
Arrows showing skipped areas post-laser photocoagulation which
should be avoided to prevent recurrence of ROP.
Well-lasered retina
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 9
TYPES AND PROPERTIES OF ANTI-VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL GROWTH FACTOR
Ranibizumab
(Licensed for
ROP treatment
in MoH
Facilities)
• A humanised monoclonal antibody
fragment of 48 kDa that has affinity
for all isoforms of VEGF
• Has 5- to 20-fold greater potency
than bevacizumab on a molar basis
and increased affinity for VEGF, and
the advantage of a shorter serum
half-life (two hours in adults) which
may reduce its potential toxicity in
premature infants
• Inhibits the human vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A)
by binding to its active forms, thereby
preventing ocular angiogenesis by
VEGF-A including reduced
endothelial cell proliferation,
vascular leakage and new blood
vessel formation
Absorption
• Intravitreal implant, Tmax: 26 days
(range: 1 to 89 days)
• Intravitreal injection, Tmax:
approximately 1 day
Excretion
• Total body: cleared primarily by
catabolism
Elimination half-life
• Intravitreal Implant: approximately
25 weeks
• Intravitreal injection: approximately
9 days (vitreous)
Bevacizumab
• A full-length humanised murine IgG
monoclonal antibody that has a
molecular weight of 149 kD and
binds to all VEGF isoforms
• Has a long half-life in the vitreous
(5.6 days in adults), a serum peak
level of approximately 2 weeks postinjection and a serum half-life of
21 days in preterm infants
• A recombinant humanised monoclonal
IgG1 antibody, binds to VEGF and
inhibits the interaction of VEGF to
Flt1 and KDR receptors on the
surface of endothelial cells
• In the process, it prevents the
proliferation of endothelial cells and
formation of new blood vessels
Distribution
• Vd: 2.9 L; 3.2 L (males); 2.7 L
(females)
Excretion
• Clearance: 0.23 L/day; 2.75 to
5 mL/kg/day
Elimination half-life
20 days (range: 11 to 50 days)
Anti-VEGF
Properties
Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacokinetics
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Source: Product Insert of the respective anti-vascular endothelium growth factors.
Aflibercept
• A 115 kDa recombinant fusion protein
that contains the Fc portion of human
IgG1 combined with VEGF-binding
portions from the extracellular
domains of human VEGF receptors 1
and 2
• High binding affinity, have an
intraocular half-life of 4.8 days in
adults and shorter serum half-life
than bevacizumab
(11.4 days in adults)
• Capable of inhibiting all isoforms of
VEGF-A and placental growth factor
and, after its intravitreal
administration, has the ability to
penetrate the retina and access the
systemic circulation, reducing the
systemic levels of VEGF for
12 weeks
• Binds to the VEGF, VEGF-A and
placental growth factor, to inhibit
their binding to receptor tyrosine
kinases and activation of VEGF-A,
thereby inhibiting neovascularisation
and vascular permeability
Absorption
• Tmax: 1 to 3 days (free aflibercept)
• Tmax, pre-term infants: 1 day
(free aflibercept)
Distribution
• Vd: 6 L (free aflibercept)
Elimination half-life
• 5 to 6 days (free aflibercept)8
Anti-VEGF
Properties
Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacokinetics
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 10
PROCEDURE FOR INTRAVITREAL ANTI-VEGF INJECTION
1.
Obtain consent from parents/caretakers.
2.
Prepare intravitreal set consisting of eyelid speculum, caliper,
conjunctival forceps, 1 ml syringe, 27 or 30G 0.5-inch needle,
cotton buds and povidone iodine 5% (refer to Figure 1).
Figure 1: Instruments required
for intravitreal
Figure 2: Instillation of
anaesthetic
Figure 3: Top view of needle
insertion
Figure 4: Side view of needle
insertion
Figure 5: Cotton bud
compression following needle
removal
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
3.
Perform procedure using aseptic technique in a clean place. Infant
may require sedation depending on decision of the attending
physician.
4.
Clean the periorbital skin and conjunctival sac with povidone iodine
5%
5.
Drape the eye and insert the speculum.
6.
Instil topical anaesthetic drops either proparacaine hydrochloride
0.5% or tetracaine hydrochloride 0.5% (refer to Figure 2).
7.
Prepare intravitreal ranibizumab 0.2 mg/0.02 ml using aseptic
technique.
8.
Use 27G/30G needle and inject 1.5 mm posterior to the limbus into
mid-vitreous cavity with the needle tip pointing towards the optic
disc as indicated by the dotted lines (refer to Figure 3 and 4).
9.
Remove the needle and compress the wound with cotton bud and
instil another drop of antiseptic solution (refer to Figure 5).
10. Perform examination using BIO to look for optic nerve perfusion
retinal break, RD, haemorrhage and cataract.
11. The speculums are removed and the eyes are irrigated with normal
saline solution. Antibiotic eyedrop is given stat to the conjunctival
sac and four times per day for 3 - 4 days.
12. Infant is examined again within 24 hours to ensure no development
of cataract or early endophthalmitis.
SPECIAL PRECAUTION FOR INTRAVITREAL INJECTION IN
PREMATURE INFANT
Eyes of the premature Infant are smaller in size, with absent or immature
pars planar and larger/globular crystalline lens relative to the volume of
the eye.
To minimise perforation of the retina or globe and cataract
formation, ensure the correct distance, angle and direction of
needle insertion.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
Appendix 11
SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL SCHOOLS AND INTEGRATION
PROGRAMMES FOR PEOPLE WITH VISUAL PROBLEMS
a. Special Educational Schools for People with Visual Problems
SKPK Jalan Batu
Jalan Raja Laut
50350 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 03-26921261
SKPK Princess
Elizabeth
Lorong 5,
Jalan Nong Chik
80100 Johor
Tel: 07-2224068
SKPK Alma (Asrama)
Jalan Bukit Minyak
14000 Bukit Mertajam
Tel: 04-5082026
SKPK Seremban
Jalan Muthu Cumaru
70200 Seremban
Tel: 06-7624181
SKPK Tuaran
Peti Surat 50553
88200 Putatan
Sabah
Tel : 088-767202
SKPK Kuching
Jalan Kolej
93200 Kuching
Tel: 082-2444526
SKPK Miri
Jalan Datuk Muip,
Piasau Jaya
98000, Miri
Tel: 6085-653246
SKPK Sungai Petani
Mukim Bujang
08400 Merbok
Kedah Darul Aman
SKPK Jalan Batu
Jalan Raja Laut
50350 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 03-26921262
SKPK Princess
Elizabeth
Lorong 5,
Jalan Nong Chik
80100 Johor Bahru
Tel: 07-2224068
SKPK Alma
Jalan Bukit Minyak
14000 Bukit Mertajam
Tel: 04-5082026
SKPK Seremban
Jalan Muthu Cumaru
70200 Seremban
Tel: 06-7624181
SKPK Tuaran
Peti Surat 50553
88200 Putatan
Sabah
Tel : 088-767202
SKPK Kuching
Jalan Kolej
93200 Kuching
Tel: 082-2444526
SKPK Miri
Jalan Datuk Muip,
Piasau Jaya
98000, Miri
Tel: 6085-653246
-
SMPK Setapak
Jalan Genting Kelang
53300 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 03-41493701
SMPKV Indahpura
Sisiran Indahpura 36/6,
Taman Indahpura,
81000 Kulai
Tel: 07-6625625/
6625622
-
-
SMK Badin
Peti Surat 149
89208 Tuaran
Sabah
Tel : 088-788357
-
-
-
Kuala Lumpur
Johor
Pulau Pinang
Negeri
Sembilan
Sabah
Sarawak
Kedah
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Primary School
Pre-School
Secondary School
State
No.
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
b. Special Educational Integration Programme at Normal Stream
School for People with Visual Problems
SKPK Kuala
Terengganu Kampung
Kubang Ikan 21080
Kuala Terengganu,
Terengganu
Tel : 09-6163220
SKPK Besut Alor
Lintang
22200 Kampung Raja
Terengganu.
Tel : 09-6902430
-
-
-
-
Terengganu
8
SK Klang
Jalan Dato’ Hamzah
41000 Kelang
Tel: 03-33712957
SK Sungai Kantan
Jalan Padang Tembak
43000 Kajang
Tel: 03-87368646
SK Seri Utama
Jalan Besar
43500 Sungai Besar
Tel: 03-32242278
SK Dato’ Maharajalela
Jalan Parit Omar
45800 Jeram
Tel: 03-32648530
-
-
-
-
-
SMK St. John
Bukit Nanas
50250 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 03 - 2078 2846
2
Kuala
Lumpur
Primary School
Secondary School
State
No.
SK Kuala Kubu Baru
Jalan Sekolah Kuala Kubu Baru
44000 Kuala Kubu Baru
Tel: 03-60641482
SK Tengku Bendahara Azman 2
Lorong Sabah Pandamaran
42000 Pelabuhan Kelang
Tel: 03-31687155
SMK Kajang Utama
43000 Kajang
Tel: 03-8733 8414
SMK Kampung Jawa
Jalan Raja Nong
41000 Kelang
Tel: 03-33734348
Selangor
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
SK Jabi
06400 Pokok Sena
Tel: 04-7821340
-
SK Dato’ Wan Ahmad
01000 Kangar
Tel: 04-9762559
-
-
-
SMK Tunku Abdul Malik
Alor Merah
05250 Alor Setar
Tel: 04-7319358
SMK Tunku Anum Tunku Abdul Rahman
Tok Jalai
06000 Jitra
Tel: 04-7144960
SMK Putra
01000 Kangar
Tel: 04-9761150
SMK Alma
Jalan Bukit Minyak
14000 Bukit Mertajam
Tel: 04-5078687
SMK Haji Zainal Abidin
Jalan Hamilton
11600 Pulau Pinang
Tel: 04-2827933
4
6
Kedah
3
Perak
5
Perlis
Pulau
Pinang
SK Air Keroh
Lebuh Ayer Keroh
75450 Air Keroh
Tel: 06-2331146
SK Indera Mahkota
Bandar Indera Mahkota
25200 Kuantan
Tel: 09 - 5733924
SK Kampong Sireh
Jalan Sultanah Zainab
15050 Kota Bharu
Tel: 09-7418451
SMK Padang Temu
KM5 Padang Temu
45050 Melaka
Tel: 06-2820117
SMK Tg. Panglima Perang
Tg. Muhammad
Bandar Indera Mahkota
25200 Kuantan
Tel: 09 - 6236594
-
Melaka
Pahang
Kelantan
7
9
8
SMK (P) St. George
Jalan Macalister
10450 Pulau Pinang
Tel: 04-2295855
SK Dato’ Laksamana Raja Mahkota
Batu 3 1/2, Jalan Maharajalela
36000 Teluk Intan
Tel/: 05-6221091
SK Seri Mutiara
Jalan Tunku Abdul Rahman
30100 Ipoh
Tel: 05-5061925
-
-
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
1. Adopted from Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia: Prosedur Operasi Standard:
Perkhidmatan Penjagaandan Rehabilitasi Visual Pesakit Penglihatan Terhad
Perkhidmatan Optometri M/s 54 - 57
2. For schooling allocations of visually impaired students, refer to the respective State
Education Department or District Education Office
3. For updated information on the list of special education schools under Ministry
of Education is available at: http://www.moe.gov.my/pendidikan/khas/sekolah
-pendidikan-khas/senarai-sekolah-pendidikan-khas
-
-
-
Sk Sibu Bandaran No. 3
D/A Pejabat Pendidikan
Daerah Sibu, Tingkat 6,
Wisma Persekutuan, Blok 3,
Lot 462, Brooke Drive
96000 Sibu
Tel/Fax: 084 - 332 512
-
-
Sekolah Tinggi Muar
Jalan Meriam
84007 Muar
Tel: 06-9521360
SMK Batu Lintang
Jalan Kolej
93200 Kuching
Tel: 082-252579
SMK Dato Permaisuri
Jalan Dato Permaisuri, Piasau Jaya
98000 Miri
Tel: 085-659066
SMK Bukit Besar
Jalan Sultan Mohamad
20050 Kuala Terengganu
Terengganu
Tel: 096-236594
Johor
10
Sabah
11
Sarawak
12
Terengganu
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AE(s)
adverse event(s)
AROP
aggressive ROP
APROP
aggressive-posterior ROP
Anti-VEGF
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
BSS
Balance salt solution
BIO
Binocular Indirect Ophthalmoscopy
BW
birth weight
CA
chronological age
CI
confidence interval
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CPAP
continuous positive airway pressure
CRYO-ROP
cryotherapy for Retinopathy of Prematurity
D
dioptre
ETROP
early treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity
FFA
fundus fluorescein angiography
G
gauge
g
gram
GA
gestational age
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluations
ICROP-3
International Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity Third
Edition
kg
kilogram
L
litre
LIO
Laser indirect ophthalmoscope
LCPUFA
Long-Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
LVS
lens sparing vitrectomy
MAB
Malaysian Association for the Blind
MD
mean difference
MIVS
micro incision vitrectomy surgery
mg
milligram
mL
millilitre
MoH
Ministry of Health
MoHE
Ministry of Higher Education
ng
nanograms
NEC
necrotising enterocolitis
NICU
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
NOS
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale
NPV
negative predictive value
OR
odds ratio
OT
operation theater
PAR
persistent avascular retina
PMA
post-menstrual age
PNA
post-natal age
PPV
positive predictive value
RAINBOW
Ranibizumab versus laser therapy for the treatment of very low
birthweight infants with retinopathy of prematurity trial
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RD(s)
retinal detachment(s)
ROP
retinopathy of prematurity
Management of Retinopathy of Prematurity (Second Edition)
RR
relative risk
SE
spherical equivalent
SGA
small for gestational age
TW-ROP
treatment-warranted ROP
UK
United Kingdom
USA
United States of America
VA
visual acuity
VEGF
vascular endothelial growth factor
Vd
Volume of distribution
VI
visual impairment
VR
vitreoretinal
WMD
weighted mean difference
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft technically
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Norharlina Che Zakaria on retrieval of evidence
• Mr. Mohamad Zharfan Bin Ismail for cover design
• Dr. Ahmed Ram Firdause Bin Ridwan Ramdass for illustration on
procedure for intravitreal Anti-VEGF Injection
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None hold shares in pharmaceutical
firms or act as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Retinopathy of
Prematurity (Second Edition) was supported financially in its entirety
by the MoH.
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES