CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES.
MANAGEMENT OF
BIPOLAR DISORDER
(SECOND EDITION)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, not sold, or used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
eISBN: 978-967-2887-73-7
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
https://mymahtas.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.psychiatry-malaysia.org
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This clinical practice guidelines (CPG) is meant to be a guide for
clinical practice based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guideline should not override the responsibility of
the practitioners to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of
the individual. This should be done in consultation with the patients and
their families or guardians, taking into account the management options
available locally.
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2024 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2028) or sooner if there is a need to do so. When
it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of
the related specialty will be informed about it. A discussion will be done
on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A
multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review
methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed. Every care is taken
to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of
publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections
will be published in the web version of this document, which is the
definitive version at all times. This version can be found on the websites
mentioned above.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1: Treatment of Acute Mania
x
Algorithm 2: Treatment of Acute Depressive Episode
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
2
3.
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
3
3.1 Screening Tools
3
3.2 Differential Diagnoses
6
3.3 Co-Morbidities
7
4.
TREATMENT
9
4.1 Pharmacotherapy
9
4.1.1 Manic Episode
9
4.1.2 Depressive Episode
11
4.1.3 Bipolar disorder with specifiers
14
4.1.4 Maintenance phase
18
4.2 Non-Pharmacological Therapy
22
4.2.1 Physical therapy
22
4.2.2 Psychosocial intervention
26
4.2.3 Psychotherapy
27
5.
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES
30
6.
FOLLOW-UP/MONITORING AND REFERRAL
31
6.1 Parameters to be Monitored during
31
Maintenance Phase
6.2 Referral Criteria
31
7.
RELAPSE PREVENTION AND ADHERENCE
33
7.1 Prevention of Relapse
33
7.2 Strategies to Improve Adherence
34
7.3 Collaborative Care Models
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
SPECIAL POPULATION
38
8.1 Pregnancy and Lactation
38
8.2 Elderly
40
8.3 Children and Adolescents
41
8.4 People with Substance Use Disorder
44
8.5 People with Borderline Personality Disorder
45
9.
SUICIDE PREVENTION
46
9.1 Risk and Protective Factors
46
9.2 Effective and Safe Intervention
47
10.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
49
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
49
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
49
REFERENCES
51
Appendix 1
Example of Search Strategy
60
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
62
Appendix 3
Diagnostic Criteria of Bipolar Disorder
63
based on Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition,
Text Revision (DSM-5-TR) or International
Classification of Diseases Eleventh
Revision (ICD-11)
Appendix 4
List of Screening Tools in Bipolar Disorder
67
Appendix 5
Recommended Adult Medication Dosages
69
and Adverse Effects for Bipolar Disorder
Appendix 6
Psychoeducation for Bipolar Disorder
77
Appendix 7
Parameters for Monitoring during
78
Treatment of Bipolar Disorder
Appendix 8
Collaborative Care Model Core Elements
80
Appendix 9
Summary of Medications for
81
Bipolar Disorder in Pregnancy
and Lactation
Appendix 10a Annual Risk Acknowledgement Form
87
Appendix 10b Borang Pengakuan Risiko Tahunan
89
Appendix 11
Suggested Paediatric Medications Dosing
91
List of Abbreviations
96
Acknowledgment
99
Disclosure Statement
99
Source of Funding
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies or case reports; reports of expert committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure
Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of body of evidence and related effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG DG.
• Recommendations are formulated based on certainty of
evidence and the wording used denotes the strength of
recommendations. This takes into account:
 quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 relevancy and applicability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s) in
the management while a blue box contains evidence-based
recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group (DG) as the key recommendations that answer
the main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
DIAGNOSIS
• Bipolar disorder should be diagnosed based on the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition, Text Revision
(DSM- 5-TR) or International Classification of Diseases Eleventh
Revision (ICD- 11).
TREATMENT AND MONITORING
• Antipsychotics or mood stabilisers, either as monotherapy or
combination, should be used to treat acute mania or depressive
episodes in bipolar disorder (BD).
• Antidepressants may be used as short-term adjunctive treatment but
not as monotherapy in acute bipolar depression.
• In BD with specifiers:
 atypical antipsychotics (AAPs) or mood stabilisers may be used
as monotherapy or combination therapy in mixed features
 AAPs may be used in anxious distress
 combination of mood stabilisers with AAPs or another mood
stabiliser is the preferred treatment of choice in rapid cycling
 antidepressants should be avoided in mixed features and used
with caution in rapid cycling
• For maintenance pharmacotherapy of BD:
 lithium and quetiapine are the preferred first-line monotherapy
while lithium plus quetiapine or aripiprazole are the preferred firstline combination therapy
 antidepressant monotherapy should be avoided
 aripiprazole or risperidone long-acting injectables may be
considered in patients who have poor adherence to oral
medications especially in preventing manic episodes
• Serum lithium level should be monitored one week upon initiation or
dose change and every six months or earlier if indicated in BD.
• Electroconvulsive therapy should be considered in both bipolar
manic and depressive episodes in indicated situations.
• Psychosocial interventions and psychotherapies should be offered
as an adjunctive treatment for BD.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
iii
RELAPSE PREVENTION AND ADHERENCE
• Psychosocial interventions and psychotherapies should be part of
strategies in relapse prevention of bipolar disorder.
SPECIAL POPULATION
• Shared decision-making in weighing the risks versus benefits of
pharmacological treatment should be done in pregnant and lactating
women with bipolar disorder (BD).
 Atypical antipsychotics (AAPs) may be used in pregnancy.
 Valproate and carbamazepine should be avoided in pregnancy
given their teratogenic risks. Other mood stabilisers should be
used with caution.
• For children and adolescents with BD:
 AAPs monotherapy may be used in manic or mixed episodes
 lurasidone and olanzapine/fluoxetine combination may be used in
depressive episodes
• Patients with BD with co-morbid substance use disorder should be
referred to psychiatric services.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the DG for this CPG were from the Ministry of Health
(MoH), Ministry of Higher Education and the private sector. There was
active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during
the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platforms: mainly Medline via Ovid and others
e.g. Pubmed (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy).
The inclusion criteria includes everyone at risk and with bipolar disorder
(BD) regardless of study design. The first search was limited to
literature published in the last eight years (2014 until 2022) on humans
and in English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature
and guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies.
Experts in the field were also contacted for studies related to the issues
addressed. All initial searches were conducted from 2 August 2022
to 17 August 2022. The literature search was repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31 December 2023 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other guidelines on BD as listed below:
i. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
and International Society for Bipolar Disoder (ISBD) - Guidelines for
the Management of Patients with Bipolar Disorder (2018)
ii. Ministry of Health, Malaysia - Clinical Practice Guidelines on
Management of Bipolar Disorder (2014)
iii. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) - Guideline
on the Assessment and Management of Bipolar Disorder in Adults,
Children and Young People in Primary and Secondary Care (2014)
iv. Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
(RANZCP) - The 2020 RANZCP Clinical Practice Guidelines for
Mood Disorders (2020)
A total of 18 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions. The DG
members met 27 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG members using
the Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meeting. All statements and
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any differences in opinion
were resolved consensually. The CPG was based largely on the
findings of systematic reviews/meta-analyses and clinical trials, with
local practices taken into consideration.
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2015) while the
grading of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE
as much as possible (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the
CPG followed strictly the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II.
Upon completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG and, the Health Technology Assessment
(HTA) and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia, for review and approval.
Details on the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from the
Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based
Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at https://
www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objective of the CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of bipolar disorder in the following aspects:
• diagnosis and assessment
• treatment
• prevention
• monitoring and referral
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Persons with BD
• Special population with BD:
 pregnant and lactating women
 elderly
 children and adolescents
 persons with substance use disorder
 persons with borderline personality disorder
Exclusion Criteria
• People with BD secondary to organic conditions
TARGET GROUP/USER
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care of both public and
private sectors in the management of BD including:
i. medical doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients, caregivers and their advocates
v. professional societies
vi. policy makers
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Melisa Abdul Aziz Psychiatrist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Aishah Siddiqah Alimuddin Medical
lecturer & Psychiatrist Faculty of
Medicine & Health Science
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Dr. Asma Assa’edah Mahmud Medical
lecturer & Psychiatrist Faculty of
Medicine & Defense Health
Universiti Pertahanan Nasional
Malaysia Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Azrina Mahmud
Family Medicine Specialist
Kesihatan Rasa Hulu, Selangor
Dr. Choy Seng Kit
Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman
Kampar, Perak
Dr. Christabel Esther Terence
Psychiatrist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun Perak
Dr. Karen Sharmini Sandanasamy
Public Health Physician
Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit Health
Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Khadijah Hasanah Abang Abdullah
Lecturer & Psychiatrist
Faculty of Medicine & Health Science
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Lee Wen Jih
Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Unit & Public Health Physician Health
Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor Faizah Ghazali
Medical Lecturer & Family Medicine
Specialist
Faculty of Medicine & Health Science
Universiti Sains Islam Malaysia
Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Ravivarma Rao Panirselvam
Psychiatrist
Hospital Miri, Sarawak
Ms. Siti Salwani Razali
Pharmacist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Ms. Umi Izzatti Saedon
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Dr. Yoong Mei Theng
Psychiatrist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Dr. Azizul Awaluddin
Head of Department & Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Members (in alphabetical order)
Datin Dr. Ang Kim Teng
Honorary Treasurer
Malaysian Mental Health Association
Ms. Ang Wei Nei
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Benjamin Chan Teck Ming
Consultant Psychiatrist
Chan Specialist Clinic
Johor Bahru, Johor
Professor Dr. Chan Lai Fong
Senior Lecturer & Consultant
Psychiatrist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Hasbeemasputra Abu Bakar
Patient Advocate
Dr. Hazli Zakaria
Consultant Psychiatrist &
Past President
Malaysian Psychiatric Association
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Jamilah Hanum Abdul Khaiyom
Clinical Psychologist
International Islamic Universiti Malaysia
Kulliyyah of Islamic Revealed Knowledge
and Human Sciences
Selangor
Dr. Salina Abdul Aziz
Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr.Yusni Yusuff
Director & Consultant Child and
Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Dr. Zainal Fitri Zakaria
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Seremban
Negeri Sembilan
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Anthony James
Consultant Child & Adolescent
Psychiatrist
Warneford Hospital
Oxford, United Kingdom
Mr. Azmi Mohamad @ Suleiman
Clinical Psychologist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun
Perak
Dr. Chee Kok Yoon
Consultant Neuropsychiatrist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Ding Lay Ming
Honorary General Secretary
Malaysian Mental Health
Association
Professor Dr. Firdaus Mukhtar
Clinical Psychologist
Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Selangor
Dr. Julia Suhaimi
Senior Lecturer & Family Medicine
Specialist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Mr. Larry Lee Lian Seng
Pharmacist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Professor Dr. Roger McIntyre
Professor of Psychiatry &
Pharmacology
University of Toronto & Head of
Mood Disorders
Psychopharmacology Unit
University Health Network
Toronto, Canada
Dr. Uma Visvalingam
Head of Department & Consultant
Psychiatrist
Hospital Sg. Buloh, Selangor
Professor Dr. Margarita M. Maramis
Professor of Psychiatry
Faculty of Medicine, Airlangga University
Surabaya, Indonesia
Dr. Nor Hayati Ali
Head of Psychiatric Services & Senior
Consultant Psychiatrist (Community &
Rehabilitation)
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Norfaridah Masiran
Family Medicine Specialist
Kinik Kesihatan Kampung Bandar
Kuala Langat, Selangor
Dr. Nurul Wafa Hussin
Head of Department & Consultant Child
& Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Dr. Selvasingam Ratnasingam
Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Hospital Tuanku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Shamini Rama
Head of Department & Pharmacist
Hospital Bahagia Ulu Kinta, Perak
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Wan Salwina Wan Ismail
Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 1. TREATMENT OF ACUTE MANIA
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 2. TREATMENT OF ACUTE DEPRESSIVE VALPROATE
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
1.
INTRODUCTION
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a potentially life-long disabling condition
presenting commonly as either bipolar I disorder (BD I) or bipolar II
disorder (BD II). BD I is characterised by episodes of mania (abnormally
elevated mood or irritability and related symptoms with severe
functional impairment or psychotic symptoms for seven days or more).
On the other hand, BD II is characterised by episodes of hypomania
(abnormally elevated mood or irritability and related symptoms with
decreased or increased function for four days or more) and depressive
episodes.
BD is a severe mental disorder. Based on World Health Organisation
(WHO) statistics in 2019, its global prevalence was estimated to be
around 40 million.1 In the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019, the
prevalence of BD showed an increasing trend from 24.8 million in 1990
to 39.5 million in 2019.2 Its prevalence in Malaysia, however, is not
well-established. BD is associated with reduced functioning, cognitive
impairment and decreased quality of life (QoL). It is also one of the
leading causes of disability in young people and increased mortality,
especially by suicide.3
Diagnosis of BD may be difficult given the complexity of its clinical
presentation which may overlap with other psychiatric disorders and
change over time. Moreover, managing BD is limited by the lack of
resources including expertise and medications. Poor adherence
remains a major issue that needs to be tackled in its management.
The first edition of the CPG Management of BD in Adults was published
in 2014. Since then, there have been advances in the management
of BD which include wider medication choices and new treatment
modalities that incorporate technological advancement.
This revised edition provides updates on the evidence and related
recommendations on the current management of BD, keeping in mind
the acceptability of the treatment and availability of resources. It also
addresses the management of children and adolescents, and looks
into evidence on psychospirituality as well as complementary and
alternative medicine. Previous topics on psychosocial interventions,
suicide prevention and management in pregnant and lactating women
are further expanded.
This CPG is aimed to be used at primary, secondary, and tertiary health
care settings. It is also useful for those involved in psychiatric training. It
is hoped that this CPG will be of benefit to healthcare professionals and
help improve the management of patients with BD.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
2.
RISK FACTORS
Identifying risk factors of BD may assist in the early detection of BD.
Several factors increase the risk of people developing BD which
include:
• offspring of maternal age group ≥40 years old (OR=1.20, 95% CI
1.10 to 1.31)4, level II-2
• presence of major depression with attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) (OR=1.50, 95% CI 1.30 to 1.72)5, level II-2
Apart from the above, the established risk factors for BD are:
• family history of BD6
• young age (<25 years old)7
• low educational level6
• low employment level6
Recurrence of BD means the return of symptoms e.g. mania,
hypomania or depression after a period of wellness (symptom-free
period). In a systematic review, factors associated with recurrence of BD
were:8, level II-2
• early age of onset
• low socio-economic status
• family history of BD
• history of child abuse
• low maternal warmth
• co-morbid mental health disorders (anxiety disorder, ADHD and
substance use disorders)
• inter-episode subsyndromal mood symptoms
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
3.
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of BD relies on signs and symptoms elicited during
clinical interviews with the patient and often with corroborative history
from informants. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
Fifth Edition, text revision (DSM-5-TR) and International Classification
of Diseases Eleventh Revision (ICD-11) classification systemfor
psychiatric disorders assist in framing operational definitions i.e.
making diagnoses for clinical work and research. Revisions of these
classifications ensure they are at pace with the recent advancements
in the field. The main changes in the new classification systems are:
• both ICD-11 and DSM-5-TR use the term bipolar disorder instead
of bipolar affective disorder as in ICD-10
• ICD-11 uses subdivision of bipolar disorder type I and II, in line
with DSM-5-TR
• definitions of manic and hypomanic syndromes and episodes are
almost identical between ICD-11 and DSM-5-TR
Refer to Appendix 3 for Diagnostic Criteria of Bipolar Disorder Based
on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth
Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR) and International Classification
of Diseases Eleventh Revision (ICD-11).
Recommendation 1
• Bipolar Disorder should be diagnosed based on the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition, Text Revision or
International Classification of Diseases Eleventh Revision.
3.1. Screening Tools
BD commonly presents as unipolar depression on the first presentation.
There is a prevalence of 17% of undiagnosed BD in primary care,
amounting to over 3 in every 20 patients.9, level II-2 This may lead to a
misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis of BD up to 10 years, which in turn
may result in an increased risk of treatment-emergent mania/hypomania
and suicide.10 - 12 Screening tools for BD may assist healthcare
practitioners in identifying those with underlying BD. Furthermore,
identifying those who are at risk of BD allows for preventive strategies
and early interventions.
The following tools are available for the screening of BD:
• Mood disorder questionnaire (MDQ)13
• Hypomania checklist (HCL-32)14
• Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale (BSDS)15
• Rapid mood screener (RMS)16
Refer Appendix 4 for List of Screening Tools in Bipolar Disorder.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
In a nationwide cross-sectional study on awareness and acceptability
of RMS and MDQ in BD screening among 200 healthcare practitioners
(HCP) in both primary and secondary care, the findings were:17, level III
• only 32% of HCP used a screening tool for BD compared with 82%
for MDD
• although 85% of the HCP were aware of MDQ, only 29% reported
on its current use
• RMS was significantly better than MDQ in terms of accuracy,
brevity, practicality and easy scoring
• HCPs were significantly more likely to use RMS than MDQ (81%
vs 19%)
Bipolarity index (BI) is a tool that can increase diagnostic confidence
of BD. This tool is clinician-rated. It is useful when symptoms of mania
are difficult to elicit, patients deny the presence of manic symptoms
or manic symptoms stem from another diagnosis. The scale has five
sections; episode characteristics, age of onset, course of illness,
response to treatment and family history. In a diagnostic study using
BI to screen for BD in outpatient psychiatric practice, the sensitivity and
specificity of BI were 0.91 and 0.90, at a cut-off point of 50, PPV of 0.88,
NPV of 0.93 and AUC of 0.97.18, level III
It may be difficult to screen for BD in the general population. A group of
researchers from the University of Melbourne introduced Bipolar at-risk
(BAR) criteria which may assist in identifying those at risk of BD in the
age range of 15 - 25 years. It included sub-threshold mania, depressive
symptoms, cyclothymic features and genetic risk.19, level III Refer to Table
1 for further description of the criteria.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
2 - 4 consecutive days of abnormally and
persistently elevated, expansive or irritable mood
with at least two of the following:
1. inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
2. decreased need for sleep (e.g. feels rested after
only three hours of sleep)
3. more talkative than usual or pressure to keep
talking
4. flight of ideas or subjective experience that
thoughts are racing
5. distractibility
6. increased goal-directed activity (socially, at work
or sexually) or psychomotor agitation
Depression defined as at least one week of
depressed mood or loss of interest/pleasure with at
least two of the following:
1. significant weight loss
2. insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day
3. psychomotor retardation or agitation
4. fatigue or loss of energy
5. feelings of worthlessness or excessive/inappropriate guilt
6. diminished ability to think or concentrate
7. recurrent thoughts of death and/or recurrent
suicidal ideation
Cyclothymic features are defined as numerous
episodes with subthreshold manic symptoms not
meeting group 1 criteria and numerous episodes
with depressive symptoms. e.g. sub-threshold
mania as defined in group
1 only for four hours within a 24-hour period and at
least four cumulative lifetime days meeting the
criteria
Group 2: Depression
and cyclothymic
features
Group 3: Depression
and genetic risk
Group 1: Subthreshold
mania
Depression same as for group 2; genetic risk
defined as first-degree relative with BD
Description
Criterion
Table 1: Bipolar At-Risk Criteria
Adapted: Bechdolf A, Nelson B, Cotton SM, et al. A preliminary evaluation of the
validity of at-risk criteria for bipolar disorders in help-seeking adolescents
and young adults. J Affect Disord. 2010;127(1-3):316-20
A cohort study assessed the association of BAR criteria and onset of
BD over 10 to 13 years of follow-up and showed that:20, level II-2
• 28.6% of subjects from BAR group developed BD over a mean
of 11.1 years whilst none developed BD in a clinically matched
comparison group. Of these:
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
 87.5% transitions were to BD II and 12.5% to BD I
 75.0% transitions occurred in those with subthreshold mania
and 25.0% in those with major depression and cyclothymic
features
• Patients with suspected unipolar depression should be screened for
BD.
• There is inadequate evidence to recommend a specific screening
tool for BD in primary care.
• Clinical diagnostic assessment should follow any positive screening
for BD.
3.2. Differential Diagnoses
Symptoms of BD can overlap with other disorders. A comprehensive
current and longitudinal history, corroborative history from informants
and relevant investigations are useful to rule out the differential
diagnoses in BD.
Below are common differential diagnoses to be considered in BD:
a) during depressive episode -
• major depressive disorder6
• major depressive disorder with mixed episode21, level III
• adjustment disorder with depressed mood6
• anxiety disorders6
• depressive disorder due to another medical condition6
• substance-induced depressive disorder6
• schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder6
b) during mania or hypomania episode -
• substance-induced bipolar disorder6
• bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition6
• schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder6
• borderline personality disorder6
• attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)22, level III
In a narrative review comparing the overlap and differences of ADHD
and BD, the authors summarised the findings as follows:22, level III
• similarities - distractibility, irritability, insomnia, poor concentration,
talkativeness and psychomotor agitation
• differences were as follows -
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Source: Asherson, P, Young AH, Eich-Höchli D et al. Differential diagnosis, comorbidity,
and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in relation to bipolar
disorder or borderline personality disorder in adults. Current medical research
and opinion. 2014;30(8):1657-1672
3.3. Co-Morbidities
BD patients may have psychiatric and medical co-morbidities. The co-
morbidities cause difficulties in treatment e.g. decision on the drugs
of choice and consideration of drug interactions. It also affects the
prognosis of BD in terms of aggravating the course of illness, delaying
recovery, increasing risk of recurrence and suicide, and reducing QoL.
The prevalence of eating disorders in BD populations ranges from 1.9%
to 33.3%.23, level III The prevalence of co-morbid antisocial personality
disorder (ASPD) in BD ranges between 4.8% and 63%.It is higher in
BD I (45.1%) than
BD II (8.2%). The most commonly abused substances in BD with ASPD
are a combination of cocaine and alcohol. People with this co-morbidity
have early onset of symptoms, impulsive traits, increased episodes
of depression and mania, aggressive behaviour and high suicide
attempts.24, level I
Other psychiatric co-morbidities in BD include:25, level II-2
• drug abuse (33.5%)
• anxiety disorder (31.8%)
• borderline personality disorder (6.9%)
• ADHD (5.2%)
ADHD
BD
Childhood or early adolescent onset
Adolescent/adult onset
Trait-like, no change from pre-morbid
Episodic course, change from prestate
morbid state
May be excitable but not grandiose/
Grandiosity/elated
elated
Reports being unable to function
Reports high-level function, not
reﬂecting behaviour
Chronic low self-esteem
Episodes of depression
Usually possesses insight
Tends to lack insight
Difﬁculty getting off to sleep
Reduced need for sleep
Complains of being unable to
Subjective sense of sharpened
concentrate/focus
mental abilities
Restless (ﬁdgety, difﬁculty being still)
Marked overactivity and agitation
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Patients with BD may have medical co-morbidities as follows:25, level II-2
• hypertension (31.1%)
• asthma (11.7%)
• diabetes mellitus (11%)
• obesity (11%)
• hypothyroidism (11%)
• migraine (5.5%)
Another co-morbidity is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
(1%).26, level II-2
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
4.
TREATMENT
There are several treatment options in BD, including pharmacological
interventions, psychotherapies and physical therapies. Ideally, treatment
needs to be individualised and patient-centered, focusing on patientrelated outcomes.
4.1. Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacological treatment is one of the main pillars in the management
of BD. There is ample evidence on the effectiveness of treatment in
acute mood episodes and the prevention of relapses in the maintenance
phase.
Medications with mood-stabilising properties include lithium, antiepileptic
agents (e.g. valproate, carbamazepine, lamotrigine), haloperidol and
AAPs. Choice of medications is based on the effectiveness, safety,
availability and affordability of the medication, concomitant medications,
response to previous medication, family history of medication response,
patient preference as well as medical and psychiatric co-morbidities.
Refer to Appendix 5 on Recommended Adult Medication Dosages
and Adverse Effects For Bipolar Disorder.
• Response to treatment is defined as a ≥50% reduction of total score
in standardised rating scales.
• Remission is an outcome of effectiveness measured by varying cutoff points in standardised scales used in clinical trials.
4.1.1.
Manic episode
The manic episode in BD poses its challenges with patients potentially
having agitation, impulsivity, risky behaviour, aggression and reduced
insight. The goal of treatment is to rapidly achieve early remission and
return to baseline levels of psychosocial functioning. Pharmacotherapy
remains one of the main treatments for a manic episode.
In a large network meta-analysis on adults with acute bipolar
mania:27, level I
• most of the anti-manic agents (aripiprazole, asenapine, carbamazepine,
cariprazine, haloperidol, lithium, olanzapine, paliperidone, quetiapine,
risperidone, valproate and ziprasidone) were more effective than
placebo; lamotrigine was among those agents found not to be
effective
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• only aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone and valproate
showed more acceptability (all-cause discontinuation) compared
with placebo
However, there was no mention on quality assessment of the primary
papers.
The above findings were supported by a more recent network metaanalysis on adults with acute bipolar mania which showed:28, level I
• the following pharmacological agents as monotherapy were more
effective than placebo in term of response to treatment -
 antipsychotics (APs) - haloperidol, risperidone, paliperidone,
olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole, cariprazine, ziprasidone
 mood stabilisers - lithium, valproate, carbamazepine
• aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone had better
acceptability (all-cause discontinuation) than placebo
The quality of most of the primary papers were moderate based on the
risk of bias assessment.
In a systematic review of recently published RCTs after 2017 on adults
with BD, results on acute mania/hypomania found that:29, level I
• olanzapine was more effective than asenapine as an adjunct to
valproate in reducing Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) and
Clinical Global Impression-Bipolar Disorder (CGI-BP) scores
• lithium was more effective than aripiprazole in reducing manic
symptoms based on Manic State Rating Scale (MSRS)
• olanzapine was associated with increased waist circumference,
waist-hip ratio and total cholesterol compared with asenapine
• reported AEs in aripiprazole were akathisia, mild stiffness and
sedation whilst tremors were seen in lithium
The risk of bias was reported to be high in most primary papers.
In another systematic review on adults with bipolar mania, lithium was
found to be:30, level I
• more effective than placebo in response, remission and
improvement of YMRS scores
• more effective when used as a combination with either risperidone,
olanzapine, quetiapine, asenapine or carbamazepine compared
with lithium monotherapy
• equally effective to valproate, carbamazepine and quetiapine
There was no mention of quality assessment done on the primary
papers.
A systematic review on the effectiveness and safety of brexpiprazole in
BD I revealed that:31, level I
• brexpiprazole showed no difference in YMRS scores at 21 days
compared with placebo
• akathisia was the only AE with an incidence of 5% being reported
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
An open-label RCT comparing the combinations of lithium with either
valproate or carbamazepine in young adults (18 - 35 years old) with BD
I showed that:32, level I
• although both groups had significant improvement in YMRS
scores at eight weeks, there was NS difference between them
• AEs reported in lithium plus valproate group were fatigue,
weight gain and decreased sexual desire while the lithium plus
carbamazepine group had significant increased rates of diarrhoea
A post-hoc analysis of three RCTs on adults with bipolar mania
comparing cariprazine vs placebo showed that the former:33, level I
• was more effective in reducing YMRS scores (SMD= -5.35, 95%
Cl -6.69 to -4.01)
• appeared to have a dose-related response in terms of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS), constipation and, changes in ALT and
AST levels
• had a low incidence of serious AEs with NS difference between
groups
Recommendation 2
• Antipsychotics or mood stabilisers, either as monotherapy* or
combination**, should be used to treat acute mania in bipolar
disorder.
*Monotherapy APs:
• haloperidol, risperidone, paliperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,
aripiprazole, cariprazine, ziprasidone or asenapine
Monotherapy mood stabilisers:
• lithium, valproate or carbamazepine
**Combination therapies:
• lithium with either valproate, carbamazepine, risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine or asenapine
• valproate with olanzapine
4.1.2.
Depressive episode
Depressive episodes are debilitating for patients with BD and account
for much of the time spent unwell. This would include subsyndromal
presentation and long-term functional impairment. Management of
depressive episodes in BD proves to be a challenging task given the
risk of treatment-emergent manic switch and increasing choices of
treatment.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
A network meta-analysis on bipolar depression comparing monotherapy
vs placebo showed:34, level I
• response rates were higher with tranylcypromine, venlafaxine,
fluoxetine,
imipramine,
valproate,
olanzapine/fluoxetine
combination
(OFC),
lurasidone,
olanzapine,
quetiapine,
cariprazine and lamotrigine
• remission rates were higher with tranylcypromine, fluoxetine,
venlafaxine, OFC, quetiapine, lurasidone, olanzapine, lamotrigine
• reduction in depression severity with fluoxetine, valproate,
lurasidone,cariprazine, olanzapine and quetiapine
• NS difference in discontinuation rate due to AEs for all medications
except aripiprazole (OR=2.25, 95% CI 1.18 to 4.30) and quetiapine
(OR=1.80, 95% Cl 1.26 to 2.55)
Majority (74%) of the primary papers were of low risk of bias.
A recent large network meta-analysis on adults with bipolar depression
compared different pharmacological treatments with placebo and
reported:35, level I
• based on statistically significant effectiveness and good confidence
evidence, the medications that improved depressive symptoms in
MADRS, HAM-D (Hamilton Depression Rating Scale), Inventory
of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS) or Quick Inventory of
Depressive Symptomatology Self-Report (QIDS-SR) were OFC,
quetiapine, olanzapine, lurasidone, lumateperone, cariprazine
and lamotrigine.
• quetiapine reduced the risk of manic switch (OR=0.49, 95% CI
0.33 to 0.75) while NS risk was seen in all other individual drugs
e.g. lithium, antiepileptics, antidepressants or APs
• lumateperone (OR=2.71, 95% CI 1.29 to 5.71) and quetiapine
(OR=1.99, 95% CI 1.51 to 2.63) had a higher risk of discontinuation
due to AEs
Overall quality assessment showed a 94% low risk of bias.
In the third network meta-analysis on adults with bipolar depression
treated with atypical antipsychotic (AAP) monotherapy vs placebo
revealed:36, level I
• significant improvement in MADRS was seen with lurasidone,
olanzapine, quetiapine and cariprazine
• NS difference in discontinuation rate due to AEs among lurasidone,
cariprazine, olanzapine and ziprasidone but significantly higher
risk in aripiprazole and quetiapine
According to SUCRA analyses, lurasidone, olanzapine and quetiapine
ranked first for improvement in MADRS compared with placebo followed
by cariprazine. Based on GRADE assessment, both direct and indirect
comparisons of the above AAPs for both outcomes were of moderate
to high quality.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Two meta-analyses on adults with acute bipolar depression on mood
stabilisers or APs, comparison between adjunctive of mainly secondgeneration antidepressants and placebo showed:37, level I; 38, level I
• small reduction in depressive symptoms in the intervention group
• NS difference in response and remission
• NS difference in affective switch at short-term (up to 26 weeks) but
a risk at long-term (52 weeks)
• NS difference in patients with at least one AE
52.6 % of included trials scored low risk on the measurement of the
outcomes. Most of the 47.4% of studies that scored high risk were
open-label studies.
A few guidelines recommend that antidepressants may be used as
short-term adjunctive treatment but not as monotherapy in acute bipolar
depression.6, 39, 40
In a Cochrane systematic review on glutamate receptor modulators in
BD, the findings were:41, level I
• IV ketamine was more effective in response than placebo at 24
hours only (OR=11.61, 95% CI 1.25 to 107.74) but showed no
difference with midazolam; however, there was no difference in
AEs between ketamine and placebo
• no difference in response between memantine and N-acetylcysteine
compared with placebo
Another systematic review of RCTs on adults with BD compared
monotherapy or adjunctive AAPs vs placebo, the findings for acute
depression were:29, level I
• cariprazine showed significant improvement in depressive
symptoms in two studies and NS changes in one study
• quetiapine showed significant improvement in depressive symptoms,
response rate and remission rate
The papers on cariprazine were of low risk while the ones on quetiapine
had high risk of bias.
For the use of lithium, existing guidelines have recommended that it
may be used in bipolar depression.39, 40
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 3
• Atypical antipsychotics* or mood stabilisers**, either as monotherapy
or combination, should be used to treat depressive episodes in
bipolar disorder.
• Antidepressants may be used as short-term adjunctive treatment but
not as monotherapy in acute bipolar depression.
 Occurrence of treatment-emergent manic switch should be
monitored.
*AAPs: olanzapine, quetiapine, lurasidone, cariprazine, OFC, lumateperone
**mood stabilisers: lamotrigine, valproate, lithium
4.1.3.
Bipolar disorder with specifiers
Specifiers in BD are descriptive terms on different features of the
disorder. They are outlined in the International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-11) and Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Health (DSM5). Only the three most commonly studied specifiers will be addressed
in this CPG.
a.
Mixed features
Mixed features are present in one-third of BD in either manic or
depressive episode. The presence of mixed features is associated
with poorer outcomes e.g. increased time in illness, poorer response
to treatment and suicidality.42 Management of mixed features is
challenging as it needs to address both mania/hypomania and
depressive symptoms that occur simultaneously. Despite its common
prevalence in BD, there is a paucity of RCTs on pharmacological
intervention of mixed features.43
In a systematic review of six international clinical guidelines on the
treatment of mixed states in mood disorders mainly BD among the adult
population, the recommended treatments are summarised in the table
below:
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
The same review recommended that antidepressants should be
avoided in mixed episodes. Clozapine was an effective option in
treatment-resistant patients.43
A systematic review on adults with BD showed that in those with mixed
episodes:30, level I
• combination of olanzapine plus lithium or valproate was effective
in acute episodes but combination of haloperidol or risperidone
plus lithium or valproate was not
• combination of quetiapine plus lithium or valproate was effective
in preventing relapse but the addition of aripiprazole on lithium or
valproate was not
• lithium monotherapy was not effective in preventing relapse Quality
assessment of primary papers however was not mentioned.
Phases of BD
Mania/hypomania with
Depression with mixed
mixed features
features
Acute episode
First-line
Monotherapy
Olanzapine, aripiprazole,
asenapine, paliperidone,
Lurasidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, valproate
Combination
therapy
Olanzapine + valproate
Olanzapine + lithium
Quetiapine + lithium
Quetiapine + valproate
Asenapine + valproate
Aripiprazole + valproate
Lurasidone + valproate
Lurasidone + lithium
Olanzapine + valproate
Olanzapine + lithium
Olanzapine/ﬂuoxetine
combination (OFC)
Ziprasidone + treatment as
usual
Second-line
Cariprazine, ziprasidone,
risperidone, clozapine,
valproate, lamotrigine,
carbamazepine
Aripiprazole, asenapine,
carbamazepine
Maintenance
First-line
Monotherapy
Lithium, valproate, olanzapine, quetiapine
Combination
therapy
Quetiapine + valproate
Quetiapine + lithium
Aripiprazole + valproate
Aripiprazole + lithium
Second-line
Ziprasidone
Risperidone + lithium
Risperidone + valproate
Aripiprazole + lamotrigine
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
A post-hoc analysis of three RCTs on acute bipolar depression with
concurrent manic symptoms compared the effectiveness of cariprazine
(1.5 mg and 3 mg) vs placebo at six weeks and showed that the former
had:44, level I
• significantly more improvement of MADRS total score, CGI-S and
HAM-D scores
• significantly higher response and remission rates
• NS improvement of YMRS total score
A 6-week placebo-controlled RCT on adults with bipolar depression
demonstrated that 42 mg of lumateperone, another new AAP, in those
with mixed features had:45, level I
• significantly reduced MADRS total scores (LSMD= -4.4, 95% Cl
-7.26 to -1.52)
• significantly reduced CGI-S-Bipolar Version-Severity (CGI-BP-S)
total scores (LSMD = -0.7, 95% Cl -1.43 to -0.05)
• higher AEs of somnolence and postural dizziness but no difference
in manic switch
The summary of the 2021 CANMAT guidelines for the management of
BD patients with mixed presentations are as follows:42
• there is limited evidence for first-line treatment based on DSM-5
manic or depressive episodes with mixed features
• for DSM-IV-defined mixed episodes, asenapine and aripiprazole
are first- line while olanzapine (monotherapy or combination),
carbamazepine and valproate are second-line agents
• for maintenance treatment following a DSM-IV mixed episode,
quetiapine (monotherapy or combination) is first-line while lithium
and olanzapine are identified as second-line options
b.
Anxious distress
Anxious distress is common in BD but often under-recognised by
clinicians. Its symptoms include feeling keyed up or tense, feeling
unusually restless, difficulty concentrating because of worry, feeling that
something awful may happen and feeling that one might lose control.
Prompt evaluation and treatment of its symptoms is important as it is
associated with adverse outcomes including higher suicidal risk and
persistence of bipolar symptoms compared with those without anxious
distress.
A meta-analysis evaluating the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy vs
placebo on BD patients (mostly in depressive episodes) with anxiety
symptoms revealed that:46, level I
• pharmacotherapy (primarily AAPs - cariprazine, quetiapine,
olanzapine and olanzapine-fluoxetine combination) was more
effective based on improvement of scores in Generalized Anxiety
Disorder-7 scale (GAD-7) or Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
scale (HADS) (SMD= -0.22, 95% CI -0.34 to -0.11) and the result
remained significant even after controlling depressive symptoms
(SMD= -0.15, 95% CI -0.28 to -0.02)
• NS difference in all-cause discontinuation rate
A total of 32 out of 37 RCTs had moderate to strong quality based
on assessment with Effective Public Health Practice Project Quality
Assessment Tool.
CANMAT guidelines state that quetiapine, olanzapine-fluoxetine
combination and lurasidone improve anxiety symptoms associated with
bipolar depression.40
c.
Rapid cycling
Patients who experience at least four episodes (meeting criteria for full
mania, hypomania or major depression) during a 12-month period are
classified in DSM-5 as “rapid cycling”. The lifetime prevalence of rapid
cycling is between 26% and 43% of those with BD.47 Patients with this
condition are more likely to demonstrate greater severity of illness and,
higher risk at suicide attempts and functional impairment compared
with non-rapid cycling patients.48 Successful treatment of rapid cycling
often requires several combinations of mood-stabilising agents.
A recent meta-analysis on mood stabilisers for treatment of rapid cycling
BD showed the following:49, level I
• combination of lamotrigine and lithium compared to lithium
monotherapy reported:
 better improvement in Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale
(PANSS) (MD= -16.67, 95% CI -22.98 to -10.36) and Brief
Psychotic Rating Scale (BPRS) scores (MD= -3.07, 95% CI
-5.02 to -1.12)
 better response rate (OR=4.26, 95% CI 1.65 to 10.99)
• lithium monotherapy had NS difference in remission rate compared
with any of the three combination therapies (lamotrigine, lithium
and valproate)
There was no mention of AEs. The quality of primary papers was high
based on the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
assessment.
In another systematic review of RCTs and meta-analysis on adults with
rapid cycling BD, it was shown that:30, level I
• both lithium and short-term venlafaxine monotherapy had equal
effectiveness in acute episodes of BD-II depression
• combination of lithium and carbamazepine was more effective in
preventing relapse compared with either monotherapy
• quetiapine as an adjunct to lithium or valproate was effective and
safe in the prevention of mood episodes in BD-I
There was no mention of quality assessment on the primary papers.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
In the third meta-analysis on adults with rapid cycling BD:47, level I
• AAPs and mood stabilisers were more effective than placebo in
 Clinical Global Impression (CGI) with Hedge’s g of 0.79 (95%
CI 0.71 to 0.86) for AAPs and 0.67 (95% CI 0.40 to 0.95) for
mood stabilisers
 Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)/
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) score with Hedge’s
g of 0.75 (95% CI 0.56 to 0.93) for AAPs and 0.83 (95% CI 0.57
to 1.08) for mood stabilisers
• AAPs were more effective than placebo in YMRS with Hedge’s g
of 1.11 (95% CI 0.92 to 1.30)
There was a mixture of quality on the primary papers based on risk of
bias (RoB) assessment.
Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
guidelines has no specific recommendation on the use of
antidepressants in BD with rapid cycling.40 The Royal Australian and
New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP) guidelines recommend
antidepressant therapy should be used cautiously in the treatment of
bipolar depression when there is a history of rapid cycling.39
Recommendation 4
• In bipolar disorder with specifiers:
 atypical antipsychotics (AAPs) or mood stabilisers may be used as
monotherapy or combination therapy in mixed features o AAPs may
be used in anxious distress
 combination of mood stabilisers with AAPs or another mood stabiliser
is the preferred treatment of choice in rapid cycling
 antidepressants should be avoided in mixed features and used with
caution in rapid cycling
4.1.4.
Maintenance phase
Maintenance phase focuses on prevention of recurrence after remission
of acute mood episodes.
The duration of maintenance phase in BD is debatable. In a metaanalysis on BD I, pooled results of five RCTs showed that patients
who were stable with combination therapy of mood stabilisers and
AAP had lower recurrence rate at 12 months compared with those on
mood stabilisers and placebo (RR=0.51, 95% CI 0.41 to 0.64 with I2 of
70.03%). There was good to moderate quality of primary papers based
on risk of bias (RoB) assessment.28, level I
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
In a systematic review of five international clinical guidelines on longterm pharmacological management of BD I in adults, the recommended
treatments are summarised below:50
The same systematic review on BD I recommended lithium or
quetiapine as the best monotherapy option in the maintenance phase.
For combination therapy, lithium + quetiapine or lithium + aripiprazole
is the first-line treatment. It also mentioned that antidepressant
monotherapy and first-generation antipsychotics (FGA) should be
avoided in the maintenance phase. Clozapine may be considered in
treatment-resistant BD.
A large network meta-analysis (NMA) of 41 RCTs assessed mood
stabilisers or APs as monotherapy or combination therapy vs placebo
in the maintenance phase of BD (mean study duration of 70.5 ± 36.6
weeks). Two categorical NMA were performed and showed the following
results:28, level I
Lithium, valproate,
lamotrigine,
quetiapine,
olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
asenapine,
paliperidone,
aripiprazole LAI
(long-acting
injectable/LAI)
Lithium or valproate +
quetiapine
Lithium + aripiprazole
Carbamazepine,
ziprasidone,
clozapine, risperidone
LAI
Valproate +
aripiprazole
Lithium or valproate +
olanzapine
Lithium or valproate +
ziprasidone
Lithium or valproate +
lurasidone
Lithium or valproate +
risperidone LAI
Lithium + valproate
Lithium, valproate,
quetiapine,
olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
asenapine,
paliperidone,
aripiprazole LAI
Lithium or valproate +
quetiapine
Lithium + aripiprazole
Carbamazepine,
lamotrigine,
ziprasidone,
clozapine, risperidone
LAI
Valproate +
aripiprazole
Lithium or valproate +
olanzapine
Lithium or valproate +
ziprasidone
Lithium or valproate +
risperidone LAI
Lithium + valproate
Lithium, valproate,
lamotrigine,
quetiapine,
olanzapine,
asenapine
Lithium or valproate +
quetiapine
Carbamazepine,
clozapine
Olanzapine fluoxetine
combination
Lithium or valproate +
olanzapine
Lithium or valproate +
lurasidone
Lithium or valproate +
lamotrigine
First line:
Monotherapy
Combination
therapy
Second line:
Monotherapy
Combination
therapy
Pharmacological
agents
Prevention of any
mood episode
Prevention of manic
episode
Prevention of
depressive episode
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• only asenapine, quetiapine, olanzapine, valproate, lithium
monotherapy and combination of lurasidone or quetiapine +
lithium or valproate had lower all-cause discontinuation rate
• significant AEs reported were:
 lithium and valproate had higher risk of EPS and nausea
 olanzapine had higher risk of somnolence
 risperidone LAI had higher risk of hyperprolactinaemia
 quetiapine had higher risk of dry mouth
 lithium had higher risk of diarrhoea
Most of the RCTs assessed had low to moderate risk of bias based on
Cochrane RoB.
In a meta-analysis of 11 RCTs on long-term effectiveness and safety
of antidepressants in BD (treatment duration ranged up from 4.4 to 36
months), the findings were:51, level I
• combination of antidepressants with mood stabilisers was more
effective than mood stabilisers and placebo for prophylaxis
of new depressive episodes (RR=0.66, 95% CI 0.47 to 0.93;
NNT=12.5), without significant increased risk of new manic/
hypomanic episodes
First NMA
(included
monotherapy
and combination therapy
in which two
drugs used
were
specified)
Second NMA
(included
combination
therapy of
SGAs and
lithium or
valproate
comparing
with placebo
and lithium or
valproate)
• Asenapine
• Aripiprazole +
valproate
• Lithium +
oxcarbazepine
• Olanzapine
• Aripiprazole LAI
• Lithium + valproate
• Quetiapine
• Aripiprazole +
lamotrigine
• Aripiprazole
• Lithium
• Valproate
• Risperidone LAI
• Lamotrigine
• Quetiapine +
lithium or valproate
• Lurasidone +
lithium or valproate
• Aripiprazole +
lithium or valproate
• Ziprasidone +
lithium or valproate
• Asenapine
• Lithium +
oxcarbazepine
• Aripiprazole LAI
• Olanzapine,
• Risperidone LAI
• Lithium + valproate
• Aripiprazole
• Aripiprazole +
lamotrigine
• Lithium
• Quetiapine,
• Paliperidone
• Valproate
• Aripiprazole +
lithium or valproate
• Quetiapine +
lithium or valproate
• Aripiprazole +
valproate
• Lamotrigine +
valproate
• Quetiapine
• Lamotrigine
• Olanzapine
• Lithium
• Lurasidone +
lithium or valproate
• Quetiapine +
lithium or valproate
Lower risk ratio of
relapse into any mood
episode (from lowest
to highest)
Lower risk ratio of
relapse into manic/
hypomanic/ mixed
episode (from lowest
to highest)
Lower risk ratio of
relapse into
depressive episode
(from lowest to
highest)
Studied
medications
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• compared with mood stabiliser monotherapy, antidepressant
monotherapy was not superior in preventing new depressive
episodes but had an increased risk of new mania/hypomania
episodes (RR=2.35, 95% CI 1.42 to 3.91; NNH=4.3)
In the subgroup analysis on the prevention of depressive episodes,
patients with BD II benefited significantly with antidepressants (used
as combination or monotherapy) at long-term but not those with BD I.
Apart from that, only second-generation antidepressants were found
to be significantly effective. Three out of 11 RCTs had high risk of bias
based on Cochrane RoB.
However, CANMAT states that usage of antidepressants in BD II
remains controversial due to safety and effectiveness concerns.40
A meta-analysis on SGA LAI on BD, four RCTs found that risperidone
LAI compared with oral active control (olanzapine, aripiprazole,
quetiapine, ziprasidone) had:52, level I
• similar relapse rate for overall and manic/hypomanic episodes
• higher relapse rate of depressive episodes (RR=1.83, 95% CI
1.05 to 3.19)
• similar all-cause discontinuation rate
• comparable risk of EPS and weight gain but higher risk of
hyperprolactinemia (RR=5.75, 95% CI 2.03 to 16.29)
Quality assessment based on the Jadad scores of the RCTs were 3 - 5.
CANMAT guidelines recommend that psychosocial strategies should
be used to improve treatment adherence. If ineffective, LAI medications
e.g. risperidone or aripiprazole LAI should be offered. They are effective
in preventing relapse of any mood episode and mania.40
In a systematic review on BD, clozapine:53, level I
• was as effective as other APs (chlorpromazine, risperidone,
olanzapine and quetiapine) in the improvement of Bech-Rafaelsen
Mania Scale (BRMS) or YMRS scores
• when used as add-on treatment for treatment-resistant BD, was
superior than the treatment as usual (lithium, valproate or APs)
in all outcome measures (BPRS, CGI and BRMS) except for the
HAM-D
• had common AEs of sedation, constipation and tachycardia whilst
severe AEs were reduced white blood cells (5.3%) and seizures
(2%)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• General principles of maintenance pharmacotherapy in BD are as
follows:50
 medications effective and safe in acute episodes should be
continued
 monotherapy should be preferred
 for combination therapy, pharmacological agents with different
mechanisms of action should be used and, benefits and risks
should be re-evaluated every six months or earlier if indicated
Recommendation 5
• For maintenance pharmacotherapy of bipolar disorder (BD),
 lithium and quetiapine are the preferred first-line monotherapy
while lithium plus quetiapine or aripiprazole are the preferred firstline combination therapy
 antidepressant monotherapy should be avoided
 aripiprazole or risperidone long-acting injectables may be
considered in patients who have poor adherence to oral
medications especially in preventing manic episodes
4.2. Non-Pharmacological Therapy
Non-pharmacological treatment in BD includes physical therapies,
psychosocial interventions and psychotherapies which are discussed
further below.
4.2.1.
Physical therapy
Physical therapies are increasingly common in the treatment of BD and
newer strategies have been developed in recent years. In comparison
to pharmacological treatment, the evidence on the effectiveness and
safety of physical therapies is diverse. Despite this, the use of physical
therapies would be a good complement to the management strategies
and provide alternatives to treatment options.
a.
Electroconvulsive therapy
In a systematic review of six international clinical guidelines on the
treatment of mainly mixed states in BD among adult population, ECT was
an effective option in patients with poor response to pharmacological
treatment.43
In another systematic review of five international clinical guidelines on
long-term management of BD I in adults, ECT was an effective secondline treatment option in prevention of any mood episode.50
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
In a 6-week RCT on adults with treatment-resistant bipolar depression,
right unilateral electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) showed lower MADRS
score (MD=6.6 points, 95% CI 2.5 to 10.6) and higher response rate
(p=0.01) compared with pharmacological treatment.54, level I Based on
the same study, there were NS differences in neurocognitive functioning
between the two groups apart from worsening autobiographical memory
in the ECT group.55, level I
Observational studies on patients treated with ECT showed:
• NS difference in number of admissions in one year between pre-
and post-ECT in bipolar patients in a pre-post study on mood
disorder56, level II-3
• increased illness-free interval and, reduced number of mood
episodes and admission in non-rapid cycling BD in a 5-year pre-
and post-ECT57, level II-3
• reduced risk for serious AEs e.g. hospitalisation due to medical
events, non-suicidal death or transfer to a medical bed (HR=0.42,
95% CI 0.20 to 0.92) compared with no ECT on bipolar depression
in a cohort study58, level II-2
RANZCP guidelines recommend the use of ECT as first-line treatment
in mood disorders with severe melancholic depression, imminent risk
of suicide, severe levels of distress, psychotic depression, catatonia,
previous responded to ECT and patients’ preference. It is also
recommended as second-line in patients who fail to respond to one or
more adequate course of medication. Potential AEs on cognition need
to be considered before offering ECT. Adverse memory changes are
short-lived and reversible; more common with bitemporal placement,
higher doses, greater number of treatments and three times weekly
treatment compared with twice weekly.39
MOH guideline on ECT recommends the use of ECT as first-line in
mental disorders when rapid definitive response is required, the risk of
other alternatives outweighs the risk of ECT, previous good response to
ECT, and patients’ preference. ECT may also be considered as secondline treatment in treatment- resistant cases, patients with severe AEs
to medication and deterioration of psychiatric conditions e.g. severe
or prolonged mania with persistent or life- threatening symptoms.
The same guideline recommends bitemporal ECT for rapid response,
bifrontal placement for those with ischaemic heart disease or cardiac
arrhythmias and unilateral ECT for patients susceptible to profound
confusional state.59
b.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
A meta-analysis on adults with bipolar depression comparing repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) with sham treatment showed
that the former was more effective in achieving clinical response as
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
measured by HAM-D or MADRS (OR=2.72, 95% CI 1.44 to 5.14). In
terms of safety, there was only one case of hypomania and one case of
mania. Majority of the primary papers had low RoB.60, level I
A systematic review on adults with BD found that:61, level I
• left rTMS, when compared with sham treatment, was more
effective in improving working memory and processing speed but
not in reducing depressive or manic symptoms while side effects
were comparable between the two groups
• right rTMS, when compared with sham treatment, was more
effective in reducing HAM-D scores at two weeks post-treatment
but conflicting results in its effectiveness in mania
• right rTMS and left rTMS showed similar response and remission
rates in depressive episodes
• bilateral rTMS was more effective than right rTMS in proportion of
responders but equally effective in remission rates in depressive
episodes
The RoB of the primary papers was heterogeneous.
A sham-controlled RCT on adults with BD at a clinically remitted or
non-acute state found that rTMS was more effective in improving
verbal learning but not in areas of processing speed, attention, working
memory, visual learning, reasoning and social cognition. In fact, there
was no dyscognitive effect seen across subdomains.62, level I
c.
Deep transcranial magnetic stimulation
In the same systematic review as above, deep transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) was more effective than sham treatment in reducing
HAM-D scores at end-point (four weeks) but not at follow-up (eight
weeks). There were no AEs reported.61, level I
A sham-controlled RCT on adults with treatment-resistant bipolar
depression found that deep TMS was more effective in improving
depressive symptoms (based on HAM-D) but showed NS difference in
response rate, remission rate and cognitive measures at six weeks. There
were no serious AEs.63, level I
d.
Theta burst stimulation
A systematic review on adults with BD found that theta burst stimulation
(TBS) showed NS difference in response and remission rates based on
MADRS score compared with sham treatment.61, level I
A sham-controlled RCT on adults with bipolar depression with mixed
features found that TBS as an adjunct showed NS difference in
effectiveness (response and remission rates based on MADRS scores)
and safety.64, level I
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
e.
Transcranial direct current stimulation
Transcranial direct current stimulation on adults with bipolar depression
demonstrated:
• NS difference in response and remission rate compared with sham
treatment in an 8-week RCT and reported AEs included increased
suicidality, headaches and blurred vision65, level I
• It was more effective as adjunct than sham treatment in response
rate (NNT=2.69, 95% CI 1.84 to 4.99) and remission (NNT=5.46,
95% CI 3.38 to 14.2) in a 6-week RCT but with higher incidences
of skin redness being reported66, level I
• NS difference in cognitive outcomes compared with sham
treatment with no dyscognitive effects reported67, level I
f.
Bright light therapy
Adjunct bright light therapy on adults with bipolar depression showed:
• higher response rate (p<0.01) and improvement in HAM-D score
reduction (p<0.01) compared with control in a 2-week RCT while
reported AEs included dizziness, fatigue and sleep disturbance;
no manic switch was reported68, level I
• higher rate of remission (OR=12.64, 95% CI 2.16 to 74.08)
compared with control in a 6-week RCT with no AEs including
manic switch reported69, level I
g.
Magnetic seizure therapy
A pre-post study on adults with treatment-resistant bipolar depression
showed that adjunct magnetic seizure therapy led to a reduction in
HAM-D scores (Cohen’s d=1.25, 95% CI 0.42 to 1.57) with a response
rate of 38.5% and a remission rate of 23.1%. Serious AEs reported
were hypomanic episode and hospitalisation due to fall.70, level II-3
h.
Vagus nerve stimulation
In a 5-year cohort study involving patients with treatment-resistant
bipolar depression, adjunctive vagus nerve stimulation showed
significant higher cumulative percentages of response based on
MADRS scores from 12 months to 60 months compared with
TAU.71, level II-2.
There is no retrievable evidence on the comparison of physical
therapies.
• The use of ECT in the maintenance phase of BD should be
individualised based on a thorough risk vs benefit analysis, given the
current limited robust evidence.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 6
• Electroconvulsive therapy should be considered in both bipolar
manic and depressive episodes with the following indications:
 rapid definitive response is required
 risk of other alternatives outweighs risk of ECT
 previous good response to ECT
 patient’s preference
 treatment-resistant cases
• Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation may be considered in
the treatment of bipolar depression.
4.2.2.
Psychosocial intervention
In the treatment of BD, psychosocial interventions may play a crucial
role. A combination of pharmacotherapy and psychosocial intervention
has been recommended in the management of BD.39
A meta-analysis on 11 RCTs investigated the effectiveness of
psychoeducation modules compared with TAU/psychological placebo
(non-specific or shared component of psychological treatment) in
reducing bipolar depression in adults. There was NS difference between
the intervention and comparators at post-treatment and 3 - 12 months
follow-up. GRADE assessment revealed low quality of evidence.72, level I
In summary, established guidelines recommend psychoeducation
in all phases of BD especially in the maintenance phase to patients
and caregivers if appropriate.39, 40, 73 Refer to Appendix 6 on
Psychoeducation for Bipolar Disorder.
In a meta-analysis of seven RCTs comparing smartphone-based
interventions vs control on adults with BD, the findings were:74, level I
• the former (specifically phone call-based and web-based) were
more effective in reducing manic (SMD= -0.19, 95% CI -0.33 to
-0.04) and depressive symptoms (SMD= -0.38, 95% CI -0.61 to
-0.14)
• self-monitoring using smartphone apps was effective in reducing
manic symptoms (SMD=0.27, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.51) compared with
baseline but NS difference for depressive symptoms
Generally, the risk of bias was low based on Cochrane RoB except for
inadequate blinding of participants and personnel in two RCTs.
In another meta-analysis of five RCTs (different RCTs from the earlier
meta- analysis) with more defined use of smartphone-based intervention
on adults with BD, the smartphone-based interventions showed NS
difference in effectiveness in reducing depressive or manic symptoms
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
compared with controls. Although the primary papers were of low risk
of bias based on RoB2, there was considerable heterogeneity among
them.75, level I
A 2-years cohort study examining effects of religiosity/spirituality beliefs
and practices on adults with BD showed a reduction in symptoms of
mania (p<0.001) and depression (p=0.001) based on YMRS and
MADRS respectively. Positive religious coping predicted better QoL
across physical, mental, social and environmental domains.76, level II-2
There is limited evidence available on psychospirituality in BD.
Supported employment is an intervention to help individuals with
severe mental illness including BD to secure and maintain meaningful
work. Its principles include competitive employment, rapid job search
and attention to patients’ preferences, among many others.77 NICE
guideline recommends that people with severe mental illness including
BD who wish to find work receive supported employment services.73
These services are available in places e.g. community mental health
centres (MENTARI) or in local psychiatric services. List of available
MENTARI can be accessed via https://mentari.moh.gov.my/ mentariminds/.
4.2.3.
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy has been used as adjunctive to pharmacotherapy for
BD. These include cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), family-focused
therapy (FFT), interpersonal and social rhythms therapy (IPSRT),
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) and dialectical behaviour
therapy (DBT). Different types of psychotherapies can address various
aspects of the condition, helping patients cope with mood swings,
manage stress and improve overall functioning.
A meta-analysis of 11 RCTs on adults with bipolar depression examined
the effectiveness of psychotherapies in reducing depressive symptoms.
The study found that:72, level I
• at post-treatment -
 CBT was more effective in reducing depressive symptoms
compared with TAU (SMD= -0.51, 95% CI -0.75 to -0.27)
 MBCT group therapy was more effective in reducing depressive
symptoms compared with TAU (SMD= -0.47, 95% CI -0.88 to
-0.06) but not with waiting list
 DBT group therapy was more effective in reducing symptoms
of depression compared with waiting list (SMD= -1.18, 95% CI
-2.06 to -0.30)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
 both group therapy for family therapy and IPSRT were not
effective in reducing depressive symptoms compared with
placebo
• at 3 - 12 months follow-up, both CBT and MBCT group therapy
had NS effect on reducing symptoms of depression compared
with TAU or placebo
Overall, the quality of studies was low, other than for studies examining
psychoeducation vs placebo in which the quality was moderate based
on GRADE.
However, in a large network meta-analysis on adjunctive psychotherapy
vs TAU on adults with BD, evidence showed that CBT (individual and
group) was more effective compared with TAU at 12 months followup in reducing depressive symptoms (SMD= -0.32, 95% CI -0.64 to
-0.01). The overall quality of studies was mixed based on Cochrane
RoB assessment.78, level I
Another meta-analysis of three RCTs on adults with BD explored the
effectiveness of group CBT vs TAU/individualised therapy in reducing
depressive and manic symptoms. The study revealed that group CBT
was not effective in reducing depressive or manic symptoms. The
overall RoB 2 of the primary studies was of some concern.79, level I
In a meta-analysis of five RCTs on adults with BD using IPSRT as an
adjunct treatment vs control, evidence found that IPSRT was more
effective in improving:80, level I
• depressive symptoms [Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation
(LIFE)] (Hedge’s g= -0.23, 95% CI -0.62 to 0.16)
• recovery rate of depression (MADRS) (Hedge’s g= -0.29, 95% CI
-0.55 to -0.03)
• stability of social rhythm [Social Rhythm Metrics (SRM)] (Hedge’s
g= -0.69, 95% CI -1.33 to -0.04)
• occupational, social and impaired functioning score (UCLA Social
Attainment Scale, Social Adjustment Scale (SAS) and Longitudinal
Interval Follow-Up Evaluation-Range of Impaired Functioning
Tool (LIFE-RIFT) respectively] (Hedge’s g= -0.34, 95% CI -0.55 to
-0.14)
The overall quality of the primary papers was mixed based on RoB.
The above findings were supported by a recent RCT on adults with BD
receiving IPSRT as an adjunct treatment. It showed that compared with
control, IPSRT reported a significant improvement in:81, level I
• anxiety symptoms [Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A)]
• manic symptoms [Mania Rating Scale (MRS)]
• depressive symptoms [Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology
Self- Report (IDS-SR)
• global functioning [Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF)]
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• response to mood stabilisers [Retrospective Criteria of Long-term
Treatment Response in Bipolar Disorder (ALDA Scale)]
• psychological functioning [Affective Morbidity Index (AMI)]
A meta-analysis on adults with BD compared MBCT vs TAU/waitlist
and found NS difference in improvement of depressive and anxiety
symptoms. The three related RCTs had mixed RoB.82, level I
The evidence on the effectiveness of Acceptance and Commitment
Therapy (ACT) in managing BD is limited. A single-group clinical
trial of adults with BD receiving group ACT as an adjunct treatment
showed significant change in the following outcomes compared with
baseline:83, level II-3
• decrease in anxiety symptoms [Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)]
• decrease in depressive symptoms [Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI- II)]
• increase in QoL [The Quality of Life Inventory (QOLI)]
• increase in psychological flexibility [The Acceptance and Action
Questionnaire (AAQ-2)]
In a narrative review on the management of BD based on wellestablished guidelines, adjunctive psychosocial interventions and
psychotherapies that had been recommended in acute depression
and maintenance were CBT, IPSRT, FFT ± psychoeducation.84, level
III In the first edition of local CPG, psychosocial interventions were
recommended to be incorporated into patients’ care in addition to
pharmacological treatment in BD.6 The CPG DG opines that this should
be maintained in the treatment of BD despite the mixed results and
quality of the latest evidence.
Recommendation 7
• Psychosocial interventions and psychotherapies should be offered
as an adjunctive treatment for bipolar disorder.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
5.
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES
Persons with BD often self-medicate themselves with complementary
and alternative medicine (CAM) despite limited evidence supporting
their use.85
Complementary therapies mentioned in RANZCP include regular
exercise being associated with improved QoL, although its benefits in
BD remain less clearly defined.39 Meanwhile, in a systematic review
of nutraceuticals use in BD, there was promising, albeit conflicting
evidence for omega-3 fatty acids, N-acetylcysteine and coenzyme
Q10.86
Meanwhile, in Malaysia, among the common alternative therapies
used are cannabis and kratom (ketum).87, level III Interactions between
cannabis use (CU) and BD are complex and bidirectional whereby one
may contribute to the other. The prevalence of CU is increasing globally
and yet there’s limited research done on the treatment options for comorbid BD and CU.40
In a systematic review, a case series on patients diagnosed with BD and
treated with cannabidiol (CBD) monotherapy showed no therapeutic
benefits in improving manic symptoms compared with the combination
of olanzapine and CBD.88, level III
Moreover, the CANMAT Task Force Report 2022 showed that CU in BD
was associated with a worsened illness course, decreased functionality
and increased mortality through suicide.89
• There is insufficient evidence for the use of cannabis and kratom in
the treatment of BD.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
6.
FOLLOW-UP/MONITORING AND REFERRAL
When managing BD, exploring several key aspects to provide effective
care during follow-up is crucial. Monitoring symptoms over time is
essential to assess the response to treatment and the current state,
whether in stable, remission or relapse. Besides that, it is important to
review the compliance with medication and presence of AEs.
6.1.
Parameters to be Monitored during Maintenance Phase
Parameters recommended to be monitored during the maintenance
phase of BD at regular intervals are:6
• weight
• height
• waist circumference
• blood pressure
• electrocardiogram (ECG)
• full blood count
• fasting blood sugar
• renal function
• liver function
• lipid profile
• thyroid function
• serum calcium level
• drug serum level
• Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index and a risk of toxicity. In the
first edition of the MoH CPG on BD, lithium monitoring has been
recommended to be carried out at least every six months.6 Monitoring
should also be done earlier in dose adjustment or suspected toxicity.
Recommendation 8
• Serum lithium level should be monitored one week upon initiation or
dose change, and every six months or earlier if indicated.
Refer to Appendix 7 on Parameters for Monitoring during Treatment
of Bipolar Disorder
6.2.
Referral Criteria
There is no direct evidence on referral criteria for BD. Existing
guidelines state that BD can be managed in primary care except in the
following conditions where the cases need to be referred to psychiatric
services:6, 73
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• unsure of diagnosis
• complex presentation of mood episodes
• acute exacerbation of symptoms
• increased risk of harm to self or others
• marked impairment in social or occupational functioning
• poor or partial response to treatment
• poor treatment adherence
• intolerable or medically important AEs of medication
• psychiatric co-morbidities
• psychotherapeutic needs
• ambivalent or wanting to stop any medication after a period of
relatively stable mood
• special population-
 pregnant or planning a pregnancy
 children and adolescents
 co-morbidity with alcohol or substance misuse
People with BD whose symptoms have responded effectively to
treatment and remain stable may have the option to return to primary
care for further management. Care plans for this group of people
include the following:73
• latest mental state assessment and diagnosis
• detailed medication plan for review and monitoring by primary care
providers
• concise and individualised recovery plan
• crisis alert plan on early warning symptoms, triggers of relapse
and referral pathways
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
7.
RELAPSE PREVENTION AND ADHERENCE
7.1.
Prevention of Relapse
In BD, relapse is defined as a new mood episode occurring within
8 weeks after having achieved remission from the index episode.90
Adjunctive psychosocial interventions and psychotherapies e.g.
psychoeducation, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and family
therapy are useful to prevent relapse. These interventions vary in
method of delivery (e.g. individual vs group format), its contents and
duration of intervention.
A meta-analysis on adults with BD demonstrated that psychoeducation:91, level I
• was more effective than TAU in not relapsing (preventing relapse)
into any episode (OR=1.98, 95% CI 1.09 to 3.58; NNT=7, 95% CI
4 to 25)
• subgroup analysis showed that group delivery was effective in not
relapsing (preventing relapse) into:
 any episode (OR=2.80, 95% CI 1.63 to 4.82; NNT=4, 95% CI 3
to 7)
 manic episode (OR=2.07, 95% CI 1.11 to 3.85; NNT=6, 95% CI
3 to 39)
 depressive episode (OR=2.08, 95% CI 1.05 to 4.12; NNT=6,
95% CI 3 to 77)
• subgroup analysis also showed that individual delivery was not
effective in not relapsing (preventing relapse) into any mood,
manic and depressive episodes
The quality of most of the primary papers was moderate based on RoB.
The above was supported by another meta-analysis of patients with BD
on pharmacotherapy where the following adjuvant group interventions
were more effective than TAU in the prevention of relapse:92, level I
• psychoeducation (RR=0.65, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.77)
• CBT (RR=0.68, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.94)
Quality assessment of primary papers however was not mentioned.
Another meta-analysis, however, on relapse prevention in a similar
study population showed effectiveness in group psychoeducation
(OR=0.43, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.62) but not in group CBT (OR = 0.72, 95%
CI 0.19 to 2.66) when compared with control. The authors concluded
that studies included in group CBT were of small size and hence
might not achieve adequate statistical power to detect the differences
between the groups.79, level I Most of the primary papers used in this
meta-analysis had some concern of bias based on Cochrane RoB2.
In a large NMA on adults with BD on adjunctive psychosocial interventions,
two high-quality RCTs showed carer-focused interventions e.g.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
psychoeducation was more effective than TAU in relapse prevention
(RR=0.61, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.86).93, level I
In another large NMA on patients with BD, the following adjunctive
psychotherapies were more effective than TAU for relapse
prevention:78, level I
• standard psychoeducation ≥6 group or individual sessions
(OR=0.52, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.84)
• brief psychoeducation ≤3 group or individual sessions (OR=0.34,
95% CI 0.16 to 0.74)
• family or conjoint therapy (OR=0.30, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.53)
• CBT (OR=0.52, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.79)
Most of the primary papers were rated to have low to moderate risk of
bias.
Meanwhile, in a small RCT on adults with BD, adjunctive mindfulnessbased cognitive therapy was not effective compared with TAU in
preventing the recurrence of depressive or hypo/manic episodes over a
12-month follow-up period.94, level I
7.2.
Strategies to Improve Adherence
Adherence to treatment within patients with BD may change over time
and vary between different pharmacotherapies. About half of patients
with BD become non-adherent during long-term treatment.95, level I Nonadherence in BD is a complex phenomenon determined by a multitude
of factors.
Significant risk factors for non-adherence are:6
• difficulties with medication routines
• negative attitudes towards drugs in general
• depressive polarity of the last acute episode
• presence of subsyndromal symptoms
• co-morbid obsessive-compulsive disorder
• current acute episode
• substance abuse/dependence
• younger age
• AEs
Enhancing adherence involves employing various approaches, which
are psychological interventions, personalised adherence enhancement,
technology- assisted strategies and community-based care which are
discussed below.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
7.2.1.
Psychological interventions
The most frequently studied intervention for enhancing adherence is
psychoeducation.
In a large NMA assessing non-adherence in patients with BD on
pharmacotherapy, a lower risk of non-adherence was found among
those who received psychoeducation alone (RR=0.27, 95% CI 0.14 to
0.53) or a combination of psychoeducation and CBT (RR=0.14, 95%
CI 0.02 to 0.85) compared with TAU. The author concluded that many
adjunctive psychosocial interventions lacked high-quality evidence to
support their effectiveness which includes adherence.93, level I
A meta-analysis of 18 RCTs among adults with BD on pharmacotherapy,
psychological interventions (e.g. family-focused therapy, CBT, cognitive
psychoeducation therapy (CPT), psychoeducation] were more effective
than control in improving medication adherence (OR=2.27, 95% CI
1.45 to 3.56).23, level I There was a mixture of quality of primary papers
based on RoB.
In an RCT of adults with BD on mood stabilisers, multifaceted interventions
that include motivational interviewing and psychoeducation were more
effective than control in improving adherence at 1- and 6-month postintervention as indicated by a higher Medication Adherence Rating
Scale (MARS) score and plasma level of mood stabilisers.96, level I
7.2.2.
Customised adherence enhancement
Customised adherence enhancement (CAE) is a module that combines
the following strategies:97, level II-3
• psychoeducation which includes information on BD and its
neurobiological facets, medication management and creation of
an individualised symptom profile to detect early signs of relapse
• modified motivational enhancement therapy where the overall
goal is to enhance personal motivation to increase the likelihood
of medication adherence
• communication with providers where individuals are supported
with discussions on the crucial aspects of treatment planning
including expectations for medication response and concerns
about medication AEs
• medication routines that aim to help individuals adjust their
treatment plans as needed and engage in discussions with
healthcare providers.
In an RCT among poorly adherent individuals with BD, CAE had
significantly improved adherence at six months based on a reduction in
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Tablet Routine Questionnaire (TRQ) mean score when compared with
BD-specific educational program. No AEs reported.98, level I
7.2.3.
Technology-assisted strategies
The technology-assisted strategies that are explored in adherencerelated intervention studies include medication event monitoring system
(MEMS), short messaging service (SMS) and android smartphonebased self-monitoring system (MONARCA System) which are described
below.
In an RCT on medication adherence among poorly adherent individuals
with BD, MEMS bottle caps detected worse adherence compared with
self-report TRQ (66.43% vs 46.61%) with a correlation between them of
0.47 (p<0.01). The findings showed that both self-report and automated
medication monitoring were reasonable methods of evaluating
adherence, although the latter was likely to provide a more sensitive
assessment on the missed drug.99, level I
In another RCT on treatment adherence in adults with BD I, those
who received a twice-weekly mobile phone-based SMS reminder
intervention for three months showed better adherence and attitude
towards the medication, based on the Morisky Medication Adherence
Scale and Drug Attitudes Inventory respectively, compared with
TAU.100, level I
In two RCTs comparing MONARCA system vs control, the findings were:
• NS difference in medication adherence based on plasma
concentration of medications on adults with BD I at six months.
However, patients in the intervention group had significantly more
depressive symptoms.101, level I
• NS difference in medication adherence measured by MARS on
BD patients at nine months. However, the intervention group
had higher depressive episodes (HR=2.89, 95% CI 1.02 to
8.23).102, level I
7.2.4.
Community-based care
There was limited evidence on adherence interventions for BD patients
conducted in the community setting.
A pre-post study of a Life Goal Program (a structured group psychotherapy
programme) delivered at three community mental health centres
demonstrated a significant increase in knowledge about BD among the
participants with a large effect size (Cohen’s d= 0.85) compared with
baseline. However, there is NS difference in medication adherence as
measured by MARS.103, level II-3
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
A cohort study that included patients with BD I with psychotic features
revealed that ACCESS model (assertive community treatment) reported
full adherence measured using an expert consensus panel criteria in
the majority of BD patients (91.3%) at 24 months.104, level II-2
Recommendation 9
• Psychosocial interventions (e.g. psychoeducation) and psychotherapies
(e.g. cognitive behavioural therapy) should be part of strategies in
relapse prevention of bipolar disorder.
7.3.
Collaborative Care Models
Collaborative care is an intervention that aims to facilitate communication
and joint working relationships between health professionals (e.g. family
physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists, pharmacists, nurses, etc.) in
delivering integrated and comprehensive care to patients in various
healthcare settings. It can be done in several ways and incorporates
at least three of the following components i.e. patient self-management
support, delivery system redesign, use of clinical information systems,
provider decision support, health care organisation support and linkage
to community resources.105, level III Refer to Appendix 8 for Collaborative
Care Model Core Elements.
In a systematic review of six RCTs comparing the effectiveness of
collaborative care with TAU on adults with BD, the findings were:106, level I
• NS difference in 2-year relapse rate of manic/hypomanic and
depressive episodes
• mixed effects on depression, mania and functionality
The RCTs assessed by the Cochrane RoB tool were of mixed quality.
A recent RCT compared collaborative care model vs TAU using
telepsychiatry services in primary care over a 12-months period on
adult patients. Adults with BD showed improvement in the following
outcomes with NS differences between groups:107, level I
• mental health QoL (measured with Veterans RAND 12-Item Health
Survey Mental Health Component Summary)
• depression
(measured
with
Hopkins
Symptom
Checklist
Depression Scale)
• anxiety (measured with GAD-7)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
8.
SPECIAL POPULATION
8.1.
Pregnancy and Lactation
There is a high risk of relapse of BD during pregnancy or the postpartum period especially in patients not on treatment. There is,
however, the issue of specific considerations to be given on the use
of medications during these periods based on the new Pregnancy and
Lactation Labelling Final Rule of the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) as shown in Appendix 9. If medications are deemed necessary,
preference should be given to monotherapy using the lowest effective
dose.40
Given the complexity of BD management in this group of women, it is
advisable to co-manage them with the obstetrics team. Risks-benefits
analysis of medications on both women and the developing foetus and
infant should be done with the patients using a shared decision-making
approach.
The Guidelines on Pre-Pregnancy Care in MOH Specialist Hospital
suggest that all women of reproductive age with BD should be referred
to a pre-pregnancy care team to optimise their mental health condition
before conception, pregnancy and lactation.108
In a large meta-analysis of six cohort studies, the use of lithium in
pregnancy showed NS difference in risk of:109, level II-2
• diabetes in pregnancy
• pre-eclampsia
• small for gestational age
• major malformations including cardiac malformations
• foetal distress
• caesarean section
• preterm birth
• low birth weight
• post-partum hemorrhage
However, there was a small risk of neonatal admission to a special care
baby unit prior to 28 days of age (OR=1.28, 95% CI 1.12 to 2.33). There
was no mention on quality assessment of the primary papers.
• The use of lithium in pregnancy should be cautioned given small
studies, heterogeneity of results and no report on quality assessment
of primary papers in the meta-analysis mentioned above.
• However, lithium may be used on a case-to-case basis after careful
consideration of risk and benefits e.g. women with high risk of relapse
without lithium.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
A systematic review of observational studies on the use of mood
stabilisers in pregnancy showed the following outcomes:110, level II-2
• Lamotrigine had a favourable reproductive risk profile and was
a preferred option for women of childbearing age, although an
increased risk of cleft lip and palate, heart malformations and
hypospadias were reported (more frequent with doses over 300
mg/day).
• Valproate and carbamazepine were classified by FDA as drugs
contraindicated during pregnancy with the following adverse
outcomes.
 Valproate was considered the most teratogenic drug since it
had a 1 - 5% rate of foetal abnormalities, particularly neural
tube defects and especially with doses over 1,000 mg/
day. Additionally, children exposed to valproate prenatally
showed higher rates of low Intelligence Quotient (IQ),
neurodevelopmental deficits, reduced verbal abilities, attention
deficit hyperkinetic disorder and autism spectrum disorder.
 Carbamazepine use was associated with teratogenicity e.g.
neural tube defects, craniofacial abnormalities, etc.
Since 2020, the National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency (NPRA)
has endorsed the use of the Annual Risk Acknowledgment form for
valproate in women with BD in child-bearing ages (refer to Appendix
10a and 10b).
There is insufficient evidence on the safety profile of APs use in BD
with pregnancy. However, RANZCP guidelines state that AAPs e.g.
quetiapine or olanzapine can be used in the treatment of BD with
pregnancy as they are generally considered to be safe aside from a
risk of gestational diabetes and having a large baby.39
In a systematic review of case series/reports, ECT use in first trimester
of pregnancy showed no safety concerns for the mother or foetus
including teratogenicity.111, level III
In another systematic review of mainly case series/reports on mood
stabilisers and APs use in lactation, the findings were:112, level II-2
• carbamazepine, valproate, quetiapine, olanzapine and risperidone
were relatively safe either due to their limited passage into breast
milk or low infant plasma concentrations
• lamotrigine had high variability in infants’ plasma concentration but
no serious AEs and thus can be considered for individual cases
• lithium was a possible treatment option although there was high
variability of transfer into breast milk
• other AAPs e.g. aripiprazole, paliperidone, lurasidone, ziprasidone
and asenapine were not recommended due to the scarcity of data
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 10
• Shared decision-making in weighing the risks versus benefits of
pharmacological treatment should be done in pregnant and lactating
women with bipolar disorder.
 Atypical antipsychotics e.g. olanzapine and quetiapine may be
used in pregnancy.
 Valproate and carbamazepine should be avoided in pregnancy
given their teratogenic risks. Other mood stabilisers should be
used with caution.
8.2.
Elderly
Older adults make up 25% of all bipolar patients and this number is
expected to increase along with the world’s ever-aging population.97
Older age bipolar disorder (OABD) includes both elderly patients
whose bipolar disorder has commenced earlier in life and those who
present for the first time in later life. There is sparse data on OABD, thus
current guidelines recommend that first- line treatment of OABD should
be similar to that for the general population with BD, whilst specifically
paying attention to side effects, co-morbidities and specific risks in
elderly patients.113 In particular, careful consideration must be given
to the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic changes that occur in
elderly patients.
A double-blind RCT comparing lithium and valproate in older patients
with BD reported that:114, level I
• lithium was more effective than valproate based on YMRS scores
at week nine (Cohen’s d=0.54, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.91)
• both lithium and valproate were equally tolerated with slightly more
tremor with lithium
On the other hand, a cohort study on lithium vs AAPs which included
aripiprazole, quetiapine, risperidone, olanzapine and lurasidone for BD
in older war veterans showed:115, level II-2
• all-cause discontinuation rate (lack of effectiveness, loss to followup and AEs) was significantly higher in lithium compared with
AAPs
• NS difference in discontinuation rate due to AEs
• tremor, renal failure, toxicity and bloating/swelling were more
often reported with lithium whilst extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS),
sedation, restlessness and hallucinations were more with AAPs
In an RCT comparing lurasidone and placebo in older adults with bipolar
I depression, the findings were:116, level I
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
• in monotherapy -
 those on placebo who switched to lurasidone had better
improvement in depressive symptoms (reduction in MADRS
score)
 no increase in mean weight or glycaemic indices and low rates
of switching to hypomania or mania
• in adjunct with lithium or valproate -
 NS difference in reduction of MADRS score
 higher rate of akathisia and tremor were noted
• common AEs for both monotherapy and adjunctive lurasidone
therapy include headache, nasopharyngitis and insomnia
8.3.
Children and Adolescents
Paediatric bipolar disorder (PBD) is a diagnostic challenge as children
have yet to achieve emotional, neurocognitive and physical maturity. A
meta-analysis of 19 studies showed that the prevalence rate of bipolar
spectrum disorders among young people below 21 years of age was
3.9% (95% CI 2.6% to 5.8%).117, level III Early diagnosis of BD is crucial
but over-diagnosis comes with its risks of medical-related AEs and
stigmatisation.
Signs and symptoms of BD may overlap with symptoms of other
psychiatric disorders that may occur in young people e.g.:40
• ADHD
• conduct disorder
• disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
• oppositional defiant disorder
• schizophrenia
• substance use disorder
• unipolar depression
• Proper clinical assessment by a psychiatrist is important to rule out
co- morbidities in children and adolescents presenting with symptoms
of BD.
Family history of BD, especially if the parents developed BD early in
life and the young person has a history of prominent mood lability,
depression/anxiety and subsyndromal manic/hypomanic symptoms
suggest a risk of developing BD.118, level III
The role of pharmacotherapy in paediatric mental health remains the
object of debate and controversy. Careful consideration of treatment
options should be given after weighing the benefits and risks.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
In a meta-analysis of RCTs on the use of lithium vs active comparators/
placebo for acute mania in children with BD, it was shown that:119, level I
• lithium was less effective than risperidone in treating manic/mixed
episodes among young people aged 6 - 15 years (SMD= 0.85,
95% CI 0.54 to 1.15) but had NS difference vs valproate or placebo
• majority of the AEs were described as mild to moderate
• high rates of psychiatric co-morbidity across all studies with the
highest being ADHD
There was a potential high or unclear risk of bias in the included primary
papers based on RoB.
An RCT of lithium vs quetiapine for the treatment of acute mania in young
people of 10 -17 years of age with BD reported that quetiapine:120, level I
• showed a greater reduction in YMRS score (-11.0 vs -13.2,
p<0.001)
• had a higher response rate (72% vs 49%, p=0.012)
• showed NS difference in remission rates
• had more somnolence (p<0.001), dizziness (p<0.05) and weight
gain (p=0.02)
In an RCT in the treatment of adolescents with BD in manic or mixed
episodes, compared with placebo, olanzapine:121, level I
• showed a greater reduction in YMRS score (p<0.001)
• had higher response (RR=2.19, 95% CI 1.28 to 3.74; NNT=3.80)
and remission (RR=3.17, 95% CI 1.43 to 7.04; NNT=4.14) rates
• had shorter times-to-reach response (p=0.003) and remission
(p=0.002) criteria
• had significantly higher common AEs with a frequency ≥5% for
increased appetite, weight gain and somnolence and sedation
In a 3-week RCT on acute treatment of manic or mixed episodes in 10 -
17-year- old patients with BD I, asenapine of three different doses was
significantly more effective than placebo (MDs for YMRS were -3.2,
-5.3 and -6.2 for asenapine 2.5 mg, 5 mg and 10 mg bd respectively).
The treatment-emergent AEs (≥5%) were somnolence, sedation, oral
hypoaesthesia/paraesthesia and increased appetite.122, level I An openlabel extension study of the same RCT demonstrated that most AEs
were mild or moderate in severity at 50 weeks. The additional reported
AEs (≥5%) were increased weight, headache, nausea, vomiting, fatigue
and upper abdominal pain.123, level I
In a 30-week RCT on manic/mixed episode of 10-17-year-old patients
with BD I, compared with placebo, aripiprazole:124, level I
• was significantly more effective (mean change from baseline for
YMRS was 14.1 and 14.9 for aripiprazole with daily doses of 10
mg and 30 mg respectively); the findings were consistent in a
subgroup analysis of 10
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
- 12-year-old and 13 - 17-year-old study subjects with or without
prior bipolar treatment
• showed greater response rates with both doses (p<0.01)
The commonly reported AEs were somnolence, headache and EPS.
In a recent RCT on 10 - 17-year-old patients with BD I in manic/mixed
episodes, ziprasidone was more effective than placebo (MD in YMRS
total score= -4.23, 95% CI -7.14 to -1.32). The common AEs were
somnolence, fatigue and nausea.125, level I
A double-blinded RCT on 10 - 17-year-old with BD I with manic/mixed
episodes showed NS difference in effectiveness and safety between
valproate ER monotherapy and placebo.126, level I
A meta-analysis of three RCTs on quetiapine monotherapy vs placebo in
children and adolescents with bipolar depression showed NS difference
in the following outcomes:127, level I
• Children’s depression rating scale revised (CDRS-R), CGI-BP-S
scores, response and remission rates
• discontinuation rate due to AEs
Based on the GRADE assessment, all outcome qualities were moderate
to high.
In an NMA of four RCTs on 10 - 18-year-old young persons with bipolar
depression, the effectiveness and safety of AAPs (lurasidone, OFC and
quetiapine) were compared with placebo. The findings were:128, level I
• improvement in CDRS-R with lurasidone (MD = -5.70, 95% CI
-8.66 to -2.76) and OFC (MD= - 5.0, 95% CI -8.63 to -1.38) but
not with quetiapine
• improvement in CGI-BP-S depression scores with lurasidone
(MD= -0.40, 95% CI -0.68 to -0.12) but not with OFC
• improvement in CGI-BP-S overall scores with lurasidone (MD=
-0.40, 95% CI -0.68 to -0.12) but not with OFC and quetiapine
• improvement in response rate with lurasidone (OR=2.64, 95% CI
1.67 to 4.01; NNT=5) and OFC (OR=2.64, 95% CI 1.43 to 4.50;
NNT=6) but not with quetiapine
• improvement in remission rate with OFC (OR=1.93, 95% CI 1.10
to 3.17; NNT=7) but not with lurasidone and quetiapine
• discontinuation due to AEs, quetiapine had fewer discontinuation
vs placebo (OR=0.32, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.83) whereas OFC had
more discontinuation vs placebo (OR=3.31, 95% CI 1.08 to 8.75)
and quetiapine (OR=15.08, 95% CI 2.32 to 56.84)
Based on SUCRA rankings, lurasidone had the highest rank followed
by OFC and quetiapine in terms of effectiveness. For safety, quetiapine
was ranked first followed by lurasidone, placebo and OFC. GRADE
assessment gave mixed quality on the various outcomes.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Recommendation 11
• For children and adolescents with bipolar disorder:
 atypical antipsychotics* monotherapy may be used in manic or
mixed episodes
 lurasidone and olanzapine/fluoxetine combination may be used in
depressive episodes
*aripiprazole, asenapine, lurasidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone
and ziprasidone
Refer to Appendix 11 for Suggested Paediatric Medications Dosing.
8.4.
People with Substance Use Disorder
Substance use disorder (SUD) is a common co-morbidity of BD.
Substance use may cause, mimic, underlie or complicate mental health
disorders. Empirical evidence to guide optimal management of BD and
co-morbid SUD is scarce, partly because such patients are difficult to
engage in clinical trials.
NICE guidelines have recommended that the use of alcohol, tobacco,
prescription and non-prescription medication, and illicit drugs should be
discussed with people with BD to address the negative effects of these
substances.73
In a guidelines on the pharmacological and psychological management
of adult patients with BD and co-morbid SUD, the following are
recommended:129
• adjuvant valproate or naltrexone may improve symptoms of
alcohol use disorder
• lamotrigine add-on therapy may reduce cocaine use
• varenicline may improve nicotine abstinence
• integrated group therapy may reduce substance use and BD
symptoms
The strength of recommendations was weak to moderate based on
GRADE.
An RCT on adjunctive psychosocial intervention for BD patients with
co-morbid substance use found that Integrated Treatment Adherence
Program (which combined elements of CBT and Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy) significantly improved depression, mania,
functioning and values-consistent living compared with those on
Enhanced Assessment and Monitoring (enhanced TAU). There was
also a trend for increased treatment adherence.130, level I
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
8.5.
People with Borderline Personality Disorder
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a co-morbid of BD, each
amplifying the symptoms of the other hence delaying time to remission.
NICE and CANMAT guidelines state that drug treatment should not be
used specifically for symptoms or behaviour of BPD. However, AAPs
and mood stabilisers are valuable in treating BPD with co-morbid
BD.40, 73 Meanwhile, the RANZCP guidelines recommend psychotherapy
as the fundamental management of BPD and is of considerable
importance in the management of BD.39
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
9.
SUICIDE PREVENTION
Annually, WHO estimates that 703,000 people die by suicide.131 In low-
and middle-income countries, 58% of those who died by suicide and 45%
of those who engaged in non-fatal suicidal behaviour had a psychiatric
disorder.132 Among those living with mental illnesses, people with BD
have been associated with the highest risk of suicide.133 In children
and adolescents (<18 years of age) with BD, the prevalence of suicidal
ideation was 50 - 60% and suicide attempt was 20 - 25%.134, level II-2
A large number of people are bereaved by suicide deaths and often
require psychosocial support.135
While there is extensive evidence on risk formulation and management
of suicidal behaviour, paucity of high-quality studies focused on
individuals with BD limits the synthesis of recommendations.
9.1.
Risk and Protective Factors
The risk factors for suicide in BD in adults are:6
• sociodemographic
 younger age
 male
 unemployed
 disabled
• symptomatology
 suicidal ideation
 rapid cycling
 psychotic symptoms
 depressive phase
 hopelessness
 mixed state
• clinical characteristics
 early onset of mood disorder
 previous suicide attempts
 multiple hospitalisations
 early sexual abuse
 stressful life events
 lack of confidant
 family history of suicide
• co-morbidity
 anxiety disorder
 Cluster B personality (antisocial/borderline/histrionic/narcissistic
personality disorder)
 substance misuse
• treatment
 duration of treatment (<5 years)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
A systematic review of 14 observational studies on children and
adolescents (<18 years of age) with BD showed that the risk factors for
suicide attempt were:134, level II-2
• early illness onset
• severe illness characteristics e.g. psychosis, hospitalisation,
hopelessness etc
• mixed episode
• co-morbid disorders e.g. ADHD, substance use disorder, panic
disorder, oppositional defiant disorder
• past self-injurious behaviour
• past suicide ideation/suicide attempt
• past physical/sexual abuse
• parental depression
• family history of suicidality
• poor family functioning
Evidence for protective factors in suicidal behaviour in BD is limited. A
small cross-sectional study on euthymic adult outpatients with BD found
that personal religious activities (e.g. meditation, prayers and religious
studies) and religious integration in daily living exerted a protective
effect against suicide attempts.136, level III
9.2.
Effective and Safe Intervention
Suicidal behaviour in BD has to be managed in a person-centered
collaborative approach requiring both clinical and community-based
strategies.132, level III
Specific attention is drawn to the role of lithium in preventing suicidal
behaviour in BD. A systematic review of adults with BD showed:30, level I
• combination of olanzapine and lithium significantly reduced
suicidal item score of HAM-D vs lithium alone
• lithium and valproate were equally effective in reducing suicide
ideation among suicidal attempters
• no definitive evidence on anti-suicidal effect of lithium
A meta-analysis of RCTs on adults with mood disorders showed NS
difference between lithium and placebo in suicide and non-fatal suicidal
behaviour between the groups.137, level I The primary papers were of
moderate quality based on RoB.
In a cohort study on patients >10 years of age with BD, ECT
reduced suicide risk in depressive state (HR=0.805, 95% CI
0.514 to 0.987) but not in mania or mixed states compared with
psychopharmacotherapy.138, level II-2
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
In a systematic review, a small RCT on the effectiveness of IV ketamine
vs placebo in bipolar depression found that suicidal ideation scores in
MADRS reduced within 40 minutes in subjects of the ketamine arm
(Cohen’s d=0.98, 95% CI 0.64 to 1.33) and remained significant to
Day 3.139, level I
Evidence on psychological interventions for suicidal behaviour in BD
population is limited. Safety Planning is a personalised and prioritised
list of coping strategies and resources to reduce suicide risk and
improve help-seeking.
Components of Safety Planning include:140, level III
• recognising warning signs of impending suicidal crisis
• identifying and employing internal coping strategies without
needing to contact another person
• utilising contacts with people as a means of distraction from
suicidal thoughts and urges
• contacting family members or friends who may help to resolve a
crisis and with whom suicidality can be discussed
• contacting mental health professionals or agencies
• reducing the potential use of lethal means
A meta-analysis of trials on safety planning interventions (cognitive
therapy and CBT for suicide prevention) vs control (TAU or other
treatment modalities) among adults with suicidal behaviour (including
those with affective disorders) showed mixed results where two RCTs
found significant reduction in suicidal behaviour while another two did
not. The overall bias of primary papers was considered high based on
RoB2.141, level I
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Percentage of
patients with bipolar
disorder not on
antidepressant
monotherapy
(Target of ≥80%)
=
Number of patients with bipolar disorder
not on antidepressant monotherapy in a period
x100%
Number of patients with bipolar disorder
in the same period
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
10.1.
Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for the application of the recommendations in the
CPG include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers
• training and updates on the management of BD in relevant
scientific and professional meetings, seminars, conferences, etc.
• public awareness programmes on the importance of BD e.g.
World Bipolar Day, World Mental Health Day, Suicide Prevention
Day, etc
• peer support and psychosocial support services by nongovernmental organisations and patient advocates
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited awareness and knowledge among healthcare providers on
BD and its management
• lack of awareness of symptoms of BD among families/carers and
community
• variation in treatment practice and preferences due to limited
accessibility to resources e.g. medications
• no national clinical registry for BD for planning services
10.2
Potential Resource Implications
BD is a complex mental disorder that is challenging to diagnose and treat.
Those with BD need to be referred to psychiatric services for accurate
diagnosis and further management. The pharmacological treatment that
had been recommended by the CPG is not readily available in some
healthcare facilities. The financial burden of psychotropic treatments
restricts treatment options and distribution, while a scarcity of clinical
psychologists limits access to essential psychosocial interventions. The
available psychoeducational materials for patients fall short in effectively
fostering early help-seeking tendencies and offering comprehensive
management strategies.
In line with the key recommendations in this CPG, the following are
proposed as clinical audit indicators for quality management of BD:
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval
of the CPG by MoH which include a Quick Reference and a Training
Module.
Percentage of
patients with bipolar
disorder on lithium
monitoring every six
months
(Target of ≥80%)
=
Number of patients with bipolar disorder on
lithium monitoring every six months within a period
x100%
Total number of patients with bipolar disorder on
lithium within the same period
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
World Health Organisation. Mental Disorders: Key Facts. Geneva: World Health
Organization 2022 (Available at: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/bipolar-disorder).
2.
GBD 2019 Mental Disorders Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden
of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and territories, 1990-2019: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Psychiatry.
2022;9(2):137-150.
3.
Zhong Y, Chen Y, Su X, et al. Global, regional and national burdens of bipolar
disorders in adolescents and young adults: a trend analysis from 1990 to 2019.
Gen Psychiatr. 2024;37(1):e101255.
4.
Polga N, Macul Ferreira de Barros P, Farhat LC, et al. Parental age and the risk
of bipolar disorder in the offspring: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta
Psychiatr Scand. 2022;145(6):568-77.
5.
Chen MH, Chen YS, Hsu JW, et al. Comorbidity of ADHD and subsequent
bipolar disorder among adolescents and young adults with major depression: a
nationwide longitudinal study. Bipolar Disord. 2015;17(3):315-22.
6.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Bipolar Disorder in Adults. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2014.
7.
Nowrouzi B, McIntyre RS, MacQueen G, et al. Admixture analysis of age at
onset in first episode bipolar disorder. J Affect Disord. 2016;201:88-94.
8.
Estrada-Prat X, Van Meter AR, Camprodon-Rosanas E, et al. Childhood
factors associated with increased risk for mood episode recurrences in bipolar
disorder-A systematic review. Bipolar Disord. 2019;21(6):483-502.
9.
Daveney J, Panagioti M, Waheed W, et al. Unrecognized bipolar disorder in
patients with depression managed in primary care: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2019;58:71-6.
10. Dome P, Rihmer Z, Gonda X. Suicide Risk in Bipolar Disorder: A Brief Review.
Medicina (Kaunas). 2019;55(8).
11. Fritz K, Russell AMT, Allwang C, et al. Is a delay in the diagnosis of bipolar
disorder inevitable? Bipolar Disord. 2017;19(5):396-400.
12. Viktorin A, Lichtenstein P, Thase ME, et al. The risk of switch to mania in patients
with bipolar disorder during treatment with an antidepressant alone and in
combination with a mood stabilizer. Am J Psychiatry. 2014;171(10):1067-73.
13. Hirschfeld RM, Williams JB, Spitzer RL, et al. Development and validation
of a screening instrument for bipolar spectrum disorder: the Mood Disorder
Questionnaire. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157(11):1873-5.
14. Angst J, Adolfsson R, Benazzi F, et al. The HCL-32: towards a self-assessment
tool for hypomanic symptoms in outpatients. J Affect Disord. 2005;88(2):217-33.
15. Nassir Ghaemi S, Miller CJ, Berv DA, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of a new
bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale. J Affect Disord. 2005;84(2-3):273-7.
16. McIntyre RS, Patel MD, Masand PS, et al. The Rapid Mood Screener (RMS):
a novel and pragmatic screener for bipolar I disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2021;37(1):135- 44.
17. Thase ME, Stahl SM, McIntyre RS, et al. Screening for Bipolar I Disorder and
the Rapid Mood Screener: Results of a Nationwide Health Care Provider Survey.
Prim Care Companion CNS Disord. 2023;25(2).
18. Aiken CB, Weisler RH, Sachs GS. The Bipolarity Index: a clinician-rated measure
of diagnostic confidence. J Affect Disord. 2015;177:59-64.
19. Bechdolf A, Nelson B, Cotton SM, et al. A preliminary evaluation of the validity
of at-risk criteria for bipolar disorders in help-seeking adolescents and young
adults. J Affect Disord. 2010;127(1-3):316-20.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
20. Ratheesh A, Hammond D, Watson M, et al. Bipolar At-Risk Criteria and Risk of
Bipolar Disorder Over 10 or More Years. JAMA Netw Open. 2023;6(9):e2334078.
21. McIntyre RS, Berk M, Brietzke E, et al. Bipolar disorders. Lancet.
2020;396(10265):1841-56.
22. Asherson P, Young AH, Eich-Höchli D, et al. Differential diagnosis, comorbidity,
and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in relation to bipolar
disorder or borderline personality disorder in adults. Curr Med Res Opin.
2014;30(8):1657- 72.
23. McDonald CE, Rossell SL, Phillipou A. The comorbidity of eating disorders in
bipolar disorder and associated clinical correlates characterised by emotion
dysregulation and impulsivity: A systematic review. J Affect Disord. 2019;259:22843.
24. Carbone EA, de Filippis R, Caroleo M, et al. Antisocial Personality Disorder in
Bipolar Disorder: A Systematic Review. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021;57(2).
25. Hossain S, Mainali P, Bhimanadham NN, et al. Medical and Psychiatric
Comorbidities in Bipolar Disorder: Insights from National Inpatient Populationbased Study. Cureus. 2019;11(9):e5636.
26. Yalin N, Conti I, Bagchi S, et al. Clinical characteristics and impacts of HIV
infection in people with bipolar disorders. J Affect Disord. 2021;294:794-801.
27. Yildiz A, Nikodem M, Vieta E, et al. A network meta-analysis on comparative
efficacy and all-cause discontinuation of antimanic treatments in acute bipolar
mania. Psychol Med. 2015;45(2):299-317.
28. Kishi T, Ikuta T, Matsuda Y, et al. Mood stabilizers and/or antipsychotics for
bipolar disorder in the maintenance phase: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Mol Psychiatry. 2021;26(8):414657.
29. Keramatian K, Chakrabarty T, Saraf G, et al. New Developments in the Use of
Atypical Antipsychotics in the Treatment of Bipolar Disorder: a Systematic Review
of Recent Randomized Controlled Trials. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2021;23(7):39.
30. Fountoulakis KN, Tohen M, Zarate CA, Jr. Lithium treatment of Bipolar disorder
in adults: A systematic review of randomized trials and meta-analyses. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2022;54:100-15.
31. Vieta E, Sachs G, Chang D, et al. Two randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trials and one open-label, long-term trial of brexpiprazole for the acute
treatment of bipolar mania. J Psychopharmacol. 2021;35(8):971-82.
32. Missio G, Moreno DH, Demetrio FN, et al. A randomized controlled trial
comparing lithium plus valproic acid versus lithium plus carbamazepine in young
patients with type 1 bipolar disorder: the LICAVAL study. Trials. 2019;20(1):608.
33. Earley W, Durgam S, Lu K, et al. Tolerability of cariprazine in the treatment of
acute bipolar I mania: A pooled post hoc analysis of 3 phase II/III studies. J Affect
Disord. 2017;215:205-12.
34. Bahji A, Ermacora D, Stephenson C, et al. Comparative efficacy and tolerability
of pharmacological treatments for the treatment of acute bipolar depression: A
systematic review and network meta-analysis. J Affect Disord. 2020;269:154-84.
35. Yildiz A, Siafis S, Mavridis D, et al. Comparative efficacy and tolerability of
pharmacological interventions for acute bipolar depression in adults: a systematic
review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2023;10(9):693-705.
36. Kadakia A, Dembek C, Heller V, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of atypical
antipsychotics for acute bipolar depression: a network meta-analysis. BMC
Psychiatry. 2021;21(1):249.
37. Hu Y, Zhang H, Wang H, et al. Adjunctive antidepressants for the acute treatment
of bipolar depression: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res.
2022;311:114468.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
38. McGirr A, Vöhringer PA, Ghaemi SN, et al. Safety and efficacy of adjunctive
second- generation antidepressant therapy with a mood stabiliser or an atypical
antipsychotic in acute bipolar depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomised placebo-controlled trials. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(12):1138-46.
39. Malhi GS, Bell E, Bassett D, et al. The 2020 Royal Australian and New Zealand
College of Psychiatrists clinical practice guidelines for mood disorders. Aust N Z
J Psychiatry. 2021;55(1):7-117.
40. Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, Parikh SV, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) and International Society for Bipolar Disorders
(ISBD) 2018 guidelines for the management of patients with bipolar disorder.
Bipolar Disord. 2018;20(2):97-170.
41. Dean RL, Marquardt T, Hurducas C, et al. Ketamine and other glutamate receptor
modulators for depression in adults with bipolar disorder. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2021;10(10):CD011611.
42. Yatham LN, Chakrabarty T, Bond DJ, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) and International Society for Bipolar Disorders
(ISBD) recommendations for the management of patients with bipolar disorder
with mixed presentations. Bipolar Disord. 2021;23(8):767-88.
43. Verdolini N, Hidalgo-Mazzei D, Murru A, et al. Mixed states in bipolar and major
depressive disorders: systematic review and quality appraisal of guidelines. Acta
Psychiatr Scand. 2018;138(3):196-222.
44. McIntyre RS, Suppes T, Earley W, et al. Cariprazine efficacy in bipolar I
depression with and without concurrent manic symptoms: post hoc analysis of 3
randomized, placebo-controlled studies. CNS Spectr. 2020;25(4):502-10.
45. McIntyre RS, Durgam S, Huo J, et al. The Efficacy of Lumateperone in Patients
With Bipolar Depression With Mixed Features. J Clin Psychiatry. 2023;84(3).
46. Cullen C, Kappelmann N, Umer M, et al. Efficacy and acceptability of
pharmacotherapy for comorbid anxiety symptoms in bipolar disorder: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Bipolar Disord. 2021;23(8):754-66.
47. Strawbridge R, Kurana S, Kerr-Gaffney J, et al. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of treatments for rapid cycling bipolar disorder. Acta Psychiatr Scand.
2022;146(4):290-311.
48. Kato M, Adachi N, Kubota Y, et al. Clinical features related to rapid cycling and
one-year euthymia in bipolar disorder patients: A multicenter treatment survey for
bipolar disorder in psychiatric clinics (MUSUBI). J Psychiatr Res. 2020;131:228-
34.
49. Zhihan G, Fengli S, Wangqiang L, et al. Lamotrigine and Lithium Combination for
Treatment of Rapid Cycling Bipolar Disorder: Results From Meta-Analysis. Front
Psychiatry. 2022;13:913051.
50. Verdolini N, Hidalgo-Mazzei D, Del Matto L, et al. Long-term treatment of bipolar
disorder type I: A systematic and critical review of clinical guidelines with derived
practice algorithms. Bipolar Disord. 2021;23(4):324-40.
51. Liu B, Zhang Y, Fang H, et al. Efficacy and safety of long-term antidepressant
treatment for bipolar disorders - A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
J Affect Disord. 2017;223:41-8.
52. Prajapati AR, Wilson J, Song F, et al. Second-generation antipsychotic longacting injections in bipolar disorder: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Bipolar Disord. 2018;20(8):687-96.
53. Delgado A, Velosa J, Zhang J, et al. Clozapine in bipolar disorder: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Psychiatr Res. 2020;125:21-7.
54. Schoeyen HK, Kessler U, Andreassen OA, et al. Treatment-resistant bipolar
depression: a randomized controlled trial of electroconvulsive therapy versus
algorithm-based pharmacological treatment. Am J Psychiatry. 2015;172(1):41- 51.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
55. Kessler U, Schoeyen HK, Andreassen OA, et al. The effect of electroconvulsive
therapy on neurocognitive function in treatment-resistant bipolar disorder
depression. J Clin Psychiatry. 2014;75(11):e1306-13.
56. Tor PC, Bin Abdin E. Mirror Readmission Study of the Association of
Electroconvulsive Therapy With 1-Year Mood Disorder Readmissions in a
Tertiary Mood Disorder Unit. J ECT. 2020;36(2):111-4.
57. Minnai GP, Salis P, Manchia M, et al. What happens to the course of bipolar
disorder after electroconvulsive therapy? J Affect Disord. 2016;195:180-4.
58. Kaster TS, Vigod SN, Gomes T, et al. Risk of serious medical events in patients
with depression treated with electroconvulsive therapy: a propensity scorematched, retrospective cohort study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2021;8(8):686-95.
59. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guideline on Electroconvulsive Therapy for Ministry
of Health Basis, Practicality & Policies. Putrajaya : MoH; 2021.
60. Nguyen TD, Hieronymus F, Lorentzen R, et al. The efficacy of repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) for bipolar depression: A systematic
review and meta- analysis. J Affect Disord. 2021;279:250-5.
61. Konstantinou G, Hui J, Ortiz A, et al. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) in bipolar disorder: A systematic review. Bipolar Disord. 2022;24(1):10-
26.
62. McIntyre RS, Lee Y, Rodrigues NB, et al. Repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation for cognitive function in adults with bipolar disorder: A pilot study. J
Affect Disord. 2021;293:73-7.
63. Matsuda Y, Kito S, Igarashi Y, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Deep Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation in Office Workers with Treatment-Resistant Depression:
A Randomized, Double-Blind, Sham-Controlled Trial. Neuropsychobiology.
2020;79(3):208-13.
64. Tavares DF, Suen P, Rodrigues Dos Santos CG, et al. Treatment of mixed
depression with theta-burst stimulation (TBS): results from a double-blind,
randomized, sham- controlled clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2021;46(13):2257-65.
65. Loo CK, Husain MM, McDonald WM, et al. International randomized-controlled
trial of transcranial Direct Current Stimulation in depression. Brain Stimul.
2018;11(1):125-33.
66. Sampaio-Junior B, Tortella G, Borrione L, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Transcranial
Direct Current Stimulation as an Add-on Treatment for Bipolar Depression: A
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(2):158-66.
67. Tortella G, Sampaio-Junior B, Moreno ML, et al. Cognitive outcomes of the
bipolar depression electrical treatment trial (BETTER): a randomized, doubleblind, sham-controlled study. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2021;271(1):93100.
68. Zhou TH, Dang WM, Ma YT, et al. Clinical efficacy, onset time and safety of bright
light therapy in acute bipolar depression as an adjunctive therapy: A randomized
controlled trial. J Affect Disord. 2018;227:90-6.
69. Sit DK, McGowan J, Wiltrout C, et al. Adjunctive Bright Light Therapy for
Bipolar Depression: A Randomized Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial. Am
J Psychiatry. 2018;175(2):131-9.
70. Tang VM, Blumberger DM, Dimitrova J, et al. Magnetic seizure therapy is
efficacious and well tolerated for treatment-resistant bipolar depression: an
open-label clinical trial. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2020;45(5):313-21.
71. Aaronson ST, Sears P, Ruvuna F, et al. A 5-Year Observational Study of Patients
With Treatment-Resistant Depression Treated With Vagus Nerve Stimulation or
Treatment as Usual: Comparison of Response, Remission, and Suicidality. Am J
Psychiatry. 2017;174(7):640-8.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
72. Yilmaz S, Huguet A, Kisely S, et al. Do psychological interventions reduce
symptoms of depression for patients with bipolar I or II disorder? A metaanalysis. J Affect Disord. 2022;301:193-204.
73. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (UK). Bipolar Disorder: The
NICE Guideline on the Assessment and Management of Bipolar Disorder in
Adults, Children and Young People in Primary and Secondary Care. London:
The British Psychological Society and The Royal College of Psychiatrists; 2014
74. Liu JY, Xu KK, Zhu GL, et al. Effects of smartphone-based interventions and
monitoring on bipolar disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. World J
Psychiatry. 2020;10(11):272-85.
75. Anmella G, Faurholt-Jepsen M, Hidalgo-Mazzei D, et al. Smartphone-based
interventions in bipolar disorder: Systematic review and meta-analyses of
efficacy. A position paper from the International Society for Bipolar Disorders
(ISBD) Big Data Task Force. Bipolar Disord. 2022;24(6):580-614.
76. Stroppa A, Colugnati FA, Koenig HG, et al. Religiosity, depression, and quality
of life in bipolar disorder: a two-year prospective study. Braz J Psychiatry.
2018;40(3):238-43.
77. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guidelines on Implementation of Supported
Employment Program for People with Mental Illness in MOH Facilities. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2022.
78. Miklowitz DJ, Efthimiou O, Furukawa TA, et al. Adjunctive Psychotherapy for
Bipolar Disorder: A Systematic Review and Component Network Meta-analysis.
JAMA Psychiatry. 2021;78(2):141-50.
79. Tan MK, Chia EC, Tam WW, et al. A Meta-Analysis of Group Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy and Group Psychoeducation for Treating Symptoms and Preventing
Relapse in People Living with Bipolar Disorder. Healthcare (Basel). 2022;10(11).
80. Lam C, Chung MH. A meta-analysis of the effect of interpersonal and social
rhythm therapy on symptom and functioning improvement in patients with bipolar
disorders. Appl Res Qual Life. 2019;16:1-22.
81. Steardo L, Jr., Luciano M, Sampogna G, et al. Efficacy of the interpersonal and
social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) in patients with bipolar disorder: results from a
real-world, controlled trial. Ann Gen Psychiatry. 2020;19:15.
82. Xuan R, Li X, Qiao Y, et al. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
bipolar disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res.
2020;290:113116.
83. Pankowski S, Adler M, Andersson G, et al. Group acceptance and commitment
therapy (ACT) for bipolar disorder and co-existing anxiety - an open pilot study.
Cogn Behav Ther. 2017;46(2):114-28.
84. Murray G. Adjunctive psychosocial interventions for bipolar disorder: some
psychotherapeutic context for the Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
Treatments (CANMAT) & International Society for Bipolar Disorders (ISBD)
guidelines. Bipolar Disord. 2018;20(1):25-33.
85. Sarris J, Lake J, Hoenders R. Bipolar disorder and complementary medicine:
current evidence, safety issues, and clinical considerations. J Altern Complement
Med. 2011;17(10):881-90.
86. Ashton MM, Kavanagh BE, Marx W, et al. A Systematic Review of Nutraceuticals
for the Treatment of Bipolar Disorder. Can J Psychiatry. 2021;66(3):262-73.
87. Ismail R, Abdul Manaf MR, Hassan MR, et al. Prevalence of Drug and Substance
Use among Malaysian Youth: A Nationwide Survey. Int J Environ Res Public
Health. 2022;19(8).
88. Pinto JV, Saraf G, Frysch C, et al. Cannabidiol as a Treatment for Mood
Disorders: A Systematic Review. Can J Psychiatry. 2020;65(4):213-27.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
89. Tourjman SV, Buck G, Jutras-Aswad D, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) Task Force Report: A Systematic Review and
Recommendations of Cannabis use in Bipolar Disorder and Major Depressive
Disorder. Can J Psychiatry. 2023;68(5):299-311.
90. Tohen M, Frank E, Bowden CL, et al. The International Society for Bipolar
Disorders (ISBD) Task Force report on the nomenclature of course and outcome
in bipolar disorders. Bipolar Disord. 2009;11(5):453-7
91. Bond K, Anderson IM. Psychoeducation for relapse prevention in bipolar
disorder: a systematic review of efficacy in randomized controlled trials. Bipolar
Disord. 2015;17(4):349-62.
92. Macheiner T, Skavantzos A, Pilz R, et al. A meta-analysis of adjuvant group-
interventions in psychiatric care for patients with bipolar disorders. J Affect
Disord. 2017;222:28-31.
93. Chatterton ML, Stockings E, Berk M, et al. Psychosocial therapies for the
adjunctive treatment of bipolar disorder in adults: network meta-analysis. Br J
Psychiatry. 2017;210(5):333-41.
94. Perich T, Manicavasagar V, Mitchell PB, et al. A randomized controlled trial of
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder. Acta Psychiatr Scand.
2013;127(5):333-43.
95. Scott J, Colom F, Vieta E. A meta-analysis of relapse rates with adjunctive
psychological therapies compared to usual psychiatric treatment for bipolar
disorders. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007;10(1):123-9.
96. Pakpour AH, Modabbernia A, Lin CY, et al. Promoting medication adherence
among patients with bipolar disorder: a multicenter randomized controlled trial of
a multifaceted intervention. Psychol Med. 2017;47(14):2528-39.
97. Sajatovic M, Dols A, Rej S, et al. Bipolar symptoms, somatic burden, and
functioning in older-age bipolar disorder: Analyses from the Global Aging &
Geriatric Experiments in Bipolar Disorder Database project. Bipolar Disord.
2022;24(2):195-206.
98. Sajatovic M, Tatsuoka C, Cassidy KA, et al. A 6-Month, Prospective, Randomized
Controlled Trial of Customized Adherence Enhancement Versus Bipolar-Specific
Educational Control in Poorly Adherent Individuals With Bipolar Disorder. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2018;79(6).
99. Sajatovic M, Levin JB, Sams J, et al. Symptom severity, self-reported adherence,
and electronic pill monitoring in poorly adherent patients with bipolar disorder.
Bipolar Disord. 2015;17(6):653-61.
100. Menon V, Selvakumar N, Kattimani S, et al. Therapeutic effects of mobile-based
text message reminders for medication adherence in bipolar I disorder: Are they
maintained after intervention cessation? J Psychiatr Res. 2018;104:163-8.
101. Faurholt-Jepsen M, Frost M, Ritz C, et al. Daily electronic self-monitoring in bipolar
disorder using smartphones - the MONARCA I trial: a randomized, placebo-
controlled, single-blind, parallel group trial. Psychol Med. 2015;45(13):2691-704.
102. Faurholt-Jepsen M, Frost M, Busk J, et al. Differences in mood instability in
patients with bipolar disorder type I and II: a smartphone-based study. Int J
Bipolar Disord. 2019;7(1):5.
103. Provencher M, Hawke L, Bélair M, et al. Dissemination of a brief psychoeducational
intervention for bipolar disorder in community mental health settings. Int J Clin
Psychiatry Ment Health. 2014;2:93-103.
104. Schöttle D, Schimmelmann BG, Karow A, et al. Effectiveness of integrated care
including therapeutic assertive community treatment in severe schizophrenia
spectrum and bipolar I disorders: the 24-month follow-up ACCESS II study. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2014;75(12):1371-9.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
105. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for patients
with chronic illness. JAMA. 2002;288(14):1775-9.
106. Butler M, Urosevic S, Desai P, et al. Treatment for bipolar disorder in adults: a
systematic review. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(US); 2018.
107. Cerimele JM, Blanchard BE, Johnson M, et al. Effectiveness of Collaborative
Care and Colocated Specialty Care for Bipolar Disorder in Primary Care: A
Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial. J Acad Consult Liaison
Psychiatry. 2023;64(4):349-56.
108. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guidelines on Pre-Pregnancy Care in MOH
Specialist Hospital. Putrajaya : MoH; 2023.
109. Munk-Olsen T, Liu X, Viktorin A, et al. Maternal and infant outcomes associated
with lithium use in pregnancy: an international collaborative meta-analysis of six
cohort studies. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(8):644-52.
110. Giménez A, Pacchiarotti I, Gil J, et al. Adverse outcomes during pregnancy
and major congenital malformations in infants of patients with bipolar and
schizoaffective disorders treated with antiepileptic drugs: A systematic review.
Psychiatria Polska. 2019;53(2):223-44.
111. Calaway K, Coshal S, Jones K, et al. A Systematic Review of the Safety of
Electroconvulsive Therapy Use During the First Trimester of Pregnancy. J ECT.
2016;32(4):230-5.
112. Pacchiarotti I, León-Caballero J, Murru A, et al. Mood stabilizers and antipsychotics
during breastfeeding: Focus on bipolar disorder. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol.
2016;26(10):1562-78.
113. Arnold I, Dehning J, Grunze A, et al. Old Age Bipolar DisorderEpidemiology,
Aetiology and Treatment. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021;57(6).
114. Young RC, Mulsant BH, Sajatovic M, et al. GERI-BD: A Randomized DoubleBlind Controlled Trial of Lithium and Divalproex in the Treatment of Mania in Older
Patients With Bipolar Disorder. Focus (Am Psychiatr Publ). 2019;17(3):314-21.
115. Burton C, Mathys M, Gutierrez E. Comparison of lithium to second-generation
antipsychotics for the treatment of bipolar disorder in older veterans. Psychiatry
Res. 2021;303:114063.
116. Forester BP, Sajatovic M, Tsai J, et al. Safety and Effectiveness of LongTerm Treatment with Lurasidone in Older Adults with Bipolar Depression:
Post-Hoc Analysis of a 6-Month, Open-Label Study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2018;26(2):150-9.
117. Van Meter A, Moreira ALR, Youngstrom E. Updated Meta-Analysis of
Epidemiologic Studies of Pediatric Bipolar Disorder. J Clin Psychiatry.
2019;80(3):18r12180
118. Hafeman DM, Merranko J, Axelson D, et al. Toward the Definition of a Bipolar
Prodrome: Dimensional Predictors of Bipolar Spectrum Disorders in At-Risk
Youths. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;173(7):695-704.
119. Duffy A, Heffer N, Goodday SM, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of lithium for the
treatment of acute mania in children with bipolar disorder: A systematic review: A
report from the ISBD-IGSLi joint task force on lithium treatment. Bipolar Disord.
2018;20(7):583-93.
120. Patino LR, Klein CC, Strawn JR, et al. A Randomized, Double-Blind, Controlled
Trial of Lithium Versus Quetiapine for the Treatment of Acute Mania in Youth
with Early Course Bipolar Disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol.
2021;31(7):485-93.
121. Tohen M, Kryzhanovskaya L, Carlson G, et al. Olanzapine versus placebo in the
treatment of adolescents with bipolar mania. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(10):1547-
56.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
122. Findling RL, Landbloom RL, Szegedi A, et al. Asenapine for the Acute Treatment
of Pediatric Manic or Mixed Episode of Bipolar I Disorder. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2015;54(12):1032-41.
123. Findling RL, Landbloom RL, Mackle M, et al. Long-term Safety of Asenapine in
Pediatric Patients Diagnosed With Bipolar I Disorder: A 50-Week Open-Label,
Flexible-Dose Trial. Paediatr Drugs. 2016;18(5):367-78.
124. Findling RL, Correll CU, Nyilas M, et al. Aripiprazole for the treatment of pediatric
bipolar I disorder: a 30-week, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Bipolar
Disord. 2013;15(2):138-49.
125. Findling RL, Atkinson S, Bachinsky M, et al. Efficacy, Safety, and Tolerability of
Flexibly Dosed Ziprasidone in Children and Adolescents with Mania in Bipolar I
Disorder: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Replication Study. J Child Adolesc
Psychopharmacol. 2022;32(3):143-52.
126. Wagner KD, Redden L, Kowatch RA, et al. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of divalproex extended-release in the treatment of bipolar
disorder in children and adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2009;48(5):519-32.
127. Maneeton B, Putthisri S, Maneeton N, et al. Quetiapine monotherapy versus
placebo in the treatment of children and adolescents with bipolar depression: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2017;13:1023-32.
128. DelBello MP, Kadakia A, Heller V, et al. Systematic Review and Network Meta-
analysis: Efficacy and Safety of Second-Generation Antipsychotics in Youths
With Bipolar Depression. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2022;61(2):243-54.
129. González-Pinto A, Goikolea JM, Zorrilla I, et al. Clinical practice guideline on
pharmacological and psychological management of adult patients with bipolar
disorder and comorbid substance use. Adicciones. 2022;34(2):142-56.
130. Wenze SJ, Gaudiano BA, Weinstock LM, et al. Adjunctive psychosocial
intervention following Hospital discharge for Patients with bipolar disorder and
comorbid substance use: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Psychiatry Res.
2015;228(3):516- 25.
131. World Health Organization. Suicide worldwide in 2019: global health estimates.
Geneva:
WHO;
2021
(Available
at:
https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789240026643).
132. Knipe D, Padmanathan P, Newton-Howes G, et al. Suicide and self-harm.
Lancet. 2022;399(10338):1903-16.
133. Schaffer A, Isometsä ET, Azorin JM, et al. A review of factors associated with
greater likelihood of suicide attempts and suicide deaths in bipolar disorder: Part
II of a report of the International Society for Bipolar Disorders Task Force on
Suicide in Bipolar Disorder. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2015;49(11):1006-20.
134. Hauser M, Galling B, Correll CU. Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in
children and adolescents with bipolar disorder: a systematic review of prevalence
and incidence rates, correlates, and targeted interventions. Bipolar Disord.
2013;15(5):507-23.
135. Cerel J, Sanford RL. It’s not who you know, it’s how you think you know
them: suicide exposure and suicide bereavement. Psychoanal Study Child.
2018;71(1):76-96.
136. Caribé AC, Studart P, Bezerra-Filho S, et al. Is religiosity a protective factor
against suicidal behavior in bipolar I outpatients? J Affect Disord. 2015;186:156-61.
137. Nabi Z, Stansfeld J, Plöderl M, et al. Effects of lithium on suicide and suicidal
behaviour: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials.
Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. 2022;31:e65.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
138. Liang CS, Chung CH, Ho PS, et al. Superior anti-suicidal effects of
electroconvulsive therapy in unipolar disorder and bipolar depression. Bipolar
Disord. 2018;20(6):539- 46.
139. Joseph B, Parsaik AK, Ahmed AT, et al. A Systematic Review on the Efficacy of
Intravenous Racemic Ketamine for Bipolar Depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2021;41(1):71-5.
140. Stanley B, Brown GK, Karlin B, et al. Safety plan treatment manual to reduce
suicide risk: Veteran version. Washington, DC: United States Department of
Veterans Affairs; 2008.
141. Nuij C, van Ballegooijen W, de Beurs D, et al. Safety planning-type interventions
for suicide prevention: meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2021;219(2):419-26.
142. Kishi T, Ikuta T, Matsuda Y, et.al. Pharmacological treatment for bipolar mania:
a systematic review and network meta-analysis of double-blind randomized
controlled trials. Mol Psychiatry. 2022;27(2):1136-1144.
143. Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, Parikh SV, et.al. Canadian Network for Mood and
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) and International Society for Bipolar Disorders
(ISBD) guidelines for the management of patients with bipolar disorder. Bipolar
Disord. 2018;20(2):97-170.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective pharmacotherapy in
the management of manic episode in BD?
1. BIPOLAR DISORDER/
2. (bipolar adj2 affective psychos#s).tw.
3. (bipolar adj1 (depressi* or disorder*)).tw.
4. (bipolar adj2 mood disorder*).tw.
5. (manic adj1 (depressi* or disorder*)).tw.
6. (manic depressi* adj2 psychos#s).tw.
7. (manic-depressi* adj1 psychos#s).tw.
8. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7
9. MANIA/
10. (manic adj1 (state* or episode*)).tw.
11. hypomani*.tw.
12. (hypomanic adj1 (episode* or state*)).tw.
13. mania*.tw.
14. 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13
15. DRUG THERAPY/
16. (drug adj1 therap*).tw.
17. pharmacotherap*.tw.
18. mood stabilizer*.tw.
19. ANTIPSYCHOTIC/
20. (antipsychotic* adj1 (agent* or drug* or effect* or medication* or
therap*)). tw.
21. antipsychotic*.tw.
22. (neuroleptic adj1 (agent* or drug* or medication* or therap*)).tw.
23. neuroleptic*.tw.
24. (major adj1 tranquili*).tw.
25. (major tranquili#ing adj2 (agent* or medication* or therap*)).tw.
26. ANTIMANIC AGENTS/
27. (antimanic adj1 (agent* or drug* or effect* or medication* or
therap*)).tw.
28. antimanic*.tw.
29. ANTIDEPRESSANTS/
30. (antidepress* adj1 (agent* or drug*or medication* or therap*)).tw.
31. antidepressant*.tw.
32. thymoanaleptic*.tw.
33. thymoleptic*.tw.
34. PSYCHOTROPIC DRUGS/
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
35 (psychotropic* adj1 (drug* or agent* or medication* or therap*)).tw.
36. psychotropic*.tw.
37. (psychoactive adj1 (agent* or drug* or medication* or therap*)).tw.
38. psychopharmaceutical*.tw.
39. (psychopharmaceutical adj1 (agent* or drug* or medication* or
therap*)). tw.
40. ANTICONVULSANTS/
41. (anticonvuls* adj1 (agent* or drug* or medication* or therap*)).tw.
42. (antiepileptic* adj1 (agent* or drug* or medication* or therap*)).tw.
43. antiepileptic*.tw.
44. anticonvulsant*.tw.
45. BENZODIAZEPINES/
46. benzodiazepine*.tw.
47. (benzodiazepine adj1 compound*).tw.
48. 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26
or 27 or 28 or 29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or
38 or 39 or 40 or 41 or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45 or 46 or 47
49. 8 and 14 and 48
50. limit 49 to (english language and humans and “all adult (19 plus
years)” and last 9 years)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. What are the risk and protective factors for bipolar disorder?
2. What are the accurate screening and diagnostic tools in bipolar
disorder?
3. What are the differential diagnoses in bipolar disorder?
4. What are the indicators of bipolarity in patients with depression?
5. What are the co-morbidities in bipolar disorder?
6. What are the effective and safe pharmacotherapy in the
management of
● manic episode in bipolar disorder?
● depressive episode in bipolar disorder?
● bipolar disorder with specifiers (mixed features, anxious distress
and rapid cycling)?
● maintenance phase of bipolar disorder?
7. What are the effective and safe physical therapies in bipolar
disorder?
8. What are the effective and safe psychosocial interventions in
bipolar disorder?
9. What are the effective and safe psychotherapies in bipolar disorder?
10. What are the effective and safe complementary and alternative
therapies in bipolar disorder?
11. What are the parameters to be monitored during the maintenance
phase of bipolar disorder?
12. What are the referral criteria for patients with bipolar disorder?
13. What are the effective and safe strategies in the prevention of
bipolar disorder?
14. What are the effective strategies to improve adherence in bipolar
disorder?
15. How effective are Collaborative Care Models in the management of
bipolar disorder?
16. What are the effective and safe treatments in the following special
population with bipolar disorder?
● pregnancy and lactation
● elderly
● children and adolescents
● people with addictions (behavioural and substance)
● borderline personality disorder
17. What are the risk and protective factors for suicide in bipolar
disorder?
18. What are the effective and safe interventions in suicide prevention
in bipolar disorder?
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ICD-11
DSM-5-TR
Hypomanic Episode
A persistent mood state lasting for
at least several days characterised
by persistent elevation of mood or
increased irritability as well as increased
activity or a subjective experience of
increased energy, accompanied by other
characteristic symptoms e.g.:
• increased talkativeness
• rapid or racing thoughts
• increased self-esteem
• decreased need for sleep
• distractibility
• impulsive or reckless behaviour
Hypomanic Episode
Abnormally and persistently elevated,
expansive or irritable mood along AND
persistently increased energy or activity
lasting at least four days accompanied by
three or four (if mood is only irritable):
• inﬂated self-esteem or grandiosity
• decreased need for sleep
• increased talkativeness or pressure
of speech
• ﬂight of ideas
• distractibility
• increased in goal-directed activity
• excessive involvement in activities
with negative consequences
Manic Episode
An extreme mood state lasting at
least one week unless shortened by a
treatment intervention characterised by
euphoria, irritability or expansiveness
and by increased activity or a subjective
experience of increased energy,
accompanied by other characteristic
symptoms e.g.:
• rapid or pressured speech
• ﬂight of ideas
• increased self-esteem or grandiosity
• decreased need for sleep
• distractibility
• impulsive or reckless behaviour
• rapid changes among different mood
states (i.e. mood lability)
Manic Episode
Abnormally and persistently elevated,
expansive or irritable mood along AND
persistently increased energy or activity
lasting at least one week accompanied by
three or four (if mood is only irritable):
• inﬂated self-esteem or grandiosity
• decreased need for sleep
• increased talkativeness or pressure
of speech
• ﬂight of ideas
• distractibility
• increased in goal-directed activity or
excessive involvement in activities
with negative consequences
At least one manic episode is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder and is
not superimposed on schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders.
Appendix 3
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA OF BIPOLAR DISORDER BASED ON
DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL DISORDERS
FIFTH EDITION, TEXT REVISION (DSM-5-TR) AND
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
ELEVENTH REVISION (ICD-11)
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ICD-11
DSM-5-TR
A manic/hypomanic episode during antidepressant treatment is accepted as evidence
of BD.
The symptoms in hypomania represent a change from the individual’s typical mood,
energy level and behaviour but are not severe enough to cause marked impairment
in functioning.
There are similarities between mania and hypomania symptoms; however the diagnosis
of manic episode necessitates that the disturbance is severe enough:
• causing impairment in social or occupational functioning or
• requiring hospitalisation or
• with psychotic features
Depressive Episode
A period of depressed mood or diminished
interest in activities occurring most of the
day, nearly every day during a period
lasting at least two weeks accompanied
by other symptoms e.g.:
• changes in appetite or sleep
• psychomotor agitation or retardation
• fatigue
• worthlessness or excessive or
inappropriate guilt feelings or
hopelessness
• difﬁculty concentrating
• suicidality
Major Depressive Episode
For at least two weeks, presenting with
ﬁve or more of the following symptoms,
of which, at least one must be depressed
mood or loss of interest or pleasure. The
other symptoms include:
• disruption in appetite with
accompanying weight loss or gain
• sleep disturbance
• psychomotor agitation or retardation
• fatiguability
• feeling worthless or guilty
• reduced concentration or indecisiveness
• recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal
ideas or acts
6A60 Bipolar Type I Disorder
An episodic mood disorder deﬁned by
the occurrence of one or more manic or
mixed episodes.
• 6460.0 Bipolar type I disorder, current
episode manic without psychotic
symptoms
• 6460.1 Bipolar type I disorder,
current episode manic with psychotic
symptoms
• 6A60.2 Bipolar type I disorder,
current episode hypomanic
• 6460.3 Bipolar type I disorder,
current episode depressive, mild
• 6460.4 Bipolar type I disorder, current
episode depressive, moderate
without psychotic symptoms
Bipolar I Disorder
Having met the criteria for at least one
manic episode.
• Current or most recent episode manic:
○ F31.11 Mild
○ F31.12 Moderate
○ F31.13 Severe
○ F31.2 With psychotic features
○ F31.73 In partial remission
○ F31.74 In full remission
• Current or most recent episode
depressed:
○ F31.31 Mild
○ F31.32 Moderate
○ F31.4 Severe
○ F31.5 With psychotic features
○ F31.75 In partial remission
○ F31.76 In full remission
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ICD-11
DSM-5-TR
• 6460.5 Bipolar type I disorder, current
episode depressive, moderate with
psychotic symptoms
• 6460.6 Bipolar type I disorder,
current episode depressive, severe
without psychotic symptoms
• 6460.7 Bipolar type I disorder,
current episode depressive, severe
with psychotic symptoms
6A61 Bipolar Type II Disorder
An episodic mood disorder is deﬁned by
the occurrence of one or more hypomanic
episodes and at least one depressive
episode.
Refer to ICD-11 for more coding.
F31.81 Bipolar II Disorder
Having met the criteria for hypomanic
episodes at least once and major
depressive episode at least once,
Specify current or most recent episode:
Hypomanic
Depressed
Current or most recent episode
hypomanic
F31.0 Not in remission
F31.71 In partial remission
F31.72 in full remission
Speciﬁers (both BD I and II):
With anxious distress
With mixed features
With rapid cycling
With melancholic features
With atypical features
With mood-congruent psychotic
features
With mood-incongruent psychotic
features
With catatonia
With peripartum onset
With seasonal pattern
Refer to DSM-5-TR for more coding.
6A62 Cyclothymia
A persistent instability of mood over a
period of at least two years, involving
numerous periods of hypomanic and
depressive symptoms that are present
during more of the time than not, but
not sufﬁcient to meet the full criteria for
an episode.
F34.0 Cyclothymic disorder
At least two years (for children, a full
year) of both hypomanic and depressive
symptoms without ever fulﬁlling the criteria
for an episode of mania, hypomania or
major depressive disorder.
Specify
With anxious distress
Mixed Episode
A mixed episode is characterised by the
presence of several prominent manic and
several prominent depressive symptoms
consistent with those observed in manic
episodes and depressive episodes, which
either occur simultaneously or alternate
very rapidly.
Mixed features
Manic or hypomanic episode, with
mixed features
Full criteria are met for a manic or
hypomanic episode, and at least three
depressive symptoms are present.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ICD-11
DSM-5-TR
Depressive episode, with mixed
features
Full criteria are met for a depressive
episode, and at least three manic/
hypomanic symptoms are present.
Rapid cycling
High frequency of mood episodes (at
least four) over the past 12 months
Rapid cycling
At least four mood episodes in the
previous 12 months that met the criteria
for manic, hypomanic or major depressive
episodes.
An interval of at least two months free of symptoms is required to
distinguish between episodes.
Source:
1. ICD-11 International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision. The global standard
for diagnostic health information (Available at: https://icd.who.int/).
2. American Psychiatric Association. Bipolar and Related Disorders. In Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision.
Washington DC: APA; 2022.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
LIST OF SCREENING TOOLS IN BIPOLAR DISORDER
Bipolarity
index (BI)
5
50
91%
High score
suggests likelihood
of a true bipolar
diagnosis.
Score 50: BD
Score 40 - 50: at
risk of conversion
to BD, thus careful
monitoring.5
Only 1 study done
in unselected
clinical patients.
90%
Screening No. of Rater
Cut-off
Sensiti-
Speciﬁ-
Comments
tool
items
points
vity
city
Mood
disorder
questionnaire
(MDQ)
17
7
(range
3 - 7)
80%
70%
Screens for lifetime
history of (hypo) mania.
There was no evidence
of a difference in
diagnostic accuracy
between Asian and
non-Asian studies for
both the MDQ and
HCL-32.1
Hypomania
checklist
(HCL-32)
32
14
(range
7 - 18)
82%
57%
Screens for lifetime
history of hypomania.
More significantly
accurate than MDQ to
detect BD II in mental
healthcare centre.2
Bipolar
spectrum
diagnostic
scale
(BSDS)
19
13
69%
86%
Uses 19 sentences
describing
manifestations of
bipolar disorder.3
Rapid mood
screener
(RMS)
6
4
88%
80%
Validated for BD I
only.
Rapid mood
screener
(RMS)
6
Cliniccian-
rated
Selfrated
Selfrated
Selfrated
Selfrated
Selfrated
4
88%
80%
Validated for BD
I only. RMS is
signiﬁcantly better
than MDQ in the
following:4
1. sensitivity/
speciﬁcity
2. brevity
3. practicality
4. easy scoring
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Reference:
1. Wang YY, Xu DD, Liu R, et al. Comparison of the screening ability between the
32-item Hypomania Checklist (HCL-32) and the Mood Disorder Questionnaire
(MDQ) for bipolar disorder: A meta-analysis and systematic review. Psychiatry
Res. 2019;273:461-466.
2. Carvalho AF, Takwoingi Y, Sales PM, et al. Screening for bipolar spectrum
disorders: A comprehensive meta-analysis of accuracy studies. J Affect Disord.
2015;172:337-46.
3. Ghaemi SN, Miller CJ, Berv DA, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of a new bipolar
spectrum diagnostic scale. Journal of affective disorders. 2005;84(2- 3):273-7.
4. McIntyre RS, Patel MD, Masand PS, et al. The Rapid Mood Screener (RMS): a
novel and pragmatic screener for bipolar I disorder. Current Medical Research
and Opinion. 2021;37(1):135-44.
5. Aiken CB, Weisler RH, Sachs GS. The Bipolarity Index: a clinician-rated measure
of diagnostic confidence. J Affect Disord. 2015;177:59-64.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
RECOMMENDED ADULT MEDICATION DOSAGES AND ADVERSE EFFECTS FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
MOOD STABILISERS
Lithium
Acute mania, acute episodes
with mixed features, acute
hypomania, acute bipolar
depression
Oral -
Initial: 600 - 900 mg/day in 2 - 3
divided doses. Titrate in
increment of 300 - 600 mg to
usual therapeutic dose range of
900 - 1800 mg/day in divided
doses.
(Max dose: 1.8 g/day in 1 to 3
divided doses)
CrCl <30 mL/min:
Use not
recommended
No dosage adjustment
provided in the
manufacturer’s
labelling
Cardiac: cardiac arrhythmia,
T-wave inversion, oedema,
hypotension
CNS: drowsiness, abnormal
EEG, confusion, memory
impairment, tremor
Dermatologic: acne,
exacerbation psoriasis
GI: dyspepsia, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain,
diarrhoea, dysgeusia
Renal: changes in eGFR
Endocrine and metabolic:
polydipsia and polyuria,
weight gain,
hyperparathyroidism,
hypercalcemia,
hypothyroidism, diabetes
insipidus
Others: sexual dysfunction
Lithium toxicity: tremor,
tinnitus, seizure, ataxia
• Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
(TDM)
○ Steady state: 4 - 5 days
○ Sampling time: before next
morning dose OR 12 hours from
last evening dose
○ Therapeutic range:
Indication
Plasma trough
concentration
(mmol/L)
Acute mania
0.8 - 1.2
Maintenance
0.8 - 1.0
• May be taken with meals to avoid GI
upset
• Caution use during periods of
dehydration e.g. acute
gastroenteritis, fasting and intense
exercise
• Drug interaction with SGLT2
inhibitor:
Reduced serum lithium
concentration. Monitor serum
lithium concentration more
frequently during treatment with an
SGLT2 inhibitor, particularly
following initiation or dose changes.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
Valproate
Acute manic or acute
episodes with mixed features,
depressive episodes
Oral -
IR: 600 mg daily and increase
by 200 mg/day at 3-day interval
until control is achieved.
ER: 1000mg daily (in once or
twice daily regimen)
Usual dose range : 1000 to 2000
mg/day (i.e 20 - 30 mg/kg/day)
(Max dose: 2500mg/day or 60
mg/kg/day)
CrCl <10 mL/min:
No specific dosage
adjustment
necessary. However,
free valproate
clearance may be
reduced up to ~30%.
Severe impairment:
Use is contraindicated
CNS: dizziness, drowsiness,
Hematologic:
thrombocytopenia,
decreased platelet
aggregation
Liver: hepatotoxicity/hepatic
failure, hyperammonaemia,
hepatic encephalopathy
Dermatologic: SJS, TEN,
DRESS
GI: abdominal pain,
diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting,
pancreatitis
Psychiatric: suicidal
Ideation
• TDM:
○ Therapeutic range: 50 - 125 mg/L
○ Steady state: 2 - 4 days
○ Sampling time: 30 minutes OR
just before next dose
○ Therapeutic serum levels
generally occur with total daily
doses of 1.5 - 2.5 g
• Valproate administration may also
impair fertility in men. Fertility
dysfunctions are in some cases
reversible at least 3 months after
treatment discontinuation, however,
the reversibility of male infertility was
unknown. Offspring of men on
valproate have an increased risk of
learning or behavioural problems
• Valproate is highly albumin-bound
(~90%). Cautious use of valproate in
patients with hypoalbuminaemia as
free valproate levels are elevated.
Lamotrigine
Acute bipolar depression
Oral -
Patients not taking any
interacting medications:
Week 1 and 2: 25 mg once daily
Week 3 and 4: 50 mg/day in 1 -
2 divided doses
Week 5: 100 mg/day in 1 - 2
divided doses
Week 6 and maintenance: 200
mg/day in 1 - 2 divided doses
(up to 400 mg/day)
CrCl <30 mL/min:
Titrate with caution
as some
pharmacokinetics
parameters (e.g. half
life) may vary
considerably
Moderate to severe
impairment
WITHOUT ascites:
Decrease doses by
~25%
Moderate to severe
impairment WITH
ascites:
Decrease doses by
~50%
Hematologic:
agranulocytosis,
neutropaenia, pancytopenia,
pure red cell aplasia, aplastic
anaemia
Dermatologic: skin rash,
SJS, TENS, DRESS
GI: nausea, vomiting,
diarrhoea
Ophthalmic: blurred vision,
diplopia
CNS: ataxia, dizziness,
drowsiness, headache,
tremor, aseptic meningitis
• Periodically reassess needed for
continued use after 16 weeks
• Restarting therapy: If lamotrigine
has been discontinued for >5 halflives (half-life varies depending on
concomitant antiepileptics), reinitiate
with initial dosage. The greater the
interval of time since previous
dosage, the greater the
consideration should be given to
restarting with initial dosing
recommendations.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
Week 1 and 2: 25 mg every
other day
Week 3 and 4: 25 mg once
daily
Week 5: 50 mg/day in 1 - 2
divided doses
Week 6 and maintenance: 100
mg/day in 1 - 2 divided doses
Patients taking drug(s) that
induce lamotriginine
metabolism but not taking
valproate
Week 1 and 2: 50 mg/day in 1 -
2 divided doses
Week 3 and 4: 100 mg/day in 1 -
2 divided doses
Week 5: 200 mg/day in 1 - 2
divided doses
Week 6 and maintenance: 300
mg/day in 1 - 2 divided doses
Carbamazepine
Bipolar I disorder, acute
manic or mixed episodes,
depressive episodes
Oral -
IR: 200 mg twice daily; may
increase in increment of 200
mg/day every 1 to 4 days.
ER: To be given in twice daily
regimen
Usual dose range: 400 -1600
mg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses
(Max dose: 1.6 g/day)
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
provided in the
manufacturer’s
labelling. Use with
caution and consider
dose reduction as it is
metabolised primarily
in the liver.
Hematologic: Aplastic
anaemia, leukopenia,
neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia
Cardiac: sinus tachycardia
Liver: Hepatotoxicity/hepatic
failure, increased serum
transaminases
Dermatologic:
maculopapular rash, SJS,
TEN, DRESS, AGEP
Electrolytes:
hyponatraemia, SIADH
CNS: ataxia, dizziness,
drowsiness
• TDM
○ Steady state:
Initiation: 2 - 3 weeks
Dose adjustment: 2 - 5 days
○ Sampling time: 0 - 30 min before
dose; after steady state achieved
○ Therapeutic range: 4 - 12 µg/ml
Patients taking valproate
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
GI: Nausea, vomiting,
constipation, xerostomia
ENT: tinnitus
ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Aripiprazole
Acute mania or episodes with
mixed features, acute
hypomania and maintenance
treatment
Oral -
10 - 15 mg once daily; increase
dose in 5 - 10mg/day increment
at intervals of >1 week
(Max dose: 30 mg/day)
LAI -
400 mg once monthly
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
necessary
Endocrine and metabolic:
weight gain,
hypertriglyceridaemia,
hypercholesterolaemia,
hyperglycaemia
CNS: drowsiness,
extrapyramidal reaction,
headache, insomnia
Hematologic: neutropenia
For long acting injectable, consider
reduce the dose to 300mg once
monthly if there are adverse reactions
with dose of 400mg once monthly
Asenapine
Acute mania or episodes with
mixed features
Oral -
5 - 10 mg twice daily
(Max dose: 10 mg twice daily)
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Child-Pugh class C:
Use is contraindicated
CNS: drowsiness, insomnia,
akathisia, extrapyramidal
reaction, headache,
dizziness
Endocrine and metabolic:
weight gain,
hypertriglyceridemia,
hypercholesterolemia,
hyperglycaemia,
GI: oral hypoesthesia
Cariprazine
Acute mania and acute
episodes with mixed features
Oral -
Initial: 1.5 mg once daily; titrate
in increment of 1.5 or 3 mg.
Recommended dosing range: 3
- 6 mg once daily
(Max dose: 6 mg/day)
Bipolar major depression
Oral -
CrCl <30 mL/min:
Use not
recommended
Child-Pugh class C:
Use not recommended
GI: nausea, vomiting,
constipation
CNS: akathisia, dizziness,
extrapyramidal reaction,
insomnia, somnolence,
headache
Endocrine and metabolic:
hyperglycaemia, weight gain
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
Initial 1.5 mg once daily;
increase to 3 mg on day 15.
(Max dose: 3 mg/day)
Clozapine
Maintenance/treatment
resistant
Oral -
Initial: 25 mg daily; titrate in
increments of 25 mg at intervals
>1 day
(Max dose: 550 mg/day in
divided doses)
No dosage
adjustment provided
in the manufacturer’s
labelling
Dose reduction may
be necessary with
significant impairment
Cardiac: hypotension,
syncope, tachycardia
Endocrine metabolic:
sweating, increased weight,
hyperglycaemia
GI: constipation, excessive
salivation, nausea,
xerostomia
CNS: dizziness, headache,
somnolence
Ophthalmic: visual
disturbance
Other: fever
Haloperidol
Acute mania, episodes with
mixed features and acute
hypomania
Oral -
2 - 15 mg/day or 0.2 mg/kg/day
(up to 15 mg/day), in 1 or 2
divided dose. Titrate in
increment of <5 mg every 2
days
(Max dose: 30 mg/day)
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
No dosage adjustment
provided in the
manufacturer’s
labelling.
Concentrations may
increase in patients
with hepatic
impairment as it is
metabolised primarily
in liver and protein
binding may decrease.
Cardiac: hypotension
GI: constipation, xerostomia
CNS: akathisia,
extrapyramidal reaction,
somnolence
Ophthalmic: blurred vision
May worsen depressive symptoms
Lumateperone
Depressive episodes
Oral -
42 mg once daily
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Child-Pugh class B
and C:
Max: 21 mg once daily
GI: nausea, xerostomia
CNS: dizziness, somnolence,
extrapyramidal reaction
Currently not registered with NPRA
Lurasidone
Depressive episodes
Oral -
Initial, 20 mg once daily. Titrate
in increment of 20 mg every >2
days.
(Max dose: 120 mg once daily)
CrCl <50 mL/min:
Max: 80 mg/day
Child-Pugh class B:
Max: 80 mg/day
Child-Pugh class C:
Max: 40 mg/day
Endocrine and metabolic:
dyslipidaemia,
hyperglycaemia, weight gain
GI: diarrhoea, nausea,
vomiting
Take with meals (>350 calories) for
adequate absorption
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
CNS: akathisia,
extrapyramidal reaction,
parkinsonism, somnolence
Psychiatric: anxiety
Olanzapine
Acute mixed or manic
episodes
Oral -
Initial: 10 - 15 mg once daily,
titrate in increment of 5 mg at
intervals of 1 day
(Max dose: 20 mg/day)
Acute depressive episode
Oral -
Initial: 5 mg once daily; titrate in
increment of 5 mg every 1 - 7
days
(Max dose: monotherapy = 20
mg/day; combination = 15
mg/day)
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
When used in
combination with
fluoxetine:
Initial: 2.5 - 5 mg daily
Cardiac: orthostatic
hypotension, peripheral
oedema
Endocrine and metabolic:
hypercholesterolaemia,
hyperglycaemia,
hyperprolactinaemia,
increased appetite,
hypertriglycerides, weight
gain
GI: constipation, xerostomia
CNS: akathisia, asthenia,
dizziness, tremor, dystonia
• Take at bedtime to help reduce
daytime sedation
• Only oral formulations registered
with NPRA
Paliperidone
Acute manic and mixed
episodes
Oral -
Initial, 6 mg once daily; titrate in
increment of 3 mg/day every 5
days
(Max dose: 12 mg/day)
CrCl 50 - <80 mL/min:
Initial: 3 mg OD
Max: 6 mg OD
CrCl 10 - <50 mL/min:
Initial: 1.5 mg OD
Max:3 mg OD
CrCl <10 mL/min:
Not recommended
No adjustment
provided in the
manufacturer’s
labelling.
Cardiac: tachycardia,
prolonged QT interval
Endocrine and metabolic:
weight gain,
hyperprolactinaemia,
GI: constipation, indigestion
CNS: akathisia, dyskinesia,
dystonia, extrapyramidal
reaction, parkinsonism
somnolence, tremor
Psychiatric: anxiety
Quetiapine
Acute mania, acute episodes
with mixed features and acute
hypomania
IR -
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Child-Pugh class A
and B:
Initial: 25 mg once
daily; may increase by
Cardiac: orthostatic
hypotension
≥
≥
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
100 - 200 mg once daily at
bedtime or in 2 divided doses;
titrate in increment of <200
mg/day
ER -
300 mg once daily on Day 1,
increase to 600 mg once daily
on Day 2, then adjust
accordingly
(Max dose: 800 mg/day)
Acute depressive episode
IR, ER -
50 mg once daily at bedtime;
increase to 100 mg once daily
on Day 2. Further increase by
50 - 100 mg/day to reach usual
target dose of 300 mg OD by
Day 4 - 7.
(Max dose: 300 mg/day)
25 - 50 mg/day based
on response and
tolerability until
effective dose
achieved, dividing total
daily dose into 1 - 3
divided doses
Child-Pugh class C:
Avoid use
Endocrine and metabolic:
hypercholesterolemia,
hpertriglycerides, weight gain
GI: xerostomia
CNS: asthenia, dizziness,
extrapyramidal reaction,
headache, insomnia,
somnolence
Psychiatric: agitation
Risperidone
Acute mania, acute episodes
with mixed features and acute
hypomania
Oral -
doses, increase 1 mg/day at
interval >24 hours
(Max dose: 8 mg/day)
LAI -
25 mg every 2 weeks; may
increase dose in increment of
12.5 mg no sooner than every 4
weeks
CrCl 30 - 60 mL/min:
Administer 50 - 75%
of usual indicationspecific dose
CrCl 10 - 30 mL/min:
Administer 50% of
usual indicationspecific dose
CrCl <10 mL/min:
Consider alternative
agent. If necessary,
administer 25% of
Child-Pugh class C:
0.5 mg twice daily;
titration in increment of
no more than 0.5 mg
twice daily. Increase to
dosages above 1.5 mg
twice a day occurring
at interval of at least 1
week.
Endocrine and metabolic:
weight gain,
hyperprolactinaemia
GI: constipation, excessive
salivation, indigestion,
nausea, abdominal pain,
vomiting, xerostomia
CNS: akathisia, dizziness,
dystonia, sedation,
parkinsonism, tremor
Ophthalmic: blurred vision
Psychiatric: anxiety
Risperdal CONSTA is discontinued in
Malaysia effective 31.07.2024
1 - 3 mg/day in 1 or 2 divided
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Source:
1. Individual product information leaflet.
2. Clinical Drug Information, Inc. Wolters Kluwer. UpToDate® [Mobile application software].
3. Micromedex® Solution [Mobile application software].
4. MOH Clinical Pharmacy Working Committee. Clinical Pharmacokinetics Pharmacy Handbook. 2nd ed. Petaling Jaya: Pharmacy Practice &
Development Division, MOH; 2019.
5. PDSB. Quest3+ Product Search Sistem Pendaftaran Produk & Perlesenan (Available at: https://quest3plus.bpfk.gov.my/pmo2/index.php).
6. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), UK:(Available at: https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/valproate-re-analysis- ofstudy-on-risks-in-children-of-men-taking-valproate).
.7. National Health Service (NHS).Sodium Valproate: Medicine to treat epilepsy and BD (Available at: https://www.nhs.uk/medicines/sodium-valproate/).
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL DOSE
HEPATIC DOSE
COMMON/SIGNIFICANT
ADVERSE EFFECTS
REMARKS
(Max dose: 50 mg every 2
weeks)
usual indicationspecific dose
Ziprasidone
Acute mania, acute episodes
with mixed features and acute
hypomania
Oral -
Initial: 40 mg twice daily;
increase to 60 or 80 mg twice
daily. If indicated, maximum
recommended dose may be
reached as early as Day 2 of
treatment.
(Max dose: 80 mg twice daily)
No dosage
adjustment is
necessary
No dosage adjustment
provided in the
manufacturer’s
labelling. Use with
caution as it
undergoes extensive
hepatic metabolism
and systemic exposure
may be increased.
Endocrine and metabolic:
weight gain
GI: constipation, indigestion,
nausea
CNS: akathisia, dizziness,
extrapyramidal reaction,
headache, somnolence,
tremor
Cardiac: prolong QTc
interval
• Oral dose needs to be taken with a
meal (>500 calories) to be
adequately absorbed
• Only oral forms are registered under
NPRA
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITOR (SSRI)
Fluoxetine
Acute depressive episode
Oral -
Initial: 20 mg once daily in the
evening with another AAP (e.g.
olanzapine) or mood stabilisers;
titrate in increment of 10 - 20
mg every 1 - 7 days
(Usual dose range: 20 - 50
mg/day)
No dosage
adjustment
necessary
Use lower dose (up to
50%) reduction and
less frequent interval
in patients with
cirrhosis and chronic
liver disease
GI: diarrhoea, indigestion,
loss of appetite, nausea,
xerostomia
CNS: asthenia, dizziness,
insomnia, somnolence,
tremor
Psychiatric: anxiety, suicidal
ideation
Respiratory: pharyngitis,
rhinitis
Other: influenza-like illness
≥
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
PSYCHOEDUCATION FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER
Source: Colom F, Vieta E, Martínez-Arán A, et al. A Randomized Trial on the
Efficacy of Group Psychoeducation in the Prophylaxis of Recurrences in
Bipolar Patients Whose Disease Is in Remission. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2003;60(4):402-407.
Duration
90 minutes per session
Total number of sessions
21 sessions, weekly
Methods of delivery
Individual or group (8 to 12
participants per group)
Major components
a.
Information on illness features
b.
Importance of treatment compliance
c.
Early detection of prodromal signs of recurrence
d.
Management of mood symptoms or co-morbid conditions
e.
Lifestyle regularity
List of sessions and its description
1.
Introduction
2.
What is bipolar illness?
3.
Causal and triggering factors
4.
Symptoms (I): mania and hypomania
5.
Symptoms (II): depression and mixed episodes
6.
Course and outcome
7.
Treatment (I): mood stabilisers
8.
Treatment (II): antimanic agents
9.
Treatment (III): antidepressants
10. Serum levels: lithium, carbamazepine and valproate
11. Pregnancy and genetic counselling
12. Psychopharmacology vs alternative therapies
13. Risk associated with treatment withdrawal
14. Alcohol and street drugs: risks in bipolar illness
15. Early detection of manic and hypomanic episodes
16. Early detection of depressive and mixed episodes
17. What to do when a new phase is detected?
18. Regularity
19. Stress management techniques
20. Problem-solving techniques
21. Final sessions
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
PARAMETERS FOR MONITORING DURING TREATMENT OF
BIPOLAR DISEASE
Relevant physical examination and laboratory investigations should
be performed before initiation of pharmacological treatment and at
regular interval thereafter
Weight (include
waist size and
BMI, if possible)
*closer
monitoring if
rapid weight
gain
Antipsychotics
Lithium
Valproate
Carbamazepine
For all
patients at
first visit
Parameter
Monthly for
the first 3
months and
annually
thereafter*
Yes
Yes
At every visit
Every 6
months and
annually
thereafter*
Every 3
months for
the first year
and annually
thereafter*
Every 6 months
and annually
thereafter*
Blood pressure
Yes
Yes
Annually
Fasting blood
sugar
Every 3 - 6
months and
annually
thereafter
If relevant abnormalities are
detected, recheck after each
dose increase
If clinically
indicated
If relevant
abnormalities
are detected,
recheck after
each dose
increase
Electrocardiogram
Yes
Annually
Every 3
months for
the first year
and annually
thereafter
If clinically
indicated
Monthly for the
first 3 months
and annually
thereafter
Full blood count
Yes
Annually
Every 6
months, more
often if
indicated
NA
Thyroid function
Annually
Every 6
months
Yes
Annually
Every 6
months, more
often if
indicated
Renal function
Every 3
months for
the first year
and annually
thereafter
Monthly for the
first 3 months
and annually
thereafter
Yes
Annually
Liver function
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Adapted from:
1. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Bipolar Disorder.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2014
2. Taylor DM, Gaughran F, Pillinger T. Maudsley Practice Guidelines for Physical
Health Conditions in Psychiatry. London: Wiley Blackwell; 2020
3. Clinical Drug Information, Inc. Wolters Kluwer. UpToDate® [Mobile application
software].
4. Micromedex® Solution [Mobile application software]
Antipsychotics
Lithium
Valproate
Carbamazepine
For all
patients at
first visit
Parameter
Yes for
Lithium
initiation
Annually
Every 6
months
NA
Serum calcium
level
Annually
Yes
Every 3
months for
the first year
and annually
thereafter
Lipid profile
Every 6 months
only if there is ineffectiveness,
poor adherence, or toxicity
NA
1 week after
initiation and
1 week after
every dose
change until
the level is
stable, then
every 3 - 6
months
Drug serum level
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
COLLABORATIVE CARE MODEL CORE ELEMENTS
Adapted:
1. Bauer MS, McBride L, Williford WO, et al. Collaborative care for bipolar disorder:
part I. Intervention and implementation in a randomized effectiveness trial.
Psychiatr Serv. 2006;57(7):927-36
2. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for patients
with chronic illness. JAMA. 2002;288(14):1775-9
Element
Focus
Example
Patient selfmanagement
support
Coaching, problem-solving, or
skills-focused psychotherapy
or psychoeducation targeting
ability to self-manage symptoms
and participate more effectively
in clinical care and decisionmaking.
Behavioural change strategies or coaching,
illness-specific psychoeducation,
shared decision-making interventions,
cognitive-behavioural or problem-solving
therapies.
Clinical
information
systems use
Facilitation of information ﬂow
from relevant clinical sources
to treating clinicians for optimal
management of individuals,
panels or populations.
Case registries, reminder systems,
provision of timely clinical information
(e.g. laboratory and study results)
regarding individuals in treatment and/
or feedback to providers.
Delivery
system
redesign
Redeﬁnition of work roles for
physicians and support staff
to facilitate anticipatory or
preventive rather than reactive
care; allocation of staff to
implement other CCM elements
e.g. self-management support
and information ﬂow.
Licensed clinical staff or health educators
to provide psychoeducation, ensure
provision of appropriately timed clinical
information for speciﬁc cases, or review
of panel or population data for anticipatory
and preventive management needs.
Provider
decision
support
Facilitated provision of expertlevel input to generalist clinicians
managing cases without need for
specialty consultation separated
in time and space from clinical
needs.
On-site or facilitated expert consultation
or provision of simpliﬁed clinical practice
guidelines supported by local clinician
champions.
Community
resource
linkage
Support for clinical and nonclinical needs from resources
outside the health care
organisation proper.
Referral to peer support groups, exercise
programmes, housing resources, home
care programmes.
Health care
organisation
support
Organisation-level leadership
and tangible resources to support
CCM goals and practices.
Provision of adequate clinical staff for
CCM training and implementation;
support from key non-clinical services e.g.
informatics; championship by organisation
leadership, optimally with a commitment
to sustainability after the research phase
of the intervention ends.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 9
SUMMARY OF MEDICATIONS FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER WITH PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
MEDICATION
PREGNANCY
LACTATION
ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Aripiprazole*
• HUMAN DATA SUGGEST LOW RISK.
• Aripiprazole crosses placenta.
• Due to limited data, avoid use in pregnancy. However, if the
mother’s condition requires treatment with aripiprazole, the
lowest effective dose, avoiding the first trimester if possible,
should be used.
• NOT RECOMMENDED DURING LACTATION.
• An alternate drug may be preferred, especially while nursing a
newborn or preterm infant due to limited information available.
• Aripiprazole can lower serum prolactin in a dose-related manner.
Cases of lactation cessation have occurred, but cases of
gynecomastia and galactorrhea have also been reported.
• Weight loss and poor weight gain have been reported in breastfed
infants whose mothers were taking aripiprazole.
• **Relative Infant Dose (RID): 0.7 - 8.3%.
Asenapine*
• NO HUMAN DATA - ANIMAL DATA SUGGEST MODERATE
RISK.
• There are no adequate data from the use of asenapine in
pregnant women. However, maternal and embryo-foetal toxic
effects were found in animal studies.
• Should not be used during pregnancy unless clearly necessary
and only if the potential benefit outweighs potential risk to the
foetus.
• Manufacturer’s labelling recommends that women receiving
asenapine should not breastfeed.
• If asenapine is required by the mother, it is not a reason to
discontinue breastfeeding. However, an alternate drug may be
preferred, especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.
Cariprazine*
• NO HUMAN DATA - ANIMAL DATA SUGGEST MODERATE
RISK.
• Absence of human pregnancy data prevents a better assessment
of the embryo-foetal risk.
• No information is available on the use of cariprazine during lactation.
An alternate drug may be preferred until more data become
available.
Clozapine*
• COMPATIBLE - MATERNAL BENEFIT >> EMBRYO-FOETAL
RISK.
• Clozapine crosses placenta and can be detected in foetal blood
and amniotic fluid.
• Other agents are preferred for use in pregnancy; however, if
indicated, may be used in women who cannot be switched to
recommended APs.
• NOT RECOMMENDED DURING LACTATION.
• Due to limited information with clozapine during breastfeeding, and
sedation and adverse haematologic effects have been reported in
breastfed infants, other agents are preferred.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor infant for excessive sedation and periodic monitoring of
the infant's white blood cell count is advisable.
Haloperidol*
•
LIMITED HUMAN DATA - ANIMAL DATA SUGGEST
MODERATE RISK
• Neonatal tardive dyskinesia may be an uncommon complication
of exposure throughout gestation.
• POSSIBLE TO USE CAUTIOUSLY DURING LACTATION.
• Limited information indicates that maternal doses of haloperidol up
to 10 mg daily produce low levels in milk and usually do not affect
the breastfed infant. Very limited long-term follow-up data indicate no
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
PREGNANCY
LACTATION
• Avoid first trimester exposure if possible.
• Preferred drug if first generation APs is needed in pregnant
patients. However, minimum effective dose should be used
to reduce risk of AEs.
adverse developmental effects when haloperidol is used alone.
However, use with other APs occasionally might negatively affect the
infant.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor infant for drowsiness and developmental milestones,
especially if other APs are used concurrently.
Lumateperone*
• Insufficient data to establish any drug-associated risk for birth
defects, miscarriage, maternal or foetal outcomes.
• No information is available on clinical use of lumateperone during
breastfeeding.
• However, amounts of lumateperone and its metabolites in
breastmilk appear to be low and would not be expected to cause
any AEs in breastfed infants.
• If lumateperone is required by the mother, it is not a reason to
discontinue breastfeeding
Lurasidone*
• LIMITED HUMAN DATA - POTENTIAL RISK IN THIRD
TRIMESTER.
• Lurasidone is >99% bound to plasma proteins, so it is unlikely that
it would be excreted into milk in sufficient amounts to affect a
breastfed infant.
• Due to limited information, an alternate drug may be preferred,
especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.
Olanzapine*
• COMPATIBLE - MATERNAL BENEFIT >> EMBRYO-FOETAL
RISK.
• Olanzapine crosses placenta.
• No established olanzapine-associated risk of major birth defects,
miscarriage or adverse maternal or foetal outcomes following
maternal use.
• Pharmacokinetics properties of olanzapine are not significantly
altered by pregnancy. However, serum levels may change (even
at a stable dose, possibly due to decreased CYP1A2 activity
during second and third trimester.
• Potential
for
excessive
maternal
weight
gain
and
development of gestational diabetes.
• ACCEPTABLE DURING LACTATION.
• First-line of AAPs during breastfeeding.
• Maternal doses of olanzapine up to 20 mg daily produce low levels
in milk and undetectable levels in the serum of breastfed infants.
• **RID: 0.3 - 4%.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor
neonates
for
extrapyramidal
and/or
withdrawal
symptoms and manage symptoms appropriately. Some
neonates recovered within hours or days without specific
treatment; others required prolonged hospitalisation.
○ Monitor infant for drowsiness, irritability, poor feeding,
extrapyramidal symptoms and developmental milestones,
especially if other APs are used concurrently.
Paliperidone*
• LIMITED HUMAN DATA - ANIMAL DATA SUGGEST LOW
RISK.
• Information specific to paliperidone in pregnancy is limited.
However, if the mother requires its use, the benefits probably
outweigh foetal risk.
• POSSIBLE TO USE CAUTIOUSLY DURING LACTATION.
• Due to little long-term follow-up data, other agents may be preferred,
especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor breastfed infants for drowsiness, adequate growth and
weight gain, jitteriness, tremors and abnormal movements.
ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
PREGNANCY
LACTATION
Quetiapine*
• COMPATIBLE - MATERNAL BENEFIT >> EMBRYO-FOETAL
RISK.
• Quetiapine crosses placenta.
• If treatment with AAPs is needed in a woman planning a
pregnancy, use of quetiapine may be considered.
• POSSIBLE TO USE DURING LACTATION.
• First- or second-choice agent during breastfeeding.
• Limited long-term follow-up of infants exposed to quetiapine
indicates that infants generally developed normally.
• Cases of galactorrhoea and milk ejection have been reported rarely.
• **RID: 0.02 - 0.1%.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor infant for drowsiness and developmental milestones,
especially if other APs are used concurrently.
Risperidone*
• COMPATIBLE - MATERNAL BENEFIT >> EMBRYO-FOETAL
RISK.
• Risperidone and its metabolite cross placenta.
• Risperidone can increase serum prolactin levels which may
decrease fertility in females on risperidone.
• POSSIBLE TO USE CAUTIOUSLY DURING LACTATION.
• Second line of AAPs during breastfeeding due to limited data
available and higher excretion into milk relative to other agents.
Other agents may be preferred, especially while nursing a newborn
or preterm infant
• Sedation, failure to thrive, jitteriness, tremors, abnormal muscle
movements and respiratory depression have been reported in
infants exposed to risperidone in milk.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor infant for drowsiness, weight gain, tremors, abnormal
respiratory
rate,
abnormal
muscle
movements
and
developmental milestones, especially if other APs are used
concurrently.
•
**RID: 2.3% - 4.7%.
Ziprasidone*
• LIMITED HUMAN DATA - ANIMAL DATA SUGGEST RISK.
• Safest course is to avoid ziprasidone in pregnancy due to limited
human data.
• However, if a woman requires treatment in pregnancy,
medication should not be withheld. Instead, an informed consent
on the unknown risk to her embryo-foetal should be obtained.
• POSSIBLE TO USE CAUTIOUSLY DURING LACTATION.
• Due to limited data, other APs may be preferred, especially while
nursing a newborn or preterm infant.
• Monitoring:
○ Breastfed infants should be monitored for excess sedation,
irritability, poor feeding and EPS e.g. tremors and abnormal
muscle movements.
ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
PREGNANCY
LACTATION
MOOD STABILISERS
Carbamazepine
• NOT RECOMMENDED FOR TREATMENT OF BIPOLAR
DISORDER.
• Carbamazepine and its active metabolite cross the placenta;
concentrations are variable.
• May be associated with teratogenic effects, including spina bifida,
craniofacial
defects,
cardiovascular
malformations
and
developmental delays. Risk of congenital malformations
increases with higher doses.
• Foetal carbamazepine syndrome has been proposed consisting
of minor craniofacial defects, fingernail hypoplasia and
developmental delay.
• POSSIBLE AND COMPATIBLE TO USE IN LACTATION.
• Breastfeeding during carbamazepine monotherapy does not appear
to adversely affect infant growth or development.
• Carbamazepine and its active metabolite have relatively high levels
in breastmilk and breastfed infants have serum levels that are
sometimes measurable, but usually well below the therapeutic
range.
• Most infants have no adverse reactions, but sedation, poor sucking,
withdrawal reactions and cases of hepatic dysfunction have been
reported.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor infant for jaundice, drowsiness, adequate weight gain
and
developmental
milestones,
especially
in
younger,
exclusively breastfed infants and when using combinations of
anticonvulsant or psychotropic drugs.
○ Measuring
infant
serum
carbamazepine
levels
is
not
recommended; however breastfeeding should be discontinued if
AEs are observed.
Lamotrigine
• COMPATIBLE - MATERNAL BENEFIT >> EMBRYO-FOETAL
RISK.
• Crosses the human placenta and can be measured in the plasma
of exposed newborns.
• Significant risk for oral clefts following first trimester exposure.
• Increased risk of malformations may be associated with larger
doses.
• Clearance of lamotrigine increases by >50% starting early in
pregnancy and reverts to the non-pregnant state quickly after
delivery. Pregnant women may require dose adjustments in order
to maintain clinical response.
• Monitoring:
○ Where facilities are available, baseline serum concentrations
should be measured once or twice prior to pregnancy.
Monitoring can then be continued up to monthly during
pregnancy and every second day during the first week postpartum.
• POSSIBLE TO USE IN LACTATION.
• Lamotrigine monotherapy does not appear to adversely affect
growth or development in most infants.
• However, neonates and young infants are at risk for high serum
levels because maternal serum and milk levels can rise to high
levels postpartum if lamotrigine dosage has been increased during
pregnancy but not reduced after delivery to the pre-pregnancy
dosage.
• If an infant rash occurs, breastfeeding should be discontinued until
the cause can be established.
• Breastfeeding should be discontinued in infants with lamotrigine
toxicity.
• Monitoring:
○ Breastfed infants should be carefully monitored for side effects
e.g. apnoea, rash, drowsiness or poor sucking, including
measurement of serum levels to rule out toxicity if there is a
concern.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
PREGNANCY
LACTATION
Monitoring of infant’s platelet count, liver function and serum
concentrations before and after increases in maternal lamotrigine
dosage might also be advisable.
• **RID: 5 - 31%.
Lithium
• HUMAN DATA SUGGEST RISK.
• Foetal echocardiography between 16 and 20 weeks gestation
should be considered in a woman with first-trimester lithium
exposure because of the potential increased risk of cardiac
malformations..
• Incidence of AEs may be associated with higher maternal doses.
• Due to pregnancy-induced physiologic changes, maternal serum
concentrations should be monitored and dosage adjusted during
pregnancy.
• Discontinuing lithium 24 - 48 hours before Caesarean section
delivery or at the onset of spontaneous labour and resuming the
pre-pregnancy lithium dose immediately after delivery should
minimise the infant's serum lithium concentration at birth.
• Use of drug near term may produce severe toxicity in the
newborn which is usually reversible.
• POSSIBLE TO USE CAUTIOUSLY IN LACTATION.
• Lithium excretion into breastmilk and concentrations in infant serum
are highly variable; most sources do not consider it an absolute
contraindication in healthy full-term infants, especially in infants >2
months of age and during lithium monotherapy.
• Long-term effects of lithium on infants are not certain; however,
limited data indicate no obvious problems in growth and
development.
• Lithium in milk can adversely affect the infant acutely when its
elimination is impaired (dehydration/newborn/premature infants).
Infants who are preterm, dehydrated or have an infection should
receive hydration and be assessed for lithium toxicity.
• As maternal lithium requirements and dosage may be increased
during pregnancy, maternal serum levels should be monitored
frequently postpartum and dosage reduced as necessary to avoid
excessive infant exposure via breastmilk.
• If infant’s serum lithium level is elevated, reducing the percentage of
breastfeeding can decrease it.
• **RID: 0 - 30%.
• Monitoring:
○ Monitor infant for lethargy, growth and feeding problems.
○ Monitor infant serum lithium, serum creatinine, BUN and TSH if
clinical concerns arise.
○
Valproate
• CONTRAINDICATED and an alternative treatment should be
decided on, with appropriate specialist consultation, for
women planning pregnancy.
• High teratogenic potential and children exposed in-utero to
valproate have a high risk congenital malformations and
neurodevelopmental disorders.
• POSSIBLE TO USE IN LACTATION.
• Valproate levels in breastmilk are low and infant’s serum levels
range from undetectable to low. Breastfeeding during valproate
monotherapy does not appear to adversely affect infant growth or
development.
• Combination therapy with sedating anticonvulsants or psychotropics
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
* Risk of EPS and/or withdrawal symptoms in newborns if APs is used in the third trimester.
** In general, RID <10% is considered compatible with breastfeeding. However, worth noting that some sources recommend that for psychotropic agents,
breastfeeding is considered acceptable if RID is <5%.4,5
Source:
1. Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB. Briggs Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation 14th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2022.
2. Drugs and Lactation Database (Lactmed) (Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/).
3. Uguz F. A New Safety Scoring System for the Use of Psychotropic Drugs During Lactation. Am J Ther. 2021;28(1):e118-e126.
4. Larsen ER, Damkier P, Pedersen LH, et.al. Use of psychotropic drugs during pregnancy and breastfeeding. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl. 2015;(445):
1-28.
5. Clinical Drug Information, Inc. Wolters Kluwer. UpToDate® [Mobile application software].
MEDICATION
PREGNANCY
LACTATION
Valproate
CONTRAINDICATED and an alternative treatment should be
decided on, with appropriate specialist consultation, for
women planning pregnancy.
High teratogenic potential and children exposed in-utero to
valproate have a high risk congenital malformations and
neurodevelopmental disorders.
Pregnancy test
Treatment must not be initiated in women of child bearing
potential without a negative pregnancy test to rule out unintended
use in pregnancy.
Contraception
Patients must be provided with comprehensive information on
pregnancy prevention and should be referred for contraceptive
advice if they are not using effective contraception.
Pregnancy Planning
Treatment with valproate should be discontinued prior to
conception and before contraception is discontinued. If needed,
alternative treatment options should be considered.
In case of pregnancy
Refer to a specialist to re-evaluate treatment with valproate and
consider alternative options.
• POSSIBLE TO USE IN LACTATION.
• Valproate levels in breastmilk are low and infant’s serum levels
range from undetectable to low. Breastfeeding during valproate
monotherapy does not appear to adversely affect infant growth or
development.
• Combination therapy with sedating anticonvulsants or psychotropics
may result in infant’s sedation or withdrawal reactions.
• Monitoring:
○ Breastfed infants should be monitored for jaundice.
○ Breastfed infants should be monitored for jaundice unusual
bruising or bleeding and other signs of liver damage during
maternal therapy.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 10a
BPFK/PPP/07/25 (21) Jld 3
ANNUAL RISK ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM
PART A. TO BE COMPLETED AND SIGNED BY THE PRESCRIBER
Patient’s name : ______________
MRN/IC No.
: ______________
Address
: ______________
For girls and women of childbearing age treated with Sodium Valproate < Product Name
>. Please read, complete and sign this form during a visit with the prescriber: at treatment
initiation, during annual visit and when the woman plans pregnancy or is pregnant.
Name of patient or care-giver:
I confirm the above-named patient needs sodium valproate because:
□ this patient does not respond adequately to other treatments, or
□ this patient does not tolerate other treatments,
□ that this patient is stable on.........dose and she is reluctant to change to other,
□ other reasons .......................................................(to specify)
I have discussed the following information with the above-named patient or caregiver:
□ The overall risk to fetus and children whose mothers are exposed to sodium valproate
during pregnancy are :
• approximately 10% chance of birth defects and
• up to 30% to 40%, chance of a wide range of early developmental problems that can
lead to learning difficulties.
□ Sodium valproate should not be used in pregnancy (except in rare situations such as
epileptic patients that are resistant or intolerant to other treatments)
□ The need for regular (at least annually) review and the need to continue sodium valproate
treatment by the prescriber
□ The need for a negative pregnancy test at treatment initiation and as required there-after
(if child-bearing age)
□ The need for an effective contraception without interruption during the entire duration of
sodium valproate (if childbearing age).
□ To need to arrange an appointment with her doctor as soon as she is planning pregnancy
to ensure timely discussion and switching to alternative treatment options prior to
conception, and before contraception is discontinued.
□ The need to contact her doctor immediately for an urgent review of the treatment in case
of suspected or inadvertent pregnancy
□ In case of pregnancy, I confirm that this patient:
• receives the lowest possible effective dose of sodium valproate to minimise the
possible harmful effect on the unborn
• is informed about the possibilities of pregnancy support or counselling and appropriate
monitoring of her baby if she is pregnant
Name of Prescriber : Signature
Date
Part A and B shall be completed. All boxes shall be ticked, and the form signed by the prescriber. This is to
make sure that all the risks and information related to the use of sodium valproate during pregnancy have
been understood.
Part A - to be kept by the prescriber
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ANNUAL RISK ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM
PART B. TO BE COMPLETED BY THE PRESCRIBER AND SIGNED
BY THE PATIENT OR CAREGIVER
Patient’s name : ______________
MRN/IC No.
: ______________
Address
: ______________
For girls and women of childbearing age treated with Sodium Valproate < Product Name >.
Please read, complete and sign this form during a visit with the prescriber: at treatment
initiation, during annual visit and when the woman plans pregnancy or is pregnant.
I discussed the following with my doctor and understand
□ Why I need sodium valproate rather than other medicine.
□ I have decided to continue with the treatment after being advised of the risk.
□ That I should visit the prescriber regularly (at least annually) to review whether sodium
valproate treatment remains the best option for me.
□ The overall risk to fetus and children whose mothers took sodium valproate during
pregnancy are:
• an approximately 10% chance of birth defects
• up to 30 to 40 % chance of a wide range of early developmental problems that can
lead to significant learning difficulties
□ Why I need a negative pregnancy test at testament initiation and if needed thereafter (if
childbearing age).
□ That I must use effective contraception without interruption during the entire duration of
treatment with sodium valproate (if childbearing age).
□ We discussed the possibilities of effective contraception or we planned a consultation
with a professional who is experienced in advising on effective contraception.
□ The need for regular ( at least annually) review and the need to continue sodium
valproate treatment by the prescriber.
□ The need to consult my doctor as soon as I am planning to become pregnant to ensure
timely discussion and switching to alternative treatment options prior to conception, and
before conception is discontinued.
□ That I should request an urgent appointment if I think I am pregnant.
In case of a pregnancy I have discussed the following with my doctor and understand:
• the possibilities of pregnancy support or counseling
• the need to appropriate monitoring of my baby if I am pregnant.
Name of Patient/Caregiver :
Signature
Date
Name of Prescriber
:
Signature
Date
Part B shall be completed. All boxes shall be ticked, and the form signed by the prescriber and the patient.
This is to make sure that all the risks and information related to the use of sodium valproate during
pregnancy have been understood.
Part B - to be given to the patient
- a copy kept by the prescriber
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 10b
BORANG PENGAKUAN RISIKO TAHUNAN
BAHAGIAN A: UNTUK DILENGKAPKAN DAN DITANDATANGANI
OLEH PEGAWAI PERUBATAN
Nama Pesakit
: ______________
MRN/No. Kad pengenalan : ______________
Alamat
: ______________
Untuk kanak-kanak perempuan dan wanita yang dalam lingkungan umur boleh melahirkan anak
dan dirawat dengan Sodium Valproate. Sila baca, lengkapkan dan tandatangan borang ini
sebelum memulakan rawatan,semasa rawatan tahunan dan apabila wanita tersebut bercadang
untuk mengandung atau sedang mengandung.
Nama pesakit atau penjaga: saya
mengesahkan bahawa penama di atas memerlukan rawatan sodium valproate kerana
□ pesakit tidak respon dengan secukupnya terhadap rawatan ubat yang lain, Atau
□ pesakit tidak serasi dengan rawatan yang lain, Atau
□ pesakit telah stabil dengan ......... dos dan enggan untuk menukar ubat yang lain, Atau
□ sebab-sebab lain ................................. (jelaskan)
Saya telah berbincang mengenai maklumat dengan pesakit atau penjaga:
□ Risiko keseluruhan terhadap janin dan kanak-kanak di mana ibunya terdedah kepada
sodium valproate semasa mengandung adalah lebih kurang 10% risiko untuk mendapat
kecacatan kelahiran manakala risiko sebanyak 30% ke 40% untuk mendapat masalah
perkembangan awal yang boleh menyebabkan masalah pembelajaran.
□ Sodium valproate tidak sepatutnya diberikan kepada ibu mengandung kecuali dalam
situasi tertentu seperti pesakit epilepsi yang sukar dirawat dengan ubatan lain.
□ Keperluan untuk pemantauan secara berkala (sekurangnya setiap tahun) dan keperluan
untuk melihat samada rawatan sodium valproate perlu diteruskan.
□ Keperluan untuk memastikan ujian kehamilan adalah negatif sebelum dan selepas
rawatan dimulakan.
□ Keperluan untuk mengambil langkah kontraseptif yang berterusan sepanjang rawatan
sodium valproate diberikan.
□ Untuk memastikan pesakit dibawah pemantaun doktor obstetrik jika merancang untuk
hamil dan berbincang untuk rawatan alternatif serta pilihan ubatan psikiatri yang lain
sebelum mengandung atau sebelum perancang kehamilan dihentikan.
□ Pesakit perlu memberitahu doktor dan berjumpa untuk temujanji susulan secepat
mungkin sekiranya didapati atau disyaki hamil.
□ Untuk kes pesakit yang sudah hamil. Saya sahkan pesakit yang hamil ini:
- Hanya menerima dos efektif yang minimum untuk mengurangkan risiko kecacatan
janin.
- Telah dimaklumkan tentang sokongan kaunseling dan pemantauan rapi terhadap
kandungan sepanjang semasa proses kehamilan.
Nama Penerima :
Tarikh tandatangan :
Bahagian A dan B hendaklah dilengkapkan. Kesemua kotak hendaklah ditanda dan borang perlu
ditandatangan oleh pegawai perubatan. Ini untuk memastikan semua risiko dan maklumat tentang
penggunaan sodium valproate semasa mengandung telah difahami.
Bahagian A - untuk simpanan pegawai perubatan.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
BORANG PENGAKUAN RISIKO TAHUNAN
BAHAGIAN B: UNTUK DILENGKAPKAN OLEH PEGAWAI
PERUBATAN DAN DITANDATANGANI OLEH PESAKIT
ATAU PENJAGA
Nama Pesakit
: ______________
MRN/No. Kad pengenalan : ______________
Alamat
: ______________
Untuk kanak-kanak perempuan dan wanita yang dalam lingkungan umur melahirkan anak
dan dirawat dengan Sodium Valproate .Sila baca, lengkapkan dan tandatangan borang ini
sebelum memulakan rawatan,semasa rawatan tahunan dan apabila wanita tersebut bercadang
untuk mengandung atau sedang mengandung.
Saya telah berbincang dengan pegawai perubatan mengenai maklumat berikut:
□
Keperluan untuk saya mengambil sodium valproate berbanding ubatan lain.
□
Saya telah memutuskan untuk meneruskan rawatan dengan sodium valproate selepas
dimaklumkan mengenai risiko.
□
Saya akan hadir untuk temujanji secara berkala (sekurangnya setahun sekali) untuk
memantau samada rawatan sodium valproate kekal sebagai pilihan terbaik untuk
rawatan saya.
□
Risiko keseluruhan terhadap janin dan kanak-kanak di mana ibunya terdedah kepada
sodium valproate semasa mengandung adalah lebih kurang 10% risiko untuk mendapat
kecacatan kelahiran manakala risiko sebanyak 30% ke 40% untuk mendapat masalah
perkembangan awal yang boleh menyebabkan masalah pembelajaran.
□
Kenapa saya perlu pastikan ujian kehamilan sebelum dan selepas memulakan rawatan
(untuk wanita dalam lingkungan umur melahirkan anak).
□
Saya perlu menggunakan kaedah kontraseptif yang efektif tanpa gangguan sepanjang
rawatan saya dengan sodium valproate (untuk wanita dalam lingkungan umur
melahirkan anak).
□
Kami telah berbincang mengenai kebarangkalian kontraseptif yang efektif atau kami
akan mendapatkan konsultasi dengan pegawai kesihatan yang arif dengan kontraseptif.
□
Saya perlu pemantauan secara berkala (sekurangnya setiap tahun) dan keperluan
untuk melihat samada rawatan sodium valproate perlu diteruskan.
□
Saya perlu memastikan saya dibawah pemantaun doktor obstetrik jika merancang
untuk hamil dan berbincang untuk rawatan alternatif serta pilihan ubatan psikiatri yang
lain sebelum mengandung atau sebelum perancang kehamilan dihentikan.
□
Saya perlu mendapatkan temujanji serta merta jika didapati saya mengandung.
□
Sekiranya saya mengandung, saya akan berbincang dengan pegawai perubatan
mengenai:
- Kebarangkalian untuk mendapatkan sokongan dan kaunseling semasa mengandung
- Keperluan untuk mendapatkan pemantauan bayi saya sekiranya saya mengandung
Nama Pesakit/Penjaga:
Tarikh tandatangan:
Nama Penerima: Tandatangan:
Tarikh:
Bahagian B hendaklah dilengkapkan: semua kotak perlu ditanda dan borang perlu ditandatangani oleh
pegawai perubatan dan pesakit. Ini untuk memastikan semua risiko dan maklumat tentang penggunaan
sodium valproate semasa mengandung telah difahami.
Bahagian B - untuk simpanan pesakit, satu salinan untuk simpanan pegawai perubatan.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
Appendix 11
SUGGESTED PAEDIATRIC MEDICATIONS DOSING
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL
HEPATIC
REMARKS
ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTICS
Aripiprazole
Acute mania or episodes with mixed features
10 to 17 years old:
Oral
D1: 2 mg once daily for 2 days;
D3: 5 mg once daily for 2 days;
D5: 10 mg once daily; may titrate subsequent dose in
increment of 5 mg/day)
(Usual target dose: 10 mg once daily)
(Max dose: 30 mg daily)
No dosage adjusment
necessary.
No dosage
adjusment
necessary.
• Only strength 5 mg,10 mg and
15 mg are registered with
NPRA.
• Commonly seen ADR in
paediatric populations:
somnolence, extrapyramidal
reaction, fatigue, nausea,
akathisia, blurred vision,
salivary hypersecretion,
dizziness.
Asenapine
Acute mania or episodes with mixed features
10 to 17 years old:
Sublingual
D1: 2.5 mg twice daily;
D4: May increase to 5 mg twice daily;
D7: May increase to 10 mg twice daily
(Max dose: 10 mg twice daily)
No dosage adjusment
necessary.
Severe hepatic
impairment (ChildPugh Class C):
Use is
contraindicated.
• Only strength 5 mg and 10 mg
are registered with NPRA.
• Commonly seen ADR in
paediatric populations:
somnolence, dizziness,
dysgeusia, oral paraesthesia,
nausea, increased appetite,
fatigue, increased weight.
Lurasidone
Bipolar disorder (depressive episodes)
10 to 17 years old
Oral
20 mg once daily; may titrate after 1 week based on
response although dose titration is not required
(Usual target dose: 20 mg - 40 mg once daily)
(Max dose: 80 mg/day)
CrCl <50 mL/minute:
Reduce initial dose.
Do not exceed an
initial dose of 20 mg
daily
(Max dose: 80
mg/day).
Moderate
impairment:
Reduce initial dose.
Do not exceed an
initial dose of 20 mg
daily
(Max dose: 80
mg/day)
• Take with a meal (>350
calories) for adequate
absorption.
• Commonly seen ADR in
paediatric populations:
nausea, weight gain,
insomnia.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL
HEPATIC
REMARKS
Severe impairment:
Reduce initial dose.
Do not exceed an
initial dose of 20 mg
daily
(Max dose: 40
mg/day)
Olanzapine
Acute mania or episodes with mixed features
13 to 17 years old
Oral
Initial: 2.5 - 5 mg once daily
Dose titration: Increment/decrement of 2.5 or 5 mg at
weekly interval
(Usual target dose: 10 mg/day)
(Max dose: 20 mg/day)
Depressive episodes (in combination with fluoxetine)
10 to 17 years old
Oral
Initial: 2.5 mg of oral olanzapine and 20 mg of oral
fluoxetine once daily
(Max dose: 12 mg olanzapine/50 mg fluoxetine)
No dosage
adjustment is
necessary as not
removed by dialysis.
Use with caution.
Dosage adjustment
may be necessary;
however, no specific
recommendations
exist.
• Only strength 5 mg and 10 mg
are registered with NPRA.
• Commonly seen ADR in
paediatric populations:
sedation,weight gain,
increased appetite, headache,
fatigue, dizziness, dry mouth,
abdominal pain.
• Fixed dose OFC capsule is
not available in Malaysian
market.
Quetiapine
Mania or episodes with mixed features
10 to 17 years old
Oral, immediate release (IR)
D1: 25 mg twice daily
D2: 50 mg twice daily
D3: 100 mg twice daily
D4: 150 mg twice daily
D5: 200 mg twice daily
Dose titration: Increment of ≤100 mg/day based on
clinical response and tolerability
(Usual dosage range: 200 - 300 mg twice daily)
No dosage
adjustment is
necessary.
Immediate release
25 mg once daily;
titrate by 25 - 50
mg/day to effective
dose based on
individual clinical
response and
tolerability.
Extended release
50 mg once daily;
titrate by 50 mg once
• Commonly seen ADR in
paediatric populations:
somnolence, dizziness,
fatigue, increased appetite,
nausea, vomiting, dry mouth,
tachycardia, weight gain.
• Switching from IR to ER:
May convert at the equivalent
total daily dose and administer
once daily; individual dosage
adjustments may be
necessary.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL
HEPATIC
REMARKS
(Max dose: 600 mg/day)
**Total daily doses may also be divided into 3 doses per
day
Oral, extended release (ER)
D1: 50 mg once daily
D2: 100 mg once daily
D3: 200 mg once daily
D4: 300 mg oce daily
D5: 400 mg once daily
(Usual dosage range: 400 - 600 mg once daily)
(Max dose: 600 mg/day)
daily to effective
dose based on
individual clinical
response and
tolerability.
Risperidone
Mania
10 to 17 years old
Oral
Initial: 0.5 mg once daily
Titrate in increment of 0.5 - 1 mg/day at intervals >24
hours
Usual target dose: 1 - 2.5 mg/day
**Doses >2.5mg/day do not confer additional benefit and
are associated with increased adverse events.
No pediatric-specific
dosage
recommendations.
Based on experience
in adult patients,
dosing adjustments
suggested.
No pediatric-specific
dosage
recommendations.
Based on
experience in adult
patients, dosing
adjustments
suggested.
• No specific FDA/ NPRA
approved dose in
children/adolescent population
for use of risperidone LAI in
bipolar disorder.*
• In patients with persistent
somnolence, administering
half the daily dose twice daily
may be beneficial.
• Well accepted for treatment of
behavioural symptoms in
children and adolescents, but
may have more sedation and
weight gain in paediatric
populations than in adult
populations.
• Other commonly seen side
effects in paediatric population
include cough, nasal
congestion, nasopharyngitis,
fatigue.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL
HEPATIC
REMARKS
for use of ziprasidone in
bipolar disorder*.
ANTIDEPRESSANT
Fluoxetine
Depressive episodes (in combination with
olanzapine)
Oral
≥10 years old and adolescents
20 mg orally once daily in the evening in combination
with olanzapine 2.5 mg; titrate to clinical effect and
tolerability
(Max: 50 mg/day)
≥7 years old and
adolescents:
Adjusment not
routinely needed
*With chronic
administration,
additional
accumulation of
fluoxetine or
norfluoxetine may
occur in patients with
severely impaired
renal function.
≥7 years old and
adolescents:
Lower doses or less
frequent
administration are
recommended.
*Elimination half-life
of fluoxetine is
prolonged in patients
with hepatic
impairment.
• Fixed dose OFC capsule is
not available in Malaysian
market.
MOOD STABILISERS
Lithium
Acute mania or episodes with mixed features
Oral
≥7 years old, weight <30 kg:
Initial: 300 mg twice daily;
Dose titration: Increment of 300 mg/weekly
7 years old, weight >30 kg
Initial: 300 mg 3 times daily;
Dose titration: Increment of 300 mg every 3 days
CrCl 30 - 89 ml/min:
Initiate therapy with
low dose.
CrCl <30 ml/min:
Avoid use.
No dosage
adjustments
provided in the
manufacturer’s
labeling.
• Commonly seen ADR in
paediatric populations:
nausea/vomiting, polyuria,
thyroid abnormalities, tremor,
thirst/polydipsia, dizziness,
rash/dermatitis, ataxia/gait
disturbance, reduced appetite,
blurry vision.
• Only immediate release
lithium carbonate formulation
is registered with NPRA.
Ziprasidone
• No specific FDA/ NPRA
approved dose in
children/adolescent population
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
* At the time of writing, there is no specific FDA/NPRA approval dose for use in children/adolescent population
Source:
1. Clinical Drug Information, Inc. Wolters Kluwer. UpToDate® [Mobile application software]
2. Micromedex® Solution [Mobile application software]
3. Invidual product information leaflet
4. Stahl SM. Stahl’s essential psychopharmacology: Prescriber’s guide. Cambridge University Press; 2014
5. Quest3+ Product Search Sistem Pendaftaran Produk & Perlesenan (Available at: https://quest3plus.bpfk.gov.my/pmo2/index.php)
MEDICATION
DOSING GUIDE
RENAL
HEPATIC
REMARKS
Usual Dose Range:
>7 years old,
wt <30 kg
>7 years old,
weight >30 kg
Acute therapy
dose range
600 - 1500 mg
in divided daily
dose
1200 - 1800 mg
in divided daily
dose
• Prior to treatment initiation:
ensure prompt and accurate
serum lithium levels can be
determined since toxicity can
occur at doses closes to
therapeutic levels.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AD
anti-depressant
ADHD
attention-deﬁcit hyperactive disorder
AE(s)
adverse event(s)
AP
antipsychotic
AAP
atypical antipsychotic
ACT
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
ASPD
antisocial personality disorder
AST
aspartate aminotransferase
BAI
Beck Anxiety Inventory
BD
bipolar disorder
BD I
bipolar I disorder
BD II
bipolar II disorder
BI
bipolarity index
BSDS
Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale
BPD
Borderline personality disorder
BPRS
Brief Psychotic Rating Scale
BW
birth weight
CAE
customised adherence enhancement
CAM
complementary and alternative medicine
CANMAT
Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments
CBD
cannabidiol
CBT
cognitive behavioural therapy
CGI-BP
Clinical Global Impression-bipolar disorder
CGI-BP-S
CGI-S-Bipolar Version-Severity
CU
cannabis use
DBT
dialectical behaviour therapy
DSM-5-TR
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth
Edition, text revision
ECG
electrocardiogram
ECT
electroconvulsive therapy
EPA
eicosapentaenoic acid
EPS
extra-pyramidal symptoms
ER
extended release
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FFT
family-focused therapy
FGA
ﬁrst generation antipsychotic
GAD-7
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 Scale
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessments, Development
and Evaluations
HADS
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
HCL-32
Hypomania checklist
HCP
healthcare practitioner
ICD-11
International Classiﬁcation of Diseases Eleventh Revision
IDS
Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS)
IPSRT
Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy (IPSRT)
MSRS
Manic State Rating Scale
MARS
Medication Adherence Rating Scale
MDQ
Mood disorder questionaire
NMA
network meta-analysis
HAM-D
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
HR
hazard ratio
IDS
Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology
IQ
Intelligence Quotient
IR
immediate release
LAI
long-acting injectable
Li
lithium
LSMD
least squares mean difference
MA
meta-analysis
MADRS
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale
MBCT
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
MDQ
Mood disorder questionnaire
MEMS
medication event monitoring system
mg
milligramme
MSRS
Manic State Rating Scale
NMA
network meta-analysis
NOS
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale
NPRA
National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency
NS
non-signiﬁcant
OFC
olanzapine/ﬂuoxetine combination
QoL
quality of life
QIDS-SR
Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology Self-Report
OR
odds ratio
PANSS
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale
RANZCP
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrist
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RID
Relative Infant Dose
RMS
Rapid mood screener
NMA
network meta-analysis
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
rTMS
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
SGA
second generation antipsychotic
SMD
standard mean difference
SMS
short messaging service
SR
systematic review
SUCRA
Surface Under the Cumulative Ranking Curve
SUD
substance use disorder
TAU
treatment as usual
TBS
theta burst stimulation
TRQ
Tablet Routine Questionnaire
WHO
World Health Organisation
YMRS
Young Mania Rating Scale
RoB
risk of bias
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft technically
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Subhiyah Ariffin for the retrieval of evidence
• Hanan Mikhael, person of lived experience, on the cover design of
the CPG
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None hold shares in pharmaceutical
firms or act as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Bipolar Disorder
(Second Edition) was supported mainly by the MoH Malaysia and partly
by the Psychiatry Department, Hospital Putrajaya.
Management of Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition)