CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN : 978-967-2887-67-6
Available on the following websites:
https://www.moh.gov.my
https://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.moa-home.com/
https://www.msgm.com.my/
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
The clinical practice guideline (CPG) is meant to be a guide to
clinical practice based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guideline should not override the responsibility of
the practitioners to make decision appropriate to the circumstances of
the individual. This should be done in consultation with the patients and
their families or guardians, taking into account the management options
available locally.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2023 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2027) or sooner if there is urgent need
to do so. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
x
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
3
3.
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
4
4.
DIAGNOSIS
5
5.
REFERRAL CRITERIA
6
6.
TREATMENT
7
6.1 Pre-operative Optimisation and Criteria for Safe Surgery
7
6.2 Safe Anaesthesia
14
6.3 Surgery
16
6.4 Rehabilitation
24
6.5
Discharge Plan and Follow-up
26
7.
PREVENTION
27
7.1 Primary prevention
27
7.2 Secondary prevention
28
8.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
29
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
29
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
29
References
31
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
37
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
38
Appendix 3 Principles of Analgesic Prescriptions in the
39
Elderly and Pre-operative Analgesia in GHF
Appendix 4 Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA)
41
for GHF
Appendix 5 Guidelines on Time Intervals Before and
42
After Neuraxial Blocks Related to the Use of
Antiplatelet Agents and Anticoagulants
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Appendix 6 Assessment of Falls Risk Factors and
46
Interventions to Reduce Identified Risk Factors
Algorithm on Risk Stratification, Assessment
and Interventions for Community-Dwelling
Older Adults
List of Abbreviations
48
Acknowledgement
49
Disclosure Statement
49
Source of Funding
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies or case reports; reports of expert committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure
Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of body of evidence and related effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG DG.
• Recommendations are formulated based on certainty of
evidence and the wording used denotes the strength of
recommendations. This takes into account:
 quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 relevancy and applicability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s) in
the management while a blue box contains evidence-based
recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
a.
Diagnosis
• Patients with suspected geriatric hip fracture (GHF) should have plain
radiographs according to standard views to confirm the diagnosis.
• Those with occult GHF (presence of symptoms and signs of hip
fractures despite normal plain radiographs) should have computed
tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging done to rule out
the fracture.
b.
Treatment
• Analgesia should be prescribed adequately in geriatric hip fractures
(GHF).
 Peripheral nerve block may be considered if pain persists and
resources are available.
• Traction should not routinely be used in GHF.
• Comprehensive geriatric assessment should be performed by the
attending physician for all frail geriatric patients with hip fracture.
• Oral nutritional support should be considered for all patients with
GHF.
• Patients with GHF should be given venous thromboembolism (VTE)
prophylaxis (chemoprophylaxis and/or mechanical prophylaxis).
 Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is the preferred choice for
chemoprophylaxis peri-operatively.
 Post-operatively VTE prophylaxis should be extended up to
4 - 5 weeks with either an anti-coagulant (LMWH, direct oral
anticoagulants, warfarin) or anti-platelet (aspirin only) according
to individual deep vein thrombosis risk assessment.
• Patients with GHF may be offered regional or general anaesthesia
for hip surgery according to individual’s risk and benefit assessment.
 Caution has to be taken to avoid hypotension intra-operatively.
• Cemented stem should be offered for arthroplasty in displaced neck
of femur fracture in geriatric patients.
• Arthroplasty is the preferred choice in non-displaced fracture neck of
femur in geriatric patients for early full weight-bearing ambulation.
• In GHF,
 cephalomedullary nail (CMN) or extramedullary device may be
offered for stable intertrochanteric fracture.
 CMN is the preferred choice for unstable intertrochanteric fracture.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
iii
• Surgery should be performed within 48 hours of admission in
medically stable GHF patients.
• Analgesia should be provided peri-operatively in GHF.
 Multimodal analgesia is the preferred choice.
• Early mobilisation should be advocated as early as on post-operative
day 1, e.g. sitting at the edge of the bed, unless contraindicated.
• Rehabilitation should be offered to all patients with GHF postoperatively with the aim to improve mobility and functional recovery.
 A multidisciplinary approach is the preferred choice.
c.
Prevention
• Geriatric population should be screened and assessed for falls risk.
 Education about falls prevention should be offered accordingly.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and
the Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement from
a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
This is the first edition of an evidence-based CPG on the Management
of Geriatric Hip Fracture (GHF). Literature search was carried out
using the following electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and
Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed
(refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy). The search was
limited to literature published on humans, in English and last 15 years.
In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines
were searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field
were also contacted for studies related to the issues addressed. All
searches were conducted from 3 January 2022 to 28 February 2022.
Literature searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of
the CPG development process, allowing any relevant papers published
before 1 July 2023 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider
evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of the search
strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other guidelines on GHF as listed below:
• American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons - Management of
Hip Fractures in Older Adults Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
Guideline (2021)
• National Institute for Health and Care Excellence - Hip fracture:
Management (2023)
A total of five clinical questions were developed under four sections
(diagnosis, risk factors, treatment and referral/follow-up). Members of
the DG were assigned individual questions within the sections (refer to
Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG members met 43 times
throughout the development of these guidelines. All literature retrieved
were appraised by at least two DG members using Critical Appraisal
Skill Programme checklist when applicable, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations subsequently formulated were agreed upon by both
the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the DG and RC. This CPG is based largely
on the findings of systematic reviews and clinical trials, with local
practices taken into consideration.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2015),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE as much as possible (refer to the preceding page). The writing
of the CPG strictly followed the requirements of Appraisal of Guidelines
for Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II.
Upon completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by
external reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia
official website for feedback from any interested parties. The draft
was finally presented to the Technical Advisory Committee
for CPG, and the Health Technology Assessment and ClinicalPractice
Guidelines Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details
on the CPG development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained
from the Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidencebased Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf ).
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
OBJECTIVES
The objective of this CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of GHF on the following aspects:
a) diagnosis and risk factors
b) treatment
c) referral and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Patients with suspected and confirmed GHF (evidence on patients
aged 60 years old and above).
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care in the management
of GHF, including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. policymakers
v. patients and their advocates
vi. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
vii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Mohd Yusof Ibrahim
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Abdul Rahman Ab Hamid
Consultant Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Chung Wai Mun
Emergency Physician
Hospital Taiping, Perak
Dr. Elizabeth Chong Gar Mit
Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Khor Hui Min
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Geriatrician
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Kunalan A/L Ganthel @ Annamalai
Consultant Arthroplasty Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Loh Pui San
Senior Lecturer & Senior Consultant
Anaesthesiologist
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit
& Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section, Ministry of Health,
Putrajaya
Dr. Muhammad Azrin Mohd Asihin
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Hospital Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr. Nur Hanani Mat Daud
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Rafidah Mohd Rafie
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Setapak, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Raiha Hasni Mohd Hanaffi
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Rizal Abdul Rani
Lecturer & Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sheliza Jamil
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Cyberjaya, Selangor
Dr. Zainura Che Isa
Consultant Acute Internal Medicine
Hospital Sultan Abdul Halim, Kedah
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Mohammad Anwar Hau Abdullah
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Members (alphabetical order)
viii
Dr. Azahirafairud Abdul Rahim
Acute Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. C. Sankara Kumar Chandrasekaran
Lecturer & Consultant Orthopaedic
Surgeon & Traumatologist
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Faris Kamaruddin
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director &
Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment Section, Ministry of Health
Putrajaya
Dr. Shah Jahan Mohd Yussof
Consultant Trauma Physician
Hospital Sg. Buloh, Selangor
Dr. Suhail Suresh
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Sunway Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Nagammai a/p Thiagarajan
Consultant Family Physician
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yau Weng Keong
Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yusniza Mohd Yusof
Head of Rehabilitation Service &
Consultant Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zalina Abd Razak
Head of Anaesthesiology Service &
Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
ix
Dr. Hannah Seymour
Consultant Orthogeriatrician
Clinical Director Electronic Medical
Program
WA Health, Perth, Australia
Professor Dr. Howe Tet Sen
Consultant Orthopaedic Trauma
Surgeon
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
Dr. Jamal Azmi Mohamad
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
KPJ Selangor Specialist Hospital
Selangor
Professor Datin Dr. Lydia Abd Latif
Consultant Rehabilitation Physician
ReGen Rehab Hospital, Selangor
Professor Dr. Matthew Costa
Professor of Orthopaedic Trauma
University of Oxford, Oxford
United Kingdom
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mohd. Amin Mohd.
Mokhtar
Head of Department, Lecturer &
Consultant Emergency Physician
Faculty of Medicine, University
Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Omar Sulaiman
Head of Department &
Senior Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Johor
Dr. Tan Wan Chuan
Emergency Physician
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Teinny Suryadi
Physical Medicine &
Rehabilitation Physician
Rumah Sakit Hermina Podomoro
Jakarta, Indonesia
Dr. Terence Ong Ing Wei
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Geriatrician
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Ti Lian Kah
Senior Consultant Anaesthesiologist
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Dr. S. Kantha Ruban Sivalingam
General Practitioner & Director
Kantha Medical Group, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Saadon Ibrahim
Head of Orthopaedic Service &
Consultant Orthopaedic & Musculoskeletal
Oncology Surgeon
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor
Dr. Sathiya Moorthi Poonosamy
Patient Advocate
Dr. Vijayan P. Panirselvam
Internal Medicine Consultant (Acute Internal
Medicine)
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Selangor
Dr. Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru
Kuala Lumpur
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
ALGORITHM ON MANAGEMENT OF GERIATRIC HIP FRACTURE
x
Suspected hip fracture case*
arrives at Emergency and Trauma
Department (ETD) from scene of
injury/home/healthcare facilities
Confirmed hip fracture
case* referred from other
healthcare facilities
Assessment by ETD team (which include haemodynamic
status, X-ray of pelvis/femur/chest, blood investigations, etc.)
Lifethreatening
medical
conditions
Refer and
treat
accordingly
at Intensive
Care
Unit/High
Dependency
Unit
No hip fracture
Hip fracture
confirmed by x-ray
Possible occult hip
fracture (normal x-ray)
Refer to
relevant
disciplines
Refer to orthopaedics
Computed tomography
scan/magnetic resonance
imaging required and done
Ward admission and
pre-operative optimisation
(medical/anaesthesia)
Fracture
Treat
accordingly
Early multidisciplinary care
Operating theatre for
surgery
Post-operative
management (orthopaedic
ward/HDW/ICU)
In-patient rehabilitation
Discharge with
follow-up plan
*Stable cases i.e. without
life-threatening medical
conditions; unstable cases
should be referred to
emergency department
No
Yes
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
1. INTRODUCTION
A hip fracture is a break in the proximal part of the femur bone and/
or around the hip joint. In older adults, it usually occurs following low
energy trauma. The decline in bone mineral density and increase in
frequency of fall among the older adults are the main reasons for the
high incidence of hip fracture among them.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States of
America (CDC) states that more than 300,000 people >65 years old are
hospitalised for hip fractures yearly. More than 95% of these fractures
are caused by falls and women account for three-quarters of all cases.1
Based on 2004 - 2006 figures, the residual lifetime risk of hip fracture
≥50 years of age in Japan was estimated to be 5.6% for men and 20%
for women. The highest incidence of hip fractures from Asia had been
reported from Singapore where the annual rates were 152 in men
and 402 in women per 100,000 based on 1991 - 1998 data.2, level III In
Malaysia, a comprehensive study on 56 public and private hospitals
between 1996 to 1997 showed an overall incidence of hip fracture of
90/100,000 population aged 50 years and above.3, level III
In an annual report by National Orthopedic Registry Malaysia (NORM)
Hip Fracture 2009, analysis on patient above 50 years old with GHF
revealed the incidence being highest among those in 70 - 79 years old
age group which accounted 41.4% of all cases. The incidence was also
higher in women than men with the ratio of 2:1. In terms of ethnicity,
majority of cases were Chinese (44.5%) followed by Malays (40%) and
Indians (13.9%).4, level III
Hip fractures are associated with increased morbidity and mortality.
Individuals with hip fractures utilise significant healthcare resources
as their hospital treatments consume large number of inpatient beddays. Majority of them require surgical fixation and many on discharge
need some form of support for daily living.5 - 6, level III Despite constituting
only 14% of osteoporosis-related fractures, hip fractures account for
nearly 75% of the economic burden related to osteoporotic fracture.
These fractures are associated with significant morbidity and mortality,
with one-year mortality after the fracture approaching 30%.7 - 8, level II-2; 9,
level III In a retrospective analysis of patients with hip fractures admitted
to the Department of Orthopaedics in a Singapore tertiary hospital,
the mean cost of hospitalisation was SGD 13,313.81 per patient.10, level III
In general, the definitive management for geriatric hip fracture (GHF)
is surgery. The type of surgery performed depends on type of fracture
and patient’s pre-morbid functional status.11, level III Elderly patients with
hip fractures have complex medical, surgical and rehabilitation needs,
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
and a well-coordinated multidisciplinary team approach is essential for
the best outcomes.12, level III
Similarly in Malaysia, the speed of increase in both proportion and
absolute numbers of older adults is unprecedented. In 2010, only 5%
(1.43 million) of the population were 65 years and over but by 2040 this
will increase to 14.5% (6.02 million). Many of the older adults will also
live longer with the average life expectancy projected to increase from
73.6 to 78.9 in men and 78.5 to 82.9 in women from 2020 to 2050.13
In view of the increased number of ageing populations, the risk of
hip fractures among them is anticipated which will impact the health
services in country.
Thus, the development of clinical practice guidelines (CPG) on the
management of GHF is timely to reduce variation in practice. It will
be the first evidence-based CPG that will guide healthcare providers
locally on the best practice in the management of the condition.
Recommendations will emphasise the importance of early surgery
and coordinating care through a multidisciplinary approach to help the
patients recover fast and regain their mobility.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
2. RISK FACTORS
Identifying risk factors for GHF is important as it can help to prevent the
occurrence of the fracture in in the susceptible groups. Established risk
factors are:14
• increasing age
• low bone density
• impaired gait and balance
• poor vision
• hazardous living environments (e.g. cluttered spaces, loose rugs
and mats or handrails and grab bars where appropriate)
Other risk factors are as below:
• women have a higher risk of hip fracture primarily due to the
decline in oestrogen levels after menopause15, level III
• history of previous fractures, particularly in the hip or spine15, level III
• certain medications e.g. glucocorticoids, proton pump inhibitors
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.16, level III
• chronic heavy alcohol consumption15, level III
• cognitive impairments e.g. dementia15, level III
In two large meta-analyses of observational studies, the following were
found to be significant risk factors for a contralateral hip fracture in
elderly patients with initial hip fracture:
• female17 - 18, level II-2
• advanced age18, level II-2
• initial trochanteric fracture18, level II-2
• osteoporosis17 - 18, level II-2
• living in institutions17, level II-2
• low vision17, level II-2
• dementia17, level II-2
• respiratory diseases17, level II-2
The quality of primary studies in the two meta-analyses was moderate
to high. The heterogeneity was mainly insignificant.17 - 18, level II-2
In a recent meta-analysis of cohort studies, a sub-group analysis
showed that sarcopenia was a risk factor for hip fracture in elderly
(HR=1.89, 95% CI 1.16 to 3.08).19, level II-2 Apart from that, a systematic
review of 11 studies showed that hand grip strength among elderly
patients with hip fracture was significantly lower than those without hip
fractures.20, level II-2
Other evidence which included a geriatric population increased risk of
hip fracture in those with:
• lower Alternative Healthy Eating Index scores21, level II-2
• current cigarette smokers22, level II-2
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
• Modifiable risk factors for GHF e.g. impaired gait and balanced, low
vision, low bone density, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking
and hazardous living environment are important to be identified and
addressed.
3. SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
Patients with GHF often present with a history of fall and may complain
of:
• hip pain and/or
• inability to weight bear or walk
Patients with occult GHF may present with vague pain at the buttock,
groin, knee or thigh. Those with minimally impacted fracture may
continue to bear weight or walk.
The principles of physical examination in GHF are to look, feel and
move. Examinations may reveal the following:
• the affected lower limb may be externally rotated and shortened
(in a displaced hip fracture)
• bruising, deformity, swelling and ecchymosis can occur at the site
of fracture (in intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures)
• palpation on the affected hip joint may elicit localised tenderness
• patient cannot perform straight leg raising
• movement of the affected hip joint causes pain
• Geriatric patients with hip pain following a fall need to be assessed
to rule out hip fracture.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
4. DIAGNOSIS
• Diagnosis of GHF is confirmed by imaging investigations.
 Plain radiographs are the main imaging modalities for patients
with suspected hip fractures.
• The majority of GHF are easily identified on plain radiographs;
however, a normal plain radiograph does not exclude a fractured hip.
The plain radiographs of the affected hip should include the following
views:
• anterior-posterior (AP) view of femur
• lateral view of femur
• AP pelvis view (with 15◦ lower limb internal rotation in neutral
abduction-adduction)
Comparison with the unaffected hip can be helpful.
However, patients with highly suspicious hip fracture, despite normal
radiographs, may require alternative forms of imaging. They are those
with:
• persistent hip pain after fall
• inability to bear weight, pain on attempted straight leg raising,
passive rotation or axial loading tests
In occult GHF, computed tomography (CT) is the modality of choice as
it is widely available locally even though magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) has higher accuracy. A cross-sectional study showed that CT
scan detected 20% femoral neck fractures and 10.7% isolated greater
trochanter fractures in geriatric patients with radiologically occult
(normal plain radiograph) hip fractures.23, level III This is supported by a
recent a meta-analysis of 35 cohort studies that showed CT scan was
able to detect 39% occult GHF.24, level II-2
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends
MRI to be offered if hip fracture is suspected despite negative
plain radiograph of the hip. If it is not available within 24 hours or is
contraindicated, CT scan should be considered.25
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Recommendation 1
• Patients with suspected geriatric hip fracture (GHF) should have
plain radiographs according to standard views to confirm the
diagnosis.
• Those with occult GHF (presence of symptoms and signs of hip
fractures despite normal plain radiographs) should have computed
tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging done to rule out
the fracture.
5. REFERRAL CRITERIA
There is no retrieval evidence on referral criteria of GHF. The CPG DG
opines that the following criteria should be used to refer to orthopaedic
services e.g.:
• confirmed GHF (by imaging) for further management
• suspected occult GHF (normal plain radiographs) for confirmation
of diagnosis
• late presentation of GHF
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
6. TREATMENT
The definitive treatment for GHF is surgical intervention with the aims
to control pain, allow early mobilisation and good functional outcomes.
Non-surgical or conservative treatment is rarely an option and only
considered when the risk of the surgery outweighs benefits (e.g.
approaching end of life, severe acute medical illness, etc.) or patient’s
refusal. However, such treatment is associated with prolonged pain.
A systematic review revealed that non-surgical treatment following hip
fracture were associated with substantially higher complication and
mortality compared with surgery.26, level I Hence, the decision for surgery
should be re-evaluated if patient’s medical condition improves.
All patients with GHF should receive early multidisciplinary care to
ensure optimal analgesia, immobilisation and appropriate medical
management.
6.1 Pre-operative Optimisation and Criteria for Safe Surgery
a.
Analgesics
Adequate analgesia is key in GHF care and should be initiated at
the first encounter. Unfortunately, pain is often undertreated and may
increase the risk of other medical conditions including delirium.27, level II-2
Treatment of pain is a combination of pharmacological and nonpharmacological modalities. The approach to management of acute pain
is as stated in the Ministry of Health’s “Pain as the 5th Vital Sign” guideline
with strong emphasis on pain assessment and pharmacotherapy. World
Health Organization (WHO) analgesic pain ladder is used to guide for
pain management as choice of pharmacological agents in elderly is
highly individualised.28
In the Guidelines of Pain Management in the Elderly by MoH, the
followings were recommended:29
• paracetamol is considered as the first-line treatment for acute pain
in older patients due to its effectiveness and good safety profile
• opioid therapy may be considered for patients with moderate or
severe pain
• selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors must be used with
caution in older people
• non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be
cautiously used if other safer treatments have not provided
adequate pain relief
If pain persists and resources are available, regional nerve blocks
with ultrasound guidance can be administered to reduce pain and
minimise sedation and other potential complications caused by opioids.
In an RCT on GHF comparing pre-operative nerve stimulator-guided
femoral nerve block and fascia iliaca compartment block, the result
showed:30, level I
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
• nerve blocks contributed in mean reduction of pain score
• femoral nerve block was more effective in pain reduction and also
required less morphine
A recent Cochrane systematic review compared peripheral nerve blocks
(PNBs) used as pre- and post-operative analgesia or as a supplement
to general anaesthesia with no nerve block (or sham block) for adults
with hip fracture. PNBs was shown to be effective in reducing:31, level I
• pain on movement within 30 minutes after block placement
(SMD= -1.05, 95% CI -1.25 to -0.86)
• risk of acute confusional state (RR=0.67, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.90)
• risk of chest infection (RR=0.41, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.89)
• time to first mobilisation (MD= -10.80 hours, 95% CI -12.83 to -8.77)
These were based on GRADE assessment where the evidence was of
moderate to high certainty quality.
Training, credentialing and privileging are required to perform the nerve
blocks procedures.
Recommendation 2
• Analgesia should be prescribed adequately in geriatric hip fractures.
 Peripheral nerve block may be considered if pain persists and
resources are available.
Refer to Appendix 3 on Principles of Analgesic Prescriptions in the
Elderly and the choice of analgesia that can be offered in GHF.
b.
Acute care and immobilisation on early admission
GHF patients should be immobilised in bed by resting the affected
limb in a comfortable position to reduce pain. Traditionally this is done
by applying skin traction over the affected leg while awaiting surgery.
However, current evidence shows no advantages of skin traction as
stated below.
• A Cochrane systematic review of 11 RCTs found that routine use
of traction for GHF did not appear to have any benefit with regards
to pain relief nor analgesia use prior to surgery and reduced
incidence of pressure sores. The review used mainly evidence
published before 2006. The quality of primary papers were
generally low.32, level I
• In an RCT on GHF comparing skin traction against non-traction
also found no difference in pre-operative pain score, postoperative analgesia and quality of reduction.33, level I
American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeon (AAOS) guidelines
recommend that pre-operative traction should not routinely be used for
patients with hip fracture. Only in some instances, the traction may be
required e.g. specific cases with peri-trochanteric fractures.14
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Recommendation 3
• Traction should not routinely be used in geriatric hip fracture.
c.
Early multi-disciplinary care
Older adults who sustain hip fractures are often of advanced age
and, may have cognitive and functional impairment with multiple comorbidities. The risk of perioperative complications is also higher in this
group of vulnerable individuals. Hence, multidisciplinary care involving
orthopedic surgeons, geriatricians and others is important in improving
the outcomes of hip fracture surgery.
The orthogeriatric care is a multidisciplinary care model with systematic
orthopedic fracture management and geriatric optimisation of patients
peri-operatively. The orthogeriatric input also involves multidisciplinary
comprehensive geriatric assessment by relevant health providers
including allied health professionals to tailor treatment according to
patient’s needs.
A prospective cohort study showed that orthogeriatric approach
improved hip fracture outcomes e.g. shorter time to surgery (OR=2.62,
95% CI 1.40 to 4.91), shorter length of hospitalisation (p=0.045) and
lower one-year mortality (OR=0.31, 95% CI 0.10 to 0.96) compared
with standard orthopaedic care.34, level II-2
•
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
Comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) is a multidisciplinary
diagnostic and treatment process that addresses the medical,
psychosocial and functional limitations of the frail older patients. This
is performed with the help of a coordinated team to provide a rapid
optimisation of fitness for surgery, early identification of individual goals
to recover independence and the sustenance of long-term well-being.
A Cochrane systematic review showed that CGA reduced delirium
rates (RR=0.75, 95% CI 0.60 to 0.94) and discharge to an increased
level of care (RR=0.71, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.92) for the older patients with
hip fracture during their hospitalisation.35, level I In another meta-analysis
on a similar group of study population admitted to a surgical service,
interdisciplinary approach, compared with routine orthopaedic care,
showed that patients post-operatively:36, level I
 regained the same activities of daily living (ADL) performance
level as before fracture at three months (OR=2.34, 95% CI 1.53
to 3.29) and 12 months (OR=1.76, 95% CI 1.11 to 2.78)
 regained the same level of walking ability at three months
(OR=1.84, 95% CI 1.42 to 2.39) and 12 months (OR=2.17, 95%
CI 1.52 to 3.10)
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
 were discharged from hospital to the same place of residence
(OR=1.67, 95% CI 1.26 to 2.21)
However, randomised controlled trials (RCTs) had illustrated that the
use of CGA in patient above 60 years old with GHF did not show any
difference in length of stay37, level I and in-patient morbidity or mortality
up to 12 months of follow-up post-surgery.36, level I There was also no
difference with regards to readmission rates.35, level I
Refer to Appendix 4 on Components of CGA.
Recommendation 4
• Comprehensive geriatric assessment should be performed by the
attending physician for all frail* geriatric patients with hip fracture.
*Frailty is an aging-related syndrome of physiological decline,
characterised by marked vulnerability to adverse health outcomes.38 - 39, level III
•
Assessment of delirium
Delirium is a common complication among older patients with hip
fractures as these patients often suffer from various co-morbidities
and have poor compensatory capacity. The assessment of delirium
can be conducted using validated tools e.g. 4AT Delirium Detection
Tool. Meta-analyses of cohort studies on older patients with post-hip
fracture surgery showed that significant predictors for incident delirium
included those aged >80 years old and living in institutional residential
care.40 - 41, level II-2
Risk of delirium increases in those with co-morbidities e.g.
visual impairment, depression, stroke,40, level II-2 cardiac failure and
dementia.40 - 41, level II-2 In addition, those with post-operative infection
e.g. pneumonia or urinary tract infection40, level II-2 and the use of
morphine41, level II-2 also have increased risk of developing delirium.
Therefore, it is important to closely monitor for delirium and institute
delirium prevention and treatment strategies for the older patients with
hip fracture, as it has been shown that patients with hip fracture who
develop delirium have an increased perioperative, 30-day and overall
mortality at follow-up.42, level II-2
•
Optimum nutritional support
Optimal nutrition is important for recovery following a hip fracture.
Older adults with hip fractures are often undernourished or at risk
of malnutrition on admission to the hospital. Poor nutritional status
is associated with unfavourable outcomes following hip fracture e.g.
increased risk of post-operative complications, impaired post-operative
rehabilitation and functional recovery, and mortality.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Mini Nutritional Assessment-Short Form (MNA-SF) is a nutritional
assessment tool that can predict mortality in older adult undergoing
surgery for hip fractures as shown by a meta-analysis of cohort studies
where patients with low MNA-SF scores had a higher risk of mortality
compared with those with higher scores (OR=3.61, 95% CI 1.70 to
7.70).43, level II-2
Two meta-analyses of low grade RCTs reported that patients with hip
fracture who received oral nutritional supplementation had reduced
post-operative complications compared with those receiving standard
care. The interventions were:44 - 45, level I
 oral multinutrient feeds that provided non-protein energy, protein,
vitamins and minerals given within the first month following hip
fracture (RR=0.71, 95% CI 0.59 to 0.86)
 protein-based oral nutrition supplements given pre-operatively
(OR=0.48, 95% CI 0.26 to 0.89)
In terms of mortality, there were no significant differences in the risk
reported between the two groups.
NICE guidelines on nutrition support for adults recommends that
healthcare professionals should ensure that overall nutrient support is
offered peri-operatively to all patients.46
Recommendation 5
• Oral nutritional support should be considered for all patients with
geriatic hip fractures.
•
Safe haemoglobin level
Hip fractures put the patients at higher risk of blood loss as a
consequence of the fracture itself or from the surgical intervention
rendered to them. Judicious use of red blood cell transfusion is pertinent
to minimise the risk related to this procedure.
A Cochrane systemic review of six RCTs compared the liberal red
blood cell transfusion thresholds (10 g/dL) and restrictive transfusion
thresholds (8 g/ dL) in surgery for hip fracture. The analysis on patients
with mean age range of 81 - 87 years old showed:47, level I
 no difference in mortality post-hip fracture surgery -
- at 30 days (RR=0.92, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.26)
- at 60 days (RR=1.08, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.44)
 no difference in functional recovery at 60 days (RR=1.00, 95% CI
0.87 to 1.15)
 no difference in post-operative morbidity e.g.
- thromboembolism stroke
- wound infection
- respiratory infection
- new diagnosis of congestive heart failure
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
However, the study found a 41% lower risk of myocardial infarction in
the liberal group (RR=0.59, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.96). The primary papers
were graded as low quality.
• Ideally, a haemoglobin (Hb) level of ≥10 g/dL is aimed for surgery
on GHF. However, patients with Hb 8 - 10 g/dL may undergo the
surgery if they are asymptomatic of anaemia and with no underlying
ischemic heart disease, provided that blood is available in operating
theatre.
•
Prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism
Perioperative immobility in GHF places the patients at risk of developing
venous thromboembolism (VTE) which comprises of deep venous
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. These may lead to significant
mortality, morbidity and financial burdens to the patient and the
carers. Existing international guidelines recommend the use of either
mechanical prophylaxis with intermittent pneumatic compression and
potent chemoprophylaxis especially in those with high risk of VTE.
However, there is a scarcity of evidence on effectiveness and safety of
any specific chemoprophylaxis.14, 48, 49
An RCT compared the effectiveness and safety of rivaroxaban, low
molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and sequential therapy of LMWH and
rivaroxaban in post-surgery GHF. There was no significant difference in
the incidence of VTE between the three arms. However, both LMWH
therapy and sequential therapy had significantly lower post-operative
drainage.50, level I
In a large cohort study on the use of anticoagulants in post-GHF
surgery, enoxaparin and apixaban had no significant difference in
90-day VTE risk, whereas warfarin had greater odds of 90-day VTE
compared with apixaban (OR=1.58, 95% CI 1.28 to 1.96). Apixaban
also had significantly half the odds of transfusions compared with
enoxaparin.51, level II-2
In the local CPG on Prevention and Treatment of Venous
Thromboembolism, LMWH has been recommended as one of the
chemoprophylaxis in patients with hip fracture surgery.52 Recent
guidelines suggest duration of post-operative VTE prophylaxis to be 4 -
5 weeks for either an anti-coagulant (LMWH, direct oral anticoagulants
(DOACs), warfarin) or anti-platelet (aspirin only) according to individual
deep vein thrombosis risk assessment.53, 54
There is no evidence on prophylaxis VTE on GHF alone. The
recommendation formulated is based on extrapolation of evidences on
other study population.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Recommendation 6
• Patients with geriatric hip fracture should be given venous
thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis (chemoprophylaxis and/or
mechanical prophylaxis)
 Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is the preferred choice for
chemoprophylaxis peri-operatively.
 Post-operatively VTE prophylaxis should be extended up to
4 - 5 weeks with either an anti-coagulant (LMWH, direct oral
anticoagulants, warfarin) or anti-platelet (aspirin only) according
to individual deep vein thrombosis risk assessment.
•
Plan for post-operative care
Patients with GHF usually have multiple co-morbidities, hence the postoperative care after their major hip surgery is an important consideration
to optimise medical care. However, the decision to transfer these
patients post-operatively to a critical care setting e.g. Intensive Care
Unit (ICU) usually causes delay to the surgery because of limited
resources in most healthcare institutions. Therefore, evidence plays an
important role to identify patients who truly require ICU admission postoperatively that will benefit their clinical outcomes.
A large retrospective cohort study in a critical care unit in the United
Kingdom investigated the epidemiology, critical care interventions
and outcomes of patients with hip fracture. The significant reasons
for critical care admission (respiratory and cardiovascular support)
and its timing (before surgery or two days after surgery) were major
determinants of mortality. In fact, many patients admitted to this unit
required no organ support but monitoring and, attention to oxygenation
and fluid balance.55, level II-2
Another prospective cohort study identified that American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) status and prolonged ICU stay (>3 days) were
independent risk factors affecting 6- and 12-month mortality, and nursing
care dependency.56, level II-2 There was also no significant difference in
early post-operative mortality rates between patients admitted to ICU
vs orthopaedic ward after surgery on ASA III patients operated under
spinal anaesthesia when patients had been evaluated thoroughly in the
pre-operative period.57, level III
Identifying risk factors for ICU admission is important. A study found
that age (≥80 years), pre-operative pulmonary disease, peri-operative
anaemia (haemoglobin <8 g/dL), peri-operative lactic acid level (>2
mmol/L), ASA classification (III/IV) and types of anaesthesia were
independent risk factors for GHF requiring transfer to ICU postoperatively. Using these variables, a risk stratification index (RSI) was
developed to guide ICU assignment. Patients with RSI scores of >4
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
were required for ICU admission. Thus, using this index significantly
reduced the number of patients transferred to ICU post-operatively
and unplanned transfers from the general ward to the ICU within 24
hours.58, level III
In a large retrospective cohort, a clinical nomogram was developed
using significant predictors of unplanned ICU admission after hip
fracture surgery which were age, coronary heart disease, chronic heart
failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Parkinson disease,
serum creatinine and albumin concentration. It was validated and had
shown good discrimination on unplanned ICU admission with AUC of
0.96 (95% CI 0.91 to 0.99).59, level II-2
• Pre-operative evaluation of GHF patients is important in identifying
those who require ICU admission post-operatively. Risk factors e.g.
increasing age, cardiac and pulmonary disease, are important to be
identified in determining the need for ICU admission.
6.2 Safe Anaesthesia
a.
Methods of anesthesia
In GHF patients, method of anesthesia is important in assisting a safe
surgery. The option for either regional or general anesthesia is often
debated as the method of choice for lowest mortality and post-operative
complications.
Two studies comprising of a Cochrane systematic review of moderate
quality RCTs and a large RCT compared regional anesthesia using
neuroaxial block and general anesthesia and, found no significant
difference in post-operative short-term mortality. Other secondary
outcomes e.g pneumonia, acute myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular
accident, acute confusional state and ability to walk independently were
also not significantly different.60 - 61, level I
NICE guidelines recommend to offer a choice of spinal or general
anaesthesia after discussing the risks and benefits to the patients.25
However, careful delivery of anaesthesia may be of greater importance
than the type of anaesthesia delivered.62, level III
In a secondary analysis of outcomes on a large post-surgery hip fracture,
the risk of death increased as blood pressure fell. The OR for mortality
within five days after surgery was 0.983 (95% CI 0.973 to 0.994) for
each 5 mmHg intra-operative increment in systolic blood pressure
and 0.980 (98% CI 0.967 to 0.993) for each mmHg increment in mean
pressure. The equivalent ORs for 30-day mortality were 0.968 (95% CI
0.951 to 0.985) and 0.976 (95% CI 0.964 to 0.988) respectively.63, level III
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Recommendation 7
• Patients with geriatric hip fracture may be offered regional or general
anaesthesia for hip surgery according to individual’s risk and benefit
assessment.
 Caution has to be taken to avoid hypotension intra-operatively.
b.
Patients on anti-platelets
Patients with GHF and on anti-platelets, especially clopidogrel, are at
risk of bleeding during surgery. Surgery will usually be delayed for 5
- 7 days after withholding the drug. However, delaying the surgery is
associated with increased risks of complications and mortality.
A meta-analysis of 24 cohort studies looked into the outcomes of surgery
on GHF patients with anti-platelets. In the first analysis of early surgery
(<5 days), the risk of blood transfusion is higher in patients with antiplatelets compared with those without anti-platelets (OR=1.21, 95% CI
1.01 to 1.44). There were no differences in other outcomes including
mortality and length of stay. For the second analysis on patients with
anti-platelets, early surgery had lower mortality (OR=0.43, 95% CI 0.23
to 0.79) and shorter length of stay (MD= -6.05, 95% CI -7.06 to -5.04)
than delayed surgery (>5 days).64, level II-2 The quality of the primary
studies was high.
Two case-control studies showed that, by withholding clopidogrel for
<5 days in patients with GHF, there was no significant differences in
estimated perioperative blood loss65 - 66, level II-2 and blood transfusion
rate.65, level II-2 One of the studies also showed no significant
differences in perioperative complications, 30-day mortality and
one-year mortality.65, level II-2 The other study revealed no significant
difference in intraoperative blood loss according to different surgical
procedures.66, level II-2
As there is no evidence on the difference in outcomes between
spinal and general anaesthesia, for patients on anti-platelet and anticoagulation who have contraindications to spinal anaesthesia, general
anaesthesia may be administered for them.
For guidelines on the use of neuraxial bocks in patients on antiplatelet
agents and anticoagulants, refer to Appendix 5.
6.3 Surgery
Out of all GHF, the proportion of extracapsular and intracapsular
fractures were 60% and 40% respectively.67, level II-2 Fracture neck of
femur can be classified using Garden’s Classification as shown in
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Figure 1 (Type 1 and Type 2 are nondisplaced fractures while Type 3
and Type 4 are displaced fractures).
Figure 1: Garden’s classification neck of femur fracture
a.
Arthroplasty in displaced neck of femur fracture
The geriatric neck of femur fracture is most commonly displaced
at presentation. Surgical options include total hip replacement and
hemiarthroplasty. The type of surgical intervention depends on
assessment of the patient’s:
• cognitive status
• pre-fracture mobility
• co-morbidities and frailty
Two meta-analyses on geriatric hip fracture showed that cemented
femoral stem was associated with less implant-related complications by
60 - 70% and reoperation rate by 40 - 50% compared with cementless
stem. There was no difference in mortality at three months. The
quality of primary papers in the two meta-analyses was moderate to
high.68 - 69, level I
Comparison between total hip arthroplasty (THA) and hemiarthroplasty
(HA) in patients more than 70 years old with hip fracture was studied
in two meta-analyses. THA had significantly lower risk of erosion rate
but higher dislocation rate.70 - 71, level I Apart from that, revision rate was
reduced in HA for RCTs <5 years follow-up (OR=2.19, 95% CI 10.9 to
4.40) and in THA for RCTs >5 years follow-up (OR=0.25, 95% CI 0.12 to
0.53).71, level I The functional Harris Hip Score (HHS) was higher in THA
T
y
p
e
1
T
y
p
e
2
T
y
p
e
3
T
y
p
e
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
up to five years.70, level I The primary papers of the two meta-analyses
were of moderate to high quality.
NICE recommends total hip replacement for people with a displaced
neck of femur fracture who meet all of the following criteria:25
• able to walk independently outdoors with or without the use of a
stick
• no co-morbidity that makes the procedure unsuitable for them
• expected to be able to carry out ADL independently beyond two
years
Recommendation 8
• Cemented stem should be offered for arthroplasty in displaced neck
of femur fracture in geriatric patients.
b.
Surgery in non-displaced fracture neck of femur
Among patients with intracapsular hip fracture, between 5% and 15% of
them have an undisplaced fracture.25
A meta-analysis of 29 cohort studies on patients with undisplaced
(Garden type I or Garden type II) femoral neck fracture), internal fixation
had a higher union rate than conservative treatment (92.6% vs 68.8%;
p<0.001). The rates of secondary displacement, non-union and bed
rest-related complications were also significantly lower. Although the
rate of avascular necrosis was higher in the conservative treatment,
the result was non-significance. Most primary studies were moderate in
methodological quality assessment.72, level II-2
In a multicentre RCT on nondisplaced femoral neck fracture,
hemiarthroplasty had better mobility (MD=6.2 seconds, 95% CI 1.9 to
10.5) and less major reoperation rate (p=0.002) compared with internal
fixation.73, level I In another RCT, arthroplasty was associated with a
reduction in the odds of mortality within 24 months of injury compared
with internal fixation in patients with displaced femoral neck fracture
(OR=0.56, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.72).74, level I
• In patients with stable (impacted/non-displaced) femoral neck
fractures, hemiarthroplasty, internal fixation or non-operative care
may be considered for surgical treatment.14
Recommendation 9
• Arthroplasty is the preferred choice in non-displaced fracture neck of
femur in geriatric patients for early full weight-bearing ambulation.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
c.
Mode of fixation for intertrochanteric fracture of femur
Intertrochanteric fractures can be categorised into stable and unstable
fractures. Pertrochanteric fracture has been designated code 31A
according to Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen Foundation
and Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification.75, level III
These fractures can be further subdivided into stable (31A1) and
unstable (31A2 & 31A3) fracture patterns. Figure 2 shows stable
intertrochanteric femur fractures.
Figure 2. Stable intertrochanteric femur fracture pattern
(31A1 and its subtypes)
A fracture is considered unstable in the presence of one or more of the
following features as seen in Figure 4 and 5.
i. incompetent lateral wall (<20.5 mm) and more than one
intermediate fragment
ii. incompetent lateral wall (<20.5 mm) and posteromedial buttress
fracture
iii. reverse oblique fracture pattern
iv. subtrochanteric fracture extension
The lateral wall thickness is taken at a point 3 cm below the innominate
tubercle of the greater trochanter angled 135○ upward to the fracture
line on the anteroposterior radiographs. Thickness must be less than
20.5 mm to be considered an 31A2 fracture. Refer to Figure 3.
Figure 3. Measurement of lateral wall thickness (d)
Subgroups:
Isolated single trochanter fracture
31A1.1*
Two-part fracture
31A1.2
Lateral wall intact (>20.5 mm) fracture
31A1.3
d
3 cm
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Figure 4. Unstable intertrochanteric femur fracture pattern with
compromised lateral wall and posteromedial buttress fracture
(31A2 and its subtypes)
Figure 5. Unstable intertrochanteric femur fracture with
reverse oblique pattern (31A3 and its subtypes)
In intertrochanteric femur fracture, the proximal femur blood supply
is usually preserved and therefore there is a higher chance of union
compared to femoral neck fracture. Intertrochanteric fractures are
often treated with either a cephalomedullary nail (CMN) e.g. proximal
femoral nail (PFN) or extramedullary device (EMD) e.g. dynamic hip
screw (DHS). In recent years, CMN has become more popular as it is
biomechanically stronger compared with EMD. Refer to Figure 6 on
Features of DHS and PFN.
(a) (b)
With 1 intermediate fragment
31A2.2
With 2 or more intermediate fragments
31A2.3
Simple oblique fracture
31A3.1
Simple transverse fracture
31A3.2
Wedge or multifragmentary fracture
31A3.3
Source: AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosvnthesefragen) Surgery Reference.
Features of DHS and PFN. 2023. Copright by AO Foundation, Switzerland
[Available at: https://surgeryreference.aofoundation.org].
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
(a) Picture of an intertrochanteric fracture with a DHS in-situ. Proximal
femur has been partially removed to show the internal position of
the DHS.
(b) Picture of a PFN. This cephalomedullary device is inserted into the
proximal femur.
Figure 6. Features of DHS and PFN
In a meta-analysis of 14 RCTs on patients >60 years old who had either
proximal femoral nail anti-rotation (PFNA), Gamma nail or DHS for
peritrochanteric femur fractures, there was no difference in mortality,
operative time and risks of complication e.g. pneumonia and wound
infection between the three interventions. However, PFNA compared
with DHS had lower:76, level I
• operative blood loss (MD= -253.86, 95% CI -270.25 to -237.47)
• fixation failure (MD=0.20, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.59)
Jadad score showed moderate quality of primary papers in the metaanalysis.
A recent Cochrane systematic review comparing CMN and EMD for
intertrochanteric femur fracture in older adults found no significant
difference in the following outcomes:77, level I
• functional status at four months
• delirium
• deep infections
• unplanned return to theatre
• mortality at four and 12 months
However, CMN had less:
• superficial infections (RR=0.71, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.96)
• non-union (RR = 0.55, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.96)
but more:
• intra-operative fractures (RR=2.94, 95% CI 1.65 to 5.24)
• post-operative fractures (RR=3.62, 95% CI 2.07 to 6.33)
Most of the primary papers used early generations of CMN implant.
GRADE gave a moderate quality to the evidence used in the review.
A meta-analysis of 12 RCTs compared PFN and DHS for throchanteric
fractures AO 31A2 and 31A3 in older patients and found that the former
was associated with:78, level I
• shorter operative time (MD= -9.49 minutes, 95% CI -18.74 to
-0.25)
• less intraoperative blood loss (MD= -158.2 mL, 95% CI -203.05 to
-113.34)
The level of evidence based on GRADE were low and very low
respectively. Apart from that, PFN had lower risk of non-union, implant
failure and revision surgery although they were non-significant. The
evidence level was moderate for these outcomes.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
In another meta-analysis of 11 RCTs on unstable femoral
intertrochanteric fracture AO 31A2 and 31A3 in patients older than 60
years old, comparison between CMN with DHS found no significant
difference in many outcomes including operative time, blood transfusion,
adverse events (AE) and hospital stay. However, CMN had:79, level I
• better functional scores (SMD= 0.43, 95 % CI 0.14 to 0.73)
• less blood loss (SMD= -0.94, 95 % CI -1.77 to -0.11)
CMN also showed lower risk in screw cut out, non-union, implant failure
and re-operation rate although they were non-significant. The quality of
the primary papers was moderate.
AAOS guidelines recommend DHS or intramedullary nail (IMN) for
stable intertrochanteric fractures while IMN for the unstable fractures.14
NICE guidelines recommend extramedullary implants e.g. a sliding hip
screw in preference to an intramedullary nail with trochanteric fractures
and including the lesser trochanter except reverse oblique.25
Recommendation 10
• In geriatric hip fractures,
 cephalomedullary nail (CMN) or extramedullary device may be
offered for stable intertrochanteric fracture
 CMN is the preferred choice for unstable intertrochanteric fracture
d.
Mode of fixation for subtrochanteric fracture of femur
Subtrochanteric femur fractures are defined as fractures of the proximal
femur that occur within 5 cm below the lesser trochanter. They occur
in the older adults from low energy trauma e.g. fall from standing. The
fractures are unique due to its deforming anatomical forces and often
difficult to manage. They are mainly treated with extramedullary plates
or intramedullary nails, with the latter being more biological and have
become the gold standard in the treatment of this fracture pattern.
In a meta-analysis of five RCTs on elderly patients with subtrochanteric
femur fracture, CMN had lower fracture fixation complications compared
with extramedullary device in terms of:80, level I
• revision rate (RR=0.17, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.60)
• fixation failure rate (RR=0.24, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.89)
• non-union rate (RR=0.23, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.81)
However, there was no difference in neck of femur fracture rate and,
intra-operative parameters and post-operative complications. The
quality of the primary papers was generally moderate.
A mixed cohort study compared treatment of subtrochanteric fractures
using CMN with open technique cerclage wiring and close CMN
technique in geriatric patients. The former was significantly better in the
following outcomes:81, level II-2
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
• EQ-5D (health-related quality of life) Index at 12 months
• Jensen Index at 12 and 18 months
• shorter length of stay (average of two days)
• better fracture reduction
• shorter time to union
However, duration of surgery was longer (average of 16 minutes;
p=0.024). There was also no difference in one-year mortality and
complications rate.
• CMN is the preferred surgical fixation technique in subtrochanteric
fracture in older adults.
 Certain fractures configuration may require additional cerclage
wiring to improve fracture reduction and shorten time to union.
e.
Appropriate waiting time for surgery
Waiting time is an important issue in GHF management but there is no
definitive time on proper time of surgery. The waiting time is very much
influenced by the availability of operation theatre (OT), co-morbidities of
the patients and human resource factors.
In a large meta-analysis of 28 prospective cohort studies on impact of
surgery timing in elderly hip fracture patients:82, level II-2
• comparison surgery within 24 hours vs surgery after 24 hours
 no significant difference in short-term and long-term mortality
 mortality was slightly significantly reduced from surgery within
24 hours in those with co-morbidities
• comparison surgery within 48 hours vs surgery after 48 hours
 20% smaller risk of long-term mortality i.e within one year
(RR=0.80, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.97) but no difference in short-term
mortality (within one month)
 in patients 90 years and above with POSSUM scores of ≥42,
delayed surgery (after 48 hours) had significantly higher
mortality
 based on Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scores, 1-year
mortality increased significantly in group 1 (dependence) and
group 2 (intermediate level) with HR of 1.14 (95% CI 1.06
to 1.22) and 1.21 (95% CI 1.09 to 1.34) respectively but no
difference in group 3 (high independence)
In terms of perioperative complications, evidence showed that surgery
within 48 hours was associated with decreased odds of the pressure
ulcers, pneumonia and urinary tract infection. Primary papers used in
the meta-analysis are of mixed quality.
A later meta-analysis on 27 studies comparing early vs delayed surgery
on proximal femoral fractures in elderly patients showed the following
outcomes:83, level I
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
• early surgery reduced perioperative complication with OR of 0.57
(95% CI 0.35 to 0.95) for surgery within 72 hours, 0.39 (95% CI
0.19 to 0.79) for surgery within 48 hours and 0.59 (95% CI 0.44 to
0.78) for surgery within 24 hours than later surgery
• early surgery also reduced mortality with RR of 0.77 (95% CI 0.65
to 0.93) for surgery within 24 and 0.72 (95% CI 0.71 to 0.73) for
surgery within 48 hours compared with later surgery
The quality of the primary papers was moderate to high.
A recent cross-sectional study showed that operation waiting time
of >36 hours was significantly associated with increased risks of
pneumonia, myocardial infarction and heart failure in geriatric patients
with hip fracture but not with 30-day mortality.84, level III
Guidelines by AAOS states that hip fracture surgery within 24 - 48 hours
of admission may be associated with better outcomes.14
Recommendation 11
• Surgery should be performed within 48 hours of admission* in
medically stable geriatric hip fracture patients.
*after physical consultation by orthopaedic team
f.
Analgesics in post-operative period
Inadequate pain relief after hip fracture surgery in older adults may
be associated with prolonged bed rest, disruption in physical therapy
and delay in mobilisation. These potentially increased the risks of
thromboembolism, functional impairment and longer hospitalisation.
Oral analgesia may be offered post-operatively for pain relief.
Multimodal techniques were compared with control for perioperative
pain relief on elderly patients undergoing hip fracture surgery in a wellconducted RCT. They involved using different analgesic agents that act
on different sites of pain pathway i.e. pre-emptive oral analgesia with
intra-articular and periarticular injections of local anaesthetic agents
during total joint arthroplasty. The interventions significantly reduced
post-operative pain (day one and four) and fentanyl consumption.
There was no difference in incidence of nausea, vomiting and delirium
between the groups.85, level I
Regional anaesthesia with peripheral nerve blocks e.g fascia iliaca
compartment block (FICB) is another analgesic technique that can
be used to provide superior pain relief for pain management after
hip surgery in the older adults. In a systematic review of 27 RCTs,
FICB application was proven to be beneficial in pain reduction perioperatively. It also showed:86, level I
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
• reduction in risk of perioperative complications e.g. delirium,
pruritus, nausea and vomiting
• decrease in length of hospital stay
• acceleration of functional recovery
The quality of the primary papers was generally moderate.
Recommendation 12
• Analgesia should be provided peri-operatively in geriatric hip
fractures.
 Multimodal analgesia is the preferred choice.
Refer to Appendix 4 on Principles of Analgesic Prescriptions in the
Elderly.
6.4 Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation addresses the impact of a health condition on a person’s
everyday life by optimising their function and reducing their experience
of disability. Anyone may need rehabilitation at some point in their life
due to injury/illness or simply because declining function with advancing
age. In relation to these, GHF result in impaired mobility and ability
to perform activities of daily living (ADL). NICE recommends to offer
people a physiotherapy assessment and mobilisation on the day after
surgery unless medically or surgically contraindicated.25
An RCT assessed different post-operative outcomes among patients
aged ≥70 years old with femoral neck fracture. Compared with
conventional care, multidisciplinary intervention was more effective in
terms of:87, level I
• reduction of fall [IRR of 0.38 (95% CI 0.20 to 0.76) for total sample
and 0.07 (95% CI 0.01 to 0.57) for dementia sample]
• shorter post-operative in-hospital stay (p=0.028)
• significantly lesser post-operative complications e.g. delirium,
delirious days, urinary tract infections, sleeping disturbances,
nutritional problems and decubitus ulcers
A systematic review of moderate quality mixed studies on the elderly
looked into the effectiveness of different interventions and settings in
hip fracture rehabilitation. The findings were:88, level I
• clinical pathway, a multidisciplinary treatment approach provided
within acute care setting, improved functional recovery, decreased
length of stay and led to more favourable discharge destination
• early supported discharge during acute care reduced risk of
fall (improved falls efficacy) and improved short-term functional
recovery at three months
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
• occupational therapy combined with physical therapy in acute
care improved short-term functional recovery at two months
• weight-bearing exercise for inpatient setting improved ambulation
and reduced requirement for walking aid
A meta-analysis on GHF compared multidisciplinary rehabilitation and
usual care post-operatively. The former was more effective in improving
ADL/physical function (SMD=0.32, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.47) and mobility
(SMD=0.32, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.52). However, there was no difference
in survival or chance of living in one’s own home after discharge. The
quality of the primary papers was generally moderate based on Pedro
scale.89, level I
Comprehensive geriatric care (CGC-multidisciplinary team approach)
when compared with orthopaedic care alone in an RCT of geriatric
patients after hip fracture surgery showed significantly better:90, level I
• upright time and number of upright events on day 4
• Short Physical Performance Battery scores on day 5
However, Cumulated Ambulation score did not significantly differ
between the groups.
In a recent and large Cochrane systematic review on older adults with
post-hip fracture surgery, multidisciplinary rehabilitation (MDR) was
compared with usual care. The former was more effective in preventing
death or deterioration of functional status leading to increased
dependency/admission to institutional care, all-cause mortality at
follow-up and readmission rate to the hospital. However, these were not
statistically significant. The quality of the primary papers was generally
moderate.91, level I
In a meta-analysis on older people with post-hip fracture surgery, OT
post-operatively improved health perception and emotion compared
with conventional care without OT (SMD=0.391, 95% CI 0.104 to 0.678).
It is measured by using Goldberg General Health Questionnaire-28.
However, there was no difference in performance of ADL, physical
function and occurrence of fall. The quality of the primary papers was
generally moderate.92, level I
• Communication between multidisciplinary team members is crucial
to determine suitable timing and level of weight bearing which will
depend on the aspects of hip fracture, types of hip surgery and
findings at the time of surgery.
• Before patient is discharged, review by any members of the
rehabilitation team (doctor/ physiotherapist/occupational therapist)
shall be done to provide education on mobilisation activites and postsurgery function.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Recommendation 13
• Early mobilisation should be advocated as early as on post-operative
day 1, e.g. sitting at the edge of the bed, unless contraindicated.
• Rehabilitation should be offered to all patients with geriatric hip
fracture post-operatively with the aim to improve mobility and
functional recovery.
 A multidisciplinary approach is the preferred choice.
6.5 Discharge Plan and Follow-up
Osteoporotic treatment should be initiated prior to discharge. Bone
mineral density for osteoporosis assessment can be performed before
discharge or during follow-up.
Patients after hip fracture surgery should be followed-up.25 Upon
discharge, patients should be followed-up by the orthopaedic team to
look for surgical site infection, fracture healing (intertrochanteric and
subtrochanteric fractures), joint stiffness and ambulation capability.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
7.
PREVENTION
7.1 Primary Prevention
Prevention of GHF can be directed towards reducing the risk factors as
mentioned in Chapter 2.
•
Prevention of GHF
A Cochrane systematic review showed non-significant results of hip
protectors in reducing hip fracture among participants in nursing/
residential care settings compared with participants in the community.
The adherence to hip protector was at 24 - 80% and the incidence of
skin irritation with hip protectors was at 0 - 5%. Most studies in the
review were generally at low risk of bias for fracture outcomes.93, level I
In another Cochrane systematic review, supplements of vitamin D
and calcium may prevent new hip fracture (RR=0.84, 95% CI 0.74 to
0.96). GRADE assessment showed high quality of evidence in new hip
fracture outcome. However, there was a small but significant increase
in gastrointestinal symptoms and renal disease. This review also found
that there was no increased risk of death from taking calcium and
vitamin D.94, level I
•
Prevention of fall
CDC reports that >95% of GHF are caused by falls.1 Two guidelines
recommend opportunistic screening at least annually on older adults of
their risk of falls during a medical encounter.95 - 96 Three key questions
have good sensitivity in screening risk of falls i.e.95
 Have you fallen in the past year?
 Do you feel unsteady when standing or walking?
 Do you have worries about falling?
All older adults should be advised on falls prevention and physical
activity. Individuals at high risk of falls should be offered a comprehensive
multifactorial falls risk assessment.95 Refer to Assessment of Falls
Risk Factors and Interventions to Reduce Identified Risk Factors
and Algorithm on Risk Stratification, Assessment and Interventions for
Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Appendix 6.
For further information on the management of osteoporosis and fall
prevention, refer to CPG on Management of Osteoporosis (3rd Edition).96
Recommendation 14
• Geriatric population should be screened and assessed for falls risk.
 Education about falls prevention should be offered accordingly.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
7.2 Secondary prevention
Fracture liaison service (FLS) is a coordinated system of care that
streamlines bone health management for an effective follow-up
strategy. FLS identifies patient following a hip fracture, investigates
the patient and initiates appropriate treatment to reduce risk of a
subsequent fracture. The delivery of the service should also incorporate
the integration of primary and secondary/tertiary care.
A meta-analysis which included 16 RCTs looked into the clinical impact
of FLS in predicting outcomes for older persons with osteoporoticrelated fractures. The pooled results of the RCTs showed:97, level I
 a 23% increase in bone mineral density testing
 a 14% increase in initiation of osteoporosis treatment
Although FLS had favourable outcomes in treatment adherence,
reduced risk of re-fractures and reduced mortality but they were not
significant:
 a 22% increase in treatment adherence
 a 5% reduction in absolute risk of re-fracture
 a 3% reduction in mortality
Majority of the RCTs in the meta-analysis were considered of high
quality.
In 2021, the National Osteoporosis Guideline Group had strongly
recommended a multidisciplinary, coordinator-based FLS as a model
of care for fracture prevention on patients who have sustained fragility
fractures.98
• Fracture Liaison Service has become an important component of
management in secondary fracture prevention.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
8.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of this CPG is important as it helps in providing quality
healthcare services based on the best and most recent available
evidence applied to local scenario and expertise. Various factors and
resource implications should be considered for the success of the
uptake in the CPG recommendations.
8.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing the CPG are:
i)
availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and
softcopies)
ii) conferences and updates on or include topics on management of
GHF including those involving professional bodies (e.g. Malaysian
Orthopaedic Association and Malaysian Society of Geriatric
Medicine)
iii) public awareness campaigns on geriatric populations (e.g.
International Day of Older Persons)
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
i)
different levels of care and wide variation in practice due to
expertise, facilities and financial constraints
ii) limited awareness and knowledge in management of GHF among
healthcare providers
iii) lack of awareness of hip fracture injury and its management by the
public
iv) lack of resources in maintaining National Orthopaedic Registry
Malaysia Hip Fracture
8.2 Potential Resource Implications
The resource implications in the management of GHF falls mainly on
the treatment part of the condition. The CPG recommends surgery to
be conducted within 48 hours of admission after physical consultation
by orthopaedic team on medically stable GHF patients. However, this
may not be feasible in view of optimisation of patients, availability of
operating theatre and arrangement to acquire the suitable implant. In
the unstable intertrochanteric fracture, CMN has been recommended
but cost is the hindering factor in obtaining it. Thus, patient may have to
opt for less suitable implant which is DHS.
In line with the key recommendations in this CPG, the following is
proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality management of GHF:
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
*after physical consultation by orthopaedic team and after excluding
those medically unfit for early surgery and refuse surgery
Target of above indicator is at 75% yearly
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage of
patients with
GHF operated
within 48 hours
of admission*
=
Total number of patients with GHF operated
in the same period
Number of patients with GHF operated within
48 hours of admission* in a period
x100%
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
References
1.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Hip Fractures Among Older
Adults. 2016. [Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/falls/hip-fractures.html].
2.
Dhanwal DK, Dennison EM, Harvey NC, et al. Epidemiology of hip fracture:
Worldwide geographic variation. Indian J Orthop. 2011;45(1):15-22.
3.
Lee JK, Khir ASM. The incidence of hip fracture in Malaysians above 50 years of
age: variation in different ethnic groups. APLAR J Rheumatol. 2007 10(4):300-5.
4. Abdullah MAH, Abdullah AT (Eds) (2009). Annual Report of the National
Orthopaedic Registry of Malaysia - Registry, 2009.
5.
Stevenson MD, Davis SE, Kanis JA. The hospitalisation costs and out-patient
costs of fragility fractures. Women’s Health Medicine. 2006;3(4):149-151.
6.
Veronese N, Maggi S. Epidemiology and social costs of hip fracture. Injury.
2018;49(8):1458-1460.
7.
Wolinsky FD, Fitzgerald JF, Stump TE. The effect of hip fracture on mortality,
hospitalization, and functional status: a prospective study. Am J Public Health.
1997;87(3):398-403.
8.
Panula J, Pihlajamaki H, Mattila VM, et al. Mortality and cause of death in hip
fracture patients aged 65 or older: a population-based study. BMC Musculoskelet
Disord. 2011;12:105.
9.
Okike K, Chan PH, Paxton EW. Effect of Surgeon and Hospital Volume on Morbidity
and Mortality After Hip Fracture. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2017;99(18):1547-1553.
10. Tan LT, Wong SJ, Kwek EB. Inpatient cost for hip fracture patients managed with
an orthogeriatric care model in Singapore. Singapore Med J. 2017;58(3):139-144.
11. Tay E. Hip fractures in the elderly: operative versus nonoperative management.
Singapore Med J. 2016;57(4):178-81.
12. Lisk R, Yeong K. Reducing mortality from hip fractures: a systematic quality
improvement programme. BMJ Qual Improv Rep. 2014;3(1).
13. Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP).
Demographic Changes in Asia and the Pacific - Malaysia. [Available at: https://
www.population-trends-asiapacific.org/data/MYS].
14. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Management of Hip Fractures
in Older Adults Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guideline. Rosemont: AAOS;
2021.
15. Cassel CK, Leipzig RM, Cohen HJ, et al. Geriatric Medicine: An Evidence-Based
Approach 4th Edition. New York Springer; 2003.
16. Gallo JJ, Bogner HR, Fulmer T, et al. Handbook of Geriatric Assessment 4th
Edition. Sudbury, Massachussetts: Jones & Bartlett Publishers; 2006
17. Liu S, Zhu Y, Chen W, et al. Risk factors for the second contralateral hip
fracture in elderly patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Rehabil.
2015;29(3):285-94.
18. Zhu Y, Chen W, Sun T, et al. Epidemiological characteristics and outcome in
elderly patients sustaining non-simultaneous bilateral hip fracture: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2015;15(1):11-8.
19. Chen H, Ma J, Liu A, et al. The association between sarcopenia and fracture
in middle-aged and elderly people: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
cohort studies. Injury. 2020;51(4):804-811.
20. Denk K, Lennon S, Gordon S, et al. The association between decreased hand
grip strength and hip fracture in older people: A systematic review. Exp Gerontol.
2018;111:1-9.
21. Panahande B, Sadeghi A, Parohan M. Alternative healthy eating index and risk
of hip fracture: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. J Hum
Nutr Diet. 2019;32(1):98-107.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
22. Wu ZJ, Zhao P, Liu B, et al. Effect of Cigarette Smoking on Risk of Hip Fracture
in Men: A Meta-Analysis of 14 Prospective Cohort Studies. PLoS One.
2016;11(12):e0168990.
23. Heikal S, Riou P, Jones L. The use of computed tomography in identifying
radiologically occult hip fractures in the elderly. Ann R Coll Surg Engl.
2014;96(3):234-7.
24. Haj-Mirzaian A, Eng J, Khorasani R, et al. Use of Advanced Imaging for
Radiographically Occult Hip Fracture in Elderly Patients: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis. Radiology. 2020;296(3):521-531.
25. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hip fracture: Management.
London: NICE; 2023.
26. Kim SJ, Park HS, Lee DW. Outcome of nonoperative treatment for hip fractures
in elderly patients: A systematic review of recent literature. J Orthop Surg (Hong
Kong). 2020;28(2):2309499020936848.
27. Titler MG, Herr K, Schilling ML, et al. Acute pain treatment for older adults
hospitalized with hip fracture: current nursing practices and perceived barriers.
Appl Nurs Res. 2003;16(4):211-27.
28. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Guideline: 3rd Edition.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2018
29. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Guidelines for Pain Management in the Elderly 1st
Edition. Putrajaya: MoH; 2018.
30. Newman B, McCarthy L, Thomas PW, et al. A comparison of pre-operative nerve
stimulator-guided femoral nerve block and fascia iliaca compartment block in
patients with a femoral neck fracture. Anaesthesia. 2013;68(9):899-903.
31. Guay J, Kopp S. Peripheral nerve blocks for hip fractures in adults. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2020;11(11):CD001159.
32. Handoll HH, Queally JM, Parker MJ. Pre-operative traction for hip fractures in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(12):CD000168.
33. Endo J, Yamaguchi S, Saito M, et al. Efficacy of preoperative skin traction for
hip fractures: a single-institution prospective randomized controlled trial of skin
traction versus no traction. J Orthop Sci. 2013;18(2):250-5.
34. Baroni M, Serra R, Boccardi V, et al. The orthogeriatric comanagement improves
clinical outcomes of hip fracture in older adults. Osteoporos Int. 2019;30(4):907916.
35. Eamer G, Taheri A, Chen SS, et al. Comprehensive geriatric assessment for
older people admitted to a surgical service. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2018;1(1):CD012485.
36. Wang H, Li C, Zhang Y, et al. The influence of inpatient comprehensive geriatric
care on elderly patients with hip fractures: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015;8(11):19815-30.
37. Lin SN, Su SF, Yeh WT. Meta-analysis: Effectiveness of Comprehensive
Geriatric Care for Elderly Following Hip Fracture Surgery. West J Nurs Res.
2020;42(4):293-305.
38. Dent E, Lien C, Lim WS, et al. The Asia-Pacific Clinical Practice Guidelines for
the Management of Frailty. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2017;18(7):564-575.
39. Morley JE, Vellas B, van Kan GA, et al. Frailty consensus: a call to action. J Am
Med Dir Assoc. 2013;14(6):392-7.
40. Smith TO, Cooper A, Peryer G, et al. Factors predicting incidence of postoperative delirium in older people following hip fracture surgery: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2017;32(4):386-396.
41. Yang Y, Zhao X, Dong T, et al. Risk factors for postoperative delirium following
hip fracture repair in elderly patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Aging Clin Exp Res. 2017;29(2):115-126.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
42. Bai J, Liang Y, Zhang P, et al. Association between postoperative delirium and
mortality in elderly patients undergoing hip fractures surgery: a meta-analysis.
Osteoporos Int. 2020;31(2):317-326.
43. Liu N, Lv L, Jiao J, et al. Association between nutritional indices and mortality
after hip fracture: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Rev Med
Pharmacol Sci. 2023;6:2297-2304.
44. Lai WY, Chiu YC, Lu KC, et al. Beneficial effects of preoperative oral nutrition
supplements on postoperative outcomes in geriatric hip fracture patients:
A PRISMA-compliant systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled studies. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021;100(47):e27755.
45. Avenell A, Smith TO, Curtain JP, et al. Nutritional supplementation for hip fracture
aftercare in older people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;11(11):CD001880.
46. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Nutrition support for adults: oral
nutrition support, enteral tube feeding and parenteral nutrition. London: NICE;
2017.
47. Brunskill SJ, Millette SL, Shokoohi A, et al. Red blood cell transfusion for
people undergoing hip fracture surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015(4):CD009699.
48. Anderson DR, Morgano GP, Bennett C, et al. American Society of Hematology
2019 guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: prevention
of venous thromboembolism in surgical hospitalized patients. Blood Adv.
2019;3(23):3898-3944.
49. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Venous thromboembolism
in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital-acquired deep vein thrombosis or
pulmonary embolism. London: NICE; 2019.
50. Tang Y, Wang K, Shi Z, et al. A RCT study of Rivaroxaban, low-molecularweight heparin, and sequential medication regimens for the prevention of
venous thrombosis after internal fixation of hip fracture. Biomed Pharmacother.
2017;92:982-988.
51. Joo PY, Modrak M, Park N, et al. Comparing Venous Thromboembolism
Prophylactic Agents After Hip Fracture Surgery: A National Database Study. J
Am Acad Orthop Surg Glob Res Rev. 2022;6(12).
52. Malaysian Society of Haematology. Prevention and Treatment of Venous
Thromboembolism. Petaling Jaya: MSH; 2013.
53. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Venous thromboembolism in
adults. London: NICE; 2021.
54. American College of Chest Physicians. Prevention of VTE in Orthopedic
Surgery Patients. Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th
Ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Illinois: ACCP; 2012.
55. Gibson AA, Hay AW, Ray DC. Patients with hip fracture admitted to critical care:
epidemiology, interventions and outcome. Injury. 2014;45(7):1066-70.
56. Eschbach D, Bliemel C, Oberkircher L, et al. One-Year Outcome of Geriatric
Hip-Fracture Patients following Prolonged ICU Treatment. Biomed Res Int.
2016;2016:8431213.
57. Kanar M, Armagan R, Oc Y, et al. Is intensive care unit necessary for geriatric hip
fractures? isli Etfal Hastan Tip Bul. 2017;51(3):201-6
58. Guo Z, Zhao F, Wang Y, et al. Intensive Care Unit Resource Utilization After
Hip Fracture Surgery in Elderly Patients: Risk Factor Identification and Risk
Stratification. Orthopedics. 2020;43(3):e159-e165.
59. Ju J, Zhang P, Wang Y, et al. A clinical nomogram predicting unplanned intensive
care unit admission after hip fracture surgery. Surgery. 2021;170(1):291-297.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
60. Neuman MD, Feng R, Carson JL, et al. Spinal Anesthesia or General Anesthesia
for Hip Surgery in Older Adults. N Engl J Med. 2021;385(22):2025-2035.
61. Guay J, Parker MJ, Gajendragadkar PR, et al. Anaesthesia for hip fracture
surgery in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;2(2):CD000521.
62. Griffiths R, Babu S, Dixon P, et al. Guideline for the management of hip
fractures 2020: Guideline by the Association of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia.
2021;76(2):225-237.
63. White SM, Moppett IK, Griffiths R, et al. Secondary analysis of outcomes after
11,085 hip fracture operations from the prospective UK Anaesthesia Sprint Audit
of Practice (ASAP-2). Anaesthesia. 2016;71(5):506-14.
64. Yang Z, Ni J, Long Z, et al. Is hip fracture surgery safe for patients on antiplatelet
drugs and is it necessary to delay surgery? A systematic review and metaanalysis. J Orthop Surg Res. 2020;15(1):105.
65. Yang MH, Li B, Yao DC, et al. Safety of early surgery for geriatric hip fracture
patients taking clopidogrel: a retrospective case-control study of 120 patients in
China. Chin Med J (Engl). 2021;134(14):1720-1725.
66. Zheng Y, Zhou Y, Yang M, et al. Evaluation of Clopidogrel Safety in Geriatric
Patients with Hip Fracture: A Retrospective Study. Orthop Surg. 2021;13(6):1912-1921.
67. Alpantaki K, Papadaki C, Raptis K, et al. Gender and Age Differences in Hip
Fracture Types among Elderly: a Retrospective Cohort Study. Maedica (Bucur).
2020;15(2):185-190.
68. Li L, Jiang X, Fu L, et al. Reactivation rates of hepatitis B or C or HIV in patients
with psoriasis using biological therapies: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Clin Exp Med. 2023;23(3):701-715.
69. Fu CW, Ma HH, Liu YC, et al. Are functional outcomes and reoperation rates
really better than those of cementless stems in displaced femoral neck fractures?
An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
in current-generation stem designs. J Chin Med Assoc. 2021;84(10):969-981.
70. Liu Y, Chen X, Zhang P, et al. Comparing total hip arthroplasty and hemiarthroplasty
for the treatment of displaced femoral neck fracture in the active elderly over 75
years old: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized control trials. J
Orthop Surg Res. 2020;15(1):215.
71. Migliorini F, Trivellas A, Driessen A, et al. Hemiarthroplasty versus total
arthroplasty for displaced femoral neck fractures in the elderly: meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2020;140(11):1695-1704.
72. Xu DF, Bi FG, Ma CY, et al. A systematic review of undisplaced femoral neck
fracture treatments for patients over 65 years of age, with a focus on union rates
and avascular necrosis. J Orthop Surg Res. 2017;12(1):28.
73. Dolatowski FC, Frihagen F, Bartels S, et al. Screw Fixation Versus
Hemiarthroplasty for Nondisplaced Femoral Neck Fractures in Elderly
Patients: A Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am.
2019;101(2):136-144.
74. Afaq S, O’Hara NN, Schemitsch EH, et al. Arthroplasty Versus Internal Fixation
for the Treatment of Undisplaced Femoral Neck Fractures: A Retrospective
Cohort Study. J Orthop Trauma. 2020;34 Suppl 3:S9-S14.
75. Meinberg EG, Agel J, Roberts CS, et al. Fracture and Dislocation Classification
Compendium-2018. J Orthop Trauma. 2018;32 Suppl 1:S1-S170
76. Ma KL, Wang X, Luan FJ, et al. Proximal femoral nails antirotation, Gamma
nails, and dynamic hip screws for fixation of intertrochanteric fractures of femur:
A meta-analysis. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res. 2014;100(8):859-66.
77. Lewis SR, Macey R, Gill JR, et al. Cephalomedullary nails versus extramedullary
implants for extracapsular hip fractures in older adults. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2022;1(1):CD000093.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
78. Xu H, Liu Y, Sezgin EA, et al. Comparative effectiveness research on proximal
femoral nail versus dynamic hip screw in patients with trochanteric fractures: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Orthop Surg Res.
2022;17(1):292.
79. Li AB, Zhang WJ, Wang J, et al. Intramedullary and extramedullary fixations for
the treatment of unstable femoral intertrochanteric fractures: a meta-analysis of
prospective randomized controlled trials. Int Orthop. 2017;41(2):403-413.
80. Liu P, Wu X, Shi H, et al. Intramedullary versus extramedullary fixation in the
management of subtrochanteric femur fractures: a meta-analysis. Clin Interv
Aging. 2015;10:803-11.
81. Codesido P, Mejia A, Riego J, et al. Subtrochanteric fractures in elderly people
treated with intramedullary fixation: quality of life and complications following
open reduction and cerclage wiring versus closed reduction. Arch Orthop
Trauma Surg. 2017;137(8):1077-1085.
82. Klestil T, Roder C, Stotter C, et al. Impact of timing of surgery in elderly hip fracture
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):13933.
83. Chen P, Shen X, Xu W, et al. Comparative assessment of early versus delayed
surgery to treat proximal femoral fractures in elderly patients: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Int J Surg. 2019;68:63-71.
84. Shen CY, Hsiao CH, Tsai W, et al. Associations between Hip Fracture Operation
Waiting Time and Complications in Asian Geriatric Patients: A Taiwan Medical
Center Study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18(6).
85. Kang H, Ha YC, Kim JY, et al. Effectiveness of multimodal pain management
after bipolar hemiarthroplasty for hip fracture: a randomized, controlled study. J
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2013;95(4):291-6.
86. Wan HY, Li SY, Ji W, et al. Fascia Iliaca Compartment Block for Perioperative
Pain Management of Geriatric Patients with Hip Fractures: A Systematic Review
of Randomized Controlled Trials. Pain Res Manag. 2020;2020:8503963.
87. Stenvall M, Olofsson B, Lundstrom M, et al. A multidisciplinary, multifactorial
intervention program reduces postoperative falls and injuries after femoral neck
fracture. Osteoporos Int. 2007;18(2):167-75.
88. Chudyk AM, Jutai JW, Petrella RJ, et al. Systematic review of hip fracture
rehabilitation practices in the elderly. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90(2):24662.
89. Nordstrom P, Thorngren KG, Hommel A, et al. Effects of Geriatric Team
Rehabilitation After Hip Fracture: Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled
Trials. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2018;19(10):840-845.
90. Taraldsen K, Sletvold O, Thingstad P, et al. Physical behavior and function early
after hip fracture surgery in patients receiving comprehensive geriatric care or
orthopedic care - a randomized controlled trial. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
2014;69(3):338-45.
91. Handoll HH, Cameron ID, Mak JC, et al. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation for older
people with hip fractures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;11(11):CD007125.
92. Lee SY, Jung SH, Lee SU, et al. Is Occupational Therapy After Hip Fracture
Surgery Effective in Improving Function?: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis of Randomized Controlled Studies. Am J Phys Med Rehabil.
2019;98(4):292-298.
93. Santesso N, Carrasco-Labra A, Brignardello-Petersen R. Hip protectors
for preventing hip fractures in older people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2014(3):CD001255.
94. Avenell A, Mak JC, O’Connell D. Vitamin D and vitamin D analogues for
preventing fractures in post-menopausal women and older men. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2014;2014(4):CD000227.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
95. Montero-Odasso M, van der Velde N, Martin FC, et al. World guidelines for falls
prevention and management for older adults: a global initiative. Age Ageing.
2022;51(9).
96. Malaysian Osteoporosis Society (MOS). Management of Osteoporosis (3rd
Edition). Kuala Lumpur MOS; 2022.
97. Wu CH, Tu ST, Chang YF, et al. Fracture liaison services improve outcomes of
patients with osteoporosis-related fractures: A systematic literature review and
meta-analysis. Bone. 2018;111:92-100.
98. Gregson CL, Armstrong DJ, Bowden J, et al. UK clinical guideline for the
prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. Arch Osteoporos. 2022;17(1):581.
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effective and safe arthroplasty in
displaced fracture neck of femur?
1.
HIP FRACTURES/
2.
(fracture* adj1 (hip or intertrochanteric or subtrochanteric or
trochanteric)).tw.
3.
FEMORAL NECK FRACTURES/
4.
(femoral neck adj2 fracture*).tw.
5.
(femur neck adj2 fracture*).tw.)
6.
fracture neck of femur.tw.
7.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6
8.
ARTHROPLASTY, REPLACEMENT, HIP/
9.
(hip replacement adj2 arthroplast*).tw.
10. (total hip adj2 arthroplast*).tw.
11. (hip prosthesis adj2 implantation*).tw.
12. (total hip adj2 replacement).tw.
13. HEMIARTHROPLASTY/
14. (hemi adj1 arthroplast*).tw.
15. hemi-arthroplast*.tw.
16. hemiarthroplast*.tw.
17. 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16
18. 7 and 17
19. limit 18 to (english language and humans and “middle aged (45
plus years)” and “systematic review” and last 15 years)
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the accurate imaging modalities to diagnose geriatric hip
fracture?
2.
What are the risk factors for geriatric hip fracture?
3.
What are the effective and safe primary prevention strategies for
geriatric hip fracture?
4.
What are the effective and safe analgesics pre-operatively for
geriatric hip fracture?
5.
What are the effective and safe prophylaxis for venous
thromboembolism pre-operatively for geriatric hip fracture?
6.
What are the pre-operative optimisation/criteria for safe surgery in
geriatric hip fracture?
7.
What are the effective and safe method of anaesthesia for geriatric
hip fracture?
8.
What are the effective and safe arthroplasties in geriatric displaced
fracture neck of femur?
9.
What are the effective and safe surgeries in geriatric non-displaced
fracture neck of femur?
10. What are the effective and safe mode of fixations for:
a.
geriatric intertrochanteric fracture of femur?
b.
geriatric subtrochanteric fracture of femur?
11. What is the recommended appropriate waiting time for surgery for
geriatric hip fracture?
12. What are the effective and safe treatments following surgical
operation of geriatric hip fracture?
13. What are the effective and safe rehabilitations for post-operative
geriatric hip fracture?
14. What are the effective and safe follow-up post-operatively for
geriatric hip fracture?
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Appendix 3
PRINCIPLES OF ANALGESIC PRESCRIPTIONS IN THE ELDERLY
1.
Timing of medication administration is important.
• Severe, episodic pain requires treatment of a rapid onset of
action and short duration.
• For continuous pain, regular analgesia is the most effective,
possibly using modified release formulations.
2.
Start with a low dose single agent at a time, followed by low
incremental dose titration.
3.
Allow adequate intervals for assessment of the effect before
considering another agent.
4.
Combination therapy using agents with different mechanisms of
action may have synergistic effects to provide greater pain relief
with fewer side effects than higher doses of a single agent.
5.
Consider the use of non-pharmacological strategies, e.g
physiotherapy
and
cognitive
behavioural
approaches,
in
combination with medication.
6.
Treatment should be monitored regularly and adjusted if required
to improve effectiveness and minimise side effects.
7.
On choosing an analgesic agent, co-morbidity, contraindications
and possibilities of drug-disease and drug-drug interactions should
be considered.
PRE-OPERATIVE ANALGESIA IN GHF
Paracetamol
325 - 500 mg 4-hourly
or 500 - 1,000 mg
6-hourly per oral (PO)
• Maximum dose usually 4 g daily
• Reduce maximum dose 50% to 75% in
patients with hepatic insufficiency or
history of alcohol abuse
Oxycodone
2.5 - 5 mg 4 - 6-hourly
PO
• Useful for acute recurrent, episodic or
breakthrough pain
Morphine
2 - 3 mg 4 - 6-hourly
(subcutaneous (SC)
or PO)
• Most commonly used for episodic or
breakthrough pain
• Intravenous (IV) morphine may be
considered in severe pain (refer to
Guidelines of Pain as 5th Vital Sign)
Celecoxib
Etericoxib
200 mg twice daily
(BD) for 2 - 5 days,
then 200 mg once
daily (OD) PO
90 mg OD PO
• Higher doses are associated with higher
incidence of gastrointestinal (GI) and
cardiovascular side effects
• Consider prescribing proton-pump
inhibitor to reduce GI side effects and
when patients on aspirin
Drug
Recommended dose
Comments
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Adapted:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Guidelines for Pain Management in the Elderly 1st
Edition. Putrajaya: MoH; 2018
2. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya: MoH
Malaysia; 2010
Tramadol
50 mg 6 - 12-hourly
PO
• Monitor side effects e.g. confusion,
drowsiness, constipation and nausea
• Risk of seizures in high doses
• May precipitate serotonin syndrome if
used with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
• Use with caution in renal impairment;
if creatinine clearance (CrCl) <30
millilitres per minute (mL/min),
requires dose reduction
Dihydrocodeine
tartrate
(DF118)
30 - 60 mg 6 - 8-hourly
PO
• Useful for acute recurrent, episodic or
breakthrough pain
Drug
Recommended dose
Comments
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Appendix 4
COMPREHENSIVE GERIATRIC ASSESSMENT (CGA) FOR GHF
The main dimensions covered in a CGA should include the following
assessments:
Adapted: National Clinical Programme for Older People. Specialist Geriatric Team
Guidance on Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment. (Available at: https://
www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/clinical-strategy-and-programmes/
comprehensive-geriatric-assessment-document-.pdf)
Physical
• Presenting
complaint
• Acute medical
issues which
include cardiac
assessment
• Past medical
history
• Medication
review
• Nutritional
status
(e.g. MNA-SF)
• Fraility
assessment
(e.g. Clinical
Frailty Scale)
Note: Advanced
directives should
also be explored
Functional
• Activities of daily
living (e.g.
Barthel Index)
• Functional ability
• Balance and gait
stability
• Mobility
Social
• Social support
• Caregiver stress
• Living
arrangements
(domestic
support)
• Living
environment
• Financial
circumstances
Psychological
• Delirium
assessment
(e.g. 4AT
Delirium
Detection Tool)
• Baseline cognition
[e.g. Mini Mental
State Examination
(MMSE),
Abbreviated
Mental Test Score
(AMTS)]
• Mood [e.g.
Geriatric
Depression
Scale (GDS)]
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Appendix 5
GUIDELINES ON TIME INTERVALS BEFORE AND AFTER NEURAXIAL BLOCKS RELATED TO THE USE OF
ANTIPLATELET AGENTS AND ANTICOAGULANTS
A. Antiplatelet agents
Antiplatelet agent
Timing of initiation of neuraxial block
after agent is stopped
Restarting agent with
neuraxial catheter in-situ
Restarting agent after
neuraxial block/catheter removal
Aspirin
No additional precaution
No additional precaution
No additional precaution
NSAIDS
No additional precaution
No additional precaution
No additional precaution
Abciximab
24 - 48 hours
Contraindicated within 4 weeks of surgery
No specific guidance
Tirofiban
4 - 8 hours
Contraindicated within 4 weeks of surgery
No specific guidance
Eptifibatide
4 - 8 hours
Contraindicated within 4 weeks of surgery
No specific guidance
Dipyridamole
24 hours for extended-release formulation
Not recommended
6 hours after removal
Clopidogrel
5 - 7 days
• Start 24 hours post-operatively
• Acceptable to maintain catheter for
1 - 2 days provided no loading dose given
• Start 24 hours post-operatively
• Acceptable to maintain catheter for
1 - 2 days provided no loading dose given
Immediately
(loading dose may be given 6 hours
after removal)
Prasugrel
7 - 10 days
Not recommended
Immediately
(loading dose may be given 6 hours
after removal)
Ticagrelor
5 - 7 days
Not recommended
Immediately
(loading dose may be given 6 hours
after removal)
Ticlopidine
10 days
Immediately
(loading dose may be given 6 hours
after removal)
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
B. Parenteral anticoagulant agents
Anticoagulant
agent (parenteral)
Timing of initiation of neuraxial block
after agent is stopped
Restarting agent with
neuraxial catheter in-situ
Restarting agent after
neuraxial block/catheter removal
Unfractionated
heparin (UFH) SC
• Ensure normal platelet count
• Low dose: Acceptable to give whilst
catheter in-situ; catheter removal
4 - 6 hours after administration
• Higher dose (doses >5,000 U or daily
total >15,000): Analyse risk/benefit in
the patient; if given, institute
neurological observation monitoring
regimen
1 hour
• Low-dose prophylaxis (5,000 units (U)
BD/ thrice daily (TDS)
• Higher-dose prophylaxis
(7,500 - 10,000 U
BD or <20,000 U daily total): 12 hours
UFH IV
• Ensure normal platelet count and
coagulation status
• Catheter removal 4 - 6 hours after
stopping infusion
1 hour
6 hours
Avoid
4 - 6 hours after stopping the infusion
and normal coagulation status
LMWH
• Ensure normal platelet count
• Prophylactic OD dose: First dose
acceptable 4 hours after catheter
placement; removal of catheter at
minimum of 12 hours after last dose
• Treatment dose: Not recommended
• Prophylactic dose: 4 hours
• Treatment dose: 24 hours after surgery
and removal of catheter
• Prophylactic dose: 12 hours
• Treatment dose: 24 hours
Fondaparinux
• Prophylactic dose: 36 - 48 hours
• Treatment dose: 72 hours
• Only for single puncture neuraxial
blockade
• Avoid indwelling neuraxial catheters
Parenteral heparin alternatives
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
C. Oral anticoagulant agents
Anticoagulant
agent (oral)
Timing of initiation of neuraxial block
after agent is stopped
Restarting agent with
neuraxial catheter in-situ
Restarting agent after
neuraxial block/catheter removal
Rivaroxaban
• Not recommended
• With unanticipated administration, hold
rivaroxaban dosing for 22 - 26 hours or
assess an anti-factor Xa assay
calibrated to rivaroxaban before
catheter removal
6 hours
• 72 hours; if earlier, consider rivaroxaban
or anti-factor Xa level [(safe residual
level for central neuraxial blockade
(CNB) is unknown)]
• Prophylactic dose: CrCl >30 mL/min;
18 hours
• Treatment dose: CrCl >30 mL/min;
48 hours
Edoxaban
• Not recommended
• With unanticipated administration, hold
edoxaban dosing for 20 - 28 hours or
assess an anti-factor Xa assay
calibrated to edoxaban before catheter
removal
• Not recommended
• With unanticipated administration, hold
apixaban dosing for 26 - 30 hours or
assess an anti-factor Xa assay
calibrated to apixaban before catheter
removal
6 hours
6 hours
6 hours
• Not recommended
• With unanticipated administration, hold
dabigatran dosing for 34 - 36 hours or
assess the dTT or ECT before catheter
removal
72 hours; if earlier, consider edoxaban
or anti-factor Xa level (safe residual
level for CNB is unknown)
72 hours; if earlier, consider apixaban
or anti-factor Xa level (safe residual
level for CNB is unknown)
Apixaban
Dabigatran
120 hours; if no additional risk factors for
bleeding:
• CrCl >80 mL/min: 72 hours
• CrCl 50 - 79 mL/min: 96 hours
• CrCl 30 - 49 mL/min: 120 hours
• CrCl 30 mL/min: Avoid
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
D. Thrombolytic drugs
Adapted:
1. Ashken T, West S. Regional anaesthesia in patients at risk of bleeding. BJA Educ. 2021;21(3):84-94.
2. NYSORA. Regional Anesthesia in Anticoagulated Patients (Available at: https://www.nysora.com/topics/sub-specialties/regional-anesthesia-inanticoagulated-patients/)
Anticoagulant
agent (oral)
Timing of initiation of neuraxial block
after agent is stopped
Restarting agent with
neuraxial catheter in-situ
Restarting agent after
neuraxial block/catheter removal
Thrombolytic
agent
Timing of initiation of neuraxial block
after agent is stopped
Restarting agent with
neuraxial catheter in-situ
Restarting agent after
neuraxial block/catheter removal
Warfarin
• Not recommended when catheter
in-situ, suggest bridging therapy
appropriately
• Check INR daily and, routine sensory
and motor neurological testing
Not recommended; if unexpectedly given,
measure fibrinogen to guide timing of
catheter removal
• Remove catheter when INR ≤1.5
• After catheter removal, continue
neurological observations for 24 hours
No recommendation, but note that
original contraindications to these agents
state that they should not be given for
10 days after puncture of
non-compressible
Ideally stop international normalised
ratio (INR) 3 days before and
INR “normalised”
48 hours and documented
normal clotting (including fibrinogen)
Thrombolytic
agents
(e.g. alteplase and
streptokinase)
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
Appendix 6
ASSESSMENT OF FALLS RISK FACTORS AND
INTERVENTIONS TO REDUCE IDENTIFIED RISK FACTORS
Source: Malaysian Osteoporosis Society (MOS). Management of Osteoporosis 2022
(3rd Edition). Kuala Lumpur; MOS: 2022
Evaluate lower limb muscle strength,
gait, and balance
Timed Up and Go
(high risk >13.5 sec)
Identify medications that increase
fall risk
Ask about potential home hazards
(e.g. slippery bathroom floor, loose rugs)
Measure positional blood pressure
(supine and standing blood pressure
measurement)
Check visual acuity
Assess feet and footwear
Assess vitamin D intake
Previous history of falls OR fear of
falling
Poor gait, strength and balance
• Refer for physical therapy
• Engagement in exercise programmes
that involve balance, functional exercise
and resistance training
Medication(s) likely to increase fall risk
• Optimise medications by stopping,
switching or reducing dosage
(especially for psychoactive medications)
Home hazards likely to increase fall risk
• Refer to occupational therapist to
evaluate home safety assessment ±
modification
Orthostatic hypotension observed
• Review medications
• Encourage adequate hydration
• Consider use of compression stockings,
abdominal binders or physical
manoeuvres
Visual impairment observed
• Refer ophthalmologist/optometrist
• Avoid wearing multifocal glasses when
walking, particularly on stairs
Feet or footwear issues identified
• Appropriate treatment for foot problem
identified
• Advise wearing well-fitted shoes indoors
and outdoors
Vitamin D deficiency observed or likely
• Recommend daily vitamin D (800 - 1000
IU) supplement for individuals with
proven vitamin D deficiency
• Provide falls education and information
to all patients
• Regular follow-up to ensure adherence
to interventions
Assessment
Interventions
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
ALGORITHM ON RISK STRATIFICATION, ASSESSMENT AND
INTERVENTIONS FOR COMMUNITY-DWELLING OLDER ADULTS
1To increase sensitivity, use three Key Questions (3KQ) with any positive answer
to a) Has fallen in the past year? b) Feels unsteady when standing or walking? or c)
Worries about falling? prompts to “fall severity” step.
Fall severity: fall with injuries (severe enough to consult a physician), laying on the
ground with no capacity to get up, a visit to emergency room or loss of consciousness/
suspected syncope.
2Assess fall severity (one is enough): ● injury ● ≥2 falls last year ● frailty ● lying
on the floor/unable to get up ● loss of consciousness/suspected syncope (syncope
suspicion should trigger evaluation/management)
3Gait speed ≤0.8 m/s or alternatively Timed up and go >15 seconds
4Exercise on balance/leg strength is recommended for the intermediate group
which may also be referred to a physiotherapist.
5High risk individuals with falls can deteriorate rapidly and close follow-up is
recommended which is guided on frequency of consequent health service utilisation.
Adapted: Montero-Odasso M, van der Velde N, Martin FC, et al. World guidelines for
falls prevention and management for older adults: a global initiative. Age
Ageing. 2022;51(9).
Opportunistic case finding
Regular health visit
Health records
(if available)
(30% risk of ≥1 fall
in the next year)
Presenting to healthcare
with fall or related injury
(70% risk of ≥1 fall in
the next year)
Fall in past
12 months1
Gait and balance
impaired3
Presence of
fall severity2
High Risk Goal:
Secondary prevention
and treatment
Intermediate Risk Goal:
Secondary prevention to
improve major risk factors
Low Risk Goal:
Primary Prevention
• Tailored exercises on
balance, gait and strength4
(physiotherapist referral)
• Education on falls
prevention
• Education on falls prevention
• Advice on physical activity/
exercise
Multifactorial falls
risk assessment
Reassess in one year
Individualised-tailored
interventions
Follow-up in 30 to
90 days5
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AO/OTA
Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen Foundation and
Orthopaedic Trauma Association
AAOS
American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeon
ACCP
American College of Chest Physicians
ADL
activities of daily living
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
AP
anterior-posterior
ASA
American Society of Anesthesiologists
AUC
area under curve
BD
twice daily
CGA
comprehensive geriatric assessment
CGC
comprehensive geriatric care
CI
confidence interval
cm
centimetre
CMN
cephalomedullary nail
CNB
central neuraxial blockade
COX-2
cyclooxygenase-2
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CrCl
creatinine clearance
CT
computed tomography
DG
development group
DHS
dynamic hip screw
ETD
Emergency & Trauma Department
EMD
extramedullary device
FICB
fascia iliaca compartment block
FLS
fracture liaison service
g
gramme
GHF(s)
geriatric hip fracture(s)
GI
gastrointestinal
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
HA
hemiarthroplasty
Hb
haemoglobin
HR
hazard ratio
HHS
Harris Hip Score
ICU
intensive care unit
IMN
intramedullary nail
INR
international normalised ratio
IRR
incidence rate ratio
IU
International unit
IV
intravenous
LMWH
low molecular weight heparin
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
MD
mean difference
MDR
multidisciplinary rehabilitation
mg
milligramme
mL/min
millilitre per minute
mm
millimetre
mmHg
millimetre mercury
MNA-SF
Mini Nutritional Assessment-Short Form
MoH
Ministry of Health
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
NICE
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NSAIDs
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
OD
once daily
OR(s)
odds ratio(s)
OT
operation theatre
p
p value
PNBs
peripheral nerve blocks
PO
per oral
PPI
proton pump inhibitor
PFN
proximal femoral nail
PFNA
proximal femoral nail anti-rotation
RCTs
randomised controlled trial(s)
RC
review committee
RR
relative risk
RSI
risk stratification index
SGD
Singapore dollar
SMD
standardised mean difference
THA
total hip arthroplasty
UFH
unfractionated heparin
U
units
vs
versus
VTE
venous thromboembolism
WHO
World Health Organization
CPG on Management of Geriatric Hip Fracture
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms Subhiyah Ariffin on retrieval of evidence
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of GHF was supported
financially in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.