(SECOND EDITION)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may
be reproduced in any number of copies and any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, not sold, or used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN: 978-967-2887-70-6
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://www.masp.org.my
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guideline should not override the practitioners’
responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the individual’s
circumstances. This should be done in consultation with the patients
and their families or guardians, taking into account the management
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
options available locally.
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2023 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2027) or sooner if necessary. When it is due for
updating, the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of the related
speciality will be informed. A discussion will be done on the need for a
revision, including the revised CPG’s scope. A multidisciplinary team
will be formed, and the latest systematic review methodology used
by MaHTAS will be employed. Every care is taken to ensure that this
publication is correct in every detail at the time of publication. However,
in the event of errors or omissions, corrections will be published in the
web version of this document, which is the definitive version at all times.
This version can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1. Management of Cancer Pain in Adults
x
Algorithm 2. Titration of Morphine for Rapid Pain Relief in
xi
Adults with Severe Pain and Distress
Algorithm 3. Management of Cancer Pain in Children
xii
1. INTRODUCTION
1
2. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
3
3.
DIAGNOSIS AND ASSESSMENT
5
3.1 Clinical Presentation
5
3.2 Clinical Assessment
7
3.2.1 History
7
3.2.2 Physical Examination
8
3.2.3 Investigations
8
3.3 Pain Assessment Tools
8
3.3.1 Assessment Tools for Neuropathic Pain
9
3.3.2 Comprehensive Assessment
10
3.3.3 Pain Assessment Tools in Cognitive
11
Impairment/Learning Disability
4.
PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTION
12
4.1 Principles of Analgesic Medicine
12
4.2 World Health Organization Analgesic Ladder
14
4.3 Non-opioids
14
4.4 Opioids
15
4.4.1 Weak opioids
15
4.4.2 Strong opioids
16
4.4.3 Opioid initiation, titration and maintenance
19
4.4.4 Breakthrough pain management
22
4.4.5 Opioid rotation
24
4.4.6 Opioids requiring special attention
26
4.4.7 Opioid use in special populations
27
4.4.8 Opioid side effects
29
4.4.9 Opioid toxicity
32
4.4.10 Tolerance and addiction to opioids
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
4.5 Adjuvants 34
4.6 Medical Cannabis
38
4.7 Anticancer Therapy
39
5.
PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTION
42
5.1 Psychoeducation Intervention
42
5.2 Psychological Intervention
42
5.3 Spiritual Intervention
43
6.
INTERVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES/SURGERY
44
6.1 Neurolysis
44
6.2 Neuraxial Opioids
45
6.3 Vertebroplasty
46
6.4 Surgical Intervention
46
7. OTHER INTERVENTION
48
8.
PAEDIATRIC CANCER PAIN
50
8.1 Principles of Pain Assessment
51
8.2 Pain Assessment Tools
52
8.3 Treatment
52
9.
BARRIERS AND EDUCATION
57
10. FOLLOW-UP AND REFERRAL
59
11. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
61
11.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
61
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
61
References
63
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
71
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
73
Appendix 3 Sedation Score
75
Appendix 4 Assessment Tools
76
a. Ministry of Health (MoH) Pain Scale
76
b. FLACC Scale
77
c. Verbal Rating Scale (VRS)
77
d. Short-form McGill Pain
78
Questionnaire (SF-MPQ-2)
e. Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic
79
Symptoms and Signs (LANSS) Scale
f. PainDETECT Questionnaire
80
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
g. Doeleur Neuropathique en 4 (DN4) Scale
82
h. NCCN Distress Thermometer
83
(English Version)
i. NCCN Distress Thermometer
84
(Malay Version)
j. Integrated Palliative Care Outcome
85
Scale (IPOS)
k. The Edmonton Symptom Assessment
87
System (ESAS) Tool
l. Pain Assessment in Advance Dementia
88
(PAINAD) Scale
Appendix 5 Pharmacological Treatment in Cancer Pain
89
a. Suggested Medication Dosages and
88
Adverse Effects in Adults
b. Suggested Medication Dosages in Paediatrics 92
Appendix 6 Guide for Transdermal Fentanyl Use
95
Appendix 7 Guide for Naloxone Use
96
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
98
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
100
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
100
SOURCE OF FUNDING
100
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies or case reports; reports of expert committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure
Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of body of evidence and related effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development
Group (DG).
• Recommendations are formulated based on certainty of
evidence and the wording used denotes the strength of
recommendations. This takes into account:
 quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 relevancy and applicability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s) in
the management while a blue box contains evidence-based
recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The
CPG
Development
Group
highlighted
the
following
recommendations as the key clinical recommendations that should be
prioritised for implementation.
Cancer Pain in Adults
• Diagnosis and Assessment
• Accurate and comprehensive assessment should be performed prior
to treatment in all patients with cancer pain.
• Appropriate pain assessment tools should be used regularly on
patients with cancer pain and documented accordingly.
 The preferred unidimensional tools are the Visual Analogue Scale,
Numerical Rating Scale, Verbal Rating Scale and Faces Pain
Scale.
• Pharmacological Intervention
• The treatment of cancer pain should be based on the World Health
Organization (WHO) analgesic ladder.
• Paracetamol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be used for
mild cancer pain (Step 1 of the World Health Organization analgesic
ladder).
• Weak opioids may be used for moderate pain (step 2 of the WHO
analgesic ladder) in cancer pain.
• Oral morphine is the preferred choice in moderate to severe cancer
pain.
 Immediate-release oral morphine should be made available in all
healthcare facilities.
• Oxycodone and fentanyl can be used as alternatives to morphine.
• Transdermal fentanyl should only be used when opioid requirements
are stable.
• Patients with persistent cancer pain should be prescribed with regular
(around-the-clock) analgesia.
 Opioid doses must be titrated to achieve optimal pain relief with
minimal adverse events.
 Long-acting opioid formulations may be considered for patients
once the effective opioid dose has been established.
• All patients with cancer pain who are on opioids should be prescribed
with rescue analgesia if required to ensure optimal pain control.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
iii
• Opioids (morphine or oxycodone) for breakthrough cancer pain
should be prescribed at 1/6 to 1/12 of the 24-hour dose.
• In the management of cancer pain for older patients or those with
renal/liver impairment:
 All opioids should be used with caution.
 Adjustment in doses/frequency of opioids should be considered.
• Opioid-induced side effects should be proactively identified and
treated adequately to ensure optimum cancer pain management.
• Anticonvulsants or antidepressants may be considered in patients
with neuropathic cancer pain.
• Corticosteroids may be used cautiously as an adjuvant in patients
with specific cancer pain syndromes.
• Bone targeting agents may be used in cancer patients with painful
bone metastasis.
• Radiotherapy may be offered to control pain in symptomatic bone
metastasis.
 Single-fraction external beam therapy is the preferred choice.
• Psychoeducation, psychological and spiritual interventions should
be considered in the management of cancer pain.
• Patients whose pain control is poor despite optimal pharmacological
therapy should be referred to specialists trained in interventional pain
management for consideration of the following interventions:
o coeliac plexus neurolysis for advanced pancreatic cancer pain
o superior hypogastric plexus or ganglion impar neurolysis for
advanced pelvic and perineal cancer pain
o intrathecal drug delivery system
o vertebroplasty for malignant spinal compression fractures
Cancer Pain in Children
• Paracetamol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be used
in children with mild cancer pain.
• Paracetamol should be used in combination with opioids as coanalgesic unless contraindicated in children with cancer pain.
• Oral morphine is the preferred choice for children with moderate to
severe cancer pain.
• Fentanyl or oxycodone may be used as alternative analgesics in
children with moderate to severe cancer pain.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the DG for this CPG were from the Ministry of
Health (MoH) and the Ministry of Higher Education. There was active
involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee during the process
of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was conducted using the following
electronic databases/platforms: Medline via Ovid and Embase. Refer
to Appendix 1 for an Example of Search Strategy. The inclusion
criteria are cancer patients with pain regardless of study design. The
first search was limited to literature published in the last 13 years (2010
until 2023) for most clinical questions on humans and in English. In
addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines
were searched and experts in the field were contacted to identify
relevant studies. All searches were conducted from 21 February 2022
to 21 October 2022. The literature search was repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 30 June 2023 to be included. Future
CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off date.
The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request from
the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other guidelines on cancer pain as listed
below:
• World Health Organization (WHO) Guidelines for the Pharmacological
and Radiotherapeutic Management of Cancer Pain in Adults and
Adolescents 2018
• Management of Cancer Pain in Adult Patients: European Society for
Medical Oncology (ESMO) Clinical Practice Guidelines 2018
• European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology - Adult Cancer Pain 2019
• Use of Opioids for Adults with Pain from Cancer or Cancer Treatment:
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Guideline 2023
• Paediatric Pain Management Guidelines 2023
• The Children’s Hospital at Westmead Pain Management Practice
Guideline 2021
• The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Cancer Pain -
Pediatric (Age ≤18 Years) 2021
• Handbook of Children’s Palliative Care Malaysia 2021
• Latin-American guidelines for cancer pain management 2017
• CRIS Cancer Clinical Practice Guideline for Pain Management in
Children with Cancer 2013
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
v
• WHO Guidelines on the Pharmacological Treatment of Persisting
Pain in Children with Medical Illness 2012
A total of 23 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions. The DG
members met 24 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG members using
the Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meeting. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and the review committee (RC). Where evidence was insufficient,
the recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was mainly
based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices considered.
The literature used in these guidelines was graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
while the recommendation grading was done using GRADE principles
(refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows strictly
the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
(AGREE II).
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG and, the Health Technology Assessment
(HTA) and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia, for review and approval.
Details on the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from
the Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidencebased Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
vi
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based guidelines to
optimise pain control with minimal side effects and adverse outcomes,
enhance well-being and improve the quality of life (QoL) of patients with
cancer pain.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Adults and children of all ages with pain from any type of cancer
TARGET GROUP/USER
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care of the
management of cancer pain including:
• doctors
• allied health professionals
• trainees and medical students
• policymakers
• patients and their advocates
• professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
vii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Aaron Hiew Wi Han
Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Ahmad Afifi Mohd Arshad
Consultant Anaesthesiologist &
Pain Specialist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Ms. Elaine Kan Mei Ying
Pharmacist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Fahisham Taib
Senior Lecturer & Paediatrician
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kelantan
Dr. Fazlina Ahmad
Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Hasriza Hashim
Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah, Selangor
Dr. Lee Yuk Loong
Consultant General Surgeon
Hospital Shah Alam, Selangor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health
Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Navin Francis Susinadan
Palliative Medicine Specialist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Noran Ramli
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Presint 9, Putrajaya
Ms. Nur Liyana Shamsudin
Clinical Psychologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Dr. Patricia Shamani Soosainathan
Clinical Oncologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Ms. Prita Nambbiar
Pharmacist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
Ms. Siti Mariam Mohtar
Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Sheriza Izwa Zainuddin
Senior Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Teoh See Wie
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Salak, Selangor
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
viii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Dr. Richard Lim Boon Leong
Senior Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Members (alphabetical order)
Ms. Felicia Loh Yuan Ye
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dato’ Dr. Fitjerald Henry
Head of Surgical Services &
Senior Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Ismail Aliyas
Senior Consultant Gynae-oncologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health
Physician
MaHTAS, Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Lee Chee Chan
Consultant Paediatrician in
Palliative Medicine
Hospital Tuanku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Loh Ee Chin
Senior Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Subang Jaya Medical Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mary Suma Cardosa
Senior Consultant Anaesthesiologist &
Pain Specialist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Nooraini Darus
Clinical Psychologist & Head Clinical
Psychology Unit, Department of Psychiatry
and Mental Health
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Siti Zarina Amir Hassan
Consultant in Nuclear Medicine
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Sri Wahyu Taher
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Simpang Kuala, Kedah
Dr. Sylvia McCarthy
Medical Director
Hospis Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zalina Abdul Razak
Head of Anaesthesiology Services &
Senior Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Zuraini Kamal
President
Persatuan Sukarelawan Kanser Negeri
Kedah, Cancer Survivors Malaysia
Dr. Vaishnavi Jeyasingam,
Consultant Clinical Oncologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
ix
Associate Professor Dr. Azizah Othman
Clinical Psychologist
School of Medical Sciences
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Daniel Munday
Consultant in Palliative Medicine and
Health Services Research &
Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer
The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Dr. Ebtesam Ahmed
Clinical Professor
College of Pharmacy and
Health Sciences
St. John’s University
New York City, United States of
America
Professor Dato’ Dr. Fuad Ismail
Senior Consultant Oncologist
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Specialist Centre
Kuala Lumpur
Professor Datuk Dr. Ismail Sagap
Senior Lecturer & Consultant General
and Colorectal Surgeon
Faculty of Medicine
University Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Jessica Geiger
Clinical Pharmacy Practitioner (Pain) &
PDMP Coordinator
VA llliana Health System
Ohio, United States of America
Dr. Lalit Krishna
Senior Consultant in Palliative Medicine
Division of Palliative Medicine
National Cancer Centre, Singapore
Dr. M.R. Rajagopal
Anaesthesiologist, Palliative Care Physician
& Director, WHO Collaborating Centre
for Training and Policy on Access to Pain
(Trivandrum Institute of Palliative Sciences)
Trivandrum, India
Dr. Muralitharan Perumal
Senior Consultant Anaesthesiologist
Hospital Tuanku Ampuan Rahimah,
Selangor
Dr. Nagammai Thiagarajan
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Richard Hain
Consultant Paediatric Palliative Care
University Hospital of Wales
Cardiff, United Kingdom
Professor Dr. Zubaidah Jamil Osman
Consultant Clinical Psychologist
International Medical School
Management and Science University
Shah Alam, Selangor
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 1. MANAGEMENT OF CANCER PAIN IN ADULTS
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2010.
x
Cancer patient with pain
Assessment - History/Physical Examination/Investigation
Pain Score
Diagnosis
• Type - Nociceptive/Neuropathic/Mixed
• Source - Cancer-related/Non-cancer-related
• Severity - Pain Score
Mild Cancer Pain
(Pain Score: 1 - 3)
Moderate Cancer Pain
(Pain Score: 4 - 6)
Severe Cancer Pain
(Pain Score: 7 - 10)
WHO LADDER STEP I
• Paracetamol
• NSAIDs
• COX-2 inhibitors
± Adjuvants
WHO LADDER STEP II
• Tramadol
• Codeine
• Dihydrocodeine
± Non-opioids
± Adjuvants
WHO LADDER STEP III
• Morphine
• Oxycodone
• Fentanyl
± Non-opioids
± Adjuvants
Pain
Control
Pain
Control
Yes
No
Yes
No
Pain
Control
Yes
No
Refer to
Palliative
Care Team/
Pain
Specialist
Reassessment
and Follow-up
NSAIDs: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
COX-2: cyclooxygenase-2
*Strong opioids can be considered to treat moderate cancer pain23, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 2. TITRATION OF MORPHINE FOR RAPID PAIN
RELIEF IN ADULTS WITH SEVERE PAIN AND DISTRESS
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2010.
xi
Intravenous morphine 1 - 2 mg*
Reassess after 5 - 10 minutes
Adult patient with severe pain
(Pain Score 7 - 10) and distress
Yes
No
Yes
No
Availability of
intravenous access
Subcutaneous morphine 2.5 - 5 mg*
Reassess after 15 - 30 minutes
• Pain score
• Respiratory rate
• Sedation score
Yes
No
Adverse events:
• Respiratory rate <8/min
OR
• Sedation score >2**
• Stop titration
• Monitor vital signs
Pain relief
acceptable to patient
OR
Reduction of pain
score by 2 points
Record total dose of morphine
used from the start of titration
Convert to regular
4-hourly morphine
*For patients already on opioids, the bolus dose of morphine should be 10% of the total
24-hour morphine requirement converted to intravenous/subcutaneous equivalent. For
elderly, frail or renal impaired patients, use lower dose of the given range.
**For details on sedation score, see Appendix 3 in the CPG.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 3. MANAGEMENT OF CANCER PAIN IN CHILDREN
xii
Cancer patient with pain
Assessment - History/Physical Examination/Investigation
Pain Score
Diagnosis
• Type - Nociceptive/Neuropathic/Mixed
• Source - Cancer-related/Non-cancer-related
• Severity - Pain Score
Mild Cancer Pain
(Pain Score: 1 - 3)
Moderate Cancer Pain
(Pain Score: 4 - 6)
Severe Cancer Pain
(Pain Score: 7 - 10)
Pain
Control
Pain
Control
Yes
No
Yes
No
Pain
Control
Yes
No
Refer to
Palliative
Care Team/
Pain
Specialist
Reassessment
and Follow-up
WHO LADDER STEP I
• Non-opioid
analgesics
(paracetamol,
NSAIDs,
COX-2 inhibitors)
± Adjuvants
WHO LADDER STEP lI
• Opioids
± Non-opioid
analgesics
± Adjuvants
WHO LADDER STEP llI
• Opioids
± Non-opioid
analgesics
± Adjuvants
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
World Health Organization (WHO) reported that there were 48,639 new
cancer cases in Malaysia in 2020.1 Cancer accounted for over 10% of
all medically-certified deaths in the country in 2021.2 For those living
with cancer, pain is a common and distressing symptom that affects
their quality of life.
Pain is defined as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience
associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential
tissue damage”.3 Cancer pain or cancer-related pain is pain experienced
by patients with cancer due to cancer itself or its treatment. A large
meta-analysis showed prevalence rates of cancer pain at 39.3% after
curative treatment, 55.0% during anticancer treatment and 66.4%
in advanced, metastatic or terminal disease. Moderate to severe
pain (numerical rating scale score ≥5) was reported by 38.0% of all
patients.4, level III This indicates that cancer pain is still prevalent despite
treatment and about a third of the patients suffer from more than just
mild pain. There is no local data on the prevalence of cancer pain.
However, a local study found that recognition of cancer symptoms
which included pain was relatively low across Malaysia.5, level III
The consumption of strong opioid analgesics (morphine, oxycodone,
fentanyl etc.), which are essential for managing moderate to severe
cancer pain, is relatively low in Malaysia compared with other countries.
A recent local study found that the total strong opioid consumption
(excluding methadone) in Malaysia was 0.086 defined daily doses
(DDD) per 1000 inhabitants per day in 2005, which increased to 0.126
DDD in 2014. However, this was lower than the global average of 32.8
DDD/1000 inhabitants/day.6, level III
The main barriers to effective pain control in Malaysia relate to
physicians’ and patients’ attitudes towards the use of opioids. In one
survey among physicians, 46% felt they lacked the knowledge to
manage patients with severe pain, 40% were concerned about opioid
addiction and 38% were worried about legal issues. In a survey of
patients, 62% reported that they did not want to take opioids because
they believed that opioids were only for terminal cases, 54% feared
adverse effects (AEs) e.g. constipation and nausea and 48% feared
becoming addicted.7, level III These misconceptions and fears may
prevent patients from reporting their pain or requesting opioids, and
physicians from prescribing adequate doses or using appropriate
routes of administration.
The first edition of CPG in cancer pain management in Malaysia
has helped to spearhead the improvement in this field. Since then,
services that provide cancer pain management increased in hospital,
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
primary care and community hospice levels. This updated CPG aims
to expand the information and incorporate new and current evidence
of pharmacological/non-pharmacological management in cancer pain.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
2. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
• The guiding principles of cancer pain management are:8, level I; 9; 10, level I
 a comprehensive pain assessment
 the application of the concept of Total Pain
 the involvement of a multidisciplinary team
 an emphasis on patient and family-centred care
 the individualisation of the pain experience and response
The principles of cancer pain management have remained similar over
the years and their importance has been strengthened by research. A
systematic review has reaffirmed the core principles outlined in the first
edition of the Malaysian CPG on Management of Cancer Pain.10, level I
Comprehensive cancer pain assessment remains the first and foremost
principle in providing good cancer pain management.9 A detailed
history, physical examination, psychological assessment, suitable
pain measurement tools and appropriate diagnostic procedures are
components of a good assessment. Regular reassessment is vital to
ensure that treatment is effective and safe.11
Cancer pain assessment is further enhanced by the concept of Total
Pain (refer to Figure 1) which guides healthcare providers to view
the multidimensionality of pain. A holistic review of the physical,
psychological, social and spiritual aspects would provide a better
understanding of the individual’s experience of pain.8, level I
Figure 1. Concept of Total Pain
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Source: Franklin AE, Lovell MR. Pain and Pain Management. In: Roderick Duncan
MacLeod, Lieve Van den Block, editors. Textbook of Palliative Care. Cham:
Springer International Publishing; 2018. p. 1-29.
A multidisciplinary team is often required to address the many needs
of a patient. A team comprising healthcare professionals of different
expertise may be able to provide effective and comprehensive
pain relief through various treatment methods.8, level I The core team
should consist of a physician, nurse, pharmacist, clinical psychologist,
social worker, physiotherapist, occupational therapist and spiritual
care provider. Other healthcare providers may be included based on
the patient’s needs. High-intensity interprofessional collaboration in
managing cancer pain has shown:9
• improvement in mean patient satisfaction
• less uncertainty and concerns among patients
• adequacy in pain management
A cohort study showed that a multidisciplinary palliative care team
significantly reduced pain intensity and other symptoms in cancer
patients.12, level II-2 Another study on the impact of a clinical pharmacist-led
team showed that it improved standardisation of opioid administration,
pain scores and quality of life, and reduced gastrointestinal (GI) AEs
compared with usual care in cancer pain.13, level II-1
Healthcare providers should involve the patient and their family/caregiver
to understand the patient’s values and preferences when planning
their cancer pain treatment. Good communication and collaboration
with the patient and their family/caregiver during decision-making will
ensure optimal care is provided in the patient’s best interest.10, level I
Furthermore, the involvement of patients and their family/caregiver in
managing cancer pain reduces barriers to analgesic use and decreases
the worst pain score.9
Healthcare providers should be aware that the patient’s experience and
response to pain is highly individualised. There are many factors that
influence an individual’s response to pain e.g. age, cognitive abilities,
cultural background and previous experience of pain. Recognising this
may help in providing individualised care and alleviating pain more
effectively.10, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
3. DIAGNOSIS AND ASSESSMENT
Pain is a highly complex and subjective phenomenon. Its components
are not only physiological, but also include behavioural, cognitive,
emotional, spiritual and social aspects. Effective treatment of pain
begins with a comprehensive assessment encompassing these
multidimensional components. The interpretation of pain and how the
sufferer responds to it behaviourally and emotionally is unique and
individualised.9
Assessment of pain is a vital step in cancer pain management
and is the responsibility of all healthcare providers. Accurate and
comprehensive assessment should be performed prior to treatment
to plan for appropriate interventions and to assess their effectiveness
after initiation.9
• Pain assessment aims to determine the:
 nature and pathophysiology of pain
 severity of pain
 impact of pain on functions and quality of life
 response to interventions
Like other clinical assessments, a complete pain assessment requires
a detailed history, physical examination and relevant investigations.
3.1 Clinical Presentation
Cancer pain can be classiﬁed by various methods according to
aetiology, pathophysiology, anatomical location of pain syndrome,
temporal pattern and severity. In the clinical context, cancer pain is
often described using a combination of these classiﬁcations. Clinical
characteristics of the pathophysiological classes of cancer pain are
shown in the following Table 1.
Table 1. Classiﬁcation of Cancer Pain Based on Pathophysiology
 Pain that is due to tissue damage associated with an
identiﬁable somatic or visceral lesion
 Subdivided into somatic and visceral types based on
the nature of tissue injury
 Damage of somatic tissue such as bones and soft
tissue
 Character is aching, stabbing or throbbing
 Pain is usually well localised
 Often made worse by movement
Nociceptive
Pain
• Somatic Pain
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2010.
Knowledge about pain characteristics, syndromes and pathophysiology
provides a useful background to understand cancer pain and helps to
determine appropriate interventions. Cancer patients experience pain
due to the underlying cancer or from its treatment. However, not all
pain experienced is from the cancer itself, it could sometimes be due
to pre-existing conditions. This emphasises the need to assess and
differentiate benign causes of pain (e.g. osteoarthritis, migraine and
osteoporosis) which may be managed differently from cancer pain.9
List of Common Pain Syndromes:9
• Nociceptive syndromes related to direct tumour involvement
 Base of skull metastasis
 Vertebral syndrome
 Diffuse or multifocal bone pain
 Pain due to neoplastic involvement of viscera e.g. liver capsular pain
• Neuropathic syndromes related to direct tumour involvement
 Peripheral nerve syndromes
 Brachial and lumbosacral plexopathy
 Leptomeningeal metastasis
 Epidural spinal cord, nerve root or cauda equina compression
• Syndromes related to therapy
 Post-operative pain syndromes such as post-thoracotomy pain
 Damage is to viscera e.g. liver, intestines, pancreas,
bladder, etc
 Character is cramping or gnawing when due to
obstruction of hollow viscus
 Character is aching, sharp or throbbing due to
tumour involvement of organ capsule
 Pain is usually diffuse and difficult to localise
 Pain may be referred to somatic structures
 Pain is due to abnormal somatosensory processing
in the peripheral or central nervous system
 Character is burning, pricking, electric-like, shooting
or stabbing, and sometimes may have a deep
aching component
 Pain is usually located in the area innervated by the
compressed/damaged peripheral nerve, plexus,
nerve root or spinal cord
 Pain is often associated with loss of sensation in
the painful region
 Allodynia (pain due to a stimulus that does not normally
provoke pain) or dysaesthesia (sponta-neous or
touch-evoked unpleasant sensations), may be present
• Visceral pain
Neuropathic
Pain
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
 Post-radiation syndromes
 Post-chemotherapy syndromes such as peripheral neuropathy
3.2 Clinical Assessment
3.2.1 History Taking
Taking a good pain history is important for accurate clinical assessment
as most pain diagnoses can be made based on history alone.
Table 2. Points for History Taking
Source: Ministry of Health Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2010.
3.2.2 Physical Examination
After taking a full history, physical examination serves to conﬁrm the
clinical diagnosis. This helps to provide a comprehensive understanding
of the patient’s condition and extent of problems.
•
Site(s) - single/multiple
•
Quality - sharp/dull/throbbing/colicky, etc.
•
Intensity - pain score
•
Timing - persistent/episodic/on movement/
spontaneous
•
Radiation of pain
•
Aggravating and relieving factors
•
Associated symptom - numbness/abnormal
sensation/ hyperalgesia/allodynia, etc.
Characteristics of pain
• Site(s) - primary/metastatic
• Treatment(s) - surgery/chemotherapy/
radiotherapy/targeted therapy
Cancer history
• Analgesics and adjuvants
• Side effects
• Concurrent medications including traditional/
alternative medications
• Treatment response/adherence
Medication
• Renal/liver disease
• Cardiac/respiratory disease
• Cognitive impairment
• Other pain conditions - acute/chronic
• Previous alcohol or drug abuse
Co-morbidities
Psychosocial-spiritual
• Emotional/psychological - depression/
anxiety/stress, etc.
• Meaning of pain to the patient
• Effects on activities of daily living/appetite/sleep
• Effects on socio-economic functioning
• Perception of pain and pain medications
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
3.2.3 Investigations
Investigations may be necessary to support the diagnosis and/
or assist clinical decision-making in certain conditions. These may
include radiological investigations such as plain X-rays, bone scans,
computerised tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), and blood investigations e.g., liver and renal function tests.
Investigations should be ordered only if the results could potentially
inﬂuence clinical management.
3.3
Pain Assessment Tools
Effective pain management requires careful assessment and
documentation of the pain. Pain assessment tools incorporate
unidimensional and multidimensional measures. The most commonly
used unidimensional assessment tools which are validated and
adequately reliable are:
• Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)
• Numerical Rating Scale (NRS)
• Verbal Rating Scale (VRS)
• Faces Pain Scale (FPS)
It is crucial to determine suitable assessment tools for each patient
according to his/her ability to use the tools. The scores should be
carefully interpreted by healthcare providers. Pain assessment using
a unidimensional scale is easily executed (with minimal training) and
sustainable in outpatient settings. In the implementation of “Pain as the
5th Vital Sign”, MoH has advocated the pain assessment tools as listed
in Appendix 4a (MoH Pain Scale) & 4c (VRS).14
A correlational study on various unidimensional tools [(NRS-11), Faces
Pain Scale (FPS), Verbal Descriptor Scale (VDS) and a mixed scale
(consisting of NRS-11, FPS and VDS)] in cancer patients aged ≥65
years showed:15, level III
• all four scales were reliable and valid for assessing cancer pain
• NRS-11 had the highest test-retest reliability for current pain
• VDS had the highest reliability for least pain
• FPS had the highest reliability for average pain
• mixed scale had the highest reliability for worst pain
A large systematic review measured assessment tools (unidimensional
and multidimensional) for cancer pain in adults based on psychometric
properties and clinical utility. The highly recommended tools
were:16, level III
• McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ)-Short Form
• NRS
• VAS
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
The other four recommended tools were Brief Pain Inventory (BPI),
BPI-Short Form, MPQ and Pain Disability Index. However, there was
no mention on the quality of the primary papers used in the review.
Recommendation 1
• Accurate and comprehensive assessment should be performed prior
to treatment in all patients with cancer pain.
• Appropriate pain assessment tools* should be used regularly on
patients with cancer pain and documented accordingly.
 The preferred unidimensional tools are Visual Analogue Scale,
Numerical Rating Scale, Verbal Rating Scale and Faces Pain Scale.
*Refer to Appendix 4 for Assessment Tools
3.3.1 Assessment tools for neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain is defined by the International Association for the
Study of Pain (IASP) as “pain caused by a lesion or disease of the
somatosensory nervous system”.3 It is a frequent consequence of
cancer pain and poses considerable suffering to the patients and their
families.
Neuropathic pain is a notable clinical challenge in relation to diagnosis
and thus can be overlooked in cancer pain. A cross-sectional study
looked into the predictors and common symptoms of neuropathic
cancer pain and showed:17, level III
• predictors were age <65 years old, disease duration >6 months,
stage IV cancer, history of chemotherapy and moderate-to-severe
cancer pain
• common descriptive symptoms were tingling, electric shock, and
‘pins and needles’
It is important to identify neuropathic pain using appropriate tools.
Two diagnostic studies looked into the accuracy of such tools. The
first study on The Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms and
Signs (LANSS) scale compared pain of predominantly neuropathic
or nociceptive origin in patients with refractory cancer-related pain.
Based on the reference test of clinician assessment, the AUC was 0.96
and a specificity of 100% at a cut-off value of 12 points in detecting
neuropathic pain.18, level I
In another diagnostic study on neuropathic pain in oncology patients
using pain specialist’s diagnosis as the gold standard, the findings
were:19, level III
• AUC of PainDETECT and Doeleur Neuropathique en 4 (DN4)
were 0.870 (95% CI 0.813 to 0.926) and 0.857 (95% CI 0.799 to
0.914) respectively
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
• PainDETECT had a specificity of 100% at cut-off value of ≥19,
while DN4 had 88.7% with a cut-off value of ≥4
• The following tools have shown good diagnostic properties in
detecting neuropathic pain:
 LANSS
 PainDETECT
 DN4
• The diagnosis of neuropathic pain needs to be confirmed with clinical
assessment.
3.3.2 Comprehensive Assessment
A comprehensive assessment is essential to achieve successful
cancer pain management. It includes the elements of history taking,
physical examination, psychological and spiritual assessment. The
use of assessment tools during clinical encounters has the potential to
shape the individual patient’s care in terms of experience, compliance,
satisfaction and improve rapport with healthcare providers. There
are a number of available tools for comprehensive assessment e.g.
Integrated Palliative Care Outcome Scale (IPOS), Edmonton Symptom
Assessment System (ESAS) and Memorial Symptom Assessment
Scale (MSAS).11
The IPOS is valid (good internal consistency with Cronbach α  of 0.77)
and reliable (good test-retest reliability with 60% of items having κw
>0.60) for outcome measures, both in patient self-report and staff
proxy-report versions.20, level III
ESAS has many modified versions. A correlational study on ESAS
using NRS with additional symptoms of constipation, sleep and added
time window of “past 24 hours” (ESAS-CS) and a version where a time
window of “now” was added (ESAS-r-CS) were compared with MSAS.
The findings were:21, level III
• ESAS-CS and ESAS-r-CS total scores correlated moderately with
total MSAS (Spearman’s rho 0.62 and 0.64 respectively)
• although participants preferred the ESAS-r-CS format (42.8% vs
18.6%) because of greater clarity and understandability, the ‘‘past
24 hours’’ time window (52.8%) was favoured over ‘‘now’’ (21.3%)
• shortness of breath and nausea correlated better for the ‘‘past 24
hours’’ time window (0.8 and 0.72 vs 0.74 and 0.64 in ESAS-CS
and ESAS-r-CS respectively)
• the 24-hour test-retest of the ESAS-CS demonstrated acceptable
reliability (ICC=0.69)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
For psychological assessment, the screening tools to measure and
recognise distress have to be simple and practical. There are the
single-item Distress Thermometer (DT) (refer to Appendix 4h & 4i)
and the multiple-item tools such as Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale (HADS), Brief Symptom Inventory-18 (BSI-18),9 Patient Health
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and General Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) that
are used to screen for psychological distress.
The foundation for spiritual evaluation models is a collection of
interpretive frameworks that requires substantial training in its use.
The common tools used in spiritual assessment are the FICA Spiritual
History Tool and HOPE Spiritual Assessment Tool.
• IPOS and ESAS are examples of comprehensive assessment tools
for patients with cancer pain.
• DT and HADS are some psychological assessment tools used to
screen for psychological distress.
3.3.3 Pain assessment tools in cognitive impairment/learning
disability
Pain assessment in patients with cognitive impairment is challenging as
self-reported assessment tools are inaccurate. Hence, observational
tools e.g. the Face Legs Activity Cry Consolability (FLACC) scale and The
Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia tool (PAINAD) may be helpful.
The PAINAD is one of the tools mentioned in WHO guidelines to assess
pain in patients with advanced dementia.11 A study evaluating the
psychometric properties of the PAINAD scale in medical inpatients with
dementia showed good inter-rater reliability (ICC of 0.92 at rest and
0.98 in movement) and internal consistency (Cronbach’s α of 0.76 at
rest and 0.80 in movement).22, level III
The MoH guidelines on Pain as the 5th Vital Sign states that FLACC
scale can be used for cognitively impaired adults.14, level III
• Observational tools e.g. FLACC scale or PAINAD may be useful to
assess pain in cognitively impaired adults.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
4. PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTION
The cornerstone of cancer pain management is using pharmacological
agents to provide pain relief and improve the quality of life for the patients.
The analgesics used can be divided into three main classes, namely
opioids, non-opioids and adjuvant medications. The choice of analgesic
as well as the dose and route of administration would depend on the
type and severity of pain. Other factors to be considered include age,
co-morbidities and patient’s adherence. A combination of medications
may be used. It is essential to monitor the patient’s response to the
medication while minimising any AEs in achieving optimal pain control.
4.1 Principles of Analgesic Medicine
WHO recommends the use of analgesic medicine should follow these
principles:11
• By mouth
 Analgesic medication should be given by mouth whenever possible.
• By the clock
 Doses of analgesic medication should be given at fixed intervals
around-the-clock.
 The aim is for the next dose to be given before the previous dose effect
has worn off.
• For the individual
 As each patient is unique and different, analgesic therapy should be
individualised.
 This is based on the type of pain, response to medication, AE etc.
• Attention to detail
 Prescription timing should consider the patient’s day and sleep
schedule.
 Education on the use of these medications should be given including
effects and AEs.
4.2 World Health Organization Analgesic Ladder
The 3-step World Health Organization (WHO) analgesic ladder, which
was introduced in 1986, remains useful as an educational tool but not
as a strict protocol for cancer pain treatment.11
The WHO analgesic ladder as shown in Figure 2 consists of three
steps: Step 1 for a pain score of 1 - 3 (mild), step 2 for a pain score of 4
- 6 (moderate) and Step 3 for a pain score of 7 - 10 (severe). The choice
of analgesia is based on the intensity of pain.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Figure 2. WHO Analgesic Ladder
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2010.
A multi-centre RCT showed that low doses of morphine were more
effective than standard doses of weak opioids for moderate cancer pain
in opioid-naive patients as shown below:23, level I
• 88.2% of patients on morphine and 54.7% of patients on weak
opioids achieved pain reduction of ≥20% from baseline (OR=6.18,
95% CI 3.12 to 12.24)
• the effectiveness of morphine over weak opioids was evident in the
first week after initiation of treatment (80.9% vs 43.6%; p<0.001)
and remained constant over four weeks
Both drug treatments were well tolerated with no differences observed
in the intensity and frequency of opioid-related side-effects between
them.
In a recent pragmatic clinical trial, there was some evidence that a
2-step approach was an alternative option and may be less expensive
than a 3-step approach in cancer pain management. However, the
findings of this trial were not intended to negate or advise against the
use of the original ladder and should be regarded as explorative as this
study was underpowered.24, level I
Recommendation 2
• The treatment of cancer pain should be based on the World Health
Organization (WHO) analgesic ladder.
NON-OPIOID
• Paracetamol
• NSAIDs (including COX-
2 inhibitors) ± adjuvant
WEAK OPIOID
• Tramadol
• Codeine
• Dihydrocodeine
± non-opioid ± adjuvant
STRONG OPIOID
• Morphine
• Oxycodone
• Fentanyl
± non-opioid ± adjuvant
Step 1
Pain Score 1 - 3
Mild
Step 2
Pain Score 4 - 6
Moderate
Step 3
Pain Score 7 - 10
Severe
*Strong opioids can be considered to treat moderate cancer pain.23, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
4.3 Non-opioids
A systematic review of 12 clinical trials comparing nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or paracetamol added to WHO Step III
opioids and opioids alone in moderate to severe cancer pain showed
the following findings:25, level I
• NSAIDs added to opioids
 Five of seven studies showed a positive impact where three
demonstrated improved analgesia and two showed a reduction
in opioid consumption.
 In terms of safety, six studies failed to demonstrate any
statistically significant difference between the two groups. In
contrast, one study showed that constipation was significantly
more frequent in the morphine group and gastric discomfort was
significantly more frequent in the morphine and ketorolac group.
• Paracetamol added to opioids
 Four studies failed to confirm any benefit of add-on paracetamol
treatment. In contrast, one study reported a slightly greater
reduction in pain score for paracetamol combination [MD of 0.4
on a 0 - 10 numeric rating scale (NRS)]. This study used the
highest paracetamol dose (5 g/day) and had a short follow-up
(96 hours).
 AEs were similar between the groups except for one study
in which increased somnolence was present in patients on
methadone plus paracetamol.
The quality assessment of the primary papers was not well reported.
A Cochrane systematic review on oral NSAIDs for cancer pain in adults
found:26, level I
• no high-quality evidence to support or refute the use of NSAIDs
alone or in combination with opioids for the three steps of the
WHO cancer pain ladder
• very low-quality evidence that some people with moderate or
severe cancer pain can obtain substantial levels of benefit within
one or two weeks
Another Cochrane systematic review on the effectiveness and safety of
paracetamol in cancer pain revealed:27, level I
• no convincing evidence of paracetamol being different from
placebo with regards to QoL, use of rescue medication and
participants’ satisfaction or preference
• measures of harm (serious AEs and other AEs) were inconsistently
reported and provided no clear evidence of difference between the
groups
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
• There is no high-quality evidence to support the use of paracetamol
or NSAIDs as an add-on to opioid analgesia in cancer pain.
While the previous edition of CPG on Management of Cancer Pain,
paracetamol or NSAIDs are the drugs of choice for mild cancer pain
(Step 1 of the WHO analgesic ladder).9 WHO guidelines for cancer
pain recommends that NSAIDs, paracetamol or opioids should be
used at the stage of initiation of pain management, either alone or in
combination in adults and adolescents with pain related to cancer. This
depends on the clinical assessment and pain severity of the patients.11
Recommendation 3
• Paracetamol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be used for
mild cancer pain (Step 1 of the World Health Organization analgesic
ladder).
4.4 Opioids
Opioid analgesics are essential for the treatment of moderate to severe
cancer pain. Constipation, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness and pruritus
are common AEs of opioids.
4.4.1 Weak opioids
Weak opioids which include tramadol, dihydrocodeine and codeine are
also classified as WHO step-2 ladder opioids and mainly used for mild
to moderate cancer pain.28
Tramadol acts both as a central opiate agonist and central nervous
system reuptake inhibitor of norepinephrine and serotonin. Liver or
renal impairment may require dose adjustments because of tramadol
hepatic metabolism and renal clearance. Serotonin syndrome has been
reported with the use of tramadol especially with concurrent use of
other serotonergic drugs e.g. antidepressants.29, level III
The use of tramadol is prevalent in cancer pain management although
data on its use is not extensive. In a Cochrane systematic review on
moderate to severe cancer pain, tramadol exhibited lower effectiveness
compared with morphine based on very low-quality evidence. Tramadol
doses ranged from 50 - 600 mg/day with the most common dose being
300 - 400 mg/day in line with the usual clinical practice. Comparisons
between tramadol and dihydrocodeine did not yield any significant
information. Most of the results in this review came from an RCT in
2016 comparing weak opioids with low-dose morphine with the latter
having a higher percentage of patients achieving a reduction in pain
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
of ≥30% (OR=5.4, 95% CI 2.92 to 9.97) and ≥50% (OR=4.27, 95% CI
2.42 to 7.54).30, level I
Tramadol exhibits the typical opioid AEs of nausea, dizziness and
dry mouth. There is also an increased risk of convulsion with its use.
However, vomiting and constipation is expected to be less compared
with strong opioids.29, level III
A Cochrane systematic review comparing codeine ± paracetamol
with placebo found limited evidence to indicate that codeine is more
effective in cancer pain. However, it had an increased risk of nausea,
vomiting and constipation.31, level I In clinical practice, oral codeine and
dihydrocodeine appear to be equipotent.9
Weak opioids are generally more accessible compared with strong
opioids. In situations where access to morphine or other strong opioids
may be limited or not immediate, tramadol or dihydrocodeine may be
an option in cancer pain management.
Recommendation 4
• Weak opioids may be used for moderate pain (step 2 of the WHO
analgesic ladder) in cancer pain.
4.4.2 Strong opioids
Strong opioids commonly used in Malaysia include morphine, fentanyl
and oxycodone. They are recommended for use in moderate to severe
cancer pain. There is no maximum dose for this group of opioids and
the appropriate dose is the dose which provides pain relief without
causing major or intolerable AEs. In most settings, morphine remains
the first choice for reasons of familiarity, availability and cost.28 It is also
listed in the WHO essential medicines list.32
•
Morphine
A large Cochrane systematic review of 62 studies compared the
effectiveness and safety of oral morphine with various controls in
relieving cancer pain. The range of oral morphine doses used varied
from 25 mg/day to 300 mg/day and titrated to effect. Mean daily doses
ranged from 100 mg/day to 250 mg/day with the maximum dose
recorded at 2000 mg/day. The findings were:33, level I
 morphine was an effective analgesic for moderate to severe
cancer pain and >90% of participants had ‘no worse than mild
pain’
 adverse events (AEs) were common and predictable but only
approximately 6% of participants discontinued treatment with
morphine because of intolerable AEs
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Other results of the above review were:
 oral morphine was as effective as other opioids when used at the
correct dose as no conclusive evidence was found on other strong
opioids being superior in effectiveness to morphine
 no difference in pain relief between immediate-release (IR) and
sustained-release (SR) morphine
 no conclusive evidence on the effectiveness of double bedtime
dose of IR morphine to improve pain relief and prevent the patients
receiving 4-hourly dosing from being woken up at night
The quality of the evidence was generally poor with some studies being
old, small and designed for registration purposes.
In the previous edition of CPG on cancer pain, it is stated that oral
morphine should be the first choice of treatment in moderate to severe
cancer pain. Alternatives to it are oxycodone and fentanyl.9
WHO recommends oral morphine, i.e. regular dosing of IR or SR
formulation, should be used to maintain effective and safe pain relief
in cancer pain. IR morphine should be used as rescue medicine with
either formulation. Thus, IR morphine must be available and accessible
to those who require it. Apart from that, SR morphine should be made
available as an addition to IR morphine.11
The time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) of IR and SR oral
morphine is 1 hour and 2 - 6 hours respectively. The Tmax for intravenous
(IV) and subcutaneous (SC) morphine is 5 - 10 minutes and 15 minutes
respectively. The duration of action of IR and SR morphine is 3 - 6 hours
and 12 hours respectively.34
•
Oxycodone
Oxycodone is an alternative strong opioid which is available in IR
and CR oral formulations. A recent Cochrane review on adult cancer
pain found that there was little to no difference in pain intensity, pain
relief and AEs between oxycodone and other strong opioids including
morphine. The review also found that constipation and hallucinations
occurred less often with CR oxycodone than with CR morphine ([RR of
0.75 (95% CI 0.66 to 0.86) and 0.52 (95% CI 0.28 to 0.97 respectively)].
However, these two findings should be treated with caution as the
certainty of the evidence was either very low or unstable with sensitivity
analysis.35, level I
IR oxycodone has a Tmax of 1 - 1.5 hours and a plasma half-life of
2 - 4 hours.34 The CR oxycodone is absorbed in a bi-exponential
fashion with a rapid phase half-life of 37 minutes (accounting for 38%
of the dose) and a slow phase half-life of 6.2 hours (which accounts
for the residual 62%). This allows the onset of analgesia using CR
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
oxycodone within one hour of ingestion and an analgesic duration of 12
hours.36, level III
•
Fentanyl
Fentanyl is an alternative opioid that can be used in cancer pain. In
Malaysia, it is available as transdermal patch, sublingual and parenteral
preparations.
Transdermal (TD) fentanyl should only be considered in patients with
stable opioid requirements who have difficulty swallowing or intractable
nausea and vomiting.9 In a Cochrane systematic review comparing
TD fentanyl with oral morphine for relief of cancer pain, there was
insufficient comparable data for a meta-analysis to be undertaken
for the analgesic effect. However, transdermal fentanyl showed a
reduction in constipation (RR=0.61, 95% CI 0.47 to 0.78; NNT=5.5). No
meaningful analysis was possible for other AEs.37, level I
When switching from other opioids to transdermal fentanyl, there is a
lag time between application of the patch and onset of analgesia due to
its pharmacokinetics whereby on average, minimally effective plasma
concentrations of fentanyl are seen in 12 hours. Regular 4-hourly
oral opioids should therefore, be discontinued 12 hours after patch
application. Similarly, when converting from SR opioid preparations, the
patch should be applied together with the last dose of SR medication.9
However, an RCT on the conversion of IV to transdermal fentanyl in
chronic cancer pain revealed that the effectiveness of continuing the IV
for six hours after patch application (6-h method) was equivalent to the
12-h method in terms of number of rescue doses for breakthrough pain
required (p>0.05) and thus may be considered for a simpler method of
conversion.38, level I
The Tmax of transdermal fentanyl is 12 - 24 hours and the duration of
action is 72 hours. The plasma half-life of transdermal fentanyl ranges
from 13 - 22 hours. Parenteral fentanyl (e.g. boluses of IV/SC) has a
short duration of action of approximately 60 minutes and is not routinely
used for maintenance therapy.34
Fentanyl is generally considered a safer opioid in renal impairment as
its metabolites have minimal effect.39, level I
The approximate pharmacokinetic parameters of morphine, oxycodone
and fentanyl are shown in Table 3.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Table 3. Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Morphine,
Oxycodone and Fentanyl
*Following the application of the first patch
Recommendation 5
• Oral morphine is the preferred choice in moderate to severe cancer
pain.
 Immediate-release oral morphine should be made available in all
healthcare facilities.
• Oxycodone and fentanyl can be used as alternatives to morphine.
• Transdermal fentanyl should only be used when opioid requirements
are stable.
4.4.3 Opioid initiation, titration and maintenance
•
Initiation
Strong opioids should be initiated at the lowest effective dose. For
persistent pain, an IR formulation should be given every four hours
to control background pain and with similar doses given up to every
hour as needed for breakthrough pain. Patients who have been taking
other analgesics, such as NSAIDs, may continue these analgesics after
opioid initiation if these agents provide additional analgesia and are not
contraindicated.
Oral morphine is the first-line therapy for moderate to severe cancer pain.
A dose of 5 mg 4-hourly of IR oral morphine in opioid-naive patients has
been shown to be a safe and effective starting dose (p<0.01). Opioidnaive patients are those not chronically receiving opioid analgesic on
a daily basis and therefore have not developed significant tolerance.
Patients already on regular weak opioids (tramadol or dihydrocodeine)
may have morphine initiated at a dose equivalent to that of the weak
opioid (refer to Table 4). A lower starting dose of 2.5 mg 4 - 6 hourly of
IR oral morphine has been shown to be effective (p<0.01) and safe in
elderly or frail patients.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
•
Titration
Early assessment and dose titration must be carried out in all patients
initiated on opioids. Dose titration can be done as early as 24 hours
after initiation. A dose increment may be necessary when a patient
reports persistent pain, or needs to take multiple doses for breakthrough
pain (>3 doses) throughout the day, while a dose reduction may be
warranted if there are intolerable side effects.
There is no maximum dose for opioids in cancer pain management.
The increase or decrease in opioid daily dose is usually approximately
25 - 50% of the total daily dose, taking into consideration patient factors
such as organ function, frailty and co-morbidities.40 However, if the
patient persistently requires many rescue doses despite increasing
ATC medication, other pain conditions need to be considered and
further assistance from specialist is required.
Options of titration:
 Calculate the total daily dose of 4-hourly opioid + dose of opioids
taken for breakthrough pain over the last 24 hours (Limit to 50%
dose increment within 24 hours. If >50% increment is needed, to
consult specialist.)
OR
 Increase opioid daily dose (25 - 50% of the daily dose) for patient
who takes no rescue doses but still has uncontrolled pain
Example 1:
To determine the new dose of opioids, the total daily dose of opioid is
calculated (4-hourly opioid added with the total dose of opioids taken
for breakthrough pain over the last 24 hours). This is divided by 6 to
give the new regular 4-hourly doses.
Patient is on aqueous morphine 5 mg 4-hourly and takes 3 extra rescue
doses.
Total 24h morphine = (5 mg x 6) + (5 mg x 3) = 45 mg/24h
New 4-hourly dose: 45 mg/6 = 7.5 mg (rounded down to nearest mg)
Prescription: aqueous morphine 7 mg 4-hourly and 7 mg PRN
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Example 2:
Patient is on aqueous morphine 5 mg 4-hourly and takes no rescue
doses but still has uncontrolled pain.
Total 24h morphine = (5 mg x 6) = 30 mg/24h
NEW 24h morphine = 30 mg + 25% of 30 mg (7.5 mg) = 37.5 mg
New 4-hourly dose: 37.5 mg/6 = 6.25 mg (rounded down to nearest mg)
Prescription: aqueous morphine 6 mg 4-hourly and 6 mg PRN
•
Maintenance
Once pain control is adequate and a stable effective dose has been
determined, long-acting opioid formulations may be considered for
ease of administration.
Long-acting morphine or oxycodone oral formulations are taken every 12
hours, while transdermal fentanyl patches are applied every 72 hours.
Example 3:
Patient’s pain control is adequate with aqueous morphine 7.5 mg
4-hourly and no additional doses required for breakthrough pain.
Total 24h morphine = 7.5 mg x 6 = 45 mg
Convert to Tab morphine SR = 45 mg/2 = 22.5 mg
Prescription: Tab morphine SR 20* mg BD (morphine SR available
in 10 mg & 30 mg tabs)
*Rounding of the prescription dose is based on drug strength availability.
In patients presenting with severe cancer pain, rapid titration using
parenteral opioids may be useful in controlling patient’s initial pain. Refer
to Algorithm 2 on Titration of Morphine for Rapid Pain Relief in Adults
with Severe Pain and Distress.
• Morphine therapy:9
 should be titrated according to individual analgesic response and
occurrence of AEs
 should be initiated at the dose of 5 - 10 mg 4-hourly using the oral
IR formulation
 should be started with a lower dose of 2.5 - 5 mg 4 - 6-hourly of the IR
formulation in the elderly
• Rapid titration using IV or SC morphine is preferred in patients
presenting with severe cancer pain for initial pain control.9
• There is no maximum dose for strong opioids in cancer pain
management.9
• Alternative methods of administration:
 4-hourly parenteral morphine/oxycodone
 continous parenteral opioid infusion
• Long-term use of opioids must not be abruptly discontinued to avoid
withdrawal. Tapering opioid therapy must be conducted in a stepwise
fashion, involving patients throughout the process.40
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Recommendation 6
• Patients with persistent cancer pain should be prescribed with regular
(around-the-clock) analgesia.
 Opioid doses must be titrated to achieve optimal pain relief with
minimal adverse events.
 Long-acting opioid formulations may be considered for patients
once the effective opioid dose has been established.
4.4.4 Breakthrough pain management
• Breakthrough pain in cancer refers to an exacerbation of pain in the
setting of chronic pain managed with analgesics around-the-clock.11
• Breakthrough pain:41
 typically, is of rapid onset, severe in intensity and self-limiting, with an
average duration of 30 min
 affects over 50% of patients with cancer
 may lead to anxiety, depression, decreased functioning and prolonged
stays in hospital
Every patient on an opioid should have access to rescue analgesia
in order to ensure optimal pain control. There are two subtypes of
breakthrough pain which are spontaneous pain and incident pain.
Spontaneous pain is sudden and has no identifiable trigger. On the
other hand, incident pain is related to an activity e.g. movement and
is predictable. Incident pain therefore may be managed by taking
medication prior to the action which precipitates it.41 This needs to be
differentiated from end-of-dose failure which occurs when medication
wears off before the next regular analgesic dose is due. End-of-dose
failure often happens just prior to the next scheduled dose of medication
and may be attributed to inadequate analgesic doses or dose intervals
exceeding the medication’s duration of minimum effective plasma level
for pain control.42
The consensus and standard of care have been on using 5% to 15%
(up to 20%) of the morphine equivalent daily dose (MEDD) in the form
of an oral IR opioid to manage transient pain episodes.43, level III Evidence
to establish the appropriate dose of morphine for breakthrough pain is
lacking. However, the widely accepted ratio of the rescue dose to the
“around-the-clock” (ATC) medication has been 1/6 i.e. equivalent to the
4-hourly opioid dose. In cases where smaller rescue doses are required
e.g. in renal impairment, doses as low as 1/12 of the 24-hour dose can
be used. This ‘rescue’ dose may be given as frequently as required (up
to hourly). The ATC dose may be adjusted considering the total amount
of rescue morphine taken for the last 24 hours.9; 44, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
A cross-sectional study on patients with advanced cancer reported
that the vast majority (89%) of patients with breakthrough pain who
had adequately controlled background pain (rated as ≤3 on ESAS pain
scale 0 - 10) found oral IR opioid to be either effective or very effective
in controlling their breakthrough pain episodes.43, level III
IV opioid titration and bolus administration have also been used to
improve control of breakthrough pain.28
Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC) which is available in Malaysia
as sublingual fentanyl is only indicated for breakthrough cancer pain
and its method of use is markedly different from other IR opioids. The
total OTFC dose taken cannot be used to calculate and titrate the
new ATC dose. Careful patient selection, titration and monitoring are
required to ensure its optimal use. It is not interchangeable with other
IR opioids. It should only be used in adults on regular strong opioids
(oral morphine 60 mg/24h) for ≥1 week.34
A non-inferiority clinical trial did not demonstrate fentanyl sublingual
tablets (FST) 100 mcg being non-inferior to SC morphine 5 mg.
Patients taking FST received a second drug dose after 30 min more
frequently than those taking SC morphine with a non-significant RD of
-13%. Thus, FST cannot be generally recommended as a substitute for
SC morphine.45, level I
In a non-randomised clinical trial on breakthrough pain, the mean pain
intensity levels were significantly lower with FST than oral morphine
solution at day 3, 7, 15 and 30. FST also provided significantly faster
relief and a shorter dose titration period.46, level II-1
• Rescue dose for breakthrough pain is given as often as required (up
to hourly).9
• ATC dose is adjusted considering the total amount of rescue dose for
the last 24 hours.9
Recommendation 7
• All patients with cancer pain who are on opioids should be prescribed
with rescue analgesia if required to ensure optimal pain control.
• Opioids (morphine or oxycodone) for breakthrough cancer pain
should be prescribed at 1/6 to 1/12 of the 24-hour dose.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
4.4.5. Opioid rotation
Opioid rotation is a strategy of switching from one opioid to another to
improve pain relief or reduce AEs.
This strategy may be indicated in up to 44% of patients with cancerrelated pain. Improvement in pain as well as reduced AEs after rotation
were seen in 50 - 90% of these patients. Uncontrolled pain was the
main reason for opioid rotation in the outpatient setting while AEs were
the reason in the inpatient setting where patients were often more
debilitated.47, level III
• Common indications for opioid switching include:47, level III
 inadequate pain relief despite appropriate titration
 intolerable AEs (e.g. sedation, nausea, vomiting, constipation)
 organ impairment
 practical considerations (e.g. lack of compliance, inability to swallow)
In a large systematic review on opioid rotation, the findings were:48, level I
• all studies showed pain improvement or stable pain relief with
opioid rotation
• dose titration may still be necessary to achieve stable analgesia
• no particular opioid demonstrated superiority to another opioid
• a higher dosage of the first-line opioid tended to result in lower
success rates of rotation
• reduction of AEs was limited with rotation, but patient’s satisfaction
was generally positive ranging from 60 - 90%
Rotating between opioids remains challenging due to a lack of wellestablished evidence to support the dose conversions used in clinical
practice, and more so in complex cases when there is a need to balance
between pain relief and AEs. To address this, a common suggestion is
to reduce the calculated dose by 25 - 50% when initiating opioid rotation
and titrate upwards accordingly.9 Because of individual variability, the
conversion between opioids should always take into consideration
the patient’s co-morbidities, concomitant medications, pain and AE
intensity and also any pharmacokinetic factors that could influence the
effectiveness of the medications.
A systematic review that specifically looked at equianalgesic opioid
doses reported the following conversion ratios:28
• morphine-oxycodone of 1.5:1
• oral morphine-transdermal fentanyl of 100:1
The conversion ratio from different opioids to methadone was highly
variable, ranging from 5:1 to 10:1.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
The suggested conversion ratio is shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Suggested Dose Conversion Ratio in
The Direction Specified
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2010.
Note: Instructions for using the conversion table
1.
This conversion chart should only be used as a guide and
treatment must be individually tailored for patients based on clinical
assessment.
2.
When changing from one opioid to another, consider a dose
reduction of 25 - 50% due to incomplete cross-tolerance.
3.
Consider reduced doses in the elderly and in patients with renal or
significant hepatic impairment.
4.
Calculate the total 24-hour opioid dose in mg (for fentanyl, note
that the hourly rate is in mcg).
5.
Begin at the left-hand column and identify the opioid currently used.
6.
Select the alternative opioid from the top row.
7.
Identify the box where the column and row intersect and determine
the conversion factor to divide or multiply in order to obtain the 24hour dose of the alternative opioid.
8.
Divide 24-hour dose according to the dosing frequency required
(for example divide by 2 for BD dosing and divide by 6 for 4-hourly
dosing).
9.
Calculate the rescue dose for breakthrough pain for each opioid as
approximately 1/6 to 1/12 of the total daily dose.
10. Additional conversions:
• PO dihydrocodeine 90 mg/day = PO morphine 10 - 12 mg/day
• PO tramadol 150 mg/day = PO morphine 15 - 30 mg/day
• TD fentanyl 25 mcg/hour = continuous SC/IV infusion fentanyl
25 mcg/hour
• SC morphine = IV morphine
Oral morphine
mg/day
Oral morphine
mg/day
SC morphine
mg/day
SC morphine
mg/day
Oral oxycodone
mg/day
Oral oxycodone
mg/day
SC oxycodone
mg/day
SC oxycodone
mg/day
TD fentanyl
mcg/h
TD fentanyl
mcg/h
TO
FROM
2
1.5
3
3
2
0.7
1.5
1.5
1.5
0.7
2
2
3
1.5
2
1
3
1.5
2
1
MULTIPLY
DIVIDE
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Example 1:
Conversion of oral morphine to oral oxycodone
Oral morphine mg/day (20 mg 4-hourly = 120 mg per day)
Conversion factor = divide by 1.5
Equivalent dose of oxycodone = 120 ÷ 1.5 = 80 mg per day
Reduce equivalent dose by 25% = 60 mg per day (due to incomplete
cross-tolerance)
Therefore, dose of CR oxycodone = 30 mg twice daily
Example 2:
Conversion of oral morphine to transdermal fentanyl
Oral morphine mg/day (16 mg 4-hourly = 100 mg per day)
Conversion factor = divide by 3
Equivalent dose of transdermal fentanyl = 100 ÷ 3 = 33 mcg per hour
Reduce equivalent dose by 25% = 25 mcg per hour (due to incomplete
cross-tolerance)
Therefore, dose of TD fentanyl = 25 mcg per hour
Recommendation 8
• Opioid rotation should be considered in patients with cancer pain who
are not responding to dose escalation or experiencing intolerable
adverse events.
4.4.6 Opioids requiring special attention
•
Methadone
Methadone is an alternative treatment in specialist services for special
circumstances e.g. difficult pain, renal impairment, neuropathic pain
syndrome and hyperalgesic states. Its use in cancer pain management
needs careful consideration and expertise due to its complex
pharmacology. In Malaysia, methadone is mainly used for harm
reduction in Methadone Replacement Therapy. However, its method of
use is different in treating cancer pain.
In a Cochrane systematic review of six studies on the effectiveness
and tolerability of methadone as an analgesic for cancer pain vs active
comparators, the findings were:49, level I
 methadone was similar to morphine in the effectiveness of pain control
 methadone was well tolerated; however, somnolence was more
common with methadone while dry mouth was more common with
morphine
Based on GRADE, the quality of evidence in this review was low to
very low.
In another systematic review of 10 small studies on cancer pain,
methadone was effective and safe as a first-line analgesic.50, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
However, no quality assessment of primary studies was mentioned.
WHO guidelines state that due to the complex nature and wide interindividual variation in its pharmacokinetics, methadone should be
initiated only by practitioners experienced in cancer pain.11
Recommendation 9
• Methadone may be considered in the management of cancer pain
 It should only be prescribed by healthcare providers experienced with
its use in the management of cancer pain.
•
Pethidine
Pethidine should not be used in chronic cancer pain management.
Long-term pethidine use or at high doses pose a risk of toxic metabolite
(norpethidine) accumulation and can cause seizures. Its use may have
an increased risk of addiction and is associated with higher incidence
of euphoria.9
Recommendation 10
• Pethidine should not be used in the management of cancer pain.
4.4.7 Opioids use in special populations
•
Renal and liver impairment
Renal and liver impairment alter the pharmacokinetics of many
medications including opioids by changing opioid metabolism
and reducing its clearance, resulting in accumulation of the opioid
metabolites. These generally result in more AEs and an increased risk
of toxicity. There is limited evidence examining the use of opioids in
cancer patients with renal and liver impairment.
The use of opioids in cancer patients with renal impairment is based
on pharmacokinetic data, extrapolation of evidence in non-cancer
patients and clinical experience. Clinical evidence on the use of opioids
in cancer patients with renal impairment was scarce and of very low
quality.39, level I; 51, level I Given the lack of relevant clinical data, the
stratification of risk is guided by the activity of its metabolites and its
potential to accumulate.
Morphine is metabolised in the liver to morphine-3-glucuronide (M3G)
and morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G). Both are excreted in the urine.
M3G is an inactive metabolite, while M6G is active and both accumulate
in renal impairment. Accumulation of M6G is associated with central
nervous system AEs and respiratory depression.9
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
A systematic review of 18 studies to evaluate the use of opioids in
cancer patients with renal impairment revealed substantial disagreement
within the existing literature on the relationship between creatinine
clearance and the clearance of morphine and its metabolites.51, level I
There was an increased chance of toxicity when morphine was used in
patients with renal impairment. Patients with renal impairment (<90 ml/
min/1.73 m2) treated with morphine had higher odds of having severe
constipation (OR=1.91, 95 % CI 1.08 to 3.37) compared with those with
normal renal function. Higher serum morphine concentrations were
more likely to lead to severe cognitive dysfunction (OR=1.77, 95 % CI
1.13 to 2.78).51, level I The significant predictors of morphine intolerance
were age >78 years, high white cell count and high platelet count on
concomitant poor liver or renal function.51, level I
Elimination of oxycodone and its metabolites was significantly
prolonged in renal impairment. Hence, these patients with increased
serum concentrations of oxycodone were more likely to report severe
fatigue (OR=1.70, 95% CI 1.04 to 2.78).51, level I
In another systematic review of 15 studies on the use of opioids
for cancer patients with moderate to severe cancer pain and renal
impairment, no studies were able to identify the risk of toxicity of opioids
in the patients. There was also no direct clinical evidence on the use of
any opioids in renal impairment or level of impairment where caution is
needed.39, level I
Fentanyl is metabolised in the liver and its metabolites have minimal
or no pharmacological effect. It is least likely to cause harm when used
appropriately.39, level I
Recommendations on the use of opioids in cancer-related pain with
eGFR of 30 - 89 ml/min (mild to moderate renal impairment) are as
follows:39, level I
• assess for any reversible factors
• all opioids that are appropriate for cancer pain can be used with
consideration of a reduced dose or frequency
• monitor for changes in renal function and consider opioid switching
in rapidly deteriorating renal function
• be aware that estimations of GFR may be less accurate in the
presence of cachexia, low protein states, oedema and acute renal
failure; a lower eGFR should prompt consideration of a change of
opioid to one considered safer in renal impairment
There was also lack of good clinical data on opioid treatment in cancer
patients with hepatic impairment. In a systematic review of three studies
assessing opioid use in cancer patients with hepatic impairment, there
was an increase in morphine and M6G concentrations although this
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
was not significant. Therefore, there was a need for dose adjustment for
morphine and oxycodone. The available evidence was heterogeneous
and of low quality.52, level I
In the earlier edition of MoH CPG on Cancer Pain, it was stated that
all opioids should be used cautiously and at reduced doses and/or
reduced frequency in patients with renal and/or liver impairment.9
•
Older adults
There is paucity of data on the use of opioids in older adults with
cancer pain. Advanced age has greater vulnerability with a proportion
of this population having multiple co-morbidities. Challenges in pain
assessment, concomitant medical conditions, cognitive impairment
e.g. dementia, increasing frailty and loss of physiologic reserve may
decrease their capacity to deal with pain and its treatment effectively.
Polypharmacy and co-morbid diseases may also reduce the type of
available treatment options.3
Effective and safe cancer pain management in older adults requires
careful assessment and individualised care.
• In older adults with cancer pain, the general principle of treatment is
to start medication at a low dose and titrate slowly.
Recommendation 11
• In the management of cancer pain for older patients or those with
renal/liver impairment:
 All opioids should be used with caution.*
 Adjustment in doses/frequency of opioids should be considered.
*Fentanyl is a safer opioid in renal impairment.
4.4.8 Opioid side effects
Opioids are generally well-tolerated and safe in cancer pain
management.9 In a large systematic review of 25 studies, nausea and
constipation were most common, whilst vomiting, drowsiness and dry
mouth were less frequent.54, level I
There was a dose-effect relationship, where higher rates of AEs were
seen with higher opioid starting doses and higher doses after titration,
particularly in morphine.54, level I Awareness of these AEs is vital to
ensure compliance and optimal pain control.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Management strategies include awareness and recognition of the
AEs, symptomatic management of individual AEs and adjustment of
opioid dosages, including dose reduction and opioid switching. Refer
to Appendix 5a for Suggested Medication Dosages and Adverse
Events in Adults. The management of the side effects is discussed
below.
• Constipation
 Constipation is the commonest reported AE with a 25% incidence
rate.53, level I
 Concurrent prophylaxis for constipation e.g. stimulants and
softening laxatives is recommended for all patients on regular
opioid therapy.9
 The rate of constipation is lower for fentanyl than morphine.54,
level I Thus, fentanyl can be considered as an alternative in severe
morphine-induced constipation.9
• Nausea and vomiting
 Nausea occurs in 21% while vomiting in 13% of patients on opioid
therapy.53, level I
 These AEs are temporary and tolerance commonly develops in 5
-10 days after initiation of opioids.9
 Anti-emetics e.g. metoclopramide, haloperidol and prochlorperazine
can be used to treat these AEs.9
• Dry mouth
 The incidences of dry mouth are variable, ranging from 17%53, level I
to 94%.54, level I
 It is particularly important, as patients on opioid therapy rated the
symptom as moderate to severe.54, level I Non-pharmacological
measures e.g. oral hygiene, sugar-free chewing gum/candies,
and saliva stimulant mouth spray/gel can be offered to patients to
improve their symptoms.
• Sedation and drowsiness
 Sedation can occur at the initiation of opioid therapy and tends to
resolve within a week.9
 Somnolence is reported in 13% of patients53, level I and drowsiness
in up to 88%, with the rate of drowsiness higher in oxycodone
compared with other opioids, even where low doses are used.54, level I
 In many patients, symptoms are brief and patient education
is
sufficient.
For
patients
with
co-morbidities
(metabolic
encephalopathy, dementia) and on concomitant sedation use,
prolonged sedation may occur.9
 Management strategies include dose reduction, titration using the
lowest effective dose, and opioid switching.9 Methylphenidate and
other psychostimulant drugs can be considered if necessary.9; 40
• Delirium and neurotoxicity (including confusion and myoclonus)
 Transient mild cognitive impairment may occur upon opioid initiation
and usually resolves within 1 - 2 weeks.9
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
 Persistent delirium should prompt further investigation for its
causes (e.g. hypercalcaemia, sepsis and electrolytes imbalances)
whenever appropriate.
 A dose reduction of 25% with opioid switching may resolve
delirium. Low-dose antipsychotics e.g. haloperidol may be used.9
 Opioid-induced myoclonus is usually mild and can be managed
by dose reduction and opioid switching. In a systematic review of
25 studies on opioid-related AEs, there was no report on
myoclonus.54,
level
I
Pharmacological
management
using
clonazepam, sodium valproate and baclofen can be considered.9
• Pruritus
 Puritus can occasionally occur as an AE and has been reported up
to 9%.54, level I It is more common after neuroaxial opioid delivery.
 Antihistamines can be considered and opioid switching may be
necessary if the symptom is severe.
• Other AEs
 Opioid-induced endocrinopathy
Cancer patients are surviving longer with the advancement of
oncological management.
 Long-term opioid treatment in surviving patients with cancerrelated pain has been shown to affect the endocrine system.55,
level III
 Patient education, close follow-up, use of the lowest effective
opioid dose and opioid tapering may be considered in this
patient population.40
 Opioid-induced hyperalgesia56
 It is a state of nociceptive sensitisation caused by exposure to
opioids.
 It is characterised by a paradoxical response whereby a patient
receiving opioids for the treatment of pain could become more
sensitive to certain painful stimuli.
 Refer to pain or palliative care physicians for further
management.
The management of opioid side effects is shown in Table 5 below. Refer
to Appendix 5a for Suggested Medication Dosages and Adverse
Effects in Adults.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Table 5. Management of Opioid Side Effects
4.4.9. Opioid toxicity
•
Respiratory depression
Respiratory depression is a result of opioid toxicity. It is a very rare event
that may occur during rapid titration.9 It is uncommon during chronic
administration.40 When appropriately titrated against the patient’s pain,
strong opioids do not cause clinically important respiratory depression.34
Sedation almost always precedes respiratory depression. Therefore,
sedation assessment is a good early clinical indicator of opioid-induced
respiratory depression.9
If severe respiratory depression occurs (respiratory rate <8/minute),
very low doses of naloxone at 40 mcg (0.04 mg) can be used and
titrated every 1 - 3 minutes against the patient’s respiratory rate.
Large bolus doses of naloxone should not be given as it reverses the
analgesic effects and causes major physical withdrawal syndromes.
Severe hypertension, pulmonary oedema, cardiac arrhythmia and
cardiac arrest have been reported with naloxone use.34
Faecal softeners
• lactulose
• macrogol
Stimulant laxatives
• bisacodyl
• senna
Anti-emetics
• Metoclopramide
• Haloperidol
• Prochlorperazine
Non-pharmacological treatment:
• Good oral hygiene
• Sugar-free chewing gum and candies/sweets
• Saliva stimulants (e.g. mouth spray/gel)
• Opioid dose reduction, titrate to the lowest effective
dose, and consider opioid switching
• Methylphenidate and other psychostimulant drugs can
be considered if necessary
• Can be managed by dose reduction and opioid switching
• Can consider using clonazepam, sodium valproate and
baclofen for myoclonus
• Can consider antipsychotics for delirium
• May consider antihistamines
• Opioid switching may be necessary if the symptoms
are severe
Constipation
Nausea and
Vomiting
Dry Mouth
Sedation and
drowsiness
Delirium and
neurotoxicity
(e.g. confusion
and myoclonus)
Pruritus
Side Effects
Management
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Refer to Appendix 7 for Guide for Naloxone Use.
Recommendation 12
• Opioid-induced side effects should be proactively identified and
treated adequately to ensure optimum cancer pain management.
• Laxatives should be prophylactically prescribed in patients with
cancer pain and on regular opioid therapy.
4.4.10
Tolerance and addiction to opioids
•
Tolerance to opioids
Opioid tolerance is defined as a long-term body adaptation to opioids
resulting in reduced clinical effectiveness of opioids with repeated use
at the same dose.57
Opioid tolerance in cancer is known to be contributed by the
downregulation of mu-receptors in neuronal cells. The exact mechanism
is still not well understood. Persistent pain, chronic opioid administration
and reduced expression of opioid receptors on certain types of cancer
cells are possible causes of mu-receptor downregulation.58
Fear of opioid tolerance should not cause any hesitation to start or
increase opioid therapy for cancer patients experiencing pain. However,
when opioid doses are very high (oral morphine >600 mg/day, oral
oxycodone >400 mg/day or transdermal fentanyl >200 mcg/hour),
patients should be referred to a pain specialist or palliative medicine
specialist.9
•
Addiction/misuse of opioids
The incidence of opioid misuse in advanced cancer patients differs
widely between studies in a recent systematic review. Particularly
among children, adolescents and young adults, misuse behaviours
were reported to range from 7% to 90%.59, level I Nonspecific substance
use disorders were reported to range between 2% to 35% of adults with
cancer. It is unclear if this included treatment-related opioid dependence
or misuse.60, level I
Multiple risk factors for opioid misuse or abuse have been identified
among patients with cancer e.g:61
 history of dependence or misuse of prescription drugs, illicit drugs or
alcohol prior to cancer diagnosis/treatment
 history of binge drinking (alcohol) or peers who binge drink
 family history of substance abuse
 history of psychiatric disorder including anxiety, depression, attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar
disorder or schizophrenia
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
 history of sexual abuse victimisation
 young age (<45 years old)
 history of legal problems or incarceration
Tools for recognising and predicting opioid misuse are available for
clinical use. The NCCN guidelines suggest the use of Screener and
Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain-Revised (SOAPP-R) and
the Opioid Risk Tool (ORT) for patients considered for long-term opioid
therapy in predicting opioid misuse. For patients already on opioids, the
guidelines suggest the Current Opioid Misuse Measure (COMM) tool to
detect aberrant behaviour associated with opioid misuse.61
• It is important to identify patients at risk of opioid misuse so that they
can be closely monitored.
• Fear of opioid misuse or tolerance should not preclude the start of
opioid therapy for cancer patients experiencing pain.
4.5 Adjuvants
Adjuvant analgesics are medications with primary indications other than
pain. However, they are useful in managing certain painful conditions,
particularly neuropathic pain. The most common classes of adjuvant
analgesics used in cancer pain management are anticonvulsants,
antidepressants and corticosteroids. Evidence for the use of these
medications was largely extrapolated from studies on non-cancer pain.
•
Anticonvulsants
A large meta-analysis on patients with neuropathic pain including
cancer-related neuropathic pain reported the following NNT to achieve
50% pain relief and NNH for the following anticonvulsants:62, level I
 gabapentin (900 - 3600 mg/day): NNT 6.3 (95% CI 5.0 to 8.3) and
NNH 25.6 (95% CI 15.3 to 78.6)
 pregabalin (150 - 600 mg/day): NNT 7.7 (95 % CI 6.5 to 9.4) and NNH
13.9 (95% CI 11.6 to 17.4)
There was no evidence on a dose-response effect for gabapentin, while
pregabalin showed a better response at higher doses. Combination
therapy of gabapentin with morphine was superior to monotherapy.
Studies using other antiepileptic agents were mostly negative. The
recommendation on the anticonvulsants based on GRADE was strong.
In a Cochrane systematic review, a small RCT on cancer-related
neuropathic pain showed that gabapentin 1800 mg daily and pregabalin
600 mg decreased pain scores, had a morphine-sparing effect and
improved functional capacity. The quality of the evidence was very
low.63, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
However, a meta-analysis on patients with tumour-related cancer pain
demonstrated that adding gabapentin or pregabalin to stable opioid
analgesia did not improve pain intensity. The quality of evidence was
low.64, level I
The Cochrane systematic review above reported that 63% of those
on gabapentin (1200 mg/day or more) experienced at least one AE,
compared with 49% on placebo (RR=1.3, 95% CI 1.2 to 1.4; NNH=7.5
95% CI 6.1 to 9.6). The most common AEs reported were somnolence
and dizziness, peripheral oedema and ataxia/gait disturbances.63, level I
•
Antidepressants
A meta-analysis on patients with neuropathic pain including cancerrelated neuropathic pain gave an NNT to achieve 50% pain relief of
3.6 (95% CI 3.0 to 4.4) for amitriptyline and 6.4 (95% CI 5.2 to 8.4) for
selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) e.g. duloxetine and
venlafaxine. The NNH were 13.4 (95% CI 9.3 to 24.4) for amitriptyline
and 11.8 (95% CI 9.5 to 15.2) for the SNRIs. There was no evidence
of a dose-response effect for amitriptyline. The final quality of evidence
was moderate for amitriptyline and high for SNRIs.62, level I
In a Cochrane systematic review, two clinical trials assessed the
effectiveness of amitriptyline in cancer-related neuropathic pain. Only
one trial showed that amitriptyline 50 - 100 mg decreased mean pain
intensity, had a morphine-sparing effect and improved functional
capacity. The quality of the evidence was very low.65, level I
In another systematic review, an RCT on patients with chemotherapyinduced peripheral neuropathy, showed that duloxetine was more
effective than placebo in pain relief (MD=0.73, 95% 0.26 to 1.20). The
quality of the evidence was low based on GRADE.4, level I
Another RCT in a systematic review on patients with tumour-related
cancer pain demonstrated that adding amitriptyline to stable opioid
analgesia did not improve pain relief. The quality of evidence was
low.64, level I
A Cochrane systematic review reported that 55% of patients on
amitriptyline experienced at least one AE compared with 36% in those
on placebo (RR=1.5, 95% CI 1.3 to 1.8; NNH=5.2, 95% CI 3.6 to
9.1). The most commonly reported AEs were somnolence, dizziness,
dryness of mouth, nausea and constipation.64, level I
The previous local CPG on cancer pain recommends that neuropathic
cancer pain may be treated with antidepressants and/or anticonvulsants.9
Despite the lack of high-quality evidence, WHO guidelines also suggests
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
that practitioners may consider anticonvulsants and/or antidepressants
for patients with inadequate pain relief or intolerable AEs to opioids.11
•
Corticosteroids
Due to their anti-inflammatory mechanism of action, corticosteroids
are used as adjuvant analgesics for pain associated with inflammation
e.g. headache from brain metastases, abdominal pain from liver
capsule distension or intestinal obstruction and neuropathic pain from
spinal cord compression.9 A Cochrane systematic review found that
corticosteroids were more effective than controls in cancer pain for up to
one week of intervention (MD= -0.84, 95% CI -1.38 to -0.30). The most
common AEs attributed to the medication were restlessness, insomnia,
GI and cardiovascular (CV) events, Cushingoid facies, anxiety, fluid
retention, hypocalcaemia and hyperglycaemia. An improvement
in quality of life or patient well-being had also been reported.66, level I
However, current evidence from this systematic review is insufficient to
establish an ideal dose, duration of therapy and route of administration
of corticosteroids for the relief of cancer pain. Therefore, it is advocated
that clinicians prescribe corticosteroids cautiously for cancer pain
management i.e. carefully assess the benefit, treat for the shortest
duration and discontinue early if ineffective.
•
Bone targeting agents
Bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclast activity and are used as supportive
treatment to prevent or delay the occurrence of skeletal-related events
(SRE) (i.e. pathological fractures, spinal cord compression, surgery
and radiotherapy to the bone, and hypercalcemia) in patients with
bone metastases. They have been found to reduce pain and analgesic
requirements in certain cases. However, the mechanism of its painrelieving effect is poorly understood. Examples include clodronate,
ibandronate, pamidronate, risendronate, etidronate and zoledronate.
Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody that is directed against the
receptor activator of the nuclear factor kappa beta (RANK) ligand which
leads to a decrease in osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast activity,
hence reducing bone resorption.9; 11
Three recent systematic reviews assessed the effectiveness of different
bone targeting agents in patients of various cancers [i.e. breast, prostate
and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)] with bone metastases. The
first systematic review on bisphosphonates and denosumab on pain
relief and QoL reported that there was no high-level evidence that any
of these agents reduced or prevented pain or improved QoL in NSCLC
patients.67, level I
On the other hand, a Cochrane review assessing the effects of
bisphosphonates and other bone agents in addition to anticancer
treatment found that in women with metastatic breast cancer and bone
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
metastases, bisphosphonates appeared to reduce bone pain compared
with placebo in six out of 11 studies. The quality of the evidence based
on GRADE was moderate.68, level I
Meanwhile, a Cochrane network meta-analysis of patients with prostate
cancer and bone metastases receiving bisphosphonates or RANKligand-inhibitors reported the following findings.69, level I
 For the outcome of the proportion of patients with pain response,
zoledronate was ranked as the best treatment option followed
by etidronate, clodronate, and risedronate. However, only
zoledronate was found to be more effective than clodronate in
pair-wise comparison (RR=1.19, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.39). There was
no trial reported on denosumab in pair-wise comparison.
 For the outcome of renal impairment, compared with no treatment/
placebo, zoledronate increased the risk (RR=1.63, 95% CI 1.08
to 2.45) while clodronate did not show any significant risk. By
comparing the different bone targeting agents with each other, no
significant differences were shown.
 For the outcome of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ), compared
with no treatment/placebo, denosumab increased the occurrence
of ONJ (RR=3.45, 95% CI 1.06 to 11.24) while zoledronate and
clodronate did not show significant difference in the outcome. By
comparing the different bone targeting agents with each other, no
significant differences were found.
 For the outcome of Grade 3 to 4 AEs (fatigue, diarrhoea and
nausea), compared with no treatment/placebo, only denosumab
increased the risk of the AEs (RR=1.46, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.99).
By comparing the different bone targeting agents with each other,
zoledronate had a lower risk of AEs compared with denosumab
(RR=0.92, 95% CI 0.87 to 0.98). The comparison between the
other agents were not significant.
WHO guidelines on cancer pain management:11
 recommends that bisphosphonate should be used to prevent and
treat bone pain in adults (including older persons) and adolescents
with bone metastases
 has no recommendation for or against the use of monoclonal
antibodies to prevent and treat bone pain
 also has no recommendation for or against the comparative
advantage of monoclonal antibodies over bisphosphonates to
prevent and treat bone pain
•
Others
Ketamine, an NMDA-receptor antagonist used for general anaesthesia
and sedation, can also be used in selected patients whose pain has
been inadequately relieved by opioids alone. However, a Cochrane
systematic review showed insufficient evidence to make any conclusion
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
on the clinical benefit of ketamine as an adjuvant to opioids for the
relief of cancer pain. Hallucinations and cognitive disturbance were
reported at higher doses of ketamine. One RCT included in the review
demonstrated twice the incidence of AEs when a rapid dose escalation
method was employed.70, level I
In the previous guidelines, ketamine was recommended to be
considered in patients with poorly controlled cancer pain despite optimal
opioid therapy. It may be used by specialists familiar with cancer pain
management or palliative medicine/pain specialists.9
• Ketamine is sometimes used as an adjunct to opioids in patients with
cancer pain.
Recommendation 13
• Anticonvulsants or antidepressants may be considered in patients
with neuropathic cancer pain.
• Corticosteroids may be used cautiously as an adjuvant in patients
with specific cancer pain syndromes.
• Bone targeting agents may be used in cancer patients with painful
bone metastasis.
4.6 Medical Cannabis
Medical cannabis is a term used to describe cannabis used for medical
purposes. In recent years, there has been increasing interest in the
potential therapeutic use of cannabis for various medical conditions
including chronic pain. However, there is still much debate surrounding
the issue due to concerns about its safety and effectiveness.
Evidence mapping of systematic reviews on the therapeutic effects
of medicinal cannabis reported that the evidence was broad, highly
heterogeneous in methodology and with conflicting conclusions. In fact,
there was a limited number of studies that investigated cancer pain
relief by medicinal cannabis.71, level I
A meta-analysis that included five RCTs showed that adding medical
cannabis to opioid therapy:72, level I
• resulted in a non-significant trivial reduction in cancer pain (WMD=
-0.18 cm on the 10 cm Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for pain, 95%
CI -0.38 to 0.02) based on high certainty evidence
• increased incidence of nausea (RR=1.43, 95% CI 1.04 to 1.96)
and vomiting (RR=1.50, 95% CI 1.01 to 2.24) based on moderate
certainty evidence
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
The above meta-analysis was supported by another meta-analysis
of four RCTs comparing medical cannabis and placebo. There was a
non-significant pain reduction (WMD= -0.1, 95% CI -0.28 to 0.09) with
a significantly higher risk of transient cognitive impairment, vomiting,
drowsiness, impaired attention and nausea in those taking medical
cannabis.73, level I
A Malaysian health technology assessment reported that current
evidence was inadequate to recommend the use of medical cannabis
in cancer pain.74
A 2023 meta-analysis on RCTs showed that medical cannabinoids had
no significant difference with placebo in pain reduction or occurrence of
serious AEs. However, the quality of the evidence was graded as low
based on GRADE.75, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to formulate a recommendation for
medical cannabis use in cancer pain.
4.7 Anticancer Therapy
Radiotherapy, chemotherapy and hormonal therapy are important
components of anticancer therapy. These therapies especially
radiotherapy may be a strategy for multidisciplinary management of
cancer pain.
•
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy has been used to reduce pain and requirements of
analgesics in symptomatic bone metastasis. External beam radiotherapy
(EBRT) is a type of radiation that could be given to a single or limited
number of sites in a patient.
The usual dose-fractionation of radiotherapy schedules for palliation
are:
 6 - 8Gy/single fraction/1 day
 20Gy/5 fractions/1 week
 30Gy/10 fractions/2 weeks
Single-fraction EBRT has been shown to be as effective as the
fractionated regime in providing pain relief from bone metastases. Two
meta-analyses showed no significant difference in complete and overall
response rates for pain control between single and multiple fractions
of radiotherapy in painful uncomplicated bone metastases. However,
the two reviews demonstrated that re-treatment was significantly
higher in single fraction with OR ranging from 2.42 to 2.60. In terms of
safety, there was no significant difference in toxicities between the two
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
arms.76 - 77, level I Both meta-analyses failed to mention the quality
assessment of the primary papers.
Advanced radiotherapy techniques e.g. stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT) have also been used in cancer pain. A systematic review of four
high-quality RCTs showed:78, level I
 SBRT was more effective than conventional RT on pain response
rate at three months (RR=1.41, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.77); however,
there was no difference at one and six months
 no significant difference in safety outcomes between the groups
Recommendation 14
• Radiotherapy may be offered to control pain in symptomatic bone
metastasis.
 Single-fraction external beam therapy is the preferred choice.
Pain flare-effect (PFE) post-radiotherapy is a phenomenon related to
a transient increase in pain. A systematic review of six studies showed
that corticosteroids were more effective in reducing PFE compared with
placebo in cancer pain (RR=0.67, 95% CI 0.48 to 0.93).79, level I
Hemibody radiotherapy for cancer pain in widespread bone metastasis
has been mentioned in the previous MoH CPG whereby:9
 average time for any pain relief was three days with an average of
eight days for maximum relief
 incidence of haematological grade 3 - 4 toxicity is low
Radiotherapy is also used for the reduction of pain related to advanced
malignancy which includes:9
 thoracic pain from lung cancer
 abdominal and pelvic pain from gynaecological, Gl and urological
cancers
 pain due to locally advanced head and neck cancers
The pain response rates range from 67% to 77% and overall
symptomatic response rates range from 74% to 79%. The commonly
used fractionation is palliative hypofractionation.
The CPG also mentions that there is no data on the optimal timing
for palliative radiotherapy in painful bone metastasis and pain related
to advanced malignancy. However, radiotherapy should be considered
early in the course of the disease.9
•
Other anticancer therapy
Other cancer therapies which include chemotherapy and hormonal
therapy can be a mode used to reduce pain and improve quality of
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
life in patients with chemo-sensitive or hormone-sensitive cancers e.g.
breast cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, lymphoma, ovarian cancer
and germ cell tumour.9
The treatment landscape of anti cancer therapy has changed with the
emergence of immunotherapy. However, the role of immunotherapy in
the management of cancer pain is still limited.
In a retrospective cohort study with a propensity score-matched (PSM)
analysis comparing four types of anticancer therapy (immunotherapy,
chemotherapy, radiotherapy and targeted therapy) in cancer pain, the
findings were:80, level II-2
 the total oral morphine equivalent daily dose (OMED)(mg) q/day
and NRS scores decreased significantly in patients receiving
immunotherapy
 compared with the other three treatment groups, the OMED (mg)
q/day and NRS were significantly lower in the immunotherapy
group after treatment
 fewer AEs were shown in the immunotherapy group compared
with the other three groups
•
Radionuclide therapy
The use of radionuclide therapy for metastatic bone pain, especially in
diffuse disease or refractory bone pain is an option.
A systematic review on pain response (partial and complete response)
of different bone-seeking radiopharmaceuticals (153Sm,186Re,188Re
and 223Ra) for palliation of malignant bone pain from prostate cancer
showed:81, level I
 pain response of greater than 50 - 60% with each radionuclide
 low incidence of grade 3 and 4 haematological toxicity
There was limited data on the use of radionuclide seeds in metastatic
bone pain.82, level II-1 In view of high cost, limited data and availability,
radionuclide and radiation seeds therapy are not a routine option for
cancer-related bone pain in this country. Thus, no recommendation can
be formulated on its use.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
5. PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTION
Pyschoeducation, psychological and spiritual interventions are
important in the management of cancer pain. Patients with cancer pain
may perceive the pain as the most feared physical consequence. The
consequences may be related to losing hope for cure or as a punishment
for previous wrongdoings. It can also affect mood and cause anxiety
and other psychological symptoms.9
5.1 Psychoeducation Intervention
A systematic review of four RCTs reported that educational interventions
given by healthcare providers (e.g. provision of educational information,
behavioural instructions and advice) showed mixed results in the
improvement of pain intensity and interference. Jadad Score of the
included studies ranged from 2 - 4.83, level I
In a meta-analysis of 12 RCTs, pain education (through interviews ±
phone calls) led to a small reduction in pain intensity of cancer patients
(SMD= -0.11, 95 % CI -0.20 to -0.02) compared with control. The quality
of the primary studies was mixed based on Jadad Score.84, level I
5.2 Psychological Intervention
Types of psychological strategies that are available include imagery,
relaxation and cognitive restructuring.
A large meta-analysis on psychosocial interventions (psychotherapy,
hypnosis, desensitisation or meditation) in patients with cancer showed
moderate positive effects on pain severity (Hedge’s g=0.34, 95% CI
0.23 to 0.46) and pain interference (Hedge’s g=0.40, 95% CI 0.21 to
0.60) compared with control. One of the limitations of this meta-analysis
was the heterogeneity of primary papers.85, level I
An RCT on brief cognitive behavioural strategies intervention in
advanced cancer showed lower symptom cluster distress (pain, fatigue
and sleep disturbance) only at six weeks of intervention (p=0.04).86, level I
Another RCT on patients with alexithymia and cancer pain showed
that psychological interventions (psychoeducation, problem-solving,
cognitive restructuring of dysfunctional illness-related concerns and
beliefs, stress management and progressive relaxation) improved
alexithymia in patients with cancer pain which led to a significantly
bigger change in score for pain intensity compared with control that
received treatment as usual.87, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Although the evidence for psychoeducation and psychological
interventions on cancer pain was of moderate level, their important
role in the management of cancer pain should be acknowledged and
considered for patients. These interventions usually need sufficient
time before benefits are seen.
5.3 Spiritual Intervention
Spiritual intervention is a part of holistic care in alleviating cancer pain
which complements physical, psychological and social strategies.
A systematic review of 11 studies that investigated the effectiveness of
spiritual intervention (Dignity Therapy, focused narrative intervention and
mindfulness-based stress reduction) found paucity and heterogeneity
of evidence on cancer pain. Some of the evidence suggested spiritual
care may aid in coping with pain rather than altering pain intensity.
However, spiritual interventions were well received by the patients and
do not appear to cause harm.88, level I
Recommendation 15
• Psychoeducation, psychological and spiritual interventions should
be considered in the management of cancer pain.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
6. INTERVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES/SURGERY
6.1 Neurolysis
Neurolysis which is performed by specialists trained in interventional
pain management, requires instilling a chemical ablative solution (e.g.
alcohol or phenol with local anaesthetics) or physical ablation (e.g.
surgical resection and radiofrequency denervation) into the nerve
plexus resulting in nerve destruction or degeneration. Commonly,
neurolysis involves ablation of sympathetic ganglia e.g. coeliac plexus
or ganglia, splanchnic plexus, superior hypogastric plexus (SHG) and
Walther’s ganglia or ganglion impar.
A Cochrane systematic review of six RCTs on advanced pancreatic
cancer pain in adults showed that coeliac plexus neurolysis (CPN) was
more effective for reducing pain than standard analgesic therapy at 4-
and 8-weeks follow-up [MD= -0.42 (95% CI -0.70 to -0.13) and MD=
-0.44 (95% CI -0.89 to -0.01) respectively]. The risk of bias based on
only three domains showed moderate quality of primary papers.89, level I
In a recent meta-analysis of 10 RCTs on unresectable pancreatic cancer,
pain control was achieved four weeks after CPN using percutaneous,
intraoperative or endoscopic approaches compared with standard
medical management alone (MD= -0.58, 95% CI -1.09 to -0.07). The
main AEs were transient hypotension (20 - 41.7%), inebriation (6.9 -
12.5%), diarrhoea (0 - 25%), burning pain at the injection site (6.9 -
10%) and nausea (8.3%). The quality of the evidence based on GRADE
was moderate.90, level I
Another meta-analysis on endoscopic ultrasound-guided CPN for
pancreatic cancer pain reported a response rate of 46% (95% CI 36
to 55) using a central injection technique. Major adverse complications
were spinal stroke which rarely occurred at 0.2% and even more scarce
was visceral ischaemia.91, level I
Studies for neurolysis of SHG and ganglion impar were limited. A 10year retrospective cohort study on the effectiveness of SHG for pelvic
cancer pain showed a significant pain score reduction in 59.4%, 55.5%
and 48.8% of patients at 1-, 3- and 6-months follow-up. The most
common AEs were transient hypotension (5.56%) and less common
ones were transient urinary incontinence (0.56%), iliac artery puncture
(0.56%) and hypertension (0.56%). Repeat injections were done in
5.5% of patients at three months to one-year follow-up.92, level II-2
An RCT reported better analgesic response when SHG neurolysis
was combined with pulsed radiofrequency of sacral roots up to three
months post-injection compared with SHG neurolysis alone in perineal
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
and pelvic cancer pain (MD= -0.67, 95% CI -1.29 to -0.05). However,
AEs were not discussed.93, level I
In a pre- and post-study on patients with uncontrolled pelvic oncologic
pain with the established therapy or experimenting opioid AEs, ganglion
impar neurolysis showed a significant reduction in pain score and
morphine consumption up to three months follow-up. AEs were not
discussed.94, level II-3
Evidence on somatic plexus neurolysis (e.g. brachial or lumbosacral
plexus) was confined to case reports.
6.2 Neuraxial Opioids
Neuraxial opioids involve the delivery of drugs via epidural, intrathecal
or intracerebroventricular routes. A catheter drug delivery system with
the aid of either a subcutaneous implanted device or spinal port with
an external syringe pump, provides an effective therapeutic option for
refractory cancer pain.
In a cohort of refractory pancreatic cancer pain, 64.3% of patients
with intrathecal drug delivery systems experienced >50% pain
reduction from baseline after three months of treatment initiation
(p<0.01).95, level II-2
A systematic review for the European Palliative Care Research
Collaborative (EPCRC) guidelines found no difference in pain scores
between neuraxial bolus and continuous opioid infusion. There was
also no difference between epidural morphine and systemic morphine.
It was concluded that spinal opioid therapy may be effective for treating
cancer pain not adequately controlled by systemic treatment based on
weak evidence.96, level I
A more recent meta-analysis showed a significant mean pain score
reduction of 3.64 (95% 3.09 to 4.18), up to one-month post-implantation
based on retrospective studies. Improvements in symptom severity
were associated with improved QoL. In addition, all included studies
that assessed the use of systemic opioids at baseline showed a dose
reduction following implantation. The most common intrathecal opioid
was morphine, which was used alone or in combination with adjuvants
such as bupivacaine, ropivacaine, clonidine or baclofen.137, level I
A prospective product surveillance registry reported severe AEs (SAEs)
from intrathecal implantable device comprised of infection (3.2%), postdural puncture headaches/cerebrospinal fluid leaks (1.27%), pump
pocket haematoma (0.28%) and pneumonia (0.14%). Other AEs of
systemic opioids may occur in neuraxial opioid therapy e.g. nausea,
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
pruritus, urinary retention, constipation, respiratory depression,
sedation and confusion.97, level II-2
6.3 Vertebroplasty
Vertebroplasty is a percutaneous vertebral augmentation procedure
that requires an injection of cement into cancellous bone of the
vertebral body to relieve pain due to spinal compression fractures
caused by osteoporosis or malignant infiltration. The procedure is
minimally invasive and relatively safe. It increases stability of the spine
by preventing vertebral body collapse. Patients who do not respond
to conservative therapy or are poor candidates for open surgery may
benefit from vertebroplasty.
A systematic review of seven RCTs with low risk of bias concluded
that percutaneous cement vertebroplasty or balloon kyphoplasty,
either alone or in combination with other local therapies e.g. iodine-125
seeds, chemotherapy, radiofrequency ablation or corticosteroids,
were significantly effective for cancer pain due to malignant spinal
compression fractures. The most common procedure-related AEs
was cement leakage which occurred at a rate of 24% (95% CI 11 to
44). Nevertheless, there was no significant morbidity or mortality
reported.98, level I
6.4 Surgical intervention
Surgery has a role in the management of cancer pain. Ablative surgery
for large painful tumours e.g. fungating breast lesions or sarcomas
may improve pain control where analgesics and other interventions
provide suboptimal relief. Palliative surgical operations e.g. colostomy
and bypass operations may also relieve pain due to malignant bowel
obstruction. The decision for surgical intervention should be made by
a multidisciplinary team taking into consideration of other treatment
options, risks to the patient and, expectations of patient and family
members.9
A systematic review found that cordotomy might be effective and safe
in mesothelioma-related pain. However, the available evidence was
limited in quantity and quality which warranted more reliable evidence
to aid decision-making on continued provision of this intervention.99, level I
A multicentre cohort study had shown that orthopaedic oncology
surgery on metastatic long bone disease significantly improved patients’
functional outcome and pain as early as two weeks post-operatively and
should be considered for impending or pathologic fracture in patients
with expected short-term survival. However, this study also found that
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
the QoL of the patients did not improve. The overall complication rate
was 35% with deep vein thrombosis being the most common.100, level II-2
Recommendation 16
• Patients whose pain control is poor despite optimal pharmacological
therapy should be referred to specialists trained in interventional pain
management for consideration of the following interventions:
 coeliac plexus neurolysis for advanced pancreatic cancer pain
 superior hypogastric plexus or ganglion impar neurolysis for advanced
pelvic and perineal cancer pain
 intrathecal drug delivery system
 vertebroplasty for malignant spinal compression fractures
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
7. OTHER INTERVENTION
Physical and complementary therapies have gained widespread
recognition as valuable interventions for relieving cancer-related
symptoms. Numerous studies and clinical trials have investigated the
effectiveness and safety of these therapies in improving the well-being
and QoL of individuals living with cancer. From exercise programmes
to massage therapy, acupuncture and Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve
Stimulation (TENS), these approaches offer a diverse range of options
to address the unique needs of patients.
A systematic review on the effect of complementary and alternative
medicine (CAM) interventions on breast cancer-related pain suggested
that CAM should be used cautiously along with other medical treatments
to ease cancer-related pain.101, level I
•
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation
A Cochrane systematic review on TENS showed insufficient evidence
on its effectiveness in adults with cancer-related pain compared with
control (sham/placebo). However, TENS was well tolerated.102, level I
•
Exercise
Exercise, with its potential to alleviate pain, improve physical function
and enhance overall well-being, is a promising non-pharmacological
intervention for the management of cancer pain.
A systematic review showed that exercise reduced cancer pain
compared with non-exercise/usual care although the effect size was
small (SMD= -0.45, 95% CI -0.62 to -0.28). Majority of the primary
papers were of high risk or with some concern of bias.103, level I
•
Massage and aromatherapy
There is a lack of clear evidence on the effectiveness of massage on
pain relief in people with cancer.
A systematic review showed mixed results that massage was effective
in reducing cancer pain in patients with advanced cancer.104, level I
However, a later meta-analysis of massage therapy on cancer pain
found that:105, level I
 massage reduced pain compared with no-massage (SMD= -1.25,
95% CI -1.63 to -0.87)
 subgroup analysis showed that body massage, aroma massage and
foot reflexology were effective in pain reduction
These are supported by a Cochrane systematic review where massage
with or without aromatherapy in people with cancer led to significant
medium- and long-term pain relief compared with no massage.106, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
The quality of primary papers in the three-evidence mentioned above
were of mixed quality.
Another meta-analysis showed no difference in reduction of cancer
pain between aromatherapy massage and control.107, level I This is
supported by another systematic review on the effect of CAM where
massage therapy was found to reduce breast cancer-related pain but
aromatherapy alone or in combination with massage did not.101, level I
•
Acupuncture
A Cochrane systematic review showed insufficient evidence on the
effectiveness of acupuncture in relieving cancer pain in adults compared
with sham acupuncture or analgesics. The findings were:108, level I
 acupuncture was effective in managing pancreatic cancer pain, latestage unspecified cancer pain and chronic neuropathic pain related to
cancer
 acupuncture was not effective in ovarian cancer and stomach
carcinoma
Specifically on breast cancer, a systematic review found that
acupuncture reduced aromatase inhibitor-related pain, post-operative
pain and chronic cancer-related pain. The 10 RCTs included were of
mixed quality.101, level I
A recent systematic review showed that acupuncture used for cancer
pain had:109, level I
 favourable effect on pain relief in palliative care
 appeared to be a safe treatment for pain management
However, there was no quality assessment reported.
Another systematic review of 14 systematic reviews concluded that
clinicians may consider acupuncture as an adjunctive therapy for
cancer-related pain management, in particular when pain control was
unsatisfactory using analgesics alone. It found that:110, level I
 acupuncture and related therapies were more effective at reducing
pain than sham acupuncture or no intervention (SMD= -0.30, 95% CI
-0.56 to -0.03)
 acupuncture and related therapies alone did not have superior painrelieving effects compared with analgesia (RR=1.11, 95% CI 0.97 to
1.26)
 acupuncture plus analgesia was more effective in reducing cancer
pain than analgesic alone (MD= -0.76, 95% CI -0.14 to -0.39)
• Physical and complementary therapies can be useful as an adjunct
in cancer pain management.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
8. PAEDIATRIC CANCER PAIN
According to The Malaysian Society of Paediatric Haematology and
Oncology, the incidence of paediatric cancer in Malaysia is about 77.4
per million in children aged <15 years old.111 The paediatric cancer pain
is quite different from the pain in adults and children respond differently
to treatment.
Pain is a common symptom in children diagnosed with cancer. The pain
can be tumour-related, procedure-related or treatment-related.
Tumour-related pain can present:112
• before or at diagnosis
• during initial treatment
• when tumour is resistant to treatment
• at disease recurrence
The following table shows examples of cancer-related pain in children.
Table 6. Examples of Cancer-related Pain in Children:112
• before or at diagnosis
• during initial treatment
•
•
when tumour is resistant to treatment
at disease recurrence
a. diagnostic procedures
• venepuncture
• lumbar puncture
• bone marrow aspirate and biopsy
• tissue biopsy
b. Procedures
• central venous line insertion
• pleural or peritoneal drainage
• external ventricular drainage
• ventricular-peritoneal shunt
• surgeries
• wound dressing/debridement
• mucositis (post-chemotherapy or radiotherapy)
• acute pancreatitis (SE of chemotherapy e.g.
asparaginase)
• neutropenic enterocolitis
• haemorrhagic cystitis (e.g. with cyclophosphamide,
ifosfamide, radiotherapy)
• intracranial haemorrhage (thrombocytopenia from bone
marrow suppression)
• peripheral neuropathic pain (e.g. with vincristine,
cisplatin)
• post-operative pain
• phantom limb pain
• procedural pain (on treatment protocol)
Tumourrelated pain
Procedural
related pain
Treatmentrelated pain
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
8.1 Principles of Pain Assessment
Pain assessment in children can be quite different than adults. The
following are principles to guide pain assessment in children using the
acronym A.B.C.D.E:
Table 7. ABC of Pain Assessment in Children112
Assessment and management of pain in children and infants are
different from adults due to:112
• Communication: Children have limited verbal and cognitive abilities.
Non-verbal cues and observation are essential approaches to
assessment.
• Development: Children have a wide physiological, cognitive, and
developmental response to pain according to their age groups.
This has to be carefully assessed.
• Fear and anxiety: Children are reluctant to report pain that reflect
their pain experience. Managing emotions can be done through
play therapy, distraction and other cognitive behaviour strategies.
• Dosage: Medication must be carefully adjusted according to age,
weight and developmental understanding. Adolescent also has a
unique approach to cancer pain management. Healthcare workers
will require appropriate training for assessment and management.
• Parental involvement: Caregivers input is an essential component
and part of the assessment.
• Ethical consideration: Children are not able to give consent for any
intervention and medical management. Consent must be taken
from legal caregivers or parents.
8.2 Pain Assessment Tools
The choice of a pain assessment tool should take into consideration:112, 113
• the child’s developmental age
• verbal ability
These are shown in Table 8 and 9.
A
Ask the child and Assess pain score
B
Use Behavioural and Biological measures
C
Find the Cause
D
Decide and Deliver treatment in a timely manner
E
Evaluate outcome
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Table 8. Pain Assessment Tools Based on Child’s
Developmental Age112
Table 9. Pain Assessment Tools Based on Verbal Ability112
8.3 Treatment
Cancer pain in children can be effectively managed by using drugs e.g.
opioids, non-opioids and adjuvant analgesics with the biopsychosocial
or multi-modality approach covering physical, psychosocial and spiritual
entities.
• WHO uses simple principle for analgesia in children:112
 oral route is the preferred choice
 dosing of analgesic should be at a fixed regular interval
 WHO 3-step analgesic ladder is the proposed model
Analgesia is given based on severity of pain from mild to severe pain
in the 3-step WHO ladder in children. Weak opioids still have a role
despite insufficient robust data.112
FLACC
• Observe the child’s behaviour in 5 dimensions (Face,
Legs, Arms, Cry, Consolability) for 2 to 5 minutes, and
assign a score (maximum 10)
Revised FACES
• Picture-based scale where the child selects 1 to 6 faces
to represent their pain experience
Numerical rating scale
• Ask the child to assign a number to their pain, with ‘0’
being no pain and ‘10’ being the worst imaginable pain
1 month to
4 years
4 years to
7 years
≥7 years
Age
Pain rating scale
Revised FLACC
• Incorporates individualised pain behaviours which is
unique to a child
COMFORT-Behaviour scale and FLACC
Neonatal/Infant Pain Scale (NIPS)
Neurological
impaired
Critically ill
Neonates
Special
population
Pain rating scale
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Figure 3. Modified Analgesic Ladder
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Paediatric Pain Management Guidelines 2023.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2023.
In developing countries, children with cancer experience pain related
to advanced disease and treatment approaches e.g. chemotherapy or
radiotherapy.114
•
Non-opioid analgesics
The first step in the WHO Analgesic 3-Step Ladder is non-opioid drugs,
e.g. paracetamol and NSAIDs, with the optional use of adjuvants
for mild pain.112 In the second step of WHO pain ladder, non-opioid
analgesics may work synergistically with opioids as co-analgesic to
produce a better pain relief (refer to Figure 3).112
Paracetamol is generally safe but may cause hepatotoxicity if
overdosed (refer to Appendix 5b).115 GI ulceration, nephrotoxicity
and CV events are the known AEs of NSAIDs. Thus, lowest effective
dose of NSAIDs should be given with proton pump inhibitors to prevent
gastro-duodenal ulcers.116 The dosages of commonly use non-opioid
analgesics are shown in Appendix 5b.
Recommendation 17
• Paracetamol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be used
in children with mild cancer pain.
• Paracetamol should be used in combination with opioids as coanalgesic unless contraindicated in children with cancer pain.
To refer to Pain Service for:
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
•
Opioid analgesics
Morphine is considered in the second step of WHO 3-Step Ladder
when the pain is moderate to severe in children. The minimum interval
between each dose is between one to four hours. The benefits of using
an effective strong opioid analgesic outweigh the benefits of weak
opioids in the paediatric population when compared with the uncertainty
associated with the response to codeine and tramadol. Caution on the
use codeine and tramadol has been issued due to ultra metabolisers
and potential AEs.117, level III
a.
Tramadol
Tramadol is a synthetic analgesic with unpredictable effects due to
its wide variability in metabolism. The drug has a ceiling effect. It is
unsuitable for escalating mild-moderate pain or severe pain. It has the
potential to cause side effects in children.112
b.
Morphine
Oral morphine is the first-line therapy for severe cancer pain in children.
Its effectiveness in pain relief has been extrapolated from the treatment
of adult with chronic cancer pain.112 Oral morphine is available as either
IR or SR preparations. IV morphine is used for rapid onset analgesia
and when the patients are unable to tolerate oral morphine.117, level III If
the opioid requirement goes beyond 1 mg/kg/day, it is likely that the
patient will require regular morphine.113; 115 Morphine dose should be
monitored after 24 - 48 hours of morphine use. Alternative routes of
administration should be based on clinical judgement, drug availability
and patient’s preference. The initial dose of morphine and its frequency
is shown in Appendix 5b.
Case Example for Opioid Titration in Paediatric Cancer Pain
Aiman is a 10-year-old boy with relapsed Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
with bone metastasis. He complains of generalised pain with pain score
of 6/10. He is opioid naïve with normal renal and liver function. His
weight is 20kg and he is currently at home.
Method of dose calculation:
• Immediate release oral morphine 0.2 mg/kg/dose x 20 kg = 4 mg
q4h (maximum initial dose is 5 mg/dose for children) = 24 mg/day
Breakthrough dose: 1/10 to 1/6 of daily dose (2.5 - 4 mg), can be served
1-2 hours after previous dose of morphine.
Recommendation 18
• Oral morphine is the preferred choice for children with moderate to
severe cancer pain.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
c.
Fentanyl
Transdermal fentanyl is an effective alternative to oral morphine in
children with difficulty in swallowing or those having intractable nausea
and vomiting whose opioid requirements are stable.115 IV fentanyl can
be used in children with specific circumstances e.g. renal failure but
preferably this is done under specialist care.112 Refer to Table 4 on
suggested dose conversion ratio for conversion of oral morphine to
fentanyl patch.
d.
Oxycodone
Oxycodone is an alternative strong opioid which is as effective as oral
morphine. Refer to Table 4 on suggested dose conversion ratio for
conversion of oral morphine to oxycodone.
Recommendation 19
• Fentanyl or oxycodone may be used as alternative analgesics in
children with moderate to severe cancer pain.
e.
Methadone
Methadone is only used as an alternative opioid for cancer pain
in children. However, it should only be prescribed under specialist
supervision in palliative care settings.118, level III
For opioid AEs and their management, refer to Chapter 4.4.8.
•
Adjuvant drugs
Adjuvant analgesics may be used with other analgesics including
strong opioids in children with cancer pain.11 Combining drugs with
different mechanisms of action improve analgesia and decrease AEs
in the patients. This can be used at any stage of pain severity as per
Figure 3. However, there is insufficient evidence on the use of adjuvant
analgesics in the paediatric age group.
The use of antidepressants in children has been associated with
an increased risk of suicidal ideation and behaviour.119 However,
amitriptyline has been used in the management of pain especially bone
pain and neuropathic pain in children.120, level III
In children, neuropathic pain can be treated with anticonvulsants
e.g. gabapentin, pregabalin and sodium valproate. It is important to
monitor undesired AEs e.g. headache, drowsiness and ataxia when
commencing these agents.113
Ketamine should be used by specialists familiar with cancer pain
management in children. It is generally used in low doses.115
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Corticosteroids are commonly used for children with pain related to mass
effect of tumour e.g. headache from brain metastases, abdominal pain
from liver capsule distension or intestinal obstruction and neuropathic
pain from spinal cord compression.121
Bisphosphonates should be considered where analgesics and/
or radiotherapy are inadequate for the management of painful bone
metastases.120, level III; 121; 122, level III
Refer to Appendix 5b on Dosage of Commonly Used Adjuvant Drugs
in Children with Cancer Pain.
Recommendation 20
• Adjuvant analgesics may be considered in cancer pain management
in children.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
9. BARRIERS AND EDUCATION
•
Barriers
Barriers to the effective management of cancer pain need to be identified
and addressed. A systematic review found negative attitudes and a lack
of knowledge towards cancer pain management among the healthcare
providers, patients, family caregivers and general public. The most
commonly cited barriers were fear of drug addiction, tolerance and AEs
of opioids.123, level III
In another study on cancer pain management by family caregivers, the
main challenges can be grouped into three parts:124, level III
 communication and teamwork issues which included caregivers’
receipt of inadequate information regarding pain management and,
inappropriate and ineffective communication from the healthcare
team
 caregiver issues which were related to caregivers’ fear and beliefs,
concurrent responsibilities and, lack of pain-related knowledge
and skills
 patient issues which included patient’s own fear and beliefs,
psychological and physiological well-being, adherence to
medications and reluctance to report pain
A cross-sectional study conducted in Hospital Umum Sarawak,
Malaysia showed that:125, level III
 among the four domains of patient-related barriers explored
via BQ-II questionnaire, fatalism had the highest median BQII score, followed by harmful effects, physiological effects and
communication
 education level, gender and marital status had significant impact
on various barrier domains
 ethnicity had no significant impact on all four domains
A multinational cross-sectional survey showed:126, level III
 of all the attitudinal barriers, fear of addiction to opioids was the
strongest barrier across all countries whereas fatalism was the
weakest barrier
 barriers scores were higher in patients of older age, male gender,
higher pain severity or pain interference, lower Karnofsky scores
and shorter duration of opioid use
In a multicentre cross-sectional study, depression was significantly
associated with total barrier score to cancer pain management.
Therefore, screening and treatment of depression should be an
important component of successful pain management.127, level III
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
• It is important to identify and address barriers to effective cancer pain
management.
•
Education
Education on issues related to cancer pain is an essential element to
effective cancer pain management. This involves not only the patients,
but also the carers, family and healthcare providers.
Educational strategies should focus on addressing the following issues:9
 understanding cancer pain
 understanding disease processes and their relation to pain
 how to describe and document pain assessment appropriately
 understanding pain management
 awareness of the available analgesics
 dispelling fears regarding opioid analgesia
 accessing help and support (when, where and who)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
10. FOLLOW-UP AND REFERRAL
Follow-up care for patients with cancer pain can be provided at home,
primary care clinics or specialised outpatient clinics. With the advent of
better internet services, teleconferencing or video call services can also
be used to help patients who do not have easy access to conventional
follow-up.
Two recent observational studies supported the structured outpatient
follow-up of cancer patients:
• proper clinic guideline programme with a multidisciplinary
approach, availability of pain interventions and palliative
care referral in a specialist outpatient clinic led to significant
improvement in BPI and pain score in ESAS128, level II-3
• physician-pharmacist joint clinic was significantly more effective
than standard care in BPI pain intensity, adequacy of pain
management and medication adherence129, level II-2
A home care service provided by community palliative care providers
can reach out to patients in their own homes. This is especially
important for patients who are unable to travel or have mobility issues. A
Cochrane systematic review showed mixed results in the improvement
in pain control between community home palliative care services and
standard care.130, level I
In the previous local CPG on cancer pain, regular follow-up either at
home, primary care clinics or specialised outpatient clinics including
palliative care and cancer pain clinics according to their preferences or
circumstances has been recommended.9
There are many different types of healthcare technology that can be
used in delivering patient care. Videoconferencing can help when inperson conversations are not feasible. A Cochrane systemic review
on telephone interventions for adults with cancer showed limited
and mixed results on pain reduction compared with usual care. The
certainty of the evidence on this outcome was very low.131, level I In a nonrandomised controlled trial, home telemonitoring significantly increased
pain registration and prescription for analgesics compared with usual
care in cancer patients.132, level II-1
In another systematic review assessing the effectiveness of mHealth
applications (apps) for self-management in improving pain, psychological
distress, fatigue or sleep outcomes in adult cancer survivors, three out
of four studies reported improvement in pain but only one showed a
significant difference in those patients using the apps compared with
those not using it.133, level I
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
A meta-analysis on the effectiveness of telemedicine on pain
management in patients with cancer showed it improved:134, level I
• pain intensity (SMD= -0.28, 95% CI -0.49 to -0.06)
• pain interference (SMD= -0.41, 95% CI -0.54 to -0.28)
According to the Cochrane Risk of Bias, the risk of bias in most studies
was considered low.
A list of community palliative care providers available in Malaysia can
be downloaded from the Malaysian Hospice & Palliative Care Council
website (https://www.malaysianhospicecouncil.com/).
Recommendation 21
• Cancer patients should be followed-up for pain management either
in the specialist outpatient clinic, primary care clinic or at home.
 Teleconsultations and digital applications may be used for this
purpose.
Although most pain experienced by the patients can be managed by
the primary team, there might be pain which does not respond well
to initial treatment and requires specialised care. Thus, patients with
severe pain and inadequate pain management should be considered
for referral to pain or palliative specialist services.135; 136, level III
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
11. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of this CPG is important as it helps in providing quality
healthcare services based on the best and most recent available
evidence applied to local scenario and expertise. Various factors and
resource implications should be considered for the success of the
uptake in the CPG recommendations.
11.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in this CPG
include:
• availability of the CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and
softcopies/online)
• regular seminars/conferences/courses for healthcare providers on
management of cancer pain including those involving professional
bodies
• presence of “Pain as 5th Vital Sign” strategy and pain-free hospital
concept involving multidisciplinary team
• public awareness activities that involve governmental/nongovernmental organisations e.g. World Hospice and Palliative
Care Day
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
• limited awareness and understanding/knowledge in managing
cancer pain among healthcare providers especially on the use of
opioids
• variation in clinical management and preferences
• insufficient resources in terms of expertise and medications
• misconception about the disease and its management by the
public
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
Appropriate assessment and treatment of cancer pain is crucial for the
successful management of the condition. This includes the proper use
of opioids for moderate to severe cancer pain. However, barriers to its
use dampen the aims of controlling cancer pain at various level of care.
These are supported by local studies on the issue and the lower rate
of opioid use in the country compared with the global rate. Efforts must
be improved to educate both healthcare providers and patients/carers
on the judicious use of opioids in patients with cancer pain. Working
together with the NGOs like hospice will facilitate the implementation of
these guidelines. Certain medications like IR morphine should be made
available in all primary care centres.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
In line with the key recommendations of the CPG and the National Key
Performance Index of Palliative Medicine, the following is proposed as
clinical audit indicator for quality management of cancer pain:
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include launching of the CPG, Quick Reference
and Training Module.
Percentage
of patients
with cancer
pain score of
7 - 10 who are
prescribed with
strong opioids
=
Total number of patients with cancer pain
score of 7 - 10 in the same period
Number of patients with cancer pain score
of 7 - 10 who are prescribed with strong
opioids in a period
x100%
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
International Agency for Research on Cancer. Malaysia: The Global Cancer
Observatory
2021
(Available
at:
https://gco.iarc.fr/today/data/factsheets/
populations/458-malaysia-fact-sheets pdf).
2.
Department of Statistics Malaysia. Statistics on Causes of Death, Malaysia.
2022.
(Available
at:
https://dev.dosm.gov.my/portal-main/release-content/
statistics-on-causes-of-death-malaysia-2022).
3.
International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP). Terminology: International
association for the study of pain. (Available at: https://www.iasp-pain.org/
resources/terminology/).
4.
van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH, Hochstenbach LM, Joosten EA, et al.
Update on Prevalence of Pain in Patients With Cancer: Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2016;51(6):1070-90.e9.
5.
Schliemann D, Ismail R, Donnelly M, et al. Cancer symptom and risk factor
awareness in Malaysia: findings from a nationwide cross-sectional study. BMC
Public Health. 2020;20(1):464.
6.
Zin CS. Ten Years of Strong Opioid Analgesics Consumption in Malaysia
and Other Southeast Asian Countries. J Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2020;12(Suppl
2):S846-s51.
7.
Lim R. Improving cancer pain management in Malaysia. Oncology. 2008;74
Suppl 1:24-34.
8.
Gomes-Ferraz CA, Rezende G, Fagundes AA, et al. Assessment of total pain in
people in oncologic palliative care: integrative literature review. Palliat Care Soc
Pract. 2022;16:26323524221125244.
9.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. CPG Management of Cancer Pain. Putrajaya: MoH;
2010.
10. Green E, Zwaal C, Beals C, et al. Cancer-related pain management: a report of
evidence-based recommendations to guide practice. Clin J Pain. 2010;26(6):449462.
11. WHO Guidelines for the Pharmacological and Radiotherapeutic Management
of Cancer Pain in Adults and Adolescents. World Health Organization. 2018.
(Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537492/)
12. Jongen JL, Overbeck A, Stronks DL, et al. Effectiveness of a multidisciplinary
consultation team for cancer pain and palliative care in a large university hospital
in The Netherlands. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2011;1(3):322-328.
13. Chen J, Lu XY, Wang WJ, et al. Impact of a clinical pharmacist-led guidance
team on cancer pain therapy in China: a prospective multicenter cohort study. J
Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;48(4):500-509.
14. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Pain as The 5th Vital Sign Guideline: 3rd Edition.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2018.
15. Chang HC, Lai YH, Lin KC, et al. Evaluation of Pain Intensity Assessment Tools
Among Elderly Patients With Cancer in Taiwan. Cancer Nurs. 2017;40(4):269275.
16. Harrington SE, Gilchrist L, Lee JQ, et al. Oncology Section EDGE Task Force
on Cancer: A Systematic Review of Clinical Measures for Pain. Rehabilitation
Oncology. 2018;36:83–92.
17. Baek SK, Shin SW, Koh SJ, et al. Significance of descriptive symptoms and
signs and clinical parameters as predictors of neuropathic cancer pain. PLoS
One. 2021;16(8):e0252781.
18. Hardy J, Quinn S, Fazekas B, et al. Can the LANSS scale be used to classify
pain in chronic cancer pain trials? Support Care Cancer. 2013;21(12):33873391.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
19. Tzamakou E, Petrou A, Tefa L, et al. Detection of Neuropathic Pain in EndStage Cancer Patients: Diagnostic Accuracy of Two Questionnaires. Pain Pract.
2018;18(6):768-776.
20. Murtagh FE, Ramsenthaler C, Firth A, et al. A brief, patient- and proxy-reported
outcome measure in advanced illness: Validity, reliability and responsiveness
of the Integrated Palliative care Outcome Scale (IPOS). Palliat Med.
2019;33(8):1045-1057.
21. Hannon B, Dyck M, Pope A, et al. Modified Edmonton Symptom Assessment
System including constipation and sleep: validation in outpatients with cancer. J
Pain Symptom Manage. 2015;49(5):945-952.
22. Dunford E, West E, Sampson EL. Psychometric evaluation of the Pain
Assessment in Advanced Dementia scale in an acute general hospital setting.
Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2022;37(12).
23. Bandieri E, Romero M, Ripamonti CI, et al. Randomized Trial of Low-Dose
Morphine Versus Weak Opioids in Moderate Cancer Pain. J Clin Oncol.
2016;34(5):436-442.
24. Fallon M, Dierberger K, Leng M, et al. An international, open-label, randomised
trial comparing a two-step approach versus the standard three-step approach of
the WHO analgesic ladder in patients with cancer. Ann Oncol. 2022;33(12):12961303.
25. Nabal M, Librada S, Redondo MJ, et al. The role of paracetamol and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs in addition to WHO Step III opioids in the control of
pain in advanced cancer. A systematic review of the literature. Palliat Med.
2012;26(4):305-312.
26. Derry S, Wiffen PJ, Moore RA, et al. Oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) for cancer pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;7(7):CD012638.
27. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA, et al. Oral paracetamol (acetaminophen) for
cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;7(7):CD012637.
28. Caraceni A, Hanks G, Kaasa S, et al. Use of opioid analgesics in the treatment of
cancer pain: evidence-based recommendations from the EAPC. Lancet Oncol.
2012;13(2):e58-68.
29. Beakley BD, Kaye AM, Kaye AD. Tramadol, Pharmacology, Side Effects, and
Serotonin Syndrome: A Review. Pain Physician. 2015;18(4):395-400.
30. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Tramadol with or without paracetamol
(acetaminophen) for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017(5):
CD012508.
31. Straube C, Derry S, Jackson KC, et al. Codeine, alone and with paracetamol
(acetaminophen), for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(9)
CD006601.
32. World Health Organization. Web Annex A. World Health Organization Model List
of Essential Medicines – 23rd List, 2023. In: The selection and use of essential
medicines 2023: Executive summary of the report of the 24th WHO Expert
Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines. Geneva: WHO;
2023.
33. Wiffen PJ, Wee B, Moore RA. Oral morphine for cancer pain. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2016;4(4):CD003868.
34. Wilcock A, Howard P, S C. Palliative Care Formulary. Eighth Edition. London:
Pharmaceutical Press; 2022.
35. Schmidt-Hansen M, Bennett MI, Arnold S, et al. Oxycodone for cancer-related
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022;6(6):CD003870.
36. Biancofiore G. Oxycodone controlled release in cancer pain management. Ther
Clin Risk Manag. 2006;2(3):229-234.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
37. Hadley G, Derry S, Moore RA, et al. Transdermal fentanyl for cancer pain.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2013(10):CD010270.
38. Nomura M, Kamata M, Kojima H, et al. Six- versus 12-h conversion method from
intravenous to transdermal fentanyl in chronic cancer pain: a randomized study.
Support Care Cancer. 2011;19(5):691-695.
39. King S, Forbes K, Hanks GW, et al. A systematic review of the use of opioid
medication for those with moderate to severe cancer pain and renal impairment:
a European Palliative Care Research Collaborative opioid guidelines project.
Palliat Med. 2011;25(5):525-552.
40. Paice JA, Bohlke K, Barton D, et al. Use of Opioids for Adults With Pain From
Cancer or Cancer Treatment: ASCO Guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2023;41(4):914-930.
41. Watson M, Ward S, Vallath N, et al. Oxford Handbook of Palliative Care. Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 2019.
42. Hall LM, O'Lenic K. Treatment strategies to overcome end-of-dose failure with
oral and transdermal opioids. J Pharm Pract. 2012;25(5):503-509.
43. Azhar A, Kim YJ, Haider A, et al. Response to Oral Immediate-Release Opioids
for Breakthrough Pain in Patients with Advanced Cancer with Adequately
Controlled Background Pain. Oncologist. 2019;24(1):125-131.
44. Currow DC, Clark K, Louw S, et al. A randomized, double-blind, crossover, dose
ranging study to determine the optimal dose of oral opioid to treat breakthrough
pain for patients with advanced cancer already established on regular opioids.
Eur J Pain. 2020;24(5):983-991.
45. Zecca E, Brunelli C, Centurioni F, et al. Fentanyl Sublingual Tablets Versus
Subcutaneous Morphine for the Management of Severe Cancer Pain Episodes
in Patients Receiving Opioid Treatment: A Double-Blind, Randomized,
Noninferiority Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(7):759-765.
46. Velázquez Rivera I, Muñoz Garrido JC, García Velasco P, et al. Efficacy of
sublingual fentanyl vs. oral morphine for cancer-related breakthrough pain. Adv
Ther. 2014;31(1):107-117.
47. Mercadante S, Bruera E. Opioid switching in cancer pain: From the beginning to
nowadays. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2016;99:241-248.
48. Schuster M, Bayer O, Heid F, et al. Opioid Rotation in Cancer Pain Treatment.
Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018;115(9):135-142.
49. Nicholson AB, Watson GR, Derry S, et al. Methadone for cancer pain. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2017;2(2):CD003971.
50. Mercadante S, Bruera E. Methadone as a First-Line Opioid in Cancer Pain
Management: A Systematic Review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2018;55(3):9981003.
51. Sande TA, Laird BJ, Fallon MT. The use of opioids in cancer patients with renal
impairment-a systematic review. Support Care Cancer. 2017;25(2):661-675.
52. Hughes LT, Raftery D, Coulter P, et al. Use of opioids in patients with cancer
with hepatic impairment-a systematic review. BMJ Support Palliat Care.
2022;12(2):152-157.
53. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Impact of morphine, fentanyl, oxycodone or
codeine on patient consciousness, appetite and thirst when used to treat cancer
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2014(5):CD011056.
54. Oosten AW, Oldenmenger WH, Mathijssen RH, et al. A Systematic Review of
Prospective Studies Reporting Adverse Events of Commonly Used Opioids for
Cancer-Related Pain: A Call for the Use of Standardized Outcome Measures. J
Pain. 2015;16(10):935-946.
55. Abou-Kassem D, Kurita GP, Sjøgren P, et al. Long-term opioid treatment and
endocrine measures in patients with cancer-related pain: a systematic review.
Scand J Pain. 2022;22(3):421-435.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
56. Lee M, Silverman SM, Hansen H, et al. A comprehensive review of opioidinduced hyperalgesia. Pain Physician. 2011;14(2):145-161.
57. Khan F, Mehan A. Addressing opioid tolerance and opioid-induced
hypersensitivity: Recent developments and future therapeutic strategies.
Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2021;9(3):e00789.
58. Viet CT, Dang D, Aouizerat BE, et al. OPRM1 Methylation Contributes to Opioid
Tolerance in Cancer Patients. J Pain. 2017;18(9):1046-1059.
59. Beauchemin M, Dorritie R, Hershman DL. Opioid use and misuse in children,
adolescents, and young adults with cancer: a systematic review of the literature.
Support Care Cancer. 2021;29(8):4521-4527.
60. Yusufov M, Braun IM, Pirl WF. A systematic review of substance use and
substance use disorders in patients with cancer. Gen Hosp Psychiatry.
2019;60:128-136.
61. Swarm RA, Paice JA, Anghelescu DL, et al. Adult Cancer Pain, Version 3.2019,
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw.
2019;17(8):977-1007.
62. Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic
pain in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol.
2015;14(2):162-173.
63. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Bell RF, et al. Gabapentin for chronic neuropathic pain in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;6(6):CD007938.
64. Kane CM, Mulvey MR, Wright S, et al. Opioids combined with antidepressants or
antiepileptic drugs for cancer pain: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Palliat
Med. 2018;32(1):276-286.
65. Moore RA, Derry S, Aldington D, et al. Amitriptyline for neuropathic pain in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(7):CD008242.
66. Haywood A, Good P, Khan S, et al. Corticosteroids for the management of cancerrelated pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(4):CD010756.
67. Hendriks LE, Hermans BC, van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH, et al. Effect
of Bisphosphonates, Denosumab, and Radioisotopes on Bone Pain and Quality
of Life in Patients with Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer and Bone Metastases: A
Systematic Review. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(2):155-173.
68. O'Carrigan B, Wong MH, Willson ML, et al. Bisphosphonates and other bone
agents for breast cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;10(10):CD003474.
69. Jakob T, Tesfamariam YM, Macherey S, et al. Bisphosphonates or RANK-ligandinhibitors for men with prostate cancer and bone metastases: a network metaanalysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;12(12):CD013020.
70. Bell RF, Eccleston C, Kalso EA. Ketamine as an adjuvant to opioids for cancer
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;6(6):CD003351.
71. Montero-Oleas N, Arevalo-Rodriguez I, Nuñez-González S, et al. Therapeutic
use of cannabis and cannabinoids: an evidence mapping and appraisal of
systematic reviews. BMC Complement Med Ther. 2020;20(1):12.
72. Noori A, Miroshnychenko A, Shergill Y, et al. Opioid-sparing effects of medical
cannabis or cannabinoids for chronic pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomised and observational studies. BMJ Open. 2021;11(7):e047717.
73. Wang L, Hong PJ, May C, et al. Medical cannabis or cannabinoids for chronic
non-cancer and cancer related pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomised clinical trials. BMJ. 2021;374:n1034.
74. Roza S, Syful Azlie MF, Mohd Aminuddin MY, et al. Cannabis for medical use:
Health Technology Assessment. Putrajaya: MoH; 2022.
75. Barakji J, Korang SK, Feinberg J, et al. Cannabinoids versus placebo for pain: A
systematic review with meta-analysis and Trial Sequential Analysis. PLoS One.
2023;18(1):e0267420.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
76. Rich SE, Chow R, Raman S, et al. Update of the systematic review of
palliative radiation therapy fractionation for bone metastases. Radiother Oncol.
2018;126(3):547-557.
77. Chow E, Zeng L, Salvo N, et al. Update on the systematic review of
palliative radiotherapy trials for bone metastases. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol).
2012;24(2):112-124.
78. Wang Z, Li L, Yang X, et al. Efficacy and safety of stereotactic body radiotherapy
for painful bone metastases: Evidence from randomized controlled trials. Front
Oncol. 2022;12:979201.
79. Fabregat C, Almendros S, Navarro-Martin A, et al. Pain Flare-Effect Prophylaxis
With Corticosteroids on Bone Radiotherapy Treatment: A Systematic Review.
Pain Pract. 2020;20(1):101-109.
80. Wu X, Qin F, Zhang Q, et al. Immunotherapy improved cancer related pain
management in patients with advanced Hepato-Pancreatic Biliary Cancers: A
propensity score-matched (PSM) analysis. Front Oncol. 2022;12:914591.
81. Jong JM, Oprea-Lager DE, Hooft L, et al. Radiopharmaceuticals for Palliation
of Bone Pain in Patients with Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer Metastatic to
Bone: A Systematic Review. Eur Urol. 2016;70(3):416-426.
82. Wang W, Liu Z, Zhu J, et al. Brachytherapy with iodine 125 seeds for bone
metastases. J Cancer Res Ther. 2017;13(5):742-747.
83. Ling CC, Lui LY, So WK. Do educational interventions improve cancer patients'
quality of life and reduce pain intensity? Quantitative systematic review. J Adv
Nurs. 2012;68(3):511-520.
84. Jho HJ, Myung SK, Chang YJ, et al. Efficacy of pain education in cancer
patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Support Care Cancer.
2013;21(7):1963-1971.
85. Sheinfeld Gorin S, Krebs P, Badr H, et al. Meta-analysis of psychosocial
interventions to reduce pain in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(5):539547.
86. Kwekkeboom K, Zhang Y, Campbell T, et al. Randomized controlled trial of
a brief cognitive-behavioral strategies intervention for the pain, fatigue, and
sleep disturbance symptom cluster in advanced cancer. Psychooncology.
2018;27(12):2761-2769.
87. Tulipani C, Morelli F, Spedicato MR, et al. Alexithymia and cancer pain: the effect
of psychological intervention. Psychother Psychosom. 2010;79(3):156-163.
88. Hindmarch T, Dalrymple J, Smith M, et al. Spiritual interventions for cancer
pain: a systematic review and narrative synthesis. BMJ Support Palliat Care.
2022;12(1):1-9.
89. Arcidiacono PG, Calori G, Carrara S, et al. Celiac plexus block for pancreatic
cancer pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;2011(3):CD007519.
90. Okita M, Otani K, Gibo N, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of celiac
plexus neurolysis for abdominal pain associated with unresectable pancreatic
cancer. Pain Pract. 2022;22(7):652-661.
91. Koulouris AI, Alexandre L, Hart AR, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided celiac
plexus neurolysis (EUS-CPN) technique and analgesic efficacy in patients with
pancreatic cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Pancreatology.
2021;21(2):434-442.
92. Rocha A, Plancarte R, Nataren RGR, et al. Effectiveness of Superior Hypogastric
Plexus Neurolysis for Pelvic Cancer Pain. Pain Physician. 2020;23(2):203-208.
93. Hetta DF, Mohamed AA, Abdel Eman RM, et al. Pulsed Radiofrequency of
the Sacral Roots Improves the Success Rate of Superior Hypogastric Plexus
Neurolysis in Controlling Pelvic and Perineal Cancer Pain. Pain Physician.
2020;23(2):149-157.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
94. Sousa Correia J, Silva M, Castro C, et al. The efficacy of the ganglion impar block
in perineal and pelvic cancer pain. Support Care Cancer. 2019;27(11):43274330.
95. Carvajal G, Dupoiron D, Seegers V, et al. Intrathecal Drug Delivery Systems
for Refractory Pancreatic Cancer Pain: Observational Follow-up Study
Over an 11-Year Period in a Comprehensive Cancer Center. Anesth Analg.
2018;126(6):2038-2046.
96. Kurita GP, Kaasa S, Sjøgren P. Spinal opioids in adult patients with cancer
pain: a systematic review: a European Palliative Care Research Collaborative
(EPCRC) opioid guidelines project. Palliat Med. 2011;25(5):560-577.
97. Stearns LM, Abd-Elsayed A, Perruchoud C, et al. Intrathecal Drug Delivery
Systems for Cancer Pain: An Analysis of a Prospective, Multicenter Product
Surveillance Registry. Anesth Analg. 2020;130(2):289-297.
98. Mattie R, Brar N, Tram JT, et al. Vertebral Augmentation of Cancer-Related
Spinal Compression Fractures: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Spine
(Phila Pa 1976). 2021;46(24):1729-1737.
99. France BD, Lewis RA, Sharma ML, et al. Cordotomy in mesothelioma-related
pain: a systematic review. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2014;4(1):19-29.
100. Nooh A, Goulding K, Isler MH, et al. Early Improvement in Pain and Functional
Outcome but Not Quality of Life After Surgery for Metastatic Long Bone Disease.
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2018;476(3):535-545.
101. Behzadmehr R, Dastyar N, Moghadam MP, et al. Effect of complementary and
alternative medicine interventions on cancer related pain among breast cancer
patients: A systematic review. Complement Ther Med. 2020;49:102318.
102. Hurlow A, Bennett MI, Robb KA, et al. Transcutaneous electric nerve
stimulation (TENS) for cancer pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012;2012(3):CD006276.
103. Plinsinga ML, Singh B, Rose GL, et al. The Effect of Exercise on Pain in
People with Cancer: A Systematic Review with Meta-analysis. Sports Med.
2023;53(9):1737-1752.
104. Hökkä M, Kaakinen P, Pölkki T. A systematic review: non-pharmacological
interventions in treating pain in patients with advanced cancer. J Adv Nurs.
2014;70(9):1954-1969.
105. Lee SH, Kim JY, Yeo S, et al. Meta-Analysis of Massage Therapy on Cancer
Pain. Integr Cancer Ther. 2015;14(4):297-304.
106. Shin ES, Seo KH, Lee SH, et al. Massage with or without aromatherapy
for symptom relief in people with cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2016;2016(6):CD009873.
107. Chen TH, Tung TH, Chen PS, et al. The Clinical Effects of Aromatherapy Massage
on Reducing Pain for the Cancer Patients: Meta-Analysis of Randomized
Controlled Trials. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:9147974.
108. Paley CA, Johnson MI, Tashani OA, et al. Acupuncture for cancer pain in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2015(10):CD007753.
109. Yang J, Wahner-Roedler DL, Zhou X, et al. Acupuncture for palliative cancer pain
management: systematic review. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2021;11(3):264270.
110. Anshasi HA, Ahmad M. An assessment of methodological quality of systematic
reviews of acupuncture and related therapies for cancer-related pain.
Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2018;32:163-168.
111. What is cancer? Malaysian Society of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology.
2015 (Available at: https://maspho.org/cancer-information/)
112. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Paediatric Pain Management Guidelines. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2023.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
113. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Handbook of Children's Palliative Care Malaysia.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2021.
114. Loeffen EAH, Kremer LCM, van de Wetering MD, et al. Reducing pain in children
with cancer: Methodology for the development of a clinical practice guideline.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2019;66(6):e27698.
115. Department of Pain Medicine. Pain Management - CHW Practice Guideline.
Sydney: The Children Hospital at Westmead. 2021.
116. Department of Clinical Effectiveness. Cancer Pain -Pediatric (Age ≤18 Years).
Texas: The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center; 2021.
117. Gai N, Naser B, Hanley J, et al. A practical guide to acute pain management in
children. J Anesth. 2020;34(3):421-433.
118. Heneghan C, Byrne M, Cramer L, et al. Pediatric palliative care approach to pain
& symptom management. Dana Farber Cancer Institute. 2020:1-39.
119. Suicidality in Children and Adolescents Being Treated With Antidepressant
Medications. FDA. 2018 (Available at: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarketdrug-safety-information-patients-and-providers/suicidality-children-andadolescents-being-treated-antidepressant-medications.)
120. Lara-Solares A, Ahumada Olea M, Basantes Pinos A, et al. Latin-American
guidelines for cancer pain management. Pain Manag. 2017;7(4):287-298.
121. González-María E, Fuentelsaz-Gallego C, Moreno-Casbas T, et al. on behalf
of the work group of the Clinical Practice Guideline for Pain Management in
Children With Cancer. Clinical Practice Guideline for Pain Management in
Children with Cancer: CRIS Foundation for Cancer Research; 2013 (Available
at: http://www.criscancer.org)
122. Hauer J, Duncan J, BF S. Pediatric pain and symptom management guidelines.
Boston: Dana Farber Cancer Institute/Boston Children’s Hospital Pediatric
Advanced Care Team; 2014.
123. Makhlouf SM, Pini S, Ahmed S, et al. Managing Pain in People with Cancer-a
Systematic Review of the Attitudes and Knowledge of Professionals, Patients,
Caregivers and Public. J Cancer Educ. 2020;35(2):214-240.
124. Chi NC, Nakad L, Han S, et al. Family Caregivers' Challenges in Cancer Pain
Management for Patients Receiving Palliative Care. Am J Hosp Palliat Care.
2023;40(1):43-51.
125. Kiu DKL, Lee ZFD, Voon PJ. Exploration of Patient-Related Barriers to Effective
Cancer Pain Management in a Diverse Multicultural Developing Country. J Pain
Symptom Manage. 2021;62(1):75-80.
126. Gunnarsdottir S, Sigurdardottir V, Kloke M, et al. A multicenter study of attitudinal
barriers to cancer pain management. Support Care Cancer. 2017;25(11):3595-3602.
127. Kwon JH, Oh SY, Chisholm G, et al. Predictors of high score patient-reported
barriers to controlling cancer pain: a preliminary report. Support Care Cancer.
2013;21(4):1175-1183.
128. Wangnamthip S, Panchoowong S, Donado C, et al. The Effectiveness of Cancer
Pain Management in a Tertiary Hospital Outpatient Pain Clinic in Thailand: A
Prospective Observational Study. Pain Res Manag. 2021;2021:5599023.
129. Liu K, Huang H, Zhang L, et al. Effects of a physician- and pharmacist-managed
clinic on pain management in cancer patients in China. Basic Clin Pharmacol
Toxicol. 2021;129(1):36-43.
130. Gomes B, Calanzani N, Curiale V, et al. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of home palliative care services for adults with advanced illness and their
caregivers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2013(6):CD007760.
131. Ream E, Hughes AE, Cox A, et al. Telephone interventions for symptom
management in adults with cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2020;6(6):CD007568.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
132. Knegtmans MF, Wauben L, Wagemans MFM, et al. Home Telemonitoring
Improved Pain Registration in Patients With Cancer. Pain Pract. 2020;20(2):122-128.
133. Hernandez Silva E, Lawler S, Langbecker D. The effectiveness of mHealth for
self-management in improving pain, psychological distress, fatigue, and sleep in
cancer survivors: a systematic review. J Cancer Surviv. 2019;13(1):97-107.
134. Chen W, Huang J, Cui Z, et al. The efficacy of telemedicine for pain management
in patients with cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ther Adv Chronic
Dis. 2023;14:20406223231153097.
135. Dans M, Kutner JS, Agarwal R, et al. NCCN Guidelines® Insights: Palliative
Care, Version 2.2021. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2021;19(7):780-788.
136. Hui D, Mori M, Watanabe SM, et al. Referral criteria for outpatient
specialty palliative cancer care: an international consensus. Lancet Oncol.
2016;17(12):e552-e9.
137. Duarte R, Copley S, Nevitt S, et al. Effectiveness and Safety of Intrathecal Drug
Delivery Systems for the Management of Cancer Pain: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. Neuromodulation. 2023;26(6):1126-1141.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effective and safe pharmacological
treatments in cancer pain?
1.
CANCER PAIN/
2.
((cancer or neoplasm or tumo?r) adj2 associated pain).tw.
3.
((cancer or neoplasm or tumo?r) adj2 related pain).tw.
4.
((cancer-associated or cancer-related or cancer or neoplasmassociated or neoplasm-related or tumo?r-associated or tumo?rrelated) adj1 pain*).tw.
5.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4
6.
(pharmaco* adj1 treatment*).tw.
7.
DRUG THERAPY/
8.
(drug adj1 therap*).tw.
9.
pharmacotherap*.tw.
10. ANALGESICS, NON-NARCOTIC/
11. ((non-opioid or nonopioid) adj1 (analgesic* or drug*)).tw.
12. (non opioid adj2 (analgesic* or drug*)).tw.
13. ((nonnarcotic or non-narcotic) adj1 (analgesic* or drug*)).tw.
14. ACETAMINOPHEN/
15. acet#minophen.tw.
16. n-acetyl-p-aminophenol.tw.
17. paracetamol.tw.
18. ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS, NON-STEROIDAL/
19. ((non-steroidal or nonsteroidal) adj2 (anti-inflammatory agent* or
antiinflammatory agent*)).tw.
20. (nonsteroidal anti inflammatory adj3 agent*).tw.
21. (analgesic* adj1 (antiiflammatory or anti-inflammatory)).tw.
22. (non steroidal anti inflammatory adj4 agent*).tw.
23. (analgesic* adj2 anti flammatory).tw.
24. nsaid*.tw.
25. TRAMADOL/
26. tramadol.tw.
27. tramadol hydrochloride.tw.
28. TAPENTADOL/
29. tapentadol.tw.
30. tapentadol hydrochloride.tw.
31. CODEINE/
32. codeine.tw.
33. codeine phosphate.tw.
34. dihydrocodeine.tw.
35. ANALGESICS, OPIOID/
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
36. ((full or partial) adj2 opioid agonist*).tw.
37. (opioid adj1 analgesic*).tw.
38. (opioid mixed adj2 agonist-antagonist*).tw.
39. opioid mixed agonist antagonist*.tw.
40. opioid*.tw.
41. MORPHINE/
42. (morphine adj1 chloride).tw.
43. (ms adj1 contin).tw.
44. duramorph.tw.
45. morphine.tw.
46. (morphine adj1 (sulfate or sulphate)).tw.
47. (oramorph adj1 sr).tw.
48. OXYCODONE/
49. oxycodone.tw.
50. (oxycodone adj1 hydrochloride).tw.
51. oxycodone naloxone.tw.
52. FENTANYL/
53. fentanyl.tw.
54. (fentanyl adj1 citrate).tw.
55. atypical opioid.tw.
56. BUPRENORPHINE/
57. buprenorphine.tw.
58. (buprenorphine adj1 hydrochloride).tw.
59. NALBUPHINE/
60. nalbuphine.tw.
61. (nalbuphine adj1 hydrochloride).tw.
62. MEPERIDINE/
63. meperidine.tw.
64. (meperidine adj1 hydrochloride).tw.
65. pethidine.tw.
66. METHADONE/
67. methadone.tw.
68. (methadone adj1 hydrochloride).tw.
69. 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18
or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27 or 28 or 29 or
30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or 38 or 39 or 40 or 41
or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45 or 46 or 47 or 48 or 49 or 50 or 51 or 52 or
53 or 54 or 55 or 56 or 57 or 58 or 59 or 60 or 61 or 62 or 63 or 64
or 65 or 66 or 67 or 68
70. 5 and 69
71. limit 70 to (english language and humans and yr=”2010-Current”)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the principles of management of pain in patients with
cancer?
2.
What are the accuracy and reliability of clinical assessment tools of
patients with cancer pain?
3.
What are the accuracy and reliability of neuropathic pain
assessment and tools in patients with cancer?
4.
What are the accuracy and reliability of screening tools for
comprehensive assessment of cancer pain?
5.
What are the accuracy and reliability of pain assessment tools in
patients with cognitive impairment/learning disabilities with cancer
pain?
6.
What are the principles of pharmacological treatment in cancer
pain?
7.
What are the effective and safe pharmacological treatments in
cancer pain?
8.
Are cannabinoids/medical cannabis effective and safe for treatment
of cancer pain?
9.
What are the prescribing, titration and maintenance issues of
morphine and other strong opioids in patients with cancer?
10. What are the clinical issues related to tolerance, dependence, and
addiction to opioids in patients with cancer?
11. What are the pharmacological strategies for breakthrough pain
and other acute pain crises in patients with cancer?
12. What are the effective and safe adjuvant medications in cancer
pain management?
13. What are the effectiveness and safety of different drug formulations
and routes of administration in managing pain for patients with
cancer?
14. What are the effectiveness and safety of anticancer therapies in
the management of cancer pain?
15. What are the effectiveness and safety of radionuclide therapies in
the management of cancer pain?
16. What are the effective and safe non-pharmacological/non-invasive
treatments in cancer pain?
17. What are the effectiveness and safety of neurolytic therapies in
management of cancer pain?
18. What are the effectiveness and safety of intrathecal neuraxial
opioid and/or neuraxial adjuvants in refractory cancer?
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
19. What are the effectiveness and safety of surgery in cancer pain?
20. What are the effective and safe treatment for cancer pain in
children?
21. What are the roles of multidisciplinary team/members/clinic in
managing patients with cancer pain?
22. How should patients with cancer pain be followed-up?
23. What are the referral criteria of patients with cancer pain to be
referred to specialist care in primary/secondary/tertiary care?
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
SEDATION SCORE (MACINTYRE)
Source: Macintyre PE & Schug SA. Acute Pain Management: A Practical Guide.
Saunders Elsevier: London; 2007.
Score Sedation level
Clinical findings
Patient is awake and alert
Occasionally drowsy, easy to rouse, and can stay
awake once awoken
Constantly drowsy, still easy to rouse, unable to
stay awake once awoken
Somnolent, difficult to rouse, severe respiratory
depression
None
Mild
Moderate
Severe
0
1
2
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
ASSESSMENT TOOLS
a. Ministry of Health (MoH) Pain Scale
The MOH pain scale is a scale that combines NRS, the VAS and faces
scale. The patient is asked to indicate his/ her level of pain intensity by
pointing along a scale. The scale has numbers and the pain score is
recorded as a number from 0 to 10.
In children less than 7 years old and cognitively impaired adults, other
scales like IASP Faces Pain Scale or FLACC scale can be used. In
patients who are sedated and intubated, pain assessment will rely on
observations and behavioral assessment.
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Guideline: 3rd Edition.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2018.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
b. FLACC Scale
This is an observational score, and is used for paediatric patients aged
>1 month to 3 years. It may also be used in adult patients who are unable
to communicate verbally, e.g. very elderly patients, cognitively impaired
patients.
1. Observe behaviour
2. Select a score according to behaviour
3. Add the scores for the total
Each of the five categories (F) face, (L) legs, (A) activity, (C) cry and
(C) consolability is scored from 0-2, resulting in the total range of 0-10.
Source: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Guideline: 3rd Edition.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2018.
c. Verbal Rating Scale (VRS)
The VRS consists of a list of adjectives describing different levels of pain
intensity. Patients are asked to select the adjective that best represents
their pain. This should reflect the extremes of this dimension; from ‘no
pain’ to ‘very severe pain’ and sufficient intervening adjectives to capture
gradations of pain intensity that may be experienced between extremes.
VRSs are scored as above but these are ranks, not equal intervals.
Adapted: Outcome measures. The Faculty of Pain Medicine of the Royal College of
Anaesthetists. 2019.
Frequent to constant
quivering chin,
clenched jaw
Occasional grimace or
frown, withdrawn,
disinterested
No particular
expression or smile
Face
Kicking or legs
drawn up
Uneasy, restless,
tense
Normal position or
relaxed
Legs
Arched, rigid or
jerking
Squirming, shifting
back and forth, tense
Lying quietly,
normal position,
moves easily
Activity
Crying steadily,
screams or sobs,
frequent
complaints
Moans or whimpers;
occasional complaint
No cry (awake or
asleep)
Cry
Consolability
0
1
2
Scoring
Category
Difficult to console
Reassured by
occasional touching,
hugging or being talked
to, distractible
Content, relaxed
No pain
Mild pain
Moderate pain
Severe pain
Very severe pain
0
1
2
3
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
d. Short-form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ-2)
Date: _______________
Subject ID: ___________
For this questionnaire, I will provide you a list of words that describe some of the different qualities of pain
and related symptoms. Please rate the intensity of each of the pain and related symptoms you felt during
the past week on 0 to 10 scale, with 0 being no pain and 10 being the worst pain you can imagine. Use 0 if
the word does not describe your pain or related symptoms. Limit yourself to a description of the pain related
to your surgery or pelvic pain.
The SF-MPQ-2 consists of 24 different descriptors of pain of which each item is rated
on a scale of 0-10. The scale of 0 equals to no pain and the scale of 10 equals to the
worst ever pain experience during last week. The total score is calculated by summing
all 24 scores.
Adapted: Melzack, Ronal. The short-form McGill pain questionnaire. Pain. 1987:
30 (2) :191-197.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
e. Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms and
Signs (LANSS) Scale
Name__________________________________ Date___________________________
This pain scale can help to determine whether the nerves that are carrying your pain signals are working
normally or not. It is important to find this out in case different treatments are needed to control your pain.
A.
PAIN QUESTIONNAIRE
•
Think about how your pain has felt over the last week.
•
Please say whether any of the descriptions match your pain exactly.
1)
Does your pain feel like strange, unpleasant sensation in your skin? Works like pricking, tingling, pins and
needles might describe these sensations.
a)
NO – my pain doesn’t really feel like this………………………………………………(0)
b)
YES – I get these sensations quite a lot……………………………………………….(5)
2)
Does your pain make the skin in the painful area look different from normal?
Words like motthled or looking more red or pink might describe the appearance.
a)
NO – My pain doesn’t affect the colour of my skin……………………...…………….(0)
b)
YES – I’ve noticed that the pain does make my skin look different from normal…..(5)
3)
Does your pain make the affected skin abnormally sensitive to touch? Getting unpleasant sensations when
lightly stroking the skin, or getting pain when wearing tight clothes might describe the abnormal sensitivity.
a)
NO – My pain doesn’t make my skin abnormally sensitive in that area…………….(0)
b)
YES – I’ve noticed that the pain does make my skin look different from normal…..(3)
4)
Does your pain come on suddenly and in bursts for no apparent reason when you’re still. Words like electric
shocks, jumping and bursting describe the sensations.
a)
NO – My pain doesn’t really fell like this………………………………………….…….(0)
b)
YES – I get these sensations quite a lot………………………………………………..(2)
5)
Does your pain feel as if the skin temperature in the painful area has changed abnormally? Words like hot
and burning describe these sensations.
a)
NO – I don’t really get these sensations………………………………….…………….(0)
b)
YES – I get these sensations quite a lot………………………………………………..(1)
B.
SENSORY TESTING
Skin sensitivity can be examined by comparing the painful area with a contralateral or adjacent non-painful area for the
presence of allodynia and an altered pin-prick threshold (PPT).
1)
ALLODYNIA
Examine the response to lightly stroking cotton wool across the non-painful area and then the painful area. If
normal sensations are experienced in the non-painful site, but pain or unpleasant sensations (tingling, nausea) are
experienced in the painful area when stroking, allodynia is present.
a)
NO, normal sensation in both areas……………………………………...…………….(0)
b)
YES, allodynia in painful area only……………………………………………………..(5)
2)
ALTERED PIN-PRICK THRESHOLD
Determine the pin-prick threshold by comparing the response to a 23 gauge (blue) needle mounted inside a 2 ml
syringe barrel placed gently on to the skin in a non-painful and then painful areas.
If a sharp pin-prink is felt in the non-painful area, but a different sensation is experienced in the painful area e.g.
none/blunt only (raised PPT) or a vary painful sensation (lowered PPT), an altered PPT is present.
If a pin-prick is not felt in either area, mount the syringe onto the needle to increase the weight and repeat.
a)
NO, equal sensation in both areas……………..……………………………………….(0)
b)
YES, altered PPT in painful area………………………………………………………..(3)
___________________________________________________________________________________________
SCORING:
Add values in parentheses for sensory description and examination finding to obtain overall score.
TOTAL SCORE (maximum 24)…………………………………………………………………
If score <12, neuropathic mechanisms are unlikely to be contributing to the patient’s pain
If score >12, neuropathic mechanisms are likely to be contributing to the patient’s pain
The LANSS identifies patients with neuropathic pain by combining the score of a patient’s verbal description of pain
and the results of neurological examination. This tool has two parts-a patient completed section and a brief physical
assessment. Five questions in the patient-completed section (maximum score 16) identify those who are experiencing
phenomena associated with neuropathic pain: ‘pins and needles’ (paraesthesia); ‘red skin’ (autonomic changes);
‘sensitive skin’ (evoked dysaesthesia); ‘electric shock pain’; and ‘burning pain’ (spontaneous dysaesthesia). The
physical assessment (maximum score 8) is designed to identify allodynia by stroking cotton wool over the painful and
the anatomically equivalent non-painful area, and altered pinprick threshold (PPT) by use of a 23-gauge needle to
assess perception of pinprick in the same areas.
Adapted: The LANSS Pain Scale
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
f. PainDETECT Questionnaire
Do you suffer from a burning sensation (e.g., stinging nettles) in the marked areas?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
Do you have a tingling or prickling sensation in the areas of your pain (like crawling ants or electrical
tingling)?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
Is light touching (clothing, a blanket) in this area painful?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
Do you have sudden pain attacks in the area of your pain, like electric shocks?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
Is cold or heat (bath water) in this area occasionally painful?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
Do you suffer from a sensation of numbness in the areas that you marked?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
Does slight pressure in this area, e.g., with a finger, trigger pain?
never hardly noticed
slightly moderately
strongly very strongly
(To be filled out by the physician)
never
hardly notice
slightly
strongly
very strongly
moderately
x 0 =
x 1 =
x 2 =
x 3 =
x 4 =
x 5 =
How would you assess your pain now, at this moment?
How strong was the strongest pain during the past 4 weeks?
How strong was the pain during the past 4 weeks on average?
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
Date:
Patient:
Mark the picture that best describes the course of your pain:
Persistent pain with slight fluctuations
Persistent pain with pain attacks
Pain attacks without pain between them
Pain attacks with pain between them
Does your pain radiate to other
regions of your body?
If yes, please draw the direction
in which the pain radiates.
Yes
No
Total Score out of 35
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
The painDETECT questionnaire consists of seven questions that address the quality of
neuropathic pain symptoms; it is completed by the patient and no physical examination
is required. The first five questions ask about the gradation of pain, scored from 0 to 5
(never = 0, hardly noticed = 1, slightly = 2; moderately = 3, strongly = 4, very strongly =
5). Question 6 asks about the pain course pattern, scored from −1 to 2, depending on
which pain course pattern diagram is selected. Question 7 asks about radiating pain,
answered as yes or no, and scored as 2 or 0 respectively. The final score between
−1 and 38, indicates the likelihood of a neuropathic pain component. A score of ≤ 12
indicates that pain is unlikely to have a neuropathic component (< 15%), while a score
of ≥ 19 suggests that pain is likely to have a neuropathic component (> 90%).
Adapted: painDETECT Questionnaire.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
g. Doeleur Neuropathique en 4 (DN4) Scale
To estimate the probability of neuropathic pain, please answer yes or
no for each item of the following four questions.
DN4 is a test for diagnosing neuropathic pain. It consists of 7 items related to
symptoms and 3 related to clinical examination. The total DN4 score ranges from 0 to
10, and a score ≥ 4 indicates a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathic pain. The scores
are added and a score of 4 or more out of 10 is suggestive of neuropathic pain.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
10
Extreme distress
No distress
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
10
Distress keterlaluan
Tiada distress
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
j. Integrated Palliative Care Outcome Scale (IPOS)
IPOS Patient Version
Pain
Shortness of breath
Weakness or lack of energy
Nausea (feeling like you are going to be sick)
Vomiting (being sick)
Poor appetite
Constipation
Sore or dry mouth
Drowsiness
Poor mobility
Not at all
Slightly
Moderately
Severely
Overwhelmingly
Not at all Occasionally
Sometimes Most of the time Always
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
1.
2.
3.
0
0
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Name:
Date (dd/mm/yyyy):
Please write clearly, one letter or digit per box. Your answers will help us to keep
improving your care and the care of others.
Thank you.
Q1. What have been your main problems or concerns over the past week?
1.
2.
3.
Q2. Below is a list of symptoms, which you may or may not have experienced. For each symptom,
please tick one box that best describes how it has affected you over the past week.
Please list any other symptoms not mentioned above, and tick one box to show how they have
affected you over the past week.
Over the past week:
Q3. Have you been feeling anxious
or worried about your illness or
treatment?
Q4. Have any of your family or friends
been anxious or worried about you?
Q5. Have you been feeling depressed?
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Always Most of the time
Sometimes Occasionally Not at all
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
Q6. Have you felt at peace?
Q7. Have you been able to share how
you are feeling with your family or
friends as much as you wanted?
Q8. Have you had as much information
as you wanted?
0
1
2
3
4
Q9. Have any practical problems
resulting from your illness been
addressed? (such as financial or
personal)
Q10. How did you complete this
questionnaire?
Problems
partly
addressed
Problems
mostly
addressed
Problems
addressed/
No problems
Problems
hardly
addressed
Problems
partly
addressed
Problems
not
addressed
With help
from a
member or
staff
With help
from a
a friend or
relative
On my own
If you are worried about any of the issues raised on this questionnaire
then please speak to your doctor or nurse.
IPOS (Integrated Palliative care Outcome Scale) is a measure of symptoms and
concerns which matter to a patient. There are 10 questions scored on a scale of
1-4, which assess a patient’s symptoms and needs with regards to physical, social,
psychological and spiritual.
Adapted: IPOS Patient Version.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
k. The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) Tool
Name:______________________________
Phone Number: ________________
Address:____________________________
Completed By:_________________
Please circle a number that best describes how you feel:
Please circle a number that best describes how you feel:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
No pain
Worst possible pain
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Not tired
Very tired
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
No nausea
Very nauseous
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Not depressed
Very depressed
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Calm
Very anxious
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Not drowsy
Very drowsy
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Normal appetite
No appetite
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Best feeling of well-being
Worst possible feeling of well-being
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
No shortness of breath
Very short of breath
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Other problem
Please mark on these pictures where you feel pain or discomfort.
The ESAS is a comprehensive, yet brief and practical self-reporting tool of symptom
severity (intensity) for nine common symptoms of advanced cancer (pain, tiredness,
nausea, depression, anxiety, drowsiness, appetite, wellbeing, shortness of breath),
with the option of adding a tenth patient-specific symptom. The time of assessment of
each symptom is rated from 0 to 10 on a numerical scale, 0 meaning that the symptom
is absent and 10 that it is of the worst possible severity.
Adapted: The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) Tool.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
l. Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) Scale
*Five-item observational tool (see the description of each item below).
**Total scores range from 0 to 10 (based on a scale of 0 to 2 for five items), with a
higher score indicating more severe pain (0=“no pain”) to 10=“severe pain”)
The PAINAD scale is a reliable pain assessment tool for patients with advanced
dementia. It assesses five behaviors: breathing, negative vocalisation, facial
expression, body language, and the ability to be consoled. Each of the five indicators
is scored on a range from 0 (not present) to 2 (completely present) based on direct
observation for a total score that ranges from 0 to 10.
Reference: Warden V, Hurley AC, Volicer L. Development and psychometric
evaluation of the Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD)
scale. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2003;4(1):9-15.
Breathing
independent of
vocalisation
Normal
Occasional laboured
breathing.
Short period of
hyperventilation.
Noisy laboured
breathing. Long period
of hyperventilation.
Cheyne-Stokes
respirations.
Negative
vocalization
None
Occasional moan or
groan. Low-level
speech with a
negative or
disapproving quality.
Repeated troubled
calling out.
Loud moaning or
groaning.
Crying.
Facial
expression
Smiling or
inexpressive
Sad. Frightened.
Frown.
Facial grimacing.
Consolability
No need to
console
Distracted or
reassured by voice
or touch.
Unable to console,
distract or reassure.
Body
language
Relaxed
Tense. Distressed
pacing. Fidgeting.
Rigid. Fists clenched.
Knees pulled up.
Pulling or pushing away.
Striking out.
Total**
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
a. SUGGESTED MEDICATION DOSAGES AND
ADVERSE EFFECTS IN ADULTS
0.5 - 1 g, 6-8-hourly
50 - 150 mg daily, 8-12
-hourly
• Peptic ulcer
• GI bleed
• Platelet dysfunction
• Renal impairment
• Cardiac events
• Renal impairment
• Cardiac events
• Drowsiness
• Dizziness
• Nausea
• Vomiting
• Constipation
• Drowsiness
• Dizziness
• Nausea
• Vomiting
• Constipation
Max: 2400 mg/day
• Drowsiness
• Dizziness
• Nausea
• Vomiting
• Constipation
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Adapted:
1. Wilcock A. Howard P, Charlesworth S. Palliative Care Formulary. Seventh Edition.
London: Pharmaceutical Press; 2020.
2. Cherny NI, Fallon MT, Kaasa S, et al. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine.
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2021.
3. Guidelines Review Committee. (2019). WHO Guidelines for the pharmacological
and radiotherapeutic management of cancer pain in adults and adolescents.
Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241550390)
Osteonecrosis of
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
b. SUGGESTED MEDICATION DOSAGES IN PAEDIATRICS
(Restricted to Pain Service)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
CGA: corrected gestational age; IR: immediate release; IV: intravenous; LA: local
infiltration; NB: newborn; OSA: obstructive sleep apnoea; SC: subcutaneous; SR:
slow release; PCA: patient-controlled analgesia; RA: regional anaesthesia; H: hour;
Max: maximum; LD: loading dose; MD: maintenance dose; IBW: ideal body weight,
ON: on night
**For Obese Children, recommended adjustments for drug dosing:
Opioids: Ideal Body weight (IBW);
Paracetamol and NSAID: Adjusted Body Weight=IBW+ 0.4 x (Actual BW - IBW)
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Paediatric Pain Management Guidelines
2023. Putrajaya: MoH; 2023.
ropivacaine
ropivacaine
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
GUIDE FOR TRANSDERMAL FENTANYL USE
Step 1: Preparation of the skin
•
Ensure that the skin is completely dry and clean before applying the
patch. Use only water to wash the skin. Do not apply soap, cream,
oil or ointment on the area.
•
Do NOT apply the patch over your Totally Implantable Venous
Catheter (e.g. chemoport)/over a joint area/on irradiated skin.
•
Body hair should be clipped with scissors IF necessary and NOT
shaved.
Step 2: Preparation of patch
•
Each patch is sealed in its own sachet. Tear or cut open the sachet
at the notch/arrow. Do NOT cut across the middle of the sachet.
Step 3: Method of administration
•
Peel one half of the plastic backing away from the centre of the
patch. Try not to touch the sticky side of the patch. Press the sticky
part of the patch onto the skin.
•
Remove the other half of the plastic backing and press the whole
patch onto the skin. Hold for 30 seconds. Make sure it sticks well,
especially the edges.
•
Change the patch every 72 hours. Remove the old patch before
applying a new one. The date and time of patch due change should
be written on the patch.
•
Do NOT apply the patch on the same place twice in a row. Change
the site of application to allow the skin to rest.
•
If you need to apply more than one patch at a time, place the
patches adequately apart so that the edges do not touch or overlap
each other.
•
If the patch falls off/peels off before the date and time of due
change, apply a new patch on a new area of skin.
Step 3: Disposal of used patch
•
Fold used patch in half with the adhesive side inwards.
•
Discard in clinical waste bin (in the hospital) or in a waste bin at
home and wash your hands.
Adapted: HKL Counseling Checklist (Oct 2020) and Hosp Selayang Palliative Unit
Information Leaflet (Administration of Transdermal Fentanyl Patch).
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
GUIDE FOR NALOXONE USE
GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
•
Naloxone, a specific opioid antagonist, is seldom necessary in
the palliative care setting when opioids are appropriately titrated
against the patient’s pain.
•
It is indicated for the reversal of opioid-induced respiratory
depression and not for treating drowsiness and/or delirium
associated with opioids.
•
The dose administered should be carefully titrated against level of
consciousness and satisfactory respiratory function (≥8 breaths/
minute and no cyanosis).
•
Titration is important to avoid acute withdrawal syndrome and
severe pain.
PHARMACOKINETICS & AVAILABILITY:
•
Route of administration: IV is preferable, but SC or IM can also be
used
•
Onset of action: 1 - 2 minutes (IV) and 2 - 5 minutes (SC/IM)
•
Half-life: approximately 1 hour
•
Pack size: 1 ampoule = 400 mcg/1 ml
•
Adverse effects (usually with large bolus doses): abdominal
cramps, nausea and vomiting, flushing, arrhythmias and erythema
at injection site
TREATMENT:
•
Respiratory depression is usually preceded by a progressive
reduction in consciousness.
•
If the respiratory rate ≥8 breaths/minute and patient can be easily
aroused (e.g. opens eyes to verbal command), monitor patient
closely and consider omitting or reducing the dose of the regular
opioid.
•
If respiratory rate is ≤8 breaths/min and patient is unresponsive,
discontinue the ongoing opioid (e.g. stop CSCI/CIVI, remove TD
patch) and naloxone should be administered.

Dilute 1 ampoule (400 mcg) of naloxone in 10 ml water for
injection

Administer small boluses of 0.5 ml (20 mcg) every two minutes
until respiratory rate is satisfactory, and patient is easily
arousable (need not be fully alert)

After the last dose of naloxone, continue to monitor the patient

Further boluses of naloxone might be necessary because
naloxone is shorter acting than the opioids.

A naloxone infusion may be considered if recovery is not
satisfactory with multiple bolus doses.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
•
After patient recovers, the regular opioid regimen must be reviewed
to consider possible causes for the respiratory depression (e.g.
drug interactions, drug accumulation due to renal impairment,
medication errors) and necessary modifications made to the
regimen.
ADDITIONAL CAUTIONS:
•
Do not use large bolus doses e.g. “1 ampoule stat” in patients who
are receiving opioids for chronic pain relief.
•
Pupil size is an unreliable indicator of opioid overdose in patients
taking regular opioids
•
Naloxone should not be given to patients on opioids when death
is expected and imminent; a slow respiratory rate is a normal
occurrence.
Source: Wilcock A. Howard P, Charlesworth S. Palliative Care Formulary. Eighth
Edition. London: Pharmaceutical Press; 2022.
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AEs
adverse effects
ATC
around-the-clock
AUC
area under the curve
BD
two times a day
BPI
Brief Pain Inventory
BQ-II
The Barriers Questionnaire II
CAM
complementary and alternative medicine
CGA
corrected gestational age
CI
confidence interval
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CPN
coeliac plexus neurolysis
CNS
central nervous system
COMM
Current Opioid Misuse Measure
COX-2
cyclooxygenase-2
CR
controlled-release
CrCL
Creatinine Clearance
CV
cardiovascular
DN4
Doeleur Neuropathique en 4
EBRT
external beam therapy
eGFR
estimated glomerular filtration rate
EPCRC
European Palliative Care Research Collaborative
ESAS
Edmonton Symptom Assessment System
ESAS-CS
Edmonton Symptom Assessment System with additional symptoms
of constipation, sleep and added time window of “past 24 hours”
ESAS-r-CS
Edmonton Symptom Assessment System with a time window of “now”
FLACC
Face Legs Activity Cry Consolability
FPS
Faces Pain Scale
FST
fentanyl sublingual tablets
g
gramme
GI
gastrointestinal
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Gy
Gray (unit of ionising radiation dose)
IASP
International Association for the Study of Pain
IPOS
Integrated Palliative Care Outcome Scale
IR
immediate release
IV
intravenous
kg
kilogramme
LANSS
The Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms and Signs
max
maximum
mcg
microgramme
MD
mean difference
MEDD
morphine milligramme equivalent daily dose
mg
milligramme
min
minute
ml
milliliter
MPQ
McGill Pain Questionnaire
MSAS
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale
M3G
morphine-3-glucuronide
M6G
morphine-6-glucuronide
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
NCCN
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
NMDA
N-methyl-D-aspartate
NNH
number needed to harm
NNT
number needed to treat
NRS
Numeric Rating Scale
NRS-11
Numeric Rating Scale (0 - 10)
NSAIDs
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
OD
daily
OMED
oral morphine equivalent daily dose
ONJ
osteonecrosis of the jaw
OR
odds ratio
ORT
Opioid Risk Tool
OTFC
oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate
PAINAD
Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia tool
PFE
pain flare-effect
PO
by mouth
QoL
quality of life
RANK
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa beta
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RD
risk difference
RR
risk ratio
SAEs
severe adverse events
SBRT
stereotactic body radiotherapy
SC
subcutaneous
SE
side effects
SHG
superior hypogastric plexus
SNRIs
selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
SOAPP-R
Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain-Revised
SR
sustained release
SRE
skeletal-related events
SMD
standardised mean difference
TD
transdermal
TDS
three times a day
TENS
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation
Tmax
time to peak drug concentration
VAS
Visual Analogue Scale
VRS
Verbal Rating Scale
WHO
World Health Organisation
WMD
Weighted mean difference
153Sm
(153Sm) lexidronam
186Re
rhenium (186Re) obisbemeda
188Re
Rhenium-188
223Ra
Radium-223
Management of Cancer Pain (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft technically
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Mrs. Wong Wai Chee for the retrieval of evidence
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None hold shares in pharmaceutical
firms or act as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG Management of Cancer Pain (Second
Edition) was supported fully by the MoH Malaysia and partly by the
Malaysian Association for the Study of Pain (MASP).