B Canica Practice Gu
J
E-CIGARETIEOR ©
VAPING PRODUCT. @
@ehssocued |
LUNG INJURY
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e-ISBN: 978-967-2887-10-2
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2021 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2025) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which is the definitive version at all times. This version can
be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iii
Development Group
vi
Review Committee
vii
External Reviewers
viii
Algorithm on Management of E-Cigarette or
xi
Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
DIAGNOSIS
3
2.1 Clinical Presentation
3
2.2 History of E-Cig or Vaping Product Use for Patients with
3
Suspected EVALI
2.3 Laboratory Investigation
4
2.4 Imaging
5
2.5 Bronchoscopy
6
2.6 Case Definitions
7
3.
AETIOLOGY/CHEMICAL PROFILING
9
4.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
11
5.
TREATMENT
12
6.
REFERRAL/FOLLOW-UP
15
6.1 Indications for Referral/Admission
15
6.2 Management in Emergency Department/
15
Primary Care Facility
6.3 Discharge from Hospital Admission
16
7.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
18
7.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
18
7.2 Potential Resource Implications
18
8.
REFERENCES
20
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
22
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
24
Appendix 3 Types of Vaping Products in Malaysia
25
Appendix 4 Imaging Features in EVALI
27
Appendix 5 EVALI Patient Follow-Up Checklist
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
List of Abbreviations
30
Acknowledgement
30
Disclosure Statement
30
Source of Funding
30
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with new development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work process. The
quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size are carefully
assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group. In formulating
the recommendations, overall balances of the following aspects are
considered in determining the strength of the recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
a.
Diagnosis
• Relevant laboratory investigations should be done to rule out other
probable diagnoses before diagnosis of e-cigarette or vaping product
use-associated lung injury (EVALI) can be made.
• Chest X-ray should be done in all suspected EVALI cases.
 Computed tomography scan of the chest should be performed if
chest X-ray is normal.
• Bronchoscopy may be performed if clinically indicated to exclude
alternative diagnosis and not to confirm EVALI.
• The diagnosis of EVALI should be made based on case definitions
as outlined by the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
b.
Treatment
• For patients suspected or confirmed of diagnosis of EVALI, these
treatments may be initiated:
 supplemental oxygen
 antibiotics when there is diagnostic uncertainty
 systemic corticosteroids based on the severity of the illness
c.
Referral/Follow-up
• A physician should be consulted for any case suspected of EVALI at
the emergency department or primary care facility.
• Patients with EVALI should only be discharged when they fulfil the
discharge criteria.
 Upon discharge, hospital prescription should be given.
 Follow-up should be done by the treating physician.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH) and
the Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement from
a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
This is the first edition of an evidence-based CPG on the Management
of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI).
Literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database of
Systemic Reviews and others e.g. Pubmed and Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans and
in English. In addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and
guidelines were searched to further identify relevant studies. Experts
in the field were also contacted to identify further studies. All searches
were conducted from 27 August 2020 to 1 September 2020. Literature
searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG
development process, allowing any relevant papers published before
28 February 2021 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider
evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of the search
strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
There was no relevant evidence-based CPG used as a reference in
developing the MoH CPG on EVALI. A total of seven clinical questions
were developed under three sections (diagnosis, treatment and referral/
follow-up). Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within the sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions).
The DG members met 12 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist when
applicable, presented in evidence tables and further discussed in
DG meetings. All statements and recommendations subsequently
formulated were agreed upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence
was insufficient, the recommendations were made by consensus of the
DG and RC. There were only a few published articles on EVALI and all
were of low level evidence. This CPG was developed largely based on
the findings of reviews and observational studies, with local practices
taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
GRADE as much as possible (refer to the preceding page). The writing
of the CPG strictly follows the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II.
Upon completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to
the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the Health Technology
Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines Council MoH Malaysia for
review and approval. Details on the CPG development methodology
by MaHTAS can be obtained from the Manual on Development and
Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines
published in 2015 (available at
http://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.
pdf?mid=634).
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
v
OBJECTIVES
The objective of this CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of EVALI on the following aspects:
a) diagnosis
b) treatment
c) referral and follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• All vape and e-cigarette users
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide health professionals and relevant
stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care in the management
of EVALI, including:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. policymakers
v. patients and their advocates
vi. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
vi
Dr. Azahirafairud Abdul Rahim
Acute Internal Medicine Specialist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Bushra Johari
Lecturer & Clinical Radiologist
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Fazlina Mohamed Yusoff
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Anika, Selangor
Dr. Mohd Afiq Mohd Nor
Emergency Physician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head, Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Noorliza Mohamad Noordin
Director & Consultant Public Health
Physician
National Public Health Laboratory
Selangor
Dr. Noorul Afidza Muhammad
Respiratory Physician
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Noriah Othman
Pathologist
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Norliana Ismail
Public Health Physician &
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Disease Control Division, MoH, Putrajaya
Ms. Sulastri Samsudin
Head, Prevention Education Unit &
Pharmacist, Pusat Racun Negara
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang
Datin Dr. Zuhanis Abdul Hamid
Thoracic Radiologist
Institut Kanser Negara, Putrajaya
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Nurhayati Mohd Marzuki
Director & Consultant Respiratory Physician
Institut Perubatan Respiratori
Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Dr. Chin Pek Woon
Head of Department & Consultant Physician
Hospital Enche’ Besar Hajjah Khalsom
Johor
Associate Professor Dr. Farizah Mohd Hairi
Lecturer & Public Health Physician
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hidayah Shafie
Emergency Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director & Public Health Physician
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Leong Yin Hui
Lecturer
Pusat Racun Negara
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang
Associate Professor Dr. Mohamad Haniki
Nik Mohamed
Lecturer & Clinical Pharmacist
Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Malaysia
Pahang
Dr. Mohammad Hanafiah Kreah
Consultant Radiologist
Sunway Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Nazrila Hairizan Nasir
Deputy Director (Primary Health)
Family Health Development Division
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor Aryana Hassan
Public Health Specialist & Head
Tobacco Control & FCTC Sector, Disease
Control Division, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Norsiah Ali
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist &
Addiction Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Masjid Tanah, Melaka
Dr. Nurahan Maning
Consultant Microbiologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kelantan
Associate Professor Dr. Pang Yong Kek
President
Malaysian Thoracic Society
vii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Irfhan Ali Hyder Ali
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
viii
Dr. Adi Osman
Senior Consultant Emergency Physician & ED Critical Care
Hospital Raja Perempuan Bainun, Perak
Professor Dr. Harmy Mohamed Yusoff
Dean of Medical Faculty & Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin, Terengganu
Dr. Henry D. Tazelaar
Consultant & Geraldine Colby Zeiler Professor of Cytopathology
Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, Mayo Clinic Alix College of
Medicine, Mayo Clinic
Arizona, United States of America
Dr. Mustafa Kamal Razak
Consultant Respiratory Physician
KPJ Penang Specialist Hospital, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Noorasyikin Mohamed Arifin
Internal Medicine Specialist
Hospital Labuan, Labuan
Associate Prof. Dr. Omar Mihat
Lecturer & Consultant Public Health Physician
Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Sultan Abdul Halim Muad’zam Shah, Kedah
Dr. Raj Kumar a/l S. Maharajah
General Practitioner, Klinik Lingam, Selangor
President, Medical Practitioners Coalition Association of Malaysia (MPCAM)
Professor Dr. Seth Kligerman
Division Chief of Cardiothoracic Radiology
Department of Radiology, University of California
San Diego, United States of America
Dr. Tie Siew Teck
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Wong Chee Kuan
Head, Division of Respiratory Medicine & Consultant Respiratory Physician
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
ix
ALGORITHM ON MANAGEMENT OF E-CIGARETTE OR
VAPING PRODUCT USE-ASSOCIATED LUNG INJURY (EVALI)
*Refer to Subchapter 2.6 on Case Definitions
**May require admission
EVALI suspected based on
history + chest X-ray
Consultation with
physician
Work-up to rule out other
differential diagnosis*
Negative work-up*
Positive work-up*
Clinician review
Treat accordingly
Probable EVALI
Confirmed EVALI
Treatment**
Notification
Discharge and
Follow-up
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
1. INTRODUCTION
Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette (e-cig) is a handheld device equipped
with aerosol generator, battery and solution storage area. Its purpose
is delivery of nicotine or other chemicals via aerosolisation.1 It was
invented in 2003 and since then marketed worldwide.2 It is believed that
e-cig entered the Malaysian market in mid-2000s and gained popularity
in 2010s.
The first local study in 2016 showed an estimated figure of 600,000
e-cig users.3 The number had increased to 1.1 million as reported in the
Malaysian National Health and Morbidity Survey 2019 with the highest
prevalence among those aged 20 to 24.4 In addition, the Tobacco and
E-Cigarette Survey Among Malaysian Adolescents (TECMA) 2016
reported 300,000 e-cig users among Malaysian youth aged 10 to 19.
The highest prevalence was among those in the age group 16 to 19.5 In
2018, a cross-sectional study among secondary school students ever
used of any smoking products in the last 30 days in Kuala Lumpur
showed a prevalence of 73% of e-cig users.6
The Committee on the Review of the Health Effects of Electronic
Nicotine Delivery Systems reported that exposure to nicotine and
toxicants from the aerosolisation of e-cig ingredients was dependent on
usage and characteristics of the device which influenced the variability
of potentially toxic substances emitted.7
Inhalation of e‑cig aerosol could potentially cause:2
• adverse effects due to acute administration of nicotine, flavourants,
chemicals, other particulates
• accidental overdose of nicotine
• developmental effects on the brain from nicotine exposure
• uptake of subsequent illicit drug use
• gateway to conventional cigarettes and dual use of both types of
cigarettes
• negative psychosocial health
• battery explosion
Health Effects of E-Cigarette Use Among U.S. Youth and Young Adults
reported that delivery of nicotine from e‑cig was in doses range from
negligible to larger than conventional cigarettes, while its second-hand
nicotine exposure was comparable to conventional cigarettes.2
E-cig can induce negative cardiovascular effects through various
mechanisms e.g. oxidative stress, inflammation, DNA damage, arterial
stiffness and, altered haemodynamics and platelet activity.8 Daily
e-cig use is associated with increased odds of having myocardial
infarction (OR=1.79, 95% CI 1.20 to 2.66).9 E-cig aerosol exposure is
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
also associated with respiratory symptoms in healthy individuals and
increased symptoms of patients with asthma, cystic fibrosis and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.10
In July 2019, a large case series of pulmonary illnesses were reported
in Illinois and Wisconsin, United States of America (USA). These
were patients with history of e-cig use within 90 days of the onset
of symptoms and had pulmonary infiltrate on imaging with no other
contributable cause of the illness. They were termed as E-cigarette or
Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI).11, level III
A total of 2,807 cases of EVALI with 68 deaths were reported to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA until 18 February
2020. Laboratory data suggested a strong link between vitamin E
acetate and the outbreak of the disease in the country.12 In addition,
analysis of THC-containing cartridges e-liquid and vapour had shown
the presence of potential toxicants e.g. solvent-derived hydrocarbons,
silicon conjugated compounds, etc.13
Based on experience of CPG DG, several cases of probable EVALI
had been highlighted among the clinicians in Malaysia. However, the
number of cases maybe underreported due to lack of awareness. The
development of this first evidence-based CPG on the Management of
EVALI is timely with the emergence of this novel medical condition. It
will guide the healthcare providers locally on the best practice in the
management of EVALI.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
2. DIAGNOSIS
2.1 Clinical Presentation
EVALI is a disease that may be missed due to lack of awareness among
healthcare providers. In a nationwide study based on cases reported to
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention of USA, there were
patients who initially presented to outpatient setting with EVALI-related
symptoms but not admitted. From this cohort, out of those who were
later admitted, 46% were fatal while 21% were non-fatal. The risk of
mortality was higher among patients with co-morbidities i.e. respiratory
disease, cardiac disease, mental health condition and obesity.14, level III
Although CDC case definition stated 90 days, evidence showed that
patients used e-cig up to the onset of illness and seek medical attention
acutely soon after symptoms appeared.15, level III
Symptoms commonly presented in EVALI are:11, level III; 16 - 17, level III
• respiratory symptoms
 shortness of breath
 cough
 chest pain
• gastrointestinal symptoms
 nausea
 vomiting
 diarrhoea
 abdominal pain
• constitutional symptom
 fever
Signs of EVALI that commonly observed are:11, level III; 16 - 17, level III
• hypoxia
• tachycardia
• tachypnoea
2.2 History of e-Cig or Vaping Product Use for Patients with
Suspected EVALI
Patients presented with EVALI symptoms should be asked on the use
of e-cig or vaping products.
Healthcare providers should employ non-judgemental, open-ended
and private questioning sessions with patients.18, level III Confidentiality
should be practised according to local guidelines.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
• Questions on e-cig or vaping product use in patients with suspected
EVALI:18 - 20, level III
 e-cig use
- time of last use
- duration
- method (aerosol, dabbing or dripping)
- frequency
- concomitant smoking products use or substances abuse
 devices and e-liquids
- product brand name
- delivery system (open or closed - refer to Appendix 3 on
Types of Vaping Products in Malaysia)
- types of substances use (tetrahydrocannabinol/THC, cannabis,
nicotine, modified products, additional substances)
- product source
2.3 Laboratory Investigation
EVALI is a diagnosis of exclusion. Thus, laboratory investigations need
to be done to rule out other probable diagnosis.
There were no laboratory abnormalities specific for the diagnosis of
EVALI. Several observational studies showed that most EVALI patients
had elevated inflammatory markers. The patients had leucocytosis
with neutrophil predominance and, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin. There was also mild
elevation of liver enzymes.11, level III; 14, level III; 16, level III; 21, level III
In a cross-sectional study, none of the EVALI patients had a
microbiologically-confirmed infectious pneumonia. Additional inflammatory
serologies (antinuclear antibody, antiglomerular basement membrane
and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) were also negative.17, level III
• Laboratory investigations for EVALI work-up will include:
 full blood count
 ESR
 CRP
 culture and sensitivity study - blood, sputum, urine
 urinalysis
 respiratory panel for influenza and other possible infectious
pathogens
 autoimmune screening
• In local setting, tuberculosis and coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
work-up has to be done.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Recommendation 1
• Relevant laboratory investigations* should be done to rule out other
probable diagnoses before diagnosis of e-cigarette or vaping product
use-associated lung injury can be made.
*Refer to the yellow box above.
2.4 Imaging
• Abnormal chest imaging, either chest X-ray (CXR) or computed
tomography (CT) scan, is mandatory for the diagnosis of EVALI.
• While CXR is often abnormal in EVALI cases, a normal CXR does
not exclude the diagnosis. In the setting of a normal CXR in a high
clinical suspicion of EVALI, a CT scan should be performed to better
assess for lung injury.
In a cross-sectional study involving 98 patients from Illinois and
Wisconsin, chest imaging findings were positive in all cases of EVALI.
These were based on either CXR or CT scan.11, level III
Findings in CXR of EVALI patients include ground-glass opacities
and consolidation which are usually bilateral and almost symmetric in
distribution.22, level III The abnormalities are lower lobe predominant or
diffuse in most cases with sparing of the heart border and subpleural
region. Septal thickening manifesting as Kerley B lines can also be
seen.23, level III
Imaging findings of EVALI are better seen on CT scan compared with
CXR. The common patterns seen on CT scan are those of acute lung injury
(ALI), in the spectrum of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) and organising
pneumonia (OP) with bilateral relatively symmetrical multifocal groundglass opacities with or without consolidation. Conspicuous lobular
and/or subpleural sparing is common as well as sparing around the
peribronchovascular interstitium.23 - 24, level III Ill-defined centrilobular
nodules, representing foci of airway-centered organising pneumonia on
biopsy, are common and usually occur in conjunction with lower lobe or
diffuse parenchymal opacity which can mimic the CT findings of acute
hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Less commonly, centrilobular nodules
may be diffuse with little or no associated ground-glass opacity. Septal
thickening is a common finding and in some instances, a crazy paving
can occur. Reverse halo or atoll signs are less common but may also
be seen.24, level III
Apart from DAD or OP, other less commonly described patterns of
ALI in EVALI are diffuse alveolar haemorrhage (DAH) and acute
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
eosinophilic pneumonia-like pattern (AEP). On CT scan, DAH may be
seen as multifocal ground-glass opacities, with or without consolidation
and often with poorly defined centrilobular nodules. The AEP-like
pattern has findings that overlap with the OP and DAD pattern but is
associated with pronounced smooth interlobular septal thickening and
pleural effusions secondary to increased vascular permeability.24, level III
Mild and symmetrical hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy are
common findings of EVALI.16, level III; 24, level III However, necrotic or calcified
lymphadenopathy is not a feature. Although uncommon, patients with
EVALI can present with pneumomediastinum and/or pneumothorax.
Lung cysts/bullae are uncommon early injury but can occur during the
reparative phase.11, level III; 23, level III Pulmonary embolism can occur in
conjunction with EVALI but is uncommon.22, level III
Refer to Appendix 4 on Imaging Features in EVALI.
Recommendation 2
• Chest X-ray should be done in all cases suspected of e-cigarette or
vaping product use-associated lung injury.
 Computed tomography scan of the chest should be performed if
chest X-ray is normal.
2.5 Bronchoscopy
There is no clear role of bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of EVALI. Based
on current evidence, there is no specific bronchoscopic findings that
can confirm the diagnosis of EVALI. Bronchoscopy may be performed
to exclude specific suspected alternative diagnosis where non-invasive
methods are inadequate. It should be guided by clinical pre-test
probabilities of the EVALI.15, level III
Several observational studies showed predominance of macrophages
and neutrophils, and scant eosinophils in cytology of bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) in EVALI patients. Lipid-laden macrophages (LLMs) in
BAL had been reported in most EVALI patients as well as asymptomatic
persons who were e-cig users. Although LLMs were not specific for
EVALI, their absence should prompt reconsideration of diagnosis. A
diverse patterns of diffuse lung injury and inflammation were seen in
histopathology examination of lung biopsy of EVALI patients, but none
were pathognomonic. Thus, cytology and histopathology examination
of lung biopsy specimens from bronchoscopy were nonspecific and
could not confirm the diagnosis of EVALI.15, level III
Findings of vitamin E acetate in BAL provided direct evidence of its
existence at the primary site of injury among EVALI patients.25, level III
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Recommendation 3
• Bronchoscopy may be performed if clinically indicated to exclude
alternative diagnosis and not to confirm e-cigarette or vaping product
use-associated lung injury.
2.6 Case Definitions
The case definitions of EVALI recommended by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention of USA is shown below:26
• 2019 Lung Injury Surveillance Primary Case Definitions:26
 Confirmed Case:
Using an e-cig (“vaping”) or dabbing* in 90 days prior to symptom onset
AND
Pulmonary infiltrate, e.g., opacities, on plain film chest radiograph
or ground-glass opacities on chest CT
AND
Absence of pulmonary infection on initial work-up. Minimum
criteria are:
1. A negative respiratory viral panel
AND
2. A negative influenza polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or rapid
test if local epidemiology supports influenza testing
AND
All other clinically indicated respiratory infectious disease testing
(e.g., urine antigen for Streptococcus pneumoniae and Legionella,
sputum culture if productive cough, BAL culture if done, blood
culture, human immunodeficiency virus-related opportunistic
respiratory infections if appropriate) are negative
AND
No evidence in medical record of alternative plausible diagnoses
(e.g., cardiac, rheumatologic, or neoplastic process).
 Probable Case:
Using an e-cig (“vaping”) or dabbing* in 90 days prior to symptom
onset
AND
Pulmonary infiltrate, e.g., opacities, on plain film chest radiograph
or ground-glass opacities on chest CT
AND
Infection identified via culture or PCR, but clinical team** believes
this infection is not the sole cause of the underlying lung injury OR
minimum criteria to rule out pulmonary infection not met (testing
not performed) and clinical team** believes infection is not the
sole cause of the underlying lung injury.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
AND
No evidence in medical record of alternative plausible diagnoses
(e.g., cardiac, rheumatologic, or neoplastic process).
Footnotes
*Using an electronic device (e.g. electronic nicotine delivery system
(ENDS), electronic cigarette, e-cig, vaporiser, vape(s), vape pen,
dab pen or other device) or dabbing to inhale substances (e.g.
nicotine, marijuana, THC, THC concentrates, cannabidiol (CBD),
synthetic cannabinoids, flavourings or other substances)
**Clinical team caring for the patient
Notes: These case definitions are meant for surveillance and not
clinical diagnosis. The case definitions are subject to change and
will be updated as additional information becomes available if
needed.
In USA, confirmed and probable EVALI cases are reported by the
clinicians to the local health authorities.11, level III; 19, level III
In our local setting, as EVALI is a new entity with an increasing trend
of e-cig use, there is a need to report EVALI cases for surveillance
purpose to MoH, Malaysia. The surveillance data can be used to plan
for policy and guidance in clinical management.
Recommendation 4
• The diagnosis of e-cigarette or vaping product use-associated lung
injury should be made based on case definitions as outlined by
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
3. AETIOLOGY/CHEMICAL PROFILING
E-cig is a device that produces an aerosol by heating a liquid which
contains a solvent in one or more flavourings, with or without nicotine
(also known as e-liquid). It is composed of an atomiser that uses
electrical current from a battery to heat a metal coil. This aerosolises
an e-liquid, which is conducted from a reservoir to the coil by a wick.
Aerosol from e-cig may contain different chemical composition subject
to device type, voltage used and e-liquid content.18, level III
Generally, e-liquid constitutes varying ratios of vegetable glycerin (VG),
propylene glycol (PG), nicotine, and flavouring agents. However, some
studies detected more than 60 compounds in e-liquid, this includes
chemicals which is not stated by the manufacturer.27, level III As e-cig
metal components undergo repeated cycles of heating and cooling,
traces of toxic metal can leach into the e-liquid and emitted through
e-cig aerosol.27 - 28, level III
Chemicals in e-liquid (e.g. PG and VG) and flavouring agent are
considered to be “generally recognised as safe (GRAS)” by United
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for oral consumption but
not through inhalation. They will be converted to toxicant when heated
during e-cig smoking.28, level III
Recent evidence showed that vitamin E acetate had been detected in
a high proportion of THC-containing products associated with EVALI
cases.29, level III
Contribution of chemicals of concerns in EVALI cases has been
studied. These include chemicals in either THC- or non-THC-containing
products. Thus, chemical profiling is important for ongoing surveillance
of the potential toxicants that can be associated with EVALI.
In a nationwide study of hospitalised EVALI patients in USA, the selfreported substance use in e-cig were 53% on both THC- and nicotinecontaining product, 33% exclusive THC-containing product and 14%
exclusive nicotine-containing product.30, level III
A small study on EVALI patients in Minnesota tested selected products
because of available product volume and features that physically
differentiated the cartridges showed that vitamin E acetate was the
most common compound detected in THC-containing product. Issues
faced in doing chemical profiling in the study include:29, level III
• poor cooperation of the patients in providing product for testing
• insufficient amount of material to be tested
• toxicant of concern did not cover flavouring agents
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
In a systematic review of case reports on e-cig-related illness and injury,
56% of patients who had respiratory symptoms reported using CBD/
THC. Another 40% of patients used unknown/unspecified liquid while
3% used nicotine. Further scientific research was warranted to study
on the causal role of each of the e-liquid ingredients, their thermolysis
byproducts, potential interactions and additive effects.31, level III
Toxicology testing has been recommended to assess aetiologies of
lung diseases instigated by substances of abuse. This need to done
with proper patient consent.18, level III
• Potential toxicants in e-liquid include PG, VG, flavouring agents,
vitamin E acetate, CBD, THC and nicotine.
• More strong evidence is warranted before proper chemical profiling
can be recommended in cases of EVALI.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
4. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The most common differential diagnoses of EVALI are infectious
pneumonia and other inflammatory lung diseases due to its flu-like
illness as listed below:15, level III
• infectious pneumonia -
 bacterial
 fungal
 viral
 pneumocystis jirovecii
• diffuse parenchymal lung diseases -
 acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis
 acute eosinophilic pneumonia
 organising pneumonia
 cellular non-specific interstitial pneumonia
• other diffuse lung diseases -
 acute respiratory distress syndrome
 diffuse alveolar haemorrhage
• Testing or empirical treatment for usual infectious pneumonia based
on the probability of the illness is recommended.
• Probability of alternative diagnosis increases when either:
 absence of typical demographic and clinical features of EVALI
 presence of atypical presentations
 presence of predisposition for other illness
• EVALI can be considered a leading or provisional diagnosis if none
other illness is probable based on the above evaluation.15, level III
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
5. TREATMENT
The treatment of EVALI is symptomatic based on the presenting
symptoms which can be respiratory, gastrointestinal or constitutional
in nature.
For respiratory symptoms, the following are done:
• Oxygenation
Ensure adequate oxygenation via nasal cannula, non-invasive or
invasive ventilation. In a cross-sectional study of 36 patients in
Pittsburgh, 64% patients required supplemental oxygen therapy during
admission with 20% on mechanical ventilation.32, level III
• Antimicrobials
In a multicentre cross-sectional study involving 60 patients, 90% of
EVALI patients were given antibiotics due to overlapping presentation
and diagnostic uncertainty.17, level III As community-acquired pneumonia
is a more common cause for hypoxaemic respiratory failure, antibiotics
are strongly recommended with sequential de-escalation if no evidence
of pulmonary or bloodstream infection is found.21, level III
Antibiotics coverage are recommended to be given empirically for at
least 48 hours if history is unclear, if patient is intubated or has severe
hypoxaemia despite supplemental oxygen.16, level III
Alternative diagnosis of concomitant EVALI with infections may be
considered when laboratory evidences of infections are positive
but in whom clinicians feel that microbiologic diagnoses alone are
incompatible with the clinical course or severity of the illness.32, level III
• Treatment with empiric antimicrobials, including antivirals, should
be considered in accordance with established local guidelines and
microbiology pattern.20, level III
• Corticosteroids
A multicentre cross-sectional study showed a rapid improvement within
days in 95% of EVALI patients received corticosteroids therapy. The
initial corticosteroids dosing and duration of therapy varied with severity
of illness at presentation. Patients admitted to the intensive care unit
(ICU) were given higher doses and longer courses of corticosteroids
while outpatients had short bursts of oral corticosteroids.17, level III
In a narrative review, systemic corticosteroids and antibiotics were
started immediately in severe cases. Majority of patients showed
excellent response (either in clinical, radiological or pulmonary function)
to methylprednisolone.21, level III
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
In less severe cases, infections were ruled out prior to initiation of
corticosteroids.21, level III Oral prednisolone had also been administered
in less severe hospitalised cases and outpatients.17, level III
Most patients responded within a week of treatment. Thus,
corticosteroids should be tapered down based on clinical improvement.
There were no established guidelines on the duration of steroids
in EVALI, but given good response and unfavourable side effects of
corticosteroids, it was recommended no longer than two weeks.21, level III
• Documented corticosteroids treatment in EVALI are:17, level III
 initial daily dose for:
 intravenous methylprednisolone is 125 mg/day (IQR 120 - 240)
 oral prednisolone is 40 mg/day (IQR 40 - 60)
 duration before tapering dose or stopping: 2 days (IQR 1 - 4)
 total duration of therapy: 11 days (IQR 6 - 18)
*There is no evidence on the use of hydrocortisone, dexamethasone
and inhaled corticosteroids in EVALI.
Treatment of gastrointestinal or constitutional symptoms are treated
accordingly based on severity of the symptoms.
Recommendation 5
• In patients suspected or confirmed of diagnosis of e-cigarette or
vaping product use-associated lung injury, these treatments may be
initiated:
 supplemental oxygen
 antibiotics when there is diagnostic uncertainty
 systemic corticosteroids based on the severity of the illness
Tobacco cessation
• Smoking of tobacco and tobacco products (cigarette, electronic
cigarette/vape, shisha, pipe, cigar etc.) can lead to various noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). Worldwide, more than eight million
people die every year because of this habit.33
• Hence, the decision to integrate smoking treatment with NCDs is
important to reduce the prevalence of NCDs and their complications.
This decision was made during the World Health Organization
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) Steering
Committee Meeting in December 2019 chaired by the Honourable
Health Minister of Malaysia.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
• The treatment for smoking should be initiated by the treating doctor
based on the assessment and treatment of tobacco use disorder as
in Table 1. Details on this can be found in the CPG on Treatment of
Tobacco Use Disorder 2016, available at:
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/
Respiratory/CPG_TobaccoDisorder.pdf
Table 1. Assessment and treatment of tobacco use disorder
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
1. Ask and document smoking status for all patients.
2. Provide brief advice on quit smoking at every visit to all smokers.
3. Assess level of nicotine addiction using Modified Fagerström
Test for Cigarette Dependence Questionnaire (COMPULSORY)
and verify smoking status using carbon monoxide breath
analyser (IF AVAILABLE).
4. Offer pharmacotherapy to all smokers who are attempting to
quit, unless contraindicated.
5. If selected, use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) for at least
eight to twelve weeks, whereas varenicline should be used for
at least twelve weeks.
6. Combination therapy (e.g. two NRTs, a non-NRT, e.g. bupropion
with an NRT) is better than monotherapy in smoking cessation
treatment and may be most useful for those smokers at highest
risk of relapse.
7. Use smoking cessation medications with caution in special
populations
(e.g.
children
and
adolescents,
pregnant,
breastfeeding women, psychiatric and substance abuse
disorder patients).
8. Arrange a minimum of six to eight face to face follow-up
sessions for smoking cessation interventions in six months
through counselling support team (health education officer,
pharmacists or any officer trained for quit smoking services).
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
6. REFERRAL/FOLLOW-UP
6.1 Indications for Referral/Admission
In view of the challenges in the diagnosis of EVALI, a diagnostic pathway
to evaluate patients with suspected EVALI should be considered. This
is due to the lack of a specific features for this clinical syndrome. If
the history and imaging are suspicious for EVALI, patients should be
admitted for thorough infectious and autoimmune work-up.16, level III
In local setting, history and chest X-ray are sufficient as initial work-up
at primary care level on suspected EVALI cases.
• Hospital admission is highly recommended for patients with:20, level III;
34, level III
 decreased oxygen saturation (<95% on room air)
 concurrent illness especially if respiratory distress is present
 co-morbidities that compromise pulmonary reserve
 unreliable access to medical care especially ability for follow-up
within 24 - 48 hours and promptly in the event of rapidly worsening
respiratory symptoms
 poor social support
Early follow-up within 24 - 48 hours post-discharge is essential due to
the considerable degree of rehospitalisation and death among those
with co-morbidities.34, level III
6.2 Management in Emergency Department/Primary Care Facility
Determining the need for hospital admission requires careful
clinical judgement by the emergency physician due to high risk of
rehospitalisation and mortality among the EVALI patients.19, level III
• Criteria appropriate for outpatient management are:19, level III
 normal oxygen saturation ≥95% with no respiratory distress on
room air
 absence of high-risk co-morbidities e.g. chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease or congestive cardiac failure
 availability of support system for outpatient follow-up
 no significant diagnostic findings on initial emergency department
(ED) workup
The plan upon discharge from ED include:19, level III
i. prescription of a short course oral corticosteroids with tapering
dose depending on clinical severity
ii. prescription of antibiotic/antiviral if warranted
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
iii. education on warning signs (refer to yellow box in Subchapter
6.3)
iv. follow-up in 24 - 48 hours
If patient is seen in primary care facility, the same principles as above
are applicable.34, level III
In our local setting, for any suspected case of EVALI, a physician should
be consulted for further management.
Recommendation 6
• A physician should be consulted for any case suspected of e-cigarette
or vaping product use-associated lung injury for confirmation of
diagnosis when seen at the emergency department or primary care
facility.
6.3 Discharge from Hospital
Due to occurrence of adverse clinical outcomes among EVALI patients
shortly after discharge, it is important to ensure that patients are clinically
stable for at least 24 - 48 hours before discharge. There should be no
clinically significant fluctuation in vital signs and patients should have a
good post-hospital care transition.34, level III
• Criteria to determine readiness for hospital discharge include:34, level III
 patient is clinically stable for 24 - 48 hours before discharge
 initial outpatient follow-up within 48 hours of discharge
 instruction on discharge medication and counselling of patient is
given
 screening for mental health, substance use disorders and social
support needs is established before discharge
 counselling and offering e-cigarette and tobacco use cessation
intervention, including behavioural intervention and medications
have been discussed
It is crucial to determine readiness for hospital discharge among EVALI
patients as this can improve their outcomes.34, level III Patients with
fatal cases are more likely than those with nonfatal cases to have a
history of any respiratory disease, cardiac disease and any mental
health condition.14, level III Thus, a holistic approach of discharge plan is
essential.19, level III
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
• Discharge from hospital prescription may include:19, level III
 prescription of a short course oral corticosteroids with appropriate
dosage, duration and tapering
 prescription of an oral antibiotic or antiviral if necessary
 follow-up at outpatient clinic within 24 - 48 hours
 education on strict return-to-ED warnings (development of new or
worsening respiratory symptoms, with or without fever)20, level III
 provision of access to outpatient smoking and vaping cessation
facility
In our local setting, since EVALI is not well established, the CPG DG
recommends such cases to be followed–up by the treating physician.
Recommendation 7
• Patients with cigarette or vaping product use-associated lung injury
should only be discharged when they fulfil the discharge criteria.*
 Upon discharge, hospital prescription should be given.**
 Follow-up should be done by the treating physician.
*Refer to preceding yellow box on Criteria to determine readiness for
hospital discharge.
**Refer to preceding yellow box on Discharge from hospital prescription.
Refer to Appendix 5 on EVALI Patient Follow-Up Checklist.
Refer to Algorithm on Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping
Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI).
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
7. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of EVALI should be guided by evidence-based
approach in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several factors
may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
7.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG (soft- and hardcopies) to healthcare
providers
• training and updates on EVALI in relevant scientific and professional
meeting, seminar, conference etc.
• public awareness campaigns related to harmful effects of e-cigarette
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• limited awareness and knowledge among healthcare providers on
EVALI and its management
• lack of awareness among patients, families/carers and community
on EVALI
• no surveillance system on EVALI locally
7.2 Potential Resource Implications
EVALI is a diagnosis of exclusion. Many tests are required to be done
prior to confirmation of the diagnosis. Accessibility for imaging facilities
especially CT scan is limited. Besides, many laboratory tests necessary
to be performed in the work-up for the diagnosis are not easily available.
Chemical profiling is another important factor to be addressed in
identifying the probable toxicants in EVALI. However, many issues are
faced in doing it which include:
• poor cooperation of patients in providing product for testing
• insufficient amount of material to be tested
• toxicant of concern did not cover flavouring agents
Currently, in local toxicology laboratories, not all toxicants can be tested
due to lack of standardised testing methods and high cost involved.
Surveillance system also need to be developed to capture the data
on EVALI for policy planning and guidance in clinical management.
Furthermore, high level of evidence is required to improve the
management of the disease.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
The following is proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality
management of EVALI:
*Target of 100%
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include quick reference, launching of the CPG
and, Training Module and training of healthcare providers in using it.
Percentage of chest
radiograph done in
suspected case
of EVALI*
=
Number of suspected cases of EVALI
in the same period
Number of chest radiograph done in
suspected cases of EVALI in a period
x100%
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
REFERENCES
1. Brown CJ, Cheng JM. Electronic cigarettes: product characterisation and design considerations. Tob
Control. 2014;23 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):ii4-10
2. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (US) Office on Smoking and
Health. E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta
(GA): Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US); 2016 (Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/books/NBK538680/)
3. Ab Rahman J, Mohd Yusoff MF, Nik Mohamed MH, et al. The Prevalence of E-Cigarette Use Among
Adults in Malaysia. Asia Pac J Public Health. 2019;31(7_suppl):9S-21S
4. Institute for Public Health (IPH), National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia. National
Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019: Vol. I: NCDs - Non-Communicable Diseases: Risk
Factors and other Health Problems. Bandar Setia Alam: NIH; 2020
5. Institute for Public Health (IPH) and International Islamic University Malaysia. National E-Cigarette
Survey (NECS) 2016: Prevalence, Pattern and Perception Regarding E-Cigarette and Vape Use
Among Malaysian Adults. Kuala Lumpur: IPH; 2017
6. Nur Atikah AH, Wee LH, Nur Zakiah MS, et al. Factors associated with different smoking statuses
among Malaysian adolescent smokers: a cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2019;19(Suppl
4):579
7. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. Public health consequences of
e-cigarettes. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2018
8. Buchanan ND, Grimmer JA, Tanwar V, et al. Cardiovascular risk of electronic cigarettes: a review of
preclinical and clinical studies. Cardiovasc Res. 2020;116(1):40-50
9. Alzahrani T, Pena I, Temesgen N, et al. Association Between Electronic Cigarette Use and Myocardial
Infarction. Am J Prev Med. 2018;55(4):455-461. Erratum in: Am J Prev Med. 2019;57(4):579-584
10. Thirión-Romero I, Pérez-Padilla R, Zabert G, et al. Respiratory Impact of Electronic Cigarettes and
“Low-Risk” Tobacco. Rev Invest Clin. 2019;71(1):17-27
11. Layden JE, Ghinai I, Pray I, et al. Pulmonary Illness Related to E-Cigarette Use in Illinois and
Wisconsin - Final Report. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(10):903-916
12. Outbreak of Lung Injury Associated with the Use of E-Cigarette, or Vaping, Products (Available at
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease.html)
13. Muthumalage T, Friedman MR, McGraw MD, et al. Chemical Constituents Involved in E-Cigarette,
or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI). Toxics. 2020;8(2):25
14. Werner AK, Koumans EH, Chatham-Stephens K, et al. Hospitalizations and Deaths Associated with
EVALI. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(17):1589-1598
15. Aberegg SK, et al. Diagnosis of EVALI: General Approach and the Role of Bronchoscopy. Chest.
2020;158(2):820-827
16. Kalininskiy A, Bach CT, Nacca NE, et al. E-cigarette, or vaping, product use associated lung injury
(EVALI): case series and diagnostic approach. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;7(12):1017-1026
17. Blagev DP, Harris D, Dunn AC, et al. Clinical presentation, treatment, and short-term outcomes of
lung injury associated with e-cigarettes or vaping: a prospective observational cohort study. Lancet.
2019;394(10214):2073-2083
18. Belok SH, Parikh R, Bernardo J, et al. E-cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung injury: a
review. Pneumonia (Nathan). 2020;12:12
19. Aldy K, Cao DJ, Weaver MM, et al. E-cigarette or vaping product use-associated lung injury
(EVALI) features and recognition in the emergency department. J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open.
2020;1(5):1090-1096
20. Jatlaoui TC, Wiltz JL, Kabbani S, et al. Update: Interim Guidance for Health Care Providers for
Managing Patients with Suspected E-cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use-Associated Lung Injury -
United States, November 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019;68(46):1081-1086
21. Cherian SV, Kumar A, Estrada-Y-Martin RM. E-Cigarette or Vaping Product-Associated Lung Injury:
A Review. Am J Med. 2020;133(6):657-663
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
22. Artunduaga M, Rao D, Friedman J, et al. Pediatric Chest Radiographic and CT Findings of Electronic
Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-associated Lung Injury (EVALI). Radiology. 2020;295(2):430-438
23. Kligerman S, Raptis C, Larsen B, et al. Radiologic, Pathologic, Clinical, and Physiologic Findings
of Electronic Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-associated Lung Injury (EVALI): Evolving Knowledge
and Remaining Questions. Radiology. 2020;294(3):491-505
24. Panse PM, Feller FF, Butt YM, et al. Radiologic and Pathologic Correlation in EVALI. AJR Am J
Roentgenol. 2020;215(5):1057-1064
25. Blount BC, Karwowski MP, Morel-Espinosa M, Rees J, et al. Evaluation of Bronchoalveolar Lavage
Fluid from Patients in an Outbreak of E-cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use-Associated Lung Injury -
10 States, August-October 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019;68(45):1040-1041. Erratum
in: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(4):116
26. 2019 Lung Injury Surveillance Primary Case Definitions September 18, 2019 (Available at https://
www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/assets/2019-Lung-Injury-Surveillance-CaseDefinition-508.pdf)
27. Traboulsi H, Cherian M, Abou Rjeili M, et al. Inhalation Toxicology of Vaping Products and
Implications for Pulmonary Health. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21(10):3495
28. Chun LF, Moazed F, Calfee CS, et al. Pulmonary toxicity of e-cigarettes. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol
Physiol. 2017;313(2):L193-L20
29. Taylor J, Wiens T, Peterson J, et al. Characteristics of E-cigarette, or Vaping, Products Used by
Patients with Associated Lung Injury and Products Seized by Law Enforcement - Minnesota, 2018
and 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019;68(47):1096-1100
30. Krishnasamy VP, Hallowell BD, Ko JY, et al. Update: Characteristics of a Nationwide Outbreak of
E-cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use-Associated Lung Injury - United States, August 2019-January
2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(3):90-94
31. Tzortzi A, Kapetanstrataki M, Evangelopoulou V, et al. A Systematic Literature Review of
E-Cigarette-Related Illness and Injury: Not Just for the Respirologist. Int J Environ Res Public
Health. 2020;17(7):2248
32. Zou RH, Tiberio PJ, Triantafyllou GA, et al. Clinical Characterization of E-Cigarette, or Vaping,
Product Use-associated Lung Injury in 36 Patients in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med. 2020;201(10):1303-1306
33. Tobacco (Available at https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco)
34. Evans ME, Twentyman E, Click ES, et al. Update: Interim Guidance for Health Care Professionals
Evaluating and Caring for Patients with Suspected E-cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use-Associated
Lung Injury and for Reducing the Risk for Rehospitalization and Death Following Hospital Discharge
- United States, December 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;68(5152):1189-1194
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are effective and safe treatments in EVALI?
Database: Ovid MEDLINE(R) and Epub Ahead of Print, In-Process &
Other Non-Indexed Citations, Daily and Versions(R) <1946 to August
28, 2020>
1.
Lung injury/
2.
((lung or pulmonary) adj1 injur*).tw.
3.
Acute lung injury/
4.
(acute adj2 lung injur*).tw.
5.
1 or 2 or 3 or 4
6.
Vaping/
7.
vap*.tw.
8.
((electronic cigarette or e cigarette or e cig) adj2 use*).tw.
9.
Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems/
10. (electronic adj1 cigarette*).tw.
11. e cigarette*.tw.
12. e cig*.tw.
13. electronic nicotine delivery system*.tw.
14. 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13
15. 5 and 14
16. EVALI.tw.
17. 15 or 16
18. THERAPEUTICS/
19. therap*.tw.
20. treatment*.tw.
21. STEROIDS/
22. steroid*.tw.
23. corticosteroid*.tw.
24. HYDROCORTISONE/
25. hydrocortisone.tw.
26. PREDNISOLONE/
27. prednisolone.tw.
28. METHYLPREDNISOLONE/
29. methylprednisolone.tw.
30. GLUCOCORTICOIDS/
31. (glucocorticoid adj1 effect*).tw.
32. glucocorticoid*.tw.
33. CRITICAL CARE/
34. ((critical or intensive) adj1 care).tw.
35. (surgical intensive adj2 care).tw.
36. NONINVASIVE VENTILATION/
37. ((non invasive or non-invasive or noninvasive) adj2 ventilation*).
tw.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
38. INTUBATION/
39. intubation*.tw.
40. BRONCHODILATOR AGENTS/
41. bronchodilator*.tw.
42. (bronchodilator adj1 (agent* or effect*)).tw.
43. supportive therap*.tw.
44. supportive treatment*.tw.
45. standard therap*.tw.
46. standard treatment*.tw.
47. or/18-46
48. 17 and 47
49. limit 50 to (english language and humans)
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Diagnosis
i.
What are the criteria to diagnose EVALI?
- clinical
presentation,
laboratory
investigations
imaging,
bronchoscopy
ii. What is the probable aetiology of EVALI?
- When is chemical profiling indicated in EVALI?
iii. What are the differential diagnoses of EVALI?
Treatment
iv. What are effective and safe treatments in EVALI?
Referral and follow-up
v. What are the indications for referral/hospitalisation of EVALI
patients?
vi. What are the discharge criteria for EVALI patients?
- outpatient and inpatient
vii. What are the discharge plans for EVALI patients?
- outpatient and inpatient
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Appendix 3
TYPES OF VAPING PRODUCTS IN MALAYSIA
Type of e-cig
delivery system
•
Features a
prominent
chamber (tank)
•
Refillable - users
can open and fill
the tank with their
choice of e-liquid
•
Allows users
to modify their
devices
•
Also known as
“tanks,” “e-vapors”
and “mods”
•
Locally also known
as vape
Other examples of
open system design
Description
Picture
Open System
Device:
E-liquid:
Tank
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
•
Uses tanks, which
come ready-filled
with e-liquid
•
Disposable or
reloadable with
prefilled cartridges
•
Does not allow
users to fill their
devices and add
other chemicals
•
Also known as
pods
Other examples of
closed system design
Closed System
Catridge
Catridge
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Appendix 4
IMAGING FEATURES IN EVALI
Figure I
a. Chest radiograph shows infiltrates with sparing of subpleural region
(black arrows) and interlobular septal thickening (white arrowhead).
b. Corresponding CT image shows perihilar predominant groundglass opacity with prominent sparing of subpleural interstitium both
peripherally and centrally (black arrows) with intermixed areas of
lobular sparing. In addition, there is sparing of peribronchovascular
interstitium (white arrows). Septal thickening (black arrowhead) and
scattered centrilobular nodules (white arrowhead) are present.
Source: Kligerman S, Raptis C, Larsen B, et al. Radiologic, Pathologic, Clinical,
and Physiologic Findings of Electronic Cigarette or Vaping Product Useassociated Lung Injury (EVALI): Evolving Knowledge and Remaining
Questions. Radiology. 2020;294(3):491-505
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Figure II
Axial CT scan in lung window:
A - Presence of bilateral ground glass opacities (asterisks) with
subpleural sparing at the upper lobes (black arrowheads).
B - Bilateral lung consolidation at the lower lobes (black arrows).
Source: Radiology Department, Hospital Umum Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak
Figure III
Coronal maximum intensity projection image showing diffuse
centrilobular nodularity.
Source: Kligerman S, Raptis C, Larsen B, et al. Radiologic, Pathologic, Clinical,
and Physiologic Findings of Electronic Cigarette or Vaping Product Useassociated Lung Injury (EVALI): Evolving Knowledge and Remaining
Questions. Radiology. 2020;294(3):491-505
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
Appendix 5
EVALI PATIENT FOLLOW-UP CHECKLIST
The following should be done on EVALI patients on follow-up:
Activity
Comment
a. At 48 hours follow-up:
• Continue education about EVALI
• Assess and encourage adherence with medication regimens
• Ask about side effects of treatment
• Reinforce the importance of abstinence from e-cig product use
• Facilitate referrals to other providers or services indicated
by patients’ medical history or conditions
• Provide relevant resources on social, mental health and
substance use disorder
b. At 1 - 2 months follow-up
• Repeat all the steps at 48 hours follow-up
• Do spirometry
• Do chest X-ray
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
AEP
acute eosinophilic pneumonia
ALI
acute lung injury
BAL
bronchoalveolar lavage
CBD
cannabidiol
CDC
Centers for Disease Control
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CRP
C-reactive protein
CT
computed tomography
CXR
chest X-ray
DAD
diffuse alveolar damage
DAH
diffuse alveolar haemorrhage
DG
development group
e-cig
electronic cigarette
ED
emergency department
ESR
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
EVALI
E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
ICU
intensive care unit
IQR
interquartile range
LLMs
lipid-laden macrophages
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
mg
milligram
MoH
Ministry of Health
OP
organising pneumonia
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PG
propylene glycol
RC
review committee
THC
tetrahydrocannabinol
US(A)
United States (of America)
VG
vegetable glycerin
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The DG members of these guidelines would like to express their
gratitude and appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Rosnani Abdul Latip and Mr. Wan Mohd Nor Fakarudin Wan
Abdullah on retrieval of evidence
• Dr. Sri Rao Siva and Dr. Nur Hanani Mat Daud on CPG development
• Dr. Muhamad Hairul Nizam Abd Hamid on the design of CPG cover
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping
Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI) was supported financially
in its entirety by the MoH Malaysia.
Management of E-Cigarette or Vaping Product Use-Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
“assusuent secon
Leos 1 Pec
‘00 Posie Maye