MOH/P/PAK/557.24(GU)-e
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
eISBN: 978-967-2887-77-5
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://mymahtas.moh.gov.my
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This clinical practice guideline (CPG) is meant to be a guide for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guideline should not override the responsibility of
the practitioners to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of
the individual. This should be done in consultation with the patients and
their families or guardians, taking into account the management options
available locally.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2024 and will be reviewed in a
minimum period of four years (2028) or sooner if new evidence becomes
available. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed, and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which will be the definitive version at all time. This version
can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grading Recommendations,
i
Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
vi
Development Group
ix
Review Committee
xi
External Reviewers
xii
Algorithm 1 : Form 4 Thalassaemia Screening Programme
xiii
Algorithm 2 : Thalassaemia Screening in Health Clinic -
xiv
Walk-In/Voluntary/Cascade
Algorithm 3 : Confirmation of Children’s Thalassaemia
xv
Status to At-Risk Couples
Algorithm 4: Iron Chelation in Thalassaemia
xvi
1.
INTRODUCTION 1
2.
DIAGNOSIS
3
2.1 Clinical Diagnosis
3
2.2 Laboratory Diagnosis
4
3
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
11
3.1 Population Screening
12
3.2 Cascade Screening
12
3.3 Pre-marital Screening
12
3.4 Antenatal Screening
13
3.5 Pre-implantation Genetic Testing
13
4.
GENETIC COUNSELLING
15
4.1 Personnel Providing Genetic Counselling
15
4.2 Persons Who Should Receive Genetic Counselling
16
4.3 Content of Genetic Counselling
16
4.4 Genetic Counselling on Reproductive Risk
17
5.
BLOOD TRANSFUSION
19
5.1 Leucodepletion
19
5.2 Pre-transfusion Haemoglobin
20
5.3 Auto- or Allo-antibodies and Blood Transfusion in
21
TDT and NTDT
5.4 Transfusion in Non-Transfusion Dependent
23
Thalassaemia
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
6.
ASSESSMENT OF IRON BURDEN
25
6.1 Serum Ferritin
25
6.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
26
7.
IRON CHELATION
29
7.1 Iron Chelation in TDT
29
7.2 Iron Chelation in NTDT
33
8.
COMPLICATIONS OF IRON OVERLOAD
36
8.1 Cardiovascular System
36
8.2 Liver Disease
41
8.3 Endocrinopathies and Osteoporosis
45
9.
INFECTIVE COMPLICATIONS
57
9.1
Transfusion-Related Infection
57
9.2
Splenectomy-Related Infection
60
9.3
Iron Chelation Therapy-Related Infection
60
9.4
Covid-19 Related Infection
61
10. COMPLICATIONS OF NTDT
62
11. SPLENECTOMY
64
12. FERTILITY AND PREGNANCY
68
12.1 Fertility
68
12.2 Pre-pregnancy Care
70
12.3 Pregnancy
71
13. HAEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
81
(HSCT)
13.1 Matched Siblings Transplantation
81
13.2 Alternative Donor Transplantation
81
13.3 Cord Blood Transplantation
82
14. LIFESTYLE AND QUALITY OF LIFE/SUPPORTIVE CARE
84
14.1 Nutrition and supplements
84
14.2 Psychosocial support
85
15. OTHER THERAPIES
88
16. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
92
16.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
92
16.2 Potential Resource Implications
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
95
Appendix 1. Example of Search Strategy
108
Appendix 2. Clinical Questions
110
Appendix 3. A. Peripheral blood film and haemoglobin
113
profiles in beta thalassaemia syndrome.
B. Peripheral blood film and haemoglobin
114
profiles in Hb H disease.
Appendix 4. Molecular Spectrum of β-Thalassaemia and 115
α-Thalassaemia Commonly Identified Among
Malaysian Population Based on Ethnicity
Appendix 5. Malaysia Thalassemia Diagnosis (MTD) 117
Code for Hb Analysis and DNA Analysis
Appendix 6. Thalassaemia Screening Card 123
Appendix 7. Risk of Inheritance Based on Carrier or
124
Disease Status of Couples
Appendix 8. A. Summary of Iron Chelators 127
B. Summary of Common Adverse Effects
128
of Iron Chelators
Appendix 9. A. Mid-Parental Height Calculations 129
B. Tanner Staging and Orchidometer 129
Appendix 10. Micronutrients Supplementation
130
Recommendations for Thalassaemia Patients
Appendix 11. Iron Content in Selected Food Items
131
Appendix 12. Malaysian Thalassaemia Associations/
132
Support Groups
List of Abbreviations
134
Acknowledgement 138
Disclosure Statement
138
Source of Funding
138
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies or case reports; reports of expert committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure
Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of body of evidence and related effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG DG.
• Recommendations are formulated based on certainty of
evidence and the wording used denotes the strength of
recommendations. This takes into account:
 quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 relevancy and applicability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s) in
the management while a blue box contains evidence-based
recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Diagnosis
• MCH of ≤27 pg and/or MCV of <80 fL should be used as cut-off levels
for a positive thalassaemia screening.
• Hb analysis (capillary electrophoresis and/or high-performance liquid
chromatography) should be used for presumptive diagnosis of betathalassaemia and other haemoglobinopathies.
• Molecular analysis should be done:
 for all thalassaemia patients
 to confirm α-thalassaemia and borderline Hb A2 thalassaemia,
Hb variants and haemoglobinopathy other than classical
β-thalassaemia trait and Hb E
 for prenatal diagnosis for at-risk couples and genetic counselling
of prospective parents
Screening
• Screening programmes for thalassaemia should be done with proper
planning, implementation and follow-up plan.
Genetic Counselling
• Genetic counselling should be provided by trained professionals to
thalassaemia patients and carriers.
• Individuals offered genetic testing for thalassaemia should receive
pre- and post-test genetic counselling.
Blood Transfusion
• Pre-storage filtration is the preferred choice for leucodepletion in
thalassaemia.
• Pre-transfusion haemoglobin in transfusion dependent thalassaemia
should be kept between 9 - 10 g/dL and a higher target of 11 - 12 g/dL
should be aimed for patients with heart disease and clinical evidence
of extramedullary haematopoiesis.
• All thalassaemia patients should have full red cell phenotyping at
diagnosis or prior to first transfusion.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
iii
• Antigen matched blood and any other antigen negative blood for
defined antibody should be given to all thalassaemia patients.
• In non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia patients:
 occasional blood transfusion should be considered in acute
stressful conditions
 regular transfusion should be considered in the presence of
ineffective erythropoiesis-related complications
Assessment of Iron Burden
• Serum ferritin level should be monitored every 3 - 6 months in all
thalassaemia patients.
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2* of the heart and liver should
be done in all thalassaemia patients to assess iron overload at 10
years old or earlier if indicated.
Iron Chelation
• Optimisation of iron chelation therapy should be done to prevent
and treat multiorgan complications of iron overload in thalassaemia
patients.
• All transfusion dependent thalassaemia (TDT) patients with iron
overload [serum ferritin (SF) >1000 ng/ml on two occasions at least
two weeks apart] should receive iron chelation therapy.
 The target of iron chelation should be SF <1000 ng/ml, liver iron
concentration <7 mg Fe/g DW liver and cardiac T2* >20 ms.
• In patients with non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia:
 iron chelators should be started at ≥10 years of age if liver iron
concentration (LIC) ≥5 mg Fe/g dry weight or SF level ≥800 ng/ml
 iron chelators should be temporarily discontinued when LIC ≤3 mg
Fe/g dry weight or SF ≤300 ng/ml
Complications of Iron Overload
• In transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT), magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) T2* should be done from age 10 years old:
 to assess and monitor cardiac iron overload
 to guide iron chelation therapy
• Continuous
intravenous
deferoxamine
in
combination
with
deferiprone should be considered in TDT with overt heart failure.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
iv
• To assess liver iron overload (LIO) in thalassaemia patients, the
following should be done:
 serum ferritin
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver from 10 years of age
• Transient elastography may be used to assess LIO when MRI is not
available.
• Growth of thalassaemia children and adolescents should be
assessed every six months with accurate measurement.
• Transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT) patients aged more than
10 years should be monitored for endocrine complications.
• Assessment of bone health in TDT patients should be commenced
at the age of 10 years except for Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry
scan which should be started later at the completion of puberty.
• All thalassaemia patients should be monitored for transfusion-related
infections every 6-monthly
Splenectomy
• Splenectomy may be considered in thalassaemia patients >5 years
old with any the following:
 increased pure red blood cell transfusion exceeding 200 - 250 ml/
kg/year and severe iron overload not controlled by iron chelation
 hypersplenism
 massive splenomegaly
• Pre-splenectomy vaccination should be given 4 - 6 weeks prior or at
least two weeks in advance.
• Post-splenectomy thalassaemia patients should be given the
following:
 low dose aspirin (75 - 150 mg daily) if the platelet counts >500,000/
mm3
 oral penicillin life-long (in high-risk thalassaemia patients)
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
v
Pregnancy
• Invasive prenatal testing may be performed to diagnose thalassaemia
in utero for at-risk couples of thalassaemia.
• Pre-transfusion haemoglobin level should be maintained at 10 g/dL
in pregnant transfusion-dependent thalassaemia patients.
• Transfusion in pregnant thalassaemia patients should take into
account worsening anaemia, cardiac decompensation and foetal
growth restriction.
• Serial ultrasound scan should be performed in pregnant thalassaemia
patients to detect foetal growth restriction.
• Low molecular weight heparin for venous thromboembolism
prophylaxis should be commenced in thalassaemia patients
according to VTE risk assessment and guidelines.
HSCT
• In transfusion dependent thalassaemia, haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation should be offered at an early age to those with
matched sibling donor.
Lifestyle
• All thalassaemia patients should be given good nutritional support to
minimise growth impairment.
• Psychological support has to be offered to all thalassaemia patients.
• A structured transition care should be arranged for all thalassaemia
patients.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH),
Ministry of Higher Education and private healthcare. There was active
involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the
process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans,
publication from year “2012 to Current” and English language. In
addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines
were searched, and experts in the field contacted to identify relevant
studies. All searches were conducted from 22 October 2021 to 10
January 2022. Literature searches were repeated for all clinical
questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing any
relevant papers published before 31 December 2023 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on Thalassaemia which
are:
• Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) - Guidelines for the
Management of Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (TDT) 4th
Edition (Version 2.0) (2021)
• Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) - Guidelines for the
Management of Non-Transfusion Dependent β-Thalassaemia 3rd
Edition (2023)
• Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) - Guidelines for the
Management of Non-Transfusion Dependent α-Thalassaemia 3rd
Edition (2023)
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 27 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 26 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the two groups. This CPG was developed
largely based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2015), while the
grading of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE
(refer to page i). The writing of the CPG follows strictly the requirement
of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and, the HTA and
CPG Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on
the CPG development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained
from Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidence-
based Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (Available at
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
OBJECTIVES
The objective of the CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of transfusion dependent thalassaemia (TDT)
and non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia (NTDT) on the following
aspects:
• diagnosis
• counselling and screening
• monitoring and follow-up
• treatment
• complications
• fertility and pregnancy
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• All patients with TDT and NTDT
Exclusion Criteria
• Any other chronic/congenital anaemia
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders involved in the management of thalassaemia.
This includes:
i. healthcare professionals (doctors, pharmacists, allied health
professionals)
ii. professional organisations
iii. policy makers
iv. patients, caregivers and their advocates
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Kogilavani Gunasagaran
Paediatric Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Ahlam Naila Kori
Consultant Physician & Clinical
Haematologist Hospital Tengku Ampuan
Afzan, Pahang
Dr. Aisyah Hj Muhammad Rivai
Consultant Paediatric Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Arini Nuran Md Idris
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Azmanira Aziz
Transfusion Medicine Specialist
Pusat Darah Negara, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. David Ng Chun Ern
Infectious Disease Paediatrician
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Doris Lau Sie Chong
Paediatrician
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hafizah Hashim
Pathologist (Haematology)
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Hazira Hanum Mohd Yusof
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Putrajaya Presint 18
Putrajaya
Dr. Kama Azira Awang @ Ramli
Consultant Cardiac Radiologist
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah Serdang,
Selangor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd. Yusoff
Head of CPG Unit
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section (MaHTAS), MoH, Putrajaya
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mohd Faizal Ahmad
Lecturer & Reproductive & Oncofertility
Specialist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Noor Ayuni Bazura Muhamad
Senior Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Noorazizah Arsad
Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Norafiza Mohd Yasin
Haematopathologist
Institut Penyelidikan Perubatan,
Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Nurul Farhana Burhanudin
Pharmacist
Hospital Bukit Mertajam, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Ong Sik Yong
Paediatric Gastroenterologist
Sunway Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Veena Selvaratnam
Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr.Vimaljit Kaur A/ P Sangat Singh
Consultant Paediatrician
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar,
Negeri Sembilan
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Mr. Lim V Co
Pharmacist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Mohamed Najib Mohamed Unni
Paediatric Haemato-Oncologist,
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd Amin Itam
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah
Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Winnie Ong
Peitee Clinical Geneticist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yeoh Seoh Leng
Consultant Paediatric Haemato-oncologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Zulaiha Muda
Senior Consultant Paediatric Haemato-Oncologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Members
Dr. Adienuar Ahmad Norawi
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bandar Kuantan, Pahang
Dr. Carol Lim Kar Koong
Maternal Fetal Medicine Consultant,
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Che Zubaidah Che Daud
Consultant Paediatric Radiologist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ezalia Esa
Head of Unit & Consultant Pathologist
(Haematology)
Institut Penyelidikan Perubatan, Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Goh Ai Sim
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Prof. Dr. Hamidah Alias
Senior Consultant Paediatric HaematoOncologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Irwinder Kaur Chhabra
Pharmacist
Klinik Kesihatan Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section (MaHTAS), MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Janet Hong Yeow Hua
Consultant Paediatric Endocrinologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Keng Wee Teik
Senior Consultant Clinical Geneticist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Leong Ming Chern
Consultant Paediatric Cardiologist
Institut Jantung Negara, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Nik Khairulddin Nik Yusoff
Consultant Infectious Disease Paediatrician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kelantan
Ms. Noorhafiza Noorhamdan
President
Federation of Malaysian Thalassaemia Societies
Prof. Dr. Raja Zahratul Azma Raja Sabudin
Senior Consultant Pathologist (Haematology)
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Saidatul Norbaya Buang
Deputy Director (Family Health)
Family Health Development Division MoH,
Putrajaya
Dr. Tan Seok Siam
Senior Consultant Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Tun Maizura Mohd Fathullah
Senior Consultant Pathologist (Haematology)
Pusat Darah Negara, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Zainah Shaikh Hedra@Hidrah Consultant
Paediatrician
Hospital Sultanah Nora Ismail, Johor
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
xii
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Fazlina Mohamed Yusoff
Consultant Family Physician Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Anika, Selangor
Prof. Dato’ Dr. Hamizah Ismail
Maternal Fetal Medicine Consultant &
Consultant Obstetrics & Gynaecologist
Kulliyyah of Medicine,
International Islamic University Malaysia,
Pahang
Datuk Dr. Hishamshah Mohd Ibrahim
Senior Consultant Paediatric Haematooncologist
Dr. Jameela Sathar
Senior Consultant Haematologist
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Dr. Lai Wei Jie
Family Medicine Specialist
Horeb Medical Group, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mary Petrou
Consultant Clinical Molecular Geneticist &
Associate Honorary Professor at
UCL University College Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust &
University College London,
United Kingdom
Dr. Nor Hafizah Ahmad
Transfusion Medicine Consultant
Pusat Darah Negara, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Raudhawati Osman
Senior Consultant Pathologist
(Haematology)
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Dr. Rizal Husaini Razali
Pharmacist
Hospital Tunku Azizah, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Teh Siao Hean
Consultant General Paediatrician
(Paediatrics and Child Health)
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Thiyagar Nadarajaw
Senior Consultant Paediatrician &
Adolescent Medicine Specialist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
xiii
Algorithm 1: Form 4 Thalassaemia Screening Programme
Source: Family Health Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Garis Panduan Program Saringan Thalassemia Kebangsaan di Penjagaan
Kesihatan Primer. Putrajaya: MoH; 2024
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
xiv
Algorithm 2: Thalassaemia Screening at Health Clinic - Walk-In/Voluntary/Cascade
*Collection of FBC and unstained PBF slides based on local laboratory management
**DNA Analysis test will be carried out if necessary, depending on the result of Hb Analysis
Source: Family Health Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Garis Panduan
Program Saringan Thalassemia Kebangsaan di Penjagaan Kesihatan Primer.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2024
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
xv
Algorithm 3: Confirmation of Children’s Thalassaemia Status to at-Risk Couples
Source: Family Health Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Garis Panduan Program Saringan Thalassemia Kebangsaan di Penjagaan Kesihatan
Primer. Putrajaya: MoH; 2024
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
xvi
Algorithm 4: Iron Chelation in Thalassaemia
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management
of Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia. Putrajaya: MoH; 2009
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
1. INTRODUCTION
Thalassaemia refers to a group of hereditary haemoglobin disorders
characterised by decreased or absent synthesis of normal globin
chains. Patients of this disorder can be categorised into two spectra;
transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT) and non-transfusion-
dependent thalassaemia (NTDT).1
Thalassaemia is a major public health issue with an enormous cost
burden for MoH.2 - 3, level III Effective control of the disease has led to
increased survival, reduced morbidity and improved quality of life for
thalassaemia patients. This guideline optimises the multi-discipline
treatment and address adequate prevention of the disease.
TDT patients require regular, life-long blood transfusion to alleviate
symptomatic anaemia, suppress ineffective erythropoiesis, enhance
growth and development which will lead to improved survival rate. On
the other hand, NTDT patients might require blood transfusion only when
they have symptomatic anaemia, poor quality of life, compromising
growth and development, or if there are features of extramedullary
haematopoiesis. TDT and NTDT are fluid categories, based on clinical
parameters, variations, and advances in the clinical management, as
well as other modifiers of disease, which may shift a patient from one
group to another during their lifetime.4
Patients with transfusional iron overload will require life-long, iron
chelation therapy to help decrease the iron burden and prevent
long-term complications associated with end-organ iron deposition
including hepatic dysfunction and failure, endocrinopathies and cardiac
dysfunction. Currently, haematopoietic stem cell transplant remains
the only option for cure for TDT patients in Malaysia. Promising
novel therapies e.g. gene therapy and molecules targeting ineffective
erythropoiesis are emerging options for thalassaemia patients.
The National Thalassaemia Prevention and Control Programme was
approved by Malaysian Cabinet in 2004. Numerous activities were carried
out following that namely the establishment of Malaysian Thalassaemia
Registry in 2007, formation of National Steering Committee, publication
of Clinical Practice Guidelines for Management of Transfusion
Dependent Thalassaemia and establishment of Thalassaemia
Control and Prevention Programme in 2009. Thalassaemia Screening
Programme was introduced with antenatal screening in 2009 which
moved on to Form 4 School Screening Programme in 2016 and also
includes voluntary and cascade screening.
The 2022 Annual Report of Family Health Development Division of
MoH Malaysia stated that thalassaemia carrier rate was 579.3/10,000
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
school children screened. The highest number of carriers was detected
in Kedah (79.27/10,000 school children screened). Kelantan recorded
the highest Thalassaemia Hb E carrier (46.10/10,000 school children
screened) while Sabah had the highest ß-thalassaemia carrier
(45.23/10,000 school children screened). α- thalassaemia carrier,
based on genotype, was highest in Kedah (33.43/10,000 school
children screened).5, level III
The
2020
Malaysian
Thalassaemia
Registry
reported
8,767
thalassaemia patients in Malaysia, an increase from 4,541 in 2009, of
which 44.1% were TDT. Malays remain the ethnic group with the highest
proportion of thalassaemia patients at 63.3%. The largest proportion
of thalassaemia patients in Malaysia was diagnosed with haemoglobin
(Hb) E-β thalassaemia (35.6%), followed by β-thalassaemia major
(30.8%), Hb H disease (21.9%), β-thalassaemia intermedia (TI) (9.1%)
and other forms of haemoglobinopathies (2.6%). The highest burden
of disease was seen in the state of Sabah (22%) followed by Selangor
and Kedah with 16% and 10% of the patients respectively.6, level III
The second edition of the CPG on Management of Thalassaemia
intends to expand the scope of its previous edition by integrating the
management of both TDT and NTDT into the CPG as well as address
the management of thalassaemia patients during pregnancy and
childbirth. It will also address fertility and prenatal diagnosis as well as
screening and prevention of the disease. This CPG also aims to update
recommendations based on new evidence that have emerged in the
management of the disease to keep the CPG current and up to global
standards.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
2. DIAGNOSIS
2.1. Clinical Diagnosis
Thalassaemia phenotypes can be classified into TDT and NTDT based
essentially on transfusion requirement. Patients who require life-long
regular transfusion for survival is considered as TDT as compared with
NTDT (refer to Figure 1).
Figure 1: Transfusion requirement in various
thalassaemia phenotypes
Adapted: Cappellini M, Farmakis D, Porter J, et al. 2021 Thalassaemia International
Federation Guidelines for the Management of Transfusion-dependent
Thalassaemia. Cyprus: Thalassaemia International Federation; 2021.
E732 p.
It should be noted that the classification may change from one
group to another. Thus, careful clinical evaluation using clinical and
haematological parameters should be taken into consideration for
the designation of TDT and NTDT based on patient’s ‘current’ clinical
course. This recent classification is used for standardisation of the
terminology for research and clinical management. Therefore, it
moves away from previous terminologies of β-thalassaemia major and
intermedia that may give a false impression of disease severity.1; 7, level III
Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia
Transfusions
seldom
required
Occasional
transfusions
required
Intermittent
transfusions
required
Regular, life-long
transfusions
required
Mild HbE/
β-thalassaemia
HbC/
β-thalassaemia
Deletional HbH
Moderate HbE/
β-thalassaemia
Non-deletional HbH
β-thalassaemia major
Severe HbE/
β-thalassaemia
Transfusion Dependent
Thalassaemia
HbC/β-thalassaemia
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• Common clinical presentation of thalassaemia is based on types of
thalassaemia:
a. TDT at 4 - 6 months up to 2 years of age
 severe anaemia
 hepatosplenomegaly
 jaundice
 thalassaemia facies
 growth failure/retardation
b. NTDT at a later age (>2 years of age)
 mild - moderate anaemia
 thalassaemia facies
 hepatosplenomegaly
• Implementation of national screening programme helps to detect
thalassaemia cases early before clinical manifestations appear.
2.2. Laboratory Diagnosis
Investigations of thalassaemia and haemoglobinopathies require step
wise approach including screening and confirmatory diagnostic tests.
A comprehensive evaluation from clinical history, physical examination
and combination of laboratory results are important for precise
diagnosis. Presumptive and confirmatory diagnosis of thalassaemia
requires several tests including red blood cell (RBC) indices, Hb typing
and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis. The laboratory approach
depends on mutation spectrum in the region, available resources and
age of target population.
a.
Screening tests
In the previous local CPG on thalassaemia, a few criteria for
thalassaemia screening have been addressed as listed below.8
• Mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH) level of <27 pg should be
used in thalassaemia screening.
• α+-thalassaemia and haemoglobinopathies e.g. Hb Constant
Spring and Hb E, may have a normal mean corpuscular volume
(MCV) and MCH, thus may potentially be missed if MCH level of
<27 pg is used as cut-off level for a screening test.
• Iron deficiency, characterised by an increase in red cell
distribution width (RDW), should be treated before proceeding
with haemoglobinopathy work-up.
Ideally, at-risk couples should be worked up for thalassaemia regardless
of their iron status.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
The above criteria should be maintained with the following additional
updated information.
• MCH of ≤27 pg and/or MCV of <80 fL are currently being used
as cut-off levels for a positive thalassaemia screening. MCH is
preferred because it is less susceptible to storage changes.8; 9
Mentzer Index has been used in clinical practice to differentiate between
iron deficiency anaemia (IDA) and β-thalassaemia trait. However,
evidence showed contradictory results on its accuracy10 - 12, level III and
thus the CPG DG does not recommend its use.
Refer to Algorithm 2 on Thalassaemia Screening at Health Clinic -
Walk-In/ Voluntary/Cascade.
b.
Diagnostic tests
i.
Hb analysis
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and capillary zone
electrophoresis (CZE) are two recommended methods to provide
presumptive identification and quantification of normal and variant
Hb. Both methods are complementary to each other for Hb variant
identification.9
Hb analysis should be performed on pre-transfusion or three months
post transfusion samples. Two studies evaluated the utility of CZE
against HPLC and found:
• Hb A and foetal haemoglobin (Hb F) level measurement correlated
well between the two methods with r of 0.99913, level III and 0.994
14, level III respectively. However, low level of Hb F may not be
detected by CZE.14, level III
• Hb A2 measurement using CZE and HPLC with the presence
of Hb variants (Hb C, Hb E and Hb S) resulted in unacceptable
agreement (r=0.0356); however, the correlation improved without
such variants (r=0.994).13, level III
• In Hb variants (Hb C, Hb E and Hb S):13, level III
 Hb S was detected by both techniques with good agreement
(r=0.996)
 Hb C was detected by both techniques with good agreement
(r=0.967)
 Hb E was not detected in any of the patients using HPLC, but
was detected in all of them using CZE
• Hb H was more difficult to measure by CZE than HPLC. The
percentage of the Hb H was 8.1, 9.4 and 17.8 by HPLC in
comparison with values of 0.5, 0.5 and 5.7 by CZE within
acceptable sample stability time.14, level III
A hospital-based study on thalassaemia screening of newborns
using CZE showed heterozygous α0, homozygous α+, compound
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
heterozygous for α+ with Hb Constant Spring, Hb H disease and Hb
H-Constant Spring could be detected by the presence of Hb Bart’s. It
was also able to detect Hb E. However, heterozygous β-thalassaemia
was not detectable by this method as switching of predominant Hb F to
adult Hb (Hb A) in newborns only occurs after six months of age.15, level III
In pregnancy, Hb F can be physiologically raised. Therefore, Hb
analysis done during antenatal period should be interpreted as below:9
• MCH <27 pg with isolated raised Hb F ≥5%: heterozygous δβthalassaemia should be suspected
• normal MCH with Hb F >10%: Hereditary Persistence Foetal
Haemoglobin (HPFH) should be suspected
Diagnosis of β-thalassaemia trait requires accurate determination of
increased Hb A2 percentage. The proportion of Hb A2 is dependent on
the precise mutation present. In most cases of heterozygosity for β0 or
severe β+ thalassaemia, the Hb A2 is 4 - 9%.8
For borderline Hb A2 thalassaemia, lower levels of Hb A2 had been
shown to detect mild or β+ mutations. A local cross-sectional study found
a sensitivity of 94% in the detection of borderline Hb A2 thalassaemia at
levels 3.3 - 3.9% by CZE method.16, level III
In iron deficiency anemia with Hb <8 g/dL, Hb A2 level can be reduced
as much as 0.5% and thus it should be interpreted cautiously in this
population.9
c.
Other useful haematological tests
• Peripheral blood film
 RBC morphology remains a useful feature to grade the
morphological changes in thalassaemia.8
• H-inclusion test
 Hb H bodies inclusion detected using H-inclusion test is useful to
support the presumptive diagnosis of Hb H disease. Regardless of
the result, the diagnosis needs to be confirmed by DNA analysis.9
• Sickle solubility test
 The test can be used as a guide to differentiate between Hb S and
Hb variant e.g. Hb G-Makassar.9; 17, level III
• Cellulose acetate electrophoresis
 Cellulose acetate electrophoresis (CAE) at pH 8.4 - 8.9 is a simple,
reliable and rapid method in Hb typing. It remains a valid method
in resource-constrained settings and as secondary technique
following a positive HPLC.9
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Refer Appendix 3 on Peripheral Blood Film and Haemoglobin
Profiles in β-Thalassaemia Syndrome and Hb H Disease.
d.
Molecular analysis (DNA analysis)
• Molecular analysis is not usually required to confirm the diagnosis
of a β-thalassaemia carrier. However, it is mandatory to confirm the
α-thalassaemia carrier status.TIF, 2021
In addition, molecular analysis is essential for genetic counselling,
risk calculation and prenatal genetic diagnosis. Refer to Table 1 for
Summary of molecular techniques for thalassaemia genotyping in
Malaysia.
Indications for molecular analysis in thalassaemia in the local setting
includes:18, level III
• confirmation for haemoglobin variant/haemoglobinopathy other
than classical heterozygous beta and Hb E
• genotyping for all cases registered under Malaysian Thalassaemia
Registry (MTR)
• borderline Hb A2 thalassaemia
• α0-thalassaemia genotype with MCH <25 pg
• cascade screening of confirmed α-thalassaemia
• prenatal diagnosis for at-risk couples and genetic counselling of
prospective parents
Other indication is for α-gene triplication or amplification in heterozygous
β-thalassaemia with α-thalassaemia intermedia phenotype.1
Various molecular techniques have been used for point mutation
detection in β-thalassaemia and large deletion detection in
α-thalassaemia. All of these techniques have some advantages and
disadvantages. DNA or molecular analysis for definitive diagnosis are
performed either by mutation-specific detection (targeted panel) or
genome scanning by direct sequencing.TIF, 2019
i.
Mutation specific detection
A diagnostic study found that single-tube multiplex polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)–based reverse dot blot (RDB) assay for simultaneous
detection of both common α- and β- thalassaemia reduced the time
and the complexity of diagnosis compared with conventional methods
(Gap-PCR, RDB and PCR-Sanger sequencing) with high concordance
rate (p<0.001).19, level III
ii.
Genomic scanning
Conventional methods for thalassaemia diagnosis require the use of
several techniques which leads to long turnaround time. The single
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
platform Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) may replace all these
methods. It reduces the time of laboratory workflow.
One local cross-sectional study on the application of targeted NGS
for investigation of thalassaemia in a developing country showed that
NGS:20, level III
• was able to determine additional mutations that were not identified
by conventional methods
• may overcome misdiagnosis of complex thalassaemia cases due
to gene interactions
• may increase the speed of establishing a correct diagnosis for
genotyping
Three cross-sectional studies on the performance of NGS for application
in clinical management of thalassaemia in a large-scale population
showed:
• the technology was able to simultaneously analyse HBB, HBA1
and HBA2 genes and thus reduce the turnaround time21 - 22, level III
• high concordance rate for analysis of α- and β-globin gene (99.98%
and 100% respectively) compared with conventional molecular
method (RDB, Gap-PCR, MLPA and PCR-Sanger sequencing)
21, level III
• additional variants and couples who are at risk of having child
affected by thalassaemia were identified by NGS that were not
identified by conventional methods21, level III
• increased detection of α- and β-thalassaemia and, co-inheritance
α- and β-thalassaemia carrier rate that were missed by conventional
methods22 - 23, level III
Table 1: Summary of molecular techniques for
thalassaemia genotyping in Malaysia
*Methods currently applied in clinical laboratories of Institute for Medical Research (IMR)
**Used for research purposes in IMR
Abbreviations: RDB=reverse dot blot; DNA=deoxyribonucleic acid; PCR=polymerase
chain reaction; ARMS=amplification refractory mutation system; NGS=nextgeneration sequencing; MLPA=multiplex ligation- dependent probe amplification;
WES=whole exome sequencing
Mutation-specific
detection
(Targeted panel)
Genome scanning
(Unknown mutation/
deletion)
Modifier gene
(Secondary modifier)
RDB
ARMS-PCR
Gap-PCR
*Real time PCR with
melting curve analysis
PCR for XMN-1
polymorphism*
Multiplex-PCR for
Anti-3.7 and anti-4.2*
α-MLPA*
NGS/WES for BCL11,
KLF-1**
DNA sequencing (HBB, HBA1,
HBA2, HBD gene)*
NGS
MLPA
**WES/ Long read
sequencing
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
e.
Genetic modifier
Several genetic modifiers play an important role in contributing to
phenotypic variability in thalassaemia patients. The genetic modifiers
can be classified as the following:
• primary - HBB gene mutations in those with underlying
β-thalassaemia
• secondary - involve in regulation of Hb F
• tertiary - not involved in globin synthesis but might modify the
severity of the disease
A scoring system for classification of Hb E/β-thalassaemia disease
severity into mild, moderate and severe has been developed based
on clinical criteria (Hb at steady state level, age at receiving first
blood transfusion, requirement of blood transfusion in a year,
size of spleen, age of thalassaemia presentation and, growth and
development).24, level III
A cross-sectional study using the above scoring system on predictive
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) for β0-thalassaemia/Hb E
disease severity in Thailand and Malaysia showed:25, level III
• the most common primary modifiers in severe disease were
different between the two population -
 Thai
patients:
HBB:c.126-129delCTTT
(45.7%)
and
HBB:c.52A>T (26.3%)
 Malaysian patients: HBB:c.92 + 5G>C (37.9%) and HBB:c.92 +
1G>A (22.4%)
• three predictive SNPs associated with secondary modifiers
included rs766432 BCL11A, rs9399137 HBS1L-MYB and
rs72872548 HBE1
In another cross-sectional study on α-triplication as secondary modifiers
among β- thalassaemia patients with diverse phenotypes, the findings
were:26, level III
• 69.4% heterozygous β-thalassaemia with α-triplication require
blood transfusion
• symptomatic heterozygotes β-thalassaemia with α-triplication had
significantly lower Hb level and higher Hb F levels compared with
asymptomatic group of the same population.
• An α-gene triplication or quadruplication is important to be considered
in heterozygous β-thalassaemia subjects with a TI phenotype.1
f.
Thalassaemia mutations in Malaysia
The mutation spectrum of β- and α-thalassaemia among Malaysian
population are presented in the table below. Genotype mapping and
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
characterisation of various mutations according to ethnicity and location
are important especially in the development of targeted panel based
on ethnic distribution (refer to Appendix 4 on Molecular Spectrum of
β-Thalassaemia and α- Thalassaemia Commonly Identified Among
Malaysian Population Based on Ethnicity). It also helps to facilitate
the establishment of prenatal diagnostic and mutation definition in
carrier and genetic counselling. An accurate, fine-scale epidemiology
data are necessary to guide sustainable national and regional health
policies for thalassaemia management.
g.
Malaysia Thalassemia Diagnosis (MTD) Code for Hb Analysis
and Molecular Analysis
The National Committee on Thalassaemia Screening and Diagnostic
Test was established in 2013 to facilitate thalassaemia diagnostic
laboratory processes. In 2016, the committee further improvised the
mechanism for result tracing, standardisation of report between MoH
laboratories, turn-around time for Hb analysis and molecular result
by introducing the national thalassaemia coding system. This coding
system was revised in 2023 as listed in Appendix 5 on Malaysia
Thalassemia Diagnosis (MTD) Code for Hb Analysis and DNA
Analysis.
Recommendation 1
• MCH of ≤27 pg and/or MCV of <80 fL should be used as cut-off levels
for a positive thalassaemia screening.
• Hb analysis (capillary electrophoresis and/or high-performance liquid
chromatography) should be used for presumptive diagnosis of betathalassaemia and other haemoglobinopathies.
• Molecular analysis should be done:
 for all thalassaemia patients
 to confirm α-thalassaemia, borderline Hb A2 thalassaemia,
Hb variants and haemoglobinopathy other than classical
β-thalassaemia trait and Hb E
 for prenatal diagnosis for at-risk couples and genetic counselling
of prospective parents
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
3. SCREENING AND PREVENTION
Strategies commonly practised in screening and prevention of
thalassaemia are:
• public awareness and education
• population screening
• targeted population screening
• cascade screening
• pre-marital screening and genetic counselling
• pre-implantation genetic testing (PGT)
• pre-natal diagnosis followed by termination of affected foetuses -
refer to Subchapter 12.3 on Pre-pregnancy Care
In Malaysia, thalassaemia screening started in 2009 through passive
screening e.g. every patient with normal Hb and MCH ≤27 pg will be
further investigated with Hb analysis to rule out thalassaemia. However,
throughout the years, the screening evolved to focus more on younger
generation for better prevention of the disease. Hence, thalassaemia
screening in Form 4 students was introduced in 2016 as one of the
strategies to reduce birth of thalassaemia babies up to 75% by
2030.27, level III
The Annual Report of Family Health Development Division 2022 on
the Form 4 Thalassaemia Screening of 2017 - 2020 showed 924,487
students had been screened. Of these, 25.5% had undergone Hb
analysis while 11.3% had DNA analysis done. Throughout the period,
53,559 students were confirmed as thalassaemia carrier (579.3/10,000)
and 109 (1.18/10,000) were diagnosed with thalassaemia. The highest
prevalence of carriers according to types of thalassaemia were
α-thalassaemia in Kedah (33.43/10,000), β-thalassaemia in Sabah
(45.23/10,000) and Hb E in Kelantan (46.10/10,000).5, level III
According to a local qualitative study on adolescents’ experiences and
views of the national school-based thalassaemia screening programme,
respondents stated that age 16 - 17 years old was appropriate for
screening. Among recommendations on the programme were to
improve pre-test education for both students and parents as well as
follow-up care and support for those identified as carriers.28, level III
Besides Form 4 thalassaemia screening locally, antenatal screening,
cascade screening and voluntary screening are still ongoing. All
individuals who underwent screening will be given a Thalassaemia
Screening Card stating their thalassaemia status. Refer to Appendix
6 on Thalassaemia Screening Card. Currently, there is no retrievable
evidence on cost- effectiveness between different screening
programmes for thalassaemia.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
3.1.
Population Screening
There is no recent evidence on the effectiveness of population screening
in the prevention of thalassaemia. In Malaysia targeted population
screening i.e. thalassaemia screening of Form 4 students has started
in 2016 and its effectiveness is yet to be seen. Refer to Algorithm 1 on
Form 4 Thalassaemia Screening Programme.
A local study on economic burden in the management of TDT patients
showed that TDT proved to be a costly disease. Implementation of an
effective national screening programme may contribute to reduction in
new thalassaemia cases.29, level III
3.2.
Cascade Screening
Cascade screening is a genetic-screening strategy that targets family
members (e.g. siblings, parents, aunts, uncles, etc.) of carriers/affected
individuals of genetic disorders through the testing of their phenotypes
or genotypes.8
Refer to Algorithm 2 on Thalassaemia Screening at Health Clinic -
Walk-In/ Voluntary/Cascade.
3.3.
Pre-marital Screening
Evidence on pre-marital screening showed various findings on the
outcomes. A study in Saudi Arabia on haemoglobinopathies trend
following establishment of Mandatory Premarital Screening Programme
in 2004 showed an increase in prevalence of haemoglobinopathies
among subjects born after initiation of the programme. The prevalence
of Hb S increased from 5.4% to 8.8% while that of β-thalassaemia
increased from 1.1% to 2.1%.30, level III
On the other hand, another study in Saudi Arabia using secondary
data where genetic counselling was added on premarital screening
showed decreasing trend in the prevalence of β-thalassaemia trait
from 24.2/1000 in 2011 to 12/1000 in 2015.31, level III A single centre
cohort study in Iraq on feasibility and effectiveness of preventive
programme for haemoglobinopathies which included education, premarital screening, counselling, prenatal diagnosis (PND) and selective
termination of affected foetus revealed a 65% reduction in number of
reported affected births over 5-years period.32, level II-2
In Malaysia, pre-marital screening is largely conducted as a voluntary
screening.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
3.4.
Antenatal Screening
In Malaysia, screening among antenatal mothers started in 2009
targeting primigravidas. Currently, antenatal mothers with anaemia or
abnormal MCV/MCH are further worked up for thalassaemia. Refer
to Garis Panduan Program Saringan Thalassaemia Kebangsaan di
Kesihatan Primer33, level III and Perinatal Care Manual 4th Edition.34, level III
3.5.
Pre-implantation Genetic Testing
PGT is the genetic screening of embryos created in-vitro by assisted
conception. Specifically, Pre-implantation Genetic Testing and Mapping
(PGT-M) is a subset of PGT that allows the identiﬁcation and exclusion
of embryos carrying familial monogenic diseases. In cases of couple
who are patient/carrier of thalassaemia, PGT-M for thalassaemia
screening may be considered.
A cross-sectional study on 138 couples with thalassaemia who
underwent PGT-M for diagnosis and HLA matching reported that:35, level III
• overall, there were 1180 blastocysts biopsied and suitable for
clinical use
 58.6% of thalassaemia alone
 16.8% of thalassaemia-HLA embryos
• there were 15 live births, out of which 12 had been used for
successful HSCT of disease- affected siblings
Another retrospective study on 171 thalassaemia couples who had
undergone 327 preimplantation HLA typing cycles showed the following
findings:36, level III
• 92% of blastomeres were biopsied and a full diagnosis was
achieved; 17.6% were HLA- matched
• embryo transfer was performed with
 34.9% clinical pregnancy rate per transfer
 59 healthy and HLA-compatible babies were born
 21 affected children had been cured through HSCT
The clinical pregnancy rate based on 2016 - 2017 data from the
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology was 35%
per embryo transfer.37, level III
• Currently, PGT-M is widely accepted worldwide for prevention of
thalassaemia offspring. Additionally, the use of combination HLAmatching with PGT-M may be useful for HLA- matching sibling
donor saviour programme. In Malaysia, it is currently offered in some
centres for these purposes and can be highlighted to thalassaemia
couples.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 2
• Screening programmes for thalassaemia should be done with proper
planning, implementation and follow-up plan.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
4. GENETIC COUNSELLING
• Thalassaemia is a single gene (monogenic) disorder. All
thalassaemias are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, and
various compound heterozygosities with different abnormal alleles
may occur, adding to the complexity and diversity of the disorder.
• Genetic counselling is therefore an essential and integral component
in the comprehensive management of thalassaemia.
Genetic counselling:38, level III
• is a communication process of helping people understand and
adapt to the medical, psychological and genetic contributions of
a disease or condition so as to allow for informed decisions to be
made with regard to the disease/condition or the risk of having a
disease/condition. It includes -
 interpretation of family and medical histories, and assessment
of the likelihood of disease occurrence or recurrence
 education about inheritance, testing, management and
prevention of a disease/condition
 provision of relevant support resources and research
Important ethical principles of genetic counselling emphasise on:
• the autonomy of the individual or couple
• the rights to complete, accurate information
• the respect for strict confidentiality of genetic information
4.1.
Personnel Providing Genetic Counselling
Genetic counselling should be provided by qualified clinical geneticists
or genetic counsellors. In view of the lack of these professionals,
appropriately trained medical/nursing practitioners who are competent
at providing information regarding all aspects of thalassaemia may also
provide the counselling.8; 39, level III
Genetic counselling of the following groups of people is ideally done by
a clinical geneticists or genetic counsellors:8
• at-risk couples seeking reproductive options (i.e. preconception
and antenatal)
• individuals with unusual/complex carrier states
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
4.2.
Persons Who Should Receive Genetic Counselling
All individuals offered genetic testing should receive pre-test and posttest genetic counselling. Genetic counselling is directed towards adults
and mature individuals, and should be offered to:8; 39 - 40, level III
• thalassaemia carriers detected via various screening opportunities -
 population screening e.g. high school students in their teenage
years
 pre-marital screening
 screening for married couples planning to start a family
(preconception)
 antenatal screening
 opportunistic screening (e.g. individuals with abnormal FBC
detected on routine test)
• affected thalassaemia individuals and/or parents/guardians at
diagnosis (newly diagnosed)
• family members of an index case (thalassaemia patients or carriers)
for cascade screening
• at-risk couples seeking counselling on reproductive options; both
partners are carriers or have the disease, or one has the disease
and the other is a carrier
The CPG DG opines that affected individuals (patients and carriers)
diagnosed during childhood should receive genetic counselling when
approaching adulthood and before starting their family. This should
ideally be done again during transition of care.
4.3.
Content of Genetic Counselling
The followings are important components to be discussed during
genetic counselling of thalassaemia patients/carriers: 8; 41, level III
• information about thalassaemia - nature of disease, symptoms,
natural history and principles of treatment
• inheritance pattern, risk of having the condition and recurrence risk
- refer to Appendix 7 on Risk of Inheritance Based on Carrier or
Disease Status of Couples
• genetic testing and description of the genetic test which includes -
 purpose and nature of the test
 implications of genetic testing
 genetic testing process and procedure risks
 effectiveness and limitations of the genetic test
 potential outcomes of the genetic test and results interpretation
 informed consent
• pedigree documentation, risk to family members and importance of
cascade screening
• reproductive options to at-risk couples planning to start a family e.g.
PND, Pre- implantation Genetic Testing and Mapping (PGT-M) and
adoption
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• other foreseeable consequences arising from genetic testing -
 impact on insurability
 employment
 ethical and psychological concerns (e.g. stress, stigma,
discrimination)
• psychosocial support and information on available resources and
support groups
• The content of genetic counselling should be tailored to the needs of
the person seeking counselling. Certain components of counselling
may need to be emphasised based on the situation and where
necessary, referral for further genetic counselling may be initiated.
4.4.
Genetic Counselling on Reproductive Risk
Culturally-sensitive, non-directive genetic counselling is particularly
important for at-risk couples so that they can make unbiased informed
decisions relating to their reproductive choices. They should be
counselled about the genetic risk and the options available for reducing
it which include PND or pre-implantation genetic testing (PGT).
Standard diagnostic methods for PND are via DNA analysis of the
foetus obtained from chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis.
Four cohort studies involving centres with high β-thalassaemia carrier
frequency reported successful reduction in affected newborns via
preventive methods of PND or PGT as mentioned below.42 - 45, level II-2
• Formal genetic counselling and psychological support was provided
to at-risk couples before testing to facilitate informed decisionmaking.
• Increasing number of PND performed over time was observed.
• Following informed parental choices, 96% - 98.4% of foetuses
affected by β- thalassaemia major and 100% affected by Hb Bart’s
underwent termination of pregnancy (TOP).
• Increasing awareness and prevention strategies resulted in marked
reduction in affected births.
Decisions for prenatal diagnosis and the selective abortion of an
affected foetus is influenced by many factors besides the information a
couple receive which include cultural, religious and social backgrounds
and, personal beliefs and experiences.
In most cases, affected births stem from failure to adequately inform
parents of the risk of thalassaemia and prevention rather than their
rejection of foetal testing. Reproductive options for families affected
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
with a transfusion-dependent thalassaemia major patient should be
decided by the families themselves after genetic counselling.8
Genetic counselling supports decision-making at all stages.
Refer to Subchapter 3.5 on Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis and
Subchapter 12.3(a) on Prenatal Diagnosis for further information.
Recommendation 3
• Genetic counselling should be provided by trained professionals to
thalassaemia patients and carriers*.
• Individuals offered genetic testing for thalassaemia should receive
pre-test and post-test genetic counselling.
*refer to Subchapter 4.2 on Persons Who Should Receive Genetic
Counselling
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
5. BLOOD TRANSFUSION
Blood transfusion in thalassaemia generally aims to deliver a safe
and effective transfusion regimen whilst minimising complications of
transfusion therapy in order to maintain good quality of life.
The decision to start blood transfusion should be individualised.
Particularly in NTDT, transfusion remains the ideal intervention only in
specific clinical conditions.
Patients should be reviewed prior to each transfusion to determine
pre-transfusion Hb levels and to ensure that the planned transfusion
is appropriate.
Transfusion should be given in a proper clinical area and supervised
by proper health personnel. Patients should be monitored closely
during blood transfusion. For suspected acute transfusion reaction,
the blood transfusion must be stopped immediately and resuscitation
measures taken, and appropriate investigations must be carried out
simultaneously to determine the cause of reaction.
For management of other transfusion reactions, refer to Transfusion
Practice Guidelines for Clinical and Laboratory Personnel.
5.1.
Leucodepletion
Regular blood transfusion remains the main conventional treatment
modality for TDT. Frequent blood transfusion that contains
leucocytes can contribute to some adverse reactions e.g. febrile non
haemolytic transfusion reactions, Human Leucocyte Antigen (HLA)
alloimmunisation of recipients and cytomegalovirus transmission.
Reduction of leucocytes to ≤1x106/L per unit is considered the critical
threshold in eliminating these reactions.46, level III
There are several methods for leucocytes filtration as discussed below.1
• Pre-storage filtration of whole blood provides high-efficient
filtration, low residual leucocytes in processed red cells and high
red cell recovery. Centrifugation of leucodepleted whole blood
produces packed red blood cells (pRBC)
• Pre-transfusion laboratory filtration refers to the filtration of pRBC
at the blood bank
• Bedside filtration refers to the pRBC unit that is filtered at the
bedside during transfusion. This method may not allow optimal
quality control because the techniques used for bedside filtration
may be highly variable.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
There is no retrievable evidence comparing pre-storage leucodepletion
and bedside filtration method.
An RCT on pre-storage leucodepletion in β-thalassaemia major
compared the techniques of red cell concentrate (RCC) which
were:47, level I
• RCC-A - obtained by whole blood leucoreduction and subsequent
plasma removal
• RCC-B - obtained by removing plasma and buffy coat first, followed
by leucoreduction
The RCC-A was more effective in terms of:
• higher total Hb content by 9.4 g/unit (p<0.00001)
• higher average pre-transfusion Hb concentration (Cohen’s
d=0.792 g/dL, 95% CI 0.474 to 1.104)
• longer median transfusion interval (Cohen’s d=0.800 days, 95%
CI 0.481 to 1.112)
• lesser number of blood units transfused/year by 4.5 unit (Cohen’s
d= -1.609, 95% CI -2.023 to 1.188)
Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) guidelines recommends
the following.1
• Use leucodepleted packed red cells.
• Pre-storage filtration is strongly recommended but blood bank pretransfusion filtration is acceptable.
• Bedside filtration is only acceptable if there is no capacity for prestorage filtration or blood bank pre-transfusion filtration.
Recommendation 4
• Pre-storage filtration is the preferred choice for leucodepletion in
thalassaemia.
5.2.
Pre-transfusion Haemoglobin
There is no new evidence on pre-transfusion Hb target in TDT. Pretransfusion Hb should be kept between 9 - 10 g/dL.8 In those with
heart disease, clinically significant extramedullary haematopoiesis or
other medical conditions, higher target of 110 - 120 g/l (11 - 12 g/dL) is
recommended.1
Volume of transfusion required is between 15 - 20 ml/kg which depend
on the pre-transfusion Hb and haematocrit of pRBC provided by the
blood bank (refer to Table 2). Whenever possible, the whole bag of
blood should be used to prevent wastage and fresh blood of less than
14 days should be given.8
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Table 2. Expected haemoglobin rise with haematocrit levels
Adapted: Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Thalassaemia. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2009.
Example: For a patient weighing 20 kg and has 360 ml transfusion
every 4 weeks with average haematocrit 60% -
Annual blood requirement = 13 transfusion x 360 ml/20 kg = 234 ml/
kg/year
Annual pure RBC requirement = 234 x 60% = 140.4 ml/kg/year
Annual transfusional iron loading = 140.4 x 1.08 = 152 mg/kg iron
Usual haematocrit level of Malaysian packed red cell ranges from 60
to 75%.
Volume of blood to be transfused is calculated based on body weight.
Post-transfusion Hb should be between 13.5 - 15.5 g/dL. It should be
taken at least one-hour post-completion of the transfusion. Transfusion
interval depends on pre- and post-transfusion Hb level and can be 2 - 4
weeks apart.8
Recommendation 5
• Pre-transfusion haemoglobin in transfusion dependent thalassaemia
should be kept between 9 - 10 g/dL and a higher target of 11 - 12 g/dL
should be aimed for patients with heart disease and clinical evidence
of extramedullary haematopoiesis.
5.3.
Auto- or Allo-antibodies and Blood Transfusion in
Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia and Non-Transfusion
Dependent Thalassaemia
The development of RBC antibodies (both allo- and auto-antibodies)
remains a major complication of RBC transfusion in thalassaemia
patients. Studies showed the prevalence of allo-antibodies were
Body weight (kg) x Hb rise required (g/dL) x
transfusion factor (3 - 4)
Volume required
=
(ml)
1 g/dL
2 g/dL
3 g/dL
4 g/dL
3.5 ml/kg
7.0 ml/kg
10.5 ml/kg
14.0 ml/kg
2.8 ml/kg
5.6 ml/kg
8.4 ml/kg
11.2 ml/kg
Haematocrit of donor red cells
Target increase in Hb
60%
75%
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
between 5.64% and 42.5% while for auto-antibodies were between
5.0% and 28.2%.48 - 50, level III
Two local studies among thalassaemia patients showed the rate of alloantibodies ranged from 10.15% to 11.4%.51 - 52, level III
Several factors influence the development of allo- and auto-antibodies.
• The significant risks of allo-antibodies development are age at first
transfusion (risk higher in those who start transfusion later in life),
splenectomy and transfusion of ≥20 units of blood.48 - 50, level III
• Risk of auto-antibodies development increases with higher
numbers of blood transfusion (p=0.01).50, level III
Another group with high risk of alloimmunisation is pregnant women
with NTDT who were never- or minimally-transfused.4
The most common antibodies observed in thalassaemia patients
are those directed against antigen in the Rh and Kell blood group
system.48 - 50, level III
In Malaysia, the most frequently detected allo-antibodies belong to Rh,
Kidd and Duffy blood group system. The most common antibody found
is anti-E.51 - 52, level III
In the local Transfusion Practice Guidelines for Clinical and Laboratory
Personnel, baseline data for each potential multiply transfused patient
shall be established before starting the transfusion programme. This
involves:53, level III
• phenotyping of red cells, which should include Rh, Kell, Kidd,
Duffy and MNSs
• screening for red cell antibodies
The use of extended antigen matched donor blood is effective in
reducing the rate of allo- antibody development. The CPG DG opines
that thalassaemia patients should receive antigen-matched blood
for ABO, Rh, Kell, Kidd, Duffy and MNSs and any other antigen
negative blood for defined antibody. RBC genotyping can be offered
for investigation in TDT patients without baseline phenotyping or those
with complex allo-antibodies. However, the results must be interpreted
by taking into consideration the clinical and transfusion history, as well
as the serological investigation results. Red cell auto-antibodies can
cause haemolysis, crossmatching difficulties and increased transfusion
rates. These patients need to be managed by a multidisciplinary
team as they may require immunosuppressive drugs, splenectomy or
alternative treatments.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 6
• All thalassaemia patients should have full red cell phenotyping at
diagnosis or prior to first transfusion consisting of ABO, Rh, Kell,
Kidd, Duffy and MNSs
• Antigen matched blood for ABO, Rh, Kell, Kidd, Duffy and MNSs
and any other antigen negative blood for defined antibody should be
given to all thalassaemia patients.
5.4.
Transfusion in Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia
Although transfusion independence is a characteristic of NTDT,
ineffective erythropoiesis will lead to a multitude of subsequent
pathophysiology including chronic anaemia.
TIF guidelines on NTDT recommend that initiation of transfusion
therapy in NTDT should not be based on Hb level alone. Occasional
blood transfusions should be considered in the following settings e.g.
anticipated acute stress, Hb drop or blood loss in pregnancy, infection
and surgery.4; 54
Apart from above, the guidelines also recommend considering more
frequent transfusions in the following ineffective erythropoiesis-related
complications, in a defined duration until a sustained clinical benefit is
achieved:4; 54
• declining Hb level in line with profound splenomegaly (at a rate
exceeding 3 cm/year)
• growth failure
• poor performance at school
• diminished exercise tolerance
• failure of secondary sexual characteristics development
• signs of bony changes
• frequent haemolytic crisis (Hb H disease)
• poor quality of life
Transfusions may be considered for the primary prevention (in high-risk
populations) or secondary prevention of the following complications in
NTDT:55
• thrombotic or cerebrovascular disease
• pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) with or without secondary
heart failure
• extramedullary haematopoietic pseudotumour
• leg ulcers
A cross-sectional study showed that regularly transfused NTDT patients
had fewer thalassaemia-related complications (mainly extramedullary
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
haematopoiesis (EMH), PAH and thrombosis) while having a higher rate
of iron overload-related endocrinopathy compared with occasionally
transfused group.56, level III
NTDT patients are not reliant on transfusions for survival but transfusion
has been shown to be protective against complications e.g. thrombosis,
EMH, PAH, heart failure, cholelithiasis and leg ulcers in patients with
NTDT.57, level III
In a small prospective cohort study, early regular blood transfusion
therapy to maintain Hb 10 - 14 g/dL in moderately severe NTDT was
shown to prevent diastolic dysfunction.58, level II-2
Recommendation 7
• In non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia patients:
 occasional blood transfusion should be considered in acute
stressful conditions
 regular transfusion should be considered in the presence of
ineffective erythropoiesis- related complications*
*Refer to the preceding texts.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
6. ASSESSMENT OF IRON BURDEN
The rate of iron loading depends on volume of blood transfusion and
gastrointestinal (GI) absorption of the iron. A unit of packed RBC from
420 ml of donor blood contains approximately 200 mg of iron or 0.47 mg/
ml of whole donor blood. For packed RBC with variable haematocrits,
the iron in mg/ml of blood can therefore be estimated from 1.16 x the
haematocrit of the transfused blood product. Transfusion regimens
which aim at keeping the pre-transfusion Hb above 90 g/L (95 - 105 g/L)
or equivalent to 9.0 g/dL have been shown to prevent extramedullary
haematopoiesis and reduce GI iron absorption.1
Iron burden can be assessed using serum ferritin, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and biopsy to determine iron content in a particular
organ. Iron concentration needs to be monitored:1
• to assess the control of body iron
• to determine effective iron chelation regimes, tailored to individual
specific needs
6.1.
Serum Ferritin
Serial serum ferritin (SF) is the recommended method to assess iron
burden in thalassaemia patients. It should be monitored 3 - 6 monthly
in all patients.8 A single SF level should be interpreted with caution as
it may be influenced by many factors. The result should be considered
with MRI liver and cardiac findings as there is no good correlation
between these methods.
The summary of advantages and disadvantages of SF in the assessment
of iron burden and treatment monitoring is shown below.1
Easy to repeat
Inexpensive
Trend identification is possible with
repeat samples
Non-linear response to iron load at
high level
Absence of changes does not
exclude response to chelation
Relationship to iron load varies with
chelator
Long-term control linked to clinical
outcome
Useful for dose adjustment of
chelation based on change in SF
levels
Indirect estimate of iron burden
Influenced by inflammation
(increased)
Relationship to liver iron
concentration differs in different
diseases (e.g. hepatitis)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
6.2.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI is a useful, non-invasive tool for iron overload quantification in
both TDT and NTDT. MRI T2* is a fast and easy technique to acquire,
more sensitive to iron levels and reproducible over time with different
scanners.
The strength of magnetic field applied by these scanners is measured in
Tesla (T) unit. MRI machines with 1.5T are widely used for T2* technique
with reliable accuracy based on standardised validation procedures.
Measurement of liver and heart T2* using 3T MRI machine has good
correlations with 1.5T values (p<0.001) in iron overload. However,
3T has greater susceptibility to artifacts and lower reproducibility
trends causing difficulty in quantifying low T2* values with severe iron
overload.59, level III
• It is necessary to measure both liver and cardiac iron separately using
MRI T2* because studies have failed to show significant correlation
between liver and cardiac iron overload by MRI.8
i.
Cardiac iron assessment
The utility of cardiac T2* MRI was originally identified on the basis
of shortened T2* values. Cardiac MRI (CMR) T2* should be done in
patients with TDT from age 10 years onwards and T2* values of <20
ms indicate cardiac siderosis.8 This test can be done at earlier age if
patient is cooperative.
The severity of cardiac iron overload based on the cardiac T2* values
and timing for repeat MRI are presented in the following table.8
Table 3: Cardiac MRI values and suggested schedule
#The CPG DG opines that this has to be done after intensification of
chelation
Diagnostic studies had shown that black-blood T2* sequence had
superior reproducibility and lower imaging artifacts than conventional
white blood T2* technique.60 - 61, level III
Degree of cardiac
iron load
Normal
Mild overload
Moderate overload
Severe overload
Cardiac T2* Value (ms)
>20
16 - 20
10 - 15
<10
Timing for repeat MRI
2-yearly
Annually#
6-monthly#
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
The risk of developing heart failure and cardiac arrhythmia in
thalassaemia increases significantly with the severity of cardiac iron
overload based on cardiac T2* MRI.62, level III
In the presence of known cardiovascular (CV) abnormalities, symptoms
suggestive of cardiac disease or abnormal findings during basic cardiac
assessment, additional CMR sequences e.g. ventricular function
analysis and myocardial tissue characterisation may be added.1
The use of cardiac T2* MRI in NTDT patients cannot be widely
recommended. It may be considered in older patients with severe iron
overload or as clinically indicated.4
ii. Liver iron assessment
In the past, liver biopsy was used as the gold standard for liver iron
concentration (LIC) measurement to reflect body iron load. Normal
individuals have LIC <1.8 mg/gm dry weight. However, liver biopsy is an
invasive procedure and its result may be affected by sampling error e.g.
in hepatitis or cirrhotic liver. An LIC >3 mg/mg dry weight may indicate
iron overload and the need for chelation therapy.8
MRI T2* is a non-invasive method that replaces liver biopsy to
quantify LIC, guide treatment and plan for follow-up. The severity of
liver iron load based on the liver T2* values is shown in the following
table:63, level III
Table 4: Liver MRI values of iron overload severity
The CPG DG opines that moderate to severe LIC should have repeat
MRI T2* done annually after intensification of chelation.
Liver disease remains one of the leading causes of death in NTDT
population. LIC levels ≥5 mg Fe/g dw are associated with a considerable
risk of morbidity and mortality in both patients with β-thalassaemia
intermedia and Hb E/β-thalassaemia.4
Recommendations by TIF guidelines on NTDT are:4; 54
• All patients with NTDT ≥10 years of age should be frequently
assessed for iron overload status.
• Assessment of iron overload status in NTDT patients should be
done through LIC or serum ferritin measurement as shown below.
Degree of liver iron load
Normal
Mild overload
Moderate overload
Severe overload
Liver T2* Value (ms)
>11.4
3.8 - 11.4
1.8 - 3.8
<1.8
LIC (mg Fe/g dw)
< 2
2 - 7
7 - 15
>15
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
iii.
Endocrine organs assessment
Diabetes
mellitus,
hypothyroidism,
hypoparathyroidism
and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are complications of iron overload in
the endocrine organs in thalassaemia. Research is being done to look
at the usefulness of MRI in predicting endocrine complications or to
identify the affected patients before irreversible damage.
Pancreatic iron is a predictor for alterations of glucose metabolism
and cardiac iron in regularly transfused β-thalassaemia intermedia. A
diagnostic study showed that the global pancreas
T2* <17.9 ms was able to predict an abnormal oral glucose tolerance
test (OGTT) in TI with AUC of 0.61 (95% CI 0.53 to 0.69).64, level III
Growth and delayed puberty are sequalae of pituitary iron overload in
thalassaemia. Diagnostic study showed that higher pituitary R2 values
and smaller anterior pituitary volumes were found in young TDT patients
(8 - 18 years old) with hypogonadism or short stature compared with
those without the features. The pituitary R2 value of 22.85 Hz had an
AUC of 0.864 in detecting iron overload in TDT patients.65, level III
Recommendation 8
• Serum ferritin level should be monitored every 3 - 6 months in all
thalassaemia patients.
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2* of the heart and liver should
be done in all thalassaemia patients to assess iron overload.
 MRI T2* using 1.5T scanner is the preferred choice.
 It should be done at 10 years old or earlier if indicated.
 Repeat MRI should be done accordingly and after intensification
of iron chelation#
#refer to the relevant preceding texts
Group of NTDT patients
All NTDT patients
Patients not receiving
chelation therapy
Patients receiving chelation
therapy
LIC by MRI T2*
Baseline at 10 years old
Repeat 1 - 2-yearly
Repeat 6 - 12-monthly
Serum Ferritin
Baseline at 10 years old
Repeat 3 - 12-monthly
Repeat 3-monthly
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
7. IRON CHELATION
Iron chelation aims to balance the rate of iron accumulation from
blood transfusion by increasing iron excretion in urine and/or faeces
with chelators. The effectiveness of chelation is closely related to
the morbidity and mortality of thalassaemia population. Eliminating
excessive amount of stored iron is crucial in preventing and reversing
iron-mediated organ damage. Deferoxamine [also known as
desferrioxamine (DFO)], deferiprone (DFP) and deferasirox (DFX)
are currently the commercially available chelators in the market which
can be used alone or in combination. However, the harms of chelation
therapy must be weighed against their benefits, which are typically
more prevalent when dosages are high compared with the degree of
iron excess.
7.1.
Iron Chelation in TDT
Optimisation of iron chelation therapy should be done to prevent and
treat multiorgan complications of iron overload in thalassaemia patients
e.g. cardiac, liver, endocrine organs and others.
a.
Commencement on iron chelation therapy
• Generally, iron chelation therapy in thalassaemia patients starts after
the first 10 - 20 blood transfusions, and/or when the SF level rises
above 1000 ng/ml on >2 occasions at least two weeks apart.1; 8
• The target of iron chelation is to keep SF <1000 ng/ml, LIC <7 mg
Fe/g dw liver and cardiac T2* >20 ms.8
Optimal threshold to start iron chelation therapy is yet to be determined.
Therefore, it should be started after discussion with a paediatrician/
physician. Careful monitoring of growth and bone development is
advised. Commencement at a reduced dosage of chelators should
be done if iron chelation therapy is started below three years of age.
Adequate response to iron chelation therapy is reflected by a reduction
in SF levels over time e.g. SF reduced by 1000 ng/ml over 12 months.
Iron is removed from tissues at a slow rate and therefore decisions to
change chelators should not be made on a single SF level.1; 8
A number of pharmacogenetic studies found various responses towards
oral iron chelators (DFX and DFP) based on the inter-individual genetic
differences which includes the effectivenss, toxicity and metabolism
rate of the chelators.66 - 68, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
b.
Deferoxamine
DFO was the first developed iron chelator used in paediatric patients
with iron overload since the 1960s. Currently, the treatment is given as
slow subcutaneous infusion. Keeping the therapeutic index at <0.025 at
all times avoids over chelation by DFO in compliant patients. Children
under three years of age should refrain from using this chelator as it
may retard bone growth and development.
In general, DFO monotherapy reduces serum ferritin (SF), liver iron
concentration (LIC) and myocardial iron concentration (by MRI T2*)
which in turn improves cardiac function caused by iron overload as
discussed below.
Two meta-analyses on TDT showed that DFO was generally more
effective in reducing SF and LIC by biopsy or SQUID (superconducting
quantum interference device) compared with DFX. However, there were
no significant differences in AEs between the two chelators except for
raised serum creatinine, ALT and incidence of rash with DFX.69 - 70, level I
c.
Deferiprone
DFP is one of the orally available iron chelators. The dose starts at 75
mg/kg/day divided into three doses and can be escalated up to 100 mg/
kg/day according to response.
Previously, DFP was not recommended for children <6 years of age. A
recent multicentre, open-label, non-inferiority RCT compared DFP to
DFX in TDT patients aged one month to 18 years old with 59 subjects
were aged <6 years old out of a total of 393. It showed that DFP was
non-inferior to DFX in terms of effectiveness and safety. In a subgroup
analysis of those <6 years old, there was NS difference in effectiveness
between DFP and DFX. This suggested that DFP may be a possible
option for TDT paediatric population.71, level I
Two large meta-analyses involving children and adults with TDT showed
that monotherapy DFP had significantly better cardio-protective effect
than monotherapy DFO in terms of:
• reduction in myocardial iron concentration by MRI T2* (MD= -0.35,
95% CI -0.63 to -0.08)72, level I
• significant improvement of LVEF72 - 73, level I
Mean daily dose (mg/kg)
Serum ferritin (ng/ml)
Therapeutic index =
(Actual dose in each daily infusion x doses per week) ÷ 7 days
Body weight (kg)
Mean daily dose =
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
There was NS difference in AE between DFP and DFO monotherapies.
72, level I However, the primary papers used in both meta-analyses were
of low to moderate quality.
Severe but rare AEs e.g. agranulocytosis (ANC <500 x 103/L) and
neutropenia (ANC <1500 x 103/L) were found in patients taking DFP. In
the event of neutropenia, rechallenge is not recommended. While in the
event of agranulocytosis, rechallenge is contraindicated.74
Compliance to DFP monotherapy was better than DFO monotherapy
(ranging from 79 - 98%).8
The United States Food and Drug Administration recently approved a
twice-a-day modified- release formulation of DFP for TDT patients.
However, there is currently no RCT demonstrating direct treatment
benefits e.g. improvement in disease-related symptoms, functioning or
increased survival.74, level III
d.
Deferasirox
DFX currently comes in the form of film-coated tablets (FCT) with a
dose between 14 - 28 mg/kg/day once daily. It is not recommended for
children below the age of 2 years old.8; 75, level III
A meta-analysis of six RCTs comparing DFX dispersible tablets with
DFO or placebo in TDT patients with iron overload found that DFX
at 30 mg/kg/day was more effective than DFO in reducing LIC (MD=
-2.50, 95% CI -4.55 to -0.45) and SF (MD= -377.57, 95% CI -488.65 to
-266.50). However, DFO was more effective than DFX at other doses.
On safety profile, DFX had higher serum creatinine (RR=2.69, 95%
CI 1.98 to 3.67) and ALT (RR=5.67, 95% CI 1.01 to 31.79) with NS
difference in rash and serious AEs between them.69, level I The metaanalysis used primary papers of mixed quality.
The higher cost of DFX compared with other iron chelators at present
may be a hindrance to starting it as a first-line treatment.
Divided twice daily dosage of DFX may be beneficial in some patients.
A small retrospective cohort study of TDT patients unresponsive or
intolerant to once daily DFX and were changed to twice daily DFX of
the same total daily dose showed a significant median decreased in
SF after six months compared with baseline. No serious AEs were
observed.76, level II-2
e.
Combination/sequential therapy
Combination or sequential dosing of DFO with DFP is indicated when
monotherapy fails. Three meta-analyses showed that combination
or sequential dosing of DFO with DFP was more effective than
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
monotherapy in improving ejection fraction, reducing LIC and reducing
SF as discussed below. In the combination therapy, the DFP dose was
at 75 - 100 mg/kg/day given daily and DFO at 40 - 50 mg/kg/day given
2 - 5 times per week. For sequential therapy, DFO was administrated
alternately with DFP on different days of the week.72 -73, level I; 77, level I
The first meta-analysis involving children and adults with TDT on either
combination DFP and DFO or monotherapy of DFP or DFO showed
that combination therapy was better in terms of:73, level I
• improvement of LVEF (MD=5.67%, 95% CI 1.32 to 10.02)
• reduction in SF (MD= -0.36 mg/L, 95% CI -0.66 to -0.07)
Another two large meta-analyses compared combination or sequential
DFP+DFO with monotherapy DFO, DFP or DFX in TDT patients of all
ages and showed:
• greater SF reduction in sequential DFP+DFO than DFP
monotherapy (MD=279.73, 95% CI 48.3 to 511.16)72, level I
• greater LVEF improvement in -
 combination DFP+DFO compared with DFO monotherapy
(SMD= -0.70, 95% CI -1.16 to -0.23)72, level I
 combination
DFO+DFP
compared
with
DFP
or
DFO
monotherapy (MD=3.37%, 95% CI 0.79 to 5.95)77, level I
 sequential DFP+DFO compared with DFO monotherapy
(MD=9.02%, 95% CI 6.40 to 11.64)77, level I
• mixed results in reduction of LIC -
 combination DFO+DFP was more effective than DFP or DFO
monotherapy (SMD= -1.06, 95% CI -1.54 to -0.58)77, level I
 NS difference between combination DFP+DFO and DFO
monotherapy72, level I
• NS difference in reduction of myocardial iron concentration
between72, level I
 combination DFO+DFP and other chelators as monotherapy
 sequential DFP+DFO and DFO monotherapy
• DFO monotherapy had lesser AE compared with combination
DFP+DFO (RR=1.46, 95% CI 1.04 to 2.04)72, level I
A double-blind RCT demonstrated that combination DFX+DFO
significantly reduced myocardial iron by MRI T2* and SF compared with
DFX monotherapy but not LIC. However, adversely this combination
showed significantly higher total bilirubin.78, level I
A Cochrane systematic review showed that combination DFP+DFX
was significantly more favoured than combination DFP+DFO in terms
of adherence (RR=0.84, 95% CI 0.72 to 0.99). However, there was NS
difference in safety profile between the two combination.79, level I
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
There is no retrievable evidence to support the use of combination of
three iron chelators in thalassaemia.
Refer to Algorithm 4 on Iron Chelation in Thalassaemia and
Appendix 8 on Summary of Iron Chelators and Summary of
Common Adverse Effects of Iron Chelators.
Recommendation 9
• Optimisation of iron chelation therapy should be done to prevent
and treat multiorgan complications of iron overload in thalassaemia
patients.
• All transfusion-dependent thalassaemia patients with iron overload
[serum ferritin (SF) >1000 ng/ml on two occasions at least two weeks
apart] should receive iron chelation therapy.
 It should be started after discussion with a paediatrician/physician.
• The target of iron chelation in thalassaemia should be SF <1000 ng/
ml, liver iron concentration <7 mg Fe/g dw liver and cardiac T2* >20
ms.
• Combination iron chelation therapy in thalassaemia should be
considered to optimise the therapy in cases of monotherapy failure.
For iron-chelation in pregnancy and fertility, refer to Chapter 12
7.2.
Iron Chelation in NTDT
Ineffective erythropoiesis in NTDT patients leads to suppression of
hepcidin levels which causes increased in both intestinal iron absorption
and release of recycled iron from the reticuloendothelial system. These,
with occasional or more frequent transfusions, result in iron overload in
the patients.80 - 81, level III
A cross-sectional study showed that TI patients on iron chelation had
lower risk of pulmonary hypertension (p=0.032), cholelithiasis (p<0.001),
osteoporosis (p=0.001) and hypogonadism (p=0.001) compared with
those not on iron chelation.56, level III
In an RCT comparing the effectiveness and safety of DFX (5 and 10
mg/kg/d) and placebo in NTDT patients ≥10 years of age with iron
overload (LIC ≥5 mg Fe/g DW and SF ≥300 ng/ml), the former was
significantly more effective in reducing LIC and SF at 52 weeks. The
frequency of AE in patients receiving DFX was similar to placebo.
The most common drug-related AE were nausea, rash and diarrhoea;
most of which were of mild to moderate severity and resolved without
discontinuing treatment.82, level I
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
A one-year extension of the above study showed further reduction in
LIC and SF over two years. Safety profile of DFX was consistent with
that seen in the core study.83, level I
A pre-post study on NTDT patients with iron overload showed that DFX
at starting dose of 10 mg/kg/day, with dose escalations from week 4
(maximum 20 mg/kg/day) up to 30 mg/kg/day at week 24, significantly
reduced LIC at week 52 compared with baseline. AEs were reported in
31.3% patients and were predominantly GI.84, level II-3
In a 5-year open-label trial between DFP vs DFO in NTDT, both
treatments had a significant linear reduction in mean SF, but there was
no significant difference between the groups. There was higher number
of agranulocytosis and neutropenia in DFP group. Compliance rates
were 85% and 76% in DFP and DFO groups respectively.85, level I
Recommendations from TIF guidelines for iron chelation in NTDT are:4
• DFX should be started in patients ≥10 years of age if:
 LIC ≥5 mg Fe/g DW
 SF level ≥800 ng/ml
 SF level 300 - 800 ng/ml and other clinical or laboratory
measures indicative of iron overload when LIC measurement is
not possible
• starting dose of DFX film-coated tablets at 7 mg/kg/day
• dose escalations after one month are as below
• dose escalations after six months are as below
*the dose is based on clinical expert opinion
Baseline LIC
(mg Fe/g dw)
5 - 7
>7 - 15
>15
Baseline SF (ng/ml)
800 - 1500
>1500 - 3000
>3000
Dose escalation
No escalation
Escalate to 11.5 mg/kg/day
Escalate to 14 mg/kg/day
LIC at six months
(mgFe/g dw)
3 - 7
>7 - 15
>15
SF at six months
(ng/ml)
300 - 1500
>1500 - 3000
>3000
Dose
Same dose with maximum dose
of 7 mg/kg/day
Escalate by 3.5 mg/kg/day
(maximum 14 mg/kg/day)
Escalate by 3.5 - 7 mg /kg/day
(maximum 21* mg/kg/day)
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• DFX should be discontinued when LIC ≤3 mg Fe/g DW or SF
≤300 ng/ml and patients should continue to be monitored for iron
overload as indicated
• monitor AE as per local product prescribing information
• monitor closely compliance to iron chelation
• use of other iron chelators cannot be recommended yet
• encourage tea consumption as it may have some benefit in
decreasing iron absorption from the gut
• NTDT patients who require regular blood transfusions should be
managed as per guidelines for patients with TDT
Recommendation 10
• In patients with non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia:
 iron chelators should be started at ≥10 years of age if liver iron
concentration (LIC) ≥5 mg Fe/g dw or serum ferritin (SF) level
≥800 ng/ml
 iron chelators should be temporarily discontinued when LIC ≤3 mg
Fe/g dw or SF ≤300 ng/ml
Refer to Algorithm 4 on Iron Chelation in Thalassaemia and
Appendix 8 on Summary of Iron Chelators and Summary of
Common Adverse Effects of Iron Chelators.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
8. COMPLICATIONS OF IRON OVERLOAD
8.1.
Cardiovascular System
In thalassaemia patients, iron overload cardiomyopathy is caused by
accumulation of iron in the myocardium.
• Cardiovascular (CV) complication is the leading cause of mortality
in thalassaemia in Malaysia where the rate was 33.9% in 2020 as
reported by the Malaysian Thalassaemia Registry.6
In populations with limited access to modern therapy, the burden of CV
disease in thalassaemia remains high.86, level III
In a large meta-analysis of 142 studies on β-thalassaemia major, the
overall prevalence of cardiac complications was 42%. The specific
cardiac complications are listed in Table 5 below.86, level III
Table 5: Cardiac complications in β-thalassaemia major
The risk of developing cardiac complications and mortality is higher in
patients with SF >2,500 µg/L. However, SF is not a sensitive predictor
of CIO as cardiomyopathy and cardiac mortality have been reported
with low ferritin levels.8
The onset of CIO can be as early as 8 - 10 years old although the risk
is usually higher in the late teens and twenties.1; 8
a.
Signs and symptoms
A high degree of clinical suspicion is necessary to identify thalassaemia
patients with iron overload. Diagnosis can be very challenging in the
early stages of the disease as patients may be asymptomatic, while
severely overloaded patients can have terminal irreversible heart failure
symptoms.
Iron overload (cardiac siderosis) (T2*<20 ms)
• Mild-moderate (T2*=10 – 20 ms)
• Severe (T2*<10 ms)
Heart failure
Arrythmias
Diastolic dysfunction
Systolic dysfunction
Pulmonary hypertension
25%
26%
17%
9%
10%
34%
9%
13%
Cardiac complications
Prevalence
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
The common presentations of cardiac complications in thalassaemia
are:1
• dyspnoea
• chest discomfort
• palpitation
• syncope or fainting
• lower limb oedema
• exercise intolerance
The presence of these symptoms warrants further CV evaluation.
b.
Investigations
i.
Electrocardiogram
Rhythm disorders which include conduction abnormalities and
ventricular arrhythmias are associated with severe CIO. Studies
on electrocardiogram (ECG) in thalassaemia patients showed that
repolarisation abnormalities, heart rate variability and arrhythmias e.g.
premature atrial ectopic, premature ventricular ectopic, atrial fibrillation
and ventricular tachycardia were common findings.87- 90, level III
ECG and/or 24-hour ambulatory ECG are done in all thalassaemia
patients, especially in those
>10 years old.8
ii.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is the easiest way to evaluate diastolic left ventricular
(LV) function/dysfunction in thalassaemia patients. It is the preferred
alternative after CMR, and 3- dimensional is preferable to 2-dimensional
because of improved longitudinal reproducibility.91, level III
A cohort study on conventional Doppler echocardiography and tissue
Doppler imaging in TM patients compared with anaemic patients and
healthy controls demonstrated that TM patients had more diastolic
dysfunction as shown by significantly higher values of the following
parameters:92, level II-2
• left atrium volume/BSA index
• mitral septal E/Em ratio
• duration of reverse pulmonary vein flow
• mitral E/A ratio
Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) values are significantly higher in
thalassaemia patients compared with healthy controls and LV function
is usually preserved until an advanced stage. LVEF <56% indicates
impaired myocardial function and, should prompt further evaluation of
CIO by MRI T2* and intensification of chelation therapy.8
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
A cohort study on echocardiography in TM adult patients
showed:93, level II-2
• reduction in LVEF ≥7% increased the risk of cardiac mortality
(OR=4.93, 95% CI 1.61 to 15.11)
• reduction of LVEF ≥7% had AUC of 0.70 in detection patients at
risk of mortality due to cardiac disease
• NS negative correlation between change in LVEF and SF levels
(r= -0.11; p=0.22)
Myocardial deformation imaging by tissue Doppler and speckle
tracking echocardiography is able to unmask subtle LV dysfunction in
TM.94 - 95, level III
A meta-analysis looked at the use of global longitudinal strain (GLS) for
the detection of CIO in thalassaemia patients. It showed:94, level III
• GLS was lower in patients with CIO compared with those
without (WMD=1.6%, 95% CI 0.76 to 2.4) and normal population
(WMD=2.2%, 95% CI 0.91 to 3.5)
• GLS < -19.5% had AUC=0.659 (95% CI 0.6 to 0.7) in predicting
CIO
• GLS < -6% had 100% PPV for detection of CIO and GLS ≥ -24.5%
had 100% NPV for detection of CIO
iii.
MRI T2*
CMR T2* is currently the best available method for early detection of
CIO and guide treatment. Refer to Table 3 on Cardiac MRI values and
suggested schedule.
A cross-sectional study of CMR in TM patients showed that 83% of
patients who developed arrhythmia had cardiac T2* <20 ms and 98%
of those who developed heart failure had cardiac T2* <10 ms.62, level III
MRI T2* should be done from the age of 10 onwards where possible
and should be repeated 2-yearly if normal, yearly if the value is between
10 - 20 ms and 6-monthly if it is <10 ms.8 Refer to Table 3 on Cardiac
MRI values and suggested schedule.
A retrospective cohort study on serial CMR in β-thalassaemia adults
on iron chelation therapy showed that a 1% absolute increase in EF
from baseline was significantly associated with a reduction in the risk
of future development of heart failure for both the lower EF stratum (EF
56 - 62% with RR of 0.818) and the higher EF stratum (EF 63 - 70%
with RR of 0.893).96, level II-2
c.
Treatment
Treatment of CIO mainly aims to decrease body iron to the safest level
by balancing iron uptake from blood transfusion with iron chelation
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
therapy. Chelation therapy removes myocardial storage iron gradually
(over months or years) and compliance is very crucial to ensure
effective treatment.1
The previous MoH CPG on Thalassaemia recommends:8
• iron chelation monotherapy should be intensified or switched to
combination therapy for asymptomatic thalassaemia patients with
mild to moderate CIO and normal cardiac function
• continuous intravenous (IV) DFO is the best treatment option for
thalassaemia patients with severe CIO or symptomatic cardiac
disease; alternatively, combination therapy can be considered
MRI T2*-guided chelation therapy represents the best available
approach to prevent cardiac dysfunction related to iron overload.1
A meta-analysis on amlodipine as adjuvant therapy to chelating agents
in TM patients showed NS difference in cardiac T2* value between
amlodipine and control.97, level I This is supported by a recent Cochrane
systematic review on six RCTs, amlodipine plus standard iron chelation
compared with standard iron chelation (alone or with placebo) have no
effect on cardiac T2* and LVEF values at 12 months. The evidence was
of low certainty.98, level I
i.
Emergency therapy
Emergency therapy is required if a patient develops heart failure
symptoms that need urgent modification of treatment which includes
intensifying the chelation therapy.
A 24-hours continuous IV infusion of DFO is recommended in high-risk
thalassaemia patients with decreased LVEF in overt heart failure as
it can reverse iron-mediated cardiac dysfunction rapidly within weeks.
DFO and DFP combination therapy is the best intensive chelation
choice for TM patients with CIO with or without overt cardiac dysfunction
or heart failure.1
Echocardiography assessment and cardiac T2* should be done as
soon as possible to confirm the diagnosis of heart failure and screen for
other causes of worsening cardiac function e.g. pulmonary embolism,
myocarditis etc.91, level III
The summarised management of acute decompensated heart failure in
TM is as follows.91, level III
• Commence continuous IV iron chelation treatment with DFO 50
mg/kg/day immediately.
• Introduce DFP as soon as possible at a dose of 75 mg/kg/day (the
total dose given in three divided doses).
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• Use supportive hemodynamic therapy with caution with the aim
of maintaining cerebral and renal perfusion as blood pressure is
typically low in TM patients.
• Use minimum diuretics because of the importance of maintaining
cardiac preload.
• Introduce β-blockers as anti-failure treatment as they reduce the
propensity to arrhythmia and may take priority over angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors/angiotensin 2 receptor blockers as
the latter are often compromised by causing a low blood pressure.
ii.
Management of pulmonary arterial hypertension
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is more common in NTDT than
TDT and is a cause of heart failure.
Annual echocardiographic screening for PAH during regular CV
assessment is recommended. Tricuspid regurgitation velocity (TRV) >3
m/s warrants a diagnostic cardiac catheterisation for confirmation of
PAH.1
PAH in β-thalassaemia was evaluated using confirmatory right heart
catheterisation in a cross- sectional study which found:99, level lII
• prevalence of PAH of 2.5% was 5-fold higher in TI compared with TM
• independent risk factors for confirmed PAH were age (OR=1.102
per 1-year increase, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.15) and splenectomy
(OR=9.31, 95% CI 2.57 to 33.7)
Another cross-sectional study on NTDT revealed that:100, level III
• 9.2% of patients had PAH
• previous splenectomy, higher cumulative RBC transfusions (≥10
RBC transfusions), higher nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) and
a high non-transferrin-bound iron (NTBI) level were significantly
associated with PAH
• NS correlation between LIC or SF and PAH
In an RCT, patients on regular blood transfusion had a greater reduction
in pulmonary artery systolic pressure than those on occasional blood
transfusion at 12 months (MD= -16.83, 95% CI -26.35 to -7.32). The
6-minute walk distance was also greater in those on regular transfusion
(MD=46.55, 95% CI 18.08 to 75.02).101, level I
Another RCT on β-thalassaemia intermedia patients with PAH
showed that, when compared with placebo, tadalafil significantly
improved:102, level I
• TRV
• pulmonary artery systolic pressure
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• parameters related to the systolic function of the right ventricle
[tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) and systolic
excursion velocity (RV S’)]
A pre-post study on thalassaemia patients with PAH found that
sildenafil:103, level II-3
• significantly decreased TRV by 13.3% and, improved LV endsystolic volume and diastolic volume
• had NS change in 6-minute-walk test distance
• was well tolerated, although minor expected AEs were commonly
reported
d.
Monitoring
Annual monitoring of CV system in thalassaemia patients from the age
of 10 onwards include ECG, echocardiography and where possible
MRI T2*.8
Apart from that, the following have been recommended:1
• CV assessment and management should ideally be performed by
or in consultation with physicians with experience in CV disease in
haemoglobinopathies and in close collaboration with the attending
thalassaemia physician
• healthy lifestyle to ensure good CV health
e.
Prevention
The main factors to prevent the complications of CIO are optimising
the management of TDT including aiming for a pre-transfusional Hb
of 10 g/dL, optimising iron chelation agents and targeting cardiac T2*
value >20 ms. A healthy lifestyle is also crucial for the prevention of CV
disease.1
Recommendation 11
• In transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT), magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) T2* should be done from the age of 10 years old:
 to assess and monitor* cardiac iron overload
 to guide iron chelation therapy
• Continuous
intravenous
deferoxamine
in
combination
with
deferiprone should be considered in TDT with overt heart failure.
*Refer to Table 3 on Cardiac MRI Values and Suggested Schedule.
8.2. Liver Disease
The improved survival in thalassaemia patients has brought to the
attention of associated long-term complications e.g. liver cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Liver cirrhosis in thalassaemia is
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
contributed by a few main factors e.g. iron overload or infection. Despite
improved screening of blood products for hepatitis viruses, improved
hepatitis B vaccination, hepatitis virus eradication and accessibility
of iron chelation, the cumulative effect of iron overload increases the
thalassaemia patients’ risk of HCC.104, level III
This subchapter will cover liver iron overload and liver cancer. The
liver infection is covered in Subchapter 9.1 on Transfusion-related
Infection.
a.
Iron overload/hepatic siderosis
The liver plays a central role in iron homeostasis. About one-third of iron
in the body is found in the liver and approximately 98% of liver iron is
found in hepatocytes. Iron, in excess of the requirements of the organs
and various metabolic processes, is stored in the hepatocytes, heart
and endocrine tissues.105, level III
Progressive accumulation of storage iron is associated with cellular
toxicity, although the specific pathophysiologic mechanisms for
hepatocyte injury and liver fibrosis are not entirely understood.106, level III
b.
Assessment and monitoring
Quantification of hepatic iron load can be a reliable index for the total
body iron pool.107, level III There are various methods in assessing liver
iron load including liver biopsy, SF, MRI scan and transient elastography
(TE).
i.
Liver biopsy
Liver iron quantification by needle biopsy sample was regarded as
the gold standard. However, the invasive nature of biopsy procedure,
sampling error and variation in tissue processing make it less favourable
now.108, level III
ii.
Serum ferritin
SF generally correlates with total body iron stores. A diagnostic study
to determine cut-off point in diagnostic test values of SF test on liver
haemosiderosis showed:109, level III
• a cut-off point of 1090 ng/ml in SF gave a sensitivity of 66.7% (95%
CI 60.1 to 72.8), specificity of 68% (95% CI 57.8 to 77.1), PPV of
82.9% (95% CI 76.6 to 88.1), NPV of 46.8% (95% CI 38.4 to 55.4)
and AUC of 0.68 (95% CI 0.63 to 0.73) for liver haemosiderosis
• SF levels >1090 ng/ml was associated with increased risk of liver
haemosiderosis (OR=3.93, 95% CI 2.02 to 7.64)
Serial SF is the method of choice to assess iron burden in thalassaemia
patients and it should be monitored 3 - 6 monthly in all patients.8 Refer
to Subchapter 6.1. on Serum Ferritin
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
iii.
MRI
MRI is now widely used for liver iron evaluation and can be considered
the standard of care where available. MRI T2* is a non-invasive method
that replaces liver biopsy to quantify LIC, guide treatment and followup.1 Refer to Subchapter 6.2.(ii) on Liver Iron Assessment. The CPG
DG opines that MRI of the liver in TDT patients should be done together
with cardiac MRI from the age of 10 years old.
iv.
Transient elastography
TE of the liver is an established tool to measure liver stiffness, mainly in
the assessment of hepatic fibrosis. Its role in estimation of iron overload
in thalassaemia patient has been studied in several studies.
A diagnostic study comparing liver stiffness measurement (LSM)
by TE with MRI T2* and SF in detecting liver iron overload (LIO) in
thalassaemia major showed:110, level III
• strong positive linear correlation between LSM and MRI R2*
(r=0.85, p<0.001)
• poor correlation between LSM and SF (r=0.19, p=0.11)
• LSM>13.5, 7.8 and 5.5 kPa predicted severe, moderate and mild
LIO with AUC of 94.8% (95% CI 0.91 to 0.98), 84.5% (95% CI 0.78
to 0.90) and 84.7% (95% CI 0.77 to 0.91) respectively
A retrospective cohort study of all transfusion-independent adults
with β-thalassaemia intermedia evaluated the effect of longitudinal
changes in SF levels on measures of hepatic fibrosis through TE and
found:111, level II-2
• median TE value increased in non-chelated patients (4.4 to 5.7
kPa, p<0.001) while it decreased in those receiving chelation
therapy (7.0 to 4.7 kPa, p=0.005) over two years
• strong correlation between rate of change in SF and TE value
(R2=0.836, p<0.001); noted in both non-chelated (R2=0.806,
p<0.001) and chelated patients (R2=0.758, p<0.001)
Apart from iron overload, an elevated liver stiffness measurement may
be observed in other conditions e.g. viral hepatitis, liver congestion
or liver tumour. Hence, an abnormal LSM should prompt further
investigations for the underlying cause.
TIF guidelines on TDT recommends the following with regards to
monitoring of liver iron overload.1
• SF should be regularly monitored and is most useful in identifying
trends.
• SF level should be maintained at <1000μg/L.
• MRI R2 or R2* is the method of choice to assess LIC and monitor
the effectiveness of chelation therapy.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
c.
Prevention/Treatment
TIF guidelines on TDT states that DFO, DFP and DFX are effective in
decreasing total body iron burden as well as LIC.1
Recommendation 12
• To assess liver iron overload (LIO) in thalassaemia patients, the
following should be done:
 serum ferritin
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver from 10 years of
age
• Transient elastography may be used to assess LIO when MRI is not
available.
d.
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been increasingly recognised as
one of the liver complications in thalassaemia patients. A multicentre
study in Italy has recorded a cumulative incidence of 1.02% among
thalassaemia patients.112, level III The median age at HCC onset in
thalassaemia patients is younger at <50 years compared with 70 years
in the general population. Few studies have recorded more frequent
occurrence of HCC among TI than in TM.112 - 114, level III
Iron overload and viral hepatitis with or without cirrhosis are established
risk factors for the development of HCC in these populations of patients.
i.
Screening and surveillance
Screening for HCC offers early detection of the disease which can
improve survival. Ultrasonography (USG) of the liver and serum alphafetoprotein (AFP) are used in screening of HCC. However, there is
no direct evidence on screening/surveillance of HCC in thalassaemia
patients.
A meta-analysis of 15 studies on patients with liver cirrhosis for the
detection of early-stage HCC as defined by Milan criteria showed USG
with AFP vs without AFP detected early-stage HCC with 63% sensitivity
(95% CI 48% to 75%) and 45% sensitivity (95% CI 30% to 62%)
respectively.115, level III
A cohort study of HCC patients from Taiwan on the role of AFP in HCC
surveillance showed that 10.9% patients with elevated AFP levels >20
ng/ml had undetectable early HCC on USG.116, level II-2
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Thalassaemia patients should have HCC screening as follows:1; 4; 54
• biannual USG abdomen with AFP in cirrhotic patients
• biannual USG abdomen with AFP in TDT patients with high risk
factors e.g. HCV and/or HBV infection, LIC ≥7 mg Fe/g DW or SF
≥1000ng/ml
• annual USG abdomen with AFP in NTDT patients with high risk
factors e.g. HCV and/or HBV infection, LIC ≥5 mg Fe/g DW or SF
level ≥800 ng/mL
Any abnormal screening results warrant further evaluation by a
gastroenterologist.
ii.
Treatment
Because of limited data, the treatment of HCC in patients with
thalassaemia is primarily based on experience in non-thalassaemia
patients.
Treatment strategies according to stage of HCC and severity of liver
disease used for the treatment of HCC in the general population (i.e.
surgical resection, transarterial chemoembolisation, percutaneous
radiofrequency ablation and ethanol injection) have been used with
success.
8.3. Endocrinopathies and Osteoporosis
Over the years, advances in the knowledge of pathophysiology and
medical therapies in TDT have resulted in a considerable increase in
patients’ survival. However, endocrine dysfunction e.g. disturbances
in growth and pubertal development, impaired gonadal, thyroid,
parathyroid and adrenal functions and, abnormal glucose homeostasis
and bone metabolism remain commonly encountered complications.
It is principally attributed to excessive iron overload and suboptimal
chelation.117, level III The prevalence varies because of the different levels
of treatment followed by centres across the world, particularly severity
of defective genetic background, Hb concentration and degree of iron
overload in various patient groups.1
Thus, early detection and institution of appropriate transfusion regimen
and chelation therapy as well as treatment of complications are the keys
to managing these patients including regular follow-up. This subchapter
covers common endocrine complications encountered in thalassaemia.
a.
Short stature and growth failure
Prevalence of short stature varies from 30 to 60%.118, level II-2; 119, level III
Short stature is more prevalent in those above the age of 10
years.1; 120, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
The pathogenesis of growth failure in thalassaemia is multifactorial. It
has been attributed to chronic anaemia and hypoxia, transfusion-related
iron overload, chronic liver disease, nutritional deficiencies, intensive
use of chelating agents, emotional factors and endocrinopathies
[hypogonadism, delayed puberty, hypothyroidism, disturbed calcium
homeostasis, bone disease and impaired growth hormone (GH) -
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) axis].1; 120, level III
Assessment of a child with thalassaemia who has growth failure is
generally similar to that of a child without it.
Growth failure is defined as:121, level III
• height less than third percentile for age and gender
• significantly short for the family [≥10 cm below mid-parental
height (MPH)] - refer to Appendix 9A on Mid-Parental Height
Calculation for calculation of MPH
• slow growth rate observed over a period of six months to one year
• downward crossing of height percentiles on growth chart (after the
age of 18 months)
Average height velocity at different phases is as below:121, level III
• prenatal: 1.2 - 1.5 cm/week
• infancy: 23 - 28 cm/year
• childhood: 5 - 6.5 cm/year
• puberty: 8.3 cm/year (girls), 9.5 cm/year (boys)
Serial measurement of growth parameters is suggested every
4 - 6 months including assessment of standing and sitting height
(alternatively upper and lower segment ratio measurement). A reliable
stadiometer (ideally Harpenden) is the gold standard tool for accurate
height measurement. Pubertal assessment can be done using Tanner
staging.8; 121 - 122, level III
It is important to detect other causes of short stature (as mentioned
above) in thalassaemia patients. Additional endocrine tests that will
be done include thyroid function tests, serum calcium, phosphate,
magnesium and zinc, alkaline phosphatase and OGTT. For patients
within pubertal age, gonadotropins and sex steroids should be measured.
Other useful tests are IGF-1 (with IGF binding protein-3 if available) and
bone age assessment.8; 123, level III The CPG DG opines that pubertal age
refers to age >10 years. In subjects with disproportionate short stature,
radiographs of the hand, wrist, tibia and spine are done to exclude the
presence of platylospondylosis or metaphyseal cartilaginous dysplasia
changes.1
For short children with suspected growth hormone deficiency (GHD),
other tests that are normally done in the referral or tertiary centres
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
include two GH stimulation tests (using two different pharmacological
agents) and anterior pituitary function tests.124; 125
Children with β- thalassaemia major frequently have growth retardation
in the presence of low serum IGF-1 and a normal GH response
to pharmacological stimulation suggesting that they have GH
insensitivity.1; 8; 117, level III
Management of growth failure should include addressing the
multifactorial causes of short stature in thalassaemia patients as
mentioned above.1; 8; 117, level III After confirmation of GHD and correction
of other factors for growth failure, GH therapy may be considered.
Recombinant human GH is a safe mode of treatment in thalassaemia
children. However, there is limited evidence that the final height may
improve.126, level I
b.
Delayed puberty and hypogonadism
Delayed puberty and hypogonadism in β-thalassaemia major
patients are caused by iron deposition mainly in the pituitary gland
[hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH)] followed by gonads or both.
The prevalence of pubertal disorders and hypogonadism in patients
with thalassaemia is up to 40% and 80% respectively in various
studies.127; 128, level II-2
Pubertal disorder in thalassaemia patients may present in three ways.
In delayed puberty, there is a complete lack of pubertal development
by 13 years of age in girls and 14 years in boys. On the other hand,
hypogonadism is defined as the absence of testicular enlargement (<4
ml) in boys and breast development (thelarche) by the age of 16 years
in girls. In the third condition, arrested puberty is characterised by a
lack of pubertal progression over one year or more. The testicular size
remains 6 - 8 ml and breast size at Tanner stage 3. In such cases,
the annual growth velocity is either markedly reduced or completely
absent.1
• It is recommended that all thalassaemia patients with pubertal
disorder be referred to a paediatric endocrinologist for diagnostic
work-up and therapeutic management.129; 127; 1 Thus, healthcare
providers are discouraged from starting oral combined hormone
therapy at presentation.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Screening of pubertal disorder may be done using:
• Tanner staging – should be determined 6-monthly from the age of
10 years8
• Orchidometer – should be used for the assessment of testicular
volume
Refer to Appendix 9B on Tanner Staging and Orchidometer.
Patients with pubertal disorder require the following investigations:1; 127; 129
• Thyroid function tests [thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free
thyroxine (FT4)]
• Luteinising hormone (LH)/Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and
oestradiol in girls or testosterone in boys
 Low basal FSH and LH for age suggest HH
 Elevated FSH and LH suggest primary hypogonadism (very
rare)
• X-ray of left hand and wrist [anteroposterior (AP) view] to determine
bone age
• Pelvic USG for assessing ovarian and uterine maturation
Treatment for girls with delayed puberty at 13 years of age is as
follows. 1; 8; 127; 129; 130
• It is important to induce puberty gradually over 2 - 3 years to allow
adequate development of secondary sexual characteristics and
feminisation before attainment of menarche.
• Low dose oestrogen in the following preparations may be used for
pubertal induction:
 17-β oestradiol (transdermal or oral)
 oestradiol valerate
 ethinyl oestradiol
 conjugated oestrogen
• Pubertal induction should be continued for 3 - 6 months
and stopped for reassessment (Tanner staging) after that to
differentiate between constitutional delay of growth and puberty
(CDGP) and HH.
• If spontaneous puberty does not occur within six months after
stopping treatment, oestrogen is reintroduced gradually in
increasing dosages until full replacement doses within 2 - 3 years.
• Cyclical oral progesterone (e.g. medroxyprogesterone acetate,
micronised progesterone, dydrogesterone or norethisterone) is
added for 12 days every month after full oestrogen replacement
to ensure cyclical endometrial shedding and decrease the risk of
endometrial dysplasia.
• Monitor response to oestrogen therapy through the evaluation of
pubertal stage, height growth, changes in dimensions of uterus
and ovaries, and bone age.
• Change pubertal induction treatment regimen to full adult
replacement therapy at the end of pubertal induction.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Treatment for boys with delayed puberty at 14 years of age is as
follows.1; 8; 127; 129; 130
• It is important to induce puberty gradually over 2 - 3 years to allow
adequate development of secondary sexual characteristics.
• Low dose IM depot testosterone esters (25 mg) is given monthly
for 3 - 6 months and stopped for reassessment (testicular volume)
after that to differentiate between CDGP and HH.
• If spontaneous puberty does not occur within six months after
stopping treatment, IM depot testosterone esters may be
reintroduced at a dose of 50 mg and gradually increased every 6 -
12 months until full replacement dose of 200 mg over 2 - 3 years.
Adult dosing is 200 - 250 mg every 2 - 4 weeks.
• Other hormonal preparations that may be used is transdermal
testosterone gel
• Monitor response to testosterone therapy through evaluation of
pubertal stage, height growth and bone age.
Men with thalassaemia who have low or falling BMD should be
evaluated for hypogonadism.130 Male adult patients should have annual
screening for hypogonadism by assessment of serum testosterone and
gonadotrophins (FSH and LH) levels.127
c.
Diabetes mellitus
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) are relatively common
abnormalities of glucose homeostasis in TM patients who have been
inadequately iron chelated.131, level III
Abnormality of glucose homeostasis begins with iron-mediated insulin
resistance rather than defective insulin production. Subsequently,
pancreatic β-cell damage and insulin deficiency will develop as a result
of direct toxic damage from iron deposition.1
The risk factors associated with IGT are male, poor compliance with
DFO therapy and LIC four times above the normal value. Liver disorders
and a positive family history of diabetes mellitus (DM) are additional
predisposing factors.131 - 132, level III
In addition to the above risk factors, other factors associated with DM
are delayed age at the start of chelation therapy, liver cirrhosis or severe
fibrosis and hepatitis C infection.131 - 132, level III
A large meta-analysis found the rate of DM at 6.54% (95% CI 5.30 to
7.78), IFG 17.21% (95% CI 8.43 to 26.00) and IGT12.46% (95% CI
5.98 to 18.94) in TM.128, level II-2 In a local study, 13.8% of TDT patients
had glucose abnormalities on OGTT at a median age of 16.8 (range
11.4 to 20.1) years.133, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
The onset of DM is often associated with the presentation of cardiac
dysfunction and high risk for additional complications e.g. thyroid
dysfunction or hypogonadism.131 - 132, level III; 134, level III
Early detection of glucose abnormalities is important as prediabetes and
clinical diabetes can potentially be prevented or reversed with optimum
chelation treatment.8; 132, level III OGTT remains the gold standard test
for assessing glucose homeostasis and TIF guidelines recommends
it should be done in every patient with thalassaemia after the age of
10 years or earlier if needed.1 However, a systematic review found
that most of the international guidelines recommend a fasting glucose
every 6-monthly. If it is ≥5.6 mmol/L, OGTT can be considered. The
diagnosis of DM is made based on the same established criteria for the
general population with the exception of HbA1C in transfused
patients.135 - 136, level III
Treatment of IGT and DM in TDT patients include thefollowing:1; 131, level III
• intensive iron-chelation therapy
• individualised management of DM
• healthy diet
• regular physical activity
• oral antidiabetic agents (limited evidence on effectiveness and
safety)
• when overt IDDM develops, patients require daily subcutaneous
injections of insulin
• prevention and treatment of chronic hepatitis C infection
• regular specialised multidisciplinary team review with expertise in
both DM and TM which includes endocrinologist and dietician
d.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism in thalassaemia is mainly attributed to iron overload
and is uncommon in optimally treated patients.128, level III Majority of
patients have primary thyroid dysfunction. Central hypothyroidism is
uncommon.137, level II-2 The prevalence of hypothyroidism in TM patients
ranges from 4% to 29%.138, level III Subclinical hypothyroidism is more
prevalent than overt primary hypothyroidism.117, level III; 119; level III
The median age at diagnosis of overt hypothyroidism in TDT
patients is 14.5 years, while that of subclinical hypothyroidism is 15.7
years.133, level III Central hypothyroidism occurs in 4.8% of adults and
only 0.5% of children and adolescents.139, level III
Symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism are usually non-specific. The
patients may be asymptomatic despite abnormal thyroid function.
Hence, regular screening of thyroid function is needed for early
detection of this condition.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Screening of thyroid function (includes measurement of serum TSH
and free T4) should be performed annually, beginning at the age of 9 -
12 years or earlier if symptomatic.1; 9; 140, level III
Guidelines recommend that overt and central hypothyroidisms to be
treated with levothyroxine (L-thyroxine). In subclinical hypothyroidism
with elevated serum TSH level but <8 mU/L, chelation should be
intensified and the patient carefully monitored. The decision to start
treatment in subclinical hypothyroidism should be individualised,
considering various factors e.g. age, TSH levels and clinical
presentation. Treatment with L-thyroxine should be started when TSH
>10 mU/ml.1; 123; 141, level III
e.
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism is a late complication of iron overload, typically
manifesting in the second decade of life in TDT patients. Its prevalence
varies from 1.2% to 32 %.119, level III; 142 - 143, level III A majority of patients
have mild form of disease. They may be asymptomatic at diagnosis
or present with paraesthesia and/or muscle cramps. More severe
cases may present with tetany, seizures, ECG changes or cardiac
failure.142, level III; 144, level III
Annual screening is suggested from the age of 10 years
onwards.8; 127; 144, level III; Screening for hypoparathyroidism includes
measurement of serum (corrected) calcium, serum phosphate, serum
magnesium and serum alkaline phosphatase. In patients with low
serum calcium and high phosphate levels, serum parathyroid hormone
(PTH) level should be measured. The diagnosis is based on low serum
calcium, high phosphate and low or inappropriately normal PTH levels.
8; 144, level III
The aim of treatment is to place the corrected calcium at the lower
limit of the normal range to avoid complications of hypercalciuria and
subsequent nephrocalcinosis.1
• Calcitriol is usually needed to normalise plasma calcium and
phosphate levels. This is accompanied by regular monitoring of
serum and urine calcium levels.
• In patients with persistent high phosphate levels, phosphate
binders (e.g. calcium carbonate) may be considered.
• Calcium supplements may be offered to patients with poor dietary
intake.
f.
Adrenal insufficiency
Iron overload may result in adrenal dysfunction by affecting the
hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis at the hypothalamic or pituitary
and/or adrenal level. Several studies reported a significant prevalence
of ‘biochemical’ adrenal insufficiency in patients with thalassaemia up
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
to 45%. However, they are usually asymptomatic. ‘Clinical’ adrenal
insufficiency, i.e. adrenal crisis, on the other hand is extremely
rare.123, level III; 145, level III
Screening for adrenal insufficiency should be performed annually,
starting after the age of 10 years, especially those with other
endocrinopathies.1; 146, level III
Morning baseline cortisol level (8 - 9 a.m.) can be used to detect subtle
adrenal insufficiency. In view of constant stress experienced by TM
patients, a higher cut-off point should be used. Adrenal insufficiency
can be excluded if morning baseline cortisol is >400 nmol/L.127; 130 Due
to the lack of conclusive scientific evidence, the CPG DG suggests to
use cortisol cut-off <200 nmol/L as an indication for adrenocorticotropic
hormone stimulation test.
Subclinical adrenal insufficiency in patients with TM may develop into
acute adrenal crises during stressful events and should be promptly
given a stress dose of hydrocortisone as a life- saving treatment.1
Recommendation 13
• Growth of thalassaemia children and adolescents should be
assessed every six months with accurate measurement.
 Those with short stature should be further assessed and screened
for growth hormone deficiency after excluding other common
causes of short stature.
• Transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT) patients aged more than
10 years should be monitored every 6-monthly for:
 pubertal disorder by Tanner staging; those with pubertal disorder
should be referred to a paediatric endocrinologist.
 fasting blood sugar; if the value is ≥5.6 mmol/L, oral glucose
tolerance test is indicated.
• TDT patients aged more than 10 years should be monitored annually
for:
 hypothyroidism
 hypoparathyroidism
 hypoadrenalism especially those with other endocrinopathies
g.
Bone disease
Bone abnormalities are common in thalassaemia and may present
as:128, level III; 147, level III
• growth retardation
• spontaneous fractures
• skeletal deformities
• decreased bone mineral density (BMD)
• arthropathies
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• disc degeneration
• spinal deformities with compression of the vertebrae and nerves
(often causing severe back pain)
Low BMD is seen in a high proportion of adults with TM despite regular
transfusions and iron chelation therapy.148, level III It often develops
as early as the second decade of life and its prevalence increases
with age. A study revealed that the prevalence of low bone mass (Z-
score ≤ -2) in patients with TM was low at 8.8% for those aged 6 - 10
years, 43.6% in patients aged 11 - 19 years and 60.5% for those ≥20
years.149. level III
In a narrative review on TM patients with a mean age of 16.0 - 30.8
years, the prevalence of fractures ranged from 16% to 49%.150, level III
Another study on thalassaemia syndromes found that the prevalence
of fracture was highly dependent on age i.e. 2.5% in patients of 0 -
10 years old, 7.4% in those 11 - 19 years old and 23.2% in patients
>20 years old. These data indicated that fractures remained a frequent
complication among older thalassaemia patients.151, level III
There are multiple predisposing factors to low BMD which include
inadequate transfusion, AE of chelation, genetic predisposition,
chronic liver disease, vitamin D deficiency, zinc deficiency and
endocrine disorders.148, level III; 152 - 153, level III The prevalence of vitamin
D deficiency and insufficiency is reported to be high at 30 - 90% in
thalassaemia.154, level III Zinc deficiency has been reported in 84.8% of
thalassaemia patients aged 10 - 20 years while 44.7% have severely
low levels.8
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA) is the gold standard for the
measurement of BMD.1; 155 BMD is reported as a T-score or Z-score
using units of standard deviation (SD). T-score is used for postmenopausal women and men >50 years old while Z-score should be
used for premenopausal women, men <50 years old and children.
T score of -1 and above is normal bone density while Z score of >
-2 is within the expected range for age. Refer to the Malaysian CPG
Management of Osteoporosis 2022 for further information.155
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• The diagnosis of osteoporosis in children should not be made on the
basis of densitometric criteria alone.
• The presence of at least one vertebral compression fracture is
indicative of osteoporosis, in the absence of local disease or
high-energy trauma. In the absence of the fracture, the diagnosis
of osteoporosis is indicated by the presence of both a clinically
significant fracture* history and a BMD Z-score ≤ -2.0 (adjusted for
height, age and sex as appropriate to avoid overdiagnosis)
• BMD/BMC Z-score > -2.0 does not preclude the possibility of skeletal
fragility and increased fracture risk.156, level III
*In a child with a known risk factor for bone fragility, a low trauma long
bone fracture is considered a clinically significant fracture. In chronic
illness, low trauma is defined as falling from a standing height or less at
no more than walking speed.157 - 158, level III
Assessment of bone health in TM patients should commence at the age
of 10 years and based on the following investigations:1; 153, level III
• serum calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
• 25-OH Vitamin D
• parathyroid hormone
• serum zinc
• 24-hour urinary calcium; CPG DG suggests initial screening
with early morning urine calcium:creatinine ratio if 24-hour urine
collection is not feasible
• spinal radiograph (AP and lateral views)
• MRI scan of the spine - may be considered for patients with severe
back pain
• bone turnover markers (includes at least 1 bone formation and 1
bone resorption markers) if available
Performing DXA scans on children with thalassaemia is challenging.
Besides, there is a lack of evidence to support the treatment of low bone
mass in children. Taking these factors into consideration, screening of
bone health using BMD measurement by DXA scan should start at
completion of puberty and repeated every 2 - 3 years.130
Peak bone mass is only achieved when an individual is in their late
20s and thus emphasis on maximising the opportunities to achieve this
peak is advocated.130
Prevention and treatment of early bone loss in thalassaemia include the
following:1; 130; 148, level III
• periodic checking of BMD starting in adolescence
• all patients should be advised on lifestyle changes -
 adequate vitamin D and calcium intake
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
 avoidance of smoking and excessive alcohol consumption
 weight bearing exercise
Most of the time, thalassaemia patients do not meet the daily
requirement intake for vitamin D and calcium. Therefore, low dose
supplementation of vitamin D and calcium is recommended. Refer to
Appendix 10 on Micronutrients Supplementation and Assessment
Strategy Recommendations for Thalassaemia Patients.
Supplements are advised in the following insufficiency:
• Vitamin D
 Oral vitamin D supplement if serum vitamin 25-OH D is <20
ng/ml (50 nmol/L) to target a vitamin D level of 75 - 80 nmol/l;
serum 25-OH D level is monitored every three to six months in
patients on high-dose supplementation148, level III; 154, level III
• Calcium
 low dose calcium supplement is preferred and if higher doses
are needed, this is divided into 2 - 3 individual doses over a 24hour period148, level III
• Zinc
 supplementation when serum plasma zinc ≤70 μg/dL153, level III
Other interventions to prevent and treat early bone loss include:1; 130
• optimisation of thalassaemia treatment which includes adequate
iron chelation and blood transfusion; the recommended DFO dose
in childhood should not be exceeded to minimise the risk of bone
toxicity or reduce height velocity
• prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment with hormonal therapy
of hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus and other endocrinopathies
A Cochrane systematic review showed that bisphosphonates
significantly increased BMD at the femoral neck and lumbar spine
compared with placebo over two years’ therapy in adult thalassaemia
patients with low BMD. Back pain was significantly better in the
neridronate group compared with placebo at 3 - 12 months. Denosumab
had NS difference in BMD but showed a reduction in bone pain at 12
months compared with placebo [VAS (MD= -2.40 cm, 95% CI -3.80 to
-1.00]. There was uncertainty on the effect of strontium on BMD and
back pain.159, level I
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• Thalassaemia patients with the following features should be assessed
by paediatric endocrinologists and adult specialists for consideration
of biphosphonates:130
 osteoporosis or with a low BMD for age (z-score < -2.0 if premenopausal or under 50 years, t-score < -2.5 if post-menopausal
or over 50 years)
 presence of fragility fractures
 falling BMD despite adequate vitamin D levels and hormone
supplementation in hypogonadism
Recommendation 14
• Assessment of bone health in transfusion-dependent thalassaemia
(TDT) patients should be commenced at the age of 10 years except
for Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry scan which should be started
later at the completion of puberty.
• Prevention and treatment of early bone loss in TDT patients should
include:
 lifestyle changes:
- adequate
vitamin
D
and
calcium
intake
(including
supplementation)
- avoidance of smoking and excessive alcohol consumption
- weight-bearing exercise
 optimisation of thalassaemia treatment which includes adequate
iron chelation and blood transfusion
 prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment with hormonal therapy
of hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus and other endocrinopathies
• Refer to paediatric endocrinologists/adult specialists for consideration
of bisphosphonates in thalassaemia when indicated*
*Refer to yellow box above.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
9. INFECTIVE COMPLICATIONS
Infection is the second leading cause of death in thalassaemia patients
with a cumulative rate of 40.63%.6
9.1. Transfusion-Related Infection
Patients with TDT face risks of transfusion-transmitted infections. The
most common infectious agents via packed RBC (pRBC) transfusions
include hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). It is recommended that TDT patients
undergo screening for HIV, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C every six
months.8
a.
Hepatitis B
The global prevalence of HbsAg positivity in thalassaemia patients
receiving multiple transfusions ranges from <1% to >20%.160 - 161, level III
In Malaysia, the reported incidence rate of hepatitis B is approximately
12.64 in 100,000 population162, level III while the prevalence is 4%.163, level III
Hepatitis B is a significant cause of chronic liver disease and HCC in
thalassaemia patients, particularly in developing countries.
i.
Investigations
For patients identified to be HBsAg positive, the following tests should
be performed: LFT, HBeAg and anti-HBe, HBV-DNA PCR. The blood
bank should be informed for donor tracing in cases of transfusionrelated infections.
ii.
Treatment
The primary goal of treatment for chronic hepatitis B is long-term
suppression of HBV-DNA viral load to low or preferably undetectable
levels, and HBeAg seroconversion in HBeAg positive subjects. This is
intended to reduce the progression to cirrhosis, liver failure and HCC.
Patients with viral replication but persistently normal or minimally
elevated ALT levels typically do not require treatment but should
undergo close follow-up and HCC surveillance every 3 - 6
months.164, level III Liver fibrosis assessment is recommended for viraemic
patients with high normal or minimally elevated ALT levels and patients
older than 40 years, except for patients with clinical evidence of cirrhosis.
Consideration for treatment in chronic HBV-infected patients should be
based on several criteria:164, level III; 165
 ALT ≥2 times the upper limit of normal
 HBV DNA ≥2.0 x 104 IU/ml if HBeAg positive or ≥2.0 x 103 IU/ml
if HBeAg-negative
 presence of advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis irrespective of ALT level
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Treatment should be initiated as early as possible in cases of impending
or overt hepatic decompensation [i.e. raised bilirubin unrelated
to thalassaemia, prolonged prothrombin time (PT) or presence
of ascites]. The treatment options for chronic hepatitis B infection
may include pegylated interferons and oral nucleoside/nucleotide
analogues.166, level III A gastroenterologist should be consulted for the
decision for treatment.
iii.
Prevention
All patients who are unvaccinated or unsure of their vaccination should
receive full hepatitis B vaccination. Locally, anti-HBs are monitored
6-monthly. For patients who have completed the vaccination but have
anti-HBs levels <10 mIU/ml, a booster dose is required. If the anti-HBs
levels remain low one month after the booster vaccination, a 3-dose
revaccination should be considered.8 Hepatits B vaccinations are given
at 0, 1 and 6 months intervals.
b.
Hepatitis C
The global prevalence of hepatitis C among thalassaemia patients
is estimated to be between 19 - 36%.167 - 168, level III In Malaysia, the
seroprevalence rate of hepatitis C in general population was 0.3%
between year 2006 and 2012.163, level III and the incidence rate in 2020
was 10.13 per 100,000 population.162, level III Meanwhile the prevalence
in TDT patients range from 13.9% to 22.4%.169 - 170, level III HCV infection
is recognised as a risk factor for development of liver cirrhosis and
HCC.171, level III
i.
Investigation
The diagnosis of chronic HCV infection should be based on the
detection of antibodies to HCV (anti-HCV) or hepatitis C core antigen
(HCVAg).172 For all patients positive for anti-HCV, active viraemia
should be confirmed by nucleic acid testing (HCV RNA PCR).173, level III
HCV genotyping testing and USG-based TE can be performed based
on consultation with the gastroenterologist. Liver biopsies are not
always recommended for making decisions for the treatment of
hepatitis C.173, level III
ii.
Treatment
The treatment of HCV has evolved dramatically with the availability
of direct-acting anti-viral agents (DAAs), which yield >95% rates of
sustained virological response (SVR), equivalent to a complete cure.1
DAAs have a safe profile and pan-genotypic regimens provide high
SVR rates across genotypes, further simplifying therapy.
All patients with chronic HCV infection and detectable HCV viraemia
are candidates for antiviral treatment to prevent progression of liver
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
damage to cirrhosis or HCC.174, level III A gastroenterologist should be
consulted for the decision for treatment. The treatment duration varies
between 8 and 12 weeks.
c.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Tranfusion-acquired human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection,
although very rare, remains a potential risk in thalassaemia patients
who receive multiple transfusions. Therefore, regular HIV screening
using HIV Ag/Ab ELISA should be performed every six months for these
patients.8
i.
Investigations
For children above 18 months old and adults, if the initial HIV Ag/
Ab ELISA screening test is reactive, the microbiology laboratory will
perform a supplementary test [e.g. particle agglutination or HIV-1/2
differentiation assay] using the same specimen. If the supplementary
test is also positive, a second sample will be requested for verification
before the patient is considered HIV positive. If the supplementary test
is negative or indeterminate, a new sample should be requested for
repeat HIV ELISA and HIV-1 RNA PCR testing.175, level III
For infants below 18 months old, a negative HIV Ag/Ab ELISA test is
adequate to rule out HIV. However, a positive HIV Ag/Ab ELISA test
should be confirmed using HIV-1 RNA PCR.175, level III
ii.
Treatment
Confirmed HIV positive cases should be urgently referred to an
infectious disease specialist for management including counselling.
Additionally, the blood bank needs to be contacted for donor tracing.
Recommendations 15
• All thalassaemia patients should be monitored every 6-monthly for:
 hepatitis B using HBsAg
 hepatitis C using anti-HCV
 HIV using HIV Ag/Ab ELISA
• Treatment for hepatitis B and hepatitis C should be initiated by the
gastroenterologist if a patient fulfils the criteria.
• All thalassaemia patients receiving blood transfusion should be
vaccinated for hepatitis B and booster vaccination should be
considered if anti-HBs levels <10 mIU/ml
• Confirmed HIV cases should be referred to the infectious disease
specialist.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
9.2. Splenectomy-Related Infection
One of the risk factors for severe infection is splenectomy. A cohort
study of splenectomised patients where the majority were thalassaemia
patients revealed:176, level II-2
• an incidence of serious bacterial infections of 35% and mortality
rate of 11%
• the most frequent pathogens were Escherichia coli and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
• NS difference in mortality rate between patients with Streptococcus
pneumoniae infection (40%) vs infections caused by other
pathogens (24%)
Overwhelming post-splenectomy infection is a medical emergency
which is defined as fulminant sepsis, meningitis or pneumonia. It can
progress rapidly to multiorgan failure and death. According to the local
thalassaemia registry report in 2020, 25% of infection-related deaths
were among splenectomised patients.6
Guidelines recommend the following.1; 8
• Patients should be educated to seek early care when fever
develops.
• Patients with fever >38° C and chills, vomiting, abdominal or
localised pain/swelling suggesting abscess need to be admitted
for prompt investigations and treatment.
• Blood cultures need to be done and empirical broad-spectrum
antibiotic regimens need to be started promptly.
• The antibiotics used should have anti-Klebsiella and antiPseudomonal properties e.g. third-generation cephalosporin
(cefotaxime
or
ceftriaxone)
combined
with
gentamicin,
ciprofloxacin or vancomycin, and tailored according to local
pathogens susceptibility and endemicity.
Recommendation 16
• Splenectomised thalassaemia patients who are suspected to have
infection should be investigated and treated promptly with broad
spectrum antibiotics.
9.3. Iron Chelation Therapy-Related Infection
Certain pathogens, including Yersinia enterocolitica, Vibrio vulnificus
and Mucorales, can utilise DFO as a siderophore to increase their
pathogenicity. Guidelines recommend:1; 8
• discontinuation of DFO during a febrile illness until it is established
that the febrile episode is not caused by a pathogen that can use
DFO as a siderophore
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• discontinuation of DFP in febrile patients until neutropaenia have
been excluded
• DFX can be continued during febrile episodes
• Thalassaemia patients on DFO and DFP who developed infection
should discontinue their chelators until relevant investigations
exclude their contraindication of use.
9.4. Covid-19-Related Infection
Evidence regarding COVID-19 infection in patients with thalassaemia
is still lacking. A systematic review on β-thalassaemia with COVID-19
found the following:177, level III
• patients with chronic conditions, e.g complications of chronic
transfusions, heart failure, PAH and DM, were more susceptible to
the infection
• mortality rate was 26.5% which was higher than general population
In a recent small cross-sectional study on β-thalassaemia patients
with COVID-19, the rate of hospitalisation was 37.5%. Half of the
hospitalised patients developed pneumonia and none developed
thrombosis.178, level III
Management of thalassaemia with COVID-19 patients should be
based on national guidelines.179, level III Patients with thalassaemia are
considered a vulnerable group and should be prioritised to receive
COVID-19 vaccination.179, level III; 180
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
10. COMPLICATIONS OF NON-TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT
THALASSAEMIA
Though most of the complications seen with TDT and NTDT are similar
when attributed to iron overload, NTDT patients also suffer from a
unique set of complications not commonly seen in TDT patients.
One prospective cohort study on NTDT showed that disease-related
complications occurred in 43% of the patients (splenectomy done in
24.6% of them) with the commonest being PHT, thromboses and leg
ulcers (unique to NTDT). Two main significant clinical risk factors of
complication were female and splenectomy.181, level II-2 Two cross-sectional
studies on TI patients demonstrated that common complications were
thrombosis, PHT, EMH, leg ulcers and cholelithiasis. Splenectomy was
a significant risk factor to develop the complications.182 - 183, level III
a.
Hypercoagulability and clinical thrombosis
A hypercoagulable state is present in NTDT patients since childhood
and contributed by ineffective erythropoiesis and chronic haemolysis.
This gives rise to pathological RBC, chronically activated platelets and
increased procoagulant microparticles leading to a more thrombogenic
state.
NTDT patients is at higher risk of thrombosis or cerebrovascular
disease than normal individuals, especially the following subgroups:4; 54
• splenectomy
• minimal- or never-transfused
• haemoglobin level ≤10 g/dL
• platelet counts ≥500 x 109/L
• NRBC counts ≥300 x 106/L
• iron overload (LIC ≥5 mg Fe/g dw or SF level ≥800 ng/ml)
• history of PAH
• pregnancy
• personal or family history of thrombosis
Within medical or surgical risk-assessment setting, the above
patients should receive prophylactic intervention with anticoagulant or
antiplatelet therapy according to local practice.
b.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Prevalence of PAH in NTDT is high. A cohort study of NTDT patients
showed that the most common disease-related complications was PAH
at 7.6%.181, level II-2 Long-term post- splenectomy complication (>5 years)
was PAH (OR=2.6, 95% CI 1.1 to 6.9).184, level III In a cross- sectional
study, TI patients on iron chelation had lower risk of PAH compared with
those not on chelation (p=0.032).56, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
For monitoring and management of PAH, refer to Subchapter 8.1.c(ii)
on Management of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
c.
Leg ulcers
Leg ulcers are often painful but benign lesions commonly seen in
NTDT. The risks of developing this complication are iron overload, skin
thinning at the extremities (age-related), high venous pressure due to
right heart failure and venous insufficiency.4
d.
Extramedullary haematopoiesis
Ineffective erythropoiesis in NTDT patients forces expansion of
haematopoietic tissue in areas other than liver and spleen, mostly
in the form of masses commonly termed EMH pseudotumours. The
prevalence of these pseudotumours is considerably higher in NTDT
than TDT patients. Its prevalence is higher in older patients, those
with more severe ineffective erythropoiesis, Hb levels ≤10 g/dL and
low foetal Hb levels. It can occur anywhere in the body with paraspinal
lesions being the most common location. Hence, diagnosis is made via
imaging, usually an MRI.
Apart from transfusion and hydroxyurea, monotherapy with lowdose radiation yields excellent results in up to 50% of patients with
neurological improvement as soon as 3 - 7 days after initiation of
treatment. However, there is a high risk of recurrence that is often
amenable to further doses.4
Summary of recommendations from TIF in the management of NTDT
complications are:4
• blood transfusions for prevention (pre-transfusion Hb target >10 g/
dL)
• hydroxyurea to treat complications
• referral or co-management with specific subspecialty i.e. refer
cardiologist for PAH, refer dermatologist for leg ulcer and refer for
oncologist/surgeon for EMH pseudotumour
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
11.
SPLENECTOMY
In thalassaemia, splenomegaly is due to excessive destruction of RBCs
and EMH. On the other hand, EMH could be significantly reduced by
optimal blood transfusion and iron chelation.185, level III
• Splenectomy is not performed routinely in thalassaemia patients as
a standard of care especially in a child <5 years old due to risk of
sepsis and thromboembolism. With the current practice of optimal
blood transfusion and chelation, splenectomy can be avoided.1; 8
a.
Indication for splenectomy
Splenectomy is indicated in the following conditions:1; 8
• pRBC transfusion requirement exceeds 200 - 250 ml/kg/year and
severe iron overload could not be adequately controlled with iron
chelation. The average blood transfusion requirement in TDT
patient is 180 ml/kg/year.8
• evidence of hypersplenism (persisting anaemia, leucopenia and
thrombocytopenia)
• massive splenomegaly that crosses the umbilicus causing
discomfort and risk of infarct or rupture from trauma
b.
Peri-operative management
Pre-splenectomy screening for gallstones by USG has been advocated.
If gallstones are present, concomitant cholecystectomy may be
performed in symptomatic patients.1; 186, level III
Splenectomised patients are at risk of overwhelming sepsis from
encapsulated organisms e.g. Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenza type b (Hib) and Neisseria meningitidis. Therefore, all patients
are given polyvalent Pneumococcal, Hib and Meningococcal vaccine
prior to splenectomy.185, level III These vaccinations are given 4 - 6 weeks
pre-splenectomy or at least two weeks in advance.1; 8
The current recommended pre-splenectomy vaccination regimen is
shown in the following table:1
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Table 6: Pre-splenectomy vaccination schedule
*Revaccination with PPSV23 0.5 ml IM is recommended after five years
post-splenectomy
**Repeat MenACWY two months after the first dose and 5-yearly
thereafter only in endemic areas
***Patients undergoing emergency splenectomy can still benefit from
vaccination two weeks post-splenectomy
c.
Post-splenectomy
Evidence have shown that blood transfusion requirement was reduced
post-splenectomy i.e.:
• significant reduction of transfusion requirement by 100 ml pRBC/
kg/year186, level III
• significant reduction of annual blood transfusion requirement
in
first
year
(mean=138.41±90.38
ml/kg/year)
and
five
years (mean=116±41.44 ml/kg/year) from pre-splenectomy
(mean=294.85±226 ml/kg/year)185, level III
d.
Complications of splenectomy
Immediate complications of splenectomy via laparascopic or open
method in TM or TI included atelectasis and bleeding. However, there
were no significant differences between the two methods.187, level I
Long-term post-splenectomy complications (>5 years) were pulmonary
hypertension, heart failure and hypogonadism as shown in table
below.184, level III
Vaccination
Dose
Schedule
Given first i.e. two months
before PPSV23
4 – 6 weeks
pre-splenectomy***
4 – 6 weeks
pre-splenectomy***
4 – 6 weeks
pre-splenectomy***
Pneumococcal
• pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine (PCV13)
• polysaccharide vaccine
(PPSV23)*
Haemophilus influenza
type b
Meningococcal conjugate
vaccine (MenACWY)**
0.5 ml IM
0.5 ml IM
0.5 ml IM
0.5 ml IM
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Independent risk factors for confirmed PAH are age (OR=1.102 per
1-year increase, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.15) and splenectomy (OR=9.31, 95%
CI 2.57 to 33.7).99, level lII
Splenectomised TI patients who develop thromboembolic events may
be identiﬁed early by high NRBC (≥300 x 106/L) and platelet counts
(≥500 x 109/L), evidence of pulmonary hypertension and transfusion
naivety.183, level III
Splenectomised thalassaemia patients are at risk of thrombosis and
thromboembolism:
• post-operative thrombocytosis is common with significant rise in
platelet counts within 24 hours185, level III
• microparticles post-splenectomy induces platelet activation188, level III
• significant reduction in natural coagulation inhibitors (protein C
and protein S) and thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor189, level III
Low dose aspirin 75 - 150 mg daily is recommended in all postsplenectomy patients when the platelet count is >500,000/mm3 and no
contraindication to the medication.1
The spleen is an important host defence organ that filters blood
by removing cellular waste and, old and damaged RBCs. It also
synthesises opsonising antibodies to fight infection.1; 8
The recommended penicillin dose and duration for post-splenectomy
patients are:190
• patients < 5 years: tablet oral penicillin 125 mg BD
• patients > 5 years: tablet oral penicillin 250 mg BD
• duration: minimum 1 - 3 years post-splenectomy; life-long
prophylaxis for those with other causes of asplenia, previous
episode of sepsis and remains immunocompromised
Chemoprophylaxis with oral penicillin depends on the age of the
individual and the preference of the treating physician. Life-long
prophylactic antibiotics should be offered to patients considered at
continued high risk of pneumococcal infection using oral penicillins or
macrolides.1
NTDT
TDT
OR=2.6,
95% CI 1.1 to 6.9
NS
OR=10.4,
95% CI 2.2 to 49.9
OR=4.5,
95% CI 1.2 to 18.2
OR=7.6,
95% CI 1.1 to 53.3
OR=9.5,
95% CI 1.4 to 64.2
Splenectomy
Pulmonary
hypertension
Heart failure
Hypogonadism
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 17
• Splenectomy may be considered in thalassaemia patients >5 years
old with any the following:
 increased pure red blood cell transfusion exceeding 200 - 250 ml/
kg/year and severe iron overload not controlled by iron chelation
 hypersplenism
 massive splenomegaly
• Pre-splenectomy vaccination should be given 4 - 6 weeks prior or at
least two weeks in advance.*
• Post-splenectomy thalassaemia patients should be given the
following:
 low dose aspirin (75 - 150 mg daily) if the platelet counts >500,000/
mm3
 oral penicillin life-long (in high-risk thalassaemia patients)
*Refer to Table 5 on Pre-splenectomy vaccination schedule.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
12. FERTILITY AND PREGNANCY
12.1 Fertility
Thalassaemia patients are at risk of subfertility depending on severity
of disease and, modality and duration of treatment. Therefore, special
needs are required to reduce the risk and preserve fertility in the future.
a.
Puberty, menstruation and fertility
For puberty and primary amenorrhoea, refer to Subchapter 8.3 (a) on
Short Stature and 8.3 (b) on Delayed Puberty and Hypogonadism.
Most TDT adolescents with iron overload are at risk of primary gonadal
failure i.e. testicular or ovarian failure which may manifest as the
following:191, level III
• hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
• low sperm concentration and high sperm DNA fragmentation
• delayed puberty due to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
• low anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) secretion
• impaired fertility due to ovarian tissue iron overload
TDT patients on oral chelators (DFX or DFP) should be advised to
switch to DFO prior to induction of ovulation/spermatogenesis due to
concerns of its teratogenicity.1
b.
Fertility treatment option in paediatric population
As there is possible risk of permanent gonadal failure due to risk of iron
overload in thalassaemia, the fertility preservation (FP) option should
be recommended as discussed below.191, level III
In thalassaemia boys:191, level III
• sperm cryopreservation (as young as 13 years old) via ejaculation
or testicular sperm extraction (TESE) procedures can be offered
• biopsy and cryopreservation of prepubertal germ cells (testicular
tissue) in males is currently experimental
In thalassaemia girls:
• oocyte cryopreservation by vitrification can be offered and is
applicable only to post- pubertal patients191, level III
• Ovarian Tissue Cryopreservation (OTC) is the only strategy
available to pre-pubertal patients; although it was previously
regarded as experimental, there is now sufficient evidence to
justify its implementation in selected cases191 - 192, level III
• Egg donation from a family member or friend followed by in-vitro
fertilisation is an option for girls with reasonable uterine status but
this is not permissible in Malaysia191, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
In a small cross-sectional study on OTC and Ovarian Tissue
Transplantation (OTT), the findings were:192, level III.
• significant negative linear association between follicle density
and age at OTC in the β- thalassaemia group compared with the
reference group
• OTT using OTC done before puberty gave rise to livebirth in two
patients with β- thalassaemia
c.
Subfertility
i.
Assessment
Majority of thalassaemia patients with good compliance to transfusion
and iron chelation are able to have spontaneous conception. In cases
of subfertility, the assessment is similar to non-thalassaemia patients
as discussed below.
The subfertility assessments include:193, level III
• baseline thalassaemia status
 baseline Hb
 SF level
 baseline organ-related iron deposition status
• analysis of gonadal function through medical history and hormone
assays
 FSH/LH, oestradiol, serum AMH level (female)
 semen analysis (male)
• standard pelvic examination in female
 pelvic USG
 tubal patency test using hysterosalpingography (HSG)
• partner
 screening for thalassaemia status
 blood and infective disease status
d.
Fertility preservation
ii.
Fertility preservation in male
Impairment of spermatogenesis occurs due to gonadal failure
secondary to iron overload. The risk decreases with iron chelation.
However, the usage of HU among thalassaemia males poses a risk of
abnormal spermatogenesis leading to subfertility. To date, the data on
recommendation for FP in male thalassaemia patients is inconclusive.
There is no study on male thalassaemia on HU. In one small multi-centre
retrospective study on sickle-cell disease (SCD) men, HU worsened all
sperm parameters including one case of azoospermia.194, level III
In a cohort study on SCD, assessment on gonadal reserve for males
with post-transplant cyclophosphamide-containing regimen revealed
high risk of azoospermia (OR=4.35, 95% CI 1.02 to 18.45).195, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
iii.
Fertility preservation in female
Similarly, ovarian function alteration can be due to iron overload as
well as post-HSCT. In the same cohort study on gonadal reserve with
post-transplant cyclophosphamide-containing regimen in females, the
findings were:195, level III
• increased risk of secondary amenorrhea (OR=9.30, 95% CI 4.94
to 17.50) and ovarian insufficiency (OR=37.8, 95% CI 2.03 to
700.94)
• secondary ovarian insufficiency developed in all women posttransplant
• Despite lack of direct evidence on thalassaemia, inference on
HU treatment and HSCT in SCD warrants an intervention of FP.
Therefore, the CPG DG encourages the following groups of patients
to be referred to obstetrics and gynaecology specialists:
 all post-pubertal male thalassaemia patients prior to HU and
HSCT initiation
 all pre- and post-pubertal female thalassaemia patients prior to
HSCT initiation
12.2 Pre-pregnancy Care
Patient with thalassaemia who is planning to conceive should be
referred to pre-pregnancy clinic for assessment of her functional status
in determining safety of the pregnancy. Hb level and iron chelation
should be optimised prior to pregnancy.
MoH Perinatal Care Manual 4th Edition states that if either partner or the
couple is a thalassaemia carrier, a referral should be made to a family
medicine specialist (FMS) or obstetrics & gynaecology (O&G) specialist
for detailed counselling which includes information regarding prenatal
diagnosis. An untested partner should be screened for thalassaemia
and the patient should be advised for early booking before 12 weeks
of gestation.
At-risk couples require adequate genetic consultation from trained
health professionals to determine their risk in having thalassaemia
offspring. A referral to the fertility specialist should be considered as
preimplantation genetic testing with IVF can be offered to ensure
only healthy embryos are implanted. Refer to Chapter 4 of Genetic
Counselling and Chapter 12.1 on Fertility.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
12.3 Pregnancy
The main concerns for pregnancy in patients with thalassaemia are:
i. maternal and foetal complications
ii. risk of offspring inheriting thalassaemia major in at-risk couples
a.
Prenatal diagnosis
Various screening and diagnostic tests may be offered to at-risk couples
to determine the offspring’s thalassaemia status, depending on the
gestational age. PND of thalassaemia is important because termination
of pregnancy (TOP) may be offered to at-risk couples, as well as to
facilitate management of foetal anaemia during the antenatal period.
Prenatal testing can be performed by either invasive (diagnostic) or
non-invasive (screening) methods. However, analysis of both cell-free
foetal DNA (cffDNA) in non-invasive test and DNA analysis of sample
obtained from invasive CVS, amniocentesis or cordocentesis are
performed in private laboratories.
i.
Non-invasive test
The non-invasive test involves extraction of foetal DNA from maternal
plasma. It is also known as non-invasive chromosomal check (NICC) or
non-invasive prenatal test (NIPT).
In a meta-analysis of nine studies, cell-free foetal DNA (cffDNA) in
maternal plasma had high sensitivity (0.99, 95% CI 0.69 to 1.00) and
specificity (0.99, 95% CI 0.89 to 1.00) in detecting paternally inherited
mutation of β-thalassaemia.196, level III However, there was no mention on
quality assessment of primary studies. Detection of the paternal allele
in maternal plasma is possible in couples with different mutations. If
the paternal allele is present in maternal plasma, the probability of the
foetus having thalassaemia major is 50% and thus the necessity to
proceed with invasive procedure to confirm the diagnosis. This may
reduce the need for performing invasive prenatal diagnosis test by 50%.
Another study also demonstrated cffDNA had high sensitivity and
specificity (ranging from 98.81 to 100% and 94.72 to 99.31%
respectively) in the detection of HbBarts.197, level III
Currently, this test is widely accepted as a screening test but not for
diagnostic purpose.
ii.
Invasive test
There are three invasive tests that can be used to diagnose thalassaemia
prenatally which are CVS, amniocentesis and cordocentesis. The
procedure chosen depends on gestational age, expertise of maternalfoetal medicine specialist as well as availability of molecular analysis test.
Refer to Subchapter 2.2(d) on Molecular analysis (DNA Analysis).
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
In a cross-sectional study to detect HbBarts using invasive prenatal
diagnosis testing:198, level III
• there was no DNA analysis failure and false negative
• in terms of safety profile, in comparison with amniocentesis,
transcervical CVS had:
 higher success rate of first-time sampling (92.96% vs 90.48%)
 lower haemorrhage (3.29% vs 12.50%)
 higher foetal loss rate (2.35% vs 0%) but this was still lower than
average spontaneous abortion rate (15%)
A Cochrane systematic review of 16 RCTs comparing the safety and
accuracy of all types of amniocentesis (early i.e. before 15 weeks’
gestation and late i.e. after 15 weeks’ gestation) and CVS (e.g.
transabdominal, transcervical) for prenatal diagnosis concluded
that:199, level I
• CVS (any route) was associated with higher overall pregnancy
losses and miscarriages, as well as more technical difficulties -
 overall pregnancy loss (RR=1.43, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.67)
 spontaneous miscarriage after test (RR=3.46, 95% CI 2.21 to
5.42)
 sampling failure (RR=3.09, 95% CI 1.98 to 4.82)
 multiple insertions (RR=4.85, 95% CI 3.92 to 6.01)
 need for second test (RR=2.83, 95% CI 1.94 to 4.13)
• When performed in early pregnancy, in comparison with
transabdominal CVS, early amniocentesis had more spontaneous
miscarriages after the procedure (RR=1.71, 95% CI 1.12 to 2.61).
Nevertheless, there were no significant difference in pregnancy
losses or in foetal anomalies.
• Second trimester amniocentesis compared with no amniocentesis
increased the risk of amniotic fluid leakage (RR=3.90, 95% CI
1.95 to 7.80). However, no difference between the two in terms
of pregnancy loss, vaginal bleeding or number of congenital
anomalies.
• First trimester amniocentesis resulted in more risk compared with
second trimester amniocentesis as illustrated by -
 increased pregnancy loss and congenital anomalies
- total pregnancy losses (RR=1.29, 95% CI 1.03 to 1.61)
- congenital anomalies including talipes (RR=1.73, 95% CI
1.26 to 2.38)
 higher procedure-related complications
- amniotic fluid leakage (RR=2.05, 95% CI 1.43 to 2.94)
- multiple needle insertions (RR=2.79, 95% CI 1.92 to 4.04)
- laboratory failures (RR=9.76, 95% CI 3.49 to 27.26)
Another meta-analysis of 21 studies (14 on amniocentesis and seven
on CVS) showed that procedure-related risks of miscarriage for
amniocentesis and CVS were 0.11% and 0.22% respectively.200, level II-2
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Recommendation 18
• Invasive prenatal testing may be performed to diagnose thalassaemia
in utero for at-risk couples of thalassaemia major offspring.
b.
Termination of pregnancy
The decision of TOP is bounded by medical indications and legal
considerations, as well as religious and cultural beliefs. A local survey
on thalassaemia parents revealed that the acceptance rates for abortion
vary markedly depending on ethnicity and religious background Despite
an overall 71.6% acceptance rate in performing prenatal diagnosis, only
28.4% agreed to proceed with TOP of thalassaemia major foetuses.
Religious restriction was the main reason in 77.6% of parents who
declined abortions whereby 73.4% were Muslims, 25% Christians and
13.3% Buddhists.201, level III
Guideline on Termination of Pregnancy for Hospitals in the Ministry of
Health Malaysia states that pre-requisite for TOP are two doctors, one
of whom is a specialist, should concur that TOP is necessary and that
continuation of pregnancy would involve risk to the life of the pregnant
woman, or injury to her mental or physical health, greater than if the
pregnancy is terminated e.g. Hb Barts Hydrops Foetalis. For mental
health reasons, an opinion from a psychologist/psychiatrist is not
needed unless it is deemed necessary by the attending doctor e.g.
because of severe depression or suicidal risk.202, level III The decision
on the most suitable method i.e surgical or medical termination would
depend on the period of gestation and the condition of the cervix.
A cross-sectional study on the use of misoprostol for termination of
741 pregnancies between 14 - 32 weeks of gestation, where foetal
thalassaemia was the most common indication, showed the following
findings:203, level III
• use of misoprostol alone gave 96.4% success rate of TOP
• overall TOP was achieved within 48 hours in 85.9% cases with a
mean of 25.35 hours
• commonest side effects were chills (43.7%) and fever (34.3%)
• commonest complications were incomplete miscarriage requiring
uterine curettage (14.8%) and post-partum haemorrhage (1.9%)
with no uterine rupture reported
As for Muslims, 52nd Muzakarah Jawatankuasa Fatwa Majlis
Kebangsaan on 1 July 2002 decided that TOP for foetus with
thalassaemia or thalassaemia carrier was:204, level III
• not encouraged (makruh) for embryo between 1 - 40 days, if it
does not endanger the mother’s life and agreed by both husband
and wife
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• permissible (harus) for embryo <120 days, if it has congenital
malformation and a disease that can endanger the mother’s life
• forbidden (haram) for embryo >120 days unless it is performed
in order to save the mother’s life as a result of severe congenital
malformation
c.
Antenatal care
Pregnant thalassaemia patients should be managed by a multidisciplinary
team which include obstetrician and physician/haematologist, as well
as cardiologist, endocrinologist and neonatologist if required. This is to
ensure optimal management throughout the perinatal period.
i.
Maternal complications
Pregnant thalassaemia patients are at risk of various maternal
complications due to frequent transfusion and increase in iron burden.
These include cardiac failure, alloimmunization, viral infection, venous
thromboembolism (VTE), osteoporosis, as well as endocrinopathies
(primarily diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism).
Hydrops foetalis due to Hb Bart’s may also predispose the mother to
maternal Mirror Syndrome and its associated complications such as
severe preeclampsia and primary postpartum haemorrhage.
In the absence of primary/secondary studies on management of
thalassaemia patients in pregnancy, the following recommendations
are based on existing guidelines.1; 4; 8; 54; 205
At booking, the recommendations are:
• to determine infective status (HIV, hepatitis B and hepatitis C),
ABO blood group, full blood group genotype and RBC antibody titres
• to perform dating scan between 7 - 9 weeks of gestation
• to review patient’s medication -
 discontinue:
- iron chelators (DFO may be used if needed in second and
third trimesters)
- hormone replacement therapy
- HU
- bisphosphonates
- interferon/ribavirin
- ACE inhibitors
 change warfarin to heparin and oral hypoglycaemic agent (other
than metformin) to insulin
For
management
throughout
pregnancy,
the
followings
are
recommended:
• maternal anaemia
 in TDT, maintain pre-transfusion Hb above 10 g/dL
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
 in NTDT α-thalassaemia, maintain pre-transfusion Hb above 8
g/dL; when required, transfusion of RBC should be performed
every 3 - 4 weeks with the aim of maintaining pre- and post-
transfusion Hb levels at 9 and 12 g/dL respectively
 in NTDT β-thalassaemia, maintain pre-transfusion Hb above 10
g/dL
 regular transfusion is to be considered if there is worsening
maternal anaemia or cardiac status, and foetal growth restriction
 fully-phenotyped matched blood should be transfused in NTDT
due to high risk of alloimmunisation
• iron burden
 serial serum ferritin level (monthly in TDT β-thalassaemia)
 hepatic
- liver function should be checked once in each trimester
- iron chelators (low-dose DFO) should be considered in
severe hepatic iron overload from 20 weeks of gestation
 cardiac
- cardiac function by echocardiography should be checked
once each trimester
- in patient at highest risk of cardiac decompensation, iron
chelators (low-dose DFO) should be commenced from 20
weeks of gestation
- if cardiac function deteriorates, DFX may be used cautiously
after first trimester
• diabetes mellitus
 in pre-existing diabetes patients, diabetic control is monitored
via serum fructosamine level
 GDM screening is performed at 16 weeks and repeated at 24 -
28 weeks of gestation
• hypothyroidism
 thyroid function should be checked once in each trimester
• VTE
 aspirin 75 mg/day should be commenced to those with platelet
>600x109/L
 thromboprophylaxis
with
low
molecular
weight
heparin
(LMWH) is recommended from mid-trimester
The MoH Guidelines on Prevention and Treatment of Thromboembolism
in Pregnancy and Puerperium suggests initiation of thromboprophylaxis
from 28 weeks of gestation until three weeks post-delivery for
thalassaemia major patients and splenectomised TI patients in the
absence of other additional VTE risks.206, level III
ii.
Iron chelation
Two small studies on TDT patients who unintentionally used DFO or
DFX during early pregnancy (6 to 14 weeks gestation) showed that all
pregnancies resulted in live births of healthy babies.207 - 208, level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
TIF guidelines recommends the following regarding the use of iron
chelators in thalassaemia and pregnancy.1
 oral iron chelating agents (DFP, DFX) should be discontinued
three months before conception
 DFO is not required during pregnancy in patients who are not iron
overloaded and have adequate cardiac function prior to pregnancy
 if cardiac function deteriorates during pregnancy, DFO may be
used with caution after the first trimester
 in patients with a history of previous myocardial iron deposition
or borderline myocardial cardiac function, DFO may be
considered in the final trimester or in the peri-delivery period, as
a prolonged labour with acidosis may increase the risk of cardiac
decompensation
 after delivery, DFO can be recommenced because its concentration
is very low in breast milk and it is also not absorbed by the oral
route
The CPG DG opines that all iron chelators should be discontinued once
pregnancy is confirmed in thalassaemia patients. These patients should
be referred immediately to the haematologist for further management.
Recommendation 19
• All pregnant thalassaemia patients:
 should be managed by a multidisciplinary team
 should have cardiac and liver function monitored closely
• In pregnancy, pre-transfusion haemoglobin level should be
maintained at:
 10 g/dL in transfusion-dependent thalassaemia
 8 g/dL in non-transfusion dependant ɑ-thalassaemia
 10 g/dL in non-transfusion dependant ß-thalassaemia
• Transfusion in pregnant thalassaemia patients should take into
account of worsening anaemia, cardiac decompensation and foetal
growth restriction.
• Phenotype-specific blood should be used if transfusion is required.
iii.
Foetal complications
Foetal complications associated with thalassaemia include miscarriage
and foetal losses, foetal growth restriction (FGR), foetal anaemia and
preterm birth, in at-risk couples. Adequate surveillance for FGR and
foetal anaemia is required to enable timely intervention and prevent
stillbirth.
•
Foetal growth restriction
Chronic hypoxia due to maternal anaemia results in placenta
insufficiency and FGR. Various evidence from cohort studies looking
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
at pregnancy outcomes between TDT and NTDT patients and normal
control showed that the former had higher FGR.209, level II-2 Apart from
that, other complications in pregnant thalassaemia patients include:
 higher risk of low-birth-weight babies209 - 211, level II-2
 lower Hb level209 - 210, level II-2;
 higher miscarriage rate210, level II-2
 higher preterm birth rate209 - 211, level II-2
Existing guidelines suggest that serial ultrasound scans should be
performed in pregnant thalassaemia patients from 24 - 26 weeks and
repeated every 4 weeks.1; 4; 205
Recommendation 20
• Serial ultrasound scans should be performed in pregnant
thalassaemia patients to detect foetal growth restriction.
•
Foetal anaemia
Surveillance for foetal anaemia and hydrops foetalis should be
performed by maternal-foetal medicine specialists during pregnancy in
at-risk couples who have not undergone prenatal diagnostic procedure,
as well as in pregnancy with homozygous alpha thalassaemia foetus
that is not terminated. Failure to detect and treat severe foetal anaemia
can result in hydrops foetalis and intrauterine foetal demise. Foetal
anaemia can also lead to maternal Mirror Syndrome and severe preeclampsia. Options of either intrauterine transfusion (IUT) or delivery
can be considered depending on gestational age as well as the
available neonatal support at the time of diagnosis of foetal anaemia
of hydrops foetalis.
Foetal doppler study via middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity
(MCA-PSV) has been used as a primary technique to detect foetal
anaemia.212 A meta-analysis showed that MCA- PSV cut-off of ≥1.5
multiples of the median (MoM) was a predictor in detecting moderate to
severe anaemia in untransfused foetuses with AUC of 87%.
Nonetheless, the sensitivity of MCA-PSV significantly declined with
increasing number of previous intrauterine transfusion [78% (95% CI 63
to 88) for one transfusion, 74% (95% CI 48 to 90) for two transfusions
and 60% (95% CI 34 to 82) for ≥3 transfusions].213, level III
The Society of Maternal-Foetal Medicine guideline recommends the
following.212
 Foetal blood sampling should be performed if a foetus has MCAPSV>1.5 MoM or hydropic, with preparation for an IUT, unless the
pregnancy is at a gestational age when the risks associated with
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
delivery are considered to be less than those associated with the
procedure.
 MCA-PSV can also be used to determine the timing of a second
transfusion in anaemic foetus. Alternatively, a predicted decline in
foetal Hb is used to predict the timing.
Hydrops foetalis features can be detected in the second or third
trimester. These can be reflected by ultrasound findings of:54
• increased cardiothoracic ratio (≥0.5)
• enlarged placenta (>18 mm before 15 weeks and >30 mm after 18
weeks)
• fluid collection in any one compartment - pericardial effusion,
pleural effusion, ascites, or skin oedema
d.
Intrapartum care
Available guidelines recommend that for thalassaemia patients in
labour:1; 4; 205, level I
• blood should be cross-matched in the presence of red cell
antibodies or if Hb <10 g/dL
• no consensus on the timing of delivery; uncomplicated pregnancy
can wait for spontaneous labour
• caesarean section is not required in the absence of an obstetrics
indication
• epidural analgesia is advisable for caesarean section to avoid risk
of difficult intubation and general anaesthesia-associated trauma
because of severe maxillofacial deformity
• continuous intrapartum electronic foetal monitoring should be
instituted as there is increased risk of operative delivery due to
possible foetal hypoxia
• in TDT patients especially those with cardiac disease, low dose IV
DFO (e.g. 2 g over 24 hours) may be used as they are at high risk
of cardiac dysrhythmias in prolonged labour
• active management of the third stage of labour to minimise blood
loss
e.
Postnatal care
i.
Maternal care
• Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
Both pregnancy and thalassaemia predispose patients to a
hypercoagulable state, thus putting them at risk of developing VTE.
For thalassaemia patients, recommendations on LMWH for VTE
prophylaxis based on international guidelines are as follows:1; 205, level I
 throughout hospital admission
 upon discharge with duration of treatment for the following
conditions:
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
- miscarriage or TOP: at least seven days
- vaginal delivery: seven days
- caesarean section: six weeks
However, MoH Guidelines on Prevention and Treatment of
Thromboembolism in Pregnancy and Puerperium, based on VTE risk
scoring, suggests extension of thromboprophylaxis until three weeks
post-delivery for TM and splenectomised TI patients.206, level III The
duration may be extended in the presence of additional VTE risk.
• Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding should be encouraged unless the patient is HIV
positive.1; 205, level I
• Medication
Chelation therapy
For DFO:1; 4; 205, level III
 it can be recommenced after delivery as its concentration is very
low in breast milk and not orally absorbed
 in patients who receive intrapartum IV or SC DFO infusion and:
- breastfeeding, oral DFO can be restarted as soon as the initial
24-hour infusion of IV DFO finishes after delivery
- not breastfeeding, IV or SC infusion is continued until discharge
or resumption of her previous iron chelation regimen under
haematology supervision, whichever is sooner Other iron
chelators should be restarted post-breastfeeding cessation as
they have minimal safety data.
Other medications
Vitamin D and calcium supplement can be resumed during
breastfeeding. Bisphosphonates should be resumed after cessation of
breastfeeding.1; 4
Contraception
WHO Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use advocates the
following for thalassaemia patients:214, level III
 no restriction for all hormonal contraception
 for intrauterine device (IUD), there is concern on initiation of usage
due to theoretical increase in menstrual blood loss; however,
patients who do not experience menorrhagia with IUD in-situ may
continue to use it
 female surgical sterilisation should be performed with caution as
it is associated with operative blood loss and risk of decrease
wound healing
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Nevertheless, TIF recommendations for TDT patients are:1
 avoid IUD (risk of infection) and oestrogen-containing preparations
(risk of VTE)
 choose either progesterone-only or barrier method
The CPG DG opines that progesterone-only preparations should be the
method of choice over other contraceptions.
ii.
Newborn care and follow-up
Children born to at-risk couples should be followed-up in primary care.
Symptomatic children should be investigated promptly. Asymptomatic
children should have their thalassaemia status confirmed by 18 months.
Refer to Algorithm 3 on Confirmation of Children’s Thalassaemia
Status to at-risk Couples.
Recommendation 21
• Low molecular weight heparin for venous thromboembolism
prophylaxis should be commenced in thalassaemia patients
according to VTE risk assessment and guidelines.
• Progesterone-only preparations is the preferred method of
contraception in thalassaemia patients.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
13. HAEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
13.1. Matched Siblings Transplantation
HLA-matched sibling haemopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)
has long been a modality of curative option for thalassaemia and this
still holds true till today.
Patients are stratified using Pesaro Classification based on the following
risk factors which have adverse effects on transplant outcomes:8
• inadequate iron chelation therapy
• presence of liver fibrosis
• hepatomegaly
The classifications are as follows:
• Class I - Patient has none of the above characteristics
• Class II - Patient has one or two of the above characteristics
• Class III - Patient has all three characteristics
Based on a landmark study on thalassaemia transplant patients in Italy,
the overall survival (OS) of Class I, Class II and Class III patients were
93%, 87% and 79% respectively. On the other hand, the disease free
survival (DFS) for Class I, Class II and Class III patients were 91%,
83% and 58%.8
In view of the above evidence, matched sibling bone marrow
transplantation (BMT) in thalassaemia should be offered to patients at
an early age before iron overload-related complications set in to ensure
the best outcome possible.
13.2. Alternative Donor Transplantation
While matched sibling HSCT offers the best curative outcome, only
about 25 - 30% of patients will have a matched sibling donor. There
is growing evidence that alternative donors can be safely used in
transplants for thalassaemia.
A cohort study on young β-TM patients who received transplants
with grafts from HLA- matched related, HLA-mismatched related
(haploidentical), HLA-matched unrelated or HLA- mismatched unrelated
donors showed:215, level II-2
• 5-year probabilities of OS for patients aged ≤6 years, 7 to 15
years and 16 to 25 years were 90%, 84% and 63% respectively
(p<0.001). The corresponding probabilities for event-free survival
were 86%, 80% and 63% (p<0.001).
• 5-year OS of HLA-matched related and HLA-matched unrelated
donor transplantation was 89% and 87% respectively (HR=1.13,
95% CI 0.64 to 2.02)
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
• 5-year event-free survival of HLA-matched related and HLAmatched unrelated donor transplantation was 86% and 82%
respectively (HR=1.25, 95% CI 0.75 to 2.07)
Another cohort study on severe thalassaemia patients who did not
have an HLA-compatible- related or HLA-compatible-unrelated donor
and underwent mismatched related (haploidentical) donor stem cell
transplant showed:216, level II-2
• 2-year OS was 95% (95% CI 69.5 to 99.3)
• 2-year event-free survival was 94% (95% CI 76.6 to 98.4)
Thus, HSCT with HLA matched-unrelated and mismatched-related
(haploidentical) donor stem cell transplant are feasible options for
curative treatment of thalassaemia.
13.3. Cord Blood Transplantation
Umbilical cord blood cells are a potential source of stem cells for
paediatric stem cell transplantation in thalasseamia. Although usage
of cord blood cells alone as a source can result in slower engraftment
and higher rejection risks, transplant outcome is good when performed
very early on young recipients with early disease status and good HLA
match.8
Recommendation 22
• In transfusion dependent thalassaemia, haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation should be offered at an early age to those with
matched sibling donor.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
In local setting, a TDT patient with normal/carrier sibling is a candidate
for HSCT. Alternatively, if parents keen for transplant when there is no
matched donor available, treating clinicians may discuss with transplant
centres for possible options. Refer to Figure 2 below.
Figure 2: Referral for consideration of bone marrow transplant
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
14. LIFESTYLE AND QUALITY OF LIFE/SUPPORTIVE CARE
14.1. Nutrition and supplements
Generally, patients with thalassaemia do not have specific nutritional
requirements. However, thalassaemia children have been shown to
have growth stunting and poor bone mineralisation.8
Growth stunting in children with thalassaemia can be minimised with
high-calorie diets which increase IGF-1 production. Supplementation of
important micro-nutrients e.g. vitamin E and C helps to reduce oxidative
stress and increase iron excretion during DFO therapy respectively. Folic
acid supplementation is important for those planning for pregnancy.8
Apart from that, Vitamin D, calcium and zinc supplementation have
also been shown to improve bone health and overall growth in these
children.
a.
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation
Vitamin D deficiency is associated with poor bone mineralisation, thus
contributing to thalassaemic bone disease; deficiency is defined as
serum 25-OH vitamin D <20 ng/ml (50 nmol/L) and insufficiency as
serum 25-OH vitamin D of 20 - 30 ng/ml (50 - 75 nmol/L).1
Calcium homeostasis is intimately related to vitamin D. Low calcium
intake in thalassaemia patients contributes to disturbances in calcium
homeostasis.1
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation significantly improve bone
mineral content (BMC), BMD and serum 25-OH vitamin D level without
any AE in thalassaemia children.217, level II-3
Monitoring serum 25-OH vitamin D levels has been recommended every
six months for thalassaemia patients. Vitamin D supplementation should
be prescribed if indicated.1 Refer to Appendix 10 for Micronutrients
Supplementation and Assessment Strategy Recommendations for
Thalassaemia Patients.
High calcium diet e.g. milk, cheese and oily fish is recommended for
thalassaemia patients. However, calcium supplementation is also
recommended if the patient needs vitamin D supplementation.1 Refer to
Appendix 10 for Micronutrients Supplementation and Assessment
Strategy Recommendations for Thalassaemia Patients.
b.
Zinc supplementation
Zinc deficiency has been demonstrated in thalassaemia and has shown
to affect growth and bone health.1
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
In two Cochrane systematic reviews, zinc supplementation was more
effective than placebo in thalassaemia patients.
• An RCT showed increase in bone mass at 18 months followup:218, level I
 whole body BMC increased by 5.7% (95% CI 2.8 to 8.6)
 whole body aerial BMD increased by 2.9% (95% CI 1.3 to 4.4)
• Another RCT showed increase in height velocity at one year
(MD=3.37 cm/year, 95% CI 2.36 to 4.38).219, level I
Zinc supplements are available in various formulations with different
contents of elemental zinc. The recommended dose is 15 mg up to a
maximum of 40 mg per day of elemental zinc according to individual
patient’s need.1
On the other hand, patients with thalassaemia should restrict iron rich
food intake.1; 8 These are listed in Appendix 11 on Iron Content in
Selected Food Items.
Recommendation 23
• All thalassaemia patients should be given good nutritional support
which include high-calorie diets and certain micro-nutrients
supplementation* to minimise growth impairment.
• All thalassaemia patients should restrict iron-rich foods intake.
*Refer Appendix 10 on Micronutrients Supplementation and
Assessment
Strategy
Recommendations
for
Thalassaemia
Patients.
14.2. Psychosocial support
Psychosocial support plays an important role in the management of
chronic disease e.g. thalassaemia. Refer to Appendix 12 on Malaysian
Thalassaemia Associations/Support Groups.
a.
Non-adherence to chelation
Good adherence to iron chelation therapy is crucial in management of
thalassaemia.
Psychosocial factors (e.g. family dynamics and level of education)
have
negative
impacts
on
adherence
to
treatment
for
thalassaemia.220, level II-2 Unfortunately, two Cochrane systematic reviews
showed lack of evidence on psychosocial support intervention79, level I and
strategies using computer and mobile technology221, level I in promoting
medication adherence in thalassaemia.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Expert psychological support (e.g. by family/child psychologists or
social workers) has to be provided at all centres specialising in
thalassaemia care and this should be tailored to the patient’s age.1
b.
Transition to adult care
As the thalassaemia children get older, there is a need for transition
from paediatric to adult health care. This transition process requires a lot
of psychological support from their parents and the medical providers.
There is no retrievable evidence directly on transition to adult care of
thalassaemia patients. Nevertheless, three systematic reviews showed
effectiveness of transition programme in other chronic diseases as
below:
• patients with SCD with transition programme had significantly
more successful transfer to adult clinic compared with nonparticipants222, level I
• patient education and specific transition clinics (either jointly
staffed by paediatric and adult physicians or dedicated young
adult clinics within adult services) were successful in some chronic
diseases (e.g. diabetes mellitus)223, level I
• a
structured
transition
programme
incorporating
detailed
intervention descriptions about transition planning, transfer
and integration into adult care often resulted in positive
outcomes224, level I
To avoid the negative consequences of abrupt shifts in responsibility,
the transition should occur gradually over time, starting when the
children are young (e.g. preparing treatment) and increasing their
involvement as they mature (e.g. getting medications, making medical
appointments).1
Recommendation 24
• Psychological support has to be offered to all thalassaemia patients.
• A structured transition care should be arranged for all thalassaemia
patients.
c.
Education and employment
In a cross-sectional study on thalassaemia in North America, about
75% of adult patients had completed tertiary education. Furthermore,
82% percent of school-age children were at expected grade
level.225, level III In another cross-sectional study in the Middle-East,
about 60% of adult thalassaemia patients had completed tertiary
education.226. level III
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Higher education level was achieved in:
• patients on regular transfusion and those on regular chelation
therapy within this group (OR=2.06, 95% CI 1.03 to 4.10 and
OR=3.87, 95% CI 1.36 to 11.0 respectively).225, level III
• patients with no complications e.g. heart disease and joint
disease.226, level III
Higher employment was observed in:
• patients on regular chelation therapy (OR= 6.67, 95% CI 1.96 to
25.0).225, level III
• patients with lower average of SF level <1500 ng/ml.226, level III
Neither type nor treatment of thalassaemia seemed to influence
education and employment in both studies.
d.
Marriage
Getting married and having a family have been reported in thalassaemia
patients. A study in Lebanon showed that around one-third (30.3%) of
the sample population was married compared with 75% of the general
Lebanese population who were married. Out of 72 married patients, 21
of them did not have children. Among those who had children, average
number of children was 1.47 and average time elapsed to first child was
0.85 years. The odds of being married were 2.5 times higher for those
not being transfused compared with those transfused (OR=2.45, 95%
CI 1.07 to 5.63).226, level III
Recommendation 25
• All thalassaemia patients should be given education and offered
employment as the general population.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
15. OTHER THERAPIES
a.
Hydroxyurea
The molecular mechanisms involving the persistence of Hb F in the first
year of life are not completely understood. HU promotes the production
of Hb F by reactivating gamma-genes. Inducing the production of Hb F
in patients with thalassaemia may alter the transfusion requirement in
the patients.
In an open-label RCT on β-thalassaemia intermedia patients of ≤18
years old, combined HU and recombinant human erythropoietin was
significantly more effective than HU alone in terms of:227, level I
• decreased transfusion frequency and index
• higher haemoglobin level
• higher HRQoL score
No serious AEs necessitating discontinuation or interruption of therapy
in both groups were observed. Combined therapy was well tolerated
with mild AEs (bone pain and headache) in a few patients.
In a cross-sectional study on NTDT, long-term use of HU (mean duration
of 18.2 ± 4.0 years) at the dose of 8 - 15 mg/kg led to:228, level III
• 82.3% patients having sustained transfusion independence
response
• average Hb levels increased from the baseline values as much as
1.3 ± 1.0 g/dL (p<0.001)
None of the patients had serious haematological AEs e.g. leukaemia or
any signs of bone marrow suppression. All AEs were mild and transient
which did not require drug interruption.
TIF recommends that HU may be considered in NTDT patients.4
Recommendation 26
• Hydroxyurea may be offered in non-transfusion dependent
thalassaemia.
b.
Novel therapy
Better understanding of β-thalassaemia pathophysiology has paved the
way for development of novel therapies. These can be classified into
the following categories based on the underlying pathophysiology that
they address:
• correction of the α/β globin chain imbalance
• targeting ineffective erythropoiesis
• targeting iron dysregulation: hepcidin or ferroportin pathways
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
i.
Correction of the α/β globin chain imbalance
The pathophysiology in thalassaemia is contributed by imbalance of the
α and β chains leading to premature destruction of RBCs and anaemia.
Gene therapy aspires to provide cure for thalassaemia through
manipulation of the genome of haematopoetic stem cell (HSC), thus
compensating for the inadequate or faulty function of mutated genes.
This can be achieved by:
• gene addition via a semi-random insertion of a healthy copy of
therapeutic gene into the cells using viral vectors
• gene editing via a precisely directed mutation that repairs gene insitu or induces a disease-modifying effect (i.e. reactivation of Hb F
synthesis) using site-specific nucleases
The modified cells then need to be introduced into the thalassaemia
patients via two methods described below:
• Ex-vivo gene therapy
This is a HSC transplantation-based procedure. The autologous
(patient-derived) HSCs are mobilised with granulocyte colonystimulating factor (G-CSF) plus plerixafor, harvested by apheresis;
separated by immunomagnetic separation and then the CD34+ cells are
genetically modified ex-vivo. The patient then undergoes myeloablative
conditioning followed by infusion of the gene-modified cells.
• In-vivo gene therapy
This has also been preclinically pursued, aiming to overcome the
limitations of ex-vivo gene therapy. However, there are no commercially
available therapy via this method at the time of writing these guidelines.
Refer to Figure 3 on Concepts of Gene Therapy.
Figure 3: Concepts of Gene Therapy
In-Vivo Gene Therapy
Ex-Vivo Gene Therapy
1. Mobilisation of
HSC
1. Mobilisation of HSC
2. Injection of
therapeutic
vector exhibiting
tropism to HSC
2. Ex-vivo culture and
transduction of CD
34 select HSC with
SIN-LV
4. Infusion of genetically
modified HSC
3. Myeloablation
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
ii.
Targeting ineffective erythropoiesis and iron dysregulation
•
Erythroid maturating agent - luspatercept
Luspatercept (ACE-536) is a recombinant fusion protein comprising
of a modified extracellular domain of human activin receptor type IIB
fused to the Fc domain of human IgG1. The domains bind selectively
to transforming growth factor (TGF) β superfamily ligands, block
SMAD2/3 signalling and enhance erythroid maturation. Murine studies
showed enhanced erythroid, reduced α-globin chain aggregation and
haemolysis, increased erythrocyte life span and improved iron overload.
Luspatercept is the most recently approved therapy for the management
of TDT229 - 230, level III and NTDT.229, level III The approval was based
on the results of the phase 2 BEYOND trial for NTDT and phase 3
BELIEVE trial for TDT which showed that subcutaneous administration
of luspatercept led to a reduction in transfusion burden as discussed
below.
In the BELIEVE trial, there was at least 33% transfusion reduction in
71% of patients along with a reduction of at least 2 red-cell units in
21% of patients over a 12-week interval with clinically meaningful and
maintained reduction of serum ferritin levels.231, level I
On the other hand, BEYOND trial showed that 77.1% of patients
in luspatercept arm vs none in placebo group achieved a mean Hb
increase of ≥1.0 g/dL from baseline during weeks 13 – 24 in the absence
of transfusions (RD=77.1, 95% CI 68.7 to 85.5).232, level I
AEs commonly seen with luspatercept were bone pain, arthralgia,
dizziness, hypertension and hyperuricaemia.231 - 232, level I Data on the
long-term luspatercept use, its real-life application and use in the
paediatric population are lacking.
The indications for luspatercept use based on the TIF guidelines are:1; 4
 age ≥18 years
 TDT: patients who require regular RBC transfusions
 NTDT: Hb is <10 g/dl with symptoms of anaemia or ineffective
erythropoiesis
Patients should be referred to haematologist for management if
luspatercept is indicated.
•
Mitapivat
Mitapivat (AG-348) is a first-in-class oral, small-molecule, allosteric
activator of the RBC specific form of pyruvate kinase (PK) and approved
for treatment of anaemia in adult patients with PK deficiency.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
A small pre-post study on mitapivat in adults with NTDT showed 80%
of the patients achieved a Hb increase by ≥1.0 g/dL compared with
baseline (p<0.0001). Favourable changes in markers of erythropoiesis
and haemolysis were also noted. The most common treatment-
emergent AEs were initial insomnia (50%), dizziness (30%) and
headache (25%).233, level II-3 Phase 3 trials are currently ongoing for both
TDT and NTDT patients.
•
Janus Kinase (JAK) inhibitor
A pre-post study on TDT patients with spleen enlargement revealed
that ruxolitinib (JAK 2 inhibitor) was well tolerated but had a limited
effect in improving pre-transfusion Hb and reducing transfusion needs.
There was a NS mean decrease of 5.9% in transfusion requirement of
haematocrit-adjusted volume of RBC compared with baseline but this
did not achieve a pre-determined >10% threshold.234, level II-3
Other agents targeting iron dysregulation e.g. hepcidin or ferroportin
pathways are still under clinical trials.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
16. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of thalassaemia should be guided by an evidencebased approach, in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several
factors may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
16.1. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitating factors for application of the recommendations in
the CPG include:
• wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers
• regular thalassaemia updates nationally according to zones
• National Thalassaemia Steering Committee that oversees the
development and implementation of thalassaemia services in
Malaysia
• established National Thalassaemia Screening Programme
• Malaysia Thalassaemia Registry that captures all thalassaemia
patients in Malaysia
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• lack of knowledge on thalassaemia and its management among
healthcare providers in general
• inadequate coverage of thalassaemia training at all levels of
healthcare
• inadequate coverage of national thalassaemia screening programme
• lack of resources for comprehensive management of thalassaemia
especially in remote or high thalassaemia burden areas
• lack of awareness, knowledge and understanding on thalassaemia
among patients, carriers and caregivers
16.2. Potential Resource Implications
The recommendations in this CPG require additional resources in terms
of funds, healthcare infrastructures and human resources/expertise for
their successful implementation as discussed below. The two main
equally important aspects in thalassaemia management are preventive
measures (including screening) and treatment. Evidence have shown
that good screening and prevention programmes effectively reduced
the disease burden in the long run.
Diagnosis of thalassaemia need to be confirmed with molecular test.
This is important especially for genetic counselling and genotypephenotype correlation. In Malaysia, only limited centres offer this test
e.g. Institute of Medical Research, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Hospital
Sultanah Bahiyah and a few university hospitals. These centralised
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
laboratories should be expanded to other zones in Malaysia to improve
the diagnostic services.
Despite the existence of dedicated thalassaemia screening programme
among Form 4 students, there is lack of resources in terms of budget
and manpower to implement the programme effectively. Currently, the
programme is unable to achieve full coverage of Form 4 students in the
country. There is also inability to retain information on the carrier status
due to lack of proper centralised database. Thus, issues of newborn
thalassaemia due to unknown parental thalassaemia carrier status
continues despite the existence of the screening programme.
There is unequal availability of safe and high-quality blood products in
certain states. For example, phenotyping and leucodepletion cannot
be done at certain areas due to lack of resources. Lack of blood is a
problem unique to Sabah which has the highest burden of thalassaemia.
Improved networking and co-ordination of blood collection centres in
other states in Malaysia is crucial to maintain sustainability of blood
supply in Sabah.
Effective iron chelators e.g. DFX is not available to all patients and
inability to continue its prescription beyond certain periods due to
budget constraints is an important problem. Furthermore, monitoring of
iron overload and its complications by MRI T2*, DXA scan and transient
elastography may not be available in all hospitals. Due to these resource
limitations, patients develop complications which require additional
treatment and may lead to more costs.
Prenatal testing is costly. Although diagnostic procedures can be
performed in public hospitals, the molecular tests are done in private
laboratories for shorter turn-around-time and the cost is borne by the
family.
Important issues that receive lack of attention among thalassaemia
patients are education and employment. School absenteeism among
thalassaemia patients is high due to regular hospital visits and
admissions. Psychological support is important for patients with this
chronic disease but this maybe lacking due to limitations of the related
service.
Several key performance indexes on thalassaemia management being
monitored by MOH is in line with the CPG recommendations. Thus, the
following are proposed as clinical audit indicators for the CPG:
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage of
thalassaemia
(TDT) patients
who have
diagnostic
molecular tests
(Target 90%)
=
Total number of TDT patients in the same
period
Number of TDT patients who have
diagnostic molecular tests in a period
x100%
Percentage of
TDT patients
who achieve
serum ferritin
<1,000 ng/
mL after
commencement
of chelation
(Target 40%)
=
Total number of TDT patients who are on
chelation in the same period
Number of TDT patients on chelation who
achieve serum ferritin <1,000 ng/mL in a
period
x100%
Percentage of
thalassaemia
patients
>10 years old
who undergo
MRI for cardiac/
liver over two
years period
(Target 80%)
=
Total number of thalassaemia patients >10
years old in the same period
Number of thalassaemia patients >10 years
old who undergo MRI for cardiac/liver
over two years period in a defined period
x100%
Percentage of
TDT patients*
who have pre-
transfusion Hb
>9 g/dl (Target
75%)
=
Total number of transfusion dependent
thalassaemia patients who receive blood
transfusion in the same period
Number of transfusion dependent
thalassaemia patients who have
a pre-transfusion Hb >9 g/dl in a period
x100%
*excluding hypersplenism,
allo- and auto -antibodies,
rare phenotype,
defaulters, haemolysis
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Cappellini M, Farmakis D, Porter J, et al. 2021 Thalassaemia International
Federation Guidelines for the Management of Transfusion-dependent
Thalassemia. Cyprus: Thalassaemia International Federation; 2021:e732 p.
2.
Alwi ZB, Syed-Hassan SR. Thalassemia in Malaysia. Hemoglobin. 2022;46(1):4552.
3.
Mohd Ibrahim H, Muda Z, Othman IS, et al. Observational study on the current
status of thalassaemia in Malaysia: A report from the Malaysian Thalassaemia
Registry. BMJ open. 2020;10(6):e037974.
4.
Taher A., Musallam K., Cappellini MD. Guidelines for the Management of NonTransfusion Dependent B-Thalassaemia 3rd Edition. Cyprus: Thalassaemia
International Federation; 2023.
5.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Annual Report Family Health Development Division
2022. Putrajaya: MoH; 2022.
6.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Annual Report of The Malaysian Thalassaemia
Registry 2020. Putrajaya: MoH; 2024.
7.
Viprakasit V, Ekwattanakit S. Clinical Classification, Screening and Diagnosis for
Thalassemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2018;32(2):193-211.
8.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of
Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia. Putrajaya: MoH; 2009.
9.
Bain BJ, Daniel Y, Henthorn J, et al. Significant haemoglobinopathies: A guideline
for screening and diagnosis: A British Society for Haematology Guideline. Br J
Haematol. 2023;201(6):1047- 65.
10. Belinda J, Mardjuki E, Bororing SR. Mentzer and RDW Index in the Establishment
of Iron Deficiency Anemia Diagnosis in the First Trimester of Pregnant Woman.
Indones J Obstet Gynecol. 2023;11(1):20-24.
11. Tabassum S, Khakwani M, Fayyaz A, et al. Role of Mentzer index for differentiating
iron deficiency anemia and beta thalassemia trait in pregnant women. Pak J Med
Sci. 2022;38(4Part- II):878-82.
12. Bose S, Maimoon S. Is Mentzer Index A Reliable Diagnostic Screening Tool
For Beta Thalassemia Trait? IOSR Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences.
2018;17(7 Ver. 6):7-11.
13. Greene DN, Pyle AL, Chang JS, et al. Comparison of Sebia Capillarys Flex
capillary electrophoresis with the BioRad Variant II high pressure liquid
chromatography in the evaluation of hemoglobinopathies. Clin Chim Acta.
2012;413(15-16):1232-8.
14. Borbely N, Phelan L, Szydlo R, et al. Capillary zone electrophoresis for
haemoglobinopathy diagnosis. J Clin Pathol. 2013;66(1):29-39.
15. Srivorakun H, Fucharoen G, Changtrakul Y, et al. Thalassemia and
hemoglobinopathies in Southeast Asian newborns: diagnostic assessment using
capillary electrophoresis system. Clin Biochem. 2011;44(5-6):406-11.
16. Mohd Yasin N, Zamri DA, Mohd Pauzy LH, et al. Delineation of The Molecular
Basis of Borderline Haemoglobin A2 in Malaysian Population. 2022.
[Unpublished]
17. Esa E, Mohamad AS, Hamzah R, et al. Clinical and haematological characteristics
of 38 individuals with Hb G-Makassar in Malaysia. EJHaem. 2023;4(4):940-8.
18. Institute of Medical Research Malaysia. Manual for sample handling for DNA
analysis of thalassaemia syndromes. Selangor; MoH; 2023.
19. Liang HF, Li LJ, Yang H, et al. Clinical validation of a single-tube PCR and reverse
dot blot assay for detection of common α-thalassaemia and β-thalassaemia in
Chinese. J Int Med Res. 2022;50(2):3000605221078785.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
20. Zulkeflee RH, Bahar R, Abdullah M, et al. Application of Targeted NextGeneration Sequencing for the Investigation of Thalassemia in a Developing
Country: A Single Center Experience. Diagnostics. 2023;13(8).
21. Shang X, Peng Z, Ye Y, et al. Rapid Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing
Platform for Molecular Screening and Clinical Genotyping in Subjects with
Hemoglobinopathies. EBioMedicine. 2017;23:150-9.
22. He J, Song W, Yang J, et al. Next-generation sequencing improves thalassemia
carrier screening among premarital adults in a high prevalence population: the
Dai nationality, China. Genet Med. 2017;19(9):1022-31.
23. Zhao J, Li J, Lai Q, et al. Combined use of gap-PCR and next-generation
sequencing improves thalassaemia carrier screening among premarital adults in
China. J Clin Pathol. 2020;73(8):488- 92.
24. Sripichai O, Makarasara W, Munkongdee T, et al. A scoring system for the
classification of beta- thalassemia/Hb E disease severity. Am J Hematol.
2008;83(6):482-4.
25. Munkongdee T, Tongsima S, Ngamphiw C, et al. Predictive SNPs for β(0)-
thalassemia/HbE disease severity. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):10352.
26. Mehta PR, Upadhye DS, Sawant PM, et al. Diverse phenotypes and transfusion
requirements due to interaction of β-thalassemias with triplicated α-globin genes.
Ann Hematol. 2015;94(12):1953-8.
27. Family Health Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Laporan
Tahunan 2019 Bahagian Perkembangan Kesihatan Keluarga. Putrajaya: MoH;
2020.
28. Tan HY, Hussein N, Lee YK, et al. Adolescents’ experiences and views of the
national school- based thalassaemia screening programme in Malaysia: a
qualitative study. J Community Genet. 2023;14(4):361-9.
29. Shafie AA, Wong JHY, Ibrahim HM, et al. Economic burden in the management
of transfusion- dependent thalassaemia patients in Malaysia from a societal
perspective. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021;16(1):157.
30. Makkawi M, Alasmari S, Hawan AA, et al. Hemoglobinopathies: An update on
the prevalence trends in Southern Saudi Arabia. Saudi Med J. 2021;42(7):784-9.
31. Alsaeed ES, Farhat GN, Assiri AM, et al. Distribution of hemoglobinopathy
disorders in Saudi Arabia based on data from the premarital screening and
genetic counseling program, 2011-2015. J Epidemiol Glob Health. 2018;7 Suppl
1(Suppl 1):S41-s7.
32. Al-Allawi NA, Jalal SD, Ahmed NH, et al. The first five years of a preventive
programme for haemoglobinopathies in Northeastern Iraq. J Med Screen.
2013;20(4):171-6.
33. Family Health Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Garis
Panduan Program Saringan Thalassemia Kebangsaan di Kesihatan Primer.
2024. (Unpublished document)
34. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Perinatal Care Manual 4th Edition. Putrajaya: MoH;
2022.
35. Tiewsiri K, Manipalviratn S, Sutheesophon W, et al. The First Asian, SingleCenter Experience of Blastocyst Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis with HLA
Matching in Thailand for the Prevention of Thalassemia and Subsequent
Curative Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation of Twelve Affected Siblings.
Biomed Res Int. 2020;2020:5292090.
36. Kahraman S, Beyazyurek C, Ekmekci CG. Seven years of experience of
preimplantation HLA typing: a clinical overview of 327 cycles. Reprod Biomed
Online. 2011;23(3):363-71.
37. van Montfoort A, Carvalho F, Coonen E, et al. ESHRE PGT Consortium data
collection XIX–XX: PGT analyses from 2016 to 2017. Human Reproduction
Open. 2021;2021(3).
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
38. Resta R, Biesecker BB, Bennett RL, et al. A new definition of Genetic Counseling:
National Society of Genetic Counselors’ Task Force report. J Genet Couns.
2006;15(2):77-83.
39. Angastiniotis M, Petrou M, Loukopoulos D, et al. The Prevention of Thalassemia
Revisited: A Historical and Ethical Perspective by the Thalassemia International
Federation. Hemoglobin. 2021;45(1):5-12.
40. Ioannides A. Genetic Counselling in the Beta-Thalassaemias. Thalassemia
Reports. 2013;3:35.
41. Ministry of Health, Singapore. Revised Code of Practice (2021). Standards for
The Provision of Clinical Genetic/Genomic Testing Services and Standards for
The Provision of Clinical Laboratory Genetic/Genomic Testing Services. 2021
(Unpublished document)
42. Colah RB, Nadkarni AH, Gorakshakar AC, et al. The Changing Trends in
Prenatal Diagnosis of Hemoglobinopathies in India: The Quest of a Single
Center to Reduce the Burden of Disease over Three Decades. Hemoglobin.
2021;45(2):112-8.
43. Xu LL, Yang Y, Zhen L, et al. The Trend in Timing of Prenatal Diagnosis for
Thalassemia at a Chinese Tertiary Obstetric Center. Hemoglobin. 2020;44(5):3258.
44. Monni G, Peddes C, Iuculano A, et al. From Prenatal to Preimplantation Genetic
Diagnosis of β- Thalassemia. Prevention Model in 8748 Cases: 40 Years of
Single Center Experience. J Clin Med. 2018;7(2).
45. Theodoridou S, Prapas N, Balassopoulou A, et al. Efficacy of the National
Thalassaemia and Sickle Cell Disease Prevention Programme in Northern
Greece: 15-Year Experience, Practice and Policy Gaps for Natives and Migrants.
Hemoglobin. 2018;42(4):257-63.
46. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Handbook on Clinical use of Blood 3rd Edition.
Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2020.
47. Gamberini MR, Fortini M, Stievano A, et al. Impact of the preparation method
of red cell concentrates on transfusion indices in thalassemia patients: A
randomized crossover clinical trial. Transfusion. 2021;61(6):1729-39.
48. Pazgal I, Yahalom V, Shalev B, et al. Alloimmunization and autoimmunization in
adult transfusion-dependent thalassemia patients: a report from a comprehensive
center in Israel. Ann Hematol. 2020;99(12):2731-6.
49. Romphruk AV, Simtong P, Butryojantho C, et al. The prevalence, alloimmunization
risk factors, antigenic exposure, and evaluation of antigen-matched red blood
cells for thalassemia transfusions: a 10-year experience at a tertiary care
hospital. Transfusion. 2019;59(1):177-84.
50. Dhawan HK, Kumawat V, Marwaha N, et al. Alloimmunization and
autoimmunization in transfusion dependent thalassemia major patients: Study
on 319 patients. Asian J Transfus Sci. 2014;8(2):84-8.
51. Noor Sheereen Adzaludin, Nor Hafizah Ahmad, Afifah Hassan, et al. A Study
of Rate and Predictive Factors for Red Cell Alloimmunisation Development in
Paediatric Thalassemia Hospital Kuala Lumpur. 2022. [Unpublished]
52. Ismail WI, Al-hassan FM, Shatar AKA, et al. Prevalence of red cell alloantibodies
among multi transfused dependent thalassemia patient in the Malaysian state of
Penang. J Sci Res Development. 2016;3:62-6.
53. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Transfusion Practice Guidelines for Clinical and
Laboratory Personel. Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2016. (Available at: https://pdn.gov.
my/v2/images/dokumen/ebook_blood_transfusion_guideline.pdf).
54. Amid A, Lal A, Coates TD, et al. Guidelines for the Management of
α-Thalassaemia. Nicosia: Thalassaemia International Federation; 2023.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
55. Taher A, Musallam K, Cappellini MD, et al. Guidelines For The Management
of Non Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (NTDT) 2md Edition. Cyprus:
Thalassaemia International Federation; 2017.
56. Taher AT, Musallam KM, Karimi M, et al. Overview on practices in thalassemia
intermedia management aiming for lowering complication rates across a region
of endemicity: the OPTIMAL CARE study. Blood. 2010;115(10):1886-92.
57. Taher AT, Radwan A, Viprakasit V. When to consider transfusion therapy
for patients with non- transfusion-dependent thalassaemia. Vox Sang.
2015;108(1):1-10.
58. Al Senaidi K, Maveda S, Joshi N, et al. Cardio-protective effect of regular
transfusion in children with non-transfusion dependent thalassemia (NTDT): A
cohort study. Acta Biomed. 2022;93(2):e2022022.
59. Alam MH, Auger D, McGill LA, et al. Comparison of 3 T and 1.5 T for T2*
magnetic resonance of tissue iron. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2016;18(1):40.
60. Khater N, Shahat H, Fahmy H, et al. Comparative study between black blood
T2* and conventional bright GRE sequences in assessment of myocardial
iron concentration. The Egyptian Journal of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine.
2016;47.
61. Smith GC, Carpenter JP, He T, et al. Value of black blood T2* cardiovascular
magnetic resonance. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2011;13(1):21.
62. Kirk P, Roughton M, Porter JB, et al. Cardiac T2* magnetic resonance
for prediction of cardiac complications in thalassemia major. Circulation.
2009;120(20):1961-8.
63. Shehata SM, Amin MI, Zidan ESH. MRI evaluation of hepatic and cardiac iron
burden in pediatric thalassemia major patients: spectrum of findings by T2*.
Egyptian Journal of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine. 2019;50(1):68.
64. Meloni A, Pistoia L, Gamberini MR, et al. The Link of Pancreatic Iron with Glucose
Metabolism and Cardiac Iron in Thalassemia Intermedia: A Large, Multicenter
Observational Study. J Clin Med. 2021;10(23).
65. Nayak AM, Choudhari A, Patkar DP, et al. Pituitary Volume and Iron Overload
Evaluation by 3T MRI in Thalassemia. Indian J Pediatr. 2021;88(7):656-62.
66. Allegra S, Cusato J, De Francia S, et al. Effect of pharmacogenetic markers of
vitamin D pathway on deferasirox pharmacokinetics in children. Pharmacogenet
Genomics. 2018;28(1):17-22.
67. Allegra S, De Francia S, Cusato J, et al. Deferasirox pharmacogenetic influence
on pharmacokinetic, efficacy and toxicity in a cohort of pediatric patients.
Pharmacogenomics. 2017;18(6):539-54.
68. Dadheech S, Rao AV, Shaheen U, et al. Three most common nonsynonymous
UGT1A6*2 polymorphisms (Thr181Ala, Arg184Ser and Ser7Ala) and
therapeutic response to deferiprone in β-thalassemia major patients. Gene.
2013;531(2):301-5.
69. Dou H, Qin Y, Chen G, et al. Effectiveness and Safety of Deferasirox in Thalassemia
with Iron Overload: A Meta-Analysis. Acta Haematol. 2019;141(1):32-42.
70. Bollig C, Schell LK, Rücker G, et al. Deferasirox for managing iron overload in
people with thalassaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;8(8):CD007476.
71. Maggio A, Kattamis A, Felisi M, et al. Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of
deferiprone compared with deferasirox in paediatric patients with transfusiondependent haemoglobinopathies (DEEP-2): A multicentre, randomised, openlabel, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7(6):e469-e78.
72. Xia S, Zhang W, Huang L, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of deferoxamine,
deferiprone and deferasirox on severe thalassemia: A meta-analysis of 16
randomized controlled trials. PLoS One. 2013;8(12):e82662.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
73. Kuo KH, Mrkobrada M. A systematic review and meta-analysis of deferiprone
monotherapy and in combination with deferoxamine for reduction of iron
overload in chronically transfused patients with β-thalassemia. Hemoglobin.
2014;38(6):409-21.
74. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Clinical Review(s): Ferriprox 1000 mg
tablet (Deferiprone). (Available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_
docs/nda/2020/212269Orig1s000MedR.pdf).
75. Novartis Pharma AG. Understanding EXJADE® (Deferasirox) Film-Coated
Tablets - A physician guide to dosing and administration. Basel: Novartis; 2017
76. Chang HH, Lu MY, Liao YM, et al. Improved efficacy and tolerability of oral
deferasirox by twice- daily dosing for patients with transfusion-dependent
β-thalassemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011;56(3):420-4.
77. Maggio A, Filosa A, Vitrano A, et al. Iron chelation therapy in thalassemia major: A
systematic review with meta-analyses of 1520 patients included on randomized
clinical trials. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2011;47(3):166-75.
78. Eghbali A, Shokri P, Afzal RR, et al. A 1-year randomized trial of deferasirox
alone versus deferasirox and deferoxamine combination for the treatment of iron
overload in thalassemia major. Transfus Apher Sci. 2019;58(4):429-33.
79. Fortin PM, Fisher SA, Madgwick KV, et al. Interventions for improving adherence
to iron chelation therapy in people with sickle cell disease or thalassaemia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;5(5):CD012349.
80. Rivella S. Iron metabolism under conditions of ineffective erythropoiesis in
β-thalassemia. Blood. 2019;133(1):51-8.
81. Gardenghi S, Grady RW, Rivella S. Anemia, ineffective erythropoiesis, and
hepcidin: interacting factors in abnormal iron metabolism leading to iron overload
in β-thalassemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2010;24(6):1089-107.
82. Taher AT, Porter J, Viprakasit V, et al. Deferasirox reduces iron overload
significantly in nontransfusion-dependent thalassemia: 1-year results from
a prospective, randomized, double- blind, placebo-controlled study. Blood.
2012;120(5):970-7.
83. Taher AT, Porter JB, Viprakasit V, et al. Deferasirox effectively reduces iron
overload in non- transfusion-dependent thalassemia (NTDT) patients: 1-year
extension results from the THALASSA study. Ann Hematol. 2013;92(11):1485-93.
84. Taher AT, Cappellini MD, Aydinok Y, et al. Optimising iron chelation therapy with
deferasirox for non-transfusion-dependent thalassaemia patients: 1-year results
from the THETIS study. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2016;57:23-9.
85. Calvaruso G, Vitrano A, Di Maggio R, et al. Deferiprone versus deferoxamine
in thalassemia intermedia: Results from a 5-year long-term Italian multicenter
randomized clinical trial. Am J Hematol. 2015;90(7):634-8.
86. Koohi F, Kazemi T, Miri-Moghaddam E. Cardiac complications and iron overload
in beta thalassemia major patients-a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann
Hematol. 2019;98(6):1323-31.
87. Amoozgar H, Zeighami S, Haghpanah S, et al. A comparison of heart function
and arrhythmia in clinically asymptomatic patients with beta thalassemia
intermedia and beta thalassemia major. Hematology. 2017;22(1):25-9.
88. Silvilairat S, Charoenkwan P, Saekho S, et al. Heart Rate Variability for Early
Detection of Cardiac Iron Deposition in Patients with Transfusion-Dependent
Thalassemia. PLoS One. 2016;11(10):e0164300.
89. Hamed AA, Elguindy W, Elhenawy YI, et al. Early Cardiac Involvement and
Risk Factors for the Development of Arrhythmia in Patients With β-Thalassemia
Major. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2016;38(1):5-11.
90. Detterich J, Noetzli L, Dorey F, et al. Electrocardiographic consequences of
cardiac iron overload in thalassemia major. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(2):139-44.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
91. Pennell DJ, Udelson JE, Arai AE, et al. Cardiovascular function and treatment
in β-thalassemia major: A consensus statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2013;128(3):281-308.
92. Rodrigues A, Guimarães-Filho FV, Braga JC, et al. Echocardiography in
thalassemic patients on blood transfusions and chelation without heart failure.
Arq Bras Cardiol. 2013;100(1):75-81.
93. Maggio A, Vitrano A, Calvaruso G, et al. Serial echocardiographic left ventricular
ejection fraction measurements: a tool for detecting thalassemia major patients
at risk of cardiac death. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2013;50(4):241-6.
94. Attar A, Hosseinpour A, Hosseinpour H, et al. Global longitudinal strain for
detection of cardiac iron overload in patients with thalassemia: A meta-analysis
of observational studies with individual-level participant data. Cardiovasc
Ultrasound. 2022;20(1):22.
95. Farmakis D, Triposkiadis F, Lekakis J, et al. Heart failure in haemoglobinopathies:
pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes, and management. Eur J Heart Fail.
2017;19(4):479-89.
96. Pennell DJ, Carpenter JP, Roughton M, et al. On improvement in ejection fraction
with iron chelation in thalassemia major and the risk of future heart failure. J
Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2011;13(1):45.
97. Elfaituri MK, Ghozy S, Ebied A, et al. Amlodipine as adjuvant therapy to
current chelating agents for reducing iron overload in thalassaemia major: A
systematic review, meta-analysis and simulation of future studies. Vox Sang.
2021;116(8):887-97.
98. Padhani ZA, Gangwani MK, Sadaf A, et al. Calcium channel blockers for preventing
cardiomyopathy due to iron overload in people with transfusion-dependent beta
thalassaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023;11(11):CD011626.
99. Derchi G, Galanello R, Bina P, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for pulmonary
arterial hypertension in a large group of β-thalassemia patients using right heart
catheterization: A Webthal study. Circulation. 2014;129(3):338-45.
100. Inthawong K, Charoenkwan P, Silvilairat S, et al. Pulmonary hypertension in
non-transfusion- dependent thalassemia: Correlation with clinical parameters,
liver iron concentration, and non- transferrin-bound iron. Hematology.
2015;20(10):610-7.
101. Chueamuangphan N, Patumanond J, Wongtheptien W, et al. Benefits of chronic
blood transfusion in hemoglobin E/β thalassemia with pulmonary arterial
hypertension. Int J Gen Med. 2014;7:411-6.
102. Jalalian R, Moghadamnia AA, Tamaddoni A, et al. Comparing the efficacy
of tadalafil versus placebo on pulmonary artery systolic pressure and right
ventricular function in patients with Beta- thalassaemia intermedia. Heart Lung
Circ. 2017;26(7):677-83.
103. Morris CR, Kim HY, Wood J, et al. Sildenafil therapy in thalassemia patients
with Doppler-defined risk of pulmonary hypertension. Haematologica.
2013;98(9):1359-67.
104. Finianos A, Matar CF, Taher A. Hepatocellular Carcinoma in β-Thalassemia
Patients: Review of the Literature with Molecular Insight into Liver Carcinogenesis.
Int J Mol Sci. 2018;19(12).
105. Hershko C, Link G, Cabantchik I. Pathophysiology of iron overload. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 1998;850:191-201.
106. Rishi G, Subramaniam VN. The liver in regulation of iron homeostasis. Am J
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2017;313(3):G157-g65.
107. Wood JC, Ghugre N. Magnetic resonance imaging assessment of excess iron in
thalassemia, sickle cell disease and other iron overload diseases. Hemoglobin.
2008;32(1-2):85-96.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
108. Wood JC. Guidelines for quantifying iron overload. Hematology Am Soc Hematol
Educ Program. 2014;2014(1):210-5.
109. Darvishi-Khezri H, Aliasgharian A, Naderisorki M, et al. Ferritin thresholds for
cardiac and liver hemosiderosis in β-thalassemia patients: A diagnostic accuracy
study. Sci Rep. 2022;12(1):17996.
110. Pipaliya N, Solanke D, Parikh P, et al. Comparison of Tissue Elastography With
Magnetic Resonance Imaging T2* and Serum Ferritin Quantification in Detecting
Liver Iron Overload in Patients With Thalassemia Major. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2017;15(2):292-8.e1.
111. Musallam KM, Motta I, Salvatori M, et al. Longitudinal changes in serum ferritin
levels correlate with measures of hepatic stiffness in transfusion-independent
patients with β-thalassemia intermedia. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2012;49(3-4):136-9.
112. Borgna-Pignatti C, Garani MC, Forni GL, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in
thalassaemia: an update of the Italian Registry. Br J Haematol. 2014;167(1):121-6.
113. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Daar S, et al. A Concise Review on the Frequency,
Major Risk Factors and Surveillance of Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC)
in β-Thalassemias: Past, Present and Future Perspectives and the ICET-A
Experience. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2020;12(1):e2020006.
114. Fragatou S, Tsourveloudis I, Manesis G. Incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma
in a thalassemia unit. Hemoglobin. 2010;34(3):221-6.
115. Tzartzeva K, Obi J, Rich NE, et al. Surveillance Imaging and Alpha Fetoprotein
for Early Detection of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Patients With Cirrhosis: A
Meta-analysis. Gastroenterology. 2018;154(6):1706-18.e1.
116. Lin SH, Lin CY, Hsu NT, et al. Reappraisal of the roles of alpha-fetoprotein in
hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance using large-scale nationwide database
and hospital-based information. J Formos Med Assoc. 2022;121(10):2085-92.
117. De Sanctis V, Elsedfy H, Soliman AT, et al. Endocrine profile of β-thalassemia
major patients followed from childhood to advanced adulthood in a tertiary care
center. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2016;20(4):451-9.
118. Arab-Zozani M, Kheyrandish S, Rastgar A, et al. A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis of Stature Growth Complications in β-thalassemia Major Patients. Ann
Glob Health. 2021;87(1):48.
119. Kinda A-H, Jessica Lee Siew H, Parijat D. Investigation and Management of
Endocrinopathies in Thalassaemia Major. In: Osaro E, Anjana M, editors. Human
Blood Group Systems and Haemoglobinopathies. Rijeka: IntechOpen; 2021. p.
Ch. 3.
120. Singh P, Seth A. Growth and endocrine issues in children with thalassemia.
Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2017;2(4):98-106.
121. Ismail HIHM, Ibrahim HM, Phak NH, et al. Paediatric Protocol For Malaysian
Hospitals 4th Edition. Kuala Lumpur: Malaysia Paediatric Association; 2019.
122. Mavinkurve M, Azriyanti AZ, Jalaludin MY. The short child: Importance of early
detection and timely referrai. Malays Fam Physician. 2021;16(3):6-15.
123. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, et al. Growth and endocrine disorders
in thalassemia: The international network on endocrine complications in
thalassemia (I-CET) position statement and guidelines. Indian J Endocrinol
Metab. 2013;17(1):8-18.
124. Grimberg A, DiVall SA, Polychronakos C, et al. Guidelines for Growth Hormone
and Insulin-Like Growth Factor-I Treatment in Children and Adolescents: Growth
Hormone Deficiency, Idiopathic Short Stature, and Primary Insulin-Like Growth
Factor-I Deficiency. Horm Res Paediatr. 2016;86(6):361-97.
125. Ministry of Health Malaysia.Clinical Practice Guidelines on The Use of Growth
Hormone in Children and Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2010.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
126. Ngim CF, Lai NM, Hong JY, et al. Growth hormone therapy for people with
thalassaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;5(5):CD012284.
127. Casale M, Baldini MI, Del Monte P, et al. Good Clinical Practice of the Italian
Society of Thalassemia and Haemoglobinopathies (SITE) for the Management
of Endocrine Complications in Patients with Haemoglobinopathies. J Clin Med.
2022;11(7).
128. Carsote M, Vasiliu C, Trandafir AI, et al. New Entity-Thalassemic Endocrine
Disease: Major Beta- Thalassemia and Endocrine Involvement. Diagnostics.
2022;12(8).
129. Nordenström A, Ahmed SF, van den Akker E, et al. Pubertal induction and
transition to adult sex hormone replacement in patients with congenital pituitary
or gonadal reproductive hormone deficiency: an Endo-ERN clinical practice
guideline. Eur J Endocrinol. 2022;186(6):G9-49.
130. United Kingdom Thalassaemia Society (UKTS). Standards for the Clinical Care
of Children and Adults with Thalassaemia in the UK 4th Edition. United Kingdom:
UKTS; 2023.
131. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, et al. The ICET-A Recommendations for
the Diagnosis and Management of Disturbances of Glucose Homeostasis in
Thalassemia Major Patients. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2016;8(1):e2016058.
132. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, et al. Diabetes and Glucose Metabolism in
Thalassemia Major: An Update. Expert Rev Hematol. 2016;9(4):401-8.
133. Tan KA, Lum SH, Yahya A, et al. Prevalence of growth and endocrine disorders
in Malaysian children with transfusion-dependent thalassaemia. Singapore Med
J. 2019;60(6):303-8.
134. Pepe A, Meloni A, Rossi G, et al. Cardiac complications and diabetes in
thalassaemia major: a large historical multicentre study. Br J Haematol.
2013;163(4):520-7.
135. ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al. 2. Classification and Diagnosis of
Diabetes: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2023. Diabetes Care. 2023;46(Suppl
1):S19-s40.
136. Libman I, Haynes A, Lyons S, et al. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus
Guidelines 2022: Definition, epidemiology, and classification of diabetes in
children and adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes. 2022;23(8):1160-74.
137. Soliman AT, Al Yafei F, Al-Naimi L, et al. Longitudinal study on thyroid function in
patients with thalassemia major: High incidence of central hypothyroidism by 18
years. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2013;17(6):1090-5.
138. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Canatan D, et al. Thyroid Disorders in Homozygous
β-Thalassemia: Current Knowledge, Emerging Issues and Open Problems.
Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2019;11(1):e2019029.
139. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Canatan D, et al. An ICET-A survey on occult and
emerging endocrine complications in patients with β-thalassemia major:
Conclusions and recommendations. Acta Biomed. 2019;89(4):481-9.
140. Belletrutti M, Bolster L, Corriveau-Bourque C, et al. Consensus Statement
on the Care of Patients with Thalassemia in Canada, 2nd Edition: Canadian
Hemoglobinopathy Association (CanHaem); 2018.
141. Jonklaas J, Bianco AC, Bauer AJ, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of
hypothyroidism: Prepared by the American Thyroid Association Task Force on
thyroid hormone replacement. 2014;24(12):1670-751.
142. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Canatan D, et al. An ICET- A survey on
Hypoparathyroidism in Patients with Thalassaemia Major and Intermedia: A
preliminary report. Acta Biomed. 2018;88(4):435-44.
143. Sleem GA, Al-Zakwani IS, Almuslahi M. Hypoparathyroidism in adult patients
with Beta- thalassemia major. Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J. 2007;7(3):215-8.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
144. De Sanctis V, Soliman A, Karimi M. Hypoparathyroidism. In: The Ludhiana
Booklet Growth disorders and endocrine complications in thalassaemia
[Internet]. Endo Thal, Scripta Manent. 2012.
145. El-Kholy M., Adrenal Disorders. In: Soliman AT et al., editors, The Ludhiana
Booklet. Growth disorders and endocrine complications in thalassaemia. Scripta
Manent; 2012.
146. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, et al. The ICET-A Survey on Current
Criteria Used by Clinicians for the Assessment of Central Adrenal Insufficiency
in Thalassemia: Analysis of Results and Recommendations. Mediterr J Hematol
Infect Dis. 2016;8(1):e2016034.
147. Hajimoradi M, Haseli S, Abadi A, et al. Musculoskeletal imaging manifestations
of beta- thalassemia. Skeletal Radiol. 2021;50(9):1749-62.
148. Stefanopoulos D, Papaioannou NA, Papavassiliou AG, et al. A contemporary
therapeutic approach to bone disease in beta-thalassemia - A review. J Frailty
Sarcopenia Falls. 2018;3(1):13-25.
149. Vogiatzi MG, Macklin EA, Fung EB, et al. Bone disease in thalassemia: A
frequent and still unresolved problem. J Bone Miner Res. 2009;24(3):543-57.
150. Gaudio A, Morabito N, Catalano A, et al. Pathogenesis of Thalassemia Majorassociated Osteoporosis: A Review with Insights from Clinical Experience. J Clin
Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2019;11(2):110-7.
151. Vogiatzi MG, Macklin EA, Fung EB, et al. Prevalence of fractures among the
Thalassemia syndromes in North America. Bone. 2006;38(4):571-5.
152. Ozturk Z, Genc GE, Gumuslu S. Minerals in thalassaemia major patients: An
overview. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2017;41:1-9.
153. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, et al. Osteoporosis in thalassemia major:
an update and the I-CET 2013 recommendations for surveillance and treatment.
Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2013;11(2):167-80.
154. Soliman A, De Sanctis V, Yassin M. Vitamin d status in thalassemia major: An
update. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2013;5(1):e2013057.
155. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of
Osteoporosis (3rd Edition). Putrajaya: MoH; 2022.
156. International Society for Clinical Densitometry (ISCD). 2019 ISCD Official
Positions - Pediatric. Skeletal Health Assessment in Children from Infancy to
Adolescence. ISCD; 2019. (Available at: www.ISCD.org).
157. Ward LM. Part I: Which Child with a Chronic Disease Needs Bone Health
Monitoring? Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2021;19(3):278-88.
158. Ward LM, Konji VN, Ma J. The management of osteoporosis in children.
Osteoporos Int. 2016;27(7):2147-79.
159. Bhardwaj A, Swe KMM, Sinha NK. Treatment for osteoporosis in people with
beta-thalassaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023;5(5):CD010429.
160. Mansour AK, Aly RM, Abdelrazek SY, et al. Prevalence of HBV and HCV infection
among multi- transfused Egyptian thalassemic patients. Hematol Oncol Stem
Cell Ther. 2012;5(1):54-9.
161. Ocak S, Kaya H, Cetin M, et al. Seroprevalence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C in
patients with thalassemia and sickle cell anemia in a long-term follow-up. Arch
Med Res. 2006;37(7):895-8.
162. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Health Facts 2021. Reference Data for Year 2020.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2021.
163. Muhamad NA, Ab Ghani RM, Abdul Mutalip MH, et al. Seroprevalence of
hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infection among Malaysian population. Sci
Rep. 2020;10(1):21009.
164. Liaw YF, Kao JH, Piratvisuth T, et al. Asian-Pacific consensus statement on the
management of chronic hepatitis B: a 2012 update. Hepatol Int. 2012;6(3):531-61.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
165. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of
Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults. Putrajaya: MoH 2022.
166. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-98.
167. Akhtar S, Nasir JA, Hinde A. The prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in
β-thalassemia patients in Pakistan: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC
public health. 2020;20(1):587.
168. Behzadifar M, Gorji HA, Bragazzi NL. The prevalence of hepatitis C virus
infection in thalassemia patients in Iran from 2000 to 2017: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Arch Virol. 2018;163(5):1131-40.
169. Lee WS, Teh CM, Chan LL. Risks of seroconversion of hepatitis B, hepatitis
C and human immunodeficiency viruses in children with multitransfused
thalassaemia major. J Paediatr Child Health. 2005;41(5-6):265-8.
170. Jamal R, Fadzillah G, Zulkifli SZ, et al. Seroprevalence of hepatitis B, hepatitis
C, CMV and HIV in multiply transfused thalassemia patients: Results from a
thalassemia day care center in Malaysia. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public
Health. 1998;29(4):792-4.
171. Angelucci E, Muretto P, Nicolucci A, et al. Effects of iron overload and hepatitis
C virus positivity in determining progression of liver fibrosis in thalassemia
following bone marrow transplantation. Blood. 2002;100(1):17-21.
172. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of
Chronic Hepatitis C in Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2019.
173. Omata M, Kanda T, Wei L, et al. APASL consensus statements and
recommendations for hepatitis C prevention, epidemiology, and laboratory
testing. Hepatol Int. 2016;10(5):681-701.
174. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL recommendations on
treatment of hepatitis C. J Hepatol. 2020;73(5):1170-218.
175. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Surat Pekeliling Ketua Pengarah Kesihatan
Malaysia Bil 10/2020. Kemaskini Carta Alir Ujian Saringan dan Pengesahan HIV.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2020.
176. Sakran W, Levin C, Kenes Y, et al. Clinical spectrum of serious bacterial
infections among splenectomized patients with hemoglobinopathies in Israel: A
37-year follow-up study. Infection. 2012;40(1):35-9.
177. Zafari M, Rad MTS, Mohseni F, et al. β-Thalassemia Major and Coronavirus-19,
Mortality and Morbidity: a Systematic Review Study. Hemoglobin. 2021;45(1):1-4.
178. Jean-Mignard E, De Luna G, Pascal L, et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients
with β- thalassemia: The French experience. Transfus Clin Biol. 2022;29(1):70-4.
179. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Guidelines on COVID-19 Vaccination in
Malaysia 4th Edition. Putrajaya: MoH; 2021.
180. Thalassaemia International Federation. Thalassaemia International Federation
Position Statetment Covid-19 Vaccines and Haemoglobin Disorders. Cyprus:
Thalassaemia International Federation; 2021.
181. Teawtrakul N, Jetsrisuparb A, Pongudom S, et al. Epidemiologic study of major
complications in adolescent and adult patients with thalassemia in Northeastern
Thailand: the E-SAAN study phase I. Hematology. 2018;23(1):55-60.
182. Hindawi S, Badawi M, Elfayoumi R, et al. The value of transfusion of phenotyped
blood units for thalassemia and sickle cell anemia patients at an academic
center. Transfusion. 2020;60 Suppl 1:S15-s21.
183. Taher AT, Musallam KM, Karimi M, et al. Splenectomy and thrombosis: the case
of thalassemia intermedia. J Thromb Haemost. 2010;8(10):2152-8.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
184. Chuncharunee S, Teawtrakul N, Siritanaratkul N, et al. Review of diseaserelated complications and management in adult patients with thalassemia: A
multi-center study in Thailand. PLoS One. 2019;14(3):e0214148.
185. Merchant RH, Shah AR, Ahmad J, et al. Post Splenectomy Outcome in
β-Thalassemia. Indian J Pediatr. 2015;82(12):1097-100.
186. Machado NO, Grant CS, Alkindi S, et al. Splenectomy for haematological
disorders: a single center study in 150 patients from Oman. Int J Surg.
2009;7(5):476-81.
187. Easow Mathew M, Sharma A, Aravindakshan R. Splenectomy for people
with thalassaemia major or intermedia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2016(6):CD010517.
188. Klaihmon P, Phongpao K, Kheansaard W, et al. Microparticles from
splenectomized β- thalassemia/HbE patients play roles on procoagulant
activities with thrombotic potential. Ann Hematol. 2017;96(2):189-98.
189. Abosdera MM, Almasry AE, Abdel-Moneim ES. Coagulation defects in
thalassemic patients. Pediatr Neonatol. 2017;58(5):421-4.
190. Pharmaceutical Services Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Antibiotic
Guideline (Fourth Edition). Petaling Jaya: MoH; 2024. (Available at: https://sites.
google.com/moh.gov.my/nag/home).
191. Ladjouze A, Donaldson M. Primary gonadal failure. Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2019;33(3):101295.
192. Mamsen LS, Kristensen SG, Pors SE, et al. Consequences of β-Thalassemia or
Sickle Cell Disease for Ovarian Follicle Number and Morphology in Girls Who
Had Ovarian Tissue Cryopreserved. Front Endocrinol. 2020;11:593718.
193. Origa R, Piga A, Quarta G, et al. Pregnancy and beta-thalassemia: An Italian
multicenter experience. Haematologica. 2010;95(3):376-81.
194. Berthaut I, Guignedoux G, Kirsch-Noir F, et al. Influence of sickle cell disease
and treatment with hydroxyurea on sperm parameters and fertility of human
males. Haematologica. 2008;93(7):988- 93.
195. Boga C, Asma S, Ozer C, et al. Gonadal Status and Sexual Function at LongTerm Follow-up after Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation in Adult Patients with
Sickle Cell Disease. Exp Clin Transplant. 2022.
196. Zafari M, Kosaryan M, Gill P, et al. Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of
β-thalassemia by detection of the cell-free fetal DNA in maternal circulation: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Hematol. 2016;95(8):1341-50.
197. Yang J, Peng CF, Qi Y, et al. Noninvasive prenatal detection of hemoglobin Bart
hydrops fetalis via maternal plasma dispensed with parental haplotyping using
the semiconductor sequencing platform. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2020;222(2):185.
e1-.e17.
198. Lai K, Li S, Lin W, et al. Invasive prenatal diagnosis of α-thalassemia to control
Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis syndrome: 15 years of experience. Arch Gynecol
Obstet. 2018;298(2):307-11.
199. Alfirevic Z, Navaratnam K, Mujezinovic F. Amniocentesis and chorionic
villus sampling for prenatal diagnosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;9(9):CD003252.
200. Akolekar R, Beta J, Picciarelli G, et al. Procedure-related risk of miscarriage
following amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2015;45(1):16-26.
201. Ngim CF, Lai NM, Ibrahim H, et al. Attitudes towards prenatal diagnosis and
abortion in a multi- ethnic country: a survey among parents of children with
thalassaemia major in Malaysia. J Community Genet. 2013;4(2):215-21.
202. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Guideline on Termination of Pregnancy (TOP) for
Hospitals in the Ministry of Health. Putrajaya: MoH; 2012.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
203. Pongsatha S, Tongsong T. Outcomes of pregnancy termination by misoprostol
at 14-32 weeks of gestation: a 10-year-experience. J Med Assoc Thai.
2011;94(8):897-901.
204. Jabatan Kemajuan Islam Malaysia. Kompilasi Pandangan Hukum Muzakarah
Jawatankuasa Fatwa Majlis Kebangsaan Bagi Hal Ehwal Ugama Islam Malaysia.
Putrajaya: JAKIM; 2015.
205. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG). Green-top
Guideline No. 66: Management of Beta Thalassaemia in Pregnancy. London:
RCOG;2014.
206. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Prevention & Treatment of Thromboembolism in
Pregnancy and Puerperium A Training Manual. Putrajaya: MoH; 2018.
207. Piccioni MG, Capone C, Vena F, et al. Use of deferoxamine (DFO) in transfusiondependent β- thalassemia during pregnancy: A retrospective study. Taiwan J
Obstet Gynecol. 2020;59(1):120- 2.
208. Diamantidis MD, Neokleous N, Agapidou A, et al. Iron chelation therapy of
transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia during pregnancy in the era of novel
drugs: Is deferasirox toxic? Int J Hematol. 2016;103(5):537-44.
209. Tongsong T, Srisupundit K, Luewan S. Outcomes of pregnancies affected by
hemoglobin H disease. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009;104(3):206-8.
210. Charoenboon C, Jatavan P, Traisrisilp K, et al. Pregnancy outcomes among
women with beta- thalassemia trait. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2016;293(4):771-4.
211. Luewan S, Srisupundit K, Tongsong T. Outcomes of pregnancies complicated
by beta- thalassemia/hemoglobin E disease. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
2009;104(3):203-5.
212. Mari G, Norton ME, Stone J, et al. Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM)
Clinical Guideline #8: the fetus at risk for anemia--diagnosis and management.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015;212(6):697-710.
213. Martinez-Portilla RJ, Lopez-Felix J, Hawkins-Villareal A, et al. Performance of
fetal middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity for prediction of anemia in
untransfused and transfused fetuses: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2019;54(6):722-31.
214. World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines Approved by the Guidelines
Review Committee. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2015
215. Li C, Mathews V, Kim S, et al. Related and unrelated donor transplantation
for β-thalassemia major: results of an international survey. Blood Adv.
2019;3(17):2562-70.
216. Anurathapan U, Hongeng S, Pakakasama S, et al. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation for homozygous β-thalassemia and β-thalassemia/hemoglobin E
patients from haploidentical donors. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2016;51(6):813-8.
217. Thiagarajan NR, Kumar CGD, Sahoo J, et al. Effect of Vitamin D and Calcium
Supplementation on Bone Mineral Content in Children with Thalassemia. Indian
Pediatr. 2019;56(4):307-10.
218. Bhardwaj A, Swe KM, Sinha NK, et al. Treatment for osteoporosis in people with
ß-thalassaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;3:CD010429.
219. Swe KM, Abas AB, Bhardwaj A, et al. Zinc supplements for treating thalassaemia
and sickle cell disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2013(6):CD009415.
220. Evangeli M, Mughal K, Porter JB. Which psychosocial factors are related
to chelation adherence in thalassemia? A systematic review. Hemoglobin.
2010;34(3):305-21.
221. Badawy SM, Morrone K, Thompson A, et al. Computer and mobile
technology interventions to promote medication adherence and disease
management in people with thalassemia. The Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2019;6(6):CD012900.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
222. Chu PY, Maslow GR, von Isenburg M, et al. Systematic Review of the Impact of
Transition Interventions for Adolescents With Chronic Illness on Transfer From
Pediatric to Adult Healthcare. J Pediatr Nurs. 2015;30(5):e19-27.
223. Crowley R, Wolfe I, Lock K, et al. Improving the transition between paediatric
and adult healthcare: a systematic review. Arch Dis Child. 2011;96(6):548-53.
224. Gabriel P, McManus M, Rogers K, et al. Outcome Evidence for Structured
Pediatric to Adult Health Care Transition Interventions: A Systematic Review. J
Pediatr. 2017;188:263-9.e15.
225. Pakbaz Z, Treadwell M, Kim HY, et al. Education and employment status of
children and adults with thalassemia in North America. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2010;55(4):678-83.
226. Bou-Fakhredin R, Ghanem NN, Kreidieh F, et al. A Report on the Education,
Employment and Marital Status of Thalassemia Patients from a Tertiary Care
Center in the Middle East. Hemoglobin. 2020;44(4):278-83.
227. Elalfy MS, Adly AA, Ismail EA, et al. Therapeutic superiority and safety of
combined hydroxyurea with recombinant human erythropoietin over hydroxyurea
in young β-thalassemia intermedia patients. Eur J Haematol. 2013;91(6):522-33.
228. Karimi M, Zarei T, Bahmanimehr A, et al. Long-term safety and efficacy of
hydroxyurea in patients with non-transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia: a
comprehensive single-center experience. Ann Hematol. 2021;100(12):2901-7.
229. European
Medicines Agency.
Reblozyl (Available at:
https://www.
ema.europa.eu/en/medicines/human/EPAR/reblozyl).
230. US Food and Drug Administration. REBLOZYL® Prescribing Information2019
(Available
at:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/
label/2020/761136orig2lbl.pdf).
231. Cappellini MD, Viprakasit V, Taher AT, et al. A Phase 3 Trial of Luspatercept
in Patients with Transfusion-Dependent β-Thalassemia. N Engl J Med.
2020;382(13):1219-31.
232. Taher AT, Cappellini MD, Kattamis A, et al. Luspatercept for the treatment of
anaemia in non- transfusion-dependent β-thalassaemia (BEYOND): A phase
2, randomised, double-blind, multicentre, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
Haematol. 2022;9(10):e733-e44.
233. Kuo KHM, Layton DM, Lal A, et al. Safety and efficacy of mitapivat, an
oral pyruvate kinase activator, in adults with non-transfusion dependent
α-thalassaemia or β-thalassaemia: An open- label, multicentre, phase 2 study.
Lancet. 2022;400(10351):493-501.
234. Taher AT, Karakas Z, Cassinerio E, et al. Efficacy and safety of ruxolitinib in
regularly transfused patients with thalassemia: results from a phase 2a study.
Blood. 2018;131(2):263-5.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effectiveness and safety of the
following chelators in TDT and NTDT?
a. deferoxamine b. deferiprone c. deferasirox d. combination therapy
Database: Ovid MEDLINE® and Epub Ahead of Print, In-Process, InData-Review & Other Non- Indexed Citations, Daily and Versions®
<1946 to January 03, 2022>
1. transfusion dependent thalass?emia*.tw.
2. transfusion-dependent thalass?emia*.tw.
3. non-transfusion dependent thalass?emia*.tw.
4. non transfusion dependent thalass?emia*.tw.
5. THALASSEMIA/
6. thalass?emia*.tw.)
7. BETA-THALASSEMIA/
8. (thalass?emia adj1 intermedia*).tw.
9. (thalass?emia* adj1 (minor or major or beta)).tw.
10. beta-thalass?emia.tw.
11. (beta type adj2 thalassemia*).tw.
12. ALPHA-THALASSEMIA/
13. a-thalass?emia.tw.
14. (alpha adj1 thalass?emia*).tw.
15. thalass?emia-alpha.tw.
16. alpha-thalass?emia*.tw.
17. (h?emoglobin h adj2 disease*).tw.
18. DELTA-THALASSEMIA/
19. delta thalass?emia*.tw.
20. delta-thalass?emia*.tw.
21. 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14
or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19 or 20
22. DEFEROXAMINE/
23. deferoxamine.tw.
24. (deferoxamine adj1 (b or mes#late or methanesulfonate)).tw.
25. deferrioxamine b.tw.
26. desferrioxamine b.tw.
27. desferioximine.tw.
28. desferrioxamine.tw.
29. desferroxamine.tw.
30. desferal.tw.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
31. (desferrioxamine b adj2 mesylate).tw.
32. DEFERIPRONE/
33. 1,2 dimethyl 3 hydroxy 4 pyridinone.tw.
34. 1,2 dimethyl 3 hydroxypyrid* 4 one.tw.
35. 1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxy-4-pyridinone.tw.
36. 1,2-dimethyl-3-hydroxypyrid*-4-one.tw.
37. 3 hydroxy 1,2 dimethyl 4 pyridinone.tw.
38. 3-hydroxy-1,2-dimethyl-4-pyridinone.tw.
39. deferiprone.tw.
40. ferriprox.tw.
41. DEFERASIROX/
42. Deferasirox.tw.
43. Exjade.tw.
44. IRON CHELATING AGENTS/
45. (iron adj2 (chelat* or chelating agent*)).tw.
46. 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27 or 28 or 29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or
34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or 38 or 39 or 40 or 41 or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45
47. 21 and 46
48. limit 47 to (English language and humans and yr=”2009 -Current”)
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
For TDT
1. What is the accuracy of the following tests in the diagnosis of
thalassaemia?
a. Hb analysis
b. Molecular tests – diagnosis and modifiers, phenotype
corelations
c.
Sequencing
2. What are the most cost-effective screening programmes for
thalassaemia?
a. population screening
b. cascade screening
c.
antenatal screening
d. pre-marital screening
3. Genetic counselling
3.1. Who should be targeted for genetic counselling in TDT and
NTDT?
3.2. What information should be discussed during genetic
counselling in TDT and NTDT?
4. Blood transfusion
4.1. What is the target pre-transfusion Hb in TDT and NTDT?
4.2. What are the correlation between auto- or allo-antibodies and
transfusion in TDT and NTDT?
4.3. Is pre-storage leucodepletion more effective and safer than
bedside filtration in TDT and NTDT?
5. Assessment of iron burden
5.1. What is the accuracy and safety of MRI for iron overload
quantification in TDT and NTDT? – liver and cardiac
5.2. What is the role of MRI for assessment of iron overload in
endocrine organs in TDT and NTDT?
6. What are the effectiveness and safety of the following chelators in
TDT and NTDT: reducing iron burden, organ damage and mortality?
a. deferoxamine
b. deferiprone
c.
deferasirox
d. combination therapy
7. What is the effective and safe assessment, monitoring, preventive
measure and treatment for the following iron overload complications
in thalassaemia?
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
a. cardiovascular system
b. liver disease
c.
endocrine and osteoporosis
8. What is the effective and safe assessment, monitoring, preventive
measure and treatment for the following infective complications in
thalassaemia?
a. transfusion-related
b. splenectomy-related
c.
iron chelation therapy-related
d. Covid-19 related
9. What are the indications and complications of splenectomy in TDT
and NTDT?
10. Fertility and pregnancy
10.1. What is the effect of TDT and NTDT on puberty, menstruation
and fertility? How should they be assessed?
10.2. What is the safe and effective treatment for TDT- and NTDTrelated problem of puberty, menstruation and fertility?
10.3. What is the appropriate assessment for male, female or
both couple with TDT and NTDT who are unable to conceive
spontaneously?
10.4. What is the accuracy and safety of different methods of
prenatal diagnosis for thalassaemia?
a. chorionic villi sampling
b. amniocentesis
c.
non-invasive prenatal testing
10.5. Regarding termination of pregnancy in TDT and NTDT, what
are the:
a. indication?
b. effective and safe method?
c.
effective and safe timing?
10.6. What are the effective and safe foetal assessment,
monitoring, preventive measure and treatment for the
following complications of thalassaemia in pregnancy?
a. foetal anaemia (including in-utero foetal transfusion)
b. small for gestational age/intrauterine growth restriction
10.7. What are the effective and safe intrapartum managements
for patients with thalassaemia?
10.8. What are the effective and safe post-partum managements
of thalassaemia patients?
a. venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
b. contraception
c.
breastfeeding
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
11. What is the effectiveness and safety of the following in treatment of
TDT?
a. matched siblings haematopoietic stem cell transplant
b. alternative donors and stem cell sources of stem cell transplant
12. Are the following treatments effective and safe in improving quality
of life in TDT and NTDT?
a. nutrition and supplements
b. psychological support – non-adherence to chelation, transition
to adult
c.
education/employment/marriage
13. What is the role of novel/other therapies (including gene therapy) in
reducing transfusion requirement?
a. hydroxyurea
b. luspatercept and other erythrocyte stimulating agents
c.
gene therapy
For NTDT
14. What are the indications for blood transfusion in NTDT?
15. What is the effective and safe assessment, monitoring, preventive
measure and treatment for the following complications in NTDT?
(other than iron overload complications)
a. thrombotic disease
b. leg ulcers
c.
haemolytic crisis
d. gallstones
e. extramedullary haematopoiesis
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
A. Peripheral Blood Film and Haemoglobin Profiles in Beta
Thalassaemia Syndrome
Figure 1a and 1b: Peripheral blood film from a patient with compound heterozygous
Hb E/ β- thalassaemia (βCD26/βIVS1-5(G>C)) and homozygous β zero FIL deletion
(β0FIL/β0FIL) shows severe anaemia with marked hypochromic microcytosis with
anisopoikilocytosis, target cells, polychromasia and nucleated RBC (red arrows and
box)
Figure 1c and 1d: HPLC and CE from a patient with patient Hb E/β1-5(G>C)
thalassaemia. It shows that 31.9% and 43.6% of the haemoglobin present is
haemoglobin F (red arrow) and zone 7 in HPLC and CE respectively. Apart from that,
55.8% is in the A2 (represent a combination of Hb E and Hb A2) window (blue arrow)
and 45.5% in zone 4 (represent Hb E).
Figure 1e and 1f: HPLC and CE from a patient with β-thalassaemia major (β0FIL/β0FIL).
There is no normal Hb A. Almost all Hb is Hb F. The Hb A2 fraction is increased.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
B. Peripheral Blood Film and Haemoglobin Profiles in
Hb H Disease
Figure 2a: Peripheral blood film from a patient with Hb H disease shows marked
anisopoikilocytosis with prominent target cells and hypochromia (red arrows). (2b)
Positive H inclusion test in α-thalassaemia shows golf ball appearance (precipitated
Hb H in RBCs) in New Methylene Blue stain (red arrows).
Figure 2c and 2d: Hb profiles using HPLC and CE show a variant Hb (Hb H by red
arrow) in pre-calibration peak in patient with deletional Hb H disease (--SEA/ -α3.7).
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
MOLECULAR SPECTRUM OF β-THALASSAEMIA AND
α-THALASSAEMIA COMMONLY IDENTIFIED AMONG
MALAYSIAN POPULATION BASED ON ETHNICITY
A.
Molecular spectrum of β-thalassaemia identified among
Malaysian population based on ethnicity
codon 19 (A>G) Hb Malay
IVS 1-5 (G>C)
IVS 1-1 (G>T)
PolyA(AATAAA>AATAGA)
codon 26 (G>A)
NG_000007.3:g.70653A>G
NG_000007.3:g.70691G>C
NG_000007.3:g.70687G>T
NG_000007.3:g.72130A>G
NG_000007.3: g.70673G>A
β+
β0/β+(severe)
β0
β+
β+/variant
Ethnicity
β- gene mutation
HGVS Nomenclature
Severity
Source
2, level III
4, level III
6, level III
7, level III
Malay
codon 26 (G>A) Hb E
IVS 1-5 (G>C)
IVS 1-1 (G>T)
codon 19 (A>G) Hb Malay
codons 41/42 (–TTCT) β0
Codon 17 (A>T) β0
NG_000007.3: g.70673G>A
NG_000007.3:g.70691G>C
NG_000007.3:g.70687G>T
NG_000007.3:g.70653A>G
NG_000007.3:g.70848_70851 del
NG_000007.3:g.70646A>T
β+/variant
β0/β+(severe)
β0
β+ β0
β0
Malay
5, level III
codon 26 (G>A) Hb E
IVS 1-5 (G>C)
IVS 1-1 (G>T)
CD 41/42 (-TTCT)
codon 19 (A>G) Hb Malay
PolyA (AATAAA>AATAGA)
Cap + 1 5’UTR (A>C)
NG_000007.3: g.70673G>A
NG_000007.3:g.70691G>C
NG_000007.3:g.70687G>T
NG_000007.3:g.70848_70851 del
NG_000007.3:g.70653A>G
NG_000007.3:g.72130A>G
β+/variant
β0/β+
β0
β0
β+ β+ β+
Malay
codons 41/42 (–TTCT)
IVS 2-654 (C>T)
codon 17 (A>T)
-28 (A>G)
NG_000007.3:g.70848_70851 del
NG_000007.3:g.71693C>T
NG_000007.3:g.70646A>T
NG_000007.3:g.70517A>G
β0
β+ (severe)
β0 β+
Chinese
codon 43 (G>T)
NG_000007.3:g.70854G>T
β0
Indian
codon 26 (G>A) Hb E
NG_000007.3: g.70673G>A
β+/variant
Orang Asli
codon 43 (G>T) β0
Codon 15 (G>A) (β0 )
NG_000007.3:g.70854G>T
NG_000007.3:g.70641G>A
β0
Indian
--FIL (Filipino β0-thal)
NG_000007.3:
g.66259_184734del118477
β0
Sabahan
--FIL (Filipino β0-thal)
NG_000007.3:
g.66259_184734del118477
β0
Sabahan
--FIL (Filipino β0-thal)
NG_000007.3:
g.66259_184734del118477
β0
Sarawakian
CD 41/42 (-TTCT)
IVS 2-654 (C>T)
-28 (A>G)
IVS 1-5 (G>C)
NG_000007.3:g.70848_70851 del
NG_000007.3:g.71693C>T
NG_000007.3:g.70517A>G
NG_000007.3:g.70691G>C
β0
β+ (severe)
β+
β0/β+ (severe)
Chinese
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
B. Molecular spectrum of α-thalassaemia identified among
Malaysian population based on ethnicity
Source:
1. Ahmad R, Saleem M, Aloysious NS, et al. Distribution of alpha thalassaemia
gene variants in diverse ethnic populations in Malaysia: data from the institute for
medical research. Int J Mol Sci. 2013;14(9):18599-614.
2. Alwi ZB, Syed-Hassan SR. Thalassaemia in Malaysia. Hemoglobin. 2022;46(1):4552.
3. Azma RZ, Ainoon O, Hafiza A, et al. Molecular characteristic of alpha thalassaemia
among patients diagnosed in UKM Medical Centre. Malays J Pathol. 2014;36(1):2732.
4. George E, Ann TJ. Genotype-phenotype diversity of beta-thalassemia in Malaysia:
treatment options and emerging therapies. Med J Malaysia. 2010;65(4):256-60.
5. Hassan S, Ahmad R, Zakaria Z, et al. Detection of β-globin gene mutations
among β-thalassaemia carriers and patients in malaysia: Application of multiplex
amplification refractory mutation system- polymerase chain reaction. Malays J
Med Sci. 2013;20(1):13-20.
6. Koh DXR, Raja Sabudin RZA, Mohd Yusoff M, et al. Molecular characterisation
of α- and β- thalassaemia among indigenous senoi orang asli communities in
peninsular malaysia. Ann Hum Genet. 2017 Sep;81(5):205-212.
7. Tan JA, Lee PC, Wee YC, et al. High prevalence of alpha- and beta-thalassemia in
the Kadazandusuns in east Malaysia: challenges in providing effective health care
for an indigenous group. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010;2010:706872.
αα/-α3.7
αα/--SEA
αCSα
αCD59α
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967 del
NG_000006.1:g.26264_45564 del
NG_000006.1:g.34461T>C
NG_000006.1:g.34071G>A
α+
α0
αT
αT
αα/--SEA
αα/-α3.7
αα/-α4.2
αCSα
NG_000006.1:g.26264_45564del
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
NG_000006.1:g.30682_34939de
NG_000006.1:g.34461T>C
α0
α+
α+
αT
Ethnicity
β- gene mutation
HGVS Nomenclature
Severity
Source
3, level III
1, level III
1, level III;
6, level III
Malay
Chinese
αα/-α3.7
αα/--SEA
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
NG_000006.1:g.26264_45564del
α+
α0
α+
α0
Indian
αα/-α3.7
αα/--SEA
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
α+
Indian
αα/-α3.7
αCSα
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
NG_000006.1:g.34461T>C
α+
α0
Orang Asli
αα/-α3.7
αα/--SEA
αα/-α3.7
αα/-αFIL
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
NG_000006.1:g.26264_45564del
Sabahan
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
NG_000006.1:g.12483_43158deI
α+
α0
Sarawakian
αα/-α3.7
αα/--SEA
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
NG_000006.1:g.26264_45564del
α+
α0
Malay
αα/--SEA
αα/-α3.7
NG_000006.1:g.26264_45564del
NG_000006.1:g.34164_37967del
α+
α0
Chinese
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
MALAYSIA THALASSAEMIA DIAGNOSIS (MTD) CODE FOR HB
ANALYSIS AND DNA ANALYSIS
A. HB Analysis Code
No abnormality detected
Hb H disease
Hb Constant Spring
Hb H disease: Hb H-Hb Constant Spring (non-deletional)
Hb H disease: Hb H-Hb Q
Hb Barts Hydrops Foetalis
Hb H disease with other Hb variant
Hb Constant Spring Homozygous (new*)
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
α-thalassaemia
β-thalassaemia
Hemoglobinopathies/Thal Hemoglobinopathies
Hb Variant (Pending Molecular Confirmation)
β-thalassaemia trait
β-thalassaemia trait with iron deficiency (if iron status known)
β-thalassaemia intermedia
β-thalassaemia major
β-thalassaemia trait with Hb variant
β-thalassaemia trait with suspected alpha thalassaemia/iron deficiency
β-thalassaemia trait with suspected triplication alpha (new*)
Diagnosis
CODE
Hb E Heterozygous/Hb E trait
Hb E Homozygous
Hb E β-thalassaemia
Hb E with iron deficiency (if iron status known)
Hb E with suspected α-thalassaemia/iron deficiency
Hb E with co-inheritance Hb variant (e.g. Hb Malay, D, J, C, S etc.)
Hb S trait
Hb S with iron deficiency (if iron status known)
Hb S with suspected α-thalassaemia/iron deficiency
Hb S Homozygous
Hb S β-interaction
Hb Q Thailand
Hb E-Beta with suspected α-thalassaemia/iron deficiency
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
C13
Hb C
Hb D
Hb J
Hb Lepore
Hb O Indonesia
HPFH or Delta Beta Thalassemia (Hb F level ≥5 %)
α-thalassaemia (Double gene deletion). DNA analysis for α gene required
(MCH <25)
Borderline Hb A2 β-thalassaemia trait (CE: A2≥ 3.3 HPLC: ≥3.4). DNA
analysis for β gene required
Other Hb variants
α-thalassaemia cannot be excluded (MCH 25 - 26.9) MCV <80 pg, Hb N
D1
D2
D4
D7
D10
D12
D13
D14
D15
D16
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
NOTES:
*NEW CODE: A7, B7
DELETED CODE: D3,D5,D6,D8,D9,D11
Date of 8th revision: 4 September 2023
B. DNA Analysis (Alpha) Code
Iron deficiency anaemia (if iron status known)
Suspected iron deficiency anaemia
High F due to acquired/physiology (e.g. pregnancy, age, sepsis)
Inconclusive (e.g. recent transfusion severe anaemia storage changes)
Miscellaneous (e.g. post-transplant, JMML)
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
Diagnosis
CODE
Others
Heterozygous for the alpha plus thalassaemia 3.7 deletion
Heterozygous for the alpha plus thalassaemia 4.2 deletion
Heterozygous for the alpha plus thalassaemia 3.5MAL deletion
Others
Result
CODE
Heterozygous Alpha Plus (Single Gene Deletion)
Homozygous Alpha Plus (Single Gene Deletion)
Alpha Zero (Heterozygous Two Genes Deletion)
Compound Heterozygous Alpha Thalassaemia (Single Gene Deletion with Others)
AP1
AP2
AP3
APHE
Homozygous for the alpha plus thalassaemia 3.7 deletion
Homozygous for the alpha plus thalassaemia 4.2 deletion
Homozygous for the alpha plus thalassaemia 3.5MAL deletion
Others
AP11
AP22
AP33
APHO
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 4.2 and
3.7 deletion
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 3.7 deletion and
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring)
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 4.2deletion and
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring)
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 3.7 deletion and
Codon 59 (GGC → GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 4.2 deletion and
Codon 59 (GGC → GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 3.7 deletion and
Codon 125 (CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 4.2 deletion and
Codon 125 (CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 3.7 deletion and
Initiation codon
Compound heterozygous for the alpha thalassaemia 4.2 deletion and
Initiation codon
others
Heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia South East Asian
deletion
CH12
CH1CS
CH2CS
CH1AD
CH2AD
CH1QS
CH2QS
CH1IC
CH2IC
AZSE
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Result
CODE
Heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia Filipino deletion
Heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia Thailand deletion
Heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia Mediterranean deletion
Heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia 20.5 kb deletion
Others
AZFI
AZTH
AZME
AZ20
AZ
Hb Variant
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring)
Codon 59 (GGC → GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Codon 125 (CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Termination codon (TAA → TAT) mutation (Hb Pakse)
Codon 35 (TCC → CCC) mutation (Hb Ѐvora)
Codon 30 (∆GAG) mutation
Initiation codon (ATG → A-G) mutation identified
α1 Codon 74 (GAC>CAC) Hb Q-Thailand
α1 Codon 116 (GAG>AAG) Hb O-Indonesia
α1 Codon 120 (GCG>GAG) Hb J-Meerut
Others
Heterozygous Hb Variant
HVCS
HVAD
HVQS
HVPA
HVEV
HV30
HVIC
HVQT
HVOI
HVJM
HV
Heterozygous Termination codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb
Constant Spring)
Heterozygous Codon 59 (GGC → GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Heterozygous Codon 125 (CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Heterozygous Termination codon (TAA → TAT) mutation (Hb Pakse)
Heterozygous Codon 35 (TCC → CCC) mutation (Hb Ѐvora)
Heterozygous Codon 30 (∆GAG) mutation
Heterozygous Initiation codon (ATG → A-G) mutation identified.
Heterozygous α1 Codon 74 (GAC>CAC) Hb Q-Thailand
Heterozygous α1 Codon 116 (GAG>AAG) Hb O-Indonesia
Heterozygous α1 Codon 120 (GCG>GAG) Hb J-Meerut
Others
HTCS
HTAD
HTQS
HTPA
HTEV
HT30
HTIC
HTQT
HTOI
HTJM
HTV
Homozygous Hb Variant
Homozygous Termination codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb
Constant Spring)
Homozygous Codon 59 (GGC → GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Homozygous Codon 125 (CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Others
HVCSCS
HVADAD
HVQSQS
HVHV
Co-Inheritance 2 Types of Hb Variant
Hb H Disease - Deletional
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) (Hb Constant Spring ) and Codon
59 (GGC → GAC) (Hb Adana)
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring) and
Codon 125 (CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) (Hb Constant Spring ) mutations
and Initiation codon (ATG → A-G)
Termination codon (TAA → CAA) (Hb Constant Spring ) mutations
and Codon 35 (TCC → CCC) mutation (Hb Ѐvora)
Others
Compound heterozygous alpha plus thalassaemia 3.7 and alpha zero
thalassaemia South East Asian deletions
HVCSAD
HVCSQS
HVCSIC
HVCSEV
HVHO
HD1SE
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Result
CODE
Alpha zero thalassaemia South East Asian deletion and Termination
Codon (TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring)
Alpha zero thalassaemia South East Asian deletion and Codon 59
(GGC → GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Alpha zero thalassaemia South East Asian deletion and Codon 125
(CTG → CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Alpha zero thalassaemia Filipino deletion and Termination Codon
(TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring)
Alpha zero thalassaemia Filipino deletion and Codon 59 (GGC →
GAC) mutation (Hb Adana)
Alpha zero thalassaemia Filipino deletion and Codon 125 (CTG →
CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze) identified
Alpha zero thalassaemia Thailand deletion and Termination Codon
(TAA → CAA) mutation (Hb Constant Spring)
Alpha zero thalassaemia Thailand and Codon 59 (GGC → GAC)
mutation (Hb Adana)
Alpha zero thalassaemia Thailand deletion and Codon 125 (CTG →
CCG) mutation (Hb Quang Sze)
Others
HNDSECS
HNDSEAD
HNDSEQS
HNDFICS
HNDFIAD
HNDFIQS
HNDTHCS
HNDTHAD
HNDTHQS
HND
Compound heterozygous alpha plus thalassaemia 3.7 and alpha zero
thalassaemia Filipino deletions
Compound heterozygous alpha plus thalassaemia 3.7 and alpha zero
thalassaemia Thailand deletions
Compound heterozygous alpha plus thalassaemia 4.2 and alpha zero
thalassaemia South East Asian deletions
Compound heterozygous alpha plus thalassaemia 4.2 and alpha zero
thalassaemia Filipino deletions
Compound heterozygous alpha plus thalassaemia 4.2 and alpha zero
thalassaemia Thailand deletions
Others
HD1FI
HD1TH
HD2SE
HD2FI
HD2TH
HD
Hb H Disease - Non-Deletional
Homozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia South East Asian
deletion identified
Homozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia Filipino deletion
identified
Homozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia Thailand deletion
Compound heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia South
East Asian and alpha zero Thailand deletions
Compound heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia South
East Asian and alpha zero Filipino deletions
Compound heterozygous for the alpha zero thalassaemia Filipino
and alpha zero Thailand deletion
Others
HFSESE
HFFIFI
HFTHTH
HFSETH
HFSEFI
HFFITH
HF
Alpha Globin Gene Amplification / Insertion
Hydrop Foetalis
Variant of Undetermined Clinical Significance (Alpha)
Unknown Clinical Significance for alpha globin gene variant
(heterozygous)
AMC
Triplication Alpha Anti 3.7
Triplication alpha anti 4.2
279nt insertion
Other rare duplication
Others - rare mutations detected by sequencing
MCAT1
MCAT2
MSIN279
MCATMC
RM
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
C. DNA Analysis (Beta) Code
Result
CODE
Uncharacterised single alpha globin gene deletion (heterozygous)
Uncharacterised single alpha globin gene deletion (homozygous)
Uncharacterised single alpha globin gene deletion with other
uncharacterised single alpha globin gene deletion (compound)
AUP
HAUP
CAUP
AUZ
HAUZ
CAUZ
Unknown Clinical Significance for alpha globin gene variant
(homozygous)
Unknown Clinical Significance for alpha globin gene variant
(compound)
HAMC
CAMC
Uncharacterised Single Alpha Gene Deletion (Alpha Plus)
Uncharacterised Two Alpha Gene Deletion (Alpha Zero)
Uncharacterised two alpha globin gene deletion (heterozygous)
Uncharacterised two alpha globin gene deletion (homozygous)
Uncharacterised two alpha globin gene deletion with other
uncharacterised two alpha globin gene deletion (compound)
Beta Thalassaemia and Variant
Heterozygous Beta Plus
Heterozygous Beta Zero
Heterozygous Hb E
Heterozygous Beta Variants
Homozygous Beta plus
Homozygous Beta zero
Homozygous Hb E
Homozygous Beta variant
Compound Heterozygous Beta plus & Beta plus
Compound Heterozygous Beta plus & Beta zero
Compound Heterozygous Beta plus & Hb E
Compound Heterozygous Beta plus & Beta variant
Compound Heterozygous Beta zero & Beta zero
Compound Heterozygous Beta zero & Hb E
Compound Heterozygous Beta zero & Beta variant
Compound Heterozygous Hb E & Beta variant
Compound Heterozygous Beta variant & Beta variant
BP
BZ
BE
BV
HBPBP
HBZBZ
HBEBE
HBVBV
BPBP
BPBZ
BPBE
BPBV
BZBZ
BZBE
BZBV
BEBV
BVBV
Variant of Undetermined Clinical Significance (Beta)
Uncharacterised Beta Gene Deletion
Unknown Clinical Significance for beta globin gene variant
(heterozygous)
Unknown Clinical Significance for beta globin gene variant
(homozygous)
Unknown Clinical Significance for beta globin gene variant
(compound)
BMC
HBMC
CBMC
Uncharacterised beta globin gene deletion (heterozygous)
Uncharacterised beta globin gene deletion (homozygous)
Uncharacterised beta globin gene deletion (compound)
BU
HBU
CBU
CODES
RESULTS
Gamma Gene Polymorphism
Gamma Plymorphism
GMC
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
CODES
RESULTS
Gamma Gene Duplication
Gamma Delta Beta Thalassaemia
Gamma Delta Beta Thalassaemia and Delta Plus/ Zero/ Variant
Gamma Delta Beta Thalassaemia and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Gamma Plymorphism
GMC
Heterozygous Gamma Delta Beta Zero
Homozygous Gamma Delta Beta Zero
GDBZ
HGDBZ
Compound gamma delta beta zero & beta zero
Compound gamma delta beta zero & beta plus
Compound gamma delta beta zero & Hb E
Compound gamma delta beta zero & beta variant
GDBZBZ
GDBZBP
GDBZBE
GDBZBV
Compound gamma delta beta zero & delta plus
Compound gamma delta beta zero & delta zero
Compound gamma delta beta zero & delta variant
GDBZDP
GDBZDZ
GDBZDV
Delta Plus Thalassaemia
Heterozygous delta plus
Homozygous delta plus
Compound Heterozygous delta plus & delta plus
DP
HDP
DPDP
Delta Zero Thalassaemia
Heterozygous delta zero
Homozygous delta zero
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & delta zero
DZ
HDZ
DZDZ
Delta Variant
Heterozygous delta variant
Homozygous delta variant
Compound Heterozygous delta variant & delta variant
DV
HDV
DVDV
Delta Plus Thalassaemia and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Compound Heterozygous delta plus & beta plus
Compound Heterozygous delta plus & beta zero
Compound Heterozygous delta plus & Hb E
Compound Heterozygous delta plus & beta variant
DPBP
DPBZ
DPBE
DPBV
Delta Zero Thalassaemia and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & beta plus
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & beta zero
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & Hb E
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & beta variant
DZBP
DZBZ
DZBE
DZBV
Delta Variant and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & beta plus
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & beta zero
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & Hb E
Compound Heterozygous delta zero & beta variant
DVBP
DVBZ
DVBE
DVBV
Delta Beta Zero Thalassaemia
Heterozygous delta beta zero
Homozygous delta beta zero
Compound Heterozygous delta beta zero & delta beta zero
DBZ
HDBZ
DBZDBZ
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
CODES
RESULTS
Delta Beta Variant
Heterozygous delta beta variant
Homozygous delta beta variant
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & delta beta variant
DBV
HDBV
DBVDBV
Delta Beta Zero Thalassaemia and Delta Beta Variant
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & delta beta variant
DBZDBV
Delta Beta Zero Thalassaemia and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Delta Beta Variant Thalassaemia and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & beta plus
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & beta zero
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & Hb E
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & beta variant
DBZBP
DBZBZ
DBZBE
DBZBV
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & beta plus
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & beta zero
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & Hb E
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & beta variant
DBVBP
DBVBZ
DBVBE
DBVBV
Delta Beta Variant Thalassaemia and Beta Thalassaemia / Variant
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & gamma delta beta zero
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & gamma delta beta zero
DBZGDBZ
DBVGDBZ
Delta Beta Zero Thalassaemia and Delta Plus/ Zero/ Variant
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & delta plus
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & delta zero
Compound heterozygous delta beta zero & delta variant
DBZDP
DBZDZ
DBZDV
Delta Beta Variant and Delta Delta Plus/ Zero/ Variant
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & delta plus
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & delta zero
Compound heterozygous delta beta variant & delta variant
DBVDP
DBVDZ
DBVDV
Source: Ministry of Health. Malaysia. Laporan Tahunan 2024 Bahagian Perkembangan
Kesihatan Keluarga. (Unpublished document)
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
THALASSAEMIA SCREENING CARD
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
RISK OF INHERITANCE BASED ON CARRIER
OR DISEASE STATUS OF COUPLES
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Genotype results and corresponding phenotypes:
Moderate anaemia and usually not transfusion dependent
Moderate anaemia and usually not transfusion dependent
Asymptomatic
(FBC parameters are more severe)
Hydrop foetalis
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
Variable phenotype depending on the variants
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
Moderate to severe anaemia
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
Asymptomatic
3 α genes affected
2 α genes affected at both allele
2 α genes affected
2 α genes affected at both allele
1 α gene affected
1 α gene affected at both allele
1 α gene affected
2 α genes affected
1 β gene affected
β genes affected at both allele
1 β gene with concomitant 2 α genes
affected
1 β gene with concomitant 1 α gene
affected
2 β genes affected
1 β gene affected
2 α genes with concomitant 1 β gene
affected
1 α gene with concomitant 1 β gene
affected
Hb H disease
Hb H phenotype
αo trait (heterozygous)
αo homozygous
α+ trait (heterozygous)
α+ homozygous
αT trait
αT homozygous/ compound
heterozygous
Hb E trait
Hb E homozygous
Hb E trait with αo trait
Hb E trait with α+ trait
Hb E β thalassaemia
β trait
αo trait with β trait
α+ trait with β trait
Patient
Patient
Carrier
α thal major
Carrier
Carrier
Carrier
Patient
Carrier
Carrier
Carrier
Carrier
Patient
Carrier
Carrier
Carrier
Gene/genes affected
Phenotype
Patient/
Carrier
Symptoms
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
A. Summary of Iron Chelators
Source:
1. European Medicines Agency. Ferriprox: EPAR - Product Information (Available
at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/ferriprox-eparproduct- information_en.pdf).
2. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of
Thalassaemia. Putrajaya: MoH; 2009.
3. Novartis Pharma AG. Understanding EXJADE® (Deferasirox) Film-Coated
Tablets - A physician guide to dosing and administration. Basel: Novartis; 2017.
• 14 - 28
• Not recommended
<2 years of age
• Oral: once daily
• Can be crushed and
sprinkled onto soft
food e.g. yoghurt or
apple puree
• Vision and hearing
assessment
annually
• Renal function test
and proteinuria
monthly at initiation
then 3 - 6 monthly
• Liver function test
(ALT in particular)
monthly
• 8 - 16 hours
• Stool
• 50 - 100
• Not recommended
<3 years of age
• Oral: three times daily
• Full blood count (ANC
in particular) monthly
• Liver function test (ALT
in particular) 3 - 6
monthly
• 2 - 3 hours
• Urine
• Enhanced removal of
cardiac iron
• May be combined with
DFO or DFX
• May improve
adherence
• Children: 20 - 40
• Adults: 50 - 60
• SC: infused over 8 - 24
hours using a small
portable pump for
5 - 7 days/week
• IV: infused over
8 - 24 hours
using a small portable pump
for 5 - 7 days/week
(infusion rate <15 mg/kg/hr)
• IM: 0.5 - 1 g QID
(max: 1 g QID)
• Vision and hearing
assessment annually
• Withhold if high fever
develops
• Has highest iron binding
affinity
• May reverse cardiac
disease
• May be combined with
DFP or DFX
• 20 mins
• Urine and stool
Dose range
(mg/kg/day)
Half-life
Route of
administration
Iron excretion
Monitoring
Advantages
Deferoxamine (DFO)
(500 mg vial; to be
reconstituted with 5 ml of
water for injection)
Deferiprone (DFP)
(500 mg tablet; oral
solution 100 mg/ml)
Deferasirox (DFX)
(90 mg, 180 mg and
360 mg filmcoated tablet)
Drug
Characteristics
• Risk of renal
impairment; thus,
requires close
monitoring
• Costly
• Risk of thrombocy
topaenia and
agranulocytosis; thus,
initial weekly FBC
required when starting
• Poor compliance
• Requires to purchase
infusion pump and
injection kits
• Potential ear, eye and
bone toxicity
Disadvantages
• Once daily oral
administration
• Doesn’t require to
be dissolved in water
(compared with
previous effervescent
tablet form)
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
B. Summary of Common Adverse Effects of Iron Chelators
N/A= Not Available
Source:
1. European Medicines Agency. Ferriprox: EPAR - Product Information (Available
at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/ferriprox-eparproduct- information_en.pdf).
2. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Thalassaemia. Putrajaya: MoH;
2009.
3. Novartis Pharma AG. Understanding EXJADE® (Deferasirox) Film-Coated
Tablets - A physician guide to dosing and administration. Basel: Novartis; 2017.
Skin – local pain,
infection at injection
sites
6 - 85%
N/A
N/A
Skin rashes
6 - 85%
Dry skin if associated
with zinc deficiency
7%
Sensorineural
deafness
N/A
<1% high frequency
hearing losses
Gastro-intestinal
symptoms e.g.
pain, nausea and
vomiting
24%
33%
14%
N/A
N/A
15.2%
2% raised liver
enzymes
Joint pain and
stiffness
18 - 19%
28 - 37.5%
If severe, consider temporary
or permanent cessation of drug
N/A
Reduced visual acuity
and impaired visual
field
Present if
dose is high
Present if
dose is high
<1% lens opacities
Haematological
N/A
Agranulocytosis
(ANC <500 x 103/L):
0.2/100 patient-years
Neutropenia
(ANC <1500 x 103/L):
2.8/100 patient-years
Thrombocytopaenia:
45% of children <7 years old
N/A
Renal – increase in
serum creatinine
38%
Reduce dose by 7 mg/kg
if serum creatinine
levels rise above ageappropriate upper limit
for paediatric patients’
and >33% above
baseline at two
consecutive visits for
adult patients’
measurements.
If eGFR <40 ml/min:
discontinue treatment
Deferoxamine
(DFO)
Deferiprone (DFP)
Deferasirox (DFX)
Drugs
Adverse effects
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 9
A. Mid-Parental Height Calculations
Source: Mavinkurve M, Azriyanti AZ, Jalaludin MY. The short child: Importance of
early detection and timely referrai. Malays Fam Physician. 2021;16(3):6-15.
B.
Tanner Staging and Orchidometer
Figure I: Pubertal assessment in males and females according to Tanner.
For the male figure, the average size of testis in cm and the
capacity in ml is indicated.
Source: Cappellini M, Farmakis D, Porter J, et al. 2021 Thalassaemia International
Federation Guidelines for the Management of Transfusion-dependent
Thalassemia. Cyprus: Thalassaemia International Federation; 2021. E732 p.
Figure II: Photos of orchidometer
For boys, MPH (cm)
= (Mother’s height + 13 + Father’s height) ÷ 2
For girls, MPH (cm)
= (Father’s height - 13 + Mother’s height) ÷ 2
For boys and girls,
= MPH ± 10 cm, which represents the 3rd to
MPH target height (cm)
97th centiles
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 10
MICRONUTRIENTS SUPPLEMENTATION RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR THALASSAEMIA PATIENTS
*RDA is the average daily level of dietary intake sufficient to meet the nutrient
requirements of nearly 98% of healthy individuals
Source: Goldberg et al. Nutrition in Thalassemia: A Systematic Review of Deficiency,
Relations to Morbidity, and Supplementation Recommendations. J Pediatr
Hematol Oncol. 2022; 44(1): 1- 11.
Recommended dietary
allowance, (RDA)*
(upper limit)
Recommended dose
Possible
adverse
effect
Nutrient
200 - 400 µg
(400 - 1000µg)
1000 µg daily
Folate
None
reported
25 - 90 mg
(650 - 2000mg)
100 mg daily
Vitamin C
None
reported
7 - 15 mg
(300 - 1000mg)
200 mg daily
Vitamin E
None
reported
5 - 11 mg
(12 - 40 mg)
20 - 25 mg daily
Zinc
Nausea
250 - 1300 mg
500 mg daily
(together with Vitamin D
supplementation)
Calcium
None
reported
600 IU
(3000 - 4000 IU)
1000 IU daily
2000 IU daily if serum
25-OHD <20 ng/mL
at baseline
Vitamin D
None
reported
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 11
IRON CONTENT IN SELECTED FOOD ITEMS
Source: Tee ES, Noor MI, Azudin MN et al. Nutrition Composition of Malaysian
Foods. Malaysian Food Composition Database Programme Fourth Edition.
Kuala Lumpur: Institute for Medical Research; 1997.
Iron content (mg)/100 gm edible portion
Food
Meat/Egg
• Beef
• Lamb
• Pork
• Chicken
• Liver
• Egg yolk
2.7
2.3
1.7
2.8
9.0
7.9
Fish and seafoods
• Dried anchovies (whole)
• Spanish mackerel
• Tuna
• Oysters
• Clams
• Shrimp
5.3
1.1
7.9
6.1
6.7
1.5
Vegetables
• Spinach
• Fern shoots (pucuk paku)
• Bitter gourd
• Mustard leaves
• Kale
• Broccoli
• Asparagus
5.0
5.2
4.8
6.1
1.0
2.0
0.7
0.6
Legumes and legume products
• Chickpea
• Tofu
• Tempeh
• Soya bean milk (250 ml)
6.9
2.2
1.8
0.2
Fruits
• Kedondong
• Jackfruit (nangka)
• Rambutan
3.4
1.1
2.5
Cereals and cereal products
• Biscuits, wholemeal crackers
• Bread, wholemeal
• Kuih-teow
4.3
3.2
3.4
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
Appendix 12
MALAYSIAN THALASSAEMIA ASSOCIATIONS/
SUPPORT GROUPS
KELAB THALASSAEMIA KEDAH
No. 93, Kampung Langgar 06500,
Alor Setar Kedah
1.
2.
Email:
kelabthalassaemiakedah@
yahoo.com
ktkpresidents@gmail.com
Phone:
Pn. NoorHafiza: 0135993577
En. Azmi: 0125790230
MyTHAL Club (Kelab Talasemia
Pusat Perubatan UKM)
Daycare Thalasemia, Tkt 2, Hospital
Tuanku Ampuan Besar Tuanku
Aishah Rohani, Hospital Pakar
Kanak-Kanak UKM, Jalan Yaacob
Latiff, Bandar Tun Razak, 5600,
Cheras, Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala
Lumpur
Email:
mythalseminar@gmail.com
Phone:
Pn. Norhidayah: 019217319
Cik Mazian: 0126212517
3.
4.
KELAB TALASEMIA HOSPITAL
AMPANG (KTHA)
Daycare Thalassaemia Hospital
Ampang, Jalan Pandan Mewah
Utara, Pandan Mewah, 68000,
Ampang, Selangor
Email:
kelabthalashospitalampang@
gmail.com
Phone:
Pn. Soffiah: 01112405776
Pn. Noranaliza: 0192003675
PERSATUAN THALASSEMIA
KELANTAN
Zul Wisma, lot 1251, Tingkat 1,
Bangunan Jalan Sultan Yahya Petra,
Kubang Kerian 15200, Kota Bharu,
Kelantan
Email:
thalasemiakelantan@gmail.com
Phone:
En. Zul Azreen: 0139990105
5.
6.
PERSATUAN ANAK-ANAK
TALASEMIA PERLIS
Lorong Abi 6, Jalan Abi Kampung
Tengah, 01000, Kangar, Perlis
Email:
m.hilmiazhari@gmail.com
Phone:
En. Hilmi:0134143160
Email:
sabahthalassaemiasociety@
gmail.com
Phone:
En. Francis Mujim: 01114118557
PERSATUAN TALASEMIA SABAH
Lot C-2-15, Kepayan Point, Jalan
Pintas Penampang, 88200 Kota
Kinabalu, Sabah
7.
Email:
thalaselangor@gmail.com
Phone:
En. Razak: 0196260162
PERSATUAN THALASSAEMIA
SELANGOR
C/O No 20 Jalan 17c Kampung
Idaman 42000, Port Klang Selangor
PERSATUAN
CONTACT
No.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
PERTUBUHAN THALASSAEMIA
JOHOR
Lot 5395 Jalan Kurniawati Kampung
Kurnia , 80250 Johor Bahru, Johor
8.
9.
Email:
tajspices.sdnbhd@yahoo.com
Phone:
Pn. Nur Syarafina: 0177925472
PERTUBUHAN THALASSAEMIA
PERAK
No. 4, Jalan Masjid, 30300, Ipoh,
Perak
Email:
thalassaemia_perak@yahoo.com
alifizamir@yahoo.com
Phone:
En. Chan: 0165480737
10.
11.
PERTUBUHAN THALASSAEMIA
PULAU PINANG
CO 38 & 39 UP Kompleks
Masyarakat Penyayang Jalan Utama,
10450 Penang
Email:
penthal88@yahoo.com
Phone:
En. Doraisingam: 0167609805
Pn. Noorasyikin: 0194126069
PERTUBUHAN THALASSAEMIA
SARAWAK
C/O No 27, Lot 2359, Ground Floor,
Bormill Estate Commercial Centre,
Jalan Tun Ahmad Zaidi Adruce,
93150, Kuching, Sarawak
Email:
sarawakthalassaemiasociety94@
gmail.com
csjg13@yahoo.com
zazy2182@yahoo.com
Phone:
En. Zul Azreen: 0139990105
12.
13.
THASUH (Thalassaemia Society of
University Hospital)
No 17, Jalan BK5/6B. Bandar Kinrara
47180, Puchong, Selangor
Email:
thasuhppum.society@gmail.com
ireneng18@hotmail.com
Phone:
En. Hilmi:0134143160
Email:
jasminchongcm@gmail.com
Phone:
Pn. Jasmin Chong: 0122135733
THALASSAEMIA ASSOCIATION
OF MALAYSIA
Unit 16-2, 16th Floor, Menara Arina
Uniti, 97, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul
Aziz 50300, Kuala Lumpur
14.
Email:
admin@gcsocietymalaysia.org.my
Phone:
0123747426
GENETIC COUNSELLING
SOCIETY OF MALAYSIA
c/o Cancer Research Malaysia 2nd
Floor, Outpatient Centre,
Subang Jaya Medical Centre,
No 1, Jalan SS12/1A,
47500 Subang Jaya,
Selangor
PERSATUAN
CONTACT
No.
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Ab
antibody
Ag
antigen
AE
adverse event/effect
AFP
alpha-fetoprotein
AGREE II
Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation II
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
ALT
alanine transferase
AMH
anti-mullerian hormone
ANC
absolute neutrophil count
anti-HBe
hepatitis B e-antibody
Anti-HCV
antibodies to HCV
AUC
area under the curve
BD
twice daily
BMC
bone mineral content
BMD
bone mineral density
BMT
bone marrow transplantation
BSA
body surface area
CAE
cellulose acetate electrophoresis
CDGP
constitutional delay of growth and puberty
CZE
capillary zone electrophoresis
cffDNA
cell-free foetal DNA
CI
confidence interval
CIO
cardiac iron overload
cm
centimeter
CMR
cardiac MRI
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CQ(s)
clinical question(s)
CV
cardiovascular
CVS
chorionic villus sampling
DAAs
direct acting anti-viral agents
DFO
deferoxamine or desferrioxamine
DFP
deferiprone
DFS
disease free survival
DFX
deferasirox
DG
Development Group
dL
decilitre
DM
diabetes mellitus
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DXA
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry
ECG
electrocardiogram
EF
ejection fraction
e.g.
example
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EMH
extramedullary haematopoiesis
FCT
film-coated tablet
FGR
foetal growth restriction
fL
femtoliter
FMS
Family Medicine Specialist
FP
fertility preservation
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
FSH
follicle stimulating hormone
FT4
free thyroxine
g
gram
G-CSF
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
GI
gastrointestinal
GH
growth hormone
GHD
growth hormone deficiency
GLS
global longitudinal strain
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations
Hb
haemoglobin
HBsAg
hepatitis B surface antigen
HBeAg
Hepatitis B e-antigen
HBV
hepatitis B virus
HCC
hepatocellular carcinoma
HCV
hepatitis C virus
HCVAg
hepatitis C core antigen
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HH
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
HLA
human leucocyte antigen
HPFH
hereditary persistence foetal haemoglobin
HPLC
high-performance liquid chromatography
HRQoL
health-related quality of life
HSC
haematopoietic stem cell
HSCT
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
HSG
hysterosalpingography
HU
hydroxyurea
IDA
iron deficiency anaemia
IDDM
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
IFG
impaired fasting glucose
IGF-1
insulin-like growth factor 1
IGT
impaired glucose tolerance
IM
intramuscular
IMR
Institute for Medical Reasearch
IU
international unit
IUD
intrauterine device
IUT
intrauterine transfusion
IV
intravenous
kg
kilogramme
L
litre
LFT
liver function test
LH
luteinising hormone
LIC
liver iron concentration
LIO
liver iron overload
LMWH
low molecular weight heparin
LSM
liver stiffness measurement
LV
left ventricular
LVEF
left ventricular ejection fraction
MCH
mean corpuscular haemoglobin
MCV
mean corpuscular volume
MCA-PSV
middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity
MD
mean difference
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
mg
milligram
mg Fe/g dw
milligram iron/gram dry weight
mg/kg
milligram per kilogram
MLPA
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
ml
millilitre
µL
microlitre
mmol/L
millimol per litre
MPH
mid-parental height
ms
millisecond
m/s
meter per second
MoH
Ministry of Health
MoM
multiples of the median
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MTR
Malaysian Thalassaemia Registry
NICC
non-invasive chromosomal check
NIPT
non-invasive perinatal test
ng
nanogram
NGS
Next-Generation Sequencing
nmol
nano mol
NPV
negative predictive value
NRBC
nucleated red blood cell
NS
non-significant
NTDT
non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia
O&G
obstetrics & gynaecology
OGTT
oral glucose tolerance test
OR
odds ratio
OS
overall survival
OTC
ovarian tissue cryopreservation
OTT
ovarian tissue transplantation
p
p-value
PAH
pulmonary arterial hypertension
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
pg
picogram
PGD
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
PGT-M
Pre-implantation Genetic Testing and Mapping
PK
pyruvate kinase
PND
prenatal diagnosis
PPV
positive predictive value
pRBC
packed red blood cell
PT
prothrombin time
PTH
parathyroid hormone
RBC
red blood cell
RCC
red cell concentrates
RDB
reverse dot blot
RDW
red cell distribution width
RC
Review Committee
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RNA
ribonucleic acid
RR
relative risk
SC
subcutaneous
SCD
sickle cell disease
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
SD
standard deviation
SF
serum ferritin
SMD
standardised mean difference
SNP
single nucleotide polymorphism
SVR
sustained virological response
T
tesla
TDT
transfusion dependent thalassaemia
TE
transient elastography
TESE
testicular sperm extraction
TI
thalassaemia intermedia
TIF
Thalassaemia International Federation
TM
thalassaemia major
TOP
termination of pregnancy
TRV
tricuspid regurgitation velocity
TSH
thyroid-stimulating hormone
USG
ultrasonography
WHO
World Health Organization
WMD
weighted mean difference
VTE
venous thromboembolism
Management of Thalassaemia (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Ms. Zamilah Mat Jusoh on retrieval of evidence
• Dr. Don Ismail Mohamed from Bahagian Pembangunan Kesihatan
Keluarga, MoH for information and data on the National Thalassaemia
Screening Programme
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Thalassaemia
(Second Edition) was supported mainly by the MoH Malaysia and partly
by the Malaysian Society of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology and
the Malaysian Society of Haematology.