MANAGEMENT OF
HEART FAILURE 2023
5th Edition
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
PUBLISHED BY:
National Heart Association of Malaysia
D-13A-06, Menara SUEZCAP 1, KL Gateway
No.2 Jalan Kerinchi, Gerbang Kerinchi Lestari
59200 Kuala Lumpur
e ISBN 978-967-11794-8-2
COPYRIGHT
The owners of this publication are the National Heart Association of Malaysia (NHAM) and the
Academy of Medicine Malaysia. The content in this document may be produced in any number of
copies and in any format or medium provided that a copyright acknowledgement to the owners is
included and the content is not changed in any form or method, not sold and not used to promote or
endorse any product or service. In addition, the content is not to be used in any inappropriate or
misleading context.
© 2023 National Heart Association of Malaysia. All right reserved.
This clinical practice guideline (CPG) is meant to be a guide for clinical practice, based on
the best available evidence at the time of development. Adherence to these guidelines
may not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider
is responsible for the management of his/her patient based on the clinical picture
presented by the patient and the management options available locally.
This CPG is issued in 2023 and will be reviewed in 5 years or sooner if new evidence
becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
c/o Health Technology Assessment Unit
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
4th Floor, Block E1, Parcel E
62590, Putrajaya.
Electronic version available on the following website:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadamed.org.my
This is the 5th update to the Clinical Practice Guidelines on Heart Failure (published 2000,
2007, 2014 and 2019). It supersedes the previous CPGs on Heart Failure.
STATEMENT OF INTENT
PERIOD OF VALIDITY
Heart failure is a condition associated with significant morbidity
and mortality. In recent years, there have been advancements
in both treatment and diagnostics, to enable all stakeholders in
healthcare to improve the management of this condition.
Over 23 years have passed since the publication of the first
Clinical Practice Guidelines in Malaysia for Heart failure.
Subsequent editions in 2007, 2014, and 2019 reflected the
growing body of evidence generated both internationally and
locally. This latest edition incorporates the latest science in this
field.
I am pleased to see that the goal of management has evolved, from reducing symptoms,
improving functional capacity, quality of life and patient survival, to reducing heart failure-
related hospitalisation, and reducing the socio-economic impact. The paradigm shift is
timely to reduce the burden of hospital admissions due to heart failure.
In addition, I can see new approaches to managing heart failure, including the introduction
of early implementation and optimization of foundational heart failure medications, and a
structured, multidisciplinary strategy is essential to embark seamless care between
hospitals and primary care.
With 25 key messages and 22 key recommendations, I am sure these guidelines will provide
all healthcare providers the necessary information that will lead to optimal care of patients
with heart failure in Malaysia.
I congratulate the Writing Committee members who have worked hard to produce these
guidelines, and I thank all stakeholders who have contributed to its publication. I look
forward to the active dissemination of the new information, and its translation into clinical
practice.
Dr Muhammad Radzi Abu Hassan
Director-General of Health Malaysia
MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEALTH
CHAIRPERSON:
Dr. Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Consultant Cardiologist,
Subang Jaya Medical Center, Selangor
MEMBERS (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Abdul Raqib Abd Ghani
Consultant Cardiologist & Electrophysiologist,
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah, Selangor
Dr. Azmee Mohd Ghazi
Consultant Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Anwar Suhaimi
Consultant Cardiac Rehabilitation Physician,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Dr. Cham Yee Ling
Consultant Cardiologist,
Sarawak Heart Center
Dr. David Chew Soon Ping
Consultant Cardiologist,
Cardiac Vasuclar Sentral Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Feisul Idzwan Mustapha
Consultant Public Health Specialist,
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia, Putrajaya
Dr. Geetha Kandavello
Consultant Pediatric &
Adult Congenital Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Izwan Effendy Ismail
Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Puchong Batu 14
Dr. Liew Houng Bang
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Queen Elizabeth II, Sabah
Dr. Ma Soot Keng
Consultant Cardiologist & Electrophysiologist,
Island Hospital
Dr. Mohd Rahal Yusoff
Consultant Cardiologist & Physician,
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM)
Dr. Noel Ross Thomas
Consultant Physician,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ong Mei Lin
Consultant Cardiologist,
Gleneagles Hospital Penang
Dr. Rohana Abdul Ghani
Consultant Endocrinologist,
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM)
Dr. Sunita Bavanandan
Consultant Nephrologist,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Vengketeswara Rao Seetharaman
Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Serendah
Dr. Wardati Mazlan Kepli
Pharmacist & Research Fellow (Cardiovascular),
Universiti Malaya
Dr. Wan Azman Wan Ahmad
Consultant Cardiologist,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Dr. W. Yus Haniff W. Isa
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
MEMBERS OF THE EXPERT PANEL
Dr. Aizai Azan Abdul Rahim
Consultant Cardiologist,
Institut Jantung Negara
Dr. Chong Kuck Meng
General Practitioner,
Klinik Chong, Slim River, Perak
Dr. Kamaruddin Mohd.Yusoff
Former Professor & Head of Biochemistry,
Universiti Malaya
Dr. Koh Kok Wei
Consultant Cardiologist & Electrophysiologist,
Subang Jaya Medical Center
Dr. Martin Wong Ngie Liong
Consultant Paediatrician,
Sarawak Heart Center
Dr. Mastura Ismail
Timbalan Pengarah (Kesihatan Primer),
Bahagian Pembangunan Kesihatan Keluarga,
Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia
Dr. Narul Aida Salleh
Family Physician,
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Ong Loke Meng
Consultant Physician & Nephrologist,
Island Hospital Penang
Dr. Ong Tiong Kiam
Consultant Cardiologist,
Sarawak Heart Center
Dr. Paras Doshi
Consultant Physician & Head of Medical Department,
Hospital Tuanku Fauziah, Perlis
Dr. Rokiah Ismail
Head, Department of Dietetics,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Dr. Sahimi Mohamed
Head of Pharmacy, Cardiology Center,
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah, Selangor
Dr. Saiful Safuan
Consultant Physician (Acute Internal Medicine) &
Head of General Internal Medicine Unit,
Department of Medicine &
Head of Clinical Research Center,
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Saari Mohamad Yatim
Consultant Rehabilitation Physician,
Rehabilitation Medicine,
Hospital Sultan Idris Shah, Selangor
Dr. Saravanan Krishinan
Consultant Cardiologist,
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Tan Maw Pin
Consultant Geriatrician,
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Dr. Wan Jumani Paizi
Head of Programme (Foreign Languages),
Center for Modern Languages,
Universiti Malaysia Pahang
Dr. Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist,
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru
Dr. Zanariah Hussein
Consultant Endocrinologist,
Hospital Putrajaya
LIST OF EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
RATIONALE AND PROCESS OF GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
Cardiovascular disease is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in Malaysia. Heart
Failure (HF), the end stage of most diseases of the heart, is a common medical problem
encountered in primary care and is an important cause of hospital admissions and readmissions
with a significant impact on hospital expenditure. As the population ages, the prevalence of
HF is expected to increase.
The 1st Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) in HF was published in 2000 with revisions in
2007, 2014 and 2019. Since then, there have been many new developments in this field.
Thus, the publication of this 5th edition is timely. This CPG stresses on the early
implementation and optimization of the “Foundational HF” medications. It also proposes a
structured multidisciplinary strategy for the seamless care of patients with HF between
hospital and primary care.
This CPG was drawn up by a committee appointed by the National Heart Association of
Malaysia and Ministry of Health. It comprises cardiologists, nephrologists, family medicine
and general physicians and pharmacists from the government, private sectors, and the
public Universities.
Objectives:
The objectives of this CPG are to:
 Critically review the latest scientific evidence, since the last CPG, in the diagnosis and
management of HF.
 Incorporate this new evidence in the daily management of our patients and adapt it to
our local needs and available resources.
 Develop clinical pathways for HF.
 Establish HF Clinics and provide guidance on step down care of these patients within
primary healthcare.
Process
The last CPG published in 2019 was used as a basis. Apart from addressing previous
clinical questions that needed to be updated, the Expert Panel also formulated new
questions that needed to be addressed. These clinical questions have been divided into
sections and each member was assigned one or more topics.
A review of current medical literature on HF from 1st Sept 2018 (the date of the last CPG) till
31st August 2022 was performed. Literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases - PubMed and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.The following
Medical Subject Headings ( MESH) terms or free text terms were used either singly or in
combination:
“Heart Failure”, “Congestive Cardiac Failure”, “Acute Heart Failure, “Chronic Heart Failure”
“Right Heart Failure”, “Left Heart Failure” [MeSH], “Heart Failure Reduced Left Ventricular
Function”, Heart Failure Preserved Left Ventricular Function” [MeSH], Acute decompensated heart failure, tachycardio-induced cardiomyopathy, heart failure mid-range, refractory
heart failure, terminal heart failure, end stage heart failure, cardio-oncology
The search was filtered to clinical trials and reviews, involving humans, and published in the
English language. The relevant articles were carefully selected from this huge list. In
addition, the reference lists of all relevant articles retrieved were searched to identify further
studies. Experts in the field were also contacted to obtain further information. International
guidelines on HF - the American Heart Association / American College of Cardiology and
European Society of Cardiology - were also studied.
All literature retrieved was appraised by members of the Expert Panel and all statements
and recommendations made were collectively agreed by the group. The grading of evidence
and the level of recommendation used in this CPG was adapted from the American College
of Cardiology / American Heart Association and the European Society of Cardiology
(Page10).
After much discussion, the draft was then drawn up and submitted to the Technical Advisory
Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines, Ministry of Health Malaysia and key health
personnel in the major hospitals of the Ministry of Health and the private sector for review
and feedback.
Clinical Questions Addressed:
There were several topics and subtopics that were formulated addressing the diagnosis and
therapy of HF.
For diagnosis: In a person presenting with shortness of breath:
 What features in the history and clinical examination would make one suspect this
patient is having HF?
 What diagnostic tests help confirm the clinical suspicion of HF with reasonable sensitivity
and specificity?
 ECG
 Chest X-ray
 Natriuretic peptides
 Echocardiogram
 Lung ultrasound
For therapy, the topics and subtopics were formulated using the Population Intervention
Comparison and Outcome (PICO) method as follows:
P: Population - Persons with confirmed HF (including both gender and the elderly) and who had:
 Reduced left ventricular (LV) function (LVEF < 40%) - HFrEF
 Preserved LV function (LVEF > 50%) - HFpEF
 Mildly reduced LV function (LVEF: 40-50%) - HFmrEF
 HF with improved LV function - HFimpEF
These patients could be:
 Congested (Volume overload),
 Hypotensive (Cold) or,
 Combination of congestion and hypotension.
The etiology could be: (either singly or in combination)
 Coronary artery disease
 Atrial Fibrillation (AF)
 Diabetes
 Chronic Kidney disease
 Not on renal replacement therapy
 On renal replacement therapy
I: Intervention:
 Non-pharmacological therapy
 Pharmacological therapy:
 Diuretics
 Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACE-I),
 Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARB)
 Angiotensin Receptor and Neprilysin Blockers ( ARNI)
 β-blockers
 Mineralocorticoid Antagonists (MRA)-both steroidal and non steroidal
 Sodium Glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2-i)
 Statins
 etc
 Surgery :
 Valve surgery/percutaneous intervention
 Coronary artery bypass surgery
 Device therapy
 Cardiac resynchronisation therapy
 Catheter ablation
 Pacemaker therapy
C: Comparison:
 Non-pharmacological therapy vs no non-pharmacological therapy
 Diuretics vs no diuretics
 ACE-I vs no ACE-I
 etc
O: Outcome:
 Improvement in symptoms.
 Reduction in:
 Hospital readmissions for HF
 Major Adverse Cardiovascular (CV) Events - MACE - (Myocardial Infarction (MI),
stroke, CV death).
 All-cause mortality
Type of Question - Involves:
 Therapy - pharmacotherapy, surgery, device therapy
 Harm -
 Worsening of symptoms and readmission rate.
 Increase in MACE.
 Increase in bleeding risk and stroke rate.
 Adverse effects due to pharmacotherapy.
 Prognosis - reduction in MI, heart failure, CV death and improvement in all-cause
mortality.
Type of Study
 Systematic review and meta-analysis.
 Randomised controlled studies.
 Cohort studies.
Thus, there were numerous clinical questions formulated.
Examples of some of these Clinical Questions:
 For a person with HFrEF and congested (volume overload) will the use of diuretics lead
to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate and / or
all-cause mortality?
 For a person with HFrEF and not congested (volume overload) will the use of diuretics
lead to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate and / or
all-cause mortality?
 For a person with HFrEF and congested (volume overload) will the use of ACE-I lead to
an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate and / or
all-cause mortality?
 For a person with HFrEF and CAD, will coronary artery bypass surgery lead to an
improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate and / or all-cause
mortality?
 For a person with HFpEF and congested (volume overload) will the use of ACE-I lead
to an improvement in symptoms, hospital readmission, cardiac event rate and / or
all-cause mortality?
Target Group and Target Population:
This guideline is developed for all healthcare providers involved in the management of HF
in individuals (> 18 years) with and at risk of HF.
Facilitators and Barriers:
The main barrier for the successful implementation of this CPG is:
1. The lack of knowledge of healthcare providers in the:
 Diagnosis of HF.
 Management of HF - initial treatment and long-term follow-up.
 Optimization of therapy and when to refer to tertiary centers.
2. Availability of Natriuretic Peptide testing - BNP, NTProBNP - for early diagnosis of HF
in Primary Health Care Clinics.
3. Availability of Foundational HF Medications in Primary Health Care Clinics (ARNI - Not
available, SGLT2- available in small quota and only for use in diabetic patients.)
Applicability of the Guidelines and Resource Implications:
These guidelines were developed considering our local health resources. Blood investigations,
chest radiographs, ECGs and echocardiograms are common in almost all public health
facilities. Most of the drugs used to treat HF - diuretics, ACE-I, ARB, β-blockers have been
approved for use in Malaysia and available in public hospitals as generics.
This guideline aims to educate health care professionals on strategies to optimize existing
resources in the timely management of patients with HF.
Implementation of the Guidelines:
The implementation of the recommendations of a CPG is part of good clinical governance.
To ensure successful implementation of this CPG we suggest:
 Increasing public awareness of CVD and HF in general and educating them on the
importance of seeking early medical attention.
 Continuous medical education and training of healthcare providers on the implementation
and optimization of the Foundational HF medications. This can be done by road shows,
electronic media, and in-house training sessions.
 Clinical audit by individual hospitals and units to ensure compliance using the suggested
performance measures in Section 19, pages 160.
Period of Validity of the Guidelines:
These guidelines need to be revised at least every 5 years to keep abreast with recent
developments and knowledge that is being learnt.
Dr. Jeyamalar Rajadurai
Chairperson
Table 1: GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
A
Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or meta-analyses.
B
Data derived from a single randomized clinical trial or large non-randomized
studies.
C
Only consensus of opinions of experts, case studies or standard of care.
Adapted from the American College of Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart Association
and the European Society of Cardiology
(Available at: http://assets.cardiosource.com/Methodology_Manual_for_ACC_ HA_Writing_Committees
and at http://www.escardio.org/guidelines-surveys/escguidelines/about/Pages/rules-writing.aspx).
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
I
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement.
II
Conditions for which there is conflicting evidence and/or divergence of opinion
about the usefulness/efficacy of a procedure/therapy.
II-a
Weight of evidence/opinion is in favor of its usefulness/efficacy.
II-b
Usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion.
III
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that a
procedure/therapy is not useful/effective and, in some cases, may be harmful.
Contents
Pages
Statement of Intent
1-18
Message from the Director General of Health
Members of the Expert Panel
List of External Reviewers
Rationale and Process of Guideline Development
Grades of Recommendations and Levels of Evidence
Table of Contents
What’s New in the Guidelines?
Glossary
Key Messages & Recommendations
19-33
Algorithm and Flowcharts
34-44
1. INTRODUCTION
45-48
1.1. Epidemiology of Heart Failure
1.2. Socio-Economic Consequences of Heart Failure
1.3. Humanistic Burden of Heart Failure
2. DEFINITION
49
3. CLASSIFICATION
49-51
4. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
51-53
4.1. HFrEF
4.2. HFpEF
4.3. HFmrEF
4.4. HFimpEF
5. ETIOLOGY
54-55
6. DIAGNOSIS AND INVESTIGATIONS
56-61
6.1. Symptoms and Signs
6.2. Investigations
7. PREVENTION OF HEART FAILURE
61-66
7.1. Stage A “At Risk”
7.2. Stage B “Pre HF”
8. NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MEASURES
67-69
8.1. Education
8.2. Exercise Training
8.3. Diet and Nutrition
8.4. Fluid Restriction
8.5. Lifestyle Measures
TABLE OF CONTENTS
8.6. Sexual Activity, Pregnancy, and contraception
8.7. Sleep Disorders
8.8. Psychosocial Support
9. ACUTE HEART FAILURE
72-87
9.1. Phase 1
9.2. Phase 2
9.3. Phase 3
10. CHRONIC HEART FAILURE- Heart Failure with Reduced LVEF (HFrEF)
88-107
10.1. Pharmacological Management
10.2. Patient Profiling and titration of “Foundational HF Medications”
10.3. Device Therapy for HF
10.4. Surgery for Heart Failure
11. CHRONIC HEART FAILURE- Heart Failure with
107-108
Mildly Reduced LVEF (HFmrEF)
12. CHRONIC HEART FAILURE- Heart Failure with
108-109
Improved LVEF (HFimpEF)
13. CHRONIC HEART FAILURE- Heart Failure with
109-114
Preserved LVEF (HFpEF)
13.1. Diagnosis
13.2. Etiology and Associated Conditions
13.3. Management
14. SPECIAL GROUPS
114-149
14.1. Diabetes and Heart Failure
14.2. Valvular Heart disease
14.3. Cardiomyopathy and Heart failure
14.4. Cardiomyopathy due to Arrhythmias or Conduction Abnormalities
14.5. Cardio-oncology and Heart Failure
14.6. Heart Failure and Chronic Kidney Disease
14.7. Heart Failure in Pregnancy
14.8. Coronavirus 2019 and Heart Failure
14.9 Heart Failure in Adult Congenital Heart Disease
15. ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
149-152
15.1. Heart Transplant
15.2. Mechanical Circulatory Support
15.3. Palliative and End of Life Care
16. HEART FAILURE REHABILITATION
152-154
16.1. Cardiac Rehabilitation in Heart Failure
16.2. Settings for Cardiac Rehabilitation in Heart Failure
16.3. Heart Failure Cardiac Rehabilitation in special populations
16.4. Barriers to HF Rehabilitation
17. ORGANISATION OF CARE
154-158
17.1. Level of Care and Shared Management
17.2. Monitoring and Follow-Up
17.3. Cardiology Referrals
17.4. Telemedicine and Telehealth
18. OTHER THERAPIES FOR HEART FAILURE
159
19. PERFORMANCE MEASURES
160
APPENDICES
REFERENCES
161-210
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
211
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
SOURCES OF FUNDING
WHAT’S NEW IN THE GUIDELINES
What is new is:
1. The concept of “Foundational Heart Failure” medications and advising on the strategy of:
 Initiating all about the same time.
 Titrating them up relatively quickly (preferably within 3 months) to maximally tolerated
or target doses.
2. The class of SGLT2-i as a HF medication based on recent clinical evidence.
4th Ed CPG Heart
5th Ed CPG Heart Failure 2023
Failure 2019 (Old)
(New)
Goal of
Focused on reducing
 In addition to the previously mentioned
management
symptoms, improving
goals, the emphasis is on making a
functional capacity,
reduction in HF related hospitalizations
quality of life and
as an important goal of management to
patient survival.
reduce the socio-economic impact of
the disease.
Definition of HF
Was defined solely
 Is defined based on clinical symptoms
based on clinical
and signs that should be supported
symptoms and signs.
objectively by either an elevation of
natriuretic peptides and/or evidence of
pulmonary or systemic congestion.
Classification of
Was classified by
 Is classified by clinical presentation as
HF
clinical presentation
well as LVEF categories and Stages of
only.
HF.
Diagnosis of HF
-
 Places more emphasis on using objective
testing with Natriuretic Peptides for the
diagnosis of HF in addition to clinical
symptoms & signs.
Acute HF
-
 Introduces the concept of 3 phases:
 Phase 1 - Urgent treatment and
stabilization usually in the emergency
department.
 Phase 2 - In-hospital management.
 Phase 3 - Discharge and Post
discharge.
 Recognizes that in the period immediately
following discharge, the patient is
“vulnerable” for decompensation and advises
closer follow up, preferably in the HF clinic.
 Provides a discharge care plan &
summary to facilitate follow up.
(Appendix III, IV, pages 164-165)
Precipitating
-
 Introduces the acronym “CHAMPION”
Factors
as a quick reminder of the precipitating
factors for acute HF. (page 73)
Pharmacotherapy
-
 Introduces the concept of “Foundational
HFrEF
HF Medications”:
 RAS blockers (ACE-I, ARB, ARNI)
 β-blockers
 MRA
 SGLT2-i
 Recommends that these be initiated
while the patient is in hospital and up
titrated to maximally tolerated or target
doses as soon as possible, preferably
within 12 weeks post- discharge.
 Recommending that the dose of diuretic
be reduced when the patient is no
longer congested.
 Provides a section on patient profiling
(section 10.2) and how to initiate and
titrate “Foundational HF Medications”.
This is complemented with Flowcharts
III, IV and V, pages 37-39
SGLT2-i
-
 Introduces this class of medications in
the management of all categories of
LVEF to reduce HF hospitalizations and
improve CV outcomes.
Diuretics
 Recommends that the dose of diuretics
be reduced when the patient is no
longer volume overloaded.
Atrial
-
 Recommends rhythm control instead of
Fibrillation
rate control for recent onset AF of < 1
year duration, wherever possible.
HFpEF
 Provides more recommendations on the
diagnosis and management of HFpEF.
New Sections
11. Chronic HF due to HFmrEF
12. Chronic HF due to HFimpEF
14.2 Valvular Heart Disease and HF
14.3 Cardiomyopathy and HF
14.8 Coronavirus 2019 (Covid-19) +/-
Vaccine and HF
15.3 Palliative and End of Life Care
16. Heart Failure Rehabilitation
17.4 Telemedicine/Telehealth
ACC
American College of Cardiology
ACE-I
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitor
ACHD
Adult Congenital Heart Disease
ACS
Acute Coronary Syndrome
ADHF
Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
AF
Atrial Fibrillation
Acute HF
Acute Heart Failure
AHA
American Heart Association
AMI
Acute Myocardial Infarction
ALCAPA
Anomalous left coronary artery from pulmonary artery
ARB
Angiotensin Receptor Blocker
ARNI
Angiotensin Receptor-Neprilysin Inhibitor
ASD
Atrial Septal Defect
ASV
Adaptive Servo-Ventilation
AV Node
Atrioventricular Node
AVM
Arteriovenous Malformation
AVSD
Atrio-Ventricular Septal Defect
Bd
Bis Die (twice daily)
BiPaP
Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure
BNP
B-Type Natriuretic Peptides
BP
Blood Pressure
BT Shunt
Blalock-Taussig shunt
CABG
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
CAD
Coronary Artery Disease
cCTGA
Congenitally Corrected Transposition of the Great Arteries
CCU
Cardiac Care Unit
CHD
Coronary Heart Disease
CIN
Contrast Induced Nephropathy
CKD
Chronic Kidney Disease
cMR
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance
CPG
Clinical Practice Guidelines
CR
Cardiac Rehabilitation
CrCl
Creatinine Clearance
CRT
Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy
CSA
Central Sleep Apnea
cTn
Cardiac troponins
CV
Cardiovascular
Abbreviation
Description
GLOSSARY
CVD
Cardiovascular Disease
CPAP
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
DBP
Diastolic Blood Pressure
DM
Diabetes Mellitus
DOAC
Direct Oral Anticoagulants
DVT
Deep Venous Thrombosis
ECG
Electrocardiogram
ECMO
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenator
ED
Erectile Dysfunction
EF
Ejection Fraction
EOD
Every Other Day
EP
Electrophysiology
ER
Emergency Room
eGFR
Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate
ERA
Endothelin Receptor Antagonists
ESC
European Society of Cardiology
FiO2
Fraction of Inspired Oxygen
GFR
Glomerular Filtration Rate
GLP-1
Glucagon Like Peptide 1
HCM
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
HF
Heart Failure
HFimpEF
Heart Failure with Improved Ejection Fraction
HFmrEF
Heart Failure with Mildly Reduced Ejection Fraction
HFrEF
Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction
HFpEF
Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction
HIIT
High Intensity Interval Training
HR
Heart Rate
HRQoL
Health Related Quality of Life
ICD
Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator
IHD
Ischemic Heart Disease
IMT
Inspiratory Muscle Training
IV
Intravenous
KDIGO
Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes
LBBB
Left Bundle Branch Block
LV
Left Ventricle
LVAD
Left Ventricular Assist Device
LVEF
Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction
LVH
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
LVT
Left Ventricular Thrombus
Abbreviation
Description
Abbreviation
Description
MACE
Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events
MI
Myocardial Infarction
mPCWP
Mean Pulmonary Capillary Wedge Pressure
MOH
Ministry of Health Malaysia
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRA
Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonist
NP
Natriuretic Peptides
NTProBNP
N-terminal (NT)-pro hormone B-Type Natriuretic Peptides
NSAIDs
Non-Steroidal Anti- inflammatory Agents
NYHA
New York Heart Association
Od
Once daily
OMT
Optimal Medical Therapy
OSA
Obstructive Sleep A
PA
Pulmonary Artery
PAH
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
PCI
Percutaneous Coronary Interventions
PCWP
Pulmonary Capillary Wedge Pressure
PDA
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
PLE
Protein Losing Enteropathy
PPCM
Peripartum Cardiomyopathy
PDE-5 inhibitors
Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitors
PSG
Polysomnography
PUFA
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
RAS
Renin Angiotensin System
RHD
Rheumatic Heart Disease
RV
Right Ventricle
SBP
Systolic Blood Pressure
SC
Subcutaneous
SCD
Sudden Cardiac Death
SCr
Serum Creatinine
SDB
Sleep Disordered Breathing
SGLT2-i
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitor
SpO2
Pulse Oximeter Oxygen Saturation
STEMI
ST Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
Tds
Ter die sumendus (three times per day)
TOF
Tetralogy of Fallot
VAD
Ventricular Assist Device
VHD
Valvular Heart Disease
VPC
Ventricular Premature Contraction
VSD
Ventricular Septal Defect
VT
Ventricular Tachycardia
# 1: Epidemiology and Goals of Management
 In Malaysia, patients with HF are almost 10-15 years younger than those in western
countries. Comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes and chronic kidney disease
are common in our patients.
 HF is associated with a huge socio-economic and humanistic burden.
 Most of the costs related to HF are related to re-hospitalizations and inpatient hospital
care.
 Important goals of management include:
 Preventing readmissions thus reducing both the socio-economic and humanistic
burden of the disease.
 Improving symptoms, functional capacity, and quality of life of these patients.
 Improving patient survival.
#2: Definition
 HF is a clinical syndrome due to any structural or physiological abnormality of the heart
resulting in its inability to meet the metabolic demands of the body or its ability to do so
only at higher-than-normal filling pressures.
 The diagnosis is made by the presence of characteristic symptoms and/or signs and
supported by the findings of either an elevation of natriuretic peptides and/or evidence
of pulmonary or systemic congestion.
#3: Classification & Stages of HF
 HF can be classified according to:
 Clinical Presentation:
 Acute heart failure (Acute HF)
 Chronic heart failure (Chronic HF)
 Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF):
 Reduced (LVEF ≤ 40%) - Heart failure with reduced ejection function (HFrEF).
 Mildly reduced (LVEF 41% - 49%) - Heart Failure with the LVEF being in the
mildly reduced range (HFmrEF).
 Preserved (LVEF > 50%) - Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF).
 Improved Ejection Fraction - HF with an initial baseline LVEF of ≤ 40%,
a ≥ 10-point increase from baseline LVEF following treatment, and a second
measurement of LVEF of >40%.(HFimpEF).
 Stages of HF are:
 A - “At Risk”
 B - “Pre HF”
 C - “Symptomatic HF with previous or current symptoms”
 D - “End Stage HF”
 The severity of symptomatic HF and the exercise capacity of the patient can be
assessed using the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class. (Table 9,
page 50)
KEY MESSAGES
#4: Pathophysiology
 The main pathophysiology of HF is the inability of the heart to provide sufficient
cardiac output to meet the perfusion and oxygenation requirements of the body while
maintaining normal filling pressures.
 This results in compensatory mechanisms which can also aggravate HF by increasing
ventricular afterload and preload to the point where pulmonary and/or systemic
congestion and edema occur.
 HF may be due to either impaired cardiac contractility or impaired relaxation and
compliance. Both mechanisms may co-exist in the same patient and depending on the
predominant pathophysiology, the patient may present as HFrEF or HFpEF.
 In HFrEF, cardiac output is reduced due to depressed myocardial contractility,
irrespective of the etiology.
 In HFpEF, there is impaired left ventricular (LV) filling due to decreased relaxation
(during early diastole) and/or reduced compliance (early to late diastole) leading to
elevated LV filling pressures at rest or during exercise resulting in dyspnea.
 HFmrEF, is a clinical entity between HFrEF and HFpEF. With regards to etiology, it
is more like HFrEF (high prevalence of CAD) but in terms of prognosis, it is like
HFpEF.
 In HFimpEF, patients have resolution of symptoms and signs of HF either spontaneously
or with treatment, but HF is known to frequently relapse especially after withdrawal of
pharmacological treatment. These patients have a lower mortality and risk of hospitali
zation compared to HFrEF and HFpEF.
# 5: Etiology
 The common underlying causes of HF in adults are:
 Coronary artery disease (CAD) - accounting for almost 60-66% of HF in Malaysia.
 Hypertension.
 Dilated cardiomyopathy - idiopathic, familial.
 Valvular heart disease - an important cause is rheumatic heart disease (RHD)
among the rural and urban poor.
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy.
 Comorbidities are common and include hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia.
#6: Prevention of HF
 Prevention and early intervention, wherever appropriate, should be the primary
objective of management.
 There is robust clinical data that by appropriate and timely interventions, HF can be
prevented, and cardiac function improved.
 It should focus on those who are in:
 Stage A - “At Risk” - Individuals who are at high risk of developing cardiac disease
but who do not have symptoms or signs of HF and still have structurally normal hearts.
 Stage B - “Pre HF” - Individuals with structural cardiac disease and who have
either normal or impaired cardiac function but do not, yet, have signs and symptoms
of HF.
# 7: Acute HF
 Acute HF may present as:
 De Novo HF - first occurrence of HF or,
 Acute decompensated HF (ADHF) - this is a more common presentation occurring
in a previously stable patient with HF who has now deteriorated.
 Three important phases should be considered in the management of these patients.
 Phase 1 - Urgent treatment and stabilization usually in the emergency department.
 Phase 2 - In-hospital management.
 Phase 3 - Discharge and Post discharge.
# 8: Chronic HF due to LV reduced Function (HFrEF)
 Optimal HF medications are:
 Diuretics- to be titrated according to the presence of congestion.
 Foundational HF medications:
 Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers:
 Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or
 Angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) or
 Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitors (ARNI).
 β-blockers.
 Mineralocorticoid Antagonists (MRA).
 Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2-i).
 Other drugs (when necessary) include:
 Ivabradine.
 Nitrates.
 For the doses and the Grades of Recommendation and Levels of Evidence of these
medications for HFrEF, see Table 3 & 4, page 40-42).
# 9: Arrhythmias
 Arrhythmias are common in HF. These include:
 Atrial Fibrillation.
 Ventricular arrhythmias.
 Bradyarrhythmias.
# 10: Surgery for HF
 Patients with HF should undergo surgery if the pathology causing the HF (e.g., CAD,
valve lesions) is amenable to surgical treatment.
#11: HFmrEF
 HFmrEF includes symptomatic HF patients with LVEF between 41-49% and is a
clinical entity between HFrEF and HFpEF.
 There are a limited number of randomized control trials focusing on management of
this category of patients - most of the evidence is derived from post-hoc or sub-group
analysis of previous HF trials.
#12: Chronic HF due to HFimpEF
 HFimpEF includes patients with a:
 Baseline LVEF of <40% and a
 >10-point increase from baseline LVEF following treatment to
 A second measure of LVEF > 40%.
 LV function and structural abnormalities do not fully normalize despite improvement
in symptoms, functional capacity, and near normalization of biomarkers.
 Symptoms and signs may however relapse and cardiac biomarkers may increase if
HF treatment is withdrawn.
 Foundational HF medications should be continued to prevent relapse of symptoms
and subsequent deterioration of LV function.
#13: Chronic HF due to HFpEF
 HFpEF is a heterogenous disease that is highly prevalent, accounting for up to 50%
of all patients with HF and is becoming the dominant form of HF in aging populations
worldwide.
 In this guideline HFpEF refers to LVEF≥ 50%. LVEF is a continuous variable and the
EF cut-offs used in definitions are therefore arbitrary.
 HFpEF differs from HFrEF in that HFpEF patients are older, more often female with
AF, CKD and have more non-CV comorbidities.
 The main hemodynamic finding in HFpEF is an elevation in LV filling pressures i.e.
end diastolic LV pressure (LVEDP), initially only on exertion and later even at rest
resulting in dyspnea.
# 14: HF and Diabetes
 HF and diabetes mellitus (DM) often co-exist, each increasing the likelihood of
developing the other. Whether this indicates a causal effect or just a comorbidity is still
unclear.
 HF per se is associated with a high morbidity and mortality and concomitant DM
compounds this risk. This is particularly so in patients with HFpEF.
# 15: HF and Valvular Heart Disease (VHD)
 VHD is an important cause of HF.
 In the young, RHD is an important cause. The incidence of RHD in rural and urban
poor is high.
 In the older population, degenerative valve disease is more common.
# 16: HF and Cardiomyopathies
 Cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of myocardial disorders which
frequently present as HF.
 They can be inherited (familial/genetic) or acquired.
 They are usually classified according to anatomic and physiologic features into:
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)
 Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
 Unclassified cardiomyopathy
 In general, treatment of patients with cardiomyopathy encompasses the Foundational
HF Medications as well as etiology-specific therapy (if available).
# 17: HF Due to Arrhythmias and Conduction Abnormalities
 HF due to arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities are potentially reversible.
 Successful treatment of the arrhythmia by drug therapy or catheter ablation can result
in normalization of LV function.
#18: Cardio-Oncology
 Heart disease and cancer are often linked due to common etiologic factors and
chemotherapeutic treatment strategies.
 Chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity is not common:
 Clinical HF occurs in 1-5%.
 An asymptomatic decrease in LV function occurs in the range of 5% to 20%.
 It can develop in a subacute, acute (within 2 weeks of termination of drug administration)
or in a chronic manner.
 One must consider both drug efficacy and toxicity in choosing chemotherapeutic
agents.
#19: HF and Chronic Kidney Disease
 Cardiac and chronic kidney disease often occur together, and this increases the
complexity and costs of care, and may interact to worsen prognosis.
 During treatment of Acute HF, a significant proportion of patients will develop varying
degrees of worsening renal function (WRF) usually in the first three to five days of
hospitalization.
 WRF may not always indicate a poor outcome-especially if it is due to overdiuresis
and hypotension or due to drug therapy.
#20: HF and Pregnancy
 About 0.5 - 4% of pregnant women have cardiac disease. HF remains the most
common complication among these women regardless of the cause.
 Women with cardiac disease should be assessed:
 Before conception to assess their risk and to be advised accordingly and
 Early in the pregnancy to optimize the outcome of the pregnancy.
 Maternal cardiovascular risk can be assessed using the modified World Health
Organization (WHO) or NYHA classification. (Appendix XI & XII, page 171-173)
 Level of Care will depend on the maternal CV risk.
 Low risk: can be managed at their local center after review by a family medicine
specialist/physician or cardiologist.
 Moderate risk: should be managed at a tertiary center by a multidisciplinary team
with cardiac expertise.
 High risk: should be referred early to a tertiary center for assessment.
 Patients with LVEF < 30% and those in NYHA Class III and IV should be strongly
advised not to get pregnant. If pregnant, termination should be considered.
# 21: HF and Covid - 19 Infection and Vaccine
 In hospitalized patients with COVID-19, the prevalence of HF varied between 4% and
21%. About 8% - 33% of these patients required critical care.
 Patients with HF who develop COVID-19 had an overall mortality rate between 20%
and 40%.
 Myocarditis is a rare but serious complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection as well as
COVID-19 mRNA vaccination.
 The rate of myocarditis or pericarditis across different age groups:
 After SARS-CoV-2 infection - 12.6-114 per 100,000 for males and 5.4-61.7 per
100,000 for females.
 After mRNA COVID-19 vaccination - 0-35.9 per 100,000 for males and 0-10.9 per
100,000 for females.
# 22: HF and Acquired Congenital Heart disease (ACHD)
 HF is the most common cause of mortality in ACHD patients, accounting for 17- 42%
of all deaths.
 Patients with isolated simple defects generally do well with mortality rates like those
in the general population.
 Patients with complex heart defects such as systemic RV, single ventricle palliated
with Fontan circulation, and unrepaired cyanotic CHD with Eisenmenger physiology
comprise the majority of HF- related deaths.
#23: Advanced HF
 All patients with severe symptomatic HF despite OMT and no other alternative
therapeutic options have a poor prognosis. There should be a discussion with the
patient and family on the choice of further management.
 Further options include:
 Heart transplant if the patient is eligible.
 If they are not eligible or a donor heart is not available, a Left Ventricular Assist
Device (LVAD) as a destination therapy or a bridge to heart transplant.
 Patients who either choose not to or are ineligible for the available options, should be
referred for palliative care.
# 24: HF Rehabilitation
 Fatigue & breathlessness leads to individuals restricting their physical activity and this
in turn, leads to deconditioning.
 Exercise training in patients with HF is safe and leads to an improvement in functional
capacity, exercise duration, and health related quality of Life.
 HF is now endorsed as an indication for Cardiac Rehabilitation, and it spans through
out the continuum of HF care.
# 25: Level of Care, Shared Care, Monitoring and Follow - Up & Telemedicine
/Telehealth
 The care of patients with HF should ideally take place in a multidisciplinary system,
allowing for shared care between the hospital (secondary or tertiary settings) and
community (primary setting).
 HF clinics will serve as an intermediary between in-patient hospital care and
community primary care.
 When stable with optimized Foundational HF medications/treatment plans, patients
can be discharged to the community with appropriate care plans to primary care.
 Telemedicine services may improve healthcare accessibility and geographical
limitations. It can complement existing HF clinic services and provide venues for
early escalation of HF therapy before decompensation.
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
Grade of
Recommendations
Recommendation/
Level of Evidence
#1: Diagnosis & Essential Investigations
 In making a diagnosis of HF, a detailed history and a thorough
I,C
physical examination are important.
 The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported by either
I,C
raised natriuretic peptides and/or evidence of pulmonary or
systemic congestion.
 Important basic investigations:
I,C
 Echocardiogram
 ECG
 Chest Radiograph
 Blood - Full Blood Count, urea, creatinine, serum
electrolytes (sodium and potassium) liver function, serum
glucose, lipid profile.
 Natriuretic Peptides: NT - Pro BNP or BNP
I,A
 They are a useful “rule out” test in the diagnosis of HF in
patients presenting with acute dyspnea.
 In chronic HF, NPs may be persistently elevated and
show substantial biological variation. In this setting, NPs
should be interpreted with careful clinical assessment
and with all other clinical information.
 A value of NT - Pro BNP of ≤1,000 pg/ml during treatment
was associated with better CV outcomes.
#2: Prevention of HF
 In the prevention of HF in patients in Stage A:
I,A
 All CV risk factors should be treated to target - BP, Lipids,
and glucose.
 Optimal profiles of the 7 CV risk factors - smoking, body
I,A
mass index, physical activity, diet, cholesterol, blood
pressure, and glucose have been shown to be associated
with a lower lifetime risk of HF.
 In the prevention of HF in patients in Stage B:
 Patients with Acute Coronary Syndrome, Hypertension,
Stable CAD and arrhythmias should be treated timely and
according to the guidelines.
 In patients who have impaired LV function (LVEF<40%):
 Treat the underlying cause and avoid/treat precipitating
factors early.
 The following medications should be instituted early to
prevent progression of the HF and improve CV outcomes.
 In the asymptomatic patient in NYHA Class I:
- ACE-I
I,A
- β-blockers
I,A
- SGLT2-i
I,A
 In symptomatic patients in NYHA Class II-IV:
- All the Foundational HF medications (RAS blockers,
I,A
MRA, β-blockers and SGLT2-i)
#3: Non-pharmacological Measures
 In managing HF, non-pharmacological measures play a vital
role. It is important to:
 Educate the patient and family about the disease, treatment
I,B
options and prognosis. There should be frank end-of-life
discussions and advanced care planning with the patient
and family. This is important as there is a potential risk of
sudden death, and they should put their affairs in order.
 Encourage lifestyle measures:
 Proper balanced diet to prevent malnutrition and cardiac
IIa,B
cachexia.
 Weight management -avoid obesity.
I,B
 Regular physical activity and exercise training.
I,B
 Smoking cessation.
I,A
 Individualize fluid intake - A general recommendation is
I,C
1-1.5 Liters per day in patients with normal renal function.
During periods of acute decompensation and in patients
with more advanced stages of HF, more fluid restriction may
be necessary.
 Provide advice regarding sexual activities and pregnancy.
IIa,B
 Address psychosocial problems encountered by the patient
I,C
and the family.
#4: Acute HF
 Phase 1 - Urgent treatment and stabilization
I,C
 Assessment and management must be prompt and done
concurrently.
 Rapid recognition and making the diagnosis of HF based on
symptoms and signs and quickly assessing its severity.
Precipitants are as in the acronym:
“C H A M P I O N”
 C - Coronary Artery Disease - Acute Coronary Syndrome
(Myocardial infarction/Ischemia).
 H - Severe and uncontrolled hypertension.
 A - Arrhythmias.
 M - Mechanical e.g., Acute valvular dysfunction (e.g.,
acute mitral regurgitation from chordal rupture);
cardiac tamponade.
 P - Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary infections.
 I - Infections e.g., urinary tract, Covid.
 O - Other medications (medications that increase fluid
retention and/or have negative inotropic effects).
 N - Non-compliance with treatment especially oral diuretics
and or dietary/fluid restriction.
 Look for non-cardiovascular comorbidities- Diabetes,
chronic kidney disease, thyroid disease (both hyper and
hypothyroidism), chronic lung disease, anemia.
#5: Acute HF
 Phase 2 - In-hospital management
 After initial clinical assessment, management should be
instituted as in Flow Chart II, Page 35.
 For grading of recommendations and levels of evidence,
see Table 2, Page 36.
 Phase 3 - Discharge and Post discharge
 Discharge planning is a very important process after an
episode of hospitalization for HF to reduce HF related
readmissions.
 The patient should be given a discharge summary and a
I,C
discharge care plan. (Appendix III & IV, pages 164-165)
 Prior to discharge, the patient should be:
 Carefully assessed to ensure that there are no longer
I,C
signs of congestion and
 If the LVEF < 40%, already initiated on Foundational HF
I,A
medications i.e., RAS blockers, MRA, β-blockers and
SGLT2-i and
 Given a discharge care plan and summary (Appendix III
I,C
& IV, pages 164-165) and
 Informed of the need and, if indicated, given appointments
I,C
for further cardiac work up e.g., coronary angiography and
cardiac rehabilitation.
 At the Follow up visit:
 The first FU visit should be within 2 weeks of discharge.
I,C
 Review that instructions in the discharge care plan
(Appendix III & IV, pages 164-165) were followed and
identify/determine reasons if otherwise.
 The Foundational HF medications should be up titrated to
I,A
maximally tolerated or target doses as soon as possible,
preferably within 12 weeks post-discharge.
#6: Chronic HF due to HFrEF: Pharmacotherapy
 Foundational HF Medications - For doses of the
medications, Grades of recommendation and Levels of
Evidence, see Table 3 & 4, pages 40-42)
 The Foundational HF Medications should be initiated at
I,A
about the same time and up titrated to their target or
maximally tolerated doses.
 Once the patient is stable and no longer volume overloaded,
the dose of diuretics may be down titrated to the lowest
maintenance dose and in selected patients, may be
discontinued especially if LVEF has improved to > 40-45%
following treatment.
 In general, starting low doses of the 4 different classes would
be preferred over up titration of each of the individual drugs
to the maximally tolerated dose before initiating the next drug.
 These drugs are preferably all initiated, albeit at low doses,
when the patient is admitted with HF so that at the time of
discharge, the patient is on all of them.
 In elderly patients who often have multiple comorbidities,
it is important to consider pill burden, compliance, and the
potential of adverse events due to drug-drug interaction.
Education of the patient, family and caregivers is important.
 For the initiation and up titration of these HF drugs see
section 10.2 and Flowcharts III, IV & V, pages 37-39.
#7: Arrhythmias
 In HF patients who present with palpitations, near faints and
syncope, arrhythmias are sometimes difficult to detect. If the
clinical suspicion is high, the following may be considered:
 Prolonged ECG rhythm monitoring using 3-day, 7-day or
even 1-month rhythm monitors or
 An implantable loop recorder or
 Using a smart watch that can monitor ECG heart rhythm.
 Atrial Fibrillation
 To be treated by:
 Rate or
IIa,B
 Rhythm control (if onset < 1 year)
IIa,A
 To anticoagulate with DOAC or Vitamin K antagonists
I,A
 Ventricular arrhythmias
 Identify contributing factors such as electrolyte imbalances,
I,C
ischemia and drugs.
 Consider an Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) for
secondary prevention in:
 Patients resuscitated from SCD due to ventricular
I,A
fibrillation or hemodynamically unstable sustained
ventricular tachycardia.
 Prior MI (> 40 days) and LVEF ≤ 40% with non-sustained
I,A
VT AND inducible sustained VT or VF during an EP study.
 Patients with chronic HF and LVEF ≤ 35% who experience
IIa,B
syncope of unclear origin.
 Prior MI (> 40 days) and 3 months after revascularization,
I,A
LVEF ≤ 35% and NYHA class II-III.
 No prior MI, LVEF ≤ 35%, on optimal medical treatment,
I,B
and in NYHA II or III
 Bradyarrhythmias
 The following patients should be considered for pacemakers:
I,A
 Significant symptomatic bradyarrhythmias.
 Trifascicular bundle branch blocks.
 Permanent or paroxysmal third-or high-degree
atrioventricular (AV) blocks.
 Prior to implanting a conventional pacemaker, the need for
I,A
an ICD or Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy (CRT) device
should be considered.
 Conduction system pacing (which includes His bundle and
left bundle branch area pacing) is a new pacing modality.
The early results appear promising but evidence on its
indications, safety and efficacy is still lacking.
#8: Chronic HF due to HFrEF
 Surgery For HF
 CAD
 Patients with HF should undergo surgery if they have:

Ischemia demonstrated as angina or on non-invasive
testing and
 An anatomy that is suitable for revascularization
I,C
(left main stem or triple vessel disease).
 Valve Heart Disease (VHD)
 All patients with VHD should be assessed periodically on
I,C
the need for early intervention before they begin to develop
symptoms of reduced effort tolerance and decompensate.
 Patients who are assessed to require intervention should
I,C
be seen by a heart team to help decide the timing and type
of intervention.
 The indications for valve intervention are as in the
Appendix V, page 166.
#9: Chronic HF due to HFmrEF
 The management of these patients include:
 Optimal treatment of CV risk factors.
I,C
 SGLT2- i.
I,A
 Diuretics for patients who remain symptomatic and show
I,C
signs of congestion.
 β-blockers, RAS blockers (ARNI, ACEI or ARB) and MRAs
IIa,B
can be considered to reduce the risk of HF hospitalization
and CV death.
#10: Chronic HF due to HFimpEF
 Symptoms and signs may relapse, and cardiac biomarkers may
increase if HF treatment is withdrawn.
 Foundational HF medications should be continued to preven
IIa,B
relapse of symptoms and subsequent deterioration of LV
function.
#11: Chronic HF due to HFpEF
 Timely and early diagnosis of HFpEF leads to a better outcome.
 The management of patients with HFpEF includes:
 Encouraging lifestyle measures
 Weight reduction
I,B
 Exercise training
I,A
 Managing comorbidities such as hypertension, CAD, CKD,
atrial fibrillation, obesity according to guidelines.
I,C
 Pharmacotherapy:
 Diuretics - for volume overload.
I,C
 SGLT2-i - decreases HF hospitalizations and CV mortality.
I,A
 RAS blockers (ARB, ACE-I, ARNI) - As a group, RAS
IIb,B
blockers have not been shown to reduce total or CV
mortality. There was a suggestion of benefit with ARNI in
women with LVEF< 60%, while for men the benefit was
restricted to LVEF<45%.
 MRA - it may be considered to decrease combined CV
IIb,B
mortality and HF hospitalizations, particularly among
patients with LVEF on the lower end of this spectrum.
 β-blockers - No good data that they are beneficial in the
treatment of HFpEF although they are often prescribed for
the management of comorbidities such as CAD or AF.
#12: HF and Diabetes
 Prevention of HF:
 Lifestyle measures are important. They have been shown to
lower the risk for HF, particularly HFpEF. These measures
include:
 Attainment of appropriate weight, and
I,A
 Increased physical activity and
I,B
 Smoking cessation.
I,B
 The BP and LDL-C should be treated to target:
 BP 130-139/70-79 mmHg
I,A
 LDL-C according to CV risk category.
I,A
 Treatment of Diabetes - Glucose lowering Agents
 Glycemic targets for patients with DM and HF should be
I,A
individualized.
 Current recommendations suggest a target range of HbA1c
I,A
7%-8%, while minimizing adverse effects of treatments
particularly hypoglycemia.
 Glucose lowering drugs:
 With proven CV benefits:
 SGLT2-i.
I,A
 GLP-1 receptor agonists.
IIa,A
 Metformin.
IIa,B
 With no proven CV benefits but which will help with
glucose control:
 DPP4 inhibitors.
IIa,B
 With no proven CV benefits and need to be used with
caution:
 Insulin -This has been associated with increased
IIa,B
all-cause mortality and hospitalization for HF especially
in patients with low HbA1c < 7%.
 Sulfonylureas.
IIa,B
 That need to be avoided:
 Thiazolidinediones
III,A
#13: HF Due to Arrhythmias and Conduction Abnormalities
 In managing cardiomyopathy due to arrhythmias (SVT, AF or
I,A
frequent PVCs or VT), radiofrequency ablation is the preferred
therapy, since most antiarrhythmic drugs are contraindicated in
the presence of HF.
 In patients with HF who have bradyarrhythmias and where
I,A
pacing is indicated, biventricular pacing (Cardiac
Resynchronisation Therapy) is the pacing mode of choice.
#14: Cardio-Oncology
 Close collaboration between the oncologist and the cardiologist
I,C
is important.
 Patients undergoing chemotherapy should have careful clinical
evaluation and assessment. Specifically:
 All CV risk factors should be treated adequately.
I,C
 High risk patients should be identified and in these patients:
 A pre-treatment cardiac echocardiogram is advisable. If
the LVEF < 50%, they should be referred to a cardiologist.
 Reassessing and repeating (if necessary) imaging studies
during and after treatment.
 Assessing cardiac biomarkers when indicated - troponins
and/or Natriuretic Peptides.
 Considering cardio-protection prior to/or during treatment
IIa,B
using β-blockers, MRA and/or ACE-I/ARB if:
 EF < 50%,
 EF drops by > 10%
 Abnormal global longitudinal strain (GLS) (> 15% drop).
#15: HF and CKD
 A multi-disciplinary approach with early referral to a
I,C
nephrologist is recommended.
 Almost all Foundational HF Medications can be used in
I,A
patients with eGFR ≥ 30mls/min/1.73m2
 In patients with eGFR < 30mls/min/1.73m2, the following drugs
can be used:
 Diuretics - usually higher maintenance doses.
I,B
 Careful use of RAS blockers.
I,B
 β-blockers.
I,B
 SGLT2-i (eGFR >20mls/min/1.73m2).
IIa,B
 Closely monitor electrolytes and kidney function. The baseline
renal function will determine how frequently this should be done.
 RAS blockers and SGLT2-i can lead to an initial drop in eGFR
I,C
but this should not be a reason to automatically stop or down
titrate these agents. See table 18, page135 for the
management of RAS blockers in response to changes in renal
function.
 Occasionally ultrafiltration and renal replacement therapy
I,C
(hemodialysis) may be necessary.
#16: HF and Pregnancy
 HF in pregnancy should be managed by a multidisciplinary
I,C
team consisting of physicians, obstetricians, and pediatricians.
 HF that develops during pregnancy can be managed with the
I,C
judicious use of diuretics, digoxin, nitrates, β-blockers (most
commonly metoprolol) and/or hydralazine.
 For postpartum women with severe acute HF caused by
I,A
Peripartum cardiomyopathy and LVEF <35%, Foundational HF
medications to improve LVEF recovery and prophylactic
anticoagulation are recommended.
#17: HF and ACHD (Appendix XIII-XV, pages 174-177)
 The principles of managing HF in ACHD HF are:
 First to access and address all reversible causes.
I,C
 If HF control is still not optimal, initiate pharmacotherapy.
I,C
 Arrhythmias to be treated appropriately by pacing or ICD
as indicated.
I,B
 To consider cardiac resynchronization and more advanced
therapies if these patients continue to have worsening HF
IIa,C
despite optimal medical therapy.
#18: Advanced HF
 Heart transplantation is well-established for refractory end
I,A
stage HF.
 Patients with severe symptomatic HF despite OMT and no
I,C
other alternative therapeutic options should be considered for
palliative care.
 Older people with multiple comorbidities and generally poor
I,C
prognosis, should be considered for palliative care even at an
early stage of the disease.
# 19: HF Rehabilitation
 Cardiac Rehabilitation should be recommended to all stable HF
IIa,B
patients, in NYHA II-III.
#22: Performance Measures
 Performance measures are used with the goal of improving
quality of care for HF.
 This includes:
 Process performance which measures the aspects of care
that are delivered to a patient and
 Outcome measures which focus on hard endpoints such as
mortality and hospitalization.
 For the quality indicators in HF, see section 19, page 160
& Appendix XVI, page 178)
Flow Chart I: Algorithm for the Diagnosis of Heart Failure*
Suspected HF Because of
Symptoms and/or Signs
Tests
Abnormal
Determine:
- Underlying Cause
- Precipitating Cause
- Type of LV Dysfunction
(HFrEF, HFpEF, HFmrEF)
*Additional
Diagnostic Tests
(Where Indicated) e.g.,
- Coronary
Angiography (CT or
Invasive as Indicated)
- Nuclear Imaging
- Cardiac MRI
Heart Failure or LV
Dysfunction is Unlikely.
Consider Other
Diagnosis e.g.,
- Coronary Artery Disease
(Angina Equivalent)
- Obesity
- Pulmonary Disease
Tests Normal but Clinical
Suspicion is High
Echocardiography
TREAT ACCORDINGLY
Tests Abnormal
Tests Normal
Tests Normal and
Clinical Suspicion is Low
ECG
Chest Radiograph
Natriuretic Peptides
*See Section 6
Flow Chart II: Management of Acute Heart Failure
Cold, Wet
Congested*
Perfusion Inadequate**
Cold, Dry
Not Congested*
Perfusion Inadequate**
Warm, Dry
Not Congested*
Perfusion Adequate**
Warm, Wet
Congested*
Perfusion Adequate**
Consider Cautious Fluid
Challenge if dehydrated
Start/titrate oral
medications.
(Flow Chart III & IV)
Titrate oral medications.
(Flow Chart III & IV)
- Correct hypoxia and acidosis
- Consider invasive ventilation
- Refer to tertiary centres
Inotropes
Noradrenaline 1st
Dopamine / Dobutamine
May be given even if BP>90mmHG
but the perfusion is inadequate
Assess for Congestion and Perfusion
Blood Pressure
Oxygen if O2 Saturation < 95%
Acute Heart Failure
SBP ≥ 90mmHG
IV Diuretics
Oral MRA#
SBP < 90mmHG
Not Improved
Not Improved
Improved
SBP still
< 90mmHG
- Diuretics, continuous infusion
+ combination with thiazides
- Nitrates
- dopamine / dobutamine
*Congestion: Peripheral oedema, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, lung crepitations, jugular venous
dilatation, hepatojugular reflux, congested hepatomegaly, gut congestion, ascites.
**Hypoperfusion: Cold peripheries, capillary refill time more than 2 seconds, diaphoresis, oliguria, dizziness,
Confusion, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension.
#Administration of MRA will depend on eGFR ≥ 30 mls/min/1.73m2 and serum potassium levels < 5.0 mmol/l
From onset, evaluate to identify correctable/reversible lesions - C H A M P I O N
Intervention
Grades of
Levels
Comments
Recommendation
of Evidence
INITIAL MANAGEMENT CONSISTS OF:
Oxygen
I
C
Maintain the oxygen saturation ≥ 95%.
Diuretics
I
B
To be given preferably when SBP ≥ 90mmHG.
MRA
I
A
To be given if eGFR ≥ 30 mLs/min/1.73m2
and serum potassium levels < 5.0mmol/l.
May be initiated within 24-48 hours of
admission.
NOT RESPONSIVE TO INITIAL TREATMENT AND SBP ≥ 90mmHg
Diuretics
IIa
B
Continuous infusion +/- combination with
thiazides.
Nitrates
I
B
Most useful if there is concomitant myocardial
ischemia, severe hypertension or aortic or
mitral regurgitation.
Noradrenaline
IIa
B
Indicated for peripheral hypoperfusion
despite an adequate filling status.
Dopamine
IIb
B
Indicated for peripheral hypoperfusion
despite an adequate filling status.
NOT RESPONSIVE TO INITIAL TREATMENT AND SBP < 90mmHg
Noradrenaline
IIa
B
Indicated to increase the BP.
Dopamine
IIb
B
Indicated to increase the BP.
IABP
IIa
B
Indicated as a bridge till myocardial recovery
or heart transplant.
Ventricular
IIa
B
Indicated as a bridge till myocardial recovery
Assist (VAD)
or heart transplant.
Occasionally as destination (definitive) therapy.
ORAL MEDICATIONS IN ACUTE HF
(Initiated when patient is hemodynamically stable, off all i.v. inotropes and SBP ≥ 100mmHG)
RAS blockers
I
A
(ACE-I or ARB in
ACE-I intolerant
patients)
ARNI
IIa
B
β-Blockers
I
A
SGLT2-i
I
A
No increase in i.v. diuretic dose and off all
iv vasodilators, including nitrates within the
last 6 hours.
The dose of diuretics may need to be
reduced on initiation of SGLT2-i.
Table 2: Grading of Recommendations in the Management of Acute HF
Flow Chart III: Initiating Foundational HF Medication
Diuretics
RAS Blockers
SGLT2-i
MRA
β-Blockers
ACE-I, ARB, ARNI
Acute HF
eGFR ≥ 30mls/min/1.73m2
SBP ≥ 100mmHg
Lung Congestion
Discharge Medications:
Diuretics (oral) + RAS Blockers + SGLT2-i + MRA + β-Blockers
*The dose of diuretics may need to be down titrated upon initiation of SGLT2-i and MRA.
The initiating drug doses may occasionally need to be modified depending on the patient’s
clinical condition. SGLT2-i should be initiated when patients have not been on inotropes for at least
24 hours, SBP > 100mmHg and there is no increase in the diuretic dose in the last 6 hours.
SGLT2-i may also be initiated post discharge .
.
See Flow Chart IV
Yes
Day 1
Day 2-4
Day 4-5
Yes
Absent
Present
No
No
See Flow Chart II
• Diuretics-usually i.v.
• Depending on BP and PerfusionVasodilators and Inotropes
Depends on:
• eGFR
• BP
• Presence of Lung Congestion
Start
• RAS Blockers (1/4 target dose)
• MRA (1/4 target dose)*
• Change iv to oral diuretics
• Start β-Blockers (1/4 - 1/2 target
dose)
• Start SGLT2-i (full dose)*
• Continue iv diurectcs till lungs are dry
• Start β-Blockers 1/8 target dose only
after no longer fluid overloaded.
• Start SGLT2-i (full dose)*
Start
• RAS Blockers (1/8 to 1/4 target dose)
• MRA (1/4 target dose)*
Flow Chart IV: For Patients with eGFR < 30mls/min/1.73m2
(Initiating Foundational HF Medication)
Diuretics
RAS Blockers
β-Blockers
SGLT2-i
ACE-I, ARB, ARNI
Acute HF
eGFR < 30mls/min/1.73m2
SBP ≥ 100mmHg
Lung Congestion
Discharge Medications:
Diuretics (oral) + RAS Blockers** + SGLT2-i* + β-Blockers
*SGLT2-i should only be initiated if eGFR ≥ 20mls/min/1.73m2. Caution should be exercised when
it is started concurrently with the RAS-blocker. The dose of diuretics may need to be down titrated
upon initiation of SGLT2-i.
**ARNI should be used with caution if eGFR < 30mls/min/1.73m2. It is not recommended in patients
with end-stage renal disease.
Yes
Day 1
Day 2-4
Day 4-5
Yes
Absent
Present
No
See Flow Chart II
• i.v diuretics
• Depending on BP and PerfusionVasodilators and Inotropes
Depends on:
• eGFR
• BP
• Presence of Lung Congestion
Start
• RAS Blockers (1/4 target dose)
• Change iv to oral diuretics
• Start β-Blockers (1/4 - 1/2 target
dose)
• Start SGLT2-i (full dose)*
• Continue iv diurectcs till no longer
fluid overloaded.
• Start β-Blockers 1/8 target dose only
after no longer fluid overloaded.
• Start SGLT2-i (full dose)*
Start
• RAS Blockers (1/4 target dose)
In CKD
• Frequent monitoring of renal
function tests is necessary.
• The exact frequency needs to
be individualized.
• With more advanced CKD,
renal function tests should be
repeated within 3-7 days after
drug initiation and every time
doses are titrated.
• Reduce of discontinue RAS
Blockers (after other causes are
excluded) when:
 SCr levels rise and remains
persistently > 30% from the
baseline (or eGFR reduces >
25%) within 2-3 months from
commencement or an increase
in dose, or
 Serum potassium ≥ 5.6 mmol/L
• If > 3 months after
commencement of RAS blockers,
the renal function usually
deteriorates gradually and the
dose of RAS blockers need not
be reduced provided serum
potassium is < 5.6 mmol/L
Flow Chart V: Optimizing Management of HFrEF
Foundational HF Medications
Up titrated depending on SBP, HR and potassium levels
• RAS blockers
• β-Blockers
• MRA
• SR with LBBB, QRS ≥ 150 msecs
and LVEF ≤ 35%
 Consider CRT/D
• SR and HF ≥ 70 bpm -
 Add Ivabradine
• Iron deficiency - iron replacement
If LVEF < 40% and/or still symptomatic:
• If still volume overloaded - increase dose of diuretics +/-
combination with thiazides.
• Change to ARNI (If not already on).
• Consider vericiquat.
If LVEF < 40% and/or still symptomatic: Advanced HF
• Consider heart transplant (if eligible)
• LVAD as a bridge or as a Destinatin Therapy (if eligible)
• Palliative Care
Continue:
• Maximally tolerated dose of Foundational HF medications -
 RAS Blockers, (ACE-I, ARB, ARNI), MRA, β-Blockers, SGLT2-i
• Reduce diuretics to lowest dose if volume overload is absent.
• Optimize dosing and patient adherence.
• Cardiac rehabilitation - Patient education and Exercise training.
Treat underlying cause and/or precipitating factors:
• CAD - revascularize as necessary.
• Valve disorders - surgery/TAVI/mitral valve repair as
indicated.
• Arrhythmias- treat appropriately:
 AF -
 Ablation (if < 1 year of onset).
 Rate control with β-blockers/digoxin.
 Anticoagulation.
 Ventricular Arrhythmias (Frequent PVCs or VT)
 Drug therapy, Ablation or ICD (as indicated)
Following parameters
considered adequate if the
patient:
 Feels well,
 Has good tissue perfusion as
shown by the absence of
giddiness, warm skin and
 Stable renal function with
good urine flow
• SBP ≥ 90mmHg
• HR ≥ 50/min
• Serum postassium < 5.6
mmol/I
If BP is low, then:
• First reduce close of
diuretics if fluid overload is
absent before reducing dose
of RAS blockers and/or
β-Blockers
Diuretics
RAS Blockers
MRA
β-Blockers
SGLT2-i
(ACE-I, ARB, ARNI)
If LVEF ≥ 40%
and asymptomatic
If LVEF < 40%
and/or pt still symptomatic
Drug
Initial
Target
1/8
1/4
1/2
Tablet Strength
Renal Dose For
Daily
Dose(s)
Target
Target
Target
Available
CrCl < 30ml/min
Dose(s)
Dose
Dose
Dose
ACE-I
Captopril
6.25mg
50mg
6.25mg
12.5mg
25mg
12.5mg, 25mg
Yes
6.25mg-12.5mg
BD
TDS
bd/tds
Enalapril
2.5mg OD
10-20mg
2.5-5mg 5-10mg
5mg, 10mg, 20mg
Yes
2.5mg OD
BD
Lisinopril
2.5–5mg
20-40mg
2.5mg
5-10mg
10-20mg 5mg, 10mg, 20mg
Yes
2.5mg OD
OD
OD
CrCl 10-30:5mg OD
CrCl<10: 2.5mg OD
Perindopril
2mg OD
8-16mg
2-4mg
4-8mg
2mg, 4mg, 8mg
Yes
CrCl 15-30: 2mg eod
OD
CrCl <15 & HD: 2mg
on dialysis day**
Ramipril
2.5mg OD
10mg
1.25mg
2.5mg
5mg
2.5mg, 5mg, 10mg
Yes
1.25mg OD
OD
CrCl <40: 25%
normal dose
ARBs
Candesartan 4-8mg OD 32mg
4mg OD 8mg
16mg
8mg, 16mg
Yes
4mg OD
Losartan
25-50mg
50-150mg
12.5-
25-
25mg, 50mg,
Yes
No adjustment
OD
OD
37.5mg
75mg
100mg
Valsartan
40mg OD
160mg
40mg
80mg
40mg, 80mg,
Yes
Use with caution
BD
160mg
ARNI
Sacubitril/
100mg
200mg
25mg
50mg
100mg
50mg,100mg,
Yes
50mg BD
valsartan
(49/51mg)
(97/
200mg
BD*
103mg)BD
Table 3: Doses of Foundational HF Medications
Drug
Starting
Target
1/8
1/4
1/2
Tablet Strength
Renal Dose For
Dose
Dose
Target
Target
Target
Available
CrCl < 30ml/min
Dose
Dose
Dose
β-Blocker
Bisoprolol
1.25mg OD 10 mg OD 1.25mg
2.5mg
5mg
2.5mg, 5mg, 10mg
Yes
No adjustment
Carvedilol
3.125mg
25 mg BD
3.125mg 6.25mg
12.5mg
6.25mg, 12.5mg,
Yes
No adjustment
BD
25mg
Metoprolol 12.5-25mg 100 mg
12.5mg
25mg
50mg
50mg, 100mg
Yes
No adjustment
Tartrate*
BD
BD
Nebivolol+
1.25mg OD 10 mg OD 1.25mg
2.5mg
5mg
5mg
Yes
No adjustment
MRA
Spironolactone 12.5-25mg
50 mg OD
12.5mg
25mg
25mg
Yes
Contraindicated
OD
Eplerenone 25 mg OD
50 mg BD
12.5mg
25mg
25mg, 50mg
Yes
Contraindicated
Finerenone 20mg OD
20mg OD
10mg, 20mg
Yes
eGFR 25-60:
10mg OD
eGFR <25:
contraindicated
SGLT2-i
Dapagliflozin 10mg OD
10mg OD
CrCl <25: limited
experience
Empagliflozin 10mg OD
10mg OD
CrCl <20: not
recommended
* The evidence-based form of metoprolol in HF is metoprolol succinate (CR/XL), which is not available in
Malaysia. The only form of metoprolol available in Malaysia is metoprolol tartrate
+ Shown to reduce the composite endpoint of all-cause mortality and CV hospitalization, but not all-cause
mortality.
IBM Micromedex Drug Ref (2023) (cited 14th January 2023) & product leaflet available from Quest3
(accessed date: 13th January 2023)
** At the discretion of the attending physician
CrCl unit: ml/min; eGFR unit: ml/min/1.73m2
Table 4: Grading of Recommendations and Levels of Evidence in the
Management of HFrEF (LVEF<40%
Intervention
Grades of
Levels of
Comments
Recommendation Evidence
INDICATED FOR FLUID RETENTION IN NYHA II - IV
Diuretics
I
B
No randomized trial to show improvement in
survival.
INDICATED IN ALL PATIENTS
ACE-I
I
A
Improves survival and delays progression in all
classes of HF.
ARB
I
A
In ACE-I intolerant patients.
ARNI
I
B
Improves survival and delays progression in all
(Instead of ACE-I)
classes of HF when compared to ACE-I.
β-Blockers
I
A
Improves survival and delays progression in all
classes of HF.
SGLT2-i
I
A
Improves survival and delays progression in all
classes of HF.
Mineralocorticoid
I
A
Improves survival and reduces hospitalizations
Receptor
in moderate to severe HF and in post MI
Antagonists
patients with mild HF.
IN ADDITION TO THE ABOVE, THE FOLLOWING ARE INDICATED IN SELECTED PATIENTS
ARB
I
B
In patients post MI and LVEF < 40%, Valsartan
(instead of ACE-I)
was shown to be comparable to captopril.
Digoxin
I
B
In patients with HF and AF
IIa
B
No effect on survival. Reduces hospitalizations
when added to optimal medical therapy.
Ivabradine
IIa
B
Reduces hospitalizations when added to optimal
medical therapy in patients in sinus rhythm and
heart rate ≥ 70bpm
I
A
Improves survival in patients with
resuscitated cardiac arrest, VF, or sustained VT
I
A
Improves survival in patients > 40 days post MI,
LVEF ≤ 30%, with non-sustained VT AND
inducible sustained VT or VF during an EP
study and on optimal medical treatment, and in
NYHA II or III
I
A
Improves survival in patients with prior MI and >
40 days post MI and 3 months after revasculari
zation, LVEF ≤ 35% and NYHA class II-III
I
B
Improves survival in patients (no prior MI), LVEF
≤ 35%, on optimal medical treatment, and in
NYHA II or III
Improves survival in patients having all of the
following:
sinus rhythm, LVEF ≤ 35%, LBBB and
QRS duration on resting 12-lead ECG:
I
A
≥ 150ms
IIa
B
≥ 120-149ms
Pacemaker
I
A
For significant symptomatic bradyarrhythmias,
trifascicular BBB, third-or high-degree AV blocks.
ICD
(Implantable
Cardioverter
Defibrillator)
CRT
(Cardiac
Resynchronisation
Therapy)
Table 5: Patient Profiling and Titration of “Foundational HF Medications”
Blood
Systolic BP
• Detect and treat causes of hypotension, such as hypovolemia from
Pressure
< 90 mmHG
over diuresis, bleeding, infection etc.
• If the patient is euvolemic, reduce the dose of diuretics to the lowest
maintenance. Occasionally it may be possible to remove the diuretic
completely especially if the LVEF > 40-45%.
• Remove all non “Foundational HF” Medications that may also cause
hypotension e.g., - nitrates, calcium channel blockers, alpha
blockers.
• The dose of “Foundational HF” Medications only needs to be
reduced or temporarily stopped if there is symptomatic hypotension.
• SGLT2-i and low-dose MRA have minimal effects on BP and may
be continued.
Systolic BP
• The dose of RAS blockers and β-blockers should be up titrated in
> 110 mmHG
turn till the target or maximally tolerated dose.
• Whether the RAS blocker or the β-blocker should be up titrated first
will depend on the patient’s heart rate, renal function, and
potassium levels.
Heart rate
HR > 70/bpm • The dose of β-blocker should first be up titrated to the target or
(Sinus
maximally tolerated dose.
Rhythm)
• Ivabradine may be added to the β-blocker to achieve the target HR.
HR < 50/bpm • Discontinue non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers e.g.,
diltiazem and verapamil, digoxin, or other antiarrhythmic drugs
such as amiodarone.
• If the HR is still < 50/bpm, the dose of ivabradine should first be
reduced.
• If the HR is still < 50/bpm or the patient has symptomatic
bradycardia, then the dose of β-blocker should be reduced or
temporarily discontinued.
Atrial
Heart Rate
• The optimal resting ventricular rate in patients with AF and HF is
Fibrillation
(HR)
unknown. It is not unreasonable to aim for a HR < 110bpm.
• If the patient is troubled by palpitations or there is deterioration of
LV function, then a more strict rate control of 80bpm may be
targeted.
• The ventricular rate should however, be maintained > 70 bpm.
Lower HR have been associated with worse outcomes.
• Excessive rate control, which may be associated with an increase in
pauses, carries a risk.
• The optimal ventricular rate during exercise is also uncertain, but
may be < 110bpm during light exercise.
Systolic BP
• β-blockers may be stopped and replaced with digoxin for rate
< 90mmHg
control.
• This action may allow for the up titration of RAS blockers as the
SBP improves to ≥ 90mmHG.
Renal
Potassium
• RAS blockers and MRA to be sequentially initiated if serum
Function
potassium is < 5.5 mmol/l.
• Consider reducing or discontinuing the dose of RAS Blockers and
MRA if serum potassium is persistently > 5.5 mmol/l despite other
measures to reduce hyperkalemia.
Serm
• Consider reducing or discontinuing RAS Blockers (after excluding
Creatinine
other precipitating factors) when SCr levels remain ≥ 30% from the
baseline (or eGFR reduces ≥ 25%) and if these occur within two
months
from commencement or dose increase.
Intervention
Grades of
Levels of
Comments
Recommendation Evidence
LIFESTYLE MEASURES
Overweight /
I
B
• A caloric restriction diet is feasible and safe
Obesity
and should ideally be combined with exercise.
• Bariatric Surgery in patients with HFpEF and
obesity was associated with improved symptoms
and reduction in HF hospitalizations.
Exercise Training
I
A
• This is safe and improves exercise capacity
and quality of life.
IDENTIFYING AND TREATING THE UNDERLYING CAUSE(S) AND CO-MORBIDITIES
Hypertension
I
A
• Improved BP control has been shown to
reduce morbidity and hospitalizations for HF.
Tachyarrhythmias
IIa
B
• Rate Control with β-blockers or non-dihydro
(Persistent or
pyridine calcium channel blockers (verapamil,
Paroxysmal AF)
diltiazem) alone or in combination.
IIa
A
• Rhythm Control in patients with recent onset
AF < 1 year duration or paroxysmal AF.
Anti Coagulation
I
A
• To reduce the risk of thromboembolic events.
Others
I
C
• Treat CAD, Diabetes, CKD appropriately
according to guidelines.
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Diuretics
I
C
• To relieve congestion.
RAS Blockers
IIb
B
• Trial data show a reduction in HF
hospitalizations, but no reduction in all-cause
or CV mortality in HFpEF.
• With ARNI, there was a suggestion of benefit
in patients with LVEF < 57% (in women
benefits of ARNI were sustained up to LVEF
60%, while for men the benefit was restricted
to LVEF 45%).
MRA
IIb
B
• It may be considered to decrease HF
hospitalizations, particularly among patients
with LVEF on the lower end of this spectrum.
SGLT2-i
IIa
A
• These have been shown to decrease HF
hospitalizations and CV mortality.
• As more trial data becomes evident, the
grading may more upwards to I, A
β-Blockers
• No good data to show that β-blockers are
beneficial in the treatment of HFpEF.
• Often prescribed for treatment of
co-morbidities.
Table 6 Grading of Recommendations and Levels of Evidence in the
Management of HFpEF (LVEF > 50%)
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Epidemiology of Heart Failure
Heart failure (HF) is a clinical syndrome and is the end stage of most heart diseases.
Globally, it affects more than 60 million individuals and in Asia, the prevalence is estimated
to be between 1.3% and 6.7%.1 In general, the incidence of HF has stabilized but the
prevalence appears to be increasing due to the ageing of the population and increasing
number of survivors post myocardial infarction.1-4
In Asia, patients with HF are younger with a mean age of 60 years and two-thirds are
< 65 years.5 This is 10 to 15 years younger than patients in Europe (71-79 years) and the
USA (mean 72 years).6-10 Most of the Asian patients were males and about two-thirds (64%)
had 2 or more comorbid conditions such as hypertension (51.9%), coronary artery disease
(CAD, 50.2%), or diabetes (40.4%).5 There were regional variations but Southeast Asians
(Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, and Philippines) had the highest burden of
comorbidities, particularly CAD, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity and chronic kidney
disease.11
In the ASIAN-HF registry, the 1-year all-cause mortality for the whole population was 9.6%,
varying from 4.4% in Japan to 21.4% in Indonesia.11 Southeast Asians had the highest
mortality (13.6%) compared with South Asians (8.3%) and Northeast Asians (8.9%).11
In Malaysia for Acute HF, (see Table 7, page 48), the:11-17
 Median age of patients was 59-64 years. In Thailand, the mean age of patients with HF
was 65.3 years.34
 Median length of hospital stay (LOS) was 3-5 days - comparable to that in the US.18
 In-hospital mortality varied from <3% to as high as 7.5%. In the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC) HF-Long term (LT) registry, the in-hospital mortality was 4.9% and in
the Get With The Guidelines-HF (GWTG-HF) registry, the in-hospital mortality was <3%.18,19
 30-day mortality was high at 11-15%.
 1-year mortality was also similarly high at 33-49.5%.
 30-day and 1-year all cause readmission rates were 4-18% and 24-76% respectively
compared to the 19% and 53% seen in a meta-analysis of 27 HF registries.20
In general, in addition to hospitalizations due to HF, all-cause hospitalizations were also
increased and observed in up to 60% of patients.21 In Malaysia, cardiovascular causes
accounted for half of all 30-day readmissions (50.1%) with HF specifically accounting for
27.8%.17 Readmission rates were higher in the older age and those with CKD.17 Length of
stay increased with each hospitalization and the time in between hospitalizations decreased
with each subsequent hospitalization.17
The prognosis of HF has improved over time, but mortality remains high.1,6-9,22,23 In the
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) HF-Long term (LT) registry, 1-year mortality was
23.6% for acute HF and 6.4% for chronic HF between 2011 and 2013.19 In ambulatory
patients with HF, pooled analysis of cohorts from three North-western European countries,
showed that outcomes have significantly improved during the last two decades. (Period
1:1995-2005 vs period 2: 2006-2015).24 Improvement in all-cause mortality can be
explained partly by demographic differences and also by better utilization of Optimal
Medical Therapy.25
1.2 Socio-Economic Consequences of Heart Failure
The socio-economic burden of HF is huge. In high-income countries, 1-2% of the total
healthcare expenditure is spent on HF.21 In the US, total cost for HF was estimated to be
$30.7 billion in 2012, with 68% attributable to direct medical costs.26 A more contemporary
review estimated annual healthcare costs for HF patients in the western world, to amount to
25,000 Euro.1 Most of the costs was linked to inpatient care and re-hospitalizations. In
Malaysia, in 2014, it was estimated that 3.6% of the GDP is being spent on total healthcare
with only 1.8% spent on HF.27 This cost is expected to rise with an ageing and rapidly
expanding population.
The overall global economic cost of HF is highly variable from country to country.21,28 In
general, the costs of treatment of a HF patient is higher:28-30
 than other diseases such as asthma, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary
diseases, diabetes, hyperlipidemia and hypertension.
 in the presence of comorbidities such as diabetes, obesity and chronic kidney disease.
Healthcare costs for HF include:27
 Direct costs - this accounts for 60% of total costs.
 Indirect costs - account for 40%. This includes premature mortality, ‘presenteeism’ (the
lost productivity that occurs when employees are not fully functioning in the workplace
because of an illness, injury, or other condition), disability, sick absenteeism (short- and
medium-term absence from work) and costs of caregiver's absenteeism.
In general, in most low and medium economies like Malaysia, the indirect costs of HF in
terms of premature mortality, morbidity, lost earning potential and unpaid care costs
outweigh the direct costs.27
In Asia, there is substantial variations in healthcare spending. In a non-interventional,
retrospective study conducted through medical chart audit for the year 2014, the average
cost of HF hospitalization varied from USD 4,513 in Taiwan to USD 1,443 in public hospitals
in Malaysia (adjusted to 2015 USD).31 This wide variation in costs could be partly explained
by the fact that in Malaysia, healthcare is heavily subsidized by the government and the
wide use of generic medications. There was also less use of more expensive medications
such as Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitors and device therapy.
In a costing study on HF conducted in Hospital Queen Elizabeth II, Kota Kinabalu, the mean
and median annual cost of HF per person were USD 5,428 (MYR 22,649) and USD 591
(MYR 2,466) respectively in 2017.32 This is much higher than that seen in the earlier study
because it includes interventional procedures. Inpatient cost accounted for 90.6% of the
total cost and was mainly attributable to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
procedures and hospitalization.32
In another cost analysis done in 3 public hospitals in Sabah, Kelantan and Pulau Penang
looking only at patients with chronic HF from 2016-2018, the mean total cost per HF patient
per-year (PPPY) was USD 1,971 (MYR 8,224) ± USD 1,255 (MYR 5,236), of which inpatient
cost accounted for 74.7% of the total cost.33 Medication costs (42.0%) and procedure cost
(40.8%) contributed to the largest proportion of outpatient and inpatient costs. HF patients
with preserved LVEF had the highest mean total cost of PPPY, at USD 2,410 (MYR 10,056)
± USD 1,226 (MYR 5,115).33
Thus, an important goal in management of HF is to prevent readmissions, reducing
both direct and indirect costs.
1.3 Humanistic Burden of Heart Failure
A diagnosis of HF also has a huge humanistic burden.21,27 This refers to the impact of an
illness on the patient’s health-related quality of life (HRQoL), activities of daily living,
caregiver(s) ‘s health, caregiver(s)’s quality of life, patients’ treatment satisfaction and
compliance with their specific treatment regimens.21,28 In general, most patients prefer
improved HRQoL to length of survival.
The goals of management of HF include:
 Preventing hospitalizations and unplanned hospital visits - this will reduce both the
socio-economic and humanistic burden of HF.
 Reducing symptoms, improving functional capacity and quality of life, and thus improving
the humanistic burden of HF.
 Improving patient survival.
This guideline provides evidence-based recommendations to help health care providers in
the management of their patients with HF. Beyond the Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG),
clinical management needs to be individualized considering the patient’s overall health
goals, values, perspective, and preferences.
Sound clinical judgment plays an important role in formulating appropriate patient-centered
care plans.
Key Message # 1: Epidemiology and Goals of Management
 In Malaysia, patients with HF are almost 10-15 years younger than those in Western
Countries. Comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes and chronic kidney disease
are common.
 HF is associated with a huge socio-economic and humanistic burden.
 Most of the costs related to HF are related to inpatient hospital care and
re-hospitalizations.
 Important goals of management include:
 Preventing readmissions thus reducing both the socio-economic and humanistic
burden of the disease.
 Improving symptoms, functional capacity, and quality of life.
 Improving patient survival.
Table 7 : Epidemiology of HF in Asia & Malaysia
Asian HF
Lim YMF
MYHF13,14
Sharif RER
Ling HS
Azmee
registry11
et al12
et al14
et al15
et al16
Source
Prospective
10 years
Prospective
Single center
Single center
Single center
of Data
longitudinal
retrospective
observational
Retrospective
Prospective
Retrospective
study of
data from
study on
data
observational on hospitalized
outpatient
1st Jan 2007
hospitalized
Jan 2012 -
study on
pts 1st Jan
(at least 1
to 31st Dec
patients from
Dec 2016
hospitalized
2009 to
episode of
2016 of pts
Aug 2019 -
pts
31st Dec
decompensated
hospitalized
Dec 2020
Sept 2017 to
2018
HF in the
with HF
Oct 2018
previous 6
months) and
hospitalized
patients
1st Oct 2012 -
31st Oct 2016
Population
6480 patients
105,399
2673 patients
1307 patients
117 patients
3923 patients
aged > 18 years
> 20 years
> 18 years
> 18 years
>18 years
Adult
With symptomatic
incident HF
Acute HF
Acute HF
HF pts
HF
hospitalizations
patients
patients
in a MOH
hospital
Mean Age
61.6 years
64.1 years
60.17 years
63.4 years
59 years
62 years
% Women
27%
44%
33.2%
53.6%
41.1%
37.7%
% HFrEF
81%
NA
64.6%
40.8%
48.6%
62.9%
Length of
NA
3 days
7.3 days
5.3 ± 3.4 days
5 days
9.2 days
Hospital Stay
(median)
(mean)
(mean).
(median)
(mean)
3 - 4 (median)
All Cause
Readmission
30 days
NA
18.1%
12.9%
4.1%
11.2%
6.8%
1 year
NA
NA
NA
76.1%
NA
24.7%
In Hospital
5.3%
2.8%
1.7%
7.5%
7.2%
Mortality
30 days
11.2%
7.8%
15.7%
13.1%
NA
Mortality
1 year
9.6%
33.1%
NA
49.7%
NA
NA
Mortality
HFrEF:10.6%
HFpEF: 5.4%,
HF is a clinical syndrome due to any structural or physiological abnormality of the heart
resulting in its inability to meet the metabolic demands of the body or its ability to do so only
at higher-than-normal filling pressures. This is supported by either an elevation of natriuretic
peptides and/or evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion.35
This may be accompanied by signs and symptoms of systemic hypoperfusion and/or
volume overload. Patients may have typical symptoms (e.g., breathlessness, ankle swelling
and fatigue) and signs (e.g., elevated jugular venous pressure, ankle edema, pulmonary
crackles and displaced apex beat). Occasionally, some patients may present without signs
or symptoms of volume overload. Older patients, often, present with atypical symptoms
such as delirium, reduced appetite, immobility, incontinence, and falls.
Most commonly, HF is due to myocardial dysfunction- either systolic, diastolic, or both.
However, pathology of the valves, pericardium, and endocardium, and abnormalities of
heart rhythm and conduction can also cause HF.
Occasionally, non-cardiac disease, e.g., anemia, pulmonary, renal, thyroid, or hepatic
disease may have symptoms and signs like those of HF, but in the absence of cardiac
dysfunction, these do not fulfil the criteria for HF. However, these pathologies can coexist
with HF and exacerbate the condition.
2. DEFINITION
HF can be classified by phenotypes. These descriptions may reflect the:
 Temporal characteristics (e.g., acuteness, chronicity)
 Affected circulatory systems (e.g., left vs right)
 Clinical context and trajectory (e.g., decompensated, improved, advanced, end-stage).
Another commonly used classification is by the severity of LV systolic function as
assessed by LV ejection Fraction (LVEF).35 (Table 8, page 50)
3. CLASSIFICATION
Key Message #2: Definition
 HF is a clinical syndrome due to any structural or physiological abnormality of the heart
resulting in its inability to meet the metabolic demands of the body or its ability to do so
only at higher-than-normal filling pressures.
 This is supported objectively by either an elevation of natriuretic peptides and/or
evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion.
Table 8: Classification Of Heart Failure According To LVEF
Ejection Fraction Terminology
LVEF
Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction (HFrEF)
≤ 40%
Heart Failure with mildly reduced LVEF (HFmrEF)
41 - 49%
Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction (HFpEF)
≥ 50%
Heart Failure with Improved Ejection
HF with a baseline LVEF of
Fraction (HFimpEF)
≤ 40%, a ≥10-point increase
from baseline LVEF following
treatment, and a second
measurement of LVEF of
> 40%.
Stages of HF include35:
 A - ‘At Risk”
 Asymptomatic without structural cardiac disease but ‘at risk’ of developing HF.
 B - “Pre HF”
 Asymptomatic but with structural and functional cardiac abnormalities that can
lead to HF. They may have normal or mildly reduced LV function.
 C - “HF”
 Symptomatic HF, either previous or current symptoms.
 D - “Advanced HF”
 Marked symptoms interfering with daily activities of living and with recurrent
hospitalizations.
The severity of symptomatic HF can be assessed by the New York Heart Association
(NYHA) Functional Class. (Table 9, page 50)
Table 9: New York Heart Association Functional Classification for
Patients with Heart Disease
CLASS
FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY
1 YEAR MORTALITY
CLASS I
No limitation. Ordinary physical activity does not
cause undue fatigue, dyspnea or palpitation.
5 - 10%
CLASS II
Slight limitation of physical activity. Such patients
are comfortable at rest. Ordinary physical activity
10 - 15%
results in fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea or angina.
CLASS III
Marked limitation of physical activity. Although
patients are comfortable at rest, less than ordinary
15 - 20%
activity will lead to symptoms.
CLASS IV
Inability to carry on any physical activity without
discomfort. Symptoms of congestive failure are
20 - 50%
present at rest. With any physical activity,
increased discomfort is experienced.
Key Message #3: Classification & Stages of HF
 HF can be classified according to:
 Clinical Presentation:
 Acute heart failure (Acute HF)
 Chronic heart failure (Chronic HF)
 Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF):
 Reduced (LVEF ≤ 40%) - Heart failure with reduced ejection function (HFrEF).
 Mildly reduced (LVEF 41%-49%) - Heart Failure with the LVEF being in the
mildly reduced range (HFmrEF)
 Preserved (LVEF > 50%) - Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
 Improved Ejection Fraction - HF with a baseline LVEF of < 40%, a >10-point
increase from baseline LVEF following treatment, and a second measurement of
LVEF of >40%.(HFimpEF)
 Stages of HF are:
 A - “At Risk”
 B - “Pre HF”
 C - “Symptomatic HF with previous or current symptoms”
 D - “Advanced HF”
 The severity of symptomatic HF and the exercise capacity of the patient can be
assessed using the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class (Table 9,
page 50).
4. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The main pathophysiology of HF is the inability of the heart to provide sufficient
cardiac output to meet the perfusion and oxygenation requirements of the body while
maintaining normal filling pressures. This may be due to either impaired cardiac
contractility or impaired relaxation and compliance. Both mechanisms may co-exist in the
same patient and depending on the predominant pathophysiology, the patient may present
as HFrEF or HFpEF.
This will result in the following compensatory mechanisms:
 A higher ventricular end diastolic pressure - This is a compensatory mechanism to
increase stroke volume by the Frank Starling mechanism.
 Increasing ventricular volume and wall thickness through ventricular remodelling.
 Neuro-hormonal activation of the:
 Sympathetic nervous system
 Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
 Vasopressin
This neuro-hormonal activation is aimed at increasing stroke volume and cardiac output by:
 An increase in heart rate and ventricular contraction.
 Vasoconstriction of arterial resistance vessels to maintain blood pressure.
 Venous constriction to increase venous preload.
 Salt and water retention to increase preload.
In general, these neuro-hormonal responses are compensatory mechanisms. However they
can also aggravate HF by increasing ventricular afterload and increasing preload to the
point where pulmonary and/or systemic congestion and edema occur.
4.1 HFrEF
In HFrEF, cardiac output is reduced due to depressed myocardial contractility,
irrespective of the etiology. This leads to a cascade of pathophysiological changes as
outlined above. There are effective medical and device therapies that have been shown to
have a survival benefit in HFrEF. In this group of patients, their LVEF can remain as < 40%
or improve to ≥ 40% when they are reclassified as Heart Failure with Improved Ejection
Fraction (HFimpEF).
4.2 HFpEF
In HFpEF there is impaired left ventricular (LV) filling due to decreased relaxation
(during early diastole) and/or reduced compliance (early to late diastole) leading to
elevated LV filling pressures at rest or during exercise. These hemodynamic changes are
accompanied predominantly by signs of pulmonary and/or venous congestion and
occasionally systemic hypoperfusion as well.
Clinical studies seem to indicate that HFrEF and HFpEF are mechanistically distinct
pathophysiological entities.36 The transition from HFpEF to HFrEF is rare.37
HFpEF appears to be a multi-organ, systemic syndrome with heterogeneous clinical
manifestations and high comorbidity burden.36
There is limited data available on therapies that improve survival in HFpEF unlike those with
HFrEF. In this group of patients, their LVEF can deteriorate to between 41 to 49% (HFmrEF)
or rarely < 40% (HFrEF).
4.3 HFmrEF
The prevalence of HFmrEF is between 10-25%.38 (Table 10, page 53). It is a clinical entity
between HFrEF and HFpEF. With regards to etiology, it is more similar to HFrEF (high
prevalence of CAD) but in terms of prognosis, they are more like HFpEF in terms of survival
rates, low risk of CV events but a higher risk of non-CV adverse events than those with
HFrEF.36,38,39
HFmrEF represents a transitional phase and the LVEF can:
 Remain in the 41 to 49% range (HFmrEF) or
 Worsen to ≤ 40% (HFrEF) or
 Improve to ≥ 50% (HFimpEF).
Patients with HFmrEF had the best outcomes, compared to the high rates of mortality seen
in patients with HFrEF and the high rates of HF readmissions seen in patients with HFpEF.6
Only 1/3 of patients with HFmrEF transitioned during follow up, with the lowest mortality
seen in patients transitioning to HFpEF.40
Clinical trials on therapies for HFpEF that enrolled patients with an LVEF of >40% or ≥45%
did not demonstrate a clear treatment effect. Post hoc analysis however suggests that some
therapies for HFrEF might also be effective in HFmrEF.
4.4 HFimpEF
In HF with improved EF (HFimpEF), the baseline LVEF is ≤40% but either spontaneously or
following treatment, there is a ≥10% increase from baseline LVEF, and a second
measurement of LVEF is >40%. 35 These patients have resolution of symptoms and signs of
HF. “HF in remission" is a term that is sometimes used but the HF is known to frequently
relapse especially after withdrawal of pharmacological treatment.41
In a large meta-analysis, the prevalence of HFimpEF was 22.64%.42 They had a lower
mortality and risk of hospitalization compared HFrEF and HFpEF.42
Key Message #4: Pathophysiology
 The main pathophysiology of HF is the inability of the heart to provide sufficient cardiac
output to meet the perfusion and oxygenation requirements of the body while
maintaining normal filling pressures.
 In HFrEF, cardiac output is reduced due to depressed myocardial contractility,
irrespective of the etiology.
 In HFpEF there is impaired left ventricular (LV) filling due to decreased relaxation
(during early diastole) and/or reduced compliance (early to late diastole) leading to
elevated LV filling pressures at rest or during exercise and dyspnea.
 HFmrEF is a clinical entity between HFrEF and HFpEF. With regards to etiology, it is
more like HFrEF (high prevalence of CAD) but in terms of prognosis, it is more like
HFpEF.
 In HFimpEF, patients have resolution of symptoms and signs of HF but HF is known
to frequently relapse especially after withdrawal of pharmacological treatment. They
have a lower mortality and risk of hospitalization compared HFrEF and HFpEF.
Table 10: Prevalence of HFrEF, HFpEF and HFmrEF in Registries
ESCHF-LT43
GWTG-
Swedish
ASIAN HF
MYHF13
HF44
HF45
Registry5
Source
Prospective
Prospective
Prospective
Prospective
Prospective
of Data
Observational Observational Observational
longitudinal
observational
study of
study of
study of
study of
study on
Outpatients
hospitalized
Outpatients
outpatient
hospitalized
and
between
and
(at least 1
patients from
hospitalized
Jan 2005
hospitalized
episode of
Aug 2019
patients April
and
patients
decompensated
- Dec 2020
2011 to
Sept 2013
between
HF in the
Jan 2015
2000 - 2018
previous
6 months)
and
hospitalized
patients
1st Oct 201231st Oct 2016
No
16,354
99,825
75,518
6,480
2,673
HFrEF
59.8%
49.0%
52.5%
81.0%
64.6%
HFmrEF
24.2%
12.8%
23.5%
NA
11.3%
HFpEF
16.0%
38.1%
24.1%
19.0%
21.6%
HF is not a complete diagnosis. It is important to identify the underlying disease and
the precipitating cause(s), if present, so that disease-specific treatment can be initiated
early.
The common underlying causes of HF in adults are:
 Coronary artery disease (CAD)
 Hypertension
 Dilated cardiomyopathy-idiopathic, familial
 Valvular heart disease
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy
The commonest cause in Malaysia is CAD accounting for almost 60-66% of HF.14,15,17
Comorbidities are common and include hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia.14,15,17
Valvular Heart Disease, especially rheumatic heart disease, is an important cause among
the rural and urban poor.
Other causes of HF include:
 Congenital heart disease
 Cor pulmonale
 Pericardial disease: constrictive pericarditis, cardiac tamponade
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 Viral myocarditis
 Acute rheumatic fever
 Toxic:
 Alcohol
 Cardiotoxic chemotherapy e.g., doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, trastuzumab (Herceptin),
immune checkpoint inhibitors,
 Radiotherapy
 Medications such as clozapine
 Substance abuse: methamphetamine and cocaine
 Endocrine and metabolic disorders: thyroid disease, acromegaly, phaechromocytoma.
 Collagen vascular disease: systemic lupus erythematosis, polymyositis, polyarteritis
nodosa.
 Tachycardia induced cardiomyopathy e.g., uncontrolled atrial fibrillation.
 Infiltrative cardiac disease e.g., amyloid, hyper-eosinophilic syndrome, Sarcoid.
 Neuromuscular Disorders: Friedreich’s Ataxia, Muscular Dystrophy.
 Storage Disorders: Haemochromatosis, Glycogen Storage Disease, Fabry disease.
 Endomyocardial disease: Carcinoid, Endomyocardial Fibrosis.
 Miscellaneous
 High output HF e.g., severe anemia, large A-V shunts/malformations.
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy.
 Stress (Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy.
5. ETIOLOGY
Patients with Chronic HF may occasionally develop acute decompensation. Factors
that can contribute to this acute decompensation are listed in Table 11, Page 55. The more
important causes that need to be recognized and treated appropriately are as in the
acronym:
C H A M P I O N
C - Coronary artery disease - Acute myocardial infarction/myocardial ischemia
H - Hypertensive emergencies
A - Arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation)
M - Mechanical causes such as acute valve regurgitation
P - Pulmonary - e.g., pulmonary embolism, pneumonia
I - Infections - e.g., urinary tract infection, Covid
O - Other medications such as NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors,
N - Non-compliance to medications
Table 11: Factors Contributing to Decompensation in a Patient with Stable HF
Key message #5: Etiology
 The common underlying causes of HF in adults are:
 Coronary artery disease (CAD) - accounting for almost 60-66% of HF in Malaysia
 Hypertension
 Dilated cardiomyopathy-idiopathic, familial.
 Valvular heart disease
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy
 Comorbidities are common and include hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia.
Patient factors
 Non-compliance to medications
 Dietary indiscretion especially salt and fluid intake
 Inappropriate medications e.g., NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors
 Alcohol consumption
Cardiac causes
 Superimposed myocardial ischemia or infarction (often asymptomatic)
 Hypertensive emergencies
 Arrhythmias
 Pulmonary embolism
 Secondary mitral or tricuspid regurgitation
Systemic conditions
 Superimposed infections
 Anemia
 Thyroid disease
 Electrolyte disturbances
 Worsening renal disease
Others
 Urinary retention
 Severe emotional or physical stress
 Medications with negative ionotropic effect, e.g., Verapamil
The diagnosis of HF depends on a detailed history focusing on symptoms, risk
factors and a thorough physical examination. Patients with HF may present differently
but tend to be consistent in their presentation whenever they develop a recurrent episode.
6.1. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported by objective evidence of cardiac
dysfunction. Breathlessness with orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND),
reduced exercise tolerance and ankle swelling are the characteristic symptoms of HF.
Orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea are markers of high filling pressures and
contribute to sleep-disordered breathing.
Signs which are more specific for HF are an elevated jugular venous pulse (JVP), and a third
heart sound. These signs are associated with adverse outcomes in patients with HF and
asymptomatic LV dysfunction.46,47 The presence of a raised JVP, a positive jugulo-venous
reflux and hepatomegaly generally indicate a raised right atrial pressure of > 8 mmHg.48 A
raised JVP has a good sensitivity (70%) and specificity (79%) of left sided congestion.48
A fourth heart sound is due to atrial contraction and is more frequent in patients with HFpEF.
It is absent in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF).
These signs may be accompanied by a laterally displaced apical impulse and a cardiac
murmur. Other supportive signs include peripheral edema, tachycardia, narrow pulse
pressure, pulmonary crepitations, hepatomegaly and ascites. These clinical findings may be
transient and resolve completely following initial therapy.
However, these signs are difficult to detect and are not always easily reproducible in the
elderly, the obese and in patients with chronic lung disease. In a small study on patients with
chronic HF, signs of congestion (rales, edema and JVP elevation) were absent in 42% of
patients with a PCWP ≥ 22 mmHg.49 Occasionally symptoms and signs of volume overload
may be absent, and the patient may present with fatigue only.
In the elderly, as exertional dyspnea increases, they begin to lead more sedentary lives.
Fatigue is common and this is likely due to low cardiac output, peripheral hypo-perfusion
and skeletal muscle deconditioning and should not be considered due to ageing only.50
Atypical symptoms, such as confusion, memory deficit, sleepiness, episodes of delirium,
irritability, syncopal states, fatigue, anorexia, and reduced level of activity are common
manifestations of HF especially after age 80.50 Other co-existing conditions such as
infections, anemia, delirium etc may complicate the clinical picture making the diagnosis of
HF difficult.51 Bilateral leg edema is common in the elderly and may be due to other causes
such as venous insufficiency, chronic kidney disease or lymphedema besides HF.51
In patients presenting with dyspnea, acute LV failure can sometimes mimic an acute
exacerbation of bronchial asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thus, a proper
history and clinical examination is essential. Similarly, in patients with CKD presenting with
dyspnea, a concomitant diagnosis of HF may be missed.
Exercise capacity in a patient with heart disease is assessed by the New York Heart Association
(NYHA) functional classification. (Table 9, page 50)
l, C
l, C
6. DIAGNOSIS
The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported objectively with either raised natriuretic
peptides and/or evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion.35 A value of NT-Pro BNP >
125pg/ml or BNP >35pg/ml is used as a cut off value for the diagnosis of HF in the
non-acute setting.35 (Table 12, page 60)
Objective evidence of cardiac dysfunction by diagnostic tests will further support the
diagnosis of HF. It will help establish the etiology and the precipitating factors of the
syndrome.
Key message # 5:
 In making a diagnosis of HF, a detailed history and a thorough physical examination
is important.
 The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported objectively with either raised
natriuretic peptides and/or evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion.
l, A
6.2 Investigations (Flowchart 1, page 32)
BASIC INVESTIGATIONS
12 Lead
- To assess heart rate, rhythm, QRS morphology, QRS duration, QRS
Electrocardiogram
voltage, evidence of ischemia, LV hypertrophy and arrhythmias.
Chest Radiograph
- To look for pulmonary congestion, cardiomegaly, and presence of
underlying lung pathology.
- Patients with HFpEF may have a normal cardiac size.
Blood Tests
Full Blood Count, urea, creatinine, serum electrolytes (sodium and potassium)
liver function, serum glucose, lipid profile.
Urinalysis
To look for proteinuria.
OTHER IMPORTANT INVESTIGATIONS
Echocardiography
This will allow assessment of:
 LV chamber size, volume, and systolic function.
 LV wall thickness, evidence of scarring and wall motion abnormalities.
 Diastolic function of the heart.
 Valvular structure and function.
 Congenital cardiac abnormalities.
 LV mechanical dyssynchrony.
 Pulmonary hypertension.
It is the most useful and widely available test to establish the diagnosis in
patients suspected of HF.
Natriuretic peptides
BNP and NT-Pro BNP are a family of hormones secreted by the ventricles
in (NP):
response to wall stress.
 Brain Natriuretic
They are useful in the following situations:
Peptide (BNP) or
 N-Terminal Pro
DIAGNOSIS OF HF
BNP (NT-Pro BNP)
A) De Novo HF-1st episode of HF
A1. Emergency Setting
 NPs are useful as a ‘rule out’ test for patients presenting with acute
dyspnea. A level of < 100pg/ml for BNP and < 300pg/ml for NT-Pro BNP
makes the diagnosis of acute HF unlikely.52-56
 There is no statistical difference between the diagnostic accuracy of
plasma B type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and NT-Pro BNP.55
 These levels are affected by renal function and gender.55-57 (See Table
12, Page 60 for the optimal cut off values of NP to exclude or diagnose
HF in patients with dyspnea.)
 A high level supports the diagnosis of acute HF and very high levels
correlate with the severity of HF and adverse outcomes.52-57
 The values of both BNP and NT-Pro BNP are predictive of both
in-hospital and 1-year mortality, irrespective of LVEF.55-60
 The discharge value as well as percent change from admission to
discharge were more predictive of subsequent mortality and/or
rehospitalization than admission values.61 A decrease by > 30% at
discharge indicates a better prognosis than when values fail to decrease
or actually increase.62
A2. In the community setting (Primary Care):
 They are a useful “rule out” test in the diagnosis of HF in patients
presenting with dyspnea.57,63,64 A point-of-care test allows early diagnosis.
 Changes in the levels of BNP and NT-Pro BNP predict risk of hospital
admissions for HF.57,65
 A decline in NT-ProBNP over time suggests favourable LV remodeand
improved clinical outcomes.66,67
B) Acute Decompensation in patients with Chronic HF
 In patients with chronic HF, NPs may be persistently elevated and show
substantial biological variation.68
 When these patients present with acute symptoms, a change of 100% or
more from the stable concentration suggests decompensation.57
 A combination of symptoms, weight gain and NP concentration may,
however, be the best way to diagnose early decompensation in these
patients.
NP levels are affected by:
 Atrial fibrillation (AF)69,70 - levels are increased even in the absence of HF.
 Age 71, 72 - Levels of NP increase with age.
 Renal function.57,73,74
 Obesity 75, 76 - Levels are reduced in obesity.
 Certain medications such as Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor
(ARNI) may interfere with the interpretation of BNP levels.
In cases of suspected HF, a point-of-care NP test allows early confirmation
of the diagnosis. However:
 A raised NP level may be due to other causes besides HF. (Appendix I,
Page 161)
 For this reason, NPs should only be used in conjunction with careful
clinical assessment and investigation and interpreted with all other clinical
information.
GUIDING THERAPY:
 The results of studies on the use of NP to guide therapy in HF are
conflicting.57,77-80
 A value of NT-Pro BNP of ≤ 1,000 pg/ml during treatment was associated
with better CV outcomes.81
ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS WHEN INDICATED:
Blood Tests
 Serum cardiac biomarkers: to look for myocardial necrosis - troponins,
creatine kinase - muscle/brain band (CKMB).
 Iron studies (ferritin, serum iron, transferrin saturation).
 Serum calcium and magnesium.
 Thyroid function tests.
Other less common tests that may be considered include:
 Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)
 Viral studies
Tests for Myocardial
 Treadmill exercise test
Ischemia and/or
 Stress echocardiography (exercise or pharmacological)
Viability
 Radionuclide studies
 Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (Cardiac MRI)
Invasive Tests
 Coronary angiography
 Cardiac catheterisation
 Endomyocardial biopsy
Others
 Holter electrocardiography, loop recorders
 Pulmonary function test
Table 12: Optimal Natriuretic Peptide Cut Points for Diagnosis or
Exclusion of Heart Failure among Patients with Dyspnea. 56,57,64
BNP (ng/L)
NT-Pro BNP (ng/L)
Emergency Setting
Heart Failure Rule Out
< 100
< 300
Heart Failure Possible
> 400
Age < 50 y: > 450
Age 50 - 75: > 900
Age > 75: > 1800
Community Setting (Primary Care)
Heart Failure Rule Out
< 35
< 125
Key Recommendations # 1: Diagnosis & Essential Investigations
 In making a diagnosis of HF, a detailed history and a thorough physical examination
are important.
 The clinical suspicion of HF should be supported objectively by either raised natriuretic
peptides and/or evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion.
 Important basic investigations:
 Echocardiogram.
 ECG.
 Chest Radiograph.
 Blood - Full Blood Count, urea, creatinine, serum electrolytes (sodium and potassium)
liver function, serum glucose, lipid profile.
 Natriuretic Peptides: NT-Pro BNP or BNP
 They are a useful “rule out” test in the diagnosis of HF in patients presenting with
acute dyspnea.
 In chronic HF, NPs may be persistently elevated and show substantial biological
variation. In this setting, NPs should be interpreted with careful clinical assessment
and investigation and with all other clinical information.
 A value of NT-Pro BNP of ≤ 1,000 pg/ml during treatment was associated with
better CV outcomes.
7. PREVENTION
FOUNDATION OF MANAGEMENT OF HEART FAILURE
Stage A
Individuals who do not have structural cardiac
“At Risk”
disease but are at high risk of developing HF/CAD.
Hypertension
Diabetes
Obesity and the Metabolic Syndrome
Cigarette smoking
Familial hypercholesterolemia
Multiple CV risk factors
Family history of Cardiomyopathy
Thyroid Disease
Renal Disease
Cardiotoxins
Others:
Sleep Disordered breathing,
Connective Tissue Disease,
Chronic Pulmonary disease and Pulmonary Hypertension
Stage B
Individuals with structural cardiac disease and who
“Pre HF”
either have normal or impaired myocardial function.
Established CAD
Hypertension with LVH
Cardiac Valve disease
Congenital Heart disease
Arrhythmias
Prevention of HF should always be the primary objective and the foundation of
management. It should focus on those who are in:
 Stage A - “At Risk” - Individuals who are at high risk of developing cardiac disease but
who do not have symptoms or signs of HF and have structurally normal hearts.
 Stage B - “Pre HF” - Individuals with structural cardiac disease and who have either
normal or impaired cardiac function but do not have signs and symptoms of HF.
There is robust clinical data that by appropriate and timely interventions, HF can be prevented
in these individuals and cardiac function improved.
7.1 STAGE A - “AT RISK”
Individuals who are at high risk of developing HF/CAD but who do not yet have structural
heart disease. These include individuals with:
 Hypertension -
 This is an important risk factor for the development of HF especially in the elderly.
 In the Framingham Heart Study, 91% of the participants with HF had a previous
diagnosis of hypertension.82 In multivariable analysis, the population-attributable risk
of HF in the Framingham population was 39% and 59% for male and females respectively.82
 In a meta-analysis of 23 hypertension trials, the risk of development of HF was comparable
to that of stroke: 8.5 and 9.1 events per 1000 patients respectively.83
 Diabetes -
 This is a risk factor for the development of HF independent of the presence of coexisting
hypertension or CAD and after adjusting for other CV risk factors such as age,
hyperlipidemia, and smoking.84
 In the Framingham population cohort, the presence of diabetes increased the risk of HF
by 2x in men and 5x in women.85
 The prevalence of HF in individuals with diabetes is 4x higher than that of the general
population.86
 Obesity and Mmetabolic Syndrome -
 In the Framingham Heart Study, obese individuals had a doubling of the risk of HF
when compared to those with a normal body-mass index.85 There was a continuous
gradient of the risk of developing HF with increasing body-mass index in both sexes
which persisted even after adjusting for other CV risk factors, presence of Left Ventricular
Hypertrophy and CAD.87
 A meta-analysis showed that there was a 41% increase in HF per 5-unit increment in
BMI and a threshold of risk at 23-24 kg/m2.88
 HFpEF is more common than HFrEF in obese individuals. Those who are overweight
and with class 1 obesity have 38% and 56% higher risk of HFpEF, respectively,
independent of other CV risk factors.89,90
 However, there exists an obesity paradox in HF - Patients with overweight or class 1
obesity have better clinical outcomes than patients with normal weight for similar
degrees of HF.90
 Metabolic Syndrome - After adjusting for other risk factors for HF, the presence of
metabolic syndrome at baseline was also a strong predictor of the development of
subsequent HF.91,92
 Cigarette Smoking -
 This is a risk factor for HF independent of traditional CV risk factors.
 Current smoking, smoking ≥20 cigarettes/day and smoking burden (≥15 pack-years)
were significantly associated with incident HF hospitalization in comparison with never
smoking.93
 In older adults, both current and past cigarette smoking was shown to increase HF risk
after adjusting for other HF risk factors.94
 Smokers had 2x the risk of developing HFrEF and HFpEF compared to never /
nonsmokers after a median of 13 years of follow up.95
 Familial Hypercholesterolemia -
 This leads to premature CAD and subsequent HF.96
 Multiple CV Risk Factors or who already have evidence of atherosclerotic disease in
other vascular beds (e.g., cerebral, peripheral vascular disease).
 Family History of Cardiomyopathy -
 These usually manifest in younger individuals as HF, arrhythmias, or syncope.
 A family history of premature cardiomyopathy death was associated with an increase in
the risk of developing cardiomyopathy ranging from 6 - to 400-fold, depending on age,
kinship, gender, and number of affected family members.97
 In the Framingham Offspring Study, parental HF was connected to asymptomatic left
ventricular dysfunction and increased the likelihood of overt HF in the offspring.98
 Thyroid Disorders -
 Both hyper and hypothyroidism increase the risk of HF.99
 A meta-analysis showed that the risk of HF is increased with a TSH < 0.10 mIU/L and >
10.0 miu/l among older adults.99-101 The risk of a low-output HF in hyperthyroid patients
has been reported to be between 6 and 15%.99
 Kidney Disease -
 Microalbuminuria is a strong and independent indicator of increased risk of CV events
and death among individuals with and without diabetes, with stable CAD and those
with HF.102-104 It is a CV risk marker - reflecting subclinical vascular damage in the kidneys
and other vascular beds.105
 There is a close relationship between the heart and the kidneys, each condition causes
or exacerbates the other, compounded by the accompanying anemia.106
 The incidence of de novo HF in known CKD is in the range of 17% to 21% and for
post-kidney transplant it is 18% at 3 years.107
 The prevalence of HF increases greatly as the patient's renal function deteriorates,
and, at end-stage kidney disease, can reach 65-70%.106
 Cardiotoxins -
 Alcohol - Heavy drinking has been shown to increase the risk of HF, whereas
light-to-moderate drinking (up to 1 drink per day for women and up to 2 drinks per day
for men) has been associated with a lower risk of HF.108
 Chemotherapeutic agents.
 Substance abuse such as cocaine, amphetamine, antidepressants.
 Healthy Sleep Pattern -
 In a prospective study, adherence to a healthy sleep pattern was associated with a
lower risk of HF, independent of the conventional risk factors.109 Healthy sleep factors
were defined as early chronotype (“morning” person or “morning” than “evening”
person); sleeping 7 to 8 hours/day; never/rarely or sometimes insomnia symptoms; no
snoring; and no excessive daytime sleepiness.
 The National Sleep Foundation recommends 7 to 9 hours for young adults and adults,
and 7 to 8 hours of sleep for older adults.110
 Sleep-disordered breathing includes Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) and Central
Sleep Apnea (CSA) with Cheyne-Stokes respiration.
 The relationship between sleep disordered breathing and HF is complex. It may just be
an association rather than a cause-and-effect relationship.111,112
 It is a frequent comorbidity in HF, the prevalence ranging from 11% to as high as
40-50% in symptomatic HF.111,112
 Connective tissue diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, SLE -
 There is a high prevalence of atherosclerotic coronary disease in these systemic
inflammatory conditions.113 In addition, HF can occur secondary to chronic myocardial
and pericardial inflammation, valvular disease and/or pulmonary hypertension.
 Chronic pulmonary disease with pulmonary hypertension- These lead to right HF which
in turn also affects left heart function and causes a complex clinical syndrome affecting
multiple organ systems.114
7.1.1 Preventive Strategies in Stage A
 Treating Hypertension to Target -
 Reducing systolic BP to 140-145mmHg, has been shown in several trials in older
patients with systolic hypertension to reduce new onset HF from 36-64%.115-118
 Further lowering of the target SBP from ≤ 140 to ≤ 120 in non-diabetic hypertensive
individuals who were age ≥ 50 years and at high CV risk was also shown to reduce the
development of HF by as much as 37%.119
 Diabetes -
 Treat A1c to target - Poor glycaemic control increases the risk of HF, each 1% increase
in A1c increases the risk by 8-32%.120,121
 In patients at high CV risk and/or with established CVD, sodium-glucose cotransport-2
inhibitors (SGLT2-i) have been shown to reduce hospitalization for HF and improve CV
outcomes.122-127
 Smoking Cessation -
 Quitting smoking appears to have a substantial and early effect (within two years) on
decreasing morbidity and mortality in patients with left ventricular dysfunction mainly
due to a reduction in CV events.128
 After > 15 years of smoking cessation, the risk of HF and death for most former smokers
becomes like that of never-smokers.129
 Familial Hypercholesterolemia -
 Treating lipid levels to target reduces risk of MI and thus prevents the development of
HF.130,131
 Multiple CV Risk Factors -
 Optimal profiles in the 7 CV risk factors -smoking, body mass index, physical activity,
diet, cholesterol, blood pressure, and glucose- are associated with a lower lifetime risk
of HF.132,133
 Family History of Cardiomyopathy -
 Screening and early treatment of first-degree relatives of patients with known heritable
cardiomyopathy.
I,B
l,A
l,A
l,A
l,A
lIa,B
l,A
 Thyroid Disease -
 Detecting and treating thyroid disease early especially in older adults to prevent thyroid
heart disease.
 Kidney Disease -
 Early detection and appropriate management of kidney disease and the coexisting
anemia. In adult CKD patients, however, KDIGO has advised that the Hb be
maintained < 11.5 gm/100ml.134 These levels are associated with lower mortality and
less frequent hospitalization rates.134
 Preservation of kidney function by avoiding nephrotoxic agents such as non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents and the use of proven kidney-protective agents.
 Alcohol -
 In the absence of large, randomized trials, light-to-moderate drinking cannot be
recommended to lower the risk of HF. Advise abstinence.
 Chemotherapy -
 Identifying and monitoring at risk individuals prior to administration of cardiotoxic
chemotherapy.
 Sleep Disordered Breathing -
 To date, the use of servo-ventilation and/or Continuous Positive Airway Pressure
(CPAP) for central and /or obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has not been shown to
prevent HF or to improve CV outcomes.135-140
 Others:
 Regular exercise - A minimum physical activity of at least 150 minutes per week of
moderate intensity activity has been recommended to reduce CV risk and prevent
ischemic heart disease.89,141
 Maintain ideal body weight - Maintenance of normal weight and physical activity during
adult life have been associated with lower incidence of HF.89,141,142
 n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (PUFA) supplements -
 To date, there have been no primary prevention trials on the use of these supplements
to prevent cardiac disease.143
 The cumulative findings from RCTs on the prevention of HF and or CV events in
patients at high CV risk and or established CVD have been mixed.143
7.2. STAGE B - “Pre HF”
Individuals with structural cardiac disease but who do not have signs and symptoms of HF.
Cardiac function may be normal or impaired. The following strategies have been shown to
prevent the development of HF.
7.2.1. In the presence of normal cardiac function
 Timely triage and appropriate treatment of patients with acute coronary syndromes.144,145
 Patients with CAD should be treated appropriately with guideline directed medical therapy
(antiplatelet agents, statins, β-blockers, and Renin Angiotensin System blockers) and
intervention as necessary.146
 Patients with hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) should have their blood
pressure control optimized. Regression of LVH has been shown to be associated with a
lower incidence of new onset HF.147,148
 Patients with significant valve disease (moderate and above) should be assessed for
l,C
lII,B
l,C
l,C
IIb,B
l,A
l,A
l,A
l,A
l,A
l,C
Key Recommendations #2: Prevention of HF
 In the prevention of HF for patients in Stage A:
 All CV risk factors should be treated to target.
 Optimal profiles of the 7 CV risk factors - blood pressure, glucose, cholesterol,
absence of smoking, body mass index and physical activity has been shown to be
associated with a lower lifetime risk of HF.
 In the prevention of HF for patients in Stage B:
 Patients with Acute Coronary Syndrome, Hypertension, CAD, arrhythmias, valve, and
congenital heart disease should be treated timely and according to the guidelines.
 In patients who have impaired LV function (LVEF<40%):
 Treat the underlying cause and avoid/treat early precipitating factors.
 In asymptomatic patients in NYHA Class I: ACE-I, β-blockers, and SGLT2-i.
 Symptomatic patients in NYHA Class II-IV: All the 4 Foundational HF medications
(RAS blockers, MRA, β-blockers and SGLT2-i) should be instituted early to
improve CV outcomes.
progression and undergo timely intervention as indicated.
 Patients with arrhythmias, when indicated, should be referred for evaluation and
treatment.
 Patients with congenital heart disease should have their cardiac lesions corrected with
appropriate follow-up looking for progression and sequelae.
7.2.2. In the presence of impaired LV function (LVEF< 40%) irrespective of symptoms:
 Treat the underlying cause wherever possible.
 The evidence for the benefits of pharmacotherapy in patients with asymptomatic LV
dysfunction in NYHA Class I has been mainly derived from studies conducted in
patients with LVEF < 40% with β-blockers and ACE-I.149-152
 SGLT2-i reduce hospitalization for HF in patients with and without established CVD,
irrespective of diabetes status.127,128,153.154
 In symptomatic patients in NYHA Class II-IV- All the 4 Foundational HF medications
(RAS blockers, MRA, β-blockers and SGLT2-i) improve CV outcomes.155,156
l,A
l,A
l,A
l,C
Key message #6: Prevention of HF
 Prevention and early intervention, wherever appropriate, should be the primary
objective of management of patients at risk for HF.
 There is robust clinical data that by appropriate and timely interventions, HF can be
prevented in these individuals and cardiac function improved.
 It should focus on those who are in:
 Stage A - “At Risk” - Individuals who are at high risk of developing cardiac disease
but who do not have symptoms or signs of HF and have structurally normal hearts.
 Stage B - “Pre HF” - Individuals with structural cardiac disease and who have
either normal or impaired cardiac function but do not have signs and symptoms of HF.
8.1 Education
HF patients and their family members should be educated on the definition, causes,
signs, symptoms, and the progressive and relapsing nature of the disease, emphasizing
self-care wherever possible. Increased awareness helps patients adhere to therapeutic
instructions whereas knowledge leads to reduced anxiety and better sense of control.157
Self-care is important and improves long term adherence to management strategies.157
Patients and their family should158:
 Be educated on self-care which includes:
 Maintenance (e.g., taking medication, exercising, and adhering to a healthy diet)
 Monitoring (e.g., regular weighing) and
 Management (e.g., changing diuretic dose in response to symptoms)
 Recognize the changes in their signs and symptoms - a sudden weight gain - more than
2kg in 3 days is a sign of worsening HF.
 Know when to contact their healthcare provider.
 Understand the indication, dosing, side effects and drug interaction of each medication
they are prescribed.
 Be warned about self-medication and potential drug interactions.
 Adhere to treatment and be informed of the potential complications resulting from
non-adherence to prescribed medications.
 Be provided with prognostic information to enable them to make realistic long-term
decisions and plans. There should be frank end-of-life discussions and advanced care
planning with the patient and family. This is important as there is a potential risk of sudden
death, and they must put their affairs in order.
In advanced HF, treatment options must be discussed tactfully and realistically with the
patient and family.
Structured telephone support and non-invasive home telemonitoring have been
shown to reduce all-cause and cardiac hospitalizations, length of hospital stays and
all-cause and cardiac mortality.159-161 Patients involved actively in educational process
through telemedicine are more likely to accept positive lifestyle changes.157
Telemedicine (See also section 17.4)
 Allows more frequent monitoring of the patient’s status using smart phones and other
mobile devices.
 Has been found to be effective in improving patient’s self-care abilities.159
 Enables HF patients to be cared for while staying at home, thus reducing hospitalizations.
They are however barriers for the widespread implementation of telemedicine. These
include:162
 Issues related to patient privacy and data safety although recently, many platforms have
been developed to address these issues.
8. NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MEASURES
I,B
 Costs- it would be more cost effective to identify:
 The most relevant biological parameters to monitor.
 The HF sub-populations who may gain from telehealth interventions (e.g., older patients
with more comorbidities).
 In which specific healthcare subsets these interventions should be implemented e.g.,
immediate post discharge.
8.2. Exercise training-see also Section 16 - HF Rehabilitation
Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses support exercise training as an integral
part of the non-pharmacological treatment of HF.163-169 Exercise also leads to an
improvement in the patient’s Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) - symptoms, a greater
sense of wellbeing, and better functional capacity.163
Exercise training:
 Is safe in patients with stable HF.163-170
 In patients with HFrEF, has been shown to reduce overall and HF-specific hospitalizations.163-169
 In patients with HFpEF has limited clinical data. Small trials show that exercise training
leads to an improvement in exercise capacity and quality of life.169,170
Exercise-based rehabilitation:
 Reduced the risk of hospital admissions.163-169
 Improved health related quality of life. (HRQoL).163-170
 Enhanced exercise capacity.163-170
 Did not result in an obvious improvement in cardiac function although in some small
studies, it has been shown to reverse left ventricular remodelling.171
Regular aerobic exercises are encouraged in NYHA I - III patients. These include:172
 Aerobic and endurance training - Moderate intensity continuous exercises such as walking,
treadmill, stationary bicycle as well as swimming with a target goal of 5 days per week, 30
minutes per session.
 Interval training and high intensity interval training (HIIT) - This has been shown to be safe
and results in greater improvements in exercise tolerance in selected patients with HF. In
a trial on patients with HFpEF, however, HIIT did not confer any advantage compared to
guideline based physical exercise.173
 Inspiratory muscle muscle training (IMT) - the addition of IMT has been shown to reduce
dyspnea, improve exercise time and HRQoL.
8.3 Diet and nutrition
It has been widely accepted that sodium intake should be restricted in patients with HF
especially in those with symptoms. However, there is little clinical evidence to support
this.174-176 Sodium restriction to < 100gm/day did not reduce clinical events.175
The current recommendation is to avoid adding salt and flavouring sauces such as
soya sauce, tomato ketchup and chilli sauce while cooking or at the table. Refer to
Appendix II, Page 162-163 on salt content of common Malaysian food.
A good balanced diet plays an important role in preventing energy depletion which can lead
to cardiac cachexia and malnutrition. Cachexia is associated with increased mortality.177
IIa,C
I,B
I,B
IIa,B
A review found that the combination of personalized nutrition intervention with conventional
treatment led to a decrease in all-cause mortality and hospital readmission.178
There are at present, however, few existing dietary strategies proven to improve clinical
outcomes in HF.179,180 The role of routine supplementation of micronutrients as a component
of HF management is unclear.179,180
8.4 Fluid restriction
The current evidence on fluid restriction is mixed.181,182 As with salt, excessive fluid
restriction can also lead to worse outcomes.181,182 This may also be due to reverse causality
- sicker patients tend to take less salt and water.
Fluid intake should be individualized. A general recommendation is 1-1.5 liters per day
in patients with normal renal function.
In older persons, particularly those living with dementia and at the end of life, fluid intake
may be more liberal.
Temporary fluid restriction can be considered in decompensated heart failure and/or
patients with hyponatremia.182
8.2.1.5 Lifestyle measures
These include:
 Weight Monitoring - Patients should be encouraged to monitor their own weight. In
obese patients, weight loss should be encouraged.183
 Alcohol - Heavy binge drinking should be avoided in patients with HF as it can predispose
to supraventricular arrhythmias especially atrial fibrillation and lead to acute cardiac
decompensation.184.185 Patients with alcoholic cardiomyopathy should abstain from
alcohol.185
 Smoking should be stopped.128,186
8.2.1.6 Sexual activity, pregnancy, and contraception
As many as 60% to 87% of HF patients have sexual problems.187 Erectile dysfunction (ED)
is common and many have misconceptions that their symptoms (20%) or medications
(10%) is the cause.185 Proper counselling is necessary to address these concerns, to allay
anxiety, avoid skipping medications and prevent the use of traditional potency enhancing
drugs or herbs.187
It is imperative that enquiries on sexual activities or dysfunction be addressed to
provide a holistic approach to patient care.188 The physician must take over the initial
approach since patients are often embarrassed to initiate the topic. Some helpful tools to
initiate the conversation include:
 PLISSIT (permission, limited information, specific suggestion, and intensive therapy).189
 Needs of Sexual Counselling Scale for Chronic Heart Failure (NSCS-CHF).190
 Sexual Adjustment Scale (SAS).190
IIa,B
I,B
IIa,B
IIa,C
I,B
I,C
Patients should be taught:
 To pay attention to their symptoms of HF.
 The potential dangers (worsening chest pain, dyspnea, giddiness and/or palpitations) and
how to manage them when they occur during sexual activities.
 To defer sexual activities if in NYHA III-IV.
 Not to resume until his/her heart condition stabilizes.
 To modify sexual practices to accommodate impaired effort tolerance.
HF patients need to be told that certain cardiac medications have important side effects and
drug interactions:
 Nitrates may dangerously interact with drugs for erectile dysfunction - phosphodiesterase
- 5-inhibitors (Viagra, Cialis, Levitra).
 β-blockers may contribute towards worsening erectile dysfunction, but it is important that
HF patients remain compliant to them.
Patients with LVEF < 30% and those with NYHA III and IV should be advised against
pregnancy because of high maternal mortality.191,192 If pregnant, termination of pregnancy
should be considered.192
When pregnancy is contraindicated, a multi-disciplinary approach with pre-conception
counselling and proper contraceptive advice becomes paramount to the safety of the patient
by preventing an unwanted pregnancy. Contraceptive counselling should begin early. In the
absence of randomized controlled studies, the choice of contraceptive method is almost
always based on expert opinion of the attending cardiologists, obstetrician, and the patient’s
choice.
Generally, Tier I methods which includes permanent sterilization and long-acting reversible
contraceptives such as intrauterine devices [IUDs] and implants, have typical-use 1-year
failure rates of < 1%. Given their excellent safety and efficacy profile, they should be
recommended for women with underlying CVD. The risk of infective endocarditis with IUD is
low.193,194
8.2.1.7 Sleep disorders
Sleep disorders are common in HF with prevalence rates of 50-75%, the prevalence
increasing with age, obesity, male sex, Atrial Fibrillation, and poorer LV systolic function.195
These sleep disorders include short sleep time, low sleep quality, and sleep-disordered
breathing.196 Sleep disordered breathing (SDB) includes either:
 Central Sleep Apnea (CSA) or
 Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) or
 Coexisting OSA and CSA.
Sleep disturbances could also be due to pulmonary congestion leading to breathlessness
and cough, and nocturnal diuresis due to diuretics and anxiety.
OSA may occur in the normal population or in HF patients, while CSA, which may present
as Cheyne-Stokes respiration, is more associated with HF.197 Independent predictors of
SDB include older age, male gender, obesity, low ejection fraction and the presence of
AF.196 Attended in-hospital polysomnography (PSG) is the gold standard in diagnosing OSA
and CSA. However, a screening using overnight pulse oximetry is useful to preselect a
patient for PSG.
l,C
l,C
SDB affects HRQoL and leads to harmful effects on cardiac function, arrhythmias (both
atrial fibrillation and malignant ventricular arrhythmias) and poorer prognosis due to the
repetitive hypoxemia, hypercapnia and swings in blood pressure and intrathoracic
pressure.196,197
OSA patients are encouraged to lose weight and to exercise moderately. Alcohol
and sedatives before sleep are best avoided.196 These patients are best managed in a
multi-disciplinary manner.
CPAP improves daytime sleepiness. However, none of the evidence so far indicates
an improvement in terms of cardiovascular or all-cause mortality or hospital
admissions.196,198-201
In patients with HF and CSA, the use of Adaptive Servo Ventilation (ASV) was associated
with an increase in all cause and CV mortality mainly driven by an increase in sudden
cardiac death.137
ASV is contraindicated in patients with HF and CSA.135-140
As CSA tends to worsen when HF worsens, optimizing medical therapy remains the
main strategy in CSA.197
8.2.1.8 Psychosocial support
About 35% patients with HF have clinical depression and about 40% have severe
anxiety.202,203 There is an association between HRQoL scores and survival.204 Most patients
prefer improved HRQoL to longevity.205,206
Patients with HF who have psychological problems have been shown to have increased
morbidity and hospital readmission rates, to be less adherent to their medical regimen, and
to have an overall increase in cost of care. Effective, homebased HF management, has
been shown to improve HRQoL, reduce expenditure and re-hospitalization rate.207,208
Thus, it is important that family members and carers are included during counselling
sessions. Depressive symptoms may affect adherence and should prompt referral to the
appropriate specialists for psychological support. Inpatient treatment and hospitalizations
are the main drivers for a decrease of HRQoL and efforts should be made to avoid this.21
l,C
Key Recommendation # 3: Non-Pharmacological Measures
 In managing HF, non-pharmacological measures play a vital role. It is important to:
 Educate patient and family about the disease, treatment options and prognosis.
There should be frank end-of-life discussions and advanced care planning with the
patient and family. This is important as there is a potential risk of sudden death, and
they should put their affairs in order.
 Encourage lifestyle measures:
 Proper balanced diet to prevent malnutrition and cardiac cachexia.
 Weight management - avoid obesity.
 Regular physical activity and exercise training.
 Smoking cessation.
 Individualize fluid intake - A general recommendation is 1-1.5 liters per day in
patients with normal renal function.
 Provide advice regarding sexual activities and pregnancy.
 Address psychosocial problems encountered by the patient and the family.
l,C
III,B
IIa,B
l,C
Acute heart failure is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome of new or worsening symptoms
and signs of HF. It may occur as:
 De Novo HF - first occurrence of HF or,
 Acute decompensated HF (ADHF) - this is a more common presentation occurring in
a previously stable patient with HF who has now deteriorated.
In general, patients presenting with De Novo HF tend to do better than previously
stable HF patients admitted with worsening symptoms ie ADHF.209,210 Patients admitted
with ADHF tend to have a greater comorbidity burden and are symptomatic despite being
on proven medical therapy.209
When previously stable patients present with ADHF, their risk of death is increased.211 Only
one quarter to one third of these patients survive 5 years after a HF related hospitalization.
Patients who have decompensated because of under or suboptimal treatment tend to do
better when compared to those who have decompensated on OMT.212-214
The onset can be:215
 Sudden with the patient presenting in acute respiratory distress and/or cardiogenic shock
- This is a more common presentation of De Novo HF following an acute cardiac injury
e.g., Acute MI or
 As a slow progressive deterioration over days (up to weeks) prior to hospital
admission - this is a more common presentation of ADHF.
Three important phases should be considered in the management of these patients.216
 Phase 1 - Urgent treatment and stabilization usually in the Emergency Room. (ER).
 Phase 2 - In-hospital management.
 Phase 3 - Discharge and Post discharge “vulnerable” period.
9.1 PHASE 1- Urgent treatment and stabilization (See Flowchart II, page 35)
Assessment and management must be prompt and done concurrently.
 Rapid recognition and making the diagnosis of HF based on symptoms and signs and
quickly assessing its severity.
 Maintaining adequate oxygenation and perfusion of vital organs.
 Identification and stabilization of life-threatening hemodynamics (heart rate and rhythm,
blood pressure and organ/tissue perfusion).
 Relieving clinical symptoms, signs and preventing end organ damage.
Once the diagnosis of Acute HF has been made, the initial management should focus on:
(see also section 8.2 & Flowchart II, page 35)
 Adequate oxygenation-SpO2 ≥ 95%.
 Intravenous (i.v.) diuretics to relieve congestion if present.
 Stabilization of hemodynamics and perfusion with vasodilators +/- inotropes.
 Identifying and treating the precipitating factors. An aide memoire to common precipitants
is: (see Table 11, Page 55)
9. ACUTE HEART FAILURE
C H A M P I O N
 C - Coronary artery disease - Acute Coronary Syndrome (Myocardial infarction/Ischemia).
 H - Severe and uncontrolled hypertension.
 A - Arrhythmias.
 M - Mechanical e.g., Acute valvular dysfunction (e.g., acute mitral regurgitation from
chordal rupture); cardiac tamponade
 P - Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary infections.
 I - Infections e.g., urinary tract, Covid.
 O - Other medications (Medications that increase fluid retention and/or have negative
inotropic effects).
 N - Non-compliance to treatment especially oral diuretics and or dietary/fluid restriction.
In 40% of patients admitted with Acute HF however, a clear underlying precipitant may not
be identified.217
 Identify non-cardiovascular comorbidities - These can complicate management affecting
the choice and doses of medications used. The presence of these non-cardiovascular
comorbidities tends to worsen the prognosis. The more common comorbidities include:
 Diabetes (Section 14.1)
 Chronic kidney disease (Section 14.6)
 Thyroid disease (Both hyper and hypothyroidism)
 Chronic lung disease
 Anemia
 It is important that precipitating factors be identified as soon as possible after
presentation and treated immediately according to guidelines.
 The patient should be seen by a specialist as soon as possible after admission to
co-ordinate the initial and further management. In the United Kingdom National Heart
Failure Audit 2022, in-hospital mortality was lower in patients who had been seen by a
specialist especially a cardiologist.218
9.1.1. Classification of Acute HF
Based on the initial clinical assessment, the patient may be classified as:215,219
 Wet or dry depending on their fluid status.
 Cold or warm depending on their perfusion status.
Table 13: Classification of Acute HF According to Clinical Presentation
and a Guide to Management
Warm / Wet
Warm / Dry
SBP
: Adequate (≥ 90mmHg)
SBP
: Adequate (≥ 90mmHg)
Perfusion
: Adequate
Perfusion
: Adequate
Fluid Status
: Congested
Fluid Status : Not congested.
Management:
Management:
 Diuretics - Yes
 Diuretics - No
 Vasodilators - Yes
 Vasodilators - No
 Inotropes - No
 Inotropes - No
 Adjust Oral Medications
Cold / Wet
Cold / Dry
SBP
: Low (< 90mmHg) or
SBP
: Low (< 90mmHg)
Adequate (≥ 90mmHg)
Perfusion
: Poor
Perfusion
: Poor
Fluid Status : Not congested
Fluid Status
: Congested
Management:
Management:
 Diuretics - Yes
 Diuretics - No
 Vasodilators - If BP ≥ 90mmHg
 Vasodilators - If BP ≥ 90mmHg
 Inotropes - Yes irrespective of the BP
 Inotropes - Yes
Consider fluid challenge cautiously
The classification in the table above will help guide the initial management.
Thus according to the clinical presentation, the patient may be: (Table 13, Page 74)
 Warm and Wet - Adequate perfusion but congested** (lungs and/or periphery).
 Cold and Dry - Hypoperfusion* and dehydrated/not congested**.
 Cold and Wet - Hypoperfusion* and congested** (lungs and/or periphery).
 Warm and Dry - Adequate perfusion and dehydrated/not congested.** These patients
have either mild HF or are in the compensated stage of HF.
*Hypoperfusion: cold peripheries, capillary refill time more than 2 seconds, diaphoresis,
oliguria, dizziness, confusion, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension.
**Congestion: peripheral edema, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, lung
crepitations, jugular venous dilatation, positive hepatojugular reflux, congested hepatomegaly,
gut congestion, ascites.
Most patients admitted with Acute HF are in the ‘wet-warm’ category.220
The goal of therapy is to make them ‘dry-warm’- optimal perfusion and fluid status.
9.1.2. Investigations
Essential Investigations in Acute HF include: (See Section 6.2)
 Electrocardiogram - ECG.
 Chest Radiograph - Chest X-Ray - About 20% of patients with congestion, however, may
exhibit a normal Chest X-Ray.221
 Blood Investigations - FBC, serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine, cardiac biomarkers
(troponins, CKMB, BNP or NT-Pro BNP), liver function tests.
 Echocardiography - To assess LV function, Pulmonary Artery Pressure and to estimate
right and left sided filling pressures. An IVC diameter less than 21 mm and which collapses
> 50% suggests normal right atrial pressures.222
Other Investigations which may be performed if indicated and/or available:
 Blood Investigations - Thyroid function tests, serum lactate and pH.
 Blood Gases - If oxygen saturation is still < 90% despite initial treatment.
 Lung Ultrasound - To look for extravascular fluid in the lungs (B-lines). These are often
observed in patients with HF, but can also occur in other conditions, such as non-cardiogenic
pulmonary edema and interstitial lung disease.223 Lung ultrasound is, in general, more
sensitive in ruling out interstitial edema and pleural effusions than Chest X-Ray.224
9.1.4. Decision for hospitalization and care-setting
Initial care in the critical care unit (ICU/CCU) should be considered for high-risk
patients with features such as:
 Hemodynamic instability.
 Arrhythmias.
 Hypoperfused state-cold peripheries, capillary refill time more than 2 seconds, diaphoresis,
oliguria, dizziness, confusion, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension.
 Need for invasive ventilatory support.
 Oxygen saturation (SpO2) < 90% despite supplemental oxygen.
The remaining patients with Acute HF can be managed in a high-dependency unit or
normal ward depending on the clinical circumstances. However clinical deterioration may
occur and hence, frequent re-assessments are necessary.
Step-down care from the ICU/CCU is dictated by clinical improvement. Similarly, should the
patient not improve, he should be considered to be transferred to a tertiary hospital with a
Cardiology Unit.
9.1.5. Response to Therapy
Response should be assessed continuously using the following parameters:
 Symptoms and signs of HF - this requires repeated thorough clinical examinations
looking for resolution or worsening of clinical signs.
 Vital signs
 Oxygen saturation - SpO2.
 Heart rate.
 Blood pressure - including looking for a postural drop whenever possible.
 Respiratory rate.
l,C
l,C
l,C
l,C
 Urine output.
 Body weight.
 Investigations
 Urea, creatinine, serum potassium and sodium.
 Invasive hemodynamic monitoring may be considered in patients if there are uncertainties
in diagnosis, or, for the more severe cases, that despite pharmacological treatment,
present refractory symptoms (particularly with hypotension and hypoperfusion).
Invasive monitoring includes:
 Arterial pressure line.
 Central venous pressure line and pulmonary artery catheter (PAC). This would allow
a more accurate assessment of the fluid status of the patient and allow better titration
of medications. It is only recommended in cardiogenic shock and in this setting, PAC
is associated with lower mortality and in-hospital cardiac arrest.225-227
An adequate response would be reflected by all the following:
An improvement in the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms,
 Warm peripheries,
 Decrease in heart rate,
 Decrease in respiratory rate,
 An improvement in oxygen saturation and
 An improvement in the urine output.
Generally, a SBP ≥ 90mmHg would be considered adequate if the patient has all the
following:
 Feels well,
 Has good tissue perfusion as shown by the absence of giddiness, warm skin and
 Stable renal function with good urine flow.
9.2. PHASE 2: In - Hospital Management (Flow Chart II, page 35, Table 2, page 36 &
Table 14, page 80)
The management of patients with Acute HF is largely based on clinical judgement and
experience rather than on randomized controlled trials. Most clinical trials have been small
and of low quality.
9.2.1. Pharmacotherapy
9.2.1.1. Oxygen
 Measurement of oxygenation by pulse oximetry (SpO2) is recommended.
 Supplemental oxygen therapy is recommended when the SpO2 < 94% and should
be titrated to achieve SpO2 ≥ 95%.
 Routine use in non-hypoxic patients is not recommended as it can cause deleterious
effects such as vasoconstriction and a reduction in cardiac output.228-235
 Supplemental oxygen therapy can be delivered as:236
 Nasal Prongs - at a flow rate of 2-6 l/min gives approximately 24-50% FiO2.
 Simple Face Mask - at a flow rate 5-10 l/min gives 35-60% FiO2. Low flow rates below
5 l/min may cause carbon dioxide rebreathing and increased resistance to inspiration
and thus should not be used.
IIb,B
I,B
III,B
IIa,B
I,C
 Venturi Masks - Gives concentrations of 24-60% FiO2. A 60% venturi mask gives
approximately 50% FiO2.
 Non-Rebreathing Reservoir Mask - gives concentration of between 60-80% FiO2.
 Non-Invasive ventilation (NIV) reduces respiratory distress and may decrease the need
for intubation although data regarding mortality are less conclusive.237,238 It includes:238,239
 High Flow Nasal Cannula (HFNC) -This seems more effective and better tolerated
than conventional oxygen therapy using nasal prongs or mask.240-242
 Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) - can be used without a ventilator and
does not require specialized training.
 Non-Invasive Pressure Support Ventilation (NIPSV - Also Called Bilevel or BiPAP).
This requires a ventilator and specialized training.
 CPAP and NIPSV should be considered early in patients with respiratory distress (respiratory
rate > 25 breaths/min, SpO2 < 90%) despite high-flow oxygen administration. There are
no significant differences in clinical outcomes when comparing CPAP with BiPAP and the
choice will depend on the equipment and expertise that is available.237,243,244
 Intubation may be considered in patients with respiratory failure, who cannot be managed
with NIV techniques and who show signs of exhaustion and respiratory muscle fatigue.
 Some helpful indicators of respiratory failure include:
 Hypoxemia (PaO2 < 60mmHg),
 Hypercapnia (PaCO2 > 50mmHg), and
 Acidosis (pH < 7.35)
9.2.1.2. Diuretics
 Diuretics is the cornerstone of therapy in patients who are fluid overloaded (wet).
 i.v. diuretics should be administered as early as possible to relieve congestion and
provide symptomatic relief. Studies on the impact of early administration of i.v. diuretics
on in-hospital mortality, however, have shown mixed results.245,246
 i.v. furosemide 40-100mg is the diuretic of choice.48,247,248 This initial dose should be
individualized depending on the severity of the clinical condition.
 In individuals who are diuretic naive, a reasonable initial dose is 20-40 mg.
 Patients who have already been on diuretics or have chronic kidney disease, may
require a higher dose. A reasonable initial strategy in these patients is a daily dose of 2.5
times the previous oral dose on a mg-to-mg basis, administered as twice-daily
boluses.48,247
 Further doses can be adjusted according to clinical response, blood pressure, urine
output and renal function.
 In general, with a sufficient dose of a loop diuretic agent, urine output should measurably
increase within 2 hours. If there is not an adequate response to the initial dose, there is no
need to wait until the next scheduled dose to increase dosing.48
 An adequate response is a urine output >100ml/ hour during the first 6 hours.48
 If the urine output is:
 Excessive (a negative balance of > 3L/day) and associated with a drop in systolic BP,
then consider:
 Temporarily stopping the diuretic or
 Reducing the dose by 50% or
 Increasing the dosing interval or
 Changing to oral administration.
IIa,B
IIa,B
I, C
I, C
I, B
 If worsening renal function occurs after the 1st i.v. dose, then:
• Stop the diuretic and
• Rehydrate the patient with i.v. fluids and
• Restart later after the renal function improves, at a much lower preferably oral dose.
 Adequate and patient is:
 Still congested - continue the same i.v. dose of diuretic at 12 hourly intervals.
 No longer congested but patient is still dyspneic - consider other causes of
dyspnea e.g., pulmonary embolism, chest infection etc.
 Inadequate (< 600ml in the first 6 hours) (rule out urinary retention as a cause) -
As HF progresses, diuretic resistance may develop and responsiveness to loop
diuretics diminish. Diuretic resistance is defined as an impaired sensitivity to diuretics
resulting in reduced natriuresis and diuresis limiting the possibility to achieve euvolemia.48
This can be overcome by:
 Uptitration of the dose of loop diuretics - this is the preferred strategy. This can
be done by:
• Increasing the dose of i.v. furosemide and/or dosing intervals.
• Continuous infusion - To date, there has been no difference between continuous
infusion or bolus dosing of furosemide for all-cause mortality, length of hospital
stay and electrolyte disturbances, but continuous infusion was superior to bolus
administration with regard to diuretic effect, safety profile and reduction in brain
natriuretic peptides.249-252
 Combination of low dose dopamine and low dose furosemide was as effective
as high-dose furosemide with a suggestion of less worsening of renal function.252,253
The addition of dopamine however, did not result in any difference in CV outcomes.252
 Using bumetanide, a second generation loop diuretic,because of its more predictable
absorption.254
 Combination of thiazides and loop diuretics for “total nephron block.” 255-257 It may
also be used in patients with refractory edema and advanced renal impairment.258,259
However, this combination has been associated with hypokalemia, hyponatremia,
worsening renal function and increased mortality.255
 Metolazone is a once-daily oral thiazide diuretic. It is given in combination with a loop
diuretic in patients with severe HF and refractory edema.260-262 At present, there is
inadequate data to show that it is superior to the other thiazides in this setting.262 It
can be used in advanced renal impairment.263
 Other agents, when used in combination with i.v. loop diuretics, that have
been shown to produce rapid and persistent diuresis and weight loss but without,
however, an impact on CV outcomes. These include :
• Tolvaptan264-266
• Nesiritide267,268
• Acetazolamide269
 When combination therapy is used, there can be a marked diuresis. Careful monitoring
of fluid and electrolyte balance and BP, including orthostatic hypotension,is essential.
 Target 0.5 - 1kg decrease in body weight/day when the patient is volume overloaded.48
Less than 0.5kg of weight loss/day may indicate inadequate diuretic dose or diuretic
resistance.48
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIb,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
I,C
9.2.1.3. Vasodilators (Table 14, page 80 for dosing)
 Vasodilators can confer symptomatic relief and an improvement in hemodynamics but
there is, however, a lack of data to draw any firm conclusions concerning their effects on CV
outcomes.270-273
 In patients with pulmonary congestion who are normotensive, emphasis should be placed
on adequate diuresis, with vasodilators reserved for patients who fail to show clinical
improvement or have poor perfusion and cool extremities.274
 Nitrates
 Nitrates are the most widely studied vasodilators.270,271
 It should be considered if the BP is adequate (SBP > 100mmHg).
 Early i.v. nitroglycerin administration pre-hospital or in the ER was associated
improved post-discharge event rate.275
 It is most useful if there is concomitant myocardial ischemia, severe hypertension or
aortic or mitral regurgitation.
 It should be administered preferably intravenously for ease of titration.
 Patients should be closely monitored for hypotension. This commonly occurs with
concomitant diuretic therapy.
 Extreme caution should be exercised in patients with aortic and mitral stenosis.
 Nitrates are contraindicated in severe valvular stenosis.
9.2.1.4. Inotropes (Table 14, page 80 for dosing)
 Inotropes are not routinely administered to patients with an adequate BP.
 They are indicated in the presence of persistent signs of hypoperfusion (hypotension and
low cardiac output - “cold patients”) despite an adequate filling status.
 These patients are best managed in specialized tertiary centers.
 These agents are best administered via central lines, inserted aseptically with proper
infection control.
 Noradrenaline infusion:
 Noradrenaline was as efficacious as dopamine with a trend towards a lower 28-day
mortality and safer especially in the subset of patients with cardiogenic shock.276,277
 The combination of noradrenaline-dobutamine appeared to be associated with more
favorable hemodynamics and a safer strategy than adrenaline alone.278
 The use of adrenaline in HF complicated with cardiogenic shock should be avoided
because of increased mortality.279
 Dopamine infusion:
 Dopamine has been shown to improve renal flow and promote natriuresis in patients
with HF.280
 The role of low-dose dopamine in helping to improve renal function is still not well
proven.252 Studies seem to indicate that “low-dose’ dopamine can worsen renal
perfusion in patients with acute renal failure.281
IIa,B
IIb,B
IIa,B
l,B
l,C
IIb,C
III,C
Route
Dosages
of Admin
Diuretics
Furosemide
i.v.
40-100mg
Initial dose:
New onset Acute HF and furosemide-naive: 20-40mg
Known HF and on oral furosemide: 2.5 times the daily
oral dose
Infusion
5-20mg/hour (better than intermittent very high bolus
doses)
Vasodilators
Nitroglycerin
Infusion
5-200mcg/min
Isosorbide
Infusion
1-10mg/hr
dinitrate
Inotropes
Noradrenaline
Infusion
0.02-1mcg/kg/min till desired blood pressure is
attained
Dopamine
Infusion
< 2-3mcg/kg/min - renal arterial vasodilation
2-5mcg/kg/min - inotropic doses
5-15mcg/kg/min - peripheral vasoconstriction
Dobutamine
Infusion
2-20mcg/kg/min
Adrenaline
Infusion
0.05-0.5μg/kg/min
Table 14: Drugs Commonly Used in Acute HF
 Dobutamine infusion:
 Started at 2-5mcg/kg/minute and titrated by 1-2mcg/kg/minute increments at 30
- minute intervals until the desired clinical and hemodynamic response is attained.
 Dobutamine, when used alone, improved cardiac output but there was a trend
towards an increase in mortality.220,283
9.2.1.5 Morphine
 i.v. 1-3mg bolus (repeated, if necessary, up to a maximum of 10mg) reduces pulmonary
venous congestion although its effect on venodilation has been shown to be minimal.284
 May reduce anxiety and dyspnea however due to paucity of data, routine use cannot be
recommended.284,285
 Dose-dependent side effects include nausea, hypotension, bradycardia, and respiratory
depression.
 Consider co-administrating i.v. antiemetics (metoclopramide 10mg or prochlorperazine
12.5mg).
 In a small study there were no significant difference in mortality between i.v. midazolam
and i.v. morphine although the use of morphine was associated with a significantly higher
rate of adverse side effects.286
IIb,B
IIb,B
If the blood pressure is low at initial presentation (SBP < 90 mmHg) or drops during
treatment:
 Noradrenaline infusion276,277 - initial inotrope and if BP is still low, add:
 Dopamine278
 Avoid vasodilators (nitrates) and morphine until the blood pressure has stabilized.
 Over diuresis or hypovolemia - correct accordingly. In Right Ventricular (RV) infarction,
the hypotension may respond to volume loading.
Other measures to be considered
 Intubation and mechanical ventilation
 Correction of acidosis
 Invasive hemodynamic monitoring
If the patient is still unwell with poor perfusion “cool” and/or congested “wet”,
Mechanical Circulatory Support may need to be considered:
9.2.2 Mechanical Circulatory Support
This includes:
 Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP):
 This would be useful in patients with ADHF and cardiogenic shock who are not
responding optimally to medical therapy and as a bridge to definitive treatment. IABP
would be particularly useful in patients with intractable myocardial ischemia or acute
moderate to severe mitral regurgitation. 287-289
 In patients with acute MI complicated by cardiogenic shock and undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention, the use of IABP has not been shown to reduce mortality.287,290,291
There was however a trend of benefit in patients in Killip class 3 & 4 undergoing
reperfusion by fibrinolytic therapy.292,293
 IABP is contraindicated in patients with aortic regurgitation or aortic dissection.
 Others - These include the Impella system, the TandemHeart, and venous-arterial
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). These are not widely available in
Malaysia.
 Ventricular Assist Devices (VAD) - see also Section 15.2
 These would be useful as a bridge in patients for whom recovery from Acute HF is
expected or for whom heart transplant is an option. It may also be used as a destination
therapy in selected patients.294
9.2.3 Treat precipitating factors for the Acute HF - “C H A M P I O N”
C Coronary Artery Disease - Myocardial Ischemia / Infarction:
 Reversible myocardial ischemia causing Acute HF needs early recognition, rapid
stabilization and referral for urgent coronary angiography.
 In STEMI, reperfusion therapy by fibrinolytic or primary Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention (PCI) may significantly improve or prevent Acute HF.
 Long term management strategy should include adequate coronary revascularization,
antiplatelet therapy, ACE-I and/or ARB, β-blockers and statins.
H Hypertensive Emergency:
 Typically presenting as “flash pulmonary edema”. Systolic LV function tends to be
normal.
 The blood pressure needs to be reduced relatively quickly.
IIa,B
I,C
IIa,B
IIa,C
IIb,C
IIa,B
IIb,B
III,C
I,C
 This is best achieved with parenteral drugs such as intravenous nitrates.
 No attempt should be made to restore “normal” values of BP as this may cause
deterioration of organ perfusion.
 Look for secondary causes of hypertension such as renal artery stenosis and phaeo
chromocytoma.
A Arrhythmias
 Unstable tachy - or bradyarrhythmias need to be identified and treated appropriately
e.g., electrical or pharmacological cardioversion or temporary pacemaker.
M Mechanical causes eg Valvular Heart Disease
 Acute HF can be caused by valvular conditions such as acute mitral or aortic valve
incompetence or stenosis, bacterial endocarditis, aortic dissection and prosthetic
valve thrombosis.
 Vasodilator therapy would be beneficial in acute valvular regurgitation, but is
contraindicated in severe valvular stenosis.
 Early access to echocardiography is crucial for the diagnosis and management.
 Percutaneous intervention such as mitral valve commissurotomy can be life saving
in patients with severe mitral stenosis.
P Pulmonary Embolism/Pulmonary infections
 Acute pulmonary embolism can mimic Acute Coronary Syndromes and Acute HF.
 Natriuretic peptides may be raised in acute pulmonary embolism.295
 Patients with previously stable HF are also predisposed to deep vein thrombosis
which can lead to pulmonary embolism.
I Infections
 Severe sepsis can lead to HF by many different mechanisms - inflammatory
cytokines, deranged celluar metabolism etc.
 In addition, type 2 MI may also occur as a result of myocardial oxygen supply -
demand mismatch as a consequence of hypotension, hypoxia etc and lead to Acute
HF.
 Sepsis in a patient with previous stable HF is a management dilemma especially with
regards fluid administration and use of HF medications. It tends to be associated with
poor clinical outcomes.
O Other medications
 These include medications that have negative inotropic effects and/or cause water
retention and include agents such as Non Steroidal Anti Inflammatory Agents,
Calcium channel blockers, Itraconazole, minoxidil, thiazolidinediones etc.
N Non compliance to Therapy
 The reasons for this may be multifactorial and some reasons include poor patient
understanding of the disease, financial or transport constraints in getting refills, fears
of polypharmacy and the effects of the medications on the kidney etc.
 Patient and family education is important prior to discharge.
9.2.4 Comorbidities
Other comorbidities should be identified, and treatment optimized. This includes:
 Diabetes
 Hypertension
 Iron deficiency
 Chronic lung disease
 Chronic Kidney Disease (see section 14.6)
 Acute HF and renal impairment can co-exist and either may give rise to the other.
 Renal impairment influences the response to drug therapy.296 In these patients with
refractory fluid retention, continuous ultrafiltration may be considered.
If the patient improves and is now “warm and dry” (no longer congested and with good
perfusion), he moves to Phase 3. (Section 8.3)
9.3 PHASE 3: Discharge and Post discharge “vulnerable” period
9.3.1. Pre - Discharge
Following “decongestion”, the challenges are to:297
 Provide guidance on how to start OMT,
 How to perform up titration at discharge and
 Correctly prioritize or select the most appropriate titration schedule according to the
patient profile. (Section 10.2)
9.3.1.1 Conversion to oral therapy
Following adequate response to intravenous therapy, the patient should be converted to
optimal oral medications. If the LVEF < 40%, they should be initiated on Foundational HF
medications (RAS blockers, β-blockers, MRA and SGLT2-i) as outlined below.
 Diuretics 48
 Oral diuretics may be commenced following resolution of symptoms of
congestion and the patient achieving his “dry weight”.
 The initial dose of oral diuretics required is generally higher than the intravenous
dose.298 A reasonable guide is to use a mg-to-mg i.v. to oral conversion.
 In patients who are suspected to have diuretic resistance, bumetanide may be considered
as it is better absorbed.254
 The dose of diuretics at discharge needs to be individualized.
 Many patients are discharged with residual clinical congestion, and this is a strong
predictor of readmission.299,300
 Residual clinical congestion is often difficult to assess. Absence of dyspnea, peripheral
edema, the amount of fluid lost during i.v. diuretic therapy and the patient achieving his
“dry weight” are inadequate signs to assess decongestion.48,299,301 This is further
compounded by the inter-individual variation in the amount of fluid retention that can
precipitate symptoms.299
 Determining the most appropriate outpatient dose of diuretic can be difficult and
requires careful follow-up, particularly early in the post-discharge period.48
 It would be prudent to discharge the patient on the same dose of oral diuretics as
the individual was on as in - patient and then only cautiously reduce the dose in
the post discharge period after careful assessment of the patient’s congestion
status.
 MRA302-304
 These can be commenced within 24-48 hours of admission.48
 Renal function and potassium levels need to be monitored.
 Renin Angiotensin System Blockers (RAS blockers)-Angiotensin Converting
Enzyme Inhibitor (ACE-I) or Angiotensin Receptor blockers (ARB)305,306
 Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) Blockers may be commenced at admission if
the initial BP is adequate. (systolic BP ≥ 100mmHg)
I, C
I, C
I, C
I, A
I, A
 In all other cases, it is best to defer for at least 24 hours till the BP is stable. (systolic
BP ≥ 100mmHg)
 If the patient is already on a RAS blocker, it is advisable to stop it for at least 24 hours
if the BP is low. It can be recommenced at a lower dose once the BP is stable. If the BP
is adequate (systolic BP ≥ 100mmHg), it can be continued at the same dose.
 Start at a low dose depending on the BP and renal function and up titrate as
tolerated.
 β-blockers307-313
 It is advisable to commence oral β-blockers if the BP is adequate (systolic BP ≥
100mmHg) and the patient is no longer congested i.e. his lungs are clear and
there is no more edema. If β-blockers are initiated in a patient who is still congested,
it can worsen the congestion.
 If already on a β-blocker, this can be continued depending on the patient’s symptoms
and hemodynamics.
 Whenever possible, β-blockers should be continued. A meta-analysis showed that
discontinuation of β-blockers in patients admitted with ADHF was associated with
significantly increased in-hospital mortality, short-term mortality, and the combined
endpoint of short-term rehospitalization or mortality.314
 RAS blockers- Angiotensin Receptor NepriIysin Inhibitor (ARNI)315,316
 ARNI can be commenced as first line therapy in Acute HF in lieu of RAS Blockers.
In the clinical trial, it resulted in a greater reduction in NT-Pro BNP levels than
an ACE-I (enalapril) without improvement in clinical end points.315
 It can be commenced if the systolic BP ≥ 100mmHg.
 Registry data indicates that among patients hospitalized for HFrEF, sacubitril/valsartan
at discharge was independently associated with reduced post discharge mortality.316
 In-hospital initiation of ARNI in patients with Acute HF in lieu of ACE-I is safe.
 Substituting ARNI for ACE-I/ARB during the in-hospital stay can be considered if the
patient is already on the latter drugs and is admitted with decompensation.
 ACE-I needs to be stopped at least 36 hours prior to the initiation of ARNI. ARB can be
switched to ARNI at the next dosing interval.
 SGLT2- Inhibitor (SGLT2-i)317,318
 These can be initiated after stabilization of the patient during the in-hospital stay.
 In most of the clinical trials, SGLT2-i was initiated when patients were:
 No longer on inotropes for the last 24 hours and
 SBP > 100mmHg and
 No increase in the diuretic dose in the last 6 hours and
 Vasodilators have been stopped for at least 6 hours.
 The diuretic dose may need adjustment taking into consideration the degree of diuresis
induced by this drug.
9.3.1.2 Worsening renal function.
Worsening Renal Function may occur during treatment.319 See Section 14.6
Following conversion to oral therapy, the patient should be observed for at least 24 hours for
the stability of symptoms, weight and hemodynamics prior to discharge. The follow-up plans
must be tailored according to the availability of facilities and expertise to manage the patient
on an outpatient basis.
I, A
I, B
IIa,B
9.3.1.3. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis
HF patients especially if they are bed-bound for protracted periods are at risk for DVT.
Prophylactic measures include:320,321
 TED stockings
 Direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC)
 Unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin.
9.3.1.4 Comorbidities
Other comorbidities should be identified, and treatment optimized according to guidelines.
This includes:
 Diabetes322
 Hypertension147
 Iron deficiency -
 In patients with HF, iron deficiency (ID) is defined as:155,323
 Serum ferritin <100 ng/mL or,
 Serum ferritin:100-299 ng/mL and a transferrin saturation (TSAT) <20%.
 In patients hospitalized with HF and having ID, treatment with i.v. iron improved
symptoms and reduced the risk of HF hospitalizations but did not reduce the risk of CV
death.324,325
 Chronic lung disease
Discharge planning is a very important process after an episode of hospitalization for HF to
reduce HF related readmissions. The patient has transitioned into a vulnerable period
during which he may develop complications such as hypotension, worsening renal function,
electrolyte imbalance or decompensate into HF due to inadequate fluid restriction. If this
phase is not optimally treated, it will lead to re-admission. The patient should be given an
early follow-up, within 2 weeks of discharge, preferably in the HF clinic. The following steps
are recommended:
 A care plan needs to be agreed upon by the patient, family, and main caregiver with the
treating physician. (Appendix III & IV, page 164-165)
 A summary of the care plan must be made available to the doctor in the out-patient clinic.
(Appendix III & IV, page 164-1654)
Hospitalization is a key opportunity to initiate Foundational HF medications.326 A large trial
showed that starting and optimizing Foundational HF medications as in- patient, followed by
regular check-ups and monitoring after hospital discharge, cuts the rate of all-cause death
and HF readmissions within 6 months.327
9.3.2 Post-discharge phase (vulnerable period)
At the time of hospital discharge, the patient should be:
 On all the foundational HF medications as tolerated.
 Given a discharge summary and discharge care plan. (Appendix III & IV, page 164-165)
 Informed of the need and, if indicated, given appointments for further cardiac work up
e.g., coronary angiography and cardiac rehabilitation.
IIa,B
IIa,B
I,C
I,C
Key Message # 7: Acute HF
 Acute HF may present as:
 De Novo HF - first occurrence of HF or,
 Acute decompensated HF (ADHF) - this is a more common presentation occurring
in a previously stable patient with HF who has now deteriorated.
 Three important phases should be considered in the management of these patients.
 Phase 1 - Urgent treatment and stabilization usually in the emergency department.
 Phase 2 - In-hospital management
 Phase 3 - Discharge and Post discharge
At the Follow up visit:
 The instructions in the discharge care plan should be followed and identify/determine if
otherwise.
 The Foundational HF medications should be up titrated to maximally tolerated or target
doses as soon as possible, preferably within 12 weeks post-discharge. (Section 12.2 -
Patient profiling and titration of Foundational HF Medications)
 After each up titration, there should be a safety check of hemodynamics and renal
function within one to two weeks.
 Where available, NT-Pro BNP measurements may be used to risk-stratify and guide
management.
 The presence of any of the following features has been shown to predict re-congestion
and re-hospitalization:328
 Orthopnea,
 Edema,
 A raised JVP,
 Weight gain and
 The need to increase daily diuretic dose because of fluid overload.
 Patients who had none of these at 1-month post discharge had good 2-year survival.328
 The presence of any of these clinical features is an indication of the need for optimization
of Foundational HF medications.
Key Recommendation #4: Acute HF
 Phase 1 - Urgent treatment and stabilization
 Assessment and management must be prompt and done concurrently.
 Rapid recognition and making the diagnosis of HF based on symptoms and signs
and quickly assessing its severity.
 Maintaining adequate oxygenation and perfusion of vital organs.
 Identification and stabilization of life-threatening hemodynamics (heart rate and
rhythm, blood pressure and organ/tissue perfusion).
 Relieving clinical symptoms, signs and preventing end organ damage.
 Identification and treatment of the underlying cause and precipitating/ aggravating
factors. The more important precipitants are as in the acronym:
“C H A M P I O N”
 C - coronary artery disease - Acute Coronary Syndrome (Myocardial infarction/Is
chemia)
 H - Severe and uncontrolled hypertension
 A - Arrhythmias
 M - Mechanical e.g., Acute valvular dysfunction (e.g., acute mitral regurgitation
from chordal rupture); cardiac tamponade
 P - Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary infections
 I - Infections e.g., urinary tract, Covid
 O - Other medications (medications that increase fluid retention and/or have
negative inotropic effects)
 N - Non-compliance to treatment especially oral diuretics and or dietary/fluid
restriction
 Look for non-cardiovascular comorbidities- Diabetes, chronic kidney disease,
thyroid disease (both hyper and hypothyroidism), chronic lung disease, Anemia.
Key Recommendation #5: Acute HF
 Phase 2 - In-hospital management
 After initial clinical assessment, management should be instituted as in Flow Chart
II, Page 35.
 For grading of recommendations and levels of evidence, see Table 2, Page 36.
 Phase 3 - Discharge and Post discharge
 Discharge planning is a very important process after an episode of hospitalization
for HF to reduce HF related readmissions.
 The patient should be given a discharge summary and care plan. (Appendix III & IV,
page 164-165)
 If the LVEF < 40%, they should be initiated on the Foundational HF medications
(RAS blockers, β-blockers. MRA and SGLT2-i) as in-patient.
10.1 PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT
There are five essential classes of medications (Optimal Medical Therapy) in the management
of patients with HFrEF. These are:
 Diuretics
 Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers:
 Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors305,306,329,330 or
 Angiotensin receptor blockers331-334 or
 Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor335
 β-blockers307-313
 Mineralocorticoid Antagonists (MRA)302-304
 Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2-i)127,336-343
 Diuretics, by relieving congestion, are the initial step in the management of patients with
symptomatic HF.
 The other four medications (RAS blockers, β-blockers, MRA and SGLT2-i) have been
shown to improve survival, reduce hospitalizations for HF and improve quality of life in
patients with HFrEF. SGLT2-i has been shown to be effective irrespective of diabetic
status.340-342 For these reasons, these 4 medications are referred to as “Foundational
HF” Medications.
 The initiation and up titration of these 4 Foundational drug classes should be guided by
the patient’s:
 Clinical status,
 Heart rate,
 Blood pressure,
 Fluid overload status,
 Renal function,
 Electrolytes and
 Tolerance.
 Comorbidities such as atrial fibrillation, diabetes, chronic kidney, and pulmonary disease
are also important conditions to be considered.
 These 4 Foundational HF Medications should be initiated at about the same time and
up titrated if needed to their target or maximally tolerated doses.
 In general, starting low doses of the 4 different classes would be preferred over up
titration of each of the individual drugs to the maximally tolerated dose before initiating
the next drug.
 These drugs are preferably all initiated, albeit at low doses, when the patient is
admitted with HF so that at the time of discharge, the patient is on all the “Foundational
HF” Medications.
 These drugs should be “up titrated” as outpatient to the maximally tolerated dose
according to the patient’s profile - hemodynamic and renal function. (Section 10.2 and
Flowcharts III, IV & V, page 37-39)
I, B
I, A
I, A
I, A
I, A
10. CHRONIC HEART FAILURE – HF DUE TO REDUCED LV
FUNCTION, LVEF<40% (HFrEF)
 Drugs with less proven survival benefits (e.g., diuretics) should be re-evaluated for
reduction in dosage when Foundation HF medications are not well tolerated due to a
low BP. If the patient is no longer congested and appears clinically to be euvolemic,
the doses of diuretics can be reduced. Alternatively, administering drugs at different
timing may be considered for those with symptomatic hypotension.
 Wherever possible, Foundational HF medications should be continued during an acute
illness. If discontinued, they should be restarted as soon as the condition has stabilized.
10.1.1 Diuretics (Table 15, page 90)
 Diuretics are indicated in all patients in whom there are signs and/or symptoms
of congestion to alleviate symptoms, improve exercise capacity, and decrease
hospitalizations for HF.344,345
 The goal is to achieve and maintain euvolemia with the lowest dose of a diuretic.
Euvolemia is, however, often difficult to assess clinically. Important features to look for
clinically are:345
 Resolution of symptoms and signs of congestion - subclinical congestion is sometimes,
however, difficult to detect.
 Improvement in effort tolerance and walking distance.
 Other useful investigative tools which may be helpful to assess euvolemia, if available,
include:
 Chest X-ray - this is a specific but not a very sensitive indicator of volume status.346,347
 Echocardiographic parameters - such as:
 Decrease in chamber sizes.
 Decrease in the diameter of the IVC and a 50% decrease with inspiration.
 Normalization or at least a decrease in doppler indices of LV and RV filling pressures.
 Natriuretic peptides - These may, however, be persistently elevated in patients with
Chronic HF and in addition, there is biological variability. A decrease in levels compared
to admission would be a helpful guide although relying on this alone can lead to a false
assurance that decongestion has been achieved.48
 Lung ultrasound (LUS) - In a small study, tailored LUS-guided diuretic treatment of
pulmonary congestion reduced the number of decompensations and improved walking
capacity in patients with HF.348
 Most of these investigative tools-such as echocardiographic parameters and natriuretic
peptides - measure filling pressures and not volume status. These tests, however, may
sometimes be insufficient to detect subclinical volume excess without accompanying
increases in filling pressures.349
 The dose of diuretic used is variable and dependent on individual requirements. In the
presence of:
 Severe congestive HF and ADHF, oral diuretic therapy may be ineffective. Intravenous
therapy may be preferred. The diuretic of choice in these patients with fluid overload
is a loop diuretic i.e., furosemide. The goal is a reduction of body weight of about
1kg/day.
 Mild fluid retention, thiazide diuretics may be preferred especially in the presence
of co-existing hypertension. Thiazides, however, are weak diuretics.
 For most patients however, a loop diuretic is often required. Other Foundational HF
Medications - ARNI, MRAs, and SGLT2-i - also have diuretic characteristics and this
may help modify the dose of the diuretic.350-353
I,B
 Patients on diuretics should be monitored closely as over diuresis can cause intravascular
volume depletion leading to hypotension and deterioration of renal function. Hypokalemia
is a common problem with diuretic use and oral potassium supplementation is usually
necessary.
 Patients should be educated in ‘dry weight’ management and advised to record their
daily weight. If there is a consistent increase in weight of more than 2kg in 3 days,
patients should be educated to self-adjust their diuretic (furosemide) dose together
with restriction of their fluid intake until their “dry weight” is regained. However, if
the weight increase is associated with worsening symptoms or the patient fails to
respond to these measures, the patient should seek medical help immediately.
 Diuretic therapy may be reduced as the clinical condition of the patient improves and they
are assessed to have attained euvolemia using the indicators listed earlier. In one study,
however, these indicators had limited predictive capability to determine down titration
success/failure.349
 In selected patients who have stable symptoms and have been taught to manage their
volume status and modify their diuretic dose accordingly, diuretic therapy may be discontinued.
This is more likely to succeed if their LVEF improves to above 40-45%. In a study of a
small number of patients with stable CHF on OMT, diuretic withdrawal did not result in
dyspnea or adverse CV events up to 90 days.354
Route of
Starting
Usual Daily
Administration
Dose
Dose
LOOP DIURETICS
i.v. / Oral
20 - 40mg
20 - 80mg
Furosemide
i.v. / Oral
0.5 - 1mg
0.5 - 2mg
Bumetanide
THIAZIDES
Hydrochlorothiazide
Oral
25mg
12.5 - 50mg
Metolazone
Oral
2.5mg
2.5 - 10mg
Table 15: Diuretics Used In Heart Failure
10.1.2 Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers (Table 3, page 93)
These include:
 Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors (ACE-I)
 Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
 Angiotensin Receptor NepriIysin Inhibitor (ARNI)
10.1.2.1 ACE-I and ARB
 ACE-I improve survival and reduce HF hospitalizations in patients with mild, moderate,
and severe symptoms of HFrEF.305,306,329,330 They are recommended in all HFrEF
patients. There are no differences among available ACE-Is in their effects on symptoms
or survival.305
 In head-to-head analysis, there was no difference between ACE-I and ARBs in terms of
CV outcomes such as mortality and HF hospitalization, in patients with HFrEF.355-357
 ACE-I are, however, the preferred agents because the data for reduction in mortality
and HF hospitalizations are more robust.356,357
I,A
I,A
 ARBs are however better tolerated because of their better side effect profile.356,357
 ARBs are indicated in HFrEF in ACE-I intolerant patients and can be considered in
patients who develop angioedema with ACE-I or ARNI.332-334
 In patients post MI with impaired LV function, the ARB, Valsartan, was found to be as
effective as captopril.331
In the initiation of ACE-I/ARB, the following should be considered:
 Patients with underlying low systolic BP < 100mmHg and/or elevated serum creatinine or
potassium (>5.0 mmol/l) should be initiated with a low-dose of ACE-I/ARB cautiously.
 Avoid excessive diuresis before treatment. If patients are on large doses of diuretics, the
BP and renal function should be monitored.
 Start with a low dose. The dose should be increased gradually to the target dose
(Flowchart III & IV, pages 37-38, Table 3, page 93) or the maximum tolerated dose.
 Orthostatic hypotension should be avoided. Wherever possible, the BP should be
measured in the lying and standing position. The consensus definition of orthostatic
hypotension is a reduction of systolic BP of at least 20 mm Hg or a reduction of diastolic
BP of at least 10 mm Hg within 3 minutes of erect standing.358 In the elderly, the presence
of orthostatic hypotension should be interpreted cautiously due to both its high prevalence
in this population and its low association with underlying pathology directly related to
volume status.345
 Renal profile should be checked periodically. Serum creatinine may increase up to 30%
(or estimated Glomerular Filtrate Rate (eGFR) may decrease by 25%) from baseline at
7-14 days, after introduction of either an ACE-I or an ARB.359 Dose adjustments is not
required if the increase in serum creatinine stabilizes at < 30% (or eGFR reduces < 25%)
and serum potassium < 5.5 mmol/l. The renal function should however be monitored
periodically on a regular basis. Other causes of deteriorating renal function such as
infection, drug therapies or worsening HF should be excluded.
 There is no significant difference in rates of hypotension, hyperkalemia, or renal dysfunction
between ACE-Is and ARBs.
 ACE-I intolerance denotes the presence of a bothersome cough (most commonly, 5% -
20% although it can be as high as 64.9%) or the experience of angioedema (uncommon,
< 1%) with ACE-I therapy.360,361 Patients with these conditions may be switched to an ARB,
although, some may still develop angioedema.362,363
 Routine combined use of both ACE-I and an ARB should be avoided, as this combination
causes more adverse effects (hypotension, hyperkalemia, and renal dysfunction).364,365
10.1.2.2. ARNI
 ARNI is a combination of angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) and a neprilysin
inhibitor (an enzyme that degrades natriuretic peptides-bradykinin, adrenomedullin, and
other vasoactive peptides). The only drug in this class is sacubitril/valsartan.
 ARNI has been shown to improve symptoms, reduce HF hospitalizations and
increase survival in patients with HFrEF who have previously tolerated ACE-I.335,366
 ARNI has also been shown to be safe in patients who are ACEI-naive and in hospitalized
patients who have just recovered from Acute HF.315
 ARNI is recommended as a replacement to ACE-I in patients with HFrEF who
remain symptomatic despite OMT. It has been shown to decrease CV death, HF
hospitalizations, and symptoms.335 The benefit of ARNI over an ACE-I, was consistent
I,A
IIa,B
I,A
I,B
I,B
III,A
regardless of background therapy and irrespective of previous coronary revascularization
or β-blocker dose.366 It has also been shown to have favorable effects on cardiac remodeling.367
 ARNI may also be considered as a first-line RAS blocker in ACE-I-naïve patients.315
 ARNI in Post MI patients with LVEF <40% was not superior to the ACE-I ramipril.368
 The tolerability of ARNI and its side effect profile is like that of ACE-I or ARB. Laboratory
monitoring is also similar.
 The use of ARNI is, however, associated with hypotension but a low incidence of
angioedema.
 When initiating an ARNI, the initial dosing and rate of titration:
 Is dependent on pre-existing treatment, hemodynamic profile, and associated comorbidities.
It should be individualized.
 Should not be initiated if systolic BP < 100mmHg and used with caution if eGFR
< 30 mL/min/1.73m2.
 When switching from ACEI to ARNI, a washout period of at least 36 hours is required
to decrease the risk of angioedema.
 No washout period is required for conversion between ARB and ARNI.
 The drug should be up titrated to the target or maximally tolerated dose shown to improve
important HF outcomes.
 Among patients with HFrEF, similar improvement in prognostic biomarkers, health status,
and cardiac remodeling were observed across various ARNI doses - average daily dose:
112 mg in Tertile 1 (low dose), 342 mg in Tertile 2 (moderate dose), and 379 mg in Tertile
3 (high dose).369
 In patients taking ARNI, NT-Pro BNP is a more reliable biomarker than BNP. BNP levels
may be spuriously elevated as the drug prevents its breakdown.
10.1.3 β-blockers (Table 3, page 94)
 In major clinical trials, β-blockers, on top of standard therapy, have been shown to
improve symptoms, reduce hospitalizations and improve survival in patients with HFrEF,
regardless of their NYHA Functional class.307-313,370-372
 All patients with HFrEF should be on β-blockers unless there is a
contraindication.307-313,370-372
 Objective improvement in cardiac function might not, however, be apparent for 6-12
months after β-blocker initiation. Hence, early initiation of β-blockers for all stable patients
with current or prior symptoms of HF upon diagnosis is warranted, unless contraindicated.
 When initiating a β-blocker, the patient should be in a non-congested state ie. out of
Acute HF and preferably euvolemic with clear lung fields. Caution should be exercised
when initiating β-blockers in a patient in NYHA class III-IV.
 Patients who decompensate and are admitted in Acute HF should be maintained on
the same dose of β-blockers unless the clinical condition (hypotension or significant
bradycardia) warrants a temporary stopping or reduction in the dose.314
 After the patient has been stabilized, an attempt should be made to titrate to the target or
maximum tolerated dose.
 The contraindications for β-blocker use include:
 Second- or third-degree atrioventricular block (without a pacemaker).
 Bronchial asthma (relative contraindication - use with caution).
 Symptomatic bradycardia or hypotension.
 Critical limb ischemia.
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
I, A
I, A
 Initiating therapy with a β-blocker first is non-inferior to the standard approach of
starting with an ACE-I.310 The benefits seen with both these drugs are additive.
IIa,B
Table 3: Doses of Foundational HF Medications
Drug
Initial
Target
1/8
1/4
1/2
Tablet Strength
Renal Dose For
Daily
Dose(s)
Target
Target
Target
Available
CrCl < 30ml/min
Dose(s)
Dose
Dose
Dose
ACE-I
Captopril
6.25mg
50mg
6.25mg
12.5mg
25mg
12.5mg, 25mg
Yes
6.25mg-12.5mg
BD
TDS
bd/tds
Enalapril
2.5mg OD
10-20mg
2.5-5mg 5-10mg
5mg, 10mg, 20mg
Yes
2.5mg OD
BD
Lisinopril
2.5–5mg
20-40mg
2.5mg
5-10mg
10-20mg 5mg, 10mg, 20mg
Yes
2.5mg OD
OD
OD
CrCl 10-30:5mg OD
CrCl<10: 2.5mg OD
Perindopril
2mg OD
8-16mg
2-4mg
4-8mg
2mg, 4mg, 8mg
Yes
CrCl 15-30: 2mg eod
OD
CrCl <15 & HD: 2mg
on dialysis day**
Ramipril
2.5mg OD
10mg
1.25mg
2.5mg
5mg
2.5mg, 5mg, 10mg
Yes
1.25mg OD
OD
CrCl <40: 25%
normal dose
ARBs
Candesartan 4-8mg OD 32mg
4mg OD 8mg
16mg
8mg, 16mg
Yes
4mg OD
Losartan
25-50mg
50-150mg
12.5-
25-
25mg, 50mg,
Yes
No adjustment
OD
OD
37.5mg
75mg
100mg
Valsartan
40mg OD
160mg
40mg
80mg
40mg, 80mg,
Yes
Use with caution
BD
160mg
ARNI
Sacubitril/
100mg
200mg
25mg
50mg
100mg
50mg,100mg,
Yes
50mg BD
valsartan
(49/51mg)
(97/
200mg
BD*
103mg)BD
Drug
Starting
Target
1/8
1/4
1/2
Tablet Strength
Renal Dose For
Dose
Dose
Target
Target
Target
Available
CrCl < 30ml/min
Dose
Dose
Dose
β-Blocker
Bisoprolol
1.25mg OD 10 mg OD 1.25mg
2.5mg
5mg
2.5mg, 5mg, 10mg
Yes
No adjustment
Carvedilol
3.125mg
25 mg BD
3.125mg 6.25mg
12.5mg
6.25mg, 12.5mg,
Yes
No adjustment
BD
25mg
Metoprolol 12.5-25mg 100 mg
12.5mg
25mg
50mg
50mg, 100mg
Yes
No adjustment
Tartrate*
BD
BD
Nebivolol+
1.25mg OD 10 mg OD 1.25mg
2.5mg
5mg
5mg
Yes
No adjustment
MRA
Spironolactone 12.5-25mg
50 mg OD
12.5mg
25mg
25mg
Yes
Contraindicated
OD
Eplerenone 25 mg OD
50 mg BD
12.5mg
25mg
25mg, 50mg
Yes
Contraindicated
Finerenone 20mg OD
20mg OD
10mg, 20mg
Yes
eGFR 25-60:
10mg OD
eGFR <25:
contraindicated
SGLT2-i
Dapagliflozin 10mg OD
10mg OD
CrCl <25: limited
experience
Empagliflozin 10mg OD
10mg OD
CrCl <20: not
recommended
* The evidence-based form of metoprolol in HF is metoprolol succinate (CR/XL), which is not available in
Malaysia. The only form of metoprolol available in Malaysia is metoprolol tartrate
+ Shown to reduce the composite endpoint of all-cause mortality and CV hospitalization, but not all-cause
mortality.
IBM Micromedex Drug Ref (2023) (cited 14th January 2023) & product leaflet available from Quest3
(accessed date: 13th January 2023)
** At the discretion of the attending physician
CrCl unit: ml/min; eGFR unit: ml/min/1.73m2
10.1.4. MRA (Table 3, page 94)
 MRAs improve symptoms, reduces HF hospitalizations and mortality in patients with
HFrEF.303-305 It is indicated in all symptomatic HFrEF patients (NYHA II-IV) in addition
to other Foundational HF Medications.
 Caution should be exercised in the following conditions :
 Hyperkalemia
 Renal dysfunction
 Concomitant use of:
 Potassium-sparing diuretics
 Potassium supplements
 ACEI/ARB/ARNI
 NSAIDs
 MRAs have also been shown to be beneficial in patients with HF and comorbid
conditions such as diabetes and chronic kidney disease despite a greater risk of
hyperkalemia and acute renal insufficiency.373
 It has also been shown to improve CV outcomes in elderly HF patients > 75 years.374
 Potassium supplements may need to be reduced or discontinued. If despite these
measures, hyperkalemia persists (serum potassium >5.5mmol/l), then the dose of MRA
should be reduced or stopped. Alternatively potassium binders may be used. (Section 14.6)
 Spironolactone may uncommonly cause gynaecomastia in men. The incidence of gynae
comastia is lower with epleronone as it is more selective for aldosterone blockade.
 Finerenone is a non-steroidal MRA which has less risk of hyperkalemia and BP-lowering
effects. It has been shown to reduce first and recurrent HF hospitalizations in patients
with Type 2 diabetes and CKD.375-378
10.1.5. SGLT2-i (Table 3, page 94)
 SGLT2-i, particularly dapagliflozin and empagliflozin, lower the risk of HF hospitalizations,
cardiovascular mortality, and improve quality of life in patients with HFrEF,
irrespective of diabetes status.340-342,379-381
 The diuretic/natriuretic characteristics of SGLT2-i may provide further benefits in
decreasing congestion and may allow for a reduction in loop diuretic dosage.351-353
 In the initiation of SGLT2-i, the following should be considered:
 Renal profile should be checked periodically and monitored regularly. Although renal
function is known to decrease modestly following initiation, SGLT2-i tends to be
renoprotective in the long term.382 A slight decrease in eGFR following initiation is
expected, but this should not lead to discontinuation of treatment.
 Monitor glycemia regularly, especially in diabetic patients. Consider modifying other
diabetic medications.
 Identify and eliminate risk factors for ketoacidosis e.g., fasting, inadequate fluid intake.
 Monitor fluid balance regularly, especially when a patient is on diuretics, is elderly,
and/or frail. Adjust diuretic therapy and fluid intake as necessary.
 Uro-genital infections may occur during treatment with SGLT2-i. Patients should be
educated on the signs and symptoms of uro-genital infections as well as the appropriate
preventive measures.
IIa,B
I,A
I,A
10.1.6. If channel inhibitor- Ivabradine (Table 16, page 96)
 Ivabradine selectively inhibits the If current in the sinoatrial node, resulting in a reduction
in heart rate.
 It is effective in patients in sinus rhythm. Ivabradine may, however, be associated with
an increased incidence of AF.383,384
 Ivabradine resulted in a reduction in the combined endpoints of CV mortality and HF
hospitalizations in patients who were still symptomatic while on OMT with an ACE-I (or
ARB), a β-blocker and an MRA and:385
 With an LVEF ≤ 35% and
 An episode of HF hospitalization in the past 12 months and
 Who were in sinus rhythm with a heart rate of ≥ 70 beats per minute (bpm).
 The magnitude of heart rate reduction by β-blocker plus ivabradine, rather than the
background dose of β-blockers, appeared to determine the effect on CV outcomes.386
 In patients with a heart rate of ≥ 75 bpm, ivabradine has been shown to improve CV
outcomes, the best risk reduction being seen in those achieving a heart rate < 60 bpm or
a heart rate reduction > 10 bpm.387
 In patients with stable CAD and LVEF < 40%, ivabradine did not reduce CV outcomes.
In a subgroup of patients with a heart rate > 70bpm, there was a reduction in the
secondary end point of the incidence of CAD (fatal and non-fatal MI and coronary
revascularization).388
 Every effort should be made to achieve target or maximally tolerated doses of
β-blockers before initiation of ivabradine. It would be useful in patients who have
contraindications to β-blockers or who are not able to tolerate higher dose of β-blockers
due to its side effects. Ivabradine has no effect on BP or myocardial contractility.
 Patients should be educated to measure and record their pulse regularly, to monitor for
bradycardia. Side effects of ivabradine include symptomatic bradycardia (dizziness,
fatigue, or hypotension) and visual disturbances.
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
Table 16: Other Drugs Recommended for HF Management and Their Dose Regime
Drug
Starting dose
Target dose
If channel inhibitor
Ivabradine
5mg bd†
7.5mg bd
Others
Isosorbide dinitrate‡
10mg tds
40mg tds
Digoxin
0.0625mg od
0.25mg od
Vericiguat
2.5mg od
10mg od
†In patients >75 years old, lower starting dose of 2.5mg bd can be used.
‡(PO) Hydralazine-nitrate combination is not available in Malaysia.
10.1.7. Soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator- Vericiguat
 Vericiguat may be considered in patients in NYHA classes II to IV, who despite being on
OMT with a RAS blocker, a β-blocker and an MRA, have evidence of worsening HF. It has
been shown to reduce CV mortality or HF hospitalizations.389
10.1.8. Nitrates (Table 16, page 96)
 Symptoms of HF such as orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, exercise-induced
dyspnea and/or angina may be relieved with the use of nitrates alone, in the form of
tablets, sprays, or transdermal patches.
 Continuous (i.e., around the clock) use should generally be avoided to prevent nitrate
tolerance and pseudotolerance.390
 Nitrates are mainly used in Acute HF.
 In chronic HF, the trials on nitrates have been in combination with hydralazine. This
combination has been shown to improve survival in the African American population with
HF.391,392
10.1.9. Digoxin
 In patients with HF, digoxin may be considered in the following situations:
 To relieve symptoms and lower the risk of hospitalization in patients with symptomatic
HFrEF and already on OMT with an ACE-I (or ARB), a β-blocker and an MRA.393-395 It
has no survival benefit.
 Rate control in patients with AF.396-398
 Where rate control is the preferred strategy, β-blocker alone or in combination with digoxin
was associated with a similar decrease in the risk of mortality.396-398
 Digoxin alone was associated with an increase in mortality.399,400
 Digoxin may be considered in patients with HF and AF in the following situations:397,398
 Rate control is inadequate on β-blockers alone.
 β-blockers are contraindicated.
 Rapid control of the ventricular rate with parenteral drugs is required.
 Digoxin has a narrow therapeutic range and thus close monitoring of renal function and
serum electrolytes (particularly potassium and magnesium levels) is required, prior to
initiation of digoxin and periodically during its use.
 No loading dose is required for the management of chronic HF. Lower doses of digoxin
and lower levels of serum digoxin (0.5-0.8ng/ml or 0.65 to 1nmol/L) are efficacious and
appear adequate in most patients with compensated HF.401-403 The maintenance dose of
digoxin may range between 0.0625mg to 0.25mg daily, which may be lower in elderly
patients, women, and those with renal impairment.
 Regular monitoring of digoxin levels is not required other than to assess for toxicity
as the levels should not be used to guide dose adjustment in chronic therapy. Digoxin
levels may be elevated in the presence of worsening renal function, electrolyte imbalance
(hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, or hypocalcemia) or interacting drugs (e.g., amiodar
one), which may lead to atrial and ventricular arrhythmias particularly in the presence of
hypokalemia.
10.1.10. Antiplatelet and Anticoagulation Therapy
 There is no role for routine antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy in patients with
HF.404-412
 The decision to treat patients with HF with antiplatelet therapy is largely influenced by
the presence or absence of concomitant arterial disease.
 In patients with HF and sinus rhythm, anticoagulation, when compared to antiplatelet
therapy, did not significantly influence the primary outcome of death and stroke, but
reduced ischemic stroke rates.409-411 Treatment with warfarin however, was associated
with a higher risk of major bleeding complications.409
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIb,B
IIb,B
IIa,C
I,A
 HF patients with the following risk factors for thromboembolism should be given an appro
priate anticoagulant, unless contraindicated:
 Atrial fibrillation (AF)
 All patients with AF, HF and CHA2DS2-VASc score > 2 in men or > 3 in women
should be given an anticoagulant indefinitely, unless contraindicated.412-416
 Direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are recommended over warfarin in
patients with HF who are eligible, with the exception of those with moderate or severe
mitral stenosis and those with mechanical prosthetic heart valves.412,416
 Left ventricular thrombus (LVT).
 The 1-year risk of stroke with LVT is high (10%) even with anticoagulation.417 There
was no statistically significant difference in thrombus resolution, risks of bleeding
complications, stroke, or systemic embolization and mortality in LVT patients treated
with warfarin compared to those treated with DOACs.418,419
 If an LVT is detected, the duration of anticoagulation will depend on clinical
judgment, including the following factors:
 If following an acute MI, then anticoagulation (especially for a duration > 3
months) was associated with an overall lower risk of MACE or all-cause mortality.417
A recent review has suggested that if the LV thrombus has resolved, anticoagulation
can be discontinued and dual antiplatelet therapy continued per management of
MI.420 If the LV thrombus is persistent, anticoagulation should continue with repeat
imaging every 3 months. Once anticoagulation has been discontinued, repeat
imaging 3 months later is advised.420
 If there is no obvious acute event and the thrombus was detected during a
routine examination, then the duration of anticoagulation becomes more difficult to
decide since the risk of embolisation decreases over time although still present. In
these cases, clinical judgment taking into account the bleeding risk and clinical
profile of the patient can help in decision making.
10.1.11. Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy
 Arrhythmias are common in HF. The more common ones are:
 Atrial fibrillation
 Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
 Bradyarrhythmias
10.1.11.1. Atrial fibrillation (AF)
 New-onset AF in a patient with established HF is associated with a poor prognosis
irrespective of the LVEF.421,422 On the other hand, patients who develop AF first, followed
by HF usually have a more benign course.423
 Combination of HF and AF may increase the risk of stroke, dementia, HF hospitalization
and all-cause mortality.416,424
 Patients with AF and HF can be managed by identifying and treating potential causes
of AF and optimizing HF treatment - i.e., Optimal Medical Therapy.
 The AF can be treated by either rate control or rhythm control although in patients
with recent onset of AF < 1 year duration, rhythm control is preferred to rate
control.155,398,416,425
I,A
IIa,C
IIa,A
10.1.11.1. A Rate control
 The optimal resting ventricular rate in patients with AF and HF is unknown. There
was no significant difference in clinical events between a strict rate control of < 80bpm vs
a more lenient < 100/bpm.416,426,427
 A reasonable approach is to aim for a HR < 110/bpm unless there are symptoms or
a deterioration in LV function, in which case, one should try to target a HR < 80 bpm.416,427
 The optimal ventricular rate during exercise is also uncertain, but may be < 110 bpm
during light exercise.416,426
 In the rate control of AF:
 β-blockers should be considered for both short - and long-term rate control.396,428-430
β-blockers are preferred over digoxin as it provides better rate control during exercise
and improves morbidity and mortality in patients with HF although the latter effect is
attenuated in patients with AF.396,426,429
 Digoxin should be considered if the ventricular rate remains elevated despite treatment
with β-blockers, or if β-blockers are contraindicated or intolerable.397,426,429,431,432
 Intravenous amiodarone may be used for rate control, but only in the acute setting.416,433
 The initial target heart rate for rate control therapy should be < 110 bpm.416
 Combination therapy may be considered if a single rate control therapy does not
achieve the target heart rate.416 Rate control is better when digoxin and β-blockers are
used in combination rather than with each drug individually.396-398,432
 In patients with marked congestion who cannot tolerate β-blockers, suggest:
 Oral or IV digoxin
 Oral or IV amiodarone 433,434
10.1.11.1. B Rhythm control
 In patients with permanent AF and HF and LVEF < 35% (HFrEF), there was no difference
in all-cause mortality or secondary outcomes (death from any cause, worsening HF or
stroke) comparing a strategy of rate or rhythm control.435,436
 In patients with early onset AF of < 1 year duration and/ or paroxysmal AF, and/or
cardiovascular problems who received early rhythm-control, there was a significantly
decreased primary end point of a composite of CV death, stroke or hospitalization due to
HF or ACS than those who received standard care.416,425 The study included 28% stable
HF patients.425 At 2 years,however, symptoms and LV function did not differ significantly
between the groups.399,437
 The primary indication for rhythm control is reduction in AF-related symptoms and
improvement of quality of life.399
 Rhythm control can be achieved by:
 Pharmacotherapy:
 Amiodarone is preferable compared to other antiarrythmic drugs as others are
associated with worse outcomes in HFrEF.433,434,438
 Electrical therapy:
 Electrical cardioversion and/or
 Radiofrequency ablation.416,425
10.1.11.2 Ventricular Arrhythmias
 The exact prevalence of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in patients with HF in the contemporary
era is not known. It varies depending on the etiology of the HF and the LVEF.439 Patients
with HF and reduced (< 30 or 35%) LVEF (HFrEF) account for < 20% of all SCDs.440
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,C
IIa,A
IIa,A
 SCD is most often due to either sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular
fibrillation (VF) although sometimes it may be due to a bradyarrhythmia or electromechanical
dissociation.440,441 Occasionally rapid supraventricular tachycardias may deteriorate to
malignant ventricular tachyarrhythmias.442
 Patients with HF with ventricular arrhythmias must be treated aggressively with OMT.
 The following medications have been shown to reduce the risk of SCD:
 β-blockers: have been shown to reduce SCD in the clinical trials done on patients post
MI as well as in the HF trials.311,313,443
 ACE-I or ARB: clinical trials done following MI and heart failure with EF < 40% showed
that ACE-I or ARB reduced SCD.444-449
 ARNI: reduced both SCD and deaths due to worsening HF.450,451
 MRA: have been shown to reduce the incidence of SCD.303,304,452,453
 Statins: do not prevent SCD or overall mortality, however statins may minimize
hospitalization for worsening heart failure in patients with HF.454,455
 In addition to the above, in patients with ventricular tachyarrhythmias, the following are
important:
 Identify contributing factors such as electrolyte imbalances, ischemia and drugs.
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).456-460 (Section 8.2.3.2)
 Antiarrhythmic drug therapy with amiodarone can be considered as adjunctive therapy
in patients with ICD to reduce the number of shocks and in patients who are not
candidates for ICD.461,462
 Radiofrequency ablation may be considered in the event of VT storms.463
10.1.11.3 Bradyarrhythmias- see section 10.3.3
10.1.12. Calcium Channel Blockers (CCBs)
 Routine use of CCBs is not recommended in patients with HFrEF as they do not confer
any morbidity or mortality benefit but worsen HF outcomes.464-469
 Diltiazem, verapamil and nifedipine should be avoided.462-467
 However, amlodipine and felodipine may be considered for other indications such as
persistent hypertension despite OMT.468,470
10.2 PATIENT PROFILING AND TITRATION OF “FOUNDATIONAL HF MEDICATIONS”
(Table 5, page 43)
The “Foundational HF” drug classes should be initiated in all patients, preferably prior to
discharge. These “Foundational HF” Medications are:
 Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers:
 Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or
 Angiotensin receptor blocker or
 Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI)
 β-blockers
 MRA
 SGLT2-i
These drugs should be up titrated cautiously depending on the patient’s BP, heart rate, renal
function, and potassium levels.297 The following is a guide to titration and modifying the
doses of these medications depending on the patient’s profile.
I,A
I,A
I,C
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
IIb,B
IIb,B
III,A
IIa,B
10.2.1 Blood Pressure:
If systolic BP < 90 mmHG
 Detect and treat causes of hypotension, such as hypovolemia from over diuresis,
bleeding, infection accordingly.
 If the patient is euvolemic using the criteria in section 10.1.1, an attempt may be made to
reduce the dose of diuretics to the lowest maintenance level e.g. furosemide 20 mg EOD
or use a mild thiazide diuretic such as hydrochlorothiazide 12.5-25 mg daily. Occasionally
it may be possible to remove the diuretic completely especially if the LVEF > 40-45%.
 Remove all non “Foundational HF” Medications that may also cause hypotension eg - nitrates,
calcium channel blockers, alpha blockers.
 The dose of the “Foundational HF” Medications only needs to be reduced or temporarily
stopped if there is symptomatic hypotension.
 SGLT2-i and low-dose MRA have minimal effects on BP and may be continued. Spironol
actone at a mean dose of 26 mg daily had no significant hemodynamic effects in the
RALES trial.303 However when used as a fourth line drug in patients on a mean of 2.9
other anti-hypertensive drugs, at a mean dose of 25 mg daily, it can drop the SBP/DBP
by 21.9/9.5 mm Hg.471
If systolic BP > 110 mmHG
 The dose of RAS blockers and β-blockers should be up titrated in turn till the target or
maximally tolerated dose.
 Whether the RAS blocker or the β-blocker should be up titrated first will depend on the
patient’s heart rate, renal function, and potassium levels.
10.2.2 Heart Rate (HR)
10.2.2.1 Sinus Rhythm
 The optimal HR for patients with HF and in sinus rhythm is 50-60/bpm.416
If the HR > 70/bpm
 The dose of β-blocker should first be up titrated to the target or maximally tolerated dose.
 Ivabradine may be added to the β-blocker to achieve the target HR.386,387
If the HR < 50/bpm
 Discontinue non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers e.g., diltiazem and verapamil,
digoxin, or other antiarrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone.
 If the HR is still < 50/bpm, the dose of ivabradine should first be reduced.
 If the HR is still < 50/bpm or the patient has symptomatic bradycardia, then the dose of
β-blocker should be reduced or temporarily discontinued.
10.2.2.2 Atrial Fibrillation
Heart rate (HR)
 The optimal resting ventricular rate in patients with AF and HF is unknown.
 It is not unreasonable to aim for a HR < 110bpm.416
 If the patient is troubled by palpitations or there is deterioration of LV function, then a more
strict rate control of 80bpm may be targeted.416 The ventricular rate should however, be
maintained > 70 bpm.297 A lower HR has been associated with worse outcomes.472
 Excessive rate control, which may be associated with an increase in pauses, carries a
risk.416
 The optimal ventricular rate during exercise is also uncertain, but may be < 110bpm during
light exercise.416,426
 In patients with persistent AF and HFrEF, heart rate is not a predictor of mortality unlike
in patients in sinus rhythm.416,426,429,431,472
 There is no clear evidence for a prognostic benefit of β-blockers in HF patients with AF.155,416,426
Systolic BP < 90mmHg
 β-blockers may be stopped and replaced with digoxin for rate control.
 This may allow for the up titration of RAS blockers.
10.2.3. Chronic Kidney Disease - see section 14.6
Key Message# 8: Chronic HF due to LV reduced Function (HFrEF)
 Optimal HF medications are:
 Diuretics - to be titrated according to presence of congestion.
 Foundational HF medications:
 Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers:
º Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or
º Angiotensin receptor blocker or
º Angiotensin receptor nephrilysin inhibitor (ARNI)
 β-blockers
 Mineralocorticoid Antagonists (MRA)
 Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2-i)
 Other drugs (when necessary) include:
 Ivabradine
 Nitrates
 For doses of these Foundational HF medications, Grades of recommendation and
Levels of Evidence of these medications, see Tables 3 & 4, page 40-42.
Key Message # 9: Arrhythmias
 Arrhythmias are common in HF. These include:
 Atrial Fibrillation
 Ventricular arrhythmias
 Bradyarrhythmias
Key Recommendations #6: Chronic HF due to HFrEF: Pharmacotherapy
 For Grades of recommendation and Levels of Evidence, see Table 4, page 42
 Foundational HF Medications
 The Foundational HF Medications should be initiated at about the same time and up
titrated if needed to their target or maximally tolerated doses.
 Once the patient is stable and no longer volume overloaded, the dose of diuretics
may be down titrated to the lowest maintenance dose.
 In general, starting low doses of the 4 different classes would be preferred over up
titration of each of the individual drugs to the maximally tolerated dose before
initiating the next drug.
 These drugs are preferably all initiated, albeit at low doses, when the patient is
admitted with HF so that at the time of discharge, the patient is on all of them.
 For the initiation and up titration of these HF drugs see Flowchart III, IV & V, page
37-39.
Key Recommendation #7: Arrhythmias
 Atrial Fibrillation
 To be treated by rate or rhythm control (if onset < 1 year).
 Anticoagulation with DOAC or Vitamin K antagonists.
 Ventricular arrhythmias
 Identify contributing factors such as electrolyte imbalances, ischemia and drugs.
 Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
 Bradyarrhythmias
 Device Therapy as indicated.
10.3. DEVICE THERAPY IN HEART FAILURE
10.3.1. Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy (CRT)
Patients who remain symptomatic (NYHA class II-III) despite OMT should be considered for
CRT.
CRT has been shown to improve symptoms, hospitalizations, and mortality. though up to
30% of patients may be non-responders.473-477
Patients with all the following criteria can be considered for CRT:475-484
 Sinus rhythm
 LVEF ≤ 35%
 LBBB
 QRS duration on resting 12 - lead ECG:
 ≥ 150ms
 ≥ 120-149ms
Mechanical ventricular dyssynchrony is no longer a criterion in selecting patients for
CRT.485-487
IIa,B
I,A
Patients with AF are less likely to respond to CRT. They may be considered for CRT along
with atrio-ventricular node ablation.488-490
Conduction system pacing may be an alternative to biventricular pacing in patients with
pacing indications (expected RV pacing of > 40%) and HF not fulfilling criteria for CRT or
with unsuccessful coronary sinus lead implantation.491-494
Regular monitoring of the patients after device implantation is mandatory to adjust medical
therapies and reprogram the device as necessary.
10.3.2. Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD)
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) in patients with HF is often due to ventricular fibrillation or
ventricular tachycardia. This risk can be reduced with the implantation of an ICD.
An ICD is recommended for secondary prevention in patients with previous sudden cardiac
arrest or documented sustained ventricular arrhythmias.456-460
It should be considered in patients who fulfil the eligibility criteria, who otherwise have good
clinical function and prognosis to improve their survival.
Secondary prevention:
The following should be considered for implantation of ICD:456-460,495-498
 Patients resuscitated from SCD due to ventricular fibrillation or hemodynamically unstable
sustained ventricular tachycardia. These cardiac arrest survivors have a high risk of
recurrent events and implantation of an ICD has been shown to reduce mortality.
 Patients with chronic HF and LVEF ≤ 35% who experience syncope of unclear origin have
a high risk of subsequent SCD should also be considered for placement of an ICD.
 Prior MI and LVEF ≤ 40% with non-sustained VT AND inducible sustained VT or VF
during an electrophysiological (EP) study.
Primary prevention (prophylactic ICD implantation)
Prophylactic ICD implantation to reduce the risk of SCD may be considered in patients with:
 Prior MI and at least 40 days after an MI and 3 months after revascularization by PCI or
CABG and:
 LVEF ≤ 35% with mild to moderate HF symptoms (NYHA class II-III).496
 LVEF ≤ 30% regardless of NYHA class, to reduce mortality.495
 Non ischemic cardiomyopathy LVEF < 35%, on guideline directed medical therapy with no
reversible causes, and
 Mild to moderate HF symptoms (NYHA class II-III)497,498
 No HF symptoms (NYHA class I)497,498
 Additional risk factors shown to further increase the risk of sudden cardiac death and
ventricular arrhythmias that may be factored to further support prophylactic implantation
of a defibrillator device (ICD/ CRTD) are:
 Syncope/ presyncope
 LVEF < 25%
 Non sustained Ventricular Tachycardia
 PVCs > 10/hr on Holter monitoring
IIa,B
I,A
I,A
IIa,B
I,A
IIa,B
I,B
10.3.3. Pacemakers
 Patients with significant bradyarrhythmias, trifascicular bundle branch blocks and permanent
or paroxysmal third-or high-degree atrioventricular (AV) blocks should be considered for
pacemaker therapy.479 Prior to implanting a conventional pacemaker, the need for an ICD
or Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy (CRT) device should be considered.
 Conduction system pacing (which includes His bundle and left bundle branch area pacing)
is a new pacing modality. The early results appear promising but evidence on its safety
and efficacy is still lacking.479
Key Recommendation #8: Arrhythmias
 Device Therapy For HF
 The grade of recommendations and levels of evidence for device therapy (ICD,
CRT, pacemakers) are as in Table 4, page 42.
IIa,B
I,A
10.4. SURGERY FOR HEART FAILURE
Patients with HF should undergo surgery if the pathology causing the HF is amenable to
surgical treatment. The decision to subject a patient to surgery should however consider the
functional status, prognosis, and comorbid conditions of the patient.
Surgical procedures include the following:
10.4.1. Revascularization Procedures
Patients with CAD and HF may benefit from revascularization particularly if they have
angina and anatomy that is suitable for revascularization (left main stem or triple vessel
disease). The benefit of revascularization is likely to be more in younger patients with more
severe left ventricular dysfunction, severe CAD with angina, viable myocardium, and reversible
ischemia.
The STICH trial did not find any difference in survival between optimal medical therapy and
CABG in patients with CAD amenable to surgery and LVEF < 35% at the end of the trial at
a median follow up of 56 months.499 An extended follow up of the trial, however, after a
median follow-up of 9.8 years, found lower total mortality, CV death and the combined
outcome of all cause death and CV hospitalizations in patients with severe HF (LVEF <
35%) who underwent CABG.500 There was an early risk of mortality following CABG, but the
benefits of CABG were seen after 2 years, and these were seen whether myocardial viability
or angina was present or absent.
Coronary revascularization by CABG should be considered in patients with HF and suitable
coronary anatomy.
A recently completed trial comparing PCI to OMT in patients with demonstrable myocardial
viability and LVEF< 35% did not result in an improvement in CV outcomes.501
These high-risk patients undergoing CABG have a high surgical morbidity with longer
intensive care unit stays, a median in-hospital stay of 9.0 days and higher 30-day mortality.499
The treatment decision should be individualized after a discussion with the patient and
family and considering the recommendations of the Heart Team.
10.4.2 LV Reduction Surgery
In the STICH trial, surgical ventricular restoration (SVR) resulted in a significant reduction of
the end-systolic volume index but despite this, there were no differences in symptoms,
exercise tolerance, rate of death or hospitalization compared with patients who underwent
CABG alone.502
As such, SVR is not routinely recommended in patients with HF who have areas of LV
dyskinesia or akinesia and undergoing CABG.502
LV aneurysmectomy may be considered in patients with a large discrete LV aneurysm who
develop HF, angina pectoris, thromboembolism, and tachyarrhythmias due to the aneurysm.503
10.4.3. Valve Surgery
Please see section Section 14.2.5.1
10.4.4. LV Assist Devices
Left ventricular assist devices have been used to:
 Bridge patients with HF to heart transplant.504
 Support patients as a bridge to recovery.505
 Provide long term hemodynamic support in patients ineligible for heart transplantation
(destination therapy).506 In this group of patients, permanent treatment with LVADs
improves survival and quality of life compared with optimal medical therapy alone. It is
however expensive and is associated with significant adverse events.507-509
Patients awaiting heart transplant who have become refractory to medical therapy and
requiring inotropic support should be considered for a mechanical support device as a
bridge to transplant.507-509
Key Messages # 10: Surgery for HF
 Patients with HF should undergo surgery if the pathology causing the HF is amenable
to surgical treatment.
 This is particularly so if they have ischemia demonstrated as angina or by non- invasive
testing and an anatomy that is suitable for revascularization (left main stem or triple
vessel disease).
 The decision to subject a patient to surgery should however consider the functional
status, prognosis, and comorbid conditions of the patient.
IIb,B
III,B
IIa,B
11. HEART FAILURE WITH MILDLY REDUCED LV EJECTION FRACTION (HFmrEF)
Symptomatic HF patients with LVEF between 41-49% are now classified under this category
(previously known as heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction).35 HFmrEF, makes up
about 10-20% of patients with HF.510
There are limited number of randomized control trials focusing on this category of patients
specifically. Hence, the evidence for treatment of this group of patients are derived from
post-hoc or sub-group analysis of previous HF trials conducted in patients with HFrEF and
HFpEF.
HFmrEF is a clinical entity between HFrEF and HFpEF. The LVEF can:
 Remain 40 - 49%.
 Improved to > 50% - HFimpEF.
 Worsen < 40% HFrEF.
It may be helpful to re-evaluate the LVEF periodically to determine the trajectory of the
disease process. It is important to appreciate that these trajectories may not be linear and
uni-directional.
In the management of these patients:
 SGLT2-i have been shown to reduce the combined end point of worsening HF or CV
death.511-513
 Diuretics are recommended in patients who remain symptomatic and show signs of
congestion despite a SGLT2-i.514,515
 Sub-group analysis of large trials indicates that β-blockers, RAS blockers (ARNI, ACEI or
ARB) and MRAs can be considered to reduce the risk of HF hospitalization and CV
death.516-519
 CV risk factors must be optimized.
Key Recommendations #8: Chronic HF due to HFrEF
 Surgery For HF
 CAD
 Patients with HF should undergo surgery if they have angina and anatomy
that is suitable for revascularization (left main stem or triple vessel disease).
 Valve Disease
 All patients with VHD should be assessed periodically on the need for early
intervention before they begin to develop symptoms of reduced effort tolerance
and decompensate.
 Patients who are assessed to require intervention should be seen by a heart
team to help decide the timing and type of intervention.
 The indications for valve intervention are as in the Appendix V, page 166.
IIa,B
I,A
I,B
12. HEART FAILURE WITH IMPROVED LV EJECTION FRACTION (HFimpEF)
This is a new category which includes patients with a:520
 Baseline LVEF of < 40% and
 > 10-point increase from baseline LVEF and
 A second measure of LVEF > 40%.
Patients with a baseline LVEF of 41-49% who have improved to a new baseline of LVEF >
50% may be categorized in this group.35
LV function and structural abnormalities do not fully normalize despite improvement in
symptoms, functional capacity, and near normalization of biomarkers. Symptoms and signs
may however relapse and cardiac biomarkers may increase if HF treatment is withdrawn.41
This “remission” status requires continued treatment for HF.
Hence in patients with HFimpEF, Foundational HF medications should be continued to
prevent relapse of symptoms and subsequent deterioration of LV function.41
IIa,B
Key Messages # 12: Chronic HF due to HFimpEF
 HFImpEF includes patients with a:
 Baseline LVEF of < 40% and
 >10-point increase from baseline LVEF and
 A second measure of LVEF > 40%.
 LV function and structural abnormalities do not fully normalize despite improvement
in symptoms, functional capacity, and near normalization of biomarkers.
Key Messages # 11: Chronic HF due to HFmrEF
 HFmrEF includes symptomatic HF patients with LVEF between 41-49% and is a
clinical entity between HFrEF and HFpEF.
 There are limited number of randomized control trials focusing on this category of
patients - most of the evidence is derived from post-hoc or sub-group analysis of
previous HF trials.
Key Recommendations #9: Chronic HF due to HFmrEF
 The management of these patients include:
 Optimal treatment of CV risk factors.
 SGLT2- i
 Diuretics for patients who remain symptomatic and show signs of congestion.
 β-blockers, RAS blockers (ARNI, ACEI or ARB) and MRAs can be considered
to reduce the risk of HF hospitalization and CV death.
13. CHRONIC HEART FAILURE - HF DUE TO PRESERVED LV SYSTOLIC
FUNCTION, LVEF > 50% - (HFpEF)
HFpEF is a heterogenous disease with various phenotypes and comorbidities.521-524 It is
highly prevalent, accounting for up to 50% of all patients with HF and is becoming the
dominant form of HF in aging populations worldwide.525,526
In this guideline HFpEF refer to LVEF ≥ 50%. Importantly, clinicians should be aware that
LVEF is a continuous variable and the EF cut-offs used in definitions are therefore
arbitrary.155,527,528
HFpEF differs from HFrEF in that HFpEF patients are older and more often female. AF,
CKD, and non-CV comorbidities are more common in patients with HFpEF than in those
with HFrEF.529
In the ASIAN-HF registry, patients with HFpEF were younger and leaner. They, however,
carried a high comorbidity burden, with 70% of patients having a least two comorbidities
-most commonly hypertension, followed by anemia, CKD, diabetes, ischemic heart disease
(IHD), AF, and obesity.525 Similarly in the MyHF registry, patients with HPpEF had a high
comorbidity burden, commonly hypertension, diabetes, IHD and CKD.530
13.1. Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HFpEF is challenging as symptoms and signs can be attributable to other
co-existing conditions and LVEF is normal. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
obesity per se can also contribute to dyspnea in these patients.
The main hemodynamic finding in HFpEF is an elevation in LV filling pressures i.e. end
diastolic LV pressure (LVEDP). In the early stages of the disease, these become elevated
only during exercise or exertion giving rise to exertional shortness of breath.531 As the
disease progresses, it becomes elevated even at rest.
As outlined previously, the definition of HF includes the presence of:
 Clinical symptoms and signs of HF and
 Raised NP - In general, the level of elevation of these peptides are less than that seen in
patients with HFrEF.532 NP levels may be normal in patients with HFpEF who are obese
and falsely raised in patients without HFpEF but with AF.533-535 Thus the diagnosis of
HFpEF cannot be relied on solely on elevated NP levels.
Key Recommendations #10: Chronic HF due to HFimpEF
 Symptoms and signs may relapse, and cardiac biomarkers may increase if HF
treatment is withdrawn.
 Foundational HF medications should be continued to prevent relapse of symptoms
and subsequent deterioration of LV function.
If the patient has HF as per above definition, then basic investigations should be performed
as outlined previously to look for possible etiology and the presence of comorbidities:
 ECG
 Chest X-ray
 Lab investigations
 Echocardiogram - Some features supporting the diagnosis of HFpEF include:536
 LVEF ≥ 50% within 72 hours of the clinical event.
 Left ventricular hypertrophy (increased LV wall thickness or LV mass index > 115g/m2
for men and > 95g/m2 for women).
 Left atrial enlargement (LA volume index > 34ml/m2 or > 40 mL/m2 in the presence of AF).
 Diastolic dysfunction if E/e′ ≥ 15.536 A mean E/e’ index >15 at rest has good diagnostic
value for identifying a high mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (mPCWP),
supporting the likelihood of HFpEF but an E/e’ ratio within the intermediate range
(9-14) is less sensitive. The E/e’ index cannot be recommended as a single diagnostic
index above all other non-invasive measures of filling pressures (such as retrograde
pulmonary venous flow).536
 Tricuspid valve regurgitation velocity > 2.8m/s.
HFpEF may be suspected in patients who have dyspnea and in whom non-cardiac causes
of breathlessness have been excluded. In addition, the:
 The LVEF > 50% and
 There is no significant heart valve disease or cardiac ischemia.
Many patients who are elderly, obese and who have hypertension, diabetes and/or AF
presenting with dyspnea would fall into this category.
The diagnosis of HFpEF is often not clear cut. It does not depend on a single parameter but
on a combination of parameters derived from clinical presentation, laboratory results and
imaging tests that together will give a probability for the diagnosis.536,537
In difficult diagnostic situations, 2 scores have been proposed to aid in the initial assessment
of patients suspected of having HFpEF (Appendix VI & VII, page 167-168)
 H2FPEF score538
 HFA-PEFF score536
In cases of intermediate probability of the disease based on the scores, confirmatory tests
such as exercise echocardiography, invasive measurement of intracardiac pressures i.e.
the mPCWP at rest and sometimes with exercise is necessary to make the diagnosis.
(Appendix VI, page 167)
These tests are best performed in specialized cardiology centers and most doctors may not
have access to them. This limits the broad clinical applicability of the scores and demonstrates
the ongoing difficulty in making the diagnosis of HFpEF.539
The following patients who continue to have dyspnea may be referred to these centers for
further evaluation and management:
 Cases where the diagnosis is unclear.
 Non responders to treatment especially those with multiple comorbidities.
Lorem ipsum
13.2. Etiology and Associated Comorbidities
 HFpEF may also share similar clinical characteristics with valvular heart disease, pericardial
disease, and high-output HF. In all these conditions, patients present with HF and have
normal LVEF and even normal LV dimensions. In HFpEF however, the HF is due to
myocardial disease resulting in abnormal myocardial relaxation, decreased compliance,
and increased filling pressure.539 For this reason, a basic echocardiogram is essential in
the initial work up of these patients.
 The etiological factors affecting HFpEF and HFrEF seem to be different. When compared
to patients with HFrEF, patients with HFpEF are more likely to have hypertension,
valvular heart disease (e.g., aortic stenosis) and AF and are less likely to have a MI or left
bundle branch block.540
 Comorbidities play an important role in the pathophysiology of HFpEF. These contribute
to systemic and endomyocardial inflammation with fibrosis which are important in the
pathogenesis of the disease.524 It is these comorbidities that primarily correlate with
outcome in patients with HFpEF rather than NP levels or echocardiographic parameters.541
 Hypertension remains the most prevalent comorbidity of HFpEF, with a prevalence of
60% to 89%.542-544
 Other comorbidities include :542-544
 Overweight or obesity- Obesity is not only a comorbidity, but it is also an important
risk factor for HFpEF development. The mechanisms involved are complex and
include neurohormonal mechanisms and oxidative stress.545 Morbid obesity also has
an adverse effect on cardiac remodeling.545
 Diabetes mellitus (DM)
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
 Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
 Anemia
 Coronary artery disease (CAD)
 Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
 The presence of diabetes, a lower systolic BP, lower hemoglobin and a lower eGFR
were associated with a poorer outcome.541
 AF is common in HFpEF and increases the risk of adverse outcomes.546
13.3 Management (Table 6, page 44)
Compared with HFrEF patients, hospitalizations, and deaths in patients with HFpEF are
more likely to be due to non-cardiovascular causes. As LVEF increases, the proportional
contribution of non-cardiac and non-HF events to death or hospitalization increases,
highlighting the importance of managing comorbidities.
The important aim of therapy is to alleviate symptoms, improve well-being and reduce
hospitalizations. Screening for comorbidities and treating these appropriately is important.
13.3.1 Lifestyle measures
 Overweight or obesity are important comorbidities in HFpEF.
 A caloric restriction diet is feasible and safe in older, obese patients with HFpEF. It has
been shown to significantly improves patient’s dyspnea, peak oxygen consumption,
and quality of life.547
 Caloric restriction should ideally be combined with exercise, such as walking exercise
for one hour three or more times per week.169,547,548
 Bariatric Surgery in patients with HFpEF and obesity was associated with improved
symptoms, reduction in HF hospitalizations, reverse cardiac remodelling, and improved
LV distensibility.549-551
I,B
 Exercise training:
 This is safe and improves exercise capacity and quality of life.169,547,551,552
 Combined endurance/resistance training appears safe for patients with HFpEF and
improves exercise capacity (as reflected by an increase in peak oxygen consumption),
physical functioning score and diastolic function.169,548,549 It should consist of dynamic
isotonic (e.g., walking or cycling) and not static exercise.
 High-intensity interval training or moderate continuous training has not proved to be
better than guideline-based physical activity for patients with HFpEF.173
13.3.2 Identifying and treating the underlying cause(s) and co- morbidities.
 Hypertension should be treated to target goals.147 Improved BP control has been shown
to reduce morbidity and hospitalizations for HF.119,554-555 More intensive BP control in
patients with high CV risk including those > 75 years of age, significantly reduces HF and
other cardiovascular outcomes.553,556,557
 CAD is common in patients with HFpEF and this should be treated appropriately.
 Diabetes - See section 14.1
 Chronic Kidney Disease - See Section 14.6
 Tachyarrhythmias should be treated, and sinus rhythm restored whenever possible.
 If the patient remains in persistent AF, β-blockers or non-dihydropyridine calcium
channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem) alone or in combination are the usual first line
agents used for rate control.
 In patients with recent onset AF < 1 year duration or paroxysmal AF who received early
rhythm-control, there was a significantly decreased primary end point of a composite of
CV death, stroke, or hospitalization due to HF than those who received rate control.416,425
 Anticoagulation - Patients with paroxysmal or persistent AF should be anticoagulated
to reduce the risk of thromboembolic events.412,416
13.3.3 Pharmacological options
Pharmacotherapy has not been shown to reduce total or CV mortality. These include:
 Diuretics: These are necessary to control pulmonary congestion and peripheral edema
but should be used cautiously so as not to lower preload excessively and thereby reduce
stroke volume and cardiac output. One should aim to use the lowest dose of a diuretic
necessary to maintain euvolemia.
 β-blockers: β-blockers are often prescribed for the management of comorbidities such as
coronary artery disease or atrial fibrillation. At present, however, there is no good data to
show that β-blockers are beneficial in the treatment of HFpEF.558 Furthermore, the type of
β-blockers (non-selective and vasodilating, such as nebivolol and carvedilol, vs. rate
controlling only) may have differential effects in different HFpEF phenotypes.559 β-blocker
withdrawal was shown to improve maximal functional capacity and chronotropic incompetence
in patients with HFpEF.560 Further studies are warranted on the use of β-blockers in these
patients.
 RAS blockers
 Current evidence does not support their routine use in HFpEF in the absence of an
alternative indication.561,562 Trial data show a reduction in HF hospitalizations, but no
reduction in all-cause or CV mortality in HFpEF.559
 ARB - the use of ARB may be considered to decrease hospitalizations, particularly
among patients with LVEF on the lower end of this spectrum.563
 ACE-I - may be considered to reduce hospitalization in patients with HFpEF.564
I,A
I,A
IIa,B
IIa,A
I,A
I,C
IIb,B
IIb,B
 ARNI - did not reduce the composite endpoint of CV death and total hospitalizations
for HF in patients with a LVEF> 45% when compared to an ARB.565 In a combined
analysis of 2 large ARNI trials, there was a suggestion of benefit in patients with LVEF
< 57% and in women (benefits of sacubitril-valsartan in women were sustained up to
LVEF 60%, while for men the benefit was restricted to LVEF < 45%).566
 MRA: MRAs improve diastolic function in patients with HFpEF.567 It may be considered to
decrease HF hospitalizations, particularly among patients with LVEF on the lower end of
this spectrum.562,568,569 Benefits were seen in patients with LVEF > 45%, elevated BNP
level or HF admission within 1 year, eGFR > 30 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine < 2.5 mg/dL,
and potassium < 5.0 mEq/L).323 MRAs showed a greater benefit in patients who demon
strated more functional impairment, obesity, diabetes, CKD, concentric LV hypertrophy,
high renin, and biomarkers of tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated inflammation, liver
fibrosis, and tissue remodeling.570 Hyperkalemia was more common in those on MRA and
close monitoring of potassium is important.
 SGLT2-i - These have been shown to decrease HF hospitalizations and CV mortality.511-513
There was also a decrease in the slope of the eGFR decline, and a modest improvement
in quality of life at 52 weeks.511-513 The benefit was similar irrespective of the presence or
absence of diabetes at baseline. In a subgroup analysis by LVEF, there was a signal for
lower benefit on the primary composite endpoint, first and recurrent HF hospitalizations,
at higher LVEF > 62.5%.511
 Non-dihydropyridine Calcium Channel Blockers (verapamil and diltiazem):
 Clinical data regarding use of calcium-channel blockers in HFpEF is sparse. Its use is
mainly to treat hypertension or for rate control in AF.
Key Message #13: Chronic HF due to HFpEF
 HFpEF is a heterogenous disease that is highly prevalent, accounting for up to 50% of
all patients with HF and is becoming the dominant form of HF in aging populations
worldwide.
 In this guideline HFpEF refer to LVEF ≥ 50%. LVEF is a continuous variable and the
EF cut-offs used in definitions are therefore arbitrary.
 HFpEF differs from HFrEF in that HFpEF patients are older, more often female with
AF, CKD and non-CV comorbidities being more common.
 The main hemodynamic finding in HFpEF is an elevation in LV filling pressures i.e. end
diastolic LV pressure (LVEDP), initially only on exertion and later even at rest.
I,A
IIb,B
IIb,B
Key Recommendation # 11: Chronic HF due to HFpEF
 Timely and early diagnosis of HFpEF leads to a better outcome.
 The management of patients with HFpEF includes:
 Lifestyle measures
 Weight reduction
 Exercise training
 Managing comorbidities such as hypertension, CAD, CKD, atrial fibrillation, obesity
according to guidelines.
 Pharmacotherapy:
 Diuretics - for volume overload.
 SGLT2-i - decreases HF hospitalizations and CV mortality.
 RAS blockers (ARB, ACE-I, ARNI) - As a group, RAS blockers have not been
shown to reduce total or CV mortality. There was a suggestion of benefit of ARNI
in women up to LVEF 60%, while for men the benefit was restricted to LVEF < 45%.
 MRA - it may be considered to decrease HF hospitalizations, particularly among
patients with LVEF on the lower end of this spectrum.
 β-blockers - No good data that they are beneficial in the treatment of HFpEF
although they are often prescribed for the management of comorbidities such as
CAD or AF.
14.1. DIABETES AND HEART FAILURE
 HF and diabetes mellitus (DM) often co-exist, each increasing the likelihood of developing
the other.571 Diabetes is one of the risk factors for the development of HF and similarly
among patients with HF there is a high prevalence of often unrecognized dysglycemia.572-574
 In Malaysia, about 60-65% of patients admitted with HF, have diabetes as a comorbidity.13-15
 Almost all the epidemiological and clinical trial data on DM and HF have been based on
trials done on patients with type 2 DM.
14.1.1 Risk of developing dysglycemia in Patients with HF
 Patients with HF irrespective of ejection fraction phenotype, were shown to be at an
increased risk of developing dysglycemia- both prediabetes and DM.573,574
 The prevalence of DM varies571:
 6-25% in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD).
 12-30% in patients with symptomatic HF.
 Up to 40% in patients hospitalized with HF.
 In the clinical trials, however, the incidence of new onset diabetes varied from 6-7%.571,575,576
 Predictors for developing new onset DM among patients with HF include:573,574,577-581
 Severity (as reflected by a higher NYHA functional class) and duration of HF.
 Elevated body mass index and waist circumference.
 History of smoking.
 Higher systolic blood pressure.
 Certain medications such as loop diuretics, metoprolol.
 The presence of DM has been shown to be linked to adverse outcomes in HF of both
ischemic and non-ischemic etiologies, irrespective of LVEF.
14. SPECIAL GROUPS
 All patients at Risk (Stage A) and who already have HF (Stage B-D) should be screened
for dysglycemia and this should be treated appropriately according to guidelines.322
14.1.2 Risk of developing HF among patients with dysglycemia
 Diabetic patients have between 2-5x risk of developing HF.572 Whether this indicates a
causal effect or just a comorbidity is still unclear. It is an important CV complication and
the prognosis of diabetic patients admitted to hospital for HF were worse than those
admitted with MI.582,583
 The prevalence of HF ranges between 4-30% in various diabetic drug trials, with almost
a third of patients being undiagnosed.584
 Even pre-diabetics (depending on the definition used) have a 9-58% risk of developing
HF.585 It is often the first manifestation of a CV event.571
 Predictors for the development of HF in patients with DM include:571,586-589
 Female sex
 Longer duration of DM
 Older age
 Increased body mass index
 Poorer glycemic control
 Insulin use
 Renal impairment
14.1.3. Prognosis of patients with Dysglycemia and HF
 HF per se is associated with a high morbidity and mortality and concomitant DM
compounds this risk.590-593
 This is particularly so in patients with HFpEF who have co-existing microvascular
complications.594 Both poor glycemic control (HbA1c >9.5%) and tight glycemic control
(HbA1c <5.5%) are associated with increased all-cause mortality in this group of
patients.595
 In Acute HF, incidence of hospitalization (adjusted for age and sex) is 2x higher in
patients with DM compared with those without.596,597 It is an independent predictor for
overall mortality in acute HF.598
 Every 1% HbA1c reduction is associated with a 15% relative risk reduction in hospitalization
for HF.599
 Inadequate glycemic control (HbA1c ≥ 7.0%) within one year after hospital discharge for
HF, was significantly associated with a higher risk for all-cause mortality compared with
an adequately controlled diabetes (HbA1c < 7.0%).598
 Once HF develops, the clinical course is marked by frequent hospitalizations and eventually
death.600-602 Most sudden deaths are due to LV dysfunction rather than a new ischemic
event.
 Advanced age, duration of the disease, insulin use, the presence of CAD and an elevated
serum creatinine are all independent risk factors for the development of HF.603
 However, despite having five risk factor variables within the target range i.e. glycated
hemoglobin level, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, blood pressure, absence of
albuminuria and smoking, the risk for hospitalizations for HF was increased by almost
45% over a 5.7-year period.604
14.1.4. Pathophysiology of HF in DM
 The development of HF in DM involves a complex interconnected process between
systemic, myocardial, and cellular mechanisms that lead to coronary atherosclerosis,
myocardial ischemia and infarction, with co-existing hypertension and dyslipidemia.605
 Diabetic cardiomyopathy is defined as the presence of diastolic or systolic dysfunction in
a patient with DM without other obvious causes for cardiomyopathy, such as CAD,
hypertension, or valvular heart disease.605-607 However, whether diabetes directly causes
a cardiomyopathy is, however, uncertain.582,584
14.1.5. Diagnosis of HF in diabetes
 The diagnosis of HF in patients with diabetes is like those without diabetes (see section 6).
 In those patients suspected of having HF, appropriate investigations as outlined in section
6 should be performed.
14.1.6. Management
14.1.6.1. Prevention of HF
 Diabetes is a CVD defining disease, and patients should have their other CV risk factors
treated aggressively and closely monitored.322
 Lifestyle measures are important and have been shown to lower risk for HF, particularly
in patients with HFpEF.608 These include:322
 Weight reduction,
 Increased physical activity; and
 Smoking cessation.
 The BP and LDL-C should be treated to target:322
 BP 130-139/70-79mmHg, SBP < 130 in those without pre-existing CAD (but not < 120
mmHG) and who are at a higher risk of CKD or stroke.
 LDL-C according to CV risk category.
 Ambulatory or home BP monitoring should be encouraged as undetected hypertension
and masked hypertension is highly prevalent among patients with DM.609
 In asymptomatic patients, routine screening for CAD is not recommended. Routine
screening does not improve outcomes if CV risk factors are not treated to target.322
14.1.6.2. Treatment of HF
 The treatment of both Acute and Chronic HF in patients with DM is similar to those without
DM with the use of the Foundational HF medications.
14.1.6.3. Treatment of Diabetes -Glucose Lowering Agents
 Intensive glucose lowering is not associated with any significant reduction in CV risk.610
In fact, tight control of DM especially with the occurrence of hypoglycemia is associated
with increased mortality.611-613
 In addition, HbA1c variability, has been shown to be an independent risk factor for CVD in
T2DM patients, even when the HbA1c is within the target range.614
 Glycemic targets for patients with DM and HF should be individualized to include consid
erations of comorbidities, severity of HF, and to balance benefits versus potential
risks.322,605
I,A
I,B
I,A
I,A
I,A
I,B
IIb,B
 However, due to limited HF-specific data in DM patients, current recommendations
suggest a target range of HbA1c 7%- 8%, while minimising adverse effects of treatments
particularly hypoglycaemia.322,584,605 This target however should be individualized based
on patient characteristics and comorbidities.
A) Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2-i)
 SGLT2 -i showed a reduced risk of major adverse CV events, with the greatest benefit
being seen for reduction in hospitalizations for HF.615,616 This is the most consistent
observation in CV outcome trials across this class.615,616
 In patients with DM and established CVD or at high CV risk, SGLT2-i should be given to
prevent hospitalizations for HF.155
 SGLT2-i with the strongest with the strongest proven benefits for HF hospitalizations should
be used.
 However, SGLT2-i should be used with caution, taking into consideration recognized side
effects including genital candidiasis, euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis, as well as
lower-limb amputation and fractures with Canagliflozin.605
B) Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 (GLP-1) Receptor Agonists
 In patients with DM and established CVD or multiple risk factors for CVD, GLP-1 receptor
agonists with proven CV benefits is recommended to reduce the risk of major adverse
cardiovascular events.322,584,617
 GLP-1 receptor agonists show a 9%-12% reduction of the risk of HF hospitalization.618,619
However, to date, there is insufficient data to include GLP-1 receptor agonists in the
recommended treatment of patients with diabetes for HF risk reduction.620,621
C) DPP4 inhibitors
 DPP4 inhibitors confer no added benefit for therapy of DM in HF patients compared to
placebo.617
 Saxagliptin and Alogliptin are not recommended in patients with DM and HF.155,156,622
D) Biguanides (Metformin)
 Observational studies indicate that metformin can be safely used in HF with no increased
mortality even in those with NYHA class III and IV.623
 It also reduced the risk of hospitalization due to HF and all-cause hospitalization.623,624
 Lactic acidosis during hospitalization was uncommon.625
 Metformin should be discontinued when the eGFR is <30ml/min/1.73m2.
 In older patients with DM who were hospitalized for HF, metformin initiation was
independently associated with a significant reduction in HF hospitalization particularly in
patients with LVEF > 40%.626 Conversely, sulfonylurea initiation was associated with
excess risk of death and HF hospitalization, regardless of LVEF.626
 Metformin is recommended for the treatment of DM in patients with HF if the eGFR is
stable and ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73m2.
 It should be used cautiously in unstable or hospitalized patients with HF.584,617,627
I,A
I,A
IIa,A
IIb,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
III,A
E) Sulfonylureas
 Current evidence based on observational cohort studies, suggests that sulfonylureas
(including 2nd generation drugs) increase the risk of HF and therefore should be avoided
if possible.605,628-631
 Sulfonylureas have been shown to be as safe as the DPP4 inhibitors as an add-on
therapy to metformin or other diabetic medications for atherosclerotic CVD end points
i.e. CVD death, nonfatal MI or nonfatal stroke. The occurrence of HF, however, was either
not a key end point or not reported in these trials.632-634 A large cohort study however,
found the use of the second-generation sulfonylurea, glimepride to be safe in patients with
diabetes and chronic HF.635
F) Insulin
 Insulin therapy may be considered in patients with advanced systolic HFrEF for better
glycemic control.584
 However, insulin has been associated with increased all-cause mortality and hospitalization
for HF.636,637 This is especially in patients with low HbA1c < 7%.636
G) Thiazolidinedione
 TZD use including pioglitazone and rosiglitazone should be avoided in patients with
T2DM and symptomatic NYHA class III & IV heart failure.584,617,638,639
Key Messages #14: HF and Diabetes
 HF and diabetes mellitus (DM) often co-exist, each increasing the likelihood of
developing the other. Whether this indicates a causal effect or just a comorbidity is still
unclear.
 Patients with HF irrespective of ejection fraction phenotype, have been shown to be
at an increased risk of developing dysglycemia.
 Also, diabetic patients have between 2-5x risk of developing HF.
 HF per se is associated with a high morbidity and mortality and concomitant DM
compounds this risk. This is particularly so in patients with HFpEF.
IIb,B
IIb,C
III,A
Key Recommendations #12: HF and Diabetes
 Prevention of HF:
 Lifestyle measures are important. They have been shown to lower the risk for HF,
particularly HFpEF. These measures include:
 Attainment of appropriate weight,
 Increased physical activity and
 Smoking cessation.
 The BP and LDL-C should be treated to target:
 BP 130-139/70-79mmHg, SBP < 130 in those without pre-existing CAD (but not <
120 mmHG) and who are at a higher risk of CKD or stroke
 LDL-C according to CV risk category.
 Treatment of HF
 The treatment of both Acute and Chronic HF in patients with DM is similar to those
without DM with the use of the Foundational HF medications.
 Treatment of Diabetes - Glucose lowering Agents
 Glycemic targets for patients with DM and HF should be individualized.
 Current recommendations suggest a target range of HbA1c 7%- 8%, while minimizing
adverse effects of treatments particularly hypoglycemia.
 Glucose lowering drugs:
 With proven CV benefits:
º SGLT2-i
º GLP-1 receptor agonists
º Metformin
 With no proven CV benefits but which will help with glucose control:
º DPP4 inhibitors
 With no proven CV benefits and need to be used with caution:
º Insulin -This has been associated with increased all-cause mortality and
hospitalization for HF especially in patients with low HbA1c < 7%.
º Sulfonylurea
 That need to be avoided:
º Thiazolidinediones
14.2. VALVULAR HEART DISEASE (VHD) AND HF
14.2.1. Etiology
Common etiological factors are:
 Rheumatic Carditis and Rheumatic Heart disease (RHD)
 In a patient with acute rheumatic carditis, the early detection and appropriate treatment
of beta-hemolytic streptococcal infections of the pharynx (positive throat swab and
raised ASOT) during the infection and with subsequent appropriate penicillin prophylaxis
against recurrent infection will help prevent the development of RHD in later life.
 RHD is a sequela of acute rheumatic carditis. It occurs because of inflammation and
scarring of the heart valves leading to fusion of the commissures and/or fusion and
shortening of the chordae and deformation of the valve cusps. The incidence of
Rheumatic Fever and RHD is still high among the rural and urban poor.640
 Infective Endocarditis
 This can result in acute valvular damage or may exacerbate an underlying valve pathology.
 A common source is poor oral hygiene.
 An often-unrecognized source is i.v. lines.
 Congenital
 This includes congenital bicuspid aortic valves, congenital mitral valve prolapse
(Barlow’s disease) and pulmonary stenosis.
 Degenerative disease
 Commonest cause in the elderly.
 This includes calcific aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation secondary to aortic root
dilatation from any cause, and degenerative mitral regurgitation.
14.2.2. Valve pathology
 Mitral Valve Disease
 Mitral stenosis (MS)
 This is almost always due to RHD.
 Mitral Regurgitation
 Primary mitral regurgitation is a disease of the mitral valve leaflets or chordae. It is
the most common primary VHD seen locally.
º In young adults and middle-aged persons, it is commonly due to RHD. It may also
be secondary to collagen disorders such as Marfan’s.
º In the older age group (>70 years of age), degenerative causes leading to
fibroelastic deficiency, myxomatous degeneration, chordal elongation and rupture
are more common.
 Secondary mitral regurgitation also known as functional MR, is a consequence of LV
dysfunction with normal mitral valve leaflets and chordae. The LV dilatation may be
secondary to CAD or any other non-ischemic etiology.
 Aortic Valve Disease
 Aortic stenosis (AS)
 May occur due to congenital bicuspid aortic valve.
 More commonly develops in the elderly due to progressive degeneration, scaring
and calcification of the valve.
 Aortic regurgitation (AR)
 Locally it is commonly due to RHD.
 Bicuspid aortic valve is the commonest congenital cause.
 Other causes include infective endocarditis or secondary to dilatation of the ascending
aorta due to Marfan’s or idiopathic aortic dilatation etc.
14.2.3. History and Physical Examination
 Common presenting symptoms are dyspnea, reduced effort tolerance and palpitations.
 The presence of symptoms of HF in a stenotic lesion is a strong indication for intervention.
 In regurgitant lesions, particularly with aortic regurgitation, it is usually a late presentation.
 The presence of valvular AF indicates significant valve pathology - usually due to mitral
valve disease.
14.2.4. Investigations
Essential investigations include:
 ECG
 Chest Radiograph - Chest X-rays
 Echocardiography -
 Transthoracic echocardiography is usually adequate to make the diagnosis and plan
management.
 Transesophageal echocardiography may be required if the transthoracic echocardiography
is of suboptimal quality or occasionally for prosthetic valve dysfunction, prosthetic valve
endocarditis or left atrial thrombi. It is also necessary preoperatively when detailed
valve anatomy is required to assess valve repairability.
14.2.5. Management
All patients with VHD should be assessed periodically on the need for early intervention
before they begin to develop symptoms of reduced effort tolerance and decompensate. This
can be achieved by:
 Serial Chest X-rays to look for progressive cardiac enlargement.
 Serial echocardiograms are more sensitive to look for progressive deterioration. It can
assess valve severity, chamber dilatation, pulmonary artery pressures and cardiac (both
LV and RV) function.
 Objective assessment of the patient’s effort tolerance and symptoms in doubtful cases.
Patients with VHD who are assessed to require intervention should be seen by a heart
team to help decide the timing and type of intervention.641 Valve intervention include:
 Surgical repair or valve replacement.
 Percutaneous intervention.
The initial medical management of patients with VHD and HF (especially those with secondary
mitral regurgitation) is as outlined earlier with the Foundational HF medications.
In addition,
 Vasodilators should be avoided in severe valve stenosis.
 Atrial Fibrillation should be managed with:
 Rate control using:
 β-blockers and/or
 Digoxin for rate control
 Anticoagulation with DOAC or vitamin K antagonists to prevent thrombo-embolism.
14.2.5.1. Valve Intervention in patients with HF
The indications for valve intervention are listed in Appendix V, page 166.
 Mitral valve intervention
 Mitral stenosis
 If the anatomy is suitable, percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty is the procedure
of choice.
 If not suitable, then open mitral commissurotomy or mitral valve replacement may be
indicated.
 Mitral Regurgitation (MR)
 Patients with HF of non-ischemic origin and severe functional mitral regurgitation
may have symptomatic improvement after mitral valve surgery.641 If the LVEF < 30%,
mitral valve repair is preferred as mitral valve replacement is associated with poorer
outcomes.642
 Patients with LV systolic dysfunction undergoing surgical coronary revascularization
who also have severe mitral regurgitation secondary to ventricular dilatation
(functional mitral regurgitation) may be considered for concomitant mitral valve
repair or replacement.643,644
I,C
III,C
I,A
IIa,B
IIb,B
 In patients with functional moderate to severe MR and who are not surgical
candidates, the use of a MitraClip on a background of Foundational HF medications
is superior to medical therapy alone.645-647 At 2 years, there was a reduction in HF
hospitalization and mortality in symptomatic HF patients with grade 3-4+ MR.648
 Compared to surgery, MitraClip demonstrated a similar safety profile and shorter
length of stay in high-risk patients, at the expense of increased residual mitral
regurgitation and higher reoperation rate.649
 The other landmark transcatheter mitral valve intervention study, however, did not
meet its primary end point although there was a trend towards benefit in the cumulative
rate of HF hospitalization between 12 and 24 months among the treated patients.650,651
 In view of the conflicting results, additional studies are needed to identify patients
who will benefit the most from transcatheter mitral valve interventions.641
 At present, it may be considered in patients with moderate to severe MR and who
are not surgical candidates and in high volume centers where this is done routinely.645-651
 Aortic valve intervention
 Aortic stenosis (AS)
 Severe AS has been defined as a:641
º Valve area < 1.0 cm2,
º A mean transvalvular gradient > 40 mm Hg, and
º Peak flow velocity > 4.0 m/s.
 In the absence of symptoms and adverse prognostic features, watchful waiting has
generally been recommended with prompt intervention at symptom onset.641
 Variants include:
º Severe AS with high gradient.
º Severe AS with low gradient and poor LV function.
º Severe AS with low/ normal gradient and preserved LV function.
 Low dose dobutamine stress echocardiography can help in the diagnosis when the
LVEF < 50% and the stroke volume index < 35 mL/m2.641,652
º In patients with true AS, the increased flow across a fixed valve orifice results in
increased transvalvular flow velocity and gradients, without a change in calculated
valve area.
º In pseudo-AS, the augmented flow results in only a mild increase in transvalvular
gradient and an increase in valve area to ≥1.0 cm2.
 In the presence of preserved LV function, LVEF>50%, the diagnosis is more
challenging.641
 In elderly patients > 70 years of age at moderate to high surgical risk, transaortic
valve replacement is a reasonable alternative to surgical valve replacement.641,653-658
 Aortic Regurgitation
 In patients not reaching the thresholds for surgery, close follow-up is advised. They
should be considered for surgery if:641
º Exercise testing indicates borderline symptomatic patients or
º There is progressive enlargement of the left ventricular end-diastolic diameter
(LVEDD) > 65 mm), or
º Progressive decrease in LVEF.
IIa,B
IIa,B
Key Messages # 15: HF and Valvular Heart Disease (VHD)
 VHD is an important cause of HF.
 In the young, RHD is an important cause. The incidence of RHD in rural and urban
poor is high.
 In the older population, degenerative valve disease is more common.
Key Recommendations #8: HF and Valvular Heart Disease
 All patients with VHD should be assessed periodically on the need for early intervention
before they begin to develop symptoms of reduced effort tolerance and decompensate.
 Patients who are assessed to require intervention should be seen by a heart team to
help decide the timing and type of intervention.
 The indications for valve intervention are as in the Appendix V, page 166.
14.3. CARDIOMYOPATHY AND HEART FAILURE
Cardiomyopathies are a heterogenous group of myocardial disorders which frequently
present as HF.659 They can be inherited (familial/genetic) or acquired and may be accelerated
by disease modifiers such as infection, immunological diseases, drugs, and comorbidities
such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus.659-661 In clinical practice they are usually
classified according to anatomic and physiologic features into:
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)
 Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
 Unclassified cardiomyopathy
As the presentation of arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy is typically ventricular arrhythmias
rather than HF, it will not be discussed further in this document.
It is worthwhile noting that specific etiologies of cardiomyopathy can have overlapping
clinical phenotypes or transform from one clinical phenotype into another. For instance,
Anderson-Fabry disease can have overlapping features of HCM and RCM, while RCM due
to amyloidosis may transform into DCM as the disease progresses.
Where applicable, genetic testing and family screening should be considered.
14.3.1 Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM)
 DCM is one of the leading causes of HFrEF globally.662
 It is characterized by systolic dysfunction and ventricular dilatation in the absence of
abnormal loading conditions (e.g., hypertension, valvular stenosis) or CAD659. Other
morphological changes include atrial dilatation, reduction in ventricular wall thickness,
and functional mitral and tricuspid regurgitation.
 The etiologies are myriad but can generally be classified into genetic or non-genetic
causes (Appendix VIII, page 169). In some circumstances these causes can overlap and
interact with one another e.g., cardiotoxicity from chemotherapeutic agents in a patient
predisposed genetically to DCM.
 A family history can be detected in 30-50% of cases663 and a genetic determinant in up
to 40% of DCM patients.659,664 More than 60 genes coding for various myocardial
proteins and molecules have been implicated in the pathogenesis of DCM.664,665 The most
common inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant.
 The clinical course of DCM is variable, but it generally follows of one these pathways666:
 Recovery following incident HF.
 Remission with improvement or stabilization of LV systolic function.
 Progression to advanced HF and death.
 Reverse remodeling is usually observed in DCM resulting from potentially reversible
causes such as alcohol-related cardiomyopathy, peripartum cardiomyopathy and
tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
14.3.1.1. Management
 Management of dilated cardiomyopathy is as outlined in the earlier sections with the
Foundational HF Medications.
14.3.2. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
 HCM accounts for 2-3% of HF667. Etiologies of HCM are shown in (Appendix VIII, page 179-180)
 It is characterized by an increase in LV wall thickness (commonly defined as >15 mm, or
>13 mm in adult first degree relatives of HCM patients) in one or more myocardial
segments which cannot be explained by abnormal loading conditions.668,669
 The predominant form of HF in HCM is HFpEF. A small number of patients develop
HFrEF later in the disease.
 HCM can be obstructive or non-obstructive. HF is prevalent in the majority of obstructive
HCM and in 10% of non-obstructive HCM.670
 The LV outflow tract obstruction may be due to:671
 Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve with prolonged septal contact.
 Midcavity muscular apposition, usually caused by anomalous papillary muscle
insertion directly into anterior mitral leaflet.
 Dynamic Left Ventricular outflow tract obstruction (gradient, ≥ 30 mm Hg) may be associated
with mitral regurgitation. It is a strong independent determinant of HF.671 Surgical
myomectomy has been shown to reduce mortality in these patients.672
 About 3.5-17% of HCM patients progress to advanced HF. The pathophysiologic
processes leading to progression of HF include severe LV obstruction, hypertrophy and
adverse remodeling.673-676
14.3.2.1 Management 668,670,677
 Referral to multidisciplinary HCM centers can help optimize care for patients with HCM.
 Genetic counseling of the patient and family is important.
 In patients with:
 Arrhythmias:
 Assessment of the individual’s risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD) and consideration
for ICD implantation.678
 To treat AF by rate or rhythm control and appropriate anticoagulation.
 Significant Left Ventricular Outflow Tract Obstruction:
 Septal reduction procedures by either:
º Surgical myomectomy - procedure of choice in experienced centers.672
º Trans-catheter alcohol ablation in patients with advanced age or significant
comorbidities.
 Pharmacotherapy - drugs that have negative inotropic effects such as β-blockers,
verapamil or disopyramide. Emerging novel agents for obstructive HCM include
agents such as mavacamten - a first-in-class cardiac myosin inhibitor. This has been
shown to improve symptoms, physical and social function, and quality of life in a
phase 3 study.679,680 It has been approved for the treatment of symptomatic New York
Heart Association (NYHA) class II-III obstructive HCM.
 HF - to treat accordingly as per clinical presentation as HFpEF or HFrEF.
14.3.3. Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
 RCM is characterized by restrictive physiology with normal or reduced diastolic volumes,
and normal or reduced systolic volumes (in LV, RV or both).669
 There is typically no LVH, but some forms of infiltrative or storage diseases such as
amyloidosis or Fabry-Anderson disease can cause an increase in LV wall thickness.681
 The etiology of RCM is heterogenous. It comprises infiltrative or non-infiltrative myocardial
disorders, storage diseases and endomyocardial disorders that are either idiopathic,
hereditary, or acquired (Appendix VIII, page 169).
 The prevalence of HF in RCM has been reported to be as high as 83%.682 The predominant
form of HF in RCM is HFpEF. HFrEF may manifest late in the disease and is more
prevalent in amyloidosis and hemochromatosis.683,684
 The pathophysiology of HF in RCM is increased myocardial wall stiffness, resulting in
diastolic dysfunction with subsequent predisposition to AF681. The LV systolic function is
usually preserved but may be reduced at late stages of the disease, such as in cardiac
amyloidosis.685
 The prognosis of RCM is generally poor, regardless of the underlying etiology.686
14.3.3.1 Management
 Management includes:
 The Foundational HF medications are generally used but caution should be exercised
as these patients tolerate over diuresis and hypotension poorly.
 Consider disease-specific therapy if available e.g., amyloidosis and Fabry’s disease.
Key Messages # 16: HF and Cardiomyopathies
 Cardiomyopathies are a heterogenous group of myocardial disorders which frequently
present as HF.
 They can be inherited (familial/genetic) or acquired.
 They are usually classified according to anatomic and physiologic features into:
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
 Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)
 Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
 Unclassified cardiomyopathy
 In general, treatment of patients with cardiomyopathy encompasses the Foundational
HF Medications as well as etiology-specific therapy (if available).
14.4. CARDIOMYOPATHY DUE TO ARRHYTHMIAS OR CONDUCTION
ABNORMALITIES
14.4.1 Arrhythmia Induced Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy (AiCM) includes:687,688
 Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
 Atrial Fibrillation (AF) induced cardiomyopathy.
 Premature Ventricular Complexes (PVC) induced cardiomyopathy.
Arrhythmia-induced Cardiomyopathy is a reversible cause of HF characterized by LV
dysfunction resulting from an increased ventricular rate. The degree of LV dysfunction
correlates with the duration as well as rate of the tachyarrhythmia. The cardiomyopathy
may present weeks, months, or years after the onset of the tachycardia.687,689 It can occur
in the setting of either an incessant or paroxysmal tachycardia and it should be suspected if
no other cause of LV dysfunction is identified.687
Recognition of this entity is important clinically, as treatment of the underlying arrhythmia
can result in either partial or complete recovery of LV function which, in turn, would result in
an improvement in morbidity and mortality.687
In managing arrhythmias in patients with HF:
 Initiate the “Foundational HF” Medications to improve LV function and optimize reverse
LV remodeling.
 Identify and treat arrhythmias accordingly. Arrhythmia recognition and suppression
should be considered as part of the holistic evaluation and management of HF.
 Treat non cardiovascular comorbidities particularly, lung disease, obstructive sleep apnea
and obesity.
14.4.1.1. Detection of Arrhythmias
Arrhythmias are sometimes difficult to detect, especially if they are paroxysmal and
infrequent. In any person who presents with a deterioration in cardiac function, paroxysmal
palpitations, near faints or syncope and the clinical suspicion that these could possibly be
due to arrhythmias are high, the following modalities may be considered to aid in the diagnosis:
 Prolonged ECG rhythm monitoring using 3-day, 7-day or even 1- month rhythm monitors.
 Using a watch that can monitor ECG heart rhythm or
 An implantable loop recorder.
14.4.1.2. Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Any supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with a rapid ventricular response may induce HF.
Commonly encountered SVTs in clinical practice include:
 Incessant atrial tachycardia (AT),
 Very frequent episodes of atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT), and
 Atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT).
Arrhythmia-induced Cardiomyopathy has been reported in 10% of patients with AT, and as
high as 37% of patients with incessant AT.688,690
Successful treatment, usually via electrophysiological study and radiofrequency ablation,
could potentially restore LV function.416
I,A
I,A
I,C
I,C
14.4.1.3. Atrial Fibrillation
AF is the commonest cardiac arrhythmia encountered in clinical practice.691 AF and atrial
flutter with rapid ventricular response is the most common cause of tachycardia induced
cardiomyopathy.687 AF induced cardiomyopathy may be suspected if LV function improves
after rhythm control has been achieved and no other underlying cause has been
identified.687
Management of AF in patients with HF would include the use of:690
 Anti-arrhythmic drugs for either rate control or rhythm control. Most anti-arrhythmic drugs
are however contraindicated in the presence of HF.
 Catheter ablation - This has a higher chance of achieving rhythm control in patients with
AF than anti-arrhythmic drugs.437 Catheter ablation has been shown to reduce the risk of
death and HF hospitalization in patients with AF and HF when compared to standard
therapy with anti-arrhythmic drugs.692,693 The success of the procedure and benefits seen
were more likely in patients who underwent the procedure within 1 year of diagnosing AF.692
14.4.1.4. Ventricular Arrhythmias
Ventricular arrhythmias, including frequent PVCs or VT, may also induce HF.689 It is however,
sometimes difficult to ascertain whether the PVCs caused LV dysfunction or whether
progressive LV dysfunction caused the frequent PVCs.694,695 Even if the PVCs are the result
of LV dysfunction, if frequent, may contribute to and increase the risk of HF and mortality
even after adjusting for age and other ECG abnormalities.689
Thus, maintenance of sinus rhythm and/ or control of ventricular rate is important in treating
patients with HF.689,694,695
PVC induced cardiomyopathy is a diagnosis of exclusion, to be suspected in patients with
frequent PVCs > 10%, especially in the nonischemic setting. Generally, LV dysfunction has
been associated with greater PVC burden (>10% and usually > 20%).694
Curative or suppressive therapies with either radiofrequency ablation or anti-arrhythmic
drugs may be considered in patients with PVC burden of:
 > 10% over 24 hours (high) - The prevalence of PVC induced cardiomyopathy in this group
of patients has been reported to be about 7% but this could be an underestimate.687,696
 > 20% over 24 hours (very high) - The exact prevalence in this group is not known.694,696,697
In patients with cardiomyopathy suspected to be caused by frequent and predominately
monomorphic PVCs, catheter ablation is recommended.
Anti-arrhythmic drug therapy that may be considered include β-blockers and class 3
anti-arrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone and sotalol.696,698
Radiofrequency ablation is preferred, since most anti-arrhythmic drug therapy are contraindicated and may be pro-arrhythmic in the presence of HF.694,699,700
14.4.2. Cardiomyopathy due to Conduction Abnormalities
This will include cardiomyopathy due to conduction abnormalities/dyssynchrony, such as
chronic RV pacing and left bundle branch block.
IIa,B
IIa,A
IIb,C
I,C
I,B
IIb,B
IIa,B
I,B
14.4.2.1. Pacing induced Cardiomyopathy
Pacing induced cardiomyopathy is defined as a reduction in LVEF of > 10% after pacemaker
placement.701 Paced QRS durations ≥ 150 milliseconds was associated with an increased
risk.701
It is a complication of single-and dual-chambered pacemakers and may be present in up to
9% of patients. It is most prevalent within the first year after implantation and is associated
with more pronounced intraventricular dyssynchrony.702 The prevalence of this condition
varies, depending on its definition, from 9% at 1 year, 7 up to 15% at 25 years.703
A high RV pacing percentage of > 40% and long-term pacing may exacerbate HF
symptoms, increase hospitalization for HF, and increase mortality.704-709
In patients with HF who have bradyarrhythmias and where pacing is indicated, biventricular
pacing (Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy - CRT) is the pacing mode of choice.708-710
14.4.2.2. Others:
This would include left bundle branch block (LBBB) - induced cardiomyopathy and other
dyssynchronopathies.
I,A
Key Messages # 17: HF due to Arrhythmias and Conduction Abnormalities
 Cardiomyopathy due to arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities are potentially
reversible causes of HF.
 Successful treatment of the arrhythmia by drug therapy or catheter ablation can result
in normalization of LV function.
Key Recommendations #13: HF Due to Arrhythmias and Conduction Abnormalities
 In managing cardiomyopathy due to arrhythmias, radiofrequency ablation is the
preferred therapy, since most antiarrhythmic drugs are contraindicated in the presence
of HF.
 In patients with HF who have bradyarrhythmias and where pacing is indicated,
biventricular pacing (Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy) is the pacing mode of choice.
14.5 CARDIO-ONCOLOGY AND HEART FAILURE
Heart disease and cancer are often linked due to:
 Common risk factors (e.g., increasing age and cigarette smoking)
 Treatment strategies
 Chemotherapy drugs has been associated with HF, arrhythmias, vasculitis and throm
boembolic disease.
 Radiotherapy of the mediastinum and left chest can lead to CAD, myopericardial
fibrosis and valvular dysfunction.
 New oncological therapeutic agents like targetted therapies affecting signalling
pathway and immune checkpoint inhibitors.
Dyspnea in cancer patients could be due to:
 Fluid overload.
 Cardiomyopathy due to chemotherapeutic agents, stress (Takotsubo), underlying CAD,
coronary vasospasm or pericardial diseases.
 The primary cancer causing anemia, lung and pericardial involvement.
Chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy is not common, clinical HF occurs in 1-5% and an
asymptomatic decrease in LV function in the range of 5% to 20%.711
Cardiotoxicity can develop in a subacute, acute, or chronic manner. Acute or subacute
cardiotoxicity may occur at any time from the commencement of therapy up to 2 weeks after
termination of treatment.709 Chronic toxicity can occur early (within 1 year) or late.711,712
Prognosis in the patients who develop HF, especially late onset HF, is poor.712,713
The anthracycline class of chemotherapeutic agents remain the major cause of chemotherapy
-induced cardiomyopathy.712,713 In the current era, newer agents have also been implicated
in a reversible form of cardiomyopathy.714-716
At present, there is no consensus definition of cardiotoxicity.717 The definition that is currently
most often used is by the Cardiac Review and Evaluation Committee of trastuzumab
-associated cardiotoxicity.718 By this defintion, chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy is
said to occur in the presence of at least one or more of the following: 714,718
1. Cardiomyopathy characterised by a decrease in Ejection Fraction (EF) globally or due
to regional changes in interventricular septum contraction.
2. Signs and symptoms of HF.
3. Signs associated with HF including but not limited to S3 gallop, tachycardia, or both.
4. Decline in initial EF of at least 5% to < 55% with signs and symptoms of HF or asympto
matic decrease in EF of at least 10% to < 55%.
Chemotherapy drugs that have been associated with HF are as listed in the (Appendix IX &
X, pages 170-171)
One must consider both drug efficacy and toxicity in choosing chemotherapeutic agents.
Many of the newer targeted agents cause a reversible form of HF and symptoms usually
resolve after the initiation of anti-failure medications.715,718-720
Risk factors for anthracycline toxicity include:713,721-726
 The total cumulative dose- there is however, no safe dose for doxorubicin.713
 Intravenous bolus administration versus infusion.
 Higher single doses.
 History of prior irradiation.
 Use of concomitant agents known to have cardiotoxicity.
 Female gender.
 Underlying CV disease.
 Age (children and elderly > 65 years).
An increase in cardiac biomarkers such as troponins during and after administration is an
indication of toxicity.726,727
14.5.1 Management
 Patients undergoing chemotherapy should have a careful clinical evaluation and assessment
and treatment of CV risk factors.714-716
 Blood pressure control is important in all patients especially in those being considered for
Vascular endothelial growth factor signaling pathway (VSP) inhibitors.
 All patients with potentially cardiotoxic chemotherapy should have an echocardiogram
prior to treatment. An important parameter is the LVEF determined using the biplane
method of discs (Simpson’s method) or three-dimensional echocardiography (preferred)
where available. Newer techniques to detect and quantitate regional and global myocardial
dysfunction (strain assessment with global longitudinal strain) can be used to detect
pre-clinical and subtle changes in function.724,727,728 A 15% change from the baseline
global longitudinal strain measure indicates an abnormality.724
 Biomarkers such as troponin and natriuretic peptides can help identify patients at higher
risk.729
Close collaboration between the oncologist and the cardiologist is important.
For the oncologists, the strategy (prior to commencement) includes:724
 Identifying high risk patients (pre-existing heart disease, presence of CV risk factors,
age-both the very young and old- female gender, use of high dose anthracycline regimens).
 High risk patients should:
 Have a pre-treatment cardiac function evaluation. If the LVEF is < 50%, refer to the
cardiologist.
 Be considered for non-cardiotoxic alternatives.
 Have their therapy protocols adjusted where necessary (e.g., reduction in doses,
continuous infusions rather than bolus injections, liposomal doxorubicin, dexrazoxane etc).
 Have regular echocardiography evaluation to detect deteriorating myocardial function.
For the cardiologists/general physicians, the strategy includes:
 Treating CV risk factors.
 Assessing, repeating (if necessary) imaging studies. (e.g., using high quality LVEF
measurement, strain evaluation etc).
 Assessing cardiac biomarkers (troponin and/or Natriuretic Peptides).
 Considering cardio-protection prior to/or during treatment using β-blockers, MRA and/or
ACE-I/ARB if:726,730-733
 EF < 50%,
 EF drops by > 10%
 Abnormal global longitudinal strain (GLS) (> 15% drop).724
 Monitoring LVEF during therapy is important with repeat echocardiography at 3-monthly
intervals and/or according to symptoms. If cardioprotective medications are given,
monitoring may be necessary at closer intervals of time depending on the clinical
condition of the patient e.g., at monthly intervals.
 Withholding cardiotoxic therapy is a last resort. (for anthracycline LVEF < 45%, for
anti-HERS2 therapy LVEF < 40%).
 Monitoring after completion of therap y:
 Obtain post therapy LVEF.
 Repeat echocardiography in 6 months or 1 year. Most cases of treatment-associated
cardiac dysfunction develop within the first year after completion of therapy.733
 If EF remains abnormal, follow guidelines for management of HF.725
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
I,C
IIb,C
IIa,B
Lorem ipsum
Key Message # 18: Cardio-Oncology
 Heart disease and cancer are often linked due to common etiologic factors and
chemotherapeutic treatment strategies.
 Chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity is not common:
 Clinical HF occurs in 1-5% and
 An asymptomatic decrease in LV function in the range of 5% to 20%.
 It can develop in a subacute, acute (within 2 weeks of termination of drug administration)
or a chronic manner.
 One must consider both drug efficacy and toxicity in choosing chemotherapeutic
agents.
Key Recommendations #17: Cardio-Oncology
 Close collaboration between the oncologist and the cardiologist is important.
 Patients undergoing chemotherapy should have a careful clinical evaluation and
assessment. Specifically:
 All CV risk factors should be treated adequately.
 High risk patients should be identified and in these patients:
 A pre-treatment cardiac echocardiogram is advisable. If the LVEF < 50%, they
should be referred to the cardiologist.
 Reassessing and repeating (if necessary) imaging studies during and after
treatment.
 Assessing cardiac biomarkers when indicated - troponins and/or Natriuretic
Peptides.
 Considering cardio-protection prior to/or during treatment using β-blockers, MRA
and/or ACE-I/ARB if:
 EF < 50%,
 EF drops by > 10%
 Abnormal global longitudinal strain (GLS) (> 15% drop).
14.6. HEART FAILURE AND CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD)
14.6.1. Epidemiology, definitions, and classifications
HF and CKD frequently co-exist. The presence of both at the time of admission for HF,
varies from 45.4% in patients with chronic HF to > 60% in those with Acute HF.734,735
In addition, during treatment of acute HF, a significant proportion of patients will develop
varying degrees of worsening renal function.
The definition of worsening renal function is:219
 An increase in serum creatinine by ≥ 26.5μmol/ L (0.3mg/dl) and/or
 A ≥ 25% increase in serum creatinine or a ≥ 20% drop in eGFR.
The rise in serum creatinine usually occurs in the first three to five days of hospitalization.
The incidence of worsening renal function is estimated to be between 19 and 45%.736 This
large observed range is due to variations in the definitions of worsening renal function, the
observed time-at-risk, and the study population.736
Risk factors for worsening renal function during admission for HF include:737
 A prior history of HF or diabetes and/or
 An admission serum creatinine of > 133μmol/L and/or
 Systolic blood pressure > 160mmHg.
Worsening renal function may fulfill criteria for type 1 or type 2 cardiorenal syndrome (CRS).
The term “cardiorenal syndrome” refers to disorders of the heart and kidneys whereby acute
or chronic dysfunction in one organ may induce acute or chronic impairment of the other.736
This syndrome has been classified by the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative working group into
5 subtypes as shown in Table 17, page 133.736 Many patients, however, may belong to more
than one subtype and may move between subtypes during the course of their disease.736
14.6.2. Pathogenesis of Cardio-Renal Syndrome (CRS)
Multiple mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of CRS. These include:
 Increased renal venous pressure - venous congestion is probably the most important factor.738
 Right ventricular dysfunction.
 Reduced renal perfusion due to reduced cardiac output.
 Volume overload.
 Neurohumoral adaptations (e.g., activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, increases in vasopressin and endothelin-1).
 Anemia.
 Metabolic abnormalities e.g., disorders of calcium, magnesium, and potassium metabolism.
14.6.3 Clinical significance /Impact of kidney dysfunction in HF
The combination of cardiac and kidney disease increases the complexity and costs of care
and may interact to worsen prognosis.
A. Pharmacologic considerations
 Safety:
 Dosing of renally-excreted cardiac drugs need adjustment in the presence of renal
impairment (e.g., digoxin, insulin, low molecular weight heparin, direct oral anticoagulants).
 Patients with HF are at increased risk of contrast-induced acute kidney injury.
 Safety of newer drugs:
 ARNI - safety has been demonstrated for eGFR > 30 mls/min/1.73m2. A small study
found that it was as safe as irbesartan in patients with eGFR > 20 mls/min/1.73m2.739
 SGLT2-i - safety has been shown for eGFR> 20 mls/min/1.73m2.740,741
 MRA - only finerenone has been shown to be safe in patients with eGFR down to
25 mls/min/1.73m2.373-376
 There is a lack of published data on newer drugs such as ARNI and SGLT2-i at eGFR
< 20 mls/min/1.73m2. If the patients are already on this drug and the eGFR drops to
< 20 mls/min/1.73m2, or if there is a compelling need for initiation despite eGFR
< 20 mls/min/1.73m2, shared decision-making with patients for off-label use is necessary.
 Efficacy:
 Impaired renal function affects drug choices and dosing. If eGFR < 30mls/min/1.73m2,
most thiazide diuretics are no longer effective and loop diuretics are preferred.
 Higher doses of loop diuretics may be required with increasing renal impairment.
B. Prognostic implications
 CKD is a risk multiplier in patients with HF - as the disease severity worsens, the risks of
CV events, hospitalizations, and mortality increase.742 In patients with HF, worsening
renal function may not always indicate a poor outcome.743 The prognostic value of
worsening renal function is mainly determined by:
 The presence of persistent congestion.
 Baseline renal function and magnitude of renal changes.
 Duration - a persistently worsening renal function is usually associated with hemody
namic derangements and poor prognosis as compared with a transient worsening of
renal function as a result of aggressive decongestive therapy.744-746
14.6.4 Management
A) General Considerations:
 A multi-disciplinary approach with an early referral to a nephrologist is recommended.
 Exclude potentially reversible causes for increasing renal dysfunction such as hyper - or
hypovolemia, concomitant medications such as aminoglycosides and NSAIDs, and renal
artery stenosis.
Cardiorenal (CRS) Subtypes
Description
CRS Type 1 (Acute CRS)
Rapid worsening of cardiac function leading to acute
kidney injury e.g., MI with cardiogenic shock.
CRS Type 2 (Chronic CRS)
Chronic abnormalities in cardiac function leading to
progressive Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) e.g.,
chronic HFrEF or HFpEF.
CRS Type 3
Worsening of renal function leading to acute cardiac
(Acute Renocardiac Syndrome)
dysfunction e.g., in Acute Kidney Injury.
CRS Type 4 (Chronic
Primary chronic kidney disease contributing to
Renocardiac Syndrome)
decreased cardiac function and an increased risk of
CV events e.g., CKD leading to LVH, CAD.
CRS Type 5 (Secondary CRS)
Presence of comorbid cardiac and renal dysfunction
due to either acute or chronic systemic disease e.g.,
diabetes, sepsis, amyloidosis.
Table 17: Classification of Cardiorenal Syndrome (CRS)
Adapted from Ronco C, McCullough P, Anker SD, et al. Cardio-renal syndromes: report from the consensus
conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative. Eur Heart J 2010;31:703-11.
I,C
I,C
 Closely monitor electrolytes and kidney function, especially during acute illnesses,
dehydration and when increasing doses of cardiac drugs including diuretics. The baseline
renal function will determine how frequently this should be done.
 The recommended range for serum potassium is 4 - 5.5mmol/L.747
 Wherever possible, avoid nephrotoxins, e.g. contrast media for angiography.
B) Choice of Pharmacotherapy
 Intravenous diuretics
 Loop diuretics are the first choice.
 Continuous infusion may not have greater benefits compared with bolus
dosing.247, 249-252
 Start initially with 2.5 x the usual oral dose.
 Combination therapy (loop diuretic and thiazide/thiazide-like diuretic/mineralocorticoid)
may be required to enhance diuresis.255,256, 748 However, care is required to avoid
electrolyte disturbances, hypovolemia and worsening renal function.
 Foundational HF Medications in patients with concomitant CKD:
 Foundational HF Medications have been proven to be equally efficacious in patients
with CKD.
 Many of these agents can still be initiated in patients with lower GFR (Table 19, page 136).
 However, most of the treatments used for HF can cause worsening renal function
and/or hyperkalemia. Therefore, close monitoring of renal function is essential:
 In the landmark MRA trials, potassium was checked after 7 days (and again after 72
hours if dose reduction was needed).
 In the RAS blocker (ACE-I/ARB/ARNI) and SGLT2-i trials, laboratory assessment of
creatinine, urea, eGFR and electrolytes was typically done after 14 days during drug
titration and every 4 months thereafter.
 The interval for monitoring renal function tests needs to be individualized depending
on baseline renal function, concomitant medications and comorbidities. With more
advanced CKD at baseline, renal function tests should be repeated within 3-7 days
after drug initiation and every time doses are titrated.
 ACE-i/ARB/ARNI and SGLT2-i can lead to an initial drop in eGFR but this should not
be a reason to automatically stop or down titrate these agents. For HFrEF, both ARNI
and SGLT2-i have renoprotective effects.749
 ACEi/ARB should be up titrated to the maximum recommended dose to achieve
optimal dosing provided:750
 SCr levels remain < 30% from the baseline (or eGFR reduces < 25%) and
 Serum potassium < 5.5 mmol/L
 Consider reducing or discontinuing ACEi/ARB within two months from commencement
(after excluding other precipitating factors) when:750
 SCr levels remain ≥ 30% from the baseline (or eGFR reduces ≥ 25%) or
 Serum potassium ≥ 5.5 mmol/L
 A decrease in eGFR over time (beyond 2 months from commencement of medication)
may reflect the underlying disease process and is not necessarily a signal to automatically
discontinue or down titrate the RAS blocker or SGLT2-i.749
I,C
I,C
I,A
I,B
IIa,B
IIa,B
 In patients with advanced renal disease, the decision to start or stop RAS blockers
should be individualized.751 The discontinuation of RAS blockers in patients with
advanced and progressive CKD did not make any significant difference in kidney
disease progression and the long-term rate of decrease in the eGFR.752 Hence the
decision to continue or discontinue RAS blockers should be made according to the
individual patient’s level of proteinuria, blood pressure control, tolerability and
cardiovascular risk profile.
 Novel potassium binders such as sodium zirconium cyclosilicate and patiromer have
been proven to be safe and efficacious even with long term use of up to one year.
These new agents may be considered to allow continuation or dosing optimization of
Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System (RAAS) inhibitors in patients with hyperkalemia.155
 A guide to adjustment of dose of RAS blockers with changes in eGFR is as in Table 18,
below.
IIa,B
IIa,B
l, C
Table18: Management of RAS Blockers in response to changes in renal function
Adapted from Clark AL, Kalra PR, Petrie MC, Mark PB, Tomlinson LA, Tomson CR. Change in renal
function associated with drug treatment in heart failure: national guidance. Heart. 2019 Jun;105(12):904-910.
Compared to baseline,
HFpEF
HFrEF
serum creatinine
increases by:
< 30%
Consider stopping RAS
Continue unless there is
blocker
symptomatic hypotension
Review Dosage of MRA
30 - 50%
Stop RAS Blocker
Consider reducing the dose
of RAS blocker and/or
temporary withdrawal
< 50%
Stop RAS Blocker
Temporarily stop RAS
blocker. Exclude other
causes and consider
re-challenge.
C) Ultrafiltration
 This involves the removal of plasma water across a semi-permeable membrane in
response to a transmembrane pressure gradient.
 It may be considered for congestive symptoms refractory to diuresis but should be
used in consultation with a nephrologist.753
 Evidence for its efficacy in fluid removal is, however, mixed at present.753
D) Renal Replacement Therapy (Hemodialysis or Peritoneal Dialysis)
 Criteria for possible need to initiate renal replacement therapy include:
 Oliguria (urine output < 200mls/12 hours) or anuria unresponsive to judicious fluid
resuscitation.
 Intractable pulmonary edema.
 Hyperkalemia refractory to medical therapy or where urgent correction is required
(serum potassium > 6.5mmol/L).
 Severe acidemia (pH < 7.2).
 Serum urea > 25mmol/L.
 Serum creatinine > 300μmol/L.
 Uremic symptoms or signs e.g., uremic pericarditis
Table 19: Initiation of HF drugs in relation to baseline CKD status*
*Adapted from Mullens W, Martens P, Testani JM, et tal. Renal effects of guideline-directed medical
therapies in heart faiure: a consensus document from the Heart Failure Association of the European
Society of Cardiology. Eur J of Heart Fail 2022;24: 603-619
Medications
EVIDENCE ACROSS eGFR STRATA
eGFR > 60
eGFR 30-60
eGFR 15-30
ESRD
mls/min/1.73m2
mls/min/1.73m2
mls/min/1.73m2
ACE-i/ARB
Strong evidence
Moderate
Moderate
evidence
evidence if on
dialysis, weak
if not on
dialysis
ARNI
Strong evidence
Weak evidence
Not
Small study only recommended
for eGFR > 25
mls/min/1.73m2
β-blockers
Strong evidence
Moderate evidence
MRA
Strong evidence
Only finerenone
Not
at eGFR > 25
recommended
mls/min/1.73m2
SGLT2-i
Strong evidence
No Evidence
(From eGFR > 20 mls/min/1.73m2)
Ivabradine
Strong evidence
No Evidence
Vericiguat
Strong evidence
No Evidence
Key Message # 19: HF and CKD
 Cardiac and kidney disease frequently co-exist, and this increases the complexity and
costs of care, and may interact to worsen prognosis.
 During treatment of Acute HF, a significant proportion of patients will develop varying
degrees of worsening renal function usually in the first three to five days of hospitalization.
 In patients with HF, worsening renal function may not always indicate a poor outcome-
especially if it is due to overdiuresis and hypotension or drug therapy.
Key Recommendations #15: HF and CKD
 A multi-disciplinary approach with early referral to a nephrologist is recommended.
 Almost all Foundational HF Medications can be used in patients with eGFR >
30mls/min/1.73m2
 In patients with eGFR < 30mls/min/1.73m2, the following drugs can be used:
 Diuretics- usually higher maintenance doses
 Careful use of RAS blockers
 β-blockers
 SGLT2-i (eGFR > 20mls/min/1.73m2)
 Closely monitor electrolytes and kidney function. The baseline renal function will
determine how frequently this should be done.
 RAS blockers and SGLT2-i can lead to an initial drop in eGFR, but this should not be
a reason to automatically stop or down titrate these agents. See table 18, page 135 for
the management of RAS blockers in response to changes in renal function.
 Occasionally ultrafiltration and renal replacement therapy (hemodialysis or peritoneal
dialysis) may be necessary.
14.7 HEART FAILURE IN PREGNANCY
About 0.5-4% of pregnant women have cardiac disease.754 HF remains the most common
complication among all pregnant women with heart disease regardless of the cause
(valvular, congenital, cardiomyopathy or pulmonary hypertension).755
In Malaysia, in 2020, the maternal mortality ratio was at 24.9 maternal deaths per one
hundred thousand live births.756 This refers to the annual number of female deaths caused
by or related to pregnancy per one hundred thousand live births.
In general, pregnancy is well-tolerated in women with cardiomyopathy and NYHA class I
pre- pregnancy. Factors increasing maternal and fetal risks include:757-761
 Previous cardiac events
 NYHA class III to IV or
 LVEF < 40%.
In the ROPAC Registry, women with pre-pregnancy or peripartum cardiomyopathy had the
highest mortality rate (2.4%)762,763
Normal hemodynamic changes that occur in pregnancy are:
 An increase in cardiac output by 30-50% during normal pregnancy.
 An increase in cardiac output to 80% above baseline during labour and delivery.
 Hemodynamic changes return to baseline 2-4 weeks after vaginal delivery and up to 6
weeks after Caesarean delivery.
In women with heart disease, these changes may have a deleterious effect on their
cardiovascular system and may precipitate HF.
The periods of greatest risk for cardiac events during pregnancy are early third trimester, at
delivery and in the immediate post partum period.
HF may develop in pregnancy:192,764
 For the first time in a patient with pre-existing heart disease (congenital and/or valvular)
due to decompensation from the stress.
 May occur in a patient who had HF previously and still has a depressed myocardial
function. (LVEF < 40%).
 In a patient with a previously unrecognized genetic cardiomyopathy or a latent cardiac
viral infection which has been unmasked or activated by the stress of pregnancy.765-768
 In a patient with a previously normal heart due to:769-771
 Hypertensive complications of pregnancy i.e. gestational hypertension and the more
severe forms preeclampsia, the HELLP syndrome.
(H: hemolysis, EL: elevated liver enzymes, LP: low platelet count).
 Peripartum cardiomyopathy.
 Takotsubo syndrome.755
14.7.1. Diagnosis
Most forms of cardiac disease can be detected by physical examination, ECG and
echocardiography. In cases of new HF or if there is diagnostic uncertainty, non-contrast
CMR may be considered.
14.7.2. Risk stratification
 Pregnant women with cardiac disease are at risk of adverse maternal and fetal outcomes.
 Their risk should be assessed before conception or early in the pregnancy to optimize the
outcome of the pregnancy.192,764
 Maternal cardiovascular risk can be assessed using the modified World Health Organization
(WHO) or NYHA classification.192 (Appendix XI & XII, page 172-173)
 Level of Care will depend on the maternal CV risk:192
 Low risk: can be managed at their local center after review by a family medicine
specialist/physician or cardiologist.
 Moderate risk: should be managed at a tertiary center by a multidisciplinary team with
cardiac expertise.
 High risk: should be referred early to the tertiary center for assessment. If termination
of pregnancy is considered, it can be performed up to 22 weeks.
14.7.3. Management
The management of HF in pregnancy is more difficult than in the non-pregnant state and
should be managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of physicians, obstetricians, and
pediatricians.789,754,755,764
In the management of HF in pregnancy, the following issues need to be considered:192,755,764
 Gestational age at presentation.
 Clinical presentation, either as Acute HF or Chronic HF.
 Response to medical therapy.
 Potential maternal and fetal risks.
 Review and replace all fetotoxic drugs
 Timing and mode of delivery.
Predictors of maternal cardiac complications are as in Table 20, Page 139.
I,C
14.7.3.1. Preconceptual counselling
 Patient-centered counselling regarding contraception and the risks of cardiovascular
deterioration during pregnancy should be provided to all women in the childbearing age
with known or suspected heart disease.192-194,764
 Patients with LVEF < 30% and those in NYHA Class III and IV should be strongly advised
not to get pregnant.192,772 If pregnant, termination should be considered.
14.7.3.2. Management of HF during pregnancy
This includes:
 Non-pharmacological measures
The management of patients with mild symptoms consists mainly of non-pharmacological
measures such as:192
 Limiting strenuous exercise.
 Adequate rest - maintaining a low salt diet.
 Treating anemia and infections early.
 Frequent antenatal examinations.
 Pharmacological measures
The following drugs may be used in the pregnant patient with HF:192
 Diuretics are the first line therapy in patients who are fluid overloaded.
 Nitrates and/or hydralazine are used for preload and afterload reduction.
 β-blockers can be used cautiously, most commonly metoprolol.773,774
 Digoxin is safe in pregnancy and during breast feeding.
 ACE-I, ARB, ARNI, MRA, SGLT2-i and ivabradine are contraindicated in pregnancy. 755,775,776
 ACE-I (enalapril and captopril) can be used in the post partum period.775,776
 In the postpartum period, Foundational HF medications may be given. The patient
should however be advised not to breast feed.
I,B
Table 20: Predictors of Maternal Risk for Cardiac Complications192,754,768,769
 Cyanosis (oxygen saturation < 90%)
 Repaired or unrepaired cyanotic heart disease
 History of HF before pregnancy
 Prior cardiac event (HF, transient ischemic attack, stroke, arrhythmia)
 Prior arrhythmia (symptomatic sustained tachyarrhythmia or bradyarrhythmia requiring treatment)
 NYHA class > II
 Valvular stenosis (aortic or mitral valve area < 1.5cm2) and LV outflow tract obstruction (peak
gradient > 30mmHg)
 Reduced systemic ventricular dysfunction (LVEF < 40%)
 Mechanical valve
 High risk aortopathy
 Reduced subpulmonary ventricular function (TAPSE < 16 mm)
 Pulmonary arterial hypertension
 Systemic and pulmonary atrio-ventricular valve regurgitation ( moderate to severe)
 Natriuretic peptide levels (NT-Pro BNP > 128pg/mL at 20 weeks predictive of event later in pregnancy)
 Cardiac medication before pregnancy
 Maternal history of smoking
 No prior cardiac intervention
I,C
I,C
IIa,C
IIa,C
IIa,C
IIa,C
III,C
 Other treatment considerations in the pregnant patient.
 Patients with AF who are hemodynamically unstable should be promptly electrically
cardioverted. This is safe in pregnancy.
 Anticoagulation is indicated in the presence of AF, dilated left atrium or mechanical
prosthetic heart valve.
 Patients with valvular lesions who remain symptomatic despite optimal medical
treatment may be considered for percutaneous valve intervention or surgery.
 Commonly recommended antihypertensive drugs include methyldopa, labetalol,
calcium channel blockers and hydralazine.192,775
 Echocardiographic reexamination may be considered:
 In the third trimester for reassessment of myocardial structure and function before
labor.
 When there are significant changes in HF symptoms or signs during pregnancy.
 When HF medications are reduced or discontinued.
 In selected patients, Natriuretic peptide (BNP or NT-Pro BNP) monitoring may have
some value for prediction of cardiovascular events.777,778
A. Antenatal care
The principles of management of HF in pregnancy are like that in the non-pregnant state. If
the patient is in decompensated HF requiring inotropes, she should be transferred to a
cardiac center.192,754
B. Labour and delivery
Timing and mode of delivery should be carefully planned by a multidisciplinary team. In the
majority of patients, vaginal delivery with epidural anesthesia is the preferred mode of
delivery.
 Cesarean section is indicated:192
 For obstetric reasons.
 In patients on warfarin or who have discontinued their warfarin for < 2 weeks and who
now are in imminent labour.
 In patients with severe pulmonary hypertension.
 It is beneficial to shorten the second stage of labour by forceps or vacuum assisted
delivery.192
 Left lateral decubitus position is preferred to attenuate the hemodynamic effects in the
supine position.
 A slow i.v. infusion of oxytocin immediately after birth, (2 U of oxytocin given over 10
min followed by 12 mU/min for 4 h) reduces the risk of post-partum hemorrhage and
has a minimal impact on cardiovascular parameters.192
 Routine antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended in patients with valvular heart disease
undergoing uncomplicated vaginal delivery or Cesarean section.
C. Post partum care
 After delivery, careful monitoring of hemodynamic status should be done for at least 24
hours, or longer in high-risk patients. In patients with severe cardiac lesions, hemody
namics may be abnormal up to 10 days after delivery.192
 These patients should be evaluated post-partum to assess the need for corrective surgery.
I,C
 The risk of recurrence of HF in subsequent pregnancies should also be made known to
the patient.
 Follow-up visit at 6 weeks post-partum should be attended by the multidisciplinary team,
a full cardiac assessment should be done, and appropriate contraception should be
advised.
 Postpartum women who breast feed can start ACE-I (enalapril or captopril preferred).
Metoprolol remains the preferred β-blocker.773-776
14.7.4 Peripartum Cardiomyopathy (PPCM)
 PPCM presents as HF secondary to LV systolic dysfunction, usually shown by an
LVEF < 45% occurring during the third trimester or in the months following delivery
without any other identifiable cause.
 The majority of PPCM cases are diagnosed in the post-partum period. PPCM frequently
presents with Acute HF but may also present with ventricular arrhythmias and/or cardiac
arrest.
 Cardiac recovery may occur in the first 3-6 months though it may be delayed up to 2
years. Recovery rates vary among regions, from 75% to less than 50%.779-781
 Subsequent pregnancies for women with previous peripartum cardiomyopathy have been
associated with further decreases in LV function, maternal death, and adverse fetal
outcomes.779 The strongest prognostic determinant is LVEF <50% before a subsequent
pregnancy.780-782
 The incidence of intracardiac thrombi during Acute HF caused by peripartum cardiomyopathy
has been reported to be around 16%-17% with a 9% thromboembolic event rate.782
 Predictors of adverse pregnancy outcomes include:780,781
 LVEF < 30%
 RV involvement.
 Prognosis is related to the initial LVEF, presence of LV thrombus, RV involvement,
preeclampsia, geographical region, and race.779,780
14.7.4.1. Management:
 This is as listed in section 14.7.3.2
 In addition:
 In those patients presenting with severe HF and cardiogenic shock requiring inotropic
or vasopressor support, it is advisable to transfer them to an advanced HF center.
Urgent delivery by cesarean section (irrespective of gestation) should be considered.
 Bromocriptine has been proposed for patients with acute PPCM to reduce the
production of a cleaved 16 kDa prolactin fragment, which may contribute to the
pathophysiology of PPCM. The efficacy and safety of bromocriptine for acute PPCM
treatment, however, remains uncertain currently, particularly in the setting of contemporary
HF and cardiogenic shock management.780,783 The use of bromocriptine increases
thromboembolic risk and thus, adequate anti-coagulation is important.
 Some patients may present with HF late post-partum and thus, they should be followed
up closely long-term. They should also be counselled about subsequent pregnancies
and the risk of relapse.
Key Message #20: HF and Pregnancy
 About 0.5-4% of pregnant women have cardiac disease. HF remains the most common
complication among all women with heart disease regardless of the cause.
 Women with cardiac disease should be assessed:
 Before conception to assess their risk and to be advised accordingly and
 Early in the pregnancy to optimize the outcome of the pregnancy.
 Maternal cardiovascular risk can be assessed using the modified World Health
Organization (WHO) or NYHA classification. (Appendix XI & XII, page 172-173)
 Level of Care will depend on the maternal CV risk.
 Low risk: can be managed at their local center after review by a family medicine
specialist/physician or cardiologist.
 Moderate risk: should be managed at a tertiary center by a multidisciplinary team
with cardiac expertise.
 High risk: should be referred early to the tertiary center for assessment.
 Patients with LVEF < 30% and those in NYHA Class III and IV should be strongly
advised not to get pregnant. If pregnant, termination should be considered.
Key Recommendations #16: HF and Pregnancy
 HF in pregnancy should be managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of physicians,
obstetricians and pediatricians.
 HF that develops during pregnancy can be managed with the judicious use of diuretics,
digoxin, nitrates, β-blockers (most commonly metoprolol) and/or hydralazine.
 For post-partum women with severe acute HF caused by Peripartum cardiomyopathy
and LVEF < 35%, Foundational HF medications to improve LVEF recovery and
prophylactic anticoagulation are recommended.
14.8. CORONAVIRUS 2019 (COVID 19) +/- VACCINE AND HEART FAILURE
COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2).
In hospitalized patients with COVID-19, the prevalence of HF varied between 4% and 21%
and about 8% - 33% required critical care admissions.784 Patients with HF who develop
COVID-19 had an overall mortality rate between 20% and 40%.784,785
HF is an independent predictor of mortality in hospitalized COVID-19 patients and these
patients were more likely to be sicker and develop complications. Patients with HFrEF did
worse than those with HFmrEF or HFpEF.784
Patients hospitalized for COVID-19 may develop both an acute decompensation of chronic
HF as well as new onset HF. New onset HF was observed in as much as a quarter of
hospitalized COVID-19 patients and about one-third of those admitted to the intensive care
unit (ICU).786
New onset HF may be due to multiple mechanisms. These include myocardial injury due to
the direct effects of the virus, myocardial ischemia (Type 1 or 2 Myocardial infarction),
multisystem inflammatory syndromes, cytokine storm, stress cardiomyopathy, acute cor
pulmonale from micro and macro pulmonary emboli.787,788 Myocardial injury occurred in at
least 10% of unselected COVID-19 cases and up to 41% in critically ill patients or in those
with concomitant CV comorbidities.789
14.8.1. Myocarditis and Myocardial Involvement
This is a rare but serious complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection as well as COVID-19 mRNA
vaccination.788
Myocarditis is deﬁned by the presence of all of the following:788
 Cardiac symptoms (e.g., chest pain, dyspnea, palpitations, syncope),
 Elevated cardiac troponin (cTn) and
 Abnormal electrocardiographic, and /or echocardiographic, cardiac magnetic resonance
imaging (CMR), in the absence of ﬂow-limiting coronary artery disease.
There may also be myocardial involvement only without myocarditis and this is defined by: 788
 An abnormal myocardium manifest by electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, CMR and
/or histopathologic findings, with or without symptoms and with or without an elevated cTn.
Prevalence
The Center for Disease Control (CDC) reported the rate of myocarditis or pericarditis after
SARS-CoV-2 infection ranged from 12.6 - 114 per 100,000 for males and 5.4 - 61.7 per
100,000 for females across different age groups.790
Myocarditis following COVID-19 mRNA vaccination is rare. The rate of myocarditis or
pericarditis after mRNA COVID-19 vaccination was 0 - 35.9 per 100,000 for males and 0 -
10.9 per 100,000 for females across different age groups and vaccine cohorts.790 The
highest observed rates have been in young male individuals (aged 12-17 years) after the
second vaccine dose.791 Vaccination-linked myocarditis is milder than that associated with
the virus itself.791 Myocarditis following administration of the COVID-19 vaccine have a
significantly lower rate of mortality compared with myocarditis associated with non-COVID-19 viral infection.792
Despite this, COVID-19 vaccination is associated with a very favorable beneﬁt-to-risk ratio
for all age and sex groups evaluated thus far.
Management788
 Hospitalization is recommended for patients with deﬁnite myocarditis, ideally at an
advanced HF center.
 Patients with myocarditis and COVID-19 pneumonia (with an ongoing need for supplemental
oxygen) should be treated with corticosteroids.
 For patients with suspected pericardial involvement, treatment with nonsteroidal
anti- inflammatory drugs, colchicine, and/or prednisone is reasonable.
 Intravenous corticosteroids may be considered in those with suspected or conﬁrmed
COVID-19 myocarditis with hemodynamic compromise or multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in adults.
 As appropriate, guideline-directed medical therapy for HF should be initiated and contin
ued after hospital discharge.
 In general, vaccine-associated myocarditis should be diagnosed, categorized, and treated
in a manner similar analogous to myocarditis following Covid-19 infection.
Long-term cardiovascular outcomes of COVID-19
 The risk and 1-year burden of cardiovascular disease in survivors of acute COVID-19 are
substantial.793
 Individuals with COVID-19 are at increased risk of other CV diseases such as cerebrovas
cular disorders, arrhythmias, ischemic and non-ischemic heart disease, pericarditis,
myocarditis, HF, and thromboembolic disease.
 These risks and burdens were evident even among individuals who were not hospitalized
during the acute phase of the infection.
 Patients with more severe initial illness were more likely to develop long-term CV
complications and this increased in a graded fashion according to the care setting during
the acute phase (non-hospitalized, hospitalized and admitted to intensive care).
 Care pathways of those surviving the acute episode of COVID-19 should include attention
to CV health and disease.
Key Message # 21: HF and Covid 19 Infection and Vaccine
 In hospitalized patients with COVID-19, the prevalence of HF varied between 4% and
21% and about 8%-33% required critical care admissions.
 Patients with HF who develop COVID-19 had an overall mortality rate between 20%
and 40%.
 Myocarditis is a rare but serious complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection as well as
COVID-19 mRNA vaccination.
 The rate of myocarditis or pericarditis across different age groups:
 After SARS-CoV-2 infection:
 12.6-114 per 100,000 for males and 5.4-61.7 per 100,000 for females.
 After mRNA COVID-19:
 0-35.9 per 100,000 for males and 0-10.9 per 100,000 for females.
14.9. HEART FAILURE IN ADULT CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE (ACHD)
Majority of pediatric patients with congenital heart disease are now surviving into adulthood
due to advances in medical and surgical treatment.794,795 However many of these adults with
congenital heart disease (ACHD) are at risk of long term sequalae with increased morbidity
and morbidity.
14.9.1. Definition
Definition of HF in the ACHD in patients with biventricular circulation is like that of those with
acquired heart disease.796
However, defining HF in patients with Fontan circulation, may be more complicated.797
14.9.2. Burden of disease
 Prevalence of HF in ACHD ranges from 3.3% (median follow up of 27.5 years)798 to 6.4%
at a mean age of 35 years.799
 HF is the most common cause of death in ACHD patients, accounting for 17- 42% of all
deaths.800-803
 The median age of death from HF was 48.4 years (range 20.2- 91.2 years)798 and varied
based on the complexity of the underlying lesions and interventions.799,800,804,805
 Those patients with more complex CHD including systemic RV, single ventricle palliated
with Fontan circulation, and unrepaired cyanotic CHD with Eisenmenger physiology
comprise the majority of HF- related deaths.799,803,806
 Hospitalization related to ACHD associated HF has increased significantly over the recent
years accounting for 11.8%-20% of all ACHD admissions.806,807
 ACHD patients with HF had longer length of stay, higher burden of arrhythmias and were
more likely to die.807 One-year mortality after HF admission was 24% and 3-year mortality
was 35%.808 Male gender, pacemaker implantation, admission duration, non-cardiac
medication use, and high serum creatinine were identified as independent risk factors for
3-year mortality.808
14.9.3. Predisposing risk factors
 The risk factors for developing HF and related mortality in ACHD patients includes
advancing age, worsening NYHA functional class, complexity of the underlying congenital
heart defect(s), pulmonary hypertension/ Eisenmenger syndrome, endocarditis, atrial
arrhythmias, ventricular dysfunction, end organ dysfunction and previous interventions
e.g., Fontan surgery.799,802,803
14.9.4. Pathophysiology of HF in ACHD
 Unlike acquired heart disease, the underlying mechanism for HF is more heterogenous
and complex.
 It is highly dependent on the underlying anatomy, presence of pulmonary arterial
hypertension, timing and type of intervention, myocardial protection during surgery,
presence of residual hemodynamic lesions and acquired comorbidities.
 The most common reasons for ACHD-HF include presence of native, new, or residual
hemodynamic lesions, myocardial failure and arrhythmias.
 For the different causes of ACHD-HF based on the underlying pathophysiology, related
congenital heart disease and etiology tailored management see Appendix XIII,
pages 174-175. 186-187796,809,810
14.9.5. Diagnosis of HF in ACHD
 Diagnosing HF is challenging as typical clinical findings may not be present and most
patients do not report symptoms of decreased functional capacity due to chronic
adaptation since childhood.811
 Interpreting the routine investigations also poses a challenge as many are abnormal even
at baseline.
 Assessment of HF in these ACHD patients should include a comprehensive review of
clinical history, underlying congenital heart defect, previous interventions, signs, symptoms,
and relevant investigations.
 Due to the multifactorial etiology of HF in these patients, a patient-centered approach is
crucial.
 Signs and symptoms of HF are non-specific. It can vary depending on whether it is due to
biventricular failure, systemic or sub pulmonary ventricle failure.812,813 See Section 6.
 Chronic lymphatic dysfunction in failing Fontan circulation causes plastic bronchitis and
protein losing enteropathy (PLE) characterized by enteric protein loss.814
 Right sided HF is more prevalent in ACHD compared to other acquired heart disease.
 Patients with palliated or unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease, Eisenmenger
syndrome or pulmonary to systemic shunts may have worsening cyanosis contributing to
impaired functional capacity with or without HF. These patients are also at risk of
thromboembolic events.815
 Arrhythmias may be the cause or the first manifestation of HF in these patients.
 Identifying the cause of HF is important as it may be reversible (e.g., new or residual
hemodynamic lesions, acute arrhythmias, compounding medical conditions like iron
deficiency anemia or thyrotoxicosis.)
14.9.6. Investigations
 Investigations are like that of acquired heart disease as outlined earlier in Section 6. In
addition, the following investigations are important to assess both structural and
hemodynamic anomalies: (Appendix XIV, page 176)
 Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram
 Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR)
 Computer tomography scan
 Cardiac catheterization for invasive hemodynamic assessment.
 Rhythm monitoring and analysis.
 Patients with ACHD are usually well adapted to their functional limitations. Thus, objective
assessment of their functional capacity and response to therapy is important. This can be
done by exercise tests (Cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) or a six-minute walk test).
The CPET predictive values of poor prognosis may, however, be different in ACHD
compared to acquired heart disease especially in single ventricle physiology816,817 and in
patients with cyanotic heart disease.818,819
14.9.7. Management (Appendix XV: Flowchart of the management of ACHD-HF, page 177)
 The aim of treatment is to alleviate symptoms, improve quality of life and to improve
survival. These patients are preferably managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes
both the ACHD and HF cardiologist.
 The principles of managing HF in ACHD HF are:
 First to access and address all reversible causes.
 To initiate pharmacotherapy if HF control is still not optimal.
 To consider cardiac resynchronization and more advanced therapies if these patients
continue to have worsening HF despite optimal medical therapy.
 Potentially reversible causes in ACHD-HF are:
 Native, new, or residual structural anomalies that are amenable to surgical or catheter
interventions. These include:
 Shunts (VSD/ASD/PDA)
 Valvular lesions (free flow Pulmonary regurgitation post TOF repair/aortic regurgitation
e.g., post arterial switch)
 Outflow tract obstruction (conduit stenosis/ LV outflow tract obstruction).820
 Arrhythmias- atrial821 or ventricular tachyarrhythmias
 Other medical problems such as-sepsis, thyrotoxicosis, anemia, uncontrolled hypertension.
 Pharmacotherapy 809,810,812
In general, drug therapy for HF in ACHD lacks evidence unlike that in acquired HF. The
medical treatment is based on the varying subgroups of ACHD-HF.
A)
Impaired systolic function
 Systemic left ventricle failure (LVEF<40%)
 The treatment is similar as acquired HF.
 Patients with HFrEF may be treated with RAS blockers (ACE-I, ARB, ARNI), β-blockers,
MRA and SGLT2-i. Loop diuretics are given for symptom relief.
 Systolic failure of subpulmonic RV (RVEF<40%)822
 No medical treatment is indicated for asymptomatic patients.
 There is limited evidence for the use of RAS blockers or β-blockers.
 Diuretics are the mainstay treatment for symptomatic patients.
 It is important to identify hemodynamically significant lesions and to address these.820
 Patients with Right Heart Failure (RHF) due to Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
(PAH)/Eisenmenger would benefit from PAH targeted therapy.823
 Systolic failure of systemic RV824,825
 There are no standard guidelines for medical therapy for asymptomatic patients.
 In symptomatic patients, standard heart failure medications may be given but evidence
for their use in this setting is lacking.
 An increase in biomarkers and worsening VO2 max may be useful parameters to
consider for initiating medical therapy.
 Systolic failure of single ventricle826-828
 There are no guidelines for the use of standard drugs in asymptomatic patients.
 Loop diuretics may be used judiciously in symptomatic patients.
 PAH targeted therapy (Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitors and Endothelin receptor
antagonists) may improve pulmonary blood flow and improve cardiac output.819
B) Arrhythmias829
 Diagnostic and interventional catheter and device-based electrophysiologic procedures
in adults with moderate or complex CHD or complex arrhythmias should be performed in
a regional ACHD center by a cardiac electrophysiologist with expertize in CHD, and in a
laboratory with appropriate personnel and equipment.821,830
 These should be managed promptly and aggressively with appropriate antiarrhythmic
drug therapy, catheter, or surgical ablation.
 Permanent pacing is recommended in:829-831
 Advanced second- or third-degree AV block associated with symptomatic bradycardia,
ventricular dysfunction, or low cardiac output.
 Post operative advanced second- or third-degree AV block that persists more than
7days after cardiac surgery.
 Congenital 3rd degree AV block.831
 Cardiac implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) may be considered for the secondary
prevention of sudden death in:
 High risk ACHD patients resuscitated from cardiac arrest due to VT/VF and
 In those with spontaneous sustained ventricular tachycardia with no clear reversible
cause.832
 CRT may be helpful in managing HF in patients with subpulmonary and systemic RV.833,834
I,C
I,B
I,B
I,B
I,B
IIa,C
C) Cyanosis815
 Iron deficiency anemia is common in those with cyanotic heart disease and may be missed
due to secondary erythrocytosis.
 Routine phlebotomy based on a predetermined hematocrit should be avoided.
 These patients are also at risk of thromboembolic events and bleeding. Anticoagulants
should be given with caution.
D) Advanced therapies for ACHD- HF835,836
 The use of mechanical circulatory support (MCS), total artificial heart, and heart
transplantation in ACHD patients are challenging due to:
 Complex anatomy with abnormal pulmonary arteries, anomalous pulmonary or
systemic venous drainage, aortopulmonary collaterals.
 Prior surgical intervention/repeated sternotomies.
 Allosensitization due to blood transfusion, use of homografts.
 Pulmonary hypertension - thus a heart-lung transplant may be required.
 End organ involvement e.g. Fontan associated liver disease (may need heart-liver
transplant).
E) General measures
 Infective endocarditis837
 Optimal oral hygiene is recommended to prevent infective endocarditis which has been
identified as a predisposing risk for ACHD-HF.837
 Antibiotic prophylaxis should be considered in selected high-risk patients to prevent
endocarditis during invasive dental procedures.
 Pregnancy (refer to section 14.7).
 It is important that in all women in the childbearing age with ACHD, preconception
counselling should be initiated early, and all pregnancies should be pre-planned.
 Exercise rehabilitation838 (refer to section 16)
 Even though the evidence is less extensive in ACHD-HF, individualized exercise
programs have been shown to be beneficial.839
 Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is a useful tool performed both at baseline and post
exercise training.
F) Palliative care and advance care planning (refer to section 15.3)840
 Advanced care planning is preferably done in an ACHD center with support from a
multidisciplinary team involving both the ACHD cardiologist and palliative care specialist.
 It should be patient-tailored and age appropriate due to the heterogenous nature and
chronicity of ACHD and counselling should be given based on the projected course of the
respective disease and prognosis.841
Key Message # 22: HF and ACHD
 HF is the most common cause of death in ACHD patients, accounting for 17- 42% of
all deaths.
 Patients with isolated simple defects generally do well with mortality rates like those in
the general population.
 Patients with complex heart defects such as systemic RV, single ventricle palliated
with Fontan circulation, and unrepaired cyanotic CHD with Eisenmenger physiology
comprise the majority of HF-related deaths.
Key Recommendations #17: HF and ACHD
 The principals of managing HF in ACHD HF are: (see Appendix XV, page 177)
 First to access and address all reversible causes.
 To initiate pharmacotherapy if HF control is still not optimal.
 To consider cardiac resynchronization and more advanced therapies if these patients
continue to have worsening HF despite optimal medical therapy.
15. ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
15.1. Heart Transplant
Heart transplantation is well-established for refractory end stage HF. It is the gold standard
for the treatment of advanced HF in the absence of contraindications. World-wide the 1-year
survival rate is 91% and the median survival post-transplant is 12 to 13 years.842
This definitive therapy for HF is however limited by the lack of donor organs.843 To address
this, worldwide, efforts are being made to increase this organ donor shortage by increasing
the donor age limit criteria, improving donor recovery strategies and being more stringent in
the selection criteria.155,843
All patients with severe symptomatic HF despite OMT and no other alternative therapeutic
options should be considered for heart transplant. They need to be referred to a HF specialist
hospital for further evaluation.
Assessment for heart transplant is done by a multispecialty, multidisciplinary team and
appropriate work up will be performed for eligibility.
Eligibility criteria to be considered for heart transplant include:
 Poor LVEF (< 25%).
 Recurrent HF hospitalizations.
 Major limitation of the patient’s daily activities.
 Poor effort tolerance i.e. peak VO2 (maximal oxygen consumption or peak oxygen
uptake) < 10ml/kg/min (or < 50% predicted). VO2 max is the maximum rate of oxygen
consumption measured during incremental exercise i.e. exercise of increasing intensity.
This is widely used as an indicator of cardiorespiratory fitness.
 Intravenous inotropic dependence for symptomatic relief or to maintain end organ function.
 Motivated, psychologically stable, and compliant with therapy.
Contraindications to heart transplant:
 Active infection.
 Severe peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular disease.
 Malignancy within 5 years.
 Diabetes mellitus with widespread microvascular complications.
 Systemic disease with multi-organ dysfunction.
 Irreversible chronic kidney, liver, or lung disease.
 Pharmacologically irreversible pulmonary hypertension.
 Other medical or psychosocial issues that would impact survival.
I,A
15.2. Mechanical Circulatory Support (MCS)-see Section 9.2.2.
The use of a mechanical circulatory support (e.g., Left Ventricular Assist Device -LVAD)
may be considered as a:844-848
 Bridge to recovery in patients with potentially reversible or treatable conditions or
 Bridge to heart transplant in suitable candidates or
 Destination therapy in candidates who are not suitable for transplant.
Patients have improvement in their symptoms when compared to OMT.844,845
However, the rate of rehospitalizations due to complications of bleeding, thrombosis and
infections are high.844-846,848 Many patients also go into major depression. Thus, extensive
discussion with the patient and family is necessary prior to LVAD implantation.
15.3. Palliative and End of Life Care
Despite recent advances in therapy, for some patients, HF remains a progressive disease
and carries a poor prognosis. Patients with refractory symptoms despite guideline-directed
medical therapy, should be considered for cardiac transplantation or LVAD implantation if
deemed eligible. This includes:
 Those with < 50% survival at 1 year (using established scoring tools)
 Persistently elevated natriuretic peptide levels and/or
 A low V02 max measurement (if available) and
 other eligibility criteria as stated in section 15.1.
In patients who are unable to receive advanced therapy, palliative care consultation should
be considered.219,849 The aim of palliative care in HF is to prevent and relieve suffering and
to promote the best quality of life for patients and their families.850
Although majority of guidelines do not specifically address when best to refer end-stage HF
patients for palliative care consideration, due to the often-unpredictable trajectory in decline
over time, palliative care is particularly important in a subgroup of patients. A recent
international consensus referral criterion for specialist palliative care for patients with
advanced HF includes 6 major categories:851
 Patients suffering from advanced HF alongside complications including cardiac cachexia
or multiorgan failure, having concurrent non-cardiac life-threatening diseases, or being
intolerant to guideline-directed therapies.
 Patients likely eligible for advanced therapies but not receiving them due to various factors.
 Patients with repeated hospitalizations or emergency department visits within the past 3
months.
 Patients with poor prognostic estimate, with estimated life expectancy of 6 months or less.
 Patients suffering from refractory symptoms requiring palliative sedation, severe emotional
or physical symptoms, and severe spiritual or existential distress.
 Patients, their families, or care teams requesting palliative care, including assistance in
discussing goals of care and other planning surrounding withdrawal or de-escalation of
life-prolonging interventions.
End-of-life issues surrounding advanced HF remains complex to this day, with minimal
evidence in the literature to guide management.852 Nonetheless, there exists several
Lorem ipsum
position papers and expert consensus documents highlighting key components in providing
palliative care for HF patients, including the following:853,854
 Advanced care planning
 Clearly define goals of care and preference for future and pre-existing treatment,
especially those which are life-sustaining. (e.g., intubation and mechanical ventilation,
ICD implantation, etc)
 Address disease-specific aspects of care with clear limits to escalation.
 Record and clearly document these plans in the medical records.
 When requested and possible, clearly nominate a personal representative for medical
decision-making.
 When available, clearly indicate where palliative care is to be provided (home versus
healthcare facility).855
 Medical management
 Medical management with clear goals of care, prioritizing symptom control over disease
control, and maximizing quality of life.
 Common symptoms and signs to be addressed include dyspnea, fatigue, pain, irregular
bowel habits including constipation, urinary retention, or incontinence, and most
importantly depression and anxiety.
 Validity of previous medications used in disease control should be continuously
re-evaluated for benefit and harm, with appropriate adjustment.
 Religious and spiritual needs, values and existential quest need to be continually
addressed during each consultation or visit.
 Professional help offered by specialists in spiritual care should be engaged when
requested for.
 Care for the dying.
 Understanding that dying is a medical diagnosis that should neither be neglected nor
postponed.
 Understanding that dying is a complex and dynamic process.
 Counselling, support, and reassurance should be provided to patients and their families.
 The aim should be to provide the highest level of comfort to the patient and their
families, and therapy that contradict this should be discontinued (e.g., ICD deactivation)
 Managing ethical dilemma
 An ethical dilemma arises when at least two of the four ethical principles conflict with
one another.
 Patient autonomy remains central in the decision making for palliative care, although the
3 other ethical principles remain paramount (beneficence, non-maleficence, and justice).
 In the event of an ethical dilemma, ethical consultation through palliative care services
or a professional ethics committee should be sought.
Key Messages #23: Advanced HF
 All patients with severe symptomatic HF despite OMT and no other alternative therapeutic
options should be considered for heart transplant.
 If they are not eligible or a donor heart is not available, they may be considered for
LVAD as a destination therapy or a bridge to heart transplant.
 Patients who are unable to receive either should be considered for palliative care.
Key Recommendations #18: Advanced HF
 Heart transplantation is well-established for refractory end stage HF.
 Patients with severe symptomatic HF despite OMT and no other alternative therapeutic
options should be considered for palliative care.
Fatigue and breathlessness lead to individuals restricting their physical activities. This in
turn leads to deconditioning - a phenomenon of reduced capacity to perform physical,
mental, and cognitive tasks. This adds to the humanistic burden of HF, increasing morbidity
and recurrent hospitalizations.
 Exercise training in HF addresses 3 main impairments:
 Exercise intolerance due to muscle wasting leading to a loss of strength and endurance.856
 Cardiopulmonary and musculoskeletal deconditioning.857
 Exertional dyspnea that occurs from:857
 Increased respiratory muscle work because of excessive ventilation to compensate
for increased muscle lactate release.
 Increased lung dead space.
 Decreased lung compliance caused by chronic pulmonary congestion and fibrosis.
 Exercise training in HF is safe and effective.858 Long-term exercise training leads to
improvement in quality of life, functional capacity and survival rates.155,164,165,859-865
16.1 Cardiac rehabilitation (CR) in HF
 HF is now endorsed as an indication for CR.866 CR spans throughout the continuum of
HF care.862
 A formal cardiac rehabilitation program usually includes:
 A medical and functional evaluation.
 Education of the patient and family on the importance of:
 Medical adherence
 Lifestyle changes
 Fluid management
 Dietary recommendations and
 Addressing psychosocial concerns
 Exercise prescription, training, counselling on physical and daily activities.
 Functional training and work hardening.
 Stress management and adaptation.
 CR should be recommended to all stable HF patients, in NYHA II-III. This includes
patients with no recent (≤ 6 weeks) or planned (≤ 6 months) major CV hospitalizations or
procedures.858
 There is insufficient data at present to recommend outpatient CR for patients in NYHA IV.
 CR involves:
 An inpatient phase which aims towards safe home discharge. Compared to routine
care, early CR significantly improves the effect of physical capacity, physiological
outcomes, and clinical outcomes in acute HF patients.867
IIa,B
16. HEART FAILURE REHABILITATION
 An outpatient phase to improve functional gains. Three exercise training modalities in
HF include:862
 Endurance aerobic training.
 Resistance strengthening - this addresses skeletal muscle alterations and sarcopenia.
 Respiratory muscle training.
 A maintenance phase that aims at improving long term survival by focusing on identifying
and treating CV risk factors and optimizing HF treatment.868
 Hydrotherapy or aquatic exercise training can improve exercise capacity, muscle strength
and quality of life like land-based training programs. It is a safe and effective alternative
for those unable to participate in traditional exercise programs.869
 Active participation in any kind of exercise training program is sufficient to improve the
prognosis, quality of life and functional capacity.870 Active participation is a more
important factor in achieving improvement than how the exercise is performed.871
 The details of the Cardiac Rehabilitation program in HF can be obtained from several
resources.868,872
16.2. Settings for CR in HF
 A community-based CR program provides patients with a structured exercise training
intervention alongside educational support and psychological counselling.873
 Settings for CR in HF include:874
 Traditional center-based CR programs are safe and effective but are resource
intensive and of limited availability. It is recommended during the initial sessions following
discharge particularly in patients with severe HF symptoms.
 Home-based programs are available for stable and well-treated patients. It is a
cost-effective treatment option even in HFrEF.165
 Emerging CR models include:
 Hybrid CR that combines short-term center-based CR with home-based CR.875
 Mobile phone based CR876
 Telerehabilitation services.877 There is still inadequate evidence at present on the
impact of this modality on hospitalization and CV death reduction.878
16.3. Heart failure CR in special populations
These include:
 Individuals with implantable devices
 CR in HF patients with ICD and CRT is safe and beneficial.862,879-881
 Activities such as hydrotherapy or pronounced arm - shoulder movements should be
avoided as this may lead to an ICD discharge and loss of consciousness.
 Elderly patients with HF
 Frailty is common among the elderly and is associated with increased morbidity and
mortality. It is partially reversible and potentially preventable in HF with early rehabilitation
referral.882
 Rehabilitation non-enrolment results in worsening frailty status.883
 Cognitive impairment and HF frequently coexist - either as acute delirium with
decompensated HF during hospital admission or dementia.
 Patients with a high frailty score and cognitive impairment will benefit from closer
contact with the HF specialist team, more frequent follow-up and monitoring and
individualized self-care support.
16.4 Barriers to HF rehabilitation
 Despite benefits, cost-effectiveness, and strong practice guideline recommendations, CR
remains underused.172
 Barriers include884
 Physician Factors:
 Fewer referrals from cardiologists.
 Fewer well trained CR staff.
 Overworked doctors.
 Patient Factors:
 Lack of motivation
 Reluctance to change in lifestyle.
 Transport difficulties.
 Lack of family support.
 Time constraints.
 Service Factors:
 Lack of insurance coverage.
 Accessibility of programs.
Key Recommendations #19: HF Rehabilitation
 Cardiac Rehabilitation should be recommended to all stable HF patients, in NYHA
II-III.
Key Messages # 24: HF Rehabilitation
 Fatigue and breathlessness lead to individuals restricting their physical activities and
this in turn, leads to deconditioning.
 Exercise training in patients with HF is safe and leads to an improvement in functional
capacity, exercise duration, and health related quality of life.
 HF is now endorsed as an indication for Cardiac Rehabilitation, and it spans through
out the continuum of HF care.
17 ORGANISATION OF CARE
17.1 LEVEL OF CARE AND SHARED MANAGEMENT
The care of patients with HF should ideally take place in a multidisciplinary system, allowing
for shared care between the hospital (secondary or tertiary settings) and community (primary
setting). A multidisciplinary approach encompasses patient education, cardiac rehabilitation,
psychosocial support and palliative care, and has been proven to reduce HF hospitalizations
and mortality in discharged patients.884-886
The multidisciplinary team usually consists of cardiologists and/or general physicians, HF
nurses, pharmacists, dieticians, physiotherapists, primary care providers, social workers as
well as geriatricians, psychologists, cardiac rehabilitation physicians, occupational therapists
and when necessary, palliative care specialists.
Care can be done in two different settings:
 In the patient’s own home - home-based interventions are associated with significantly
lower healthcare costs, reduced hospital readmissions and an improvement in the
patient’s quality of life.855 This may now be possible with telemedicine.
 Specialist outpatient clinic - the HF clinic.
HF clinics can either be:
 Nurse-directed - these are run by nurses with special training in HF.
 Physician-directed - run by general physicians and/or cardiologists.
HF clinics can be established in the tertiary hospitals or in the primary care setting. The
minimum human resource requirements are:
 A cardiologist or general physician with an interest in cardiology and heart failure,
 A dedicated nurse and
 A medical technologist for blood taking, doing echocardiography and 6 minute-walk tests.
In bigger clinic settings, the involvement of a cardiac rehabilitation team and physiotherapists
to encourage physical activities, pharmacists and counsellors for end-of-life care would be
advisable. The needs of these patients vary, and these may need to be addressed by a
multidisciplinary team.
These clinics will be the intermediary between in-patient hospital care and community
primary care. Patients who can be seen in these clinics include those:887
 Recently discharged after an admission for decompensated HF (a waiting time of 7-12
days post discharge has to be the maximum wait-time).
 Who are in the early decompensation phase and need treatment modification.
 Who are stable but need up titration of HF medications.
 With ICD or CRTs.
 With comorbidities, such as renal dysfunction, diabetes and COPD.
 With advanced HF who may benefit from:
 Heart transplant.
 Left Ventricular Assist Device (LVAD).
 Palliative care.
The objectives of these HF clinics may vary based on local settings. They include:887,888
 Optimization of Foundational HF medications particularly the up titration of β-blockers,
ACE-I and MRA.
 Initiating referral for Cardiac Rehabilitation
 Education of the patient and caregiver on the nature of the disease and its progression.
 Promotion of self-care such as :
 Compliance to medical therapy and fluid restriction.
 Regular weighing and adjusting diuretic doses according to symptoms and body weight.
Patient with optimized HF medications/treatment plans can be discharged to the community
with appropriate care plans to primary care. Close partnership between these HF clinics and
primary care helps to reduce unnecessary admissions to hospital.
Moving forward, it may be timely, to suggest establishing community medical care centers
for chronic illnesses such as diabetes, HF, CKD etc. This could serve as a resource and
rehabilitation center for individuals with chronic illnesses. It could be run by both volunteers
- doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, rehabilitation physicians - with funding from government
and Non Government Organizations and offering tax incentives to all those participating in
the program.
In 2018, the Heart Failure Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic (MTAC) was introduced.
These clinics are conducted by pharmacists in collaboration with doctors and other healthcare
providers to improve heart failure management. The objectives of the Heart Failure MTAC
are:889
 Enhance patient’s adherence to HF pharmacotherapy and non-pharmacological interventions.
 To reduce unscheduled emergency department visits or hospitalizations of HF patient
due to acute decompensation.
 To provide consultative service to doctors on evidence-based HF pharmacotherapy and
related issues.
 To collaborate with doctors and other health care professionals in HF management
program.
17.2. MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
Patients with HF require regular follow-up and monitoring. Serial evaluations serve to
assess a patient’s status, response to therapy, development of complications and disease
progression.
17.2.1. Assessment during Follow Up Visits
Key components of assessment include:
 History:
 Functional capacity - NYHA functional class or 6-minute walk test
 Cognitive status and nutritional status
 Diet and sodium intake
 Consumption of alcohol or illicit drugs
 Smoking history
 Physical examination:
 Fluid status and body weight
 Blood pressure, heart rate and rhythm
 Examination of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems
 Investigations:
 Blood tests - serum urea, electrolytes, creatinine and eGFR as necessary.
 Serial brain natriuretic peptide measurements to guide and tailor HF therapy cannot be
recommended at the present time due to a lack of consistent evidence.77,81,891,892
 Echocardiogram:
 Routine serial echocardiogram is not recommended. However, if there has been a
recent change in clinical status (e.g., episode of acute coronary sydrome) or if the
patient has received treatment (e.g., revascularization or device therapy) that might
significantly change certain echocardiographic parameters, a follow-up echocardiogram
is reasonable to re-assess the LVEF, degree of valvular function and structural remodeling.
 Others:
 Review of pharmacotherapy - compliance, side effects and titration of dosages as
necessary.
 Control of disease specific management - hypothyroidism, hyperthyrodism, acromegaly,
connective tissue disease, HIV, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, hemochromatosis.
 Review use of potentially detrimental medication to HF control - e.g., NSAIDs.
 Education:
 Another key component during follow up is education regarding the name, dose and
function of each medication the patient is on. This is not only important in terms of
enhancing compliance, but this is also to avoid polypharmacy from a different facility
the patient may also be seeing.
17.2.2. Frequency of follow-up
This will depend on:
 The patient’s clinical stability and
 Need for pharmacotherapy optimization.
A patient with a recent episode of decompensation or clinical instability, for instance, should
ideally be seen again soon, usually within 2 weeks. Ultimately, the intensity and type of
follow-up would be determined by the local organization of care and resources.
17.3. CARDIOLOGY REFERRALS
HF patients with stable symptoms may be managed at the primary care level.
Referral to the cardiologist should be considered in the following situations:
 De novo HF for a comprehensive workup to confirm the diagnosis and determine the
etiology, and to devise a management plan.
 Episodes of acute decompensation
 Worsening HF symptoms despite appropriate therapy
 HF that is complicated with symptomatic hypotension or excessive bradycardia, limiting
up titration of pharmacotherapy.
 Symptomatic stable CAD and/or acute coronary syndrome for consideration of
revascularization (PCI or CABG)
 Resuscitated cardiac arrest.
 Documented or suspected significant arrhythmias e.g., AF, VT
 ECG demonstrating a LBBB morphology with a QRS duration of > 150ms for consideration
of device therapy.
 Significant valvular disease not previously assessed or worsening valvular dysfunction.
 Preconception assessment and counselling of women with significant structural heart
disease and a history of HF or LV dysfunction.
 Complex congenital cardiac lesions and/or Eisenmenger’s syndrome.
17.4. TELEMEDICINE/TELEHEALTH
Telemedicine services may improve healthcare accessibility and geographical limitations.
In the unforeseen circumstances of a future pandemic, telemedicine may provide uninterrupted
patient consultation when community lockdowns or social distancing is required.893
Early escalation of HF care with a multidisciplinary team is possible without the need for
face-to-face consultation.
17.4.1. Telemedicine Strategies
Requirements
 Home Monitoring Equipment -The following are required:
 Computer, tablet, or smart phone
 BP machines
 Weighing scales
 Optional:
 ECG recording device on smart phone.
 Mobile monitor (e.g., Cardio Mobile)
Patients, and/or their younger family members can record and transmit the information to
the physician.
Virtual visits
 This will help maintain the doctor-patient relationship.
 These virtual visits can be performed via audio-visual telecommunication system or
through an online portal to review the following:
 Assessment of symptoms.
 Review information from the Home Monitoring devices.
 Where available, laboratory results from a laboratory close to the patient’s home.
 Optimization of Foundational HF Medications.
Telerehabilitation
Telemedicine can allow:
 Initiation of dietary and physical cardiac rehabilitation.
 Identification of cardiac decompensation and advise hospitalization, when necessary.
Key Messages # 25: Level of Care, Shared Care, Monitoring and Follow - Up &
Telemedicine/Telehealth
 The care of patients with HF should ideally take place in a multidisciplinary system,
allowing for shared care between the hospital (secondary or tertiary settings) and
community (primary setting).
 Heart Failure clinics will serve as an intermediary between in-patient hospital care and
community primary care.
 HF clinics can either be:
 Nurse-directed - these are run by nurses with special training in HF.
 Physician-directed
 At these clinics, patients with HF undergo close follow-up and monitoring to evaluate
their status, response to therapy, development of complications and disease progression.
 When stable with optimized HF medications/treatment plans, patients can be discharged
to the community with appropriate care plans to primary care.
 Where necessary, (decompensation, development of significant arrhythmias) they can
be referred to the cardiologists/specialists.
 Telemedicine services may improve healthcare accessibility and geographical
limitations. It can complement existing HF clinic services and provide venues for early
escalation of HF therapy before decompensation.
18. OTHER THERAPIES FOR HEART FAILURE
Despite taking conventional HF therapy, patients may seek alternative therapy and healing
approaches that are not considered as allopathic medicine. The National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) defines complementary and alternative
medicine (CAM) as a group of diverse medical and healthcare interventions, practices,
products, or disciplines that are not generally considered part of conventional medicine.
18.1. Enhanced External Counter Pulsation (EECP)
There is inadequate evidence of clinical effectiveness of EECP in HF.894-898 Data seem to
indicate that there is improved functional status, walk distance, and symptoms and NYHA
Functional class.896-897 There is however, concern that it could precipitate or exacerbate
symptoms in those with a history of HF.898
18.2. Stem cell therapy
Stem cells, which are derived from bone marrow or umbilical cord blood, have been infused
into the coronary arteries or injected directly into the myocardium. The original hypothesis
was that stem cells would engraft in the myocardium and replace damaged cardiomyocytes.
Subsequent research has suggested that stem cells probably do not differentiate into
functional cardiomyocytes, but as an alternative hypothesis, it was hoped that they might
have paracrine effects that would benefit myocardial function.
There is still limited knowledge on the optimal cell type, dosing, route of administration,
patient parameters, patient safety, and other important variables that contribute to successful
stem cell therapy. There is, however, still a lot of research left to do into the effectiveness
and safety of these interventions.899-901
18.3. Omega 3 fatty acids
This may be considered as an adjunctive therapy to standard HF therapy, based on
observations and clinical trials which showed a small benefit in CV death and/or hospitalizations
especially among diabetics.902-907
18.4. Coenzyme Q10
There is some evidence that coenzyme Q10 probably reduces all-cause mortality and
hospitalization for HF. However there still needs to be further research to determine the role
of Coenzyme Q10 in patients with HF, the optimal dose, and the duration of Coenzyme Q10
supplementation.908-910
18.5. Tai Chi
Tai Chi may improve 6 minute walk test distance, quality of life and LVEF in patients with
HF.911-914 Its effect on hard CV outcomes such as rehospitalization, MI and mortality is not
known.
18.6. Yoga
Yoga improves peak VO2 (exercise capacity) and quality of life in chronic HF patients.915 In
addition, it has been reported to reduce cardiovascular events, morbidity, and mortality
although the evidence supporting these conclusions is somewhat limited.916
19. PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Performance measures should be used with the goal of improving quality of care for HF and
conversion of scientific evidence into clinical practice.155,917 It has been shown that higher
hospital performance measures were inversely associated with HF readmissions.918,919
Process performance measures focus on the aspects of care that are delivered to a
patient, while outcome measures focus on the endpoints such as mortality or hospitalization.
Process performance indicators for in-patients with HF includes:155,917-919
 % of patients who had documentation of NYHA Functional Class.
 % of patients who had LVEF measurement.
 % of patients with current or prior LVEF < 40% and without contraindications discharged
with ACE-I/ARB/ARNI.
 % of patients with current or prior LVEF < 40% and without contraindications discharged
on β-blockers.
 % of patients with current or prior LVEF < 40% and without contraindications discharged
on MRA.
 % of patients with chronic or paroxysmal AF/Atrial Flutter without contraindications on
anticoagulant therapy at discharge.
 % of patients given a post discharge appointment within 14 days.
 % of patients who had up titration of their Foundational HF medications to target or
maximally tolerated doses at 3 months.
The accepted performance measure is 60%.
Outcome Measures indicators include:
 In-hospital mortality
 30-day readmission for heart failure
Refer to Appendix XVI, page 178 for calculation of these measures.
Key Recommendations #20: Performance Measures
 Performance measures are used with the goal of improving quality of care for HF.
 This includes:
 Process performance which measures the aspects of care that are delivered to a
patient and
 Outcome measures which focus on hard endpoints such as mortality or hospitalization.
 For the Quality indicators in HF, see section 19 & Appendix XVI, page 178.
Appendix I: Causes of Elevated Natriuretic Peptide Levels*
Cardiac
 Heart Failure, including RV syndromes
 Acute coronary syndromes
 Heart muscle disease, including Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
 Valvular heart disease
 Pericardial disease
 Atrial fibrillation
 Myocarditis
 Infective Endocarditis
 Cardiac surgery
 Cardioversion
 Toxic-metabolic myocardial insults, including cancer chemotherapy
Non-cardiac
 Advancing age (Table 12, page 60 for optimal cut off values according to age)
 Anemia
 Renal failure:
 NTProBNP loses its prognostic value in patients with GFR < 30ml/min/1.73 m2.
 BNP levels are relatively independent of GFR.
 Right ventricular overload from:
 Pulmonary causes: obstructive sleep apnea, severe pneumonia
 Pulmonary hypertension whatever the cause
 Shock
 Critical illness
 Bacterial sepsis
 Severe burns
 Liver cirrhosis
 Intracranial pathologies
 Thyrotoxicosis
*Adapted from
 Yancy WC, Jessup M, Bozkut B, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for
the Management of Heart Failure. A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America. Circulation 2017;136:e137-61.
 Goei D, Schouten O, Boersma E, et al. Influence of renal function on the usefulness of N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide as a prognostic cardiac risk marker in patients undergoing noncardiac vascular surgery. Am J
Cardiol 2008;101:122-6.
 Tagore R, Ling LH, Yang H, Daw HY, Chan YH, Sethi SK. Natriuretic peptides in chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2008;3:1644-51.
 Tsai SH, Lin YY, Chu SJ, Hsu CW, Cheng SM. Interpretation, and use of natriuretic peptides in non-congestive heart
failure settings. Yonsei Med J. 2010:51(2):151-63
Appendix II: Salt Content of Common Malaysian Foods
Daily Reference Intake (DRI) for salt: 5 g per day (1 teaspoon)
SALT CONTENT IN FOOD
LOW
MODERATE
HIGH
(< 5% of DRI)
(5% - 20% of DRI)
(> 20% of DRI)
Tosai without
0.5g
Preserved
0.8g
Fried Chicken (3 pieces),
10.4g
Gravy (1 piece)
Bean Curd
(16% of DRI)
Coleslaw, Mashed potato,
(208% of DRI)
(16g)
Soft Drink
Cereal
0.4g
Luncheon
0.9g
Curry Mee
8.2g
(Cornflakes)
Meat
(18% of DRI)
(1 large bowl)
(164% of DRI)
(1 cup, 30g)
(1 piece)
Fresh Fruit
<0.15
Beef Burger
0.8g
Wonton Noodle Soup
4.5g
(1 medium)
(3% of DRI)
Patty
(16% of DRI)
(1 large bowl)
(90% of DRI)
(1 piece,74g)
Fresh
<0.3g
Nuggets
0.7g
Bihun Soup
4.0g
Vegetables
(5% of DRI)
(2 pieces,40g)
(14% of DRI)
(1 large bowl)
(80% of DRI)
(1 cup, cooked)
Tuna In Water,
0.2g
Chili Sauce
0.56g
Char Kway Teow
3.6g
no salt (1 can)
(4% of DRI)
(1 tbsp,15g)
(11% of DRI)
(1 plate)
(72% of DRI)
Low Fat Milk
0.2g
Fried Hokkien Noodles
3.6g
(1 packet)
(4% of DRI)
with prawn (1 plate)
(72% of DRI)
Putu Mayam
0.15g
Pizza with Tomato Sauce,
2.75g
(1 piece,50g )
(3% of DRI)
Chicken, and Mushroom
(55% of DRI)
Baked Potato
<0.15g
Chicken Burger + Fries and
2.6g
(1 whole)
(<3% of DRI)
Soft Drink (1 regular set)
(52% of DRI)
Fresh Fish
<0.13g
Budu (1 tbsp)
2.2g
(1 whole)
(2.6% of DRI)
(44% of DRI)
Oat Crackers
0.11g
Salted Egg (1/2 piece)
2.0g
(3 pieces)
(2.2% of DRI)
(40% of DRI)
Low Salt Biscuit
0.09g
Beef Noodles
9.9g
(3 pieces)
(2% of DRI)
(789g)
(198% of DRI)
Chicken Breast
0.06g
Hot Dog Set
3.9g
Part
(1% of DRI)
(78% of DRI)
(1 piece, 38g)
Margerine
0.05g
Nasi Lemak
2.1g
Reduced Salt
(1% of DRI)
(210g)
(42% of DRI)
(1 tsp)
Unsalted Nuts
0.04g
Yong Tau Fu
4.3g
(1 cup)
(0.9% of DRI)
(324g)
(86% of DRI)
Chapatti with
0.04g
Instant Noodles
3.8g
Gravy (1 pc)
(0.8% of DRI)
(85g)
(76% of DRI)
White Rice
0.04g
Chinese Sausage
2.6g
(1 scoop)
(0.8% of DRI)
(1 piece, 68g)
(52% of DRI)
Soy Milk
0.01g
Instant Porridge
2.4g
(1 glass, 250ml)
(0.2% of DRI)
(1 cup, 35g)
(48% of DRI)
Tau Kua
0.005g
Instant Soup
2.0g
(1 pc)
(0.1% of DRI)
(1 packet ,63g)
(40% of DRI)
Oat
0.001g
Cube/Stock Powder
5.52g
(6 tbsp, 35g)
(0.06% of DRI)
(110% of DRI)
(1 cube,12g)
Appendix II: Salt Content of Common Malaysian Foods,cont’d
Daily Reference Intake (DRI) for salt: 5g per day (1 teaspoon)
SALT CONTENT IN FOOD
LOW
MODERATE
HIGH
(< 5% of DRI)
(5% - 20% of DRI)
(> 20% of DRI)
Light Soya Sauce
3.14g
(1 tbsp,15g)
(63 % of DRI)
Fish Sauce
2.58g
(1 tbsp,15g)
(52% of DRI)
Salted Fish
1.1g
(1 piece, 25g)
(22% of DRI)
Dried Anchovies
1.2g
(¼ cup)
(24% of DRI)
Cheddar Cheese
1.2g
(2 slices)
(24% of DRI)
Oyster Sauce
1.6g
(1 tbsp)
(32% of DRI)
Spaghetti Sauce
1.3g
(½ cup)
(26% of DRI)
Baked Beans
1.3g
(¾ cups)
(26% of DRI)
Belacan
1.7g
(1 tbsp)
(34% of DRI)
Asam Jawa
1.5g
(1 tbsp)
(30% of DRI)
Taucu
1.4g
(1 tbsp)
(28% od DRI)
Dried Prawn
1.2g
(1 tbsp)
(24% of DRI)
Cheese Sausage
1.4g
(2 pieces,70g)
(28% of DRI)
Meatballs
1.4g
(5 pieces)
(28% of DRI)
Keropok Lekur
1.0g
(4 pieces,120g)
(20% of DRI)
Salted Nuts
1.6g
(1 cup, 155g)
(32% of DRI)
Canned Chicken Curry
1.4g
(150g)
(28% of DRI)
Pickled Lettuce
1.3g
(9 pieces,30g)
(26% of DRI)
Mono Sodium Glutamate
1.54g
(1 tsp,5g)
(31% of DRI)
Dark Soya Sauce
1.41g
(1 tbsp,15g)
(28% of DRI)
Source: Malaysian Food Composition Database
Appendix III: Discharge Care Plan
NO
PARAMETER
TICK
1
Discussion on:
 The precipitating factor(s) leading to this current exacerbation,
 How to avoid such circumstances and
 Other precipitating factors for decompensation.
2
To re-enforce education regarding:
 The current status of the patient and the disease trajectory
3
To establish the role of:
 Fluid management and
 Daily weight measurement at the same time each day (if possible).
If weight measurement is not able to be done daily, at least 2-3
times a week is encouraged.
A sudden weight gain of more than 2kg in 3 days is a sign of worsening
HF. Patients should be educated to increase their diuretic (furosemide)
dose together with restriction of their fluid intake until their “dry weight”
is regained. However, if the weight increase is associated with
worsening symptoms or fails to respond to these measures, the patient
should seek medical help immediately.
4
To ensure compliance with medication by explaining the reason and
why the medication is integral to the patient’s wellbeing.
5
To encourage:
 Appropriate physical activity and exercise.
 Lifestyle modification:
 Healthy balanced diet with no “added salt and flavoring sauces.”
 Weight management.
 Ssmoking cessation.
6
Stressing on the importance of follow up visit to ensure a safe post
discharge period.
7
Referral for cardiac rehabilitation as soon as possible.
The following discharge care plans should be discussed and agreed upon by the patient
and treating physician.
Appendix IV: Discharge Care Summary
NO
PARAMETER
TICK
1
Establish:
 Type of HF (HFrEF, HFpEF, HFmrEF)
 Underlying cause
 Precipitating factors (if any)
2
Brief synopsis of admission with pertinent findings:
 Blood results
 ECG abnormalities
 Echocardiogram findings with LVEF
3
Highlight:
 Blood tests that need to be re checked - e.g., electrolytes
 Tracing blood results e.g., iron studies
4
Medication progress
 Outline plans for resuming medications that had been stopped
temporarily.
 Up titrating Foundational HF Medications and titration goals)
5
Further cardiac work and referrals if indicated:
 Appointment for further cardiac investigations e.g., coronary
angiography, cardiac imaging etc.
6
Management of non-cardiac diseases (pulmonary disease,
substance abuse).
7
Identify problems like poor psychosocial support, impaired health
literacy, cognitive impairment, frailty.
8
Additional services needed like rehabilitation, device therapy,
palliative care and destination therapy discussed.
9
List of patient’s and family expectations
A summary of the discharge care plan should be made available to the physician at the
outpatient clinic upon follow up.
Appendix V: Indications for Valve Intervention*
Valve
Pathology
Recommendations
Mitral
Stenosis
Intervention is indicated in patients with MVA < 1.0 cm2 and
who are:
 Symptomatic
 Asymptomatic but have new onset AF, Pulmonary
Hypertension or planning a pregnancy.
Regurgitation Surgery is recommended for:
 Acute severe mitral regurgitation
 Chronic severe mitral regurgitation with:
 Symptoms of decreasing effort tolerance
 Asymptomatic but:
 LVEF ≤ 60%,
 LVESD ≥ 40 mm
 LA volume ≥ 60 mL/m2 or diameter ≥ 55 mm
 Systolic pulmonary arterial pressure > 50 mmHg and/or
 AF
Aortic
Stenosis
Surgery is recommended for patients who are:
 Symptomatic
 Asymptomatic patients with severe aortic stenosis and:
 Impaired LV function of no other cause
 Those who are asymptomatic during normal activities but
develop symptoms during exercise testing.
Regurgitation Aortic valve replacement should be advised for:
 Symptomatic patients irrespective of the LVEF
 Asymptomatic patients with:
 LVEF ≤ 50% or
 Left ventricular end-systolic diameter (LVESD) > 50 mm
Aortic valve replacement may be considered in asymptomatic
patients and:
 LVEF< 55% without any other cause
 Sustained fall in systolic BP < 20 mmHg on exercise
testing
*Adapted from:Vahanian, A., Beyersdorf, F., Praz, F., Milojevic, M., Baldus, S.et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS
Guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J 2022; 43(7), 561-632.
Appendix VI: ESC Heart Failure Association algorithm (HFA–PEFF)
P - Pretest Assessment
This includes a detailed clinical evaluation, electrocardiogram, laboratory tests, and basic
echocardiogram. HFpEF is suggested by:
 Normal LVEF and
 Nondilated left ventricle with concentric remodelling, or left ventricular hypertrophy and
 Left atrial enlargement.
E - Diagnostic Workup
This will include a more detailed echocardiographic study and measurement of natriuretic peptides.
They have proposed a scoring system using major and minor diagnostic criteria as outlined below.
Natriuretic Peptides:
 NT-Pro BNP:
 Major Criterion:
> 220 pg/mL
- sinus rhythm
> 660 pg/mL
- in AF
 Minor Criterion:
125-220 pg/mL
- sinus rhythm
375-660 pg/mL
- in AF
 BNP
 Major Criterion:
> 80 pg/ml
- sinus rhythm
> 240 pg/mL
- in AF
 Minor Criterion:
35-80 pg/mL
- sinus rhythm
105-240 pg/Ml
- in AF
Echocardiographic Criteria:
HFpEF cannot be diagnosed from a single echocardiographic measure. Suggestive criteria include:16
 Septal e’:
 Major Criterion: e’ < 7 cm/s; or lateral e’ < 10 cm/s (subjects aged < 75 years)
 Major Criterion: e’ < 5 cm/s; or lateral e’ < 7 cm/s (subjects aged ≥ 75 years)
 Average Septal-Lateral E/e’ Ratio: - The E/e’ index cannot be recommended as a single
diagnostic index above all other non-invasive measures of filling pressures (such as retrograde
pulmonary venous flow).16
 Major Criterion: ≥ 15 -This has good diagnostic value for identifying a high mean pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure rest has (mPCWP) supporting the likelihood of HFpEF
 Minor Criterion: 9 -14 - This is less sensitive in identifying a high mPCWP.
 Tricuspid Regurgitant (TR) Peak Velocity
 Major Criterion: > 2:8m/s
 Pulmonary Artery Systolic Pressure - This is estimated 4x peak TR velocity plus estimated right
atrial pressure.
 Major Criterion: > 35mmHg
 Left Atrial Volume Index: This is an indirect correlate of LV filling pressures. It is more accurate
as a marker of chronic LA remodelling than either LA area or diameter.
 Major Criterion: > 34mL/m2 - in sinus rhythm
 Major Criterion: > 40mL/m2 - in atrial fibrillation
 Minor Criterion: 29-34mL/m2 - in sinus rhythm
 Minor Criterion: 34-40mL/m2 - in atrial fibrillation
 Left Ventricular Mass Index and Relative Wall Thickness (RWT)
 Major Criterion: LVMI ≥ 149 g/m2 in men or ≥ 122 g/m2 in women and RWT > 0:42
 Minor Criterion: LVMI ≥ 115 g/m2 in men or ≥ 95 g/m2 in women or RWT > 0:42 or
LV end-diastolic wall thickness ≥ 12mm
Scoring System Based on Echocardiographic and Natriuretic Peptide Levels:
For each major criterion met, 2 points are awarded, and 1 point is awarded for a minor criterion.
 A score of ≥ 5
is diagnostic of HFpEF.
 A score of ≤ 1
makes a diagnosis of HFpEF very unlikely.
 A score of 2-4
makes the diagnosis uncertain and additional work up is recommended.
F- Advanced Work Up
This includes functional testing in cases of uncertainty:
 Exercise echocardiogram - To assess diastolic dysfunction during exercise.
 An average E/e’ ratio at peak stress of ≥ 15, with or without a peak TR velocity > 3.4 m/s
 Invasive hemodynamic assessment - If criteria for diastolic dysfunction during an exercise
echocardiogram through E/e’ ratio and TR velocity are not met, then a right heart catheterization at
rest and/or with exercise is the next step.
 Invasive hemodynamic assessment through a right heart catheterization at rest or at exercise.
The following are diagnostic of HFpEF:
 At rest PCWP ≥ 15 mmHg
 At rest left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) ≥ 16mmHg
 Exercise PCWP ≥ 25 mmHg
F- Final Etiological Workup
This consists of establishing the etiology of the HFpEF. This includes assessment of blood pressure
control, chronotropic competence, arrhythmias, and ischemia. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
should be considered where specific etiology such as amyloidosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are
suspected.
In general, steps E, F, F are best performed in specialized cardiology centers. The following patients
who continue to have dyspnea may be referred for further evaluation and management:
 Cases where the diagnosis is unclear.
 Non responders to treatment especially those with multiple comorbidities.
Characteristic
Measurement
Score
H
Heavy
Body mass index >
2
30 kg/m2
H
Hypertension
Two or more hypertensive
1
medications
F
Atrial Fibrillation
Paroxysmal or persistent
3
P
Pulmonary Artery Pressure Pulmonary artery systolic
1
pressure > 35 mmHg
E
Elderly
Age > 60 years
1
F
LV filling pressure by
Echocardiographic E/e’ > 9
1
echocardiogram
Appendix VII: H2FPEF score
Score
Probability of HFpEF
6-9
>90%
0-1
≤ 23%
2-5
Intermediate probability and require additional
testing to determine the cause of dyspnea.
Appendix VIII: Etiology of Cardiomyopathies
Adapted from “Heart failure in cardiomyopathies: a position paper from the
Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology”)
Dilated Cardimyopathy
Genetic
Infection
Drugs
Peipartum
Toxic and
Overload
Endocrine/
Metabolic
Systemic Immunemediated Disease
Cardiac Phenotype:
• Titin (TTN)
• Lamin A/C (LMNA)
• Myosin Heavey
Chain (MYH7)
• Troponin T (TNT2)
• Myosin Binding
Protein C
(MYBPC3)
• Phospholamban
(PLN)
Neuromuscular
Disorders:
• Duchenne
Muscular
Dystrophy
• Becker Muscular
Dystrophy
Post-Myocarditis:
• Enteroviruses
(e.g.,
Coxsackieviruses)
• Parvovirus B19
• Adenoviruses
• Herpes Viruses
(Human
Cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-Barr Virus,
Human
Herpesvirus 6)
• Echoviruses
• Hepatitis C Virus
• Influenza A Virus
Other:
[e.g. HIV, Chagas]
Autoimmune:
• Rheumatoid Arthritis
• Coeliac Disease
• Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus
• Dematomyositis,
Polymyositis
• Systemic Sclerosis
• Primary Biliary
Cirrhosis
• Vasculitis (some)
• Mysthenia Gravis
• Pemphigus,
Pemphigoid
Autoimflammatory:
[e.g. Chron disease,
ulcerative colitis, gout,
reactive arthritis, rate
monogenic disorders]
• Alcohol
(Ethanol)
• Cocaine
• Amphetamines
• Ecstary
• Anabolic
Steroids
• Arsenic
• Cobalt
• Carbonmonoxide
• Lead
• Iron-
overload/heam
ochromatosis
• Amyloidosis
Chemotherapy:
[Anthracycline,
trastuzumab,
antimetablites,
monoclonal antibodies,
tyrosine kinase
inhibitors,
immunomodulating
agents]
Other:
[Clozapine, olzapine,
chlorpromzine,
risperidone, lithium,
trycyclic
antidepressants,
ephedrine
all-trans retinoic acid
phenothiazines]
• Diabetes Mellitus
• Acromegaly
• Pheochromocy
toma
• Thyroid gland
dysfunction
Idopathic
cordiomyopathy
presenting with
HFrEF towards the
end of pregnancy, or
in the months
following delivery,
where no others
cause of HF is found.
Hypertrophic Cardimyopathy
Genetic
Storage Diseases
Malformation Syndromes
Neuromuscular and
Mitochondrial Disorders
• Beta-Mysin Heavy Chain
(MYH7)
• Mysion-Binding Protein C
(NYBPC3)
• Troponin I and T (TNNI3,
TNNT2)
• Tropomyosin alpha-1 Chain
(TPM1)
• Myosin Light Chain 3
(MYL3)
• Anderson-Fabry Disease
• Danon Disease
• Pompe Disease
• Gaucher Disease
• Friedreich’s ataxia
• MELAS (Mitochondrial
Encephalomyopathy, Lactic
Acidosis, and Stroke-Like
Episodes)
• MERFF (Myoclonic Epilepsy
with Ragges Red Fibres)
• LEOPARD (Lentigines; ECG
Abnormalities; Ocular
hypertelorism; Pulmonary
Stenosis; Abnoral Genitalia;
Retarded Growth; Deafness)
• Noonan
• Costello
Restrictive Cardimyopathy
Noninfiltrative Disorders
Infiltrative Disorders
Storage Diseases
Endomyocardial Disorders
• Idiopathic
• Hereditary (Sarcomere
Protein Disorders, Myofibrillar
Myopathies, Werner
Syndrome)
• Systemic Sclerosis
• Amyloidosis:
º Immunoglobulin Light
Chain (AL)
º Hereditary (ATTR-m)
º Wild-Type (ATTR-wt)
º Other
• Sarcoidosis
• Hereditary Hyperoxaluria
• Anderson-Fabry Disease
• Danon Disease
• Pompe Disease
• Gaucher Disease
• Iron Overload
• Hereditary
Haemochromatosis
• Carchinoid
• Endomyocardial Fibrosis
(Idiopathic,
Hypereoshinophilic
Syndrome, Drug-Related)
• Endocardial Fibroelastosis
• Matastatic Tumor
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation Therapy
Appendix IX: Anticancer Agents Associated with Heart Failure / LV Dysfunction)
Chemotherapy Agents
Prevention/Treatment
Anthracyclines
Monitor LVEF, strain assessment with global
Doxorubicin
longitudinal strain.
Epirubicin
Measure troponins.
Idarubicin
Consider use of dexrazoxane, continuous infusion,
liposomal preparations, β-blockers, ACE-I.
Alkylating Agents
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Antimetabolites
Decitabine
Clofarabine
Antimicrotubule Agents
Docetaxel
Monoclonal Antibody-Based
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
Trastuzumab
Bevacizumab
Avoid concomitant use with anthracyclines.
Adostratuzumab emtacine
Pertuzumab
Small Molecule Tyrosine
Kinase Inhibitors
Pazopanib
Treat hypertension aggressively
Sorafenib
Sunitinib
Lapatinib
Proteasome Inhibitor
Carfilzomib
Bortezomib
Lorem ipsum
Class of Drugs
Examples
Anthracyclines
Doxorubicin, daunorubicin, epirubicin,
Antimetabolite
Capecitabine, 5 Fluorouracil
Alkylating Agents
Cisplatin, cyclophosphamide
Vinca Alkaloids
Vincristine, vinblastine
Taxanes
Paclitaxel, docetaxel
Immune Checkpoint
Pembrolizumab, nivolumab
Inhibitor
Targeted Therapies
Herceptin, imatinib, bevacizumab
Appendix X: Chemotherapy drugs that have been associated with HF
Appendix XI: Modified World Health Organization Maternal
Cardiovascular Risk Assessmenta-f
WHO CLASS I: No Increase or a Mild Increase in Morbidity
 Uncomplicated, small, or mild
 Pulmonary stenosis.
 Patent ductus arteriosus.
 Ventricular septal defect.
 Mitral valve prolapse (with no more than trivial mitral regurgitation).
 Successfully repaired simple lesions (secundum atrial or ventricular septal defect,
patent ductus arteriosus, anomalous pulmonary venous drainage.
 Isolated Atrial ectopic beats or ventricular extrasystoles.
WHO CLASS II: (If otherwise well and uncomplicated)
Moderate Increase in Maternal Morbidity
Small Increase in Maternal Mortality (< 1%)
 Unoperated atrial or ventricular septal defect (moderate size, velocity < 4m/s).
 Repaired tetralogy of Fallot (without significant residual lesions).
 Most asymptomatic arrhythmias without cardiac decompensation - atrial fibrillation,
supraventricular tachycardia, Wolff Parkinson White syndrome, long QT syndrome
without any cardiac decompensation.
WHO CLASS II-III: Maternal Mortality, (1-5%)
Depending on the individual or other co-existing conditions
 Mild left ventricular dysfunction (LVEF 40-50%).
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
 No LV outflow tract obstruction: WHO II
 LV outflow tract obstruction present: WHO III
 Marfan syndrome without aortic dilation.
 Aorta < 45 mm in aortic disease associated with bicuspid aortic valve.
 Native or tissue valve disease not considered WHO I or IV.
 Mild native or repaired coarctation of aorta (without hypertension or significant
obstruction.
Appendix XI: Modified World Health Organization Maternal
Cardiovascular Risk Assessment (cont’d)a-f
WHO CLASS III: Severe Increase in Maternal Morbidity
Significant Increase in Maternal Mortality (5-15%)
Expert counselling required. If pregnancy is decided upon, needs an
individualized pregnancy care plan with a multidisciplinary team
management.
 Left ventricular dysfunction (LVEF 35-40%).
 Mechanical valve.
 Systemic right ventricle (cCTGA, post Senning/Mustard).
 Fontan circulation.
 Repaired Tetralogy of Fallot with severe pulmonary regurgitation, right ventricular failure, right
ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
 Cyanotic heart disease (unrepaired).
 Other complex congenital heart disease.
 Aortic dilatation 40 - 45 mm in Marfan syndrome.
 Aortic dilatation 45 - 50 mm in aortic disease associated with bicuspid aortic valve.
WHO CLASS IV: Maternal mortality is 25-50%
Pregnancy Is Not Recommended or Is Contraindicated.
If pregnancy occurs, termination should be discussed.
If pregnancy continues, care as for class III.
 Severe pulmonary arterial hypertension of any cause (mortality 17-33%).
 Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (LVEF < 30%, NYHA III-IV).
 Previous peripartum cardiomyopathy with any residual impairment of left ventricular
function.
 Severe mitral stenosis (MVA < 1.0 cm2), severe symptomatic aortic stenosis (AVA
< 1.0cm2).
 Marfan syndrome with aorta dilated > 45 mm .
 Aortic dilatation > 50 mm in aortic disease associated with bicuspid aortic valve.
 Uncorrected severe coarctation.
Modified from:
a)
Thorne S, MacGregor A, NelsonPiercy C. Risks of contraception and pregnancy in heart disease. Heart 2006;
92:15205;
b)
RegitzZagrosek V, Blomstrom Lundqvist C, Borghi C et al. European Society of Cardiology guidelines on the
management of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy. Eur Heart J 2011; 32:314797
c)
Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, Alvarez AN, Mercier LA et al. Prospective multicentre study of pregnancy
outcomes in women with heart disease. Circulation 2001; 104: 515-521.
d)
Drenthen W, Boersma E, Balci A, Moons P, Roos-Hesselink JW et al. Predictors of pregnancy complications in
women with congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J 2010; 31: 2124-2132.
e)
Khairy P, Ouyang DW, Fernandes SM, Lee-Parritz A, Economy KE, Landzberg MJ. Pregnancy outcomes in
women with congenital heart disease. Circulation 2006; 113:517-524
f)
Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Erwin JP 3rd,Guyton RA, O’Gara PT, Ruiz CE, Skubas NJ,
Sorajja P, Sundt TM 3rd, Thomas JD; ACC/AHA Task Force Members. 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the
Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease: executive summary: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2440-2492
Appendix XII: New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classification
Functional
Symptoms
Maternal
Class
Cardiovascular
Risk
CLASS I
No limitation. Ordinary physical activity does not
Low
cause undue fatigue, dyspnea or palpitation.
CLASS II
Slight limitation of physical activity. Such patients are
comfortable at rest. Ordinary physical activity results
Low
in fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea or angina.
CLASS III
Marked limitation of physical activity. Although
patients are comfortable at rest, less than ordinary
High
will activity lead to fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea or
angina.
CLASS IV
Inability to carry on any physical activity without
discomfort. Symptoms of congestive heart failure
High
are present at rest. With any physical activity,
increased discomfort is experienced.
Modified from:
The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis of Diseases of
the Heart and Great Vessels. 9th ed. Boston, Mass: Little, Brown & Co; 1994:253-256.
Appendix XIII: The different causes of ACHD-HF based on the underlying
pathophysiology, related CHD and etiology tailored management
Etiology
Pathophysiology
Congenital heart defect
Management
Systemic left
Pressure overload
Sub, supravalvular or valvular
Surgical or catheter
ventricle failure
aortic stenosis,
intervention to address
coarctation of the aorta,
obstructive or regurgitant
congenital MS, Shone syndrome
valve lesions, persistent
shunts, coronary anomalies.
Volume overload
Aortic/mitral valve regurgitation,
For coarctation of aorta -
persistent shunts: VSD, ASD,
correct residual lesion,`
PDA
treat hypertension
atrioventricular valve
Medical therapy
regurgitation (post AVSD repair)
ACEi, ARB + sacubitril,
Aorto-pulmonary collaterals
RAS blockers
Myocardial injury
Inadequate myocardial
Beta blockers
/ischemia
protection during surgery,
Mineralocorticoid receptor
supply-demand mismatch,
antagonist
ventriculotomy, myocardial
Loop diuretics for
hypertrophy, cyanosis, coronary
symptom relief
anomalies (ALCAPA)
CRT/ Biventricular pacing
Sub-pulmonary Ventricle - Severe pulmonary regurgitation
in patients with chronic RV
systemic ventricle
in TOF, Chronic right ventricular
pacing and desynchrony
interaction
pacing
Sub-pulmonary
Volume overload
Severe pulmonary regurgitation
Surgical or catheter
morphological
in TOF, atrial septal defect with
intervention to address
right ventricle
large left-to-right shunt
obstructive or regurgitant
failure a,b
Ebsteins with severe
valve lesions, persistent
tricuspid regurgitation
shunts, conduit stenosis
Pressure overload
Severe RV outflow tract
Medical therapy
obstruction, RV to PA conduit
PAH targeted therapy if
stenosis, double chambered RV
RV failure due to PAH
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Loop diuretics for symptom
relieve
Morphological
Pressure Overload
Congenitally corrected
No standard guidelines
systemic right
Volume Overload
transposition of the great
for medical therapyf,g
ventricle
Myocardial architecture -
arteries, transposition of
Medical therapy if
failurec
RV morphology,
the great arteries after
symptomatic
Tricuspid systemic
atrial switch repair
Treat arrhythmias,
atrioventricular valve/
(Mustard or Senning)d,e
correct residual
Ebsteinoid
systemic atrioventricular
hemodynamic lesions
valve regurgitation -
E.g,baffle stenting /
Tricuspid Regurgitation
systemic TV replacement
where appropriate
CRT may have a role
Systemic
Complicated multifactor
Single ventricle physiology
Transcatheter Intervention
single ventricle
etiology
(unrepaired)
eg fenestration closure or
failureh
Volume overload (valve
Heterotaxy
creation of fenestration,
regurgitation, collaterals)
Single ventricle physiology
coil occlusion of aorto -
Decrease in preload -
palliated
pulmonary collaterals
post Fontan
(BTshunt, Glenn, PDA stenting)
pulmonary artery stenting
Myocardial injury /
Post Fontan - PLE, valve
surgical Fontan conversion
underlying morphology
regurgitations, arterial
Manage arrhythmias - EPS
Elevated systemic
desaturation fenestration.
+RFA, pacemaker
venous pressure
implantation
Diastolic dysfunction
No standard guidelines for
(impaired relaxation
medical therapy
and ventricular filling) j,
Judicious use of Loop
Tachy &
Diuretics for symptom relief
bradyarrhythmias
PDE5 inhibitors & ERA to
decrease PA pressures and
to improve cardiac output
Appendix XIII: The different causes of ACHD-HF based on the underlying
pathophysiology, related CHD and etiology tailored management
Etiology
Pathophysiology
Congenital heart defect
Management
Cyanotic
Myocardial injury by
Uncorrected or palliated cyanotic
Surgical Correction/repair
systemic and/or
chronic hypoxia
congenital heart disease (TOF,
all hemodynamic lesions
sub-pulmonary
TOF with pulmonary atresia,
Transcatheter intervention
ventricle failure
Pulmonary to systemic
single ventricle)
to occlude any veno-veno
with or without
shunts
Baffle leak (post atrial switch)
collateral, occlude baffle
pulmonary
leaks
hypertension
Veno-veno collateral, pulmonary
Treat iron deficiency
(PH)
AVM
anemia
Pressure overload
Eisenmenger syndrome
Routine phlebotomy not
recommended PAH
targeted therapy
Systolic
Atrial or ventricular
Post TOF repair,
Antiarrhythmic
dysfunction of
tachyarrhythmias
Senning/Mustard (Atrial switch)
medication
the systemic
Sinus node
cCTGA, Ebstein Anomaly,
Electrophysiology study
ventricle due to
dysfunction/AV node
post Fontan l
and catheter or surgical
arrhythmias k
dysfunction
ablation
Interatrial re-entrant
Devices: Pacemaker,
tachycardia
ICD, CRT
Acquired
Coronary artery disease &
Systemic hypertension,
Treat appropriately
ischemic heart
Cardiovascular risk
hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus,
disease and
factors m
smoking
ventricular
dysfunction
Congenital coronary artery Anomalous origin and/or course,
Treat appropriately
abnormalities
extrinsic compression by a dilated
pulmonary artery, coronary
kinking after re-implantation of
coronary arteries
Non cardiac
Anemia, Thyroid diseases,
Can affect any CHD
Treat appropriately
cause of
renal failure, Liver failure
Fontan associated liver disease
ventricular
Iron deficiency anemia more
dysfunction
common in cyanotic heart
disease
a) Konstam MA, Kiernan MS, Bernstein D, Bozkurt B, Jacob M, Kapur NK, Kociol RD, Lewis EF, Mehra MR, Pagani FD, Raval AN, Ward C;
American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; and Council on Cardiovascular
Surgery and Anesthesia. Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2018 May 15;137(20):e578-e622.
b) Santens B, Van De Bruaene A, De Meester P, D'Alto M, Reddy S, Bernstein D, Koestenberger M, Hansmann G, Budts W. Diagnosis and
treatment of right ventricular dysfunction in congenital heart disease. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2020 Oct;10(5):1625-1645.
c) Brida M, Diller GP, Gatzoulis MA. Systemic Right Ventricle in Adults With Congenital Heart Disease: Anatomic and Phenotypic Spectrum and
Current Approach to Management. Circulation. 2018 Jan 30;137(5):508-518..
d) Lubiszewska B, Gosiewska E, Hoffman P, et al. Myocardial perfusion and function of the systemic right ventricle in patients after atrial switch
procedure for complete transposition: long-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000;36:1365-70.
e) Roos-Hesselink JW, Meijboom FJ, Spitaels SE, et al. Decline in ventricular function and clinical condition after Mustard repair for transposition
of the great arteries (a prospective study of 22-29 years). Eur Heart J. 2004;25(14):1264-70
f) Ladouceur M, Segura de la Cal T, Gaye B, Valentin E, Ly R, Iserin L, Legendre A, Mousseaux E, Li W, Rafiq I, Kempny A, Barradas-Pires A,
Babu-Narayan SV, Gatzoulis MA, Dimopoulos K. Effect of medical treatment on heart failure incidence in patients with a systemic right ventricle.
Heart. 2021 Sep;107(17):1384-1389.
g) Dos L, Pujadas S, Estruch M, Mas A, Ferreira-González I, Pijuan A, Serra R, Ordóñez-Llanos J, Subirana M, Pons-Lladó G, Marsal JR,
García-Dorado D, Casaldàliga J. Eplerenone in systemic right ventricle: double blind randomized clinical trial. The evedes study. Int J Cardiol.
2013 Oct 15;168(6):5167-73. .
h) Perrin N, Dore A, van de Bruaene A, Mongeon FP, Mondésert B, Poirier N, Miró J, Khairy P, Ibrahim R, Chaix MA. The Fontan Circulation: From
Ideal to Failing Hemodynamics and Drug Therapies for Optimization. Can J Cardiol. 2022 Jul;38(7):1059-1071..
i) Book WM, Gerardin J, Saraf A, Marie Valente A, Rodriguez F 3rd. Clinical Phenotypes of Fontan Failure: Implications for Management.
Congenit Heart Dis. 2016 Jul;11(4):296-308
j) CheungYF, Penny DJ, RedingtonAN(2000) Serial assessment of left ventricular diastolic function after Fontan procedure. Heart Br Card Soc
83:420-424.
k) Motonaga KS, Khairy P, Dubin AM. Electrophysiologic therapeutics in heart failure in adult congenital heart disease. Heart Fail Clin. 2014 Jan;
10(1):69-89.
l) Egbe AC, Connolly HM, Khan AR, et al. Outcomes in adult Fontan patients with atrial tachyarrhythmias. Am Heart J 2017;186:12-20.
m) Fedchenko M, Z. Mandalenakis, K.W. Giang, A. Rosengren, P. Eriksson, M. Dellborg, Long-term outcomes after myocardial infarction in
middle-aged and older patients with congenital heart disease-a nationwide study, Eur. Heart J. 2021: 42 (26): 2577-2586.
a) Burchill LJ, Mertens L, Broberg CS. Imaging for the assessment of heart failure in congenital heart disease: ventricular function and beyond.
Heart Fail Clin. 2014 Jan;10(1):9-22
b) J.A. Eindhoven, A.E. van den Bosch, P.R. Jansen, E. Boersma, J.W. Roos-Hesselink, The usefulness of brain natriuretic peptide in complex
congenital heart disease: a systematic review, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 60 (21) (2012) 2140-2149.
c) Giannakoulas G, Dimopoulos K, Bolger AP, Tay EL, Inuzuka R, Bedard E, Davos C, Swan L, Gatzoulis MA. Usefulness of natriuretic peptide
levels to predict mortality in adults with congenital heart disease. Am J Cardiol 2010;105:869 - 873
d) KochAM, ZinkS, SingerH, DittrichS.B-type natriuretic peptide levelsinpatients with functionally univentricular hearts after total cavopulmonary
connection. Eur J Heart Fail 2008;10:60-62.
e) Inuzuka R, Diller GP, Borgia F, Benson L, Tay EL, Alonso-Gonzalez R, Silva M, Charalambides M, Swan L, Dimopoulos K, Gatzoulis MA.
Comprehensive use of cardiopulmonary exercise testing identifies adults with congenital heart disease at increased mortality risk in the
f) Kempny A, Dimopoulos K, Uebing A, Moceri P, Swan L, Gatzoulis MA, Diller GP. Reference values for exercise limitations among adults with
congenital heart dis- ease. Relation to activities of daily life-single centre experience and review of published data. Eur Heart J 2012;33:1386 -1396.
Investigations
Important
Values/Parameter
Electrocardiogram
To identify new onset/change in baseline ECG
Baseline ECG is abnormal to begin with in
(ECG)
e.g., right/left ventricular hypertrophy,
many ACHD.
Conduction abnormalities.
New or recent change in baseline ECG
should trigger further review.
Chest X-ray (CXR)
Abnormalities in pulmonary artery and cardiac
Baseline CXR may be abnormal.
size, lungs(oligemic/plethoric) and
thorax/skeletal
Transthoracic echo
Anatomical diagnosis, identify residual or new
Poor echo window (obesity, multiple scars,
lesions and sequelae, assess ventricular
skeletal anomalies, lung pathology.)
function, screening for pulmonary hypertension Echo parameters for left ventricular
(PH).
assessment are not suitable for single/
Right Ventricle (RV) function.
Extracardiac lesions may not be clearly
visualised.
Transesophageal
Anatomical diagnosis, conduits, valvular
Useful to assess intracardiac shunts
echo
lesions
(especially ASD), valvular lesion,
anomalous venous return.
Used to assist in transcatheter
interventions
CMR
Ventricular volumes and function especially RV Excellent tool for assessment of RV and to
Flow and regurgitation fractions.
study flow in Fontan and calculate shunts.
Perfusion defects/fibrosis.
Artifacts if patients have coils/ pacemakers
Cardiac and extracardiac anatomy.
that are not MRI compatible.
Not optimal for coronary anatomy.
Cardiac CT
Assessment of extracardiac anomalies.
3D reconstruction is invaluable in planning
pulmonary artery anatomy.
surgical intervention and assessing
stents, conduit and aorto- pulmonary collateral
surrounding non cardiac structures.
arteries & shunts, aortic anomalies, coronary
Risk of radiation and contrast induced
arteries
nephropathy.
Tachycardia impairs resolution.
Cardiac
Hemodynamic assessment
Allows for transcatheter interventions for
catheterisation
of shunts.
appropriate lesions.
Pressure gradients across stenotic lesions,
extracardiac shunts
severity of PH and vasoreactivity .
Biomarkers
Reflects hemodynamic significant lesions,
Levels may be raised at baseline
(BNP/NT ProBNP)b,c,d
ventricular dysfunction.
- increasing trends/acute rise may suggest
HF.
Assess response to treatment.
Cardiopulmonary
Objective exercise capacity-peak Vo2,
Heterogenous populationf
exercise teste
chronotropic competence,
(Trending may be more important than
exercise induced arrhythmias,
absolute values)
desaturation on exercise.
Prognostic values not standardized.
Assess response to treatment.
Rhythm Analysis (24
Identifies baseline and new onset conduction
May miss paroxysmal arrhythmias.
hours & up to 7 days
abnormalities (atrial/ventricular premature
ECG monitoring, loop contractions, tachy/bradyarrhythmias, pauses,
recorders
heart rate variabilities
Appendix XIV: Investigations in ACHDa
Detail History Physical Examination
Basic Investigation - TTE, CXR, ECG, Routine Bloods
Signs and Symptom of Heart Failure
Abnormal
Symptomatic
Asymptomatic
Biomarkers / CPET
Normal
Systemic Right
Ventricle
Single Ventricle
Biomarkers / CPET
Normal
Surveillance
/ assess for
other
diagnosis
Worsening
Symptoms
No
No
Appropriate
Treatment
PAH
Targeted Therapy
No
No
No
Yes
Response to Treatment
Ventricular Dysfunction
Yes
Yes
Yes
Follow Up -
Imaging
Biomarkers /
CPET
Exercise
Rehabilitation
Lifestyle
Modifincation
Abnormal
Advance Diagnostic Testing:
TEE
Advance Imaging: CT/CMR
+ Cardiac Catheterization
Rhythm Analysis
Others Bleeding (Anaemia,
Infective Endocarditis /
Thyroid Disease Systemic
Pulmonary Hypertension
Worsening Heart Failure Despite
Optimal Therapy
Heart Failure Pharmacotherapy
(GDMT)
Consider CRT
Advanced Therapies MCS (Mechanical
Circulatory Support)
Heart Transplant
Appendix XV: Flow Chart of the Management of ACHD-HF
Hemodynamic Significant Structural / Shunt /
Valvular Lesion
Transcatheter /
Surgical Intervention
Palliative Care /
Advance Care Planning
Evaluation for
Underlying Cause
Arrhythmia
Antiarrhythmic
Medical
Therapy
EPS + Catheter
Ablation
Pacemaker
Surveillance/
Reassurance
Yes
APPENDIX XVI Calculation of Performance and Outcome Measures
Number of patients who had
% of patients who had
documentation of
documentation of NYHA
=
NYHA Functional Class
x 100
Functional Class
Number of HF patients who were
seen during that time period
Number of patients who
% of patients who had
=
had LVEF measurement
x 100
LVEF measurement
Number of HF patients who were
seen during that time period
Number of patients who
ere on ACE-I /
ARB at discharge
% of patients discharged
=
Number of HF patients who were
x 100
with ACE-I / ARB
discharged during this time period
who had no contraindications to
ACE-I/ARB
Number of patients who
% of patients discharged
were on β-blockers at discharge
on β-blockers
=
Number of HF patients who were
x 100
discharged during that time period
who had no contraindications to β-blockers
Number of patients who
% of patients discharged on
were on MRA at discharge
MRA
=
Number of HF patients who were
x 100
discharged during that time period
who had no contraindications to MRA
Number of patients who had
% of patients with chronic
AF/Atrial Flutter who
or paroxysmal AF/Atrial
=
were on OAC at discharge
x 100
Flutter on anticoagulant
Number of HF patients who had
therapy (OAC) at discharge.
AF/Atrial Flutter during that time
period who had no contraindications
to OAC at discharge
Number of patients who
% of patients given a post
were given a post
discharge appointment
=
discharge appointment
x 100
within 14 days
Number of HF patients who were
seen during that time period
% of patients who had their
Number of patients who
Foundational HF medications
Had the HF medications up titrated
up titrated to maximally
=
within 3 months
x 100
tolerated doses by 3 months
Number of HF patients who were
post discharge
seen during that time period
1.
Savarese G, Becher PM, Lund LH, Seferovic P, Rosano GMC, Coats AJS. Global burden of heart failure: a comprehensive
and updated review of epidemiology. Cardiovasc Res 2022:cvac013. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvac013
2.
Savarese G, Lund LH. Global Public Health Burden of Heart Failure. Cardiac Failure Review 2017;3:7-11.
3.
Groenewegen A, Rutten FH, Mosterd A, Hoes AW. Epidemiology of heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail. 2020 Aug;22(8):
1342-1356
4.
Conrad N, Judge A, Tran J, Mohseni H, Hedgecott D et al. Temporal trends and patterns in heart failure incidence:
a population-based study of 4 million individuals. Lancet 2018;391:572–580.
5.
Lam CS, Teng TK, Tay WT, Anand I, Zhang S et al. Regional and Ethnic Differences among Patients with Heart
Failure in Asia: The Asian Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Registry. Eur Heart J 2016: 37: 3141-53.
6.
Cleland JG, Swedberg K, Follath F, Komajda M, Cohen-Solal A et al. The EuroHeart Failure survey programme - a
survey on the quality of care among patients with heart failure in Europe. Part 1: patient characteristics and diagnosis.
Eur Heart J 2003;24:442-463.
7.
Buddeke, J., Valstar, G.B., van Dis, I. et al. Mortality after hospital admission for heart failure: improvement over
time, equally strong in women as in men. BMC Public Health 2020: 20, 36
8.
Conrad N, Judge A, Canoy D et al. Temporal Trends and Patterns in Mortality After Incident Heart Failure. A
Longitudinal Analysis of 86000 Individuals. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4(11):1102-1111
9.
Cunningham LC, Fonarow GC, Yancy CW, Sheng S, Matsouaka RA, DeVore AD, Jneid H, Deswal A. Regional
Variations in Heart Failure Quality and Outcomes: Get With The Guidelines-Heart Failure Registry. J Am Heart
Assoc. 2021 Apr 6;10(7):e018696.
10.
Yancy CW, Lopatin M, Stevenson LW, De Marco T, Fonarow GC. Clinical presentation, management, and in-hospital
outcomes of patients admitted with acute decompensated heart failure with preserved systolic function: a report from
the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry (ADHERE) Database.J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47:76-84.
11.
MacDonald MR, Tay WT, Teng TK,et al: Regional Variation of Mortality in Heart Failure With Reduced and Preserved
Ejection Fraction Across Asia: Outcomes in the ASIAN-HF Registry. J Am Heart Assoc 2020 Jan 7;9(1):e012199.
12.
Lim YMF, Ong SM, Koudstaal S, Hwong WY, Liew HB, Rajadurai J et al: Trends for Readmission and Mortality After
Heart Failure Hospitalisation in Malaysia, 2007 to 2016. Glob Heart. 2022 Mar 8;17(1):20
13.
Ahmad, W. A. Wan, M. A. S. K. Abdul Kader, N. T. Ross, et al. “Demographic and Characteristic of Patients Admitted
with Heart Failure: Interim Analysis of Malaysia Heart Failure (MYHF) Registry.” Int J Cardiology 2021: 345:(December
1, 2021): 13-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2021.10.057
14.
Malek, A.M. Abd, M.A.S. Abdul Kader, T.K. Ong, A.W. Ramli, H.H. et al. “Clinical Characteristics of Hospitalized
Heart Failure Patients with 30 Days Mortality: Insights from Malaysian Heart Failure (MYHF) Registry.” Int J
Cardiology 2022: 369: 21-22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.10.070.
15.
Raja Shariff RE, Kasim S, Borhan MK, Yusoff MR. Acute heart failure - The ‘real’ Malaysian experience: An observational
study from a single non-cardiac centre. Proceedings of Singapore Healthcare 2021, Vol. 30(3) 218-224
16.
Ling, H.S., Chung, B.K., Chua, P.F. et al. Acute decompensated heart failure in a non cardiology tertiary referral
centre, Sarawak General Hospital (SGH-HF). BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2020:20, 511
17.
Azmee Mohd Ghazi, Chee Kiang Teoh and Aizai Azan Abdul Rahim: Patient profiles on outcomes in patients
hospitalized for heart failure: a 10-year history of the Malaysian population ESC Heart Failure (2022) Published
online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.13992
18.
Ambrosy AP, Fonarow GC, Butler J, Chioncel O. The global health and economic burden of hospitalizations for heart
failure lessons learned from hospitalized heart failure registries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1123-1133
19.
Crespo-Leiro MG, Anker SD, Maggioni AP, Coats AJ, Filippatos G, Ruschitzka F, et al. European Society of
Cardiology heart failure long-term registry (ESC-HF-LT): 1-year follow-up outcomes and differences across regions.
Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:613-625.
20.
Lan T, Liao Y-H, Zhang J, Yang Z-P, Xu G-S et al. Mortality and Readmission Rates After Heart Failure: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management 2021:17 1307-1320
21.
Hessel FP. Overview of the socio-economic consequences of heart failure. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther 2021;11(1):254-262
22.
Jones NR, Roalfe AK, Adoki I, Hobbs FDR, Taylor CJ. Survival of patients with chronic heart failure in the community:
a systematic review and metaanalysis. Eur J Heart Fail 2019;21:1306-1325
23.
Taylor CJ, Ordóñez-Mena JM, Roalfe AK, Lay-Flurrie S, Jones NR et al., Trends in survival after a diagnosis of heart
failure in the United Kingdom 2000-2017: population based cohort study. BMJ 2019;364:l223
24.
Frohlich H, Rosenfeld N, Tager T, Goode K, Kazmi S, Hole T, et al. Epidemiology and long-term outcome in
outpatients with chronic heart failure in Northwestern Europe. Heart 2019:105:1252-1259.
25.
Lund LH, Carrero J-J, Farahmand B, Henriksson KM, Jonsson A et al. Association between enrolment in a heart
failure quality registry and subsequent mortality-a nationwide cohort study. Eur J of Heart Failure 2017:19,1107-1116.
26.
Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, Allen LA, Bluemke DA, Butler J, Fonarow GC, Ikonomidis JS, Khavjou O, Konstam MA,
Maddox TM, Nichol G, Pham M, Piña IL, Trogdon JG. Forecasting the impact of heart failure in the United States: a
policy statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013; 6:606-19.
27.
Cook C, Cole G, Asaria P, Jabbour R, Francis DP.The annual global economic burden of heart failure. Int J Card
2014:171(3):368-76.
28.
Giles L, Freeman C, Field P et al. Humanistic burden and economic impact of heart failure - a systematic review of
the literature [version 2]. F1000Research 2020, 8:859 (doi: 10.12688/f1000research.19365.2)
29.
Alva ML, Gray A, Mihaylova B, et al.: The impact of diabetes-related complications on healthcare costs: new results
from the UKPDS (UKPDS 84). Diabet Med. 2015; 32(4): 459-66.
REFERENCES
30.
Nichols GA, Ustyugova A, Déruaz-Luyet A, O'Keeffe-Rosetti M, Brodovicz KG. Health Care Costs by Type of
Expenditure across eGFR Stages among Patients with and without Diabetes, Cardiovascular Disease, and Heart
Failure. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020 Jul;31(7):1594-1601
31.
Yingchoncharoen T, Wu T-C, Choi D-J, Ong TK, Liew HB, Cho M-C. Economic Burden of Heart Failure in Asian
Countries with Different Healthcare Systems. Korean Circ J. 2021 Aug;51(8):681-693
32.
Shafie AA, Tan YP, Liau SY, Yang SL, Liew HB, Chaiyakunapruk N. Registry based analysis of cost-of-illness study
among stage C heart failure patients at Hospital Queen Elizabeth II, Sabah, Malaysia. Health Policy and Technology
2019; 8 : 51-60
33.
Ong SC, Low JZ, Yew WY, Yen CH, Ali MSK et al. Cost analysis of chronic heart failure management in Malaysia:
A multi-centred retrospective study. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 9:971592. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.971592
34.
Janwanishstaporn, S., Karaketklang, K. & Krittayaphong, R. National trend in heart failure hospitalization and
outcome under public health insurance system in Thailand 2008-2013. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2022: 22, 203
35.
Bozkurt B, Coats AJ, Tsutsui H, et al. Universal Definition and Classification of Heart Failure: a report of the Heart
Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology, Japanese Heart
Failure Society and Writing Committee of the Universal Definition of Heart Failure. J Card Fail 2021;27:387-413
36.
Roh J, Hill JA, Singh A, Valero-Muñoz M,Sam F. Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: Heterogeneous
Syndrome, Diverse Preclinical Models. Circulation Research. 2022;130:1906-1925
37.
Dunlay SM, Roger VL, Redfield MM. Epidemiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.Nat Rev Cardiol.
2017; 14:591-602
38.
Savarese, G., Stolfo, D., Sinagra, G. et al. Heart failure with mid-range or mildly reduced ejection fraction. Nat Rev
Cardiol 2022: 19:100-116.
39.
Koh AS, Tay WT, Teng THK, Vedin O, Benson L, Dahlstrom U, et al. A comprehensive population-based characterization
of heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:1624-1634
40.
Webb J, Draper J, Fovargue L,Sieniewicz B, Gould J et al. Is heart failure with mid range ejection fraction (HFmrEF)
a distinct clinical entity or an overlap group? IJC Heart & Vasculature 2018: 21: 1-6.
41.
Halliday BP, Wassall R, Lota AS, et al. Withdrawal of pharmacological treatment for heart failure in patients with
recovered dilated cardiomyopathy (TRED-HF): an open-label, pilot, randomised trial. Lancet 2019;393:61-73.
42.
He Y, Ling Y, Guo W, Li Q, Yu S, Huang H, Zhang R, Gong Z, Liu J, Mo L, Yi S, Lai D, Yao Y, Liu J, Chen J, Liu Y,
Chen S. Prevalence and Prognosis of HFimpEF Developed From Patients With Heart Failure With Reduced
Ejection Fraction: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Nov 25;8:757596.
43.
Chioncel O, Lainscak M, Seferovic PM, Anker SD, Crespo-Leiro MG, Harjola VP, et al. Epidemiology and one-year
outcomes in patients with chronic heart failure and preserved, mid-range and reduced ejection fraction: an analysis
of the ESC heart failure long-term registry. Eur J Heart Fail. 2017:19:1574-85.
44.
John R. Kapoor JR, Kapoor R, Ju C, Heidenreich PA, Eapen ZJ et al. Precipitating Clinical Factors, Heart Failure
Characterization, and Outcomes in Patients Hospitalized With Heart Failure With Reduced, Borderline,and
Preserved Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol HF 2016;4:464-72
45.
Lindberg F, Lund LH, Benson L, Schrage B, Edner M et al. Patient profile and outcomes associated with follow-up
in specialty vs. primary care in heart failure. ESC Heart Failure 2022; 9: 822-833
46.
Drazner MH, Rame JE, Stevenson LW, et al; Prognostic importance of elevated jugular venous pressure and a third
heart sound in patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(8):574-81.
47.
Drazner MH, Rame JE, Dries DL. Third heart sound and elevated jugular venous pressure as markers of the
subsequent development of heart failure in patients with asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction. Am J Med
2003;114:431-7.
48.
Mullens W, Damman K, Harjola V-P, Mebazaa A, La Rocca HBP et al. The use of diuretics in heart failure with
congestion - a position statement from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J
Heart Failure 2019:21:137-155
49.
Stevenson LW, Perloff JK. The limited reliability of physical signs for estimating hemodynamics in chronic heart
failure. JAMA1989;261:884-888.
50.
de Freitas EV, Batlouni M, Gamarsky R. Heart failure in the elderly. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2012 Jun;9(2):101-7.
51.
S. Katsanos, G. Bakosis, A. Frogudaki .Acute heart failure syndrome in the elderly.Cont Cardiol Educ 2017:3: 87-87
https://doi.org/10.1002/cce2.60
52.
Maisel AS, Krishnaswamy P, Nowak RM, et al for Breathing Not Properly Multinational Study Investigators. Rapid
measurement of B-type natriuretic peptide in the emergency diagnosis of heart failure. N Engl J Med
002;347(3):161-7.
53.
Maisel AS, McCord J, Nowak RM, et al. Bedside B-type natriuretic peptide in the emergency diagnosis of heart
failure with reduced or preserved ejection fraction. Results from the Breathing Not Properly Multinational Study. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41(11):2010-7.
54.
Januzzi JL, van Kimmenade R, Lainchbury J, et al. NT-proBNP testing for diagnosis and short-term prognosis in
acute destabilized heart failure: an international pooled analysis of 1256 patients: the International Collaborative of
NT-proBNP Study. Eur Heart J 2006;27(3):330-7.
55.
Roberts E, Ludman AJ, Dworzynski K, Al-Mohammad A, Cowie MR, et al NICE Guideline Development Group for
Acute Heart Failure. The diagnostic accuracy of the natriuretic peptides in heart failure: systematic review and
diagnostic meta-analysis in the acute care setting. BMJ 2015;350:h910.
56.
Kim H-N, Januzzi JL, Jr. Natriuretic peptide testing in heart failure. Circulation 2011;123:2015-19.
57.
Mueller C, McDonald K, de Boer RA, Maisel A, Cleland JGF et al. Heart Failure Association of the European Society
of Cardiology. Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology practical guidance on the use of
natriuretic peptide concentrations. Eur J Heart Fail 2019;21:715 731.
58.
Fonarow GC, Peacock WF, Phillips CO, et al. Admission B-type natriuretic peptide levels and in-hospital mortality in
acute decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;49:1943-50.
59.
Januzzi JL, Jr., Sakhuja R, O'Donoghue M, et al. Utility of amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide testing for
prediction of 1-year mortality in patients with dyspnea treated in the emergency department. Arch Intern Med
2006;166:315-20.
60.
Lam CSP, Gamble GD, Ling LH, Sim D, Leong KTG, Yeo PSD, Ong HY, Jaufeerally F, Ng TP, Cameron VA, Poppe
K, Lund M, Devlin G, Troughton R, Richards AM, Doughty RN. Mortality associated with heart failure with preserved
vs. reduced ejection fraction in a prospective international multi-ethnic cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2018 May
21;39(20):1770-1780
61.
Kociol RD, Horton JR, Fonarow GC, et al. Admission, discharge, or change in B-type natriuretic peptide and
long-term outcomes: data from Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized Patients with
Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF) linked to Medicare claims. Circ Heart Fail 2011;4:628-36.
62.
Bettencourt P, Azevedo A, Pimenta J, Frioes F, Ferreira S, Ferreira A. N-terminal-pro-brain natriuretic peptide
predicts outcome after hospital discharge in heart failure patients. Circulation. 2004; 110:2168-2174
63.
Booth RA, Hill SA, Don-Wauchope A, Santaguida PL, Oremus M, McKelvie R, Balion C, Brown JA, Ali U, Bustamam
A, Sohel N, Raina P. Performance of BNP and NT-proBNP for diagnosis of heart failure in primary care patients: a
systematic review. Heart Fail Rev 2014;19:439-451
64.
Zaphiriou A, Robb S, Murray-Thomas T, Mendez G, Fox K, McDonagh T, Hardman SM, Dargie HJ, Cowie MR. The
diagnostic accuracy of plasma BNP and NTproBNP in patients referred from primary care with suspected heart
failure: results of the UK natriuretic peptide study. Eur J Heart Fail 2005;7:537-541.
65.
Savarese G, Musella F, D’Amore C, et al. Changes of natriuretic peptides predict hospital admissions in patients
with chronic heart failure. A meta-analysis. JACC Heart Failure 2014:2(2):148-58.
66.
Aimo A, Gaggin HK, Barison A et al (2019) Imaging, biomarker, and clinical predictors of cardiac remodeling in heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction. JACC Heart Fail 7:782-794.
67.
Daubert MA, Adams K, Yow E et al (2019) NT-proBNP goal achievement is associated with significant reverse
remodeling and improved clinical outcomes in HFrEF. JACC Heart Fail 7:158-168.
68.
Meijers WC, van der Velde AR, Müller Kobold AC, Dijck-Brouwer J, Wu AH, Jaffe A, de Boer RA. Variability of
biomarkers in patients with chronic heart failure and healthy controls. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:357-365.
69.
Morello A, Lloyd-Jones DM, Chae CU, van Kimmenade RRJ, Chen AC, Baggish AL, O'Donoghue M, Lee-Lewandrowski
E, Januzzi JL. Association of atrial fibrillation and amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide concentrations in
dyspneic subjects with and without acute heart failure: results from the ProBNP investigation of dyspnea in the
Emergency Department (PRIDE) study. Am Heart J 2007;153:90-97
70.
Richards M, Di Somma S, Mueller C, Nowak R, Peacock WF, Ponikowski P, Möckel M, Hogan C, Wu AH, Clopton
P, Filippatos GS, Anand I, Ng L, Daniels LB, Neath SX, Shah K, Christenson R, Hartmann O, Anker SD, Maisel A.
Atrial fibrillation impairs the diagnostic performance of cardiac natriuretic peptides in dyspneic patients. JACC Heart
Fail 2013;1:192-199
71.
Keyzer JM, Hoffmann JJ, Ringoir L, Nabbe KC, Widdershoven JW, Pop VJ. Age- and gender-specific brain natriuretic
peptide (BNP) reference ranges in primary care. Clin Chem Lab Med 2014;52(9):1341-6.
72.
Wang TJ, Larson MG, Levy D, Leip EP, Benjamin EJ, Wilson PW, Sutherland P, Omland T, Vasan RS. Impact of
age and sex on plasma natriuretic peptide levels in healthy adults. Am J Cardiol 2002;90:254-258.
73.
Kimmenade RRJ van, Januzzi JL, Baggish AL, Lainchbury JG, Bayés-Genis A, Richards AM, Pinto YM. Amino-terminal
pro-brain natriuretic peptide, renal function and outcomes in acute heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48:1621-1627.
74.
Anwaruddin S, Lloyd-Jones DM, Baggish A, Chen A, Krauser D, Tung R, Chae C, Januzzi JL. Renal function,
congestive heart failure, and amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide measurement: results from the ProBNP
Investigation of Dyspnea in the Emergency Department (PRIDE) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47:91-97
75.
Bayes-Genis A, Lloyd-Jones DM, van Kimmenade RR, Lainchbury JG, Richards AM, Ordonez-Llanos J, Santalo M,
Pinto YM, Januzzi JL. Effect of body mass index on diagnostic and prognostic usefulness of amino-terminal
pro-brain natriuretic peptide in patients with acute dyspnea. Arch Intern Med. 2007; 167:400-40
76.
Daniels LB, Clopton P, Bhalla V, Krishnaswamy P, Nowak RM, McCord J, Hollander JE, Duc P, Omland T, Storrow
AB, Abraham WT, Wu AH, Steg PG, Westheim A, Knudsen CW, Perez A, Kazanegra R, Herrmann HC, McCullough
PA, Maisel AS. How obesity affects the cut-points for B-type natriuretic peptide in the diagnosis of acute heart failure:
results from the Breathing Not Properly Multinational Study. Am Heart J. 2006; 151:999-1005.
77.
Felker GM, Anstrom KJ, Adams KF, Ezekowitz JA, Fiuzat M, Houston-Miller N, Januzzi JL, Mark DB, Piña IL,
Passmore G, Whellan DJ, Yang H, Cooper LS, Leifer ES, Desvigne-Nickens P, O'Connor CM. Effect of natriuretic
peptide-guided therapy on hospitalization or cardiovascular mortality in high-risk patients with heart failure and
reduced ejection fraction. JAMA 2017;318:713-720.
78.
Bajaj NS, Patel N, Prabhu SD, Arora G, Wang TJ, Arora P. Effect of NT-proBNP-guided therapy on all-cause
mortality in chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:951-952.
79.
Pfisterer M, Buser P, Rickli H, Gutmann M, Erne P, Rickenbacher P, Vuillomenet A, Jeker U, Dubach P, Beer H,
Yoon SI, Suter T, Osterhues HH, Schieber MM, Hilti P, Schindler R, Brunner-La Rocca HP; TIME-CHF Investigators.
BNP-guided vs symptom-guided heart failure therapy: the trial of intensified vs standard medical therapy in elderly
patients with congestive heart failure (TIME-CHF) randomized trial. JAMA 2009;301:383-392.
80.
Januzzi JL, Rehman SU, Mohammed AA, Bhardwaj A, Barajas L et al. Use of amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
peptide to guide outpatient therapy of patients with chronic left ventricular systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol
2011;58:1881-1889
81.
Januzzi JL Jr, Ahmad T, Mulder H, Coles A, Anstrom KJ et al. Natriuretic Peptide Response and Outcomes in
Chronic Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 Sep 3;74(9):1205-1217
82.
Levy D, Larson MG, Vasan RS, Kannel WB, Ho KK. The progression from hypertension to congestive heart failure.
JAMA. 1996;275:1557-62.
83.
Tocci G, Sciarretta S, Volpe M. Development of heart failure in recent hypertension trials. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1477-86
84.
Dunlay SM, Givertz MM, Aguilar D, Allen LA, Chan M et al. Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Heart Failure: A Scientific
Statement From the American Heart Association and the Heart Failure Society of America. Circulation. 2019;140:e
294-e324
85.
Kannel WB, McGee DL. Diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The Framingham study. JAMA. 1979; 241:2035-2038.
86.
Kenny HC, Abe ED. Heart Failure in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Circ Research. 2019;124:121-141
87.
Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, Wilson PWF et al. Obesity and the Risk of Heart Failure. N Engl J Med 2002;
347:305-313
88.
Aune D, Sen A, Norat T, Janszky I, Romundstad P et al. Body mass index, abdominal fatness and heart failure
incidence and mortality: a systematic review anddose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Circulation
2016;133:639-49.
89.
Pandey A, Cornwell WK, Willis B, Neeland IJ, Gao A, Leonard D, DeFina L, Berry JD. Body mass index and
cardiorespiratory fitness in mid-life and risk of heart failure hospitalization in older age: findings from the Cooper
Center Longitudinal Study.JACC Heart Fail. 2017; 5:367-374
90.
Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, Després JP, Gordon-Larsen P et al. Obesity and Cardiovascular Disease: A
Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021;143:e984-e1010
91.
Ingelsson E, Arnlöv J, Lind L, Sundström J. Metabolic syndrome and risk for heart failure in middle-aged men. Heart.
2006;92:1409-1413.
92.
Tang ZH, Wang L, Zeng F, Zhang K. Association and predictive value analysis for metabolic syndrome on systolic
and diastolic heart failure in high-risk patients. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014;14:124
93.
Kamimura D, Cain LR, Mentz RJ, White WB, Blaha MJ et al. Cigarette Smoking and Incident Heart Failure. Insights
From the Jackson Heart Study. Circulation. 2018;137:2572-2582
94.
Gopal DM, Kalogeropoulos AP, Georgiopoulou VV,Smith AL, Bauer DC et a. for the Health ABC Study. Cigarette
Smoking Exposure and Heart Failure Risk in Older Adults: The Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Am
Heart J. 2012 Aug; 164(2): 236-242.
95.
Ding N, Shah AM, Blaha MJ, Chang PP, Rosamond WD, Matsushita K. Cigarette smoking, cessation, and risk of
heart failure with preserved and reduced ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;79(23):2298-2305.
96.
Ference BA, Ginsberg HN, Graham I, Ray KK, Packard CJ et al. Low-density lipoproteins cause atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease. 1. Evidence from genetic, epidemiologic, and clinical studies. A consensus statement from
the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel. Eur Heart J 2017;38:2459-2472
97.
Ranthe MF, Carstensen L, Øyen N, Jensen MK, Axelsson A et al. Risk of Cardiomyopathy in Younger Persons With
a Family History of Death from Cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 2015;132:1013-1019
98.
Lee DS, Pencina MJ, Benjamin EJ, Wang TJ, Levy D, O’Donnell CJ et al. Association of parental heart failure with
risk of heart failure in offspring. N Engl J Med 2006: 355(2):138-147
99.
Gencer B, Collet TH, Virgini V, Bauer DC, Gussekloo J, Cappola AR, Nanchen D, den Elzen WPJ, Balmer P, Luben
RN, Iacoviello M, Triggiani V, Cornuz J, Newman AB, Khaw KT, Jukema JW, Westendorp RGJ, Vittinghoff E,
Aujesky D, Rodondi N, Thyroid Studies Collaboration . Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and the risk of heart failure
events: an individual participant data analysis from six prospective cohorts. Circulation 2012 126 1040-1049.
100. Rodondi N, Newman AB, Vittinghoff E, et al. Subclinical Hypothyroidism and the Risk of Heart Failure, Other
Cardiovascular Events, and Death. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165(21):2460-2466.
101. Rodondi N, Bauer DC, Cappola AR, Cornuz J, Robbins J, Fried LP, Ladenson PW, Vittinghoff E, Gottdiener JS,
Newman AB. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction, cardiac function, and the risk of heart failure. The Cardiovascular
Health Study. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 2008 52 1152-1159.
102. Gerstein HC, Mann JFR, Yi Q et al. Albuminuria and Risk of Cardiovascular Events, Death, and Heart Failure in
Diabetic and Nondiabetic Individuals. JAMA. 2001;286(4):421-426.
103. Solomon SD, Lin J, Solomon CJ, Jablonski KA, Rice KM et al.for the Prevention of Events With ACE Inhibition
(PEACE) Investigators. Influence of Albuminuria on Cardiovascular Risk in Patients With Stable Coronary Artery
Disease. Circulation. 2007;116:2687-2693
104. Nagata M, Ninomiya T, Kiyohara Y, Murakami Y, Irie F et al. for the EPOCH-JAPAN Research Group, Prediction of
Cardiovascular Disease Mortality by Proteinuria and Reduced Kidney Function: Pooled Analysis of 39,000 Individuals
From 7 Cohort Studies in Japan, Am J Epidem 2013:178(1): 1-11
105. Weir MR. Microalbuminuria and cardiovascular disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 May;2(3):581-90
106. Silverberg, D., Wexler, D., Blum, M., Schwartz, D., & Iaina, A. The association between congestive heart failure and
chronic renal disease. Current Opinion in Nephrology and Hypertension 2004:13(2), 163-170.
107. Kottgen A, Russell S.D.,,Loehr L.R.,et al. Reduced kidney function as a risk factor for incident heart failure: the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007; 18: 1307-1315
108. Kloner RA, Rezkalla SH. To drink or not to drink? That is the question. Circulation. 2007;116:1306-1317.
109. Li X, Xue Q, Wang M, Zhou T, Ma T, Heianza Y, Qi L.Adherence to a Healthy Sleep Pattern and Incident Heart
Failure.A Prospective Study of 408 802 UK Biobank Participants. Circulation. 2021;143:97-99
110. Hirshkowitz M, Whiton K, Albert SM, Alessi C, Bruni O et al. National Sleep Foundation's sleep time duration
recommendations: methodology and results summary. Sleep Health. 2015 Mar;1(1):40-43.
111. Shahar E, Whitney CW, Redline S, et al. Sleep-disordered breathing and cardiovascular disease. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med. 2001; 163: 19-25.
112. Oldenburg O, Lamp B, Faber L, Teschler H, Horstkotte D, Töpfer V. Sleep-disordered breathing in patients with
symptomatic heart failure: a contemporary study of prevalence in and characteristics of 700 patients.Eur J Heart
Fail. 2007; 9:251-257
113. Alenghat, F. The Prevalence of Atherosclerosis in Those with Inflammatory Connective Tissue Disease by Race,
Age and Traditional Risk Factors. Sci Rep 2016: 6, 20303.
114. Rosenkranz S, Howard LS, Gomberg-Maitland M, Hoeper MM. Systemic Consequences of Pulmonary Hypertension
and Right-Sided Heart Failure. Circulation. 2020;141:678-693
115. Staessen JA, Fagard R, Thijs L, et al. Randomised double-blind comparison of placebo and active treatment for
older patients with isolated systolic hypertension. The Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) Trial Investigators.
Lancet 1997;350: 757-64.
116. Kostis JB, Davis BR, Cutler J, et al. Prevention of heart failure by antihypertensive drug treatment in older persons
with isolated systolic hypertension: SHEP Cooperative Research Group. JAMA 1997;278:212-16
117. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al for the HYVET Study Group. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years
of age or older. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1887-98.
118. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of blood pressure-lowering treatment. 6. Prevention of heart failure
and new-onset heart failure-metaanalyses of randomized trials. J Hypertens. 2016;34:373-384.
119. Upadhya B, Rocco M, Lewis CE, et al; SPRINT Research Group. Effect of intensive blood pressure treatment on
heart failure events in the Systolic Blood Pressure Reduction Intervention Trial. Circ Heart Fail 2017;10(4). pii: e003613.
120. Iribarren C, Karter AJ, Go AS, Ferrara A, Liu JY, Sidney S, Selby JV. Glycemic control and heart failure among adult
patients with diabetes. Circulation. 2001; 103:2668-2673.
121. Nichols GA, Gullion CM, Koro CE, Ephross SA, Brown JB. The incidence of congestive heart failure in type 2
diabetes: an update. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:1879-1884
122. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, Fitchett D, Bluhmki E et al. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373:2117-2128.
123. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl
J Med. 2017;377:644-657.
124. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al. Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2019;380:347-357.
125. Cannon CP, Pratley R, Dagogo-Jack S, et al., for the VERTIS CV Investigators. Cardiovascular Outcomes With
Ertugliflozin in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:1425-35.
126. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, Im K, Goodrich EL et al. SGLT2 inhibitors for primary and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta‐analysis of cardiovascular
outcome trials. Lancet. 2018; 393:31-39.
127. Kosiborod M, Cavender MA, Fu AZ, Wilding JP, Khunti K, Holl RW, Norhammar A, Birkeland KI, Jorgensen ME,
Thuresson M, Arya N, Bodegard J, Hammar N, Fenici P. Lower risk of heart failure and death in patients initiated on
sodium‐glucose cotransporter‐2 inhibitors versus other glucose‐lowering drugs: the CVD‐REAL study (Comparative
Effectiveness of Cardiovascular Outcomes in New Users of Sodium‐Glucose Cotransporter‐2 Inhibitors).
Circulation. 2017; 136:249-259.
128. Suskin N, Sheth T, Negassa A, Yusuf S. Relationship of current and past smoking to mortality and morbidity in
patients with left ventricular dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;37:1677-82.
129. Ahmed AA, Patel K, Nyaku MA, Kheirbek RE, Bittner V et al. Risk of Heart Failure and Death After Prolonged
Smoking Cessation.Role of Amount and Duration of Prior Smoking. Circulation: Heart Failure. 2015;8:694-701
130. Visseren FLJ, Mach F, Smulders YM, Carballo D, Koskinas KC et al. 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular
disease prevention in clinical practice. Developed by the Task Force for cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical
practice with representatives of the European Society of Cardiology and 12 medical societies. Eur Heart J 2021: 42:
3227-3337.
131. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Dyslipidemia, 5th Ed [Internet]. 2017. Available
from: www.acadmed.com.my
132. Benjamin EJ, Virani SS, Callaway CW, Chamberlain AM, Chang AR, Cheng S, et al.; American Heart Association
Council on Epidemiology and Prevention Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart Disease
and Stroke Statistics-2018 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2018Mar;137(12):e67-492.
133. Djouss´e L, Driver JA, Gaziano JM. Relation between modifiable lifestyle factors and lifetime risk of heart failure.
Physicians Health Study 1. JAMA 2009;302:4:394-400.
134. Kliger AS, Foley RN, Goldfarb DS, Goldstein SL, Johansen K, Singh A, et al. KDOQI US commentary on the 2012
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in CKD. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 Nov. 62 (5):849-59.
135. Bradley TD, Logan AG, Kimoff RJ, et al; CANPAP Investigators. Continuous positive airway pressure for central
sleep apnea and heart failure. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2025-33.
136. McEvoy RD, Antic NA, Heeley E, et al; SAVE Investigators and Coordinators. CPAP for prevention of cardiovascular
events in obstructive sleep apnea. N Engl J Med 2016;375:919-31.
137. Cowie MR, Woehrle H, Wegscheider K, et al. Adaptive servo-ventilation for central sleep apnea in systolic heart
failure. N Engl J Med 2015;373:1095-105.
138. C.M. O’Connor, D.J. Whellan, M. Fiuzat, et al.Cardiovascular outcomes with minute ventilation-targeted adaptive
servo-ventilation therapy in heart failure.J Am Coll Cardiol 2017: 69:1577-1587
139. R.D. McEvoy, N.A. Antic, E. Heeley, et al. CPAP for prevention of cardiovascular events in obstructive sleep apnea.
N Engl J Med 2016:375: 919-931
140. Cowie MR, Gallagher AM. Sleep Disordered Breathing and Heart Failure: What Does the Future Hold? JACC: Heart
Failure 2017: 5:715-723
141. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease. 1st
Ed, 2018. Available at www.acadmed.org
142. Del Gobbo LC, Kalantarian S, Imamura F, Lemaitre R, Siscovick DS, Psaty BM, Mozaffarian D. Contribution of Major
Lifestyle Risk Factors for Incident Heart Failure in Older Adults: The Cardiovascular Health Study. JACC Heart Fail.
2015 Jul;3(7):520-528.
143. Siscovick DS, Barringer TA, Fretts AM, Wu JHU et al. and On behalf of the American Heart Association Nutrition
Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention;
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; and Council on
Clinical Cardiology. Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (Fish Oil) Supplementation and the Prevention of Clinical
Cardiovascular Disease. A Science Advisory From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e867-e884.
144. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of NON-ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction. 3RD Ed
[Internet]. 2021. Available from: www.acadmed.gov.my
145. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction. 4th Ed
[Internet]. 2019. Available from: www.acadmed.gov.my
146. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Stable Coronary artery Disease. 2nd Ed
[Internet]. 2018. Available from: www.acadmed.gov.my
147. Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Hypertension. 5thd Ed [Internet]. 2018. Available
from: www.acadmed.gov.my
148. Larstorp AC, Okin PM, Devereux RB, et al. Regression of ECG-LVH is associated with lower risk of new-onset heart
failure and mortality in patients with isolated systolic hypertension; The LIFE study. Am J Hypertens. 2012 ;25(10):1101-9.
149. The SOLVD Investigator. Effect of Enalapril on Mortality and the Development of Heart Failure in Asymptomatic
Patients with Reduced Left Ventricular Ejection Fractions. N Engl J Med 1992; 327:685-691
150. Jong P, Yusuf S, Rousseau MF, Ahn SA, Bangdiwala SI. Effect of enalapril on 12-year survival and life expectancy
in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction: a follow-up study. Lancet. 2003 May 31;361(9372):1843-8
151. Arnold JMO, Yusuf S, Young J, et al. Prevention of heart failure in patients without known left ventricular dysfunction:
the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study. Circulation. 2003; 107: 1284-1290.
152. Dargie HJ. Effect of carvedilol on outcome after myocardial infarction in patients with left-ventricular dysfunction: the
CAPRICORN randomised trial. Lancet. 2001 May 5;357(9266):1385-90.
153. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al. Association of SGLT2 Inhibitors With Cardiovascular and Kidney
Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6(2):148-158.
154. Zannad F, Ferreira JP, Pocock SJ, Anker SD, Butler J et al. SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction: a meta-analysis of the EMPEROR-Reduced and DAPA-HF trials. The Lancet.
2020;396(10254):819-29.
155. McDonagh T.A., Metra M., Adamo M., et al. "2021 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and
chronic heart failure: Developed by the Task Force for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure
of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) With the special contribution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of
the ESC". Eur Heart J 2021;42:36: 3599-3726
156. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, Allen LA, Byun JJ et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management
of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895-e1032
157. Pizga, A., Karatzanos, E., Tsikrika, S., Gioni, V., Vasileiadis, I., Nanas, S. and Kordoutis, P. Psychosocial Interventions
to Enhance Treatment Adherence to Lifestyle Changes in Cardiovascular Disease: A Review of the Literature
2011-2021. Eur J Environ Public Health 2022, 6(1), em0102.
158. Jaarsma T, Hill L, Bayes-Genis A, La Rocca HPB, Castiello T et al. Self-care of heart failure patients: practical
management recommendations from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J
Heart Fail 2021: 23: 157-174
159. Inglis SC, Clark RA, McAlister FA, Ball J, Lewinter C, Cullington D, Stewart S, Cleland JG. Structured telephone
support or telemonitoring programmes for patients with chronic heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010
Aug 4;(8):CD007228. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007228.pub2.
160. Inglis SC, Clark RA, Dierckx R Structured telephone support or non invasive telemonitoring for patients with heart
failure. Review. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 10. Art. No. CD007228.
161. Zhu Y, Gu X, Xu C. Effectiveness of telemedicine systems for adults with heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomized
ontrolled trials. Heart Fail Rev. 2020 Mar;25(2):231-243.
162. Gensini GF, Alderighi C, Rasoini R, Mazzanti M, Casolo G. Value of Telemonitoring and Telemedicine in Heart
Failure Management. Card Fail Rev. 2017 Nov;3(2):116-121.
163. Taylor R, Long L, Mordi I, et al. Exercise-Based Rehabilitation for Heart Failure. J Am Coll Cardiol HF. 2019 Aug, 7
(8) 691-705.
164. Long L, Mordi IR, Bridges C, Sagar VA, Davies EJ, Coats AJ, Dalal H, Rees K, Singh SJ, Taylor RS. Exercise-based
cardiac rehabilitation for adults with heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Jan 29;1(1):CD003331.
165. Taylor RS, S. Walker, N.A. Smart, et al. Impact of exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation in patients with heart failure
(ExTraMATCH II) on mortality and hospitalization: an individual patient data meta-analysis of randomized trials. Eur
J Heart Fail, 2018:20: 1735-1743
166. Taylor RS, Sagar VA, Davies EJ Briscoe S, Coats AJ, Dalal H, Lough F, Rees K, Singh S. Exercise-based rehabilitation
for heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014. p. CD003331.
167. Sagar VA, Davies EJ, Briscoe S et al. Exercise-based rehabilitation for heart failure: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Open Heart. 2015;2:e000163.
168. Buckley BJR, Harrison SL, Fazio-Eynullayeva E, Underhill P, Sankaranarayanan R et al. Cardiac rehabilitation and
all-cause mortality in patients with heart failure: a retrospective cohort study, Eur J Preventive Cardiol 2021:
28(15):1704-1710,
169. Pandey A, Parashar A, Kumbhani D et al. Exercise training in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection
fraction: meta-analysis of randomized control trials. Circ Heart Fail. 2015;8:33-40.
170. Chan E, Giallauria F, Vigorito C, Smart NA. Exercise training in heart failure patients with preserved ejection fraction:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2016 Oct 14;86(1-2):759.
171. Chen YM, Li ZB, Zhu M, Cao YM. Effects of exercise training on left ventricular remodelling in heart failure patients:
an updated meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Int J Clin Pract. 2012 : 66(8):782-791
172. Bozkurt B, Fonarow GC, Goldberg LR, Guglin M, Josephson RA et al. Cardiac Rehabilitation for Patients With Heart
Failure. JACC Expert Panel. J Am Coll Cardiol 2021;77:1454-69
173. Mueller S, Winzer EB, Duvinage A, et al. Effect of High-Intensity Interval Training, Moderate Continuous Training,
or Guideline-Based Physical Activity Advice on Peak Oxygen Consumption in Patients With Heart Failure With
Preserved Ejection Fraction: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2021;325(6):542-551.
174. Doukky R, Avery E, Mangla A, Collado FM, Ibrahim Z, Poulin MF, Richardson D, Powell LH. Impact of Dietary
Sodium Restriction on Heart Failure Outcomes. JACC Heart Fail. 2016 Jan;4(1):24-35.
175. Ezekowitz JA, Colin-Ramirez E, Ross H, Escobedo J, Macdonald on behalf of the SODIUM-HF Investigators.
Reduction of dietary sodium to less than 100 mmol in heart failure (SODIUM-HF): an international, open-label,
randomised, controlled trial. Lancet 2022: 399:10333:1391-1400
176. Aliti GB, Rabelo ER, Clausell N, Rohde LE, Biolo A, Beck-da Silva. Aggressive fluid and sodium restriction in acute
decompensated heart failure: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2013 Jun 24;173(12):1058-64.
177. von Haehling S, Anker SD. Prevalence, incidence and clinical impact of cachexia: facts and numbers-update 2014.
J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2014;5(4):261-263
178. Habaybeh D, de Moraes MB, Slee A, Avgerinou C. Nutritional interventions for heart failure patients who are
malnourished or at risk of malnutrition or cachexia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart Failure Reviews
2021: 26:1103-1118
179. Billingsley HE, Hummel SL, Carbone S. The Role of Diet and Nutrition in Heart Failure: A State-of-the-Art Narrative
Review.Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2020 Sep-Oct; 63(5): 538-551.
180. Vest AR, Chan M, Deswal A, Givertz MM, Lekavich C et al. Nutrition, obesity,and cachexia in patients with heart
failure: a consensus statement from the Heart Failure Society of America Scientific Statements Committee. J Card
Fail 2019;25:380-400.
181. Jaarsma T, Hill L, Bayes-Genis A, La Rocca HPB, Castiello T et al. Self-care of heart failure patients: practical
management recommendations from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J
Heart Fail 2021: 23: 157-174
182. Johansson P, van der Wal MH, Stromberg A, Waldreus N, Jaarsma T. Fluid restriction in patients with heart failure:
how should we think? Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2016;15:301-304.
183. Padwal R, McAlister FA, McMurray JJV, Cowie MR, Rich M, Pocock S. Meta-Analysis Global Group In Chronic
Heart Failure (MAGGIC). The obesity paradox in heart failure patients with preserved versus reduced ejection
fraction: a meta-analysis of individual patient data. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2014;38:1110-4.
184. Klatsky AL. Alcohol and cardiovascular diseases: where do we stand today? J Intern Med. 2015 Sep;278(3):238-50.
185. Laonigro I, Correale M, Di Biase M, Altomare E. Alcohol abuse and heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2009;11:453-62.
186. Son YJ, Lee HJ. Association between persistent smoking after a diagnosis of heart failure and adverse health
outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Tob Induc Dis. 2020 Jan 20;18:
187. Jaarsma T. Sexual function of patients with heart failure: facts and numbers. ESC Heart Fail. 2017 Feb;4(1):3-7
188. Steinke E, Jaarsma T. Sexual counseling and cardiovascular disease - Practical approaches. Asian J Androl
2015;17:32-9.
189. Jaarsma T, Steinke E, Gianotten W. Sexual problems in cardiac patients. How to assess, when to refer. J Cardiovasc
Nurs 2010;25(2):159-64.
190. Van Driel AG, De Hosson MJ, Gamel C. Sexuality of patients with chronic heart failure and their spouses and the
need for information regarding sexuality. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2014;13(3):227-34.
191. Oakley CM, Child A, Lung B, et al. Expert consensus document on management of cardiovascular diseases during
pregnancy. The Task Force on the Management of Cardivascular Diseases during Pregnancy of the European
Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 2003:24;761-81.
192. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Heart Disease in Pregnancy, 2nd Ed, 2016. Available at
www.acadmed.gov.my
193. Roos-Hesselink JW, Cornette J, Sliwa K, Pieper PG, Veldtman GR, Johnson MR. Contraception and cardiovascular
disease. Eur Heart J 2015;36(27):1728-34.
194. Lindley KJ, Bairey Merz CN, Davis MB, Madden T, Park K, Bello , and on behalf of the American College of
Cardiology Cardiovascular Disease in Women Committee and the Cardio-Obstetrics Work Group. Contraception
and Reproductive Planning for Women With Cardiovascular Disease: JACC Focus Seminar. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2021 : 77 (14): 1823-1834
195. Cowie M, Linz D, Redline S, et al. Sleep Disordered Breathing and Cardiovascular Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021
Aug, 78 (6) 608-624.
196. Parati, G., Lombardi, C., Castagna, F. et al. Heart failure and sleep disorders. Nat Rev Cardiol 2016:13, 389-403
197. Constanzo MR, Khayat R, Ponikowski P, et al. Mechanisms and clinical consequences of untreated central sleep
apnea in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;65(1):72-84.
198. McEvoy RD, Antic NA, Heeley E, et al. CPAP for prevention of cardiovascular events in obstructive sleep apnea. N
Engl J Med. 2016;375: 919-931.
199. Peker Y, Glantz H, Eulenburg C, et al. Effect of positive airway pressure on cardiovascular outcomes in coronary
artery disease patients with non-sleepy obstructive sleep apnea. The RICCADSA randomised controlled trial. Am J
Resp Crit Care Med. 2016;194:613-620.
200. Sanchez-de-la-Torre M, Sanchez-de-la-Torre A, Bertran S, et al. Effect of obstructive sleep apnoea and its
treatment with continuous positive airway pressure on the presence of cardiovascular events in patients with acute
coronary syndrome (ISAAC study): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2020;8:359-367.
201. Da-Silva-Paulitsch F, Zhang L. Continuous positive airway pressure for adults with obstructive sleep apnea and
cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Sleep Med. 2019;54:28-34.
202. Ghosh, R. K., Ball, S., Prasad, V., & Gupta, A. (2016). Depression in heart failure: Intricate relationship, pathophysiology
and most updated evidence of interventions from recent clinical studies. International Journal of Cardiology, 224, 170-177.
203. Moser, D. K., Dracup, K., Evangelista, L. S., Zambroski, C. H., Lennie, T. A., Chung, M. L., Doering, L. V., Westlake,
C., & Heo, S. (2010). Comparison of prevalence of symptoms of depression, anxiety, and hostility in elderly patients
with heart failure, myocardial infarction, and a coronary artery bypass graft. Heart and Lung, 39(5), 378-385.
204. Chamberlain AM, McNallan SM, Dunlay SM, et al. Physical health status measures predict all-cause mortality in
patients with heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2013;6:669-75.
205. Hoekstra T, Jaarsma T, van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Quality of life and survival in patients with heart failure. Eur J Heart
Fail 2013;15:94-102
206. Remme WJ, McMurray JV, Rauch B, et al. Public awareness of heart failure in Europe: first results from SHAPE.
Eur Heart J 2005;26:2413-21.
207. Fang, J., Mensah, G. A., Croft, J. B., & Keenan, N. L. Heart failure related hospitalisation in the US 1979 to 2004. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2008: 52(6): 428-434.
208. Maru S., Byrnes J., Carrington M., Chan Y., Thompson R.D., Stewart S., Scuffham A.P. Cost effectiveness of home
versus clinic based management of chronic heart failure: Extended follow-up of pragmatic, multicentre randomised
trial cohort - The WHICH? Study (which heart failure intervention is most cost-effective & consumer friendly in
reducing hospital care). Int J Cardiol 2015: 15(201), 368-375.
209. Butt JH, Fosbøl EL, Gerds TA, Andersson C, McMurray JJV et al. Readmission and death in patients admitted with
new-onset versus worsening of chronic heart failure: insights from a nationwide cohort. Eur J Heart Fail. 2020
Oct;22(10):1777-1785
210. Tavazzi L, Senni M, Metra M, Gorini M, Cacciatore G, Chinaglia A, Di Lenarda A, Mortara A, Oliva F, Maggioni AP;
IN-HF (Italian Network on Heart Failure) Outcome Investigators. Multicenter prospective observational study on
acute and chronic heart failure: one-year follow-up results of IN-HF (Italian Network on Heart Failure) outcome
registry. Circ Heart Fail. 2013 May;6(3):473-81.
211. Shahar E, Lee S, Kim J, Duval S, Barber C, Luepker RV. Hospitalized heart failure: rates and long-term mortality. J
Card Fail. 2004 Oct;10(5):374-9.
212. Okumura N, Jhund PS, Gong J, Lefkowitz MP, Rizkala AR et al PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees.
Importance of Clinical Worsening of Heart Failure Treated in the Outpatient Setting.Evidence From the Prospective
Comparison of ARNI With ACEI to Determine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart Failure Trial
(PARADIGM-HF). Circulation. 2016;133:2254-2262.
213. Ferreira JP, Metra M, Mordi I, Gregson J, ter Maaten JM et al. Heart failure in the outpatient versus inpatient setting:
findings from the BIOSTAT-CHF study. Eur J Heart Fail 2019: 21:112-120
214. Skali H, Dwyer EM, Goldstein R, Haigney M, Krone R et al. Prognosis and response to therapy of first inpatient and
outpatient heart failure event in a heart failure clinical trial: MADIT-CRT. Eur J Heart Fail 2014;16 : 560-565
215. Sameer Kurmani, Iain Squires. Acute heart failure: definition, classification and epidemiology. Curr Heart Fail Rep
2017;14:385-392.
216. Gheorghiade M, Braunwald E. A proposed model for initial assessment and management of acute heart failure.
JAMA 2011;Vol 305(16):1702-1703
217. Beusekamp JC, Ouwerkerk W, van der Meer P, Cleland JGF et al. Regional differences in precipitating factors of
hospitalization for acute heart failure: insights from the REPORT-HF registry. Eur J Heart Fail. 2022 Apr;24(4):645-652.
218. United Kingdom. National Heart failure Audit 2020. Available at : https://www.nicor.org.uk/wp-content/up loads/2020
/12/National-Heart-Failure-Audit-2020-FINAL.pdf
219. Ponikowski P, Voors AA, Anker SD et al. 2016 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic
heart failure. EHJ 2016;37(27):2129-2200.
220. Chioncel O, Mebazaa A, Maggioni AP, Harjola V-P, Rosano G on behalf of the ESC-EORP-HFA Heart Failure
Long-Term Registry Investigators. Acute heart failure congestion and perfusion status - impact of the clinical
classification on in-hospital and long-term outcomes; insights from the ESC-EORP-HFA Heart Failure Long-Term
Registry.Eur J Heart Fail 2019; 21(11):1338-1352
221. Collins SP, Lindsell CJ, Storrow AB, Abraham WT. Prevalence of negative chest radiography results in the
emergency department patient with decompensated heart failure.Ann Emerg Med2006;47:13-18.
222. Lang RM, Badano LP, Mor-Avi V, Afilalo J, Armstrong A et al. Recommendations for cardiac chamber quantification
by echocardiography in adults: an update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European
Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2015;28:1-39.e
223. Pellicori P, Platz E, Dauw J, ter Maaten JM, Martens P et al. Ultrasound imaging of congestion in heart failure:
examinations beyond the heart. Eur J Heart Fail. 2021 May ; 23(5): 703-712
224. Maw AM, Hassanin A, Ho PM, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of Point-of-Care Lung Ultrasonography and Chest
Radiography in Adults With Symptoms Suggestive of Acute Decompensated Heart Failure: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(3):e190703.
225. Hernandez GA, Lenor A, Blumer V et al. Trends and outcomes of PAC in HF with and without cardiogenic shock. J
of Card Fail 2019(25)5:364-371.
226. Binanay C, Califf RM, Hasselblad V, et al; ESCAPE Investigators and ESCAPE Study Coordinators. Evaluation
study of congestive heart failure and pulmonary artery catheterization effectiveness: the ESCAPE trial. JAMA
2005;294(13):1625-33.
227. Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al. Impact of the pulmonary artery catheter in critically ill patients:
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2005;294(13):1664-70.
228. Stub D, Smith K, Bernard S, et al for the AVOID Investigators. Air versus oxygen in ST-segment- elevation myocardial
infarction. Circulation 2015;131:2143-50.
229. Cabello JB, Burls A, Emparanza JI, Bayliss SE, Quinn T. Oxygen therapy for acute myocardial infarction (Review).
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;12:CD007160.
230. Hofmann R, James SK, Jernberg T, et al for the DETO2X-SWEDEHEART Investigators. Oxygen therapy in
suspected acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2017;377:1240-9.
231. Sjöberg F, Singer M. The medical use of oxygen: a time for critical reappraisal. J Intern Med 2013;274(6):505-28.
232. Park JH, Balmain S, Berry C, Morton JJ, McMurray JJ. Potentially detrimental cardiovascular effects of oxygen in
patients with chronic left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Heart 2010;96(7):533-8.
233. Shuvy M, Atar D, Steg PG, Halvorsen S, Jolly S, Yusuf S, Lotan C. Oxygen therapy in acute coronary syndrome: are
the benefits worth the risk? Eur Heart J 2013:34: 1630-5.
234. Sepehrvand N, Ezekowitz JA. Oxygen Therapy in Patients With Acute Heart Failure: Friend or Foe? JACC Heart
Fail. 2016 Oct;4(10):783-790
235. Yu, Y., Yao, RQ., Zhang, YF. et al. Is oxygen therapy beneficial for normoxemic patients with acute heart failure? A
propensity score matched study. Military Med Res 2021: 8: 38
236. O’Driscoll BR,Howard LS, Davison AG on behalf of the British Thoracic Society. BTS guideline for emergency
oxygen use in adult patients. Thorax 2008;63(Suppl VI):vi1-vi68.
237. Gray A, Goodacre S, Newby DE, Masson M, Sampson F, Nicholl J; Nicholl J for the 3CPO Trialists. Noninvasive
ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. N Engl J Med 2008;359:142-151.
238. Masip J, Peacock WF, Price S, Cullen L, Martin-Sanchez FJ et al. Indications and practical approach to non-invasive
ventilation in acute heart failure. Eur Heart J 2018: 39: 17-25.
239. Masip J, Roque M, Sanchz B, Fernandez R, Subirana M, Exposito JA. Non invasive ventilation in acute cardiogenic
pulmonary edema: systemic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2005;294(24):3124-30.
240. Helviz Y, Einav S. A systematic review of the high-flow nasal cannula for adult patients. Crit Care 2018;22:71.
241. Ni YN, Luo J, Yu H, et al. Can high-flow nasal cannula reduce the rate of endotracheal intubation in adult patients
with acute respiratory failure compared with conventional oxygen therapy and noninvasive positive pressure
ventilation? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2017;151:764-75.
242. Ko DR, Beom J, Lee HS, You JS, Chung HS et al. Benefits of High-Flow Nasal Cannula Therapy for Acute
Pulmonary Edema in Patients with Heart Failure in the Emergency Department: A Prospective Multi-Center
Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Med. 2020 Jun; 9(6): 1937.
243. Ho KM, Wong K. A comparison of continuous and bi-level positive airway pressure non-invasive ventilation in
patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema: a meta-analysis. Crit Care 2006;10:R49.
244. Li H, Hu C, Xia J, et al. A comparison of bilevel and continuous positive airway pressure noninvasive ventilation in
acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Am J Emerg Med 2013;31:1322-7.
245. Matsue Y, Damman K, Voors AA, Kagiyama N, Yamaguchi T et al. Time-to-Furosemide Treatment and Mortality in
Patients Hospitalized With Acute Heart Failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Jun 27;69(25):3042-3051
246. Miró Ò, Harjola P, Rossello X, Gil V, Jacob J et al. ICA-SEMES Research Group. The FAST-FURO study: effect of
very early administration of intravenous furosemide in the prehospital setting to patients with acute heart failure
attending the emergency department. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2021 Jun 30;10(5):487-496
247. Felker GM, Ellison DH, Mullens W, Cox ZL,Testani JM. Diuretic Therapy for Patients With Heart Failure: JACC
State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020: 75: 1178-1195.
248. K.F. Adams Jr., G.C. Fonarow, C.L. Emerman, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of patients hospitalized for heart
failure in the United States: rationale, design, and preliminary observations from the first 100,000 cases in the Acute
Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry (ADHERE).Am Heart J, 149 (2005), pp. 209-216
249. Ng KT, Yap JLL. Continuous infusion vs. intermittent bolus injection of furosemide in acute decompensated heart
failure: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Anaesthesia 2018;73(2):238-47.
250. Salvador DR, Rey NR, Ramos GC, Punzalan FE. Continuous infusion versus bolus injection of loop diuretics in
congestive heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;(1):CD003178.
251. Ng KT, Velayit A, Khoo DKY, Mohd Ismail A, Mansor M. Continuous infusion versus intermittent bolus injection of
furosemide in critically ill patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2018;32(5):
2303-10.
252. Triposkiadis FK, Butler J, Karayannis G, et al. Efficacy and safety of high dose versus low dose furosemide with or
without dopamine infusion: the Dopamine in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure II (DAD-HF II) trial. Int J Cardiol
2014;172(1):115-21.
253. Giamouzis G, Butler J, Starling RC, et al. Impact of dopamine infusion on renal function in hospitalized heart failure
patients: results of the Dopamine in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (DAD-HF) Trial. J Card Fail 2010;16(12):922-30.
254. Brater DC, Day B, Burdette A, Anderson S. Bumetanide and furosemide in heart failure. Kidney International 1984:
26(2):183-189
255. Jentzer JC, DeWald TA, Hernandez AF. Combination of loop diuretics with thiazide-type diuretics in heart failure. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56(19):1527-1534.
256. Kissling KT, Pickworth KK. Comparison of the effects of combination diuretic therapy with oral hydrochlorothiazide
or intravenous chlorothiazide in patients receiving intravenous furosemide therapy for the treatment of heart failure.
Pharmacotherapy 2014;34(8):882-7.
257. Cox ZL, Hung R, Lenihan DJ, Testani JM. Diuretic Strategies for Loop Diuretic Resistance in Acute Heart Failure:
The 3T Trial. JACC: Heart Failure 2020: 8: (3): 157-168
258. Wollam GL, Tarazi RC, Bravo EL, Dustan HP. Diuretic potency of combined hydrochlorothiazide and furosemide
therapy in patients with azotemia. Am J Med 1982;72(6):929.
259. Fliser D, Schröter M, Neubeck M, Ritz E. Coadministration of thiazides increases the efficacy of loop diuretics even
in patients with advanced renal failure. Kidney Int 1994;46(2):482.
260. Brisco-Bacik MA, Ter Maaten JM, Houser SR, et al. Outcomes Associated With a Strategy of Adjuvant Metolazone
or High-Dose Loop Diuretics in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure: A Propensity Analysis. Journal of the American
Heart Association. 2018;7(18):e009149.
261. Rosenberg J, Gustafsson F, Galatius S, Hildebrandt PR. Combination therapy with metolazone and loop diuretics in
outpatients with refractory heart failure: an observational study and review of the literature. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther
2005;19(4):301-6.
262. Moranville MP, Choi S, Hogg J, Anderson AS, Rich JD. Comparison of metolazone versus chlorothiazide in acute
decompensated heart failure with diuretic resistance. Cardiovasc Ther 2015;33(2):42-9.
263. Cheng, H.W.B., Sham, MK., Chan, KY. et al. Combination therapy with low-dose metolazone and furosemide: a
“needleless” approach in managing refractory fluid overload in elderly renal failure patients under palliative care. Int
Urol Nephrol 2014: 46:1809–1813.
264. Konstam MA, Kiernan M, Chandler A, Dhingra R, Mody FV, Eisen H, Haught WH, Wagoner L, Gupta D, Patten R,
Gordon P, Korr K, Fileccia R, Pressler SJ, Gregory D, Wedge P, Dowling D, Romeling M, Konstam JM, Massaro JM,
Udelson JE; SECRET of CHF Investigators, Coordinators, and Committee Members. Short-Term Effects of
Tolvaptan in Patients With Acute Heart Failure and Volume Overload. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 ; 69(11):1409-1419.
265. Felker GM, Mentz RJ, Cole RT, Adams KF, Egnaczyk GF, Fiuzat M, Patel CB, Echols M, Khouri MG, Tauras JM,
Gupta D, Monds P, Roberts R, O'Connor CM. Efficacy and Safety of Tolvaptan in Patients Hospitalized With Acute
Heart Failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69(11):1399-1406
266. Ma G, Ma X, Wang G, Teng W, Hui X. Effects of tolvaptan add-on therapy in patients with acute heart failure:
meta-analysis on randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open 2019;9:e025537
267. O’Connor CM, et al. Effect of Nesiritide in Patients with Acute Decompensated Heart Failure. N Engl J Med
2011;365(1):32-43
268. Chen HH, Anstrom KJ, Givertz MM, Stevenson LW, Semigran MJ et al.for the NHLBI Heart Failure Clinical
Research Network. Low-dose dopamine or low-dose nesiritide in acute heart failure with renal dysfunction: the
ROSE acute heart failure randomized trial. JAMA. 2013 Dec 18;310(23):2533-43.
269. Mullens W, Dauw J, Martens P, Verbrugge FH, Nijst P et al. for the ADVOR Study Group. Acetazolamide in Acute
Decompensated Heart Failure with Volume Overload. N Eng J Med. 2022;387(13):1185-1195.
270. Publication Committee for the VMAC Investigators (Vasodilatation in the Management of Acute CHF). Intravenous
nesiritide vs nitroglycerin for treatment of decompensated congestive heart failure: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2002;287(12):1531-40.
271. Wakai A, McCabe A, Kidney R, et al. Nitrates for acute heart failure syndromes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2013;(8):CD005151.
272. Kozhuharov N, Goudeva A, Flores D et al. Effect of a strategy of comprehensive vasodilator therapy versus usual
care on mortality and heart failure hospitalization across patient in acute heart failure. The GALACTIC randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 2019;322:2291-2302.
273. Freund Y, Cachanado M, Delannoy Q, Laribi S, Yordanov Y et al. Effect of an emergency department care bundle
on 30-day hospital discharge and survival among elderly patients with acute heart failure: the ELISABETH
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;324:1948-1956.
274. Curfman G. Vasodilator Therapy in Acute Heart Failure. JAMA. 2019 ; 322(23): 2288-2289.
275. Miró Ò, Llorens P, Freund Y, Davison B, Takagi K et al EAHFE Research Group. Early intravenous nitroglycerin
use in prehospital setting and in the emergency department to treat patients with acute heart failure: Insights from
the EAHFE Spanish registry. Int J Cardiol. 2021 Dec 01; 344:127-134.
276. De Backer D, Biston P,Devriendt J, et al for the SOAP II Investigators. Comparison of dopamine and norepinephrine
in the treatment of shock. N Engl J Med 2010; 362:779-89.
277. Rui Q, Jiang Y, Chen M, Zhang N, Yang H, Zhou Y. Dopamine versus norepinephrine in the treatment of cardiogenic
shock. A PRISMA-compliant meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017; 96(43):e8402.
278. Levy B, Perez P, Perny J, Thivilier C, Gerard A. Comparison of norepinephrine-dobutamine to epinephrine for
hemodynamics, lactate metabolism, and organ function variables in cardiogenic shock. A prospective, randomized
pilot study. Crit Care Med 2011;39(3):450-5.
279. Leopold V, Gayat E, Pirracchio R, Spinar J, Parenica Jet al. Epinephrine and short-term survival in cardiogenic
shock: an individual data meta-analysis of 2583 patients. Intensive Care Med 2018;44:847-856.
280. Elkayam U, Ng TMH, Hatamizadeh P, Janmohamed M, Mehra A. Renal Vasodilatory Action of Dopamine in Patients
With Heart Failure. Magnitude of Effect and Site of Action. Circulation. 2008;117:200-205.
281. Lauschke A, Teichgräber UKM, Frei U, Eckardt K-U. ‘Low-dose’ dopamine worsens renal perfusion in patients with
acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2006: 69: 1669-1674.
282. Tacon CL, McCaffrey J, Delaney A. Dobutamine for patients with severe heart failure - a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Intensive Care Med 2012;38(3):359–67.
283. Wang XC, Zhu DM, Shan YX. Dobutamine Therapy is Associated with Worse Clinical Outcomes Compared with
Nesiritide Therapy for Acute Decompensated Heart Failure: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J
Cardiovasc Drugs. 2015 Dec;15(6):429-37
284. Sosnowski MA. Review article: Lack of effect of opiates on the treatment of acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Emerg Med Australasia 2008;20:384-90.
285. Peacock WF, Hollander JE, Diercks DB, Lopatin M, Fonarow G, Emerman CL. Morphine and outcomes in acute
decompensated heart failure: an ADHERE analysis. Emerg Med J 2008;25(4):205-9.
286. Domínguez-Rodríguez A, Suero-Mendez C, Burillo-Putze G, Gil V, Calvo-Rodriguez R et al for the MIMO
(MIdazolam versus MOrphine) Trial Investigators. Midazolam versus morphine in acute cardiogenic pulmonary
oedema: results of a multicentre, open-label, randomized controlled trial. Eur J Heart Failure .Available at
https://doi.org/10.1002/ejhf.2602
287. Baldetti L, Pagnesi M, Gramegna M, Belletti A, Beneduce A et al. Intra-Aortic Balloon Pumping in Acute Decompensated
Heart Failure With Hypoperfusion: From Pathophysiology to Clinical Practice. Circulation: Heart Failure. 2021;14
288. G.A.B Boros, V.S.C Bellini, D Fatori, C Bernoche, M.F Macatrao-Costa, L.N.G.D Lopes, F Bacal, W Hueb, L Kopel,
S.G Lage, Intra-aortic balloon pump as a bridge therapy to heart transplant in refractory heart failure, Eur Heart J
2020: 41(Suppl 2), ehaa946.1234,
289. Morici N, Marini C, Sacco A, Tavazzi G, Saia F, Palazzini M, Oliva F, Ferrari GM, Colombo PC, Kapur NK, Garan
AR, Pappalardo F. Intra-aortic Balloon Pump for Acute-on-Chronic Heart Failure Complicated by Cardiogenic
Shock. J Card Fail. 2022 : 28(7):1202-1216.
290. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, et al. Intraaortic balloon support for myocardial infarction with cardiogenic
shock.N Engl J Med 2012;367(14):1287-96.
291. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann F-J, et al. Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in acute myocardial infarction
complicated by cardiogenic shock (IABP-SHOCK II): final 12 month results of a randomised,open-label trial. Lancet
2013;382:1638-45.
292. Ohman EM, Nanas J, Stomel RJ, Leesar MA, Nielsen DW, O’Dea D, Rogers FJ, Harber D, Hudson MP, Fraulo E,
et al.; TACTICS Trial. Thrombolysis and counterpulsation to improve survival in myocardial infarction complicated by
hypotension and suspected cardiogenic shock or heart failure: results of the TACTICS Trial.J Thromb Thrombolysis.
2005; 19:33-39.
293. Romeo F, Acconcia MC, Sergi D, Romeo A, Muscoli S et al. The outcome of intra-aortic balloon pump support in
acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock according to the type of revascularization: a
comprehensive meta-analysis.Am Heart J. 2013; 165:679-692.
294. Marialisa Nesta, Federico Cammertoni, Piergiorgio Bruno, Massimo Massetti, Implantable ventricular assistance
systems (VAD) as a bridge to transplant or as ‘destination therapy’, European Heart Journal Supplements, Volume
23, Issue Supplement_E, October 2021, Pages E99-E102
295. Cavallazzi R, Nair A, Vasu T, Marik PE. Natriuretic peptides in acute pulmonary embolism: a systematic review.
Intensive Care Med. 2008 Dec;34(12):2147-56
296. Ronco C, McCullough P, Anker SD, et al for the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) consensus group. Cardio-renal
syndromes: report from the consensus conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative. Eur Heart J 2010;31(6):703-11.
297. Rosano GMC, Moura B, Metra M, Böhm M, Bauersachs J et al. Patient profiling in heart failure for tailoring medical
therapy. A consensus document of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart
Fail. 2021 Jun;23(6):872-881.
298. Hammarlund MM, Paalzow LK, Odlind B. Pharmacokinetics of furosemide in man after intravenous and oral
administration. Application of moment analysis. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1984;26(2):197-207.
299. Lala A, McNulty SE, Mentz RJ, Dunlay SM, Vader JM et al. Relief and recurrence of con-gestion during and after
hospitalization for acute heart failure: insights fromDiuretic Optimization Strategy Evaluation in Acute Decompensated
Heart Fail-ure (DOSE-AHF) and Cardiorenal Rescue Study in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (CARESS-HF).
Circ Heart Fail2015;8:741-748
300. Ambrosy AP, Pang PS, Khan S, Konstam MA, Fonarow GC et al. Clinical course and predictive value of congestion
during hospitalization in patients admitted for worsening signs and symptoms of heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction: findings from the EVEREST trial . Eur Heart J 2013: 34 (11): 835-0843,
301. Testani JM, Brisco MA, Kociol RD, Jacoby D, Bellumkonda L et al. Substantial discrepancy between fluid and weight
loss during acute decompensated heart failure treatment. Am J Med 2015;128:776-783.
302. Pitt B, Zannad F, Remme WJ, et al. for the Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study Investigators. The effect of
spironolactone on morbidity and mortality in patients with severe heart failure. N Engl J Med 1999;341:709-17.
303. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, et al. Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone blocker, in patients with left ventricular
dysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1309-21.
304. Zannad F, McMurray JJV, Krum H, et al for the EMPHASIS-HF Study Group. Eplerenone in patients with systolic
heart failure and mild symptoms. N Engl J Med 2011;364:11-21.
305. Garg R, Yusuf S. Overview of randomized trials of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors on mortality and
morbidity in patients with heart failure. Collaborative Group on ACE Inhibitor Trials. JAMA 1995;273:1450-6.
306. Flather MD, Yusuf S, Kober L, et al. Long-term ACE-inhibitor therapy in patients with heart failure or left-ventricular
dysfunction: a systematic overview of data from individual patients. ACE-Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction Collaborative
Group. Lancet 2000;355:1575-81.
307. Packer M, Coats ASS, Fowler MB, et al. Effect of carvediolol on survival in severe chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med
2001;344:1651-8.
308. The CAPRICORN Investigators. Effect of carvedilol on outcomes after myocardial infarction in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction: the CAPRICORN randomized trial. Lancet 2001;357:1385-90.
309. Australia-New Zealand Heart failure Research Collaborative Group. Randomised, placebo-controlled trial of
carvedilol in patients with congestive heart failure due to ischemic heart disease. Lancet 1997;349:375-80.
310. Willenheimer R, van Veldhuisen DJ, Silke B, et al. Effect on survival and hospitalization of initiating treatment for
chronic heart failure with bisoprolol followed by enalapril, as compared with the opposite sequence. Results of the
Randomized Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study (CIBIS) III. Circulation 2005;112:2426-35.
311. MERIT-HF Study Group. Effect of metoprolol CR/XL in chronic heart failure: Metoprolol CR/XL randomized Intervention
Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF). Lancet 1999;353:2001-7.
312. Poole- Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Cleland JG, et al. Comparison of carvedilol and metoprolol on clinical outcomes in
patients with CHF in the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol European Trail (COMET): randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2003;362:7-13.
313. CIBIS-II Investigators and Committees The Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study II (CIBIS-II): a randomised trial.
Lancet 1999;353(9146):9-13
314. Prins KW, Neill JM, Tyler JO et al. Effect of beta blocker withdrawal in acute decompensated heart failure, A
systematic review and meta analysis. JACC HF 2015;3:647-653
315. Velazquez EJ, Morrow DA, DeVore AD, Duffy CI, Ambrosy AP et al for the PIONEER-HF Investigators. Angiotensin
-Neprilysin Inhibition in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure. N Engl J Med 2019; 380:539-548
316. Greene SJ, Choi S, Lippmann SJ, Mentz RJ, Greiner MA et al. Clinical Effectiveness of Sacubitril/Valsartan Among
Patients Hospitalized for Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Aug 17;10(16):e021459
317. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Steg PG, Cannon CP, Leiter LA et al SOLOIST-WHF Trial Investigators. Sotagliflozin in
Patients with Diabetes and Recent Worsening Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 2021: 384(2):117-128
318. Voors AA, Angermann CE, Teerlink JR et al. The SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin in patients hospitalized for acute
heart failure: a multinational randomized trial. Nature Med 2022:28:568-574
319. Brunner-La Rocca HR, Knackstedt C, Eurlings L et al. Impact of worsening renal function related to medication in
heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2015;17:159-168
320. Cohen AT, Spiro TE, Buller HR et al. Rivaroxaban for thromboprophylaxis in acute ill medical patients. NEJM
2013:368;512-523.
321. Kleber FX, Witt C, Vogel E et al. Randomized comparison of enoxaparin with unfractionated heparin for the
prevention of venous thromboembolism in medical patients with heart failure or severe respiratory disorder. Am J
Cardiol 2003;145:614-621.
322. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 2020. 6Th Ed. Available at www.acadmed.org. my
323. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA focused update of the 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America.Circulation.
2017; 136:e137-e161.
324. Ponikowski P, Kirwan BA, Anker SD, et al. Ferric carboxymaltose for iron deficiency at discharge after acute heart
failure: a multicentre, double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Lancet 2020;369:1895-1904.
325. Sawicki KT, Ardehali H. Intravenous Iron Therapy in Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction: Tackling the
Deficiency. Circulation. 2021;144:253-255
326. WA, Ali MS, Kader SKA, Ross NT, Ramli AW et al for the MYHF Investigators’. Abstract 12125: Baseline Analysis
of National Malaysian Heart Failure Registry Indicates Hospitalization as a Key Opportunity to Initiate GDMT in HF
Patients. Circulation 2021; 144: A12125
327. Mebazaa A, Davison B, Chioncel O, Cohen-Solal A, Diaz R et al. Safety, tolerability and efficacy of up-titration of
guideline-directed medical therapies for acute heart failure (STRONG-HF): a multinational, open-label, randomised,
trial. Lancet. Published on line 7th November 2022.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)02076-1
328. Lucas C, Johnson W, Hamilton MA, Fonarow GC, Woo MA et al. Freedom from congestion predicts good survival
despite previous class IV symptoms of heart failure. American heart journal. 2000; 140:840-847
329. The Consensus Trial Study Group. Effects of Enalapril on Mortality in Severe Congestive Heart Failure. N Engl J
Med 1987; 316:1429-1435
330. The SOLVD Investigators. Effect of Enalapril on Survival in Patients with Reduced Left Ventricular Ejection Fractions
and Congestive Heart Failure. N Engl J Med 1991; 325:293-302
331. Pfeffer MA, McMurray JJ, Velazquez EJ, et al for the Valsartan in Acute Myocardial Infarction Trial Investigators.
Valsartan, captopril or both in myocardial infarction complicated by heart failure, left-ventricular dysfunction or both.
N Engl J Med 2003; 349:1893-906.
332. Yusuf S, Teo K, Anderson C, et al. Effects of the angiotensin-receptor blocker telmisartan on cardiovascular events
in high-risk patients intolerant to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2008;372(9644):1174-1183.
333. Maggioni AP, Anand I, Gottlieb SO, et al; Val-HeFT Investigators (Valsartan Heart Failure Trial). Effects of valsartan
on morbidity and mortality in patients with heart failure not receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2002; 40: 1414-1421.
334. Caldeira D, David C, Sampaio C. Tolerability of angiotensin-receptor blockers in patients with intolerance to
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs
2012;12(4):263-77.
335. McMurray JJ, Packer M, Desai AS, et al; PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees. Angiotensin-neprilysin
inhibition versus enalapril in heart failure. N Engl J Med 2014;371:993-1004.
336. Fitchett D., Zinman B., Wanner C., et al. Heart failure outcomes with empagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes
at high cardiovascular risk: results of the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial. European Heart Journal.2016;37(19):1526-1534.
337. Kato E. T., Silverman M. G., Mosenzon O., et al. Effect of dapagliflozin on heart failure and mortality in type 2
diabetes mellitus. Circulation. 2019;139(22):2528-2536
338. Bhatt D. L., Szarek M., Steg P. G., et al. Sotagliflozin in patients with diabetes and recent worsening heart failure.
New England Journal of Medicine. 2021;384(2):117-128
339. Rådholm K., Figtree G., Perkovic V., et al. Canagliflozin and heart failure in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation.
2018;138(5):458-468.
340. Anker S. D., Butler J., Filippatos G., et al. Effect of empagliflozin on cardiovascular and renal outcomes in patients
with heart failure by baseline diabetes status. Circulation. 2021;143(4):337-349.
341. McMurray J. J. V., Solomon S. D., Inzucchi S. E, et al. Dapagliflozin in patients with heart failure and reduced
ejection fraction. New England Journal of Medicine. 2019;381:1995-2008.
342. Santos-Gallego C. G., Vargas-Delgado A. P., Requena J. A., et al. Randomized trial of empagliflozin in non-diabetic
patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2020;77(3)
343. Seo Y., Yamamoto M., Machino-Ohtsuka T., Ishizu T., Aonuma K. Effects and safety of sodium glucose cotransporter
2 inhibitors in diabetes patients with drug-refractory advanced heart failure. Circulation Journal. 2018;82(7):1959-1962
344. Faris R, Flather M, Purcell H, Henein M, Poole-Wilson P, Coats A. Current evidence supporting the role of diuretics
in heart failure: a meta analysis of randomised controlled trials. Int J Cardiol. 2002;82(2):149-158.
345. Elhassan MG, Chao PW, Curiel A. The Conundrum of Volume Status Assessment: Revisiting Current and Future
Tools Available for Physicians at the Bedside. Cureus. 2021 May 26;13(5):e15253
346. Kalantari K, Chang JN, Ronco C, Rosner MH. Assessment of intravascular volume status and volume responsiveness
in critically ill patients. Kidney International 2013: 83:1017-1028
347. Ely EW, Smith AC, Chiles C et al. Radiologic determination of intravascular volume status using portable, digital
chest radiography: a prospective investigation in 100 patients. Crit Care Med 2001; 29 :1502-1512
348. Rivas-Lasarte M, Álvarez-García J, Fernández-Martínez J, Maestro A, López-López L, Solé-González E, Pirla MJ,
Mesado N, Mirabet S, Fluvià P, Brossa V, Sionis A, Roig E, Cinca J. Lung ultrasound-guided treatment in ambulatory
patients with heart failure: a randomized controlled clinical trial (LUS-HF study). Eur J Heart Fail. 2019 Dec;21(12):
1605-1613
349. Martens P, Verbrugge FH, Boonen L, Nijst P, Dupont M, Mullens W. Value of routine investigations to predict loop
diuretic down-titration success in stable heart failure. Int J Cardiol 2018;250:171-175.
350. Vardeny O, Claggett B, Kachadourian J, et al. Reduced loop diuretic use in patients taking sacubitril/valsartan
compared with enalapril: the PARADIGM-HF trial. Eur J Heart Fail. 2019;21(3):337-341.
351. Delanaye P, Scheen AJ. The diuretic effects of SGLT2 inhibitors: A comprehensive review of their specificities and
their role in renal protection. Diabetes Metab. 2021 Nov;47(6):101285
352. Verma A, Patel AB, Waikar SS. SGLT2 Inhibitor: Not a Traditional Diuretic for Heart Failure. Cell Metabolism 2020:
32 (1): 13-14
353. Schulze PC, Bogoviku J, Westphal J, Aftanski P, Haertel F et al. Effects of Early Empagliflozin Initiation on Diuresis
and Kidney Function in Patients With Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (EMPAG-HF). Circulation. 2022;146:289-298
354. Rohde LE, Rover MM, Figueiredo Neto JA, et al. Short-term diuretic withdrawal in stable outpatients with mild heart
failure and no fluid retention receiving optimal therapy: a double-blind, multicentre, randomized trial. Eur Heart J.
2019;40(44):3605-3612.
355. Lee VC, Rhew DC, Dylan M, et al. Meta-analysis: angiotensin-receptor blockers in chronic heart failure and high-risk
acute myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med 2004;141:693-704.
356. Heran BS, Musini VM, Bassett K, Taylor RS, Wright JM. Angiotensin receptor blockers for heart failure. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD003040.
357. Tai C, Gan T, Zou L, Sun Y, Zhang Y et al. Effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II
receptor blockers on cardiovascular events in patients with heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. BMC Cardiovascular Disorders (2017) 17:257
358. Kostis WJ, Sargsyan D, Mekkaoui C, Moreyra AE, Cabrera J et al. Association of orthostatic hypertension with
mortality in the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program. J Hum Hypertens. 2019 Oct;33(10):735-740.
359. Bakris GL, Weir MR. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor associated elevations in serum creatinine. Is this a
cause for concern? Arch Intern Med 2000;160:685-93.
360. Pereira ANP, Júnior RA, Macedo CRB, Teixeira RRDN, Magalhães IR, et al. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
Inhibitor-Induced Cough Prevalence in Refractory Hypertensive Patients. J Hypertens Manag 2016: 2:015
361. Banerji A, Blumenthal KG, Lai KH, Zhou L. Epidemiology and Incidence of ACE Inhibitor Angioedema Utilizing a
Large Electronic Health Record. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017 ; 5(3): 744–749
362. Brown T, Gonzalez J, Monteleone C. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor–induced angioedema: A review of the
literature. J Clin Hyper 2017: 19 : 1377-1382
363. Caldeira D, David C, Sampaio C. Tolerability of angiotensin-receptor blockers in patients with intolerance to
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs.
2012;12:263-277.
364. Knecht SE, Dunn SP, Macaulay TE. Angioedema related to angiotensin inhibitors. J Pharm Pract. 2014;27:461-465.
365. Yusuf S; Teo KK; Pogue J; Dyal L; Copland I; Schumacher H; Dagenais G; Sleight P; Anderson C. Telmisartan,
ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events.N Engl J Med. 2008; 358(15):1547-59
366. Okumura N, Jhund PS, Gong I, et al on behalf of the PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees. Effects of
sacubitril/valsartan in the PARADIGM-HF Trial (Prospective Comparison of ARNI with ACEI to Determine Impact on
Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart Failure) according to background therapy. Circ Heart Fail 2016;9:e003212.
367. Zheng C, Dai H, Huang J, Lin M, Zheng Q et al. The efficacy and safety of Sacubitril/Valsartan in the treatment of
chronic heart failure: a meta-analysis. Am J Transl Res 2021;13(11):12114-12128
368. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Lewis EF, Granger CB, Køber L et al for the PARADISE-MI Investigators and Committees.
Angiotensin Receptor–Neprilysin Inhibition in Acute Myocardial Infarction. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1845-55
369. Mohebi R, Liu Y, Piña IL, Prescott MF, Butler J et al. Dose-Response to Sacubitril/Valsartan in Patients With Heart
Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;80:1529–1541
370. The RESOLVD Investigators. Effects of metoprolol CR in patients with ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy.
Circulation 2000;101:378-84.
371. Foody JM, Farrell MH, Krumholz HM. Beta-blocker therapy in heart failure: scientific review. JAMA 2002;287:883-9.
372. van Veldhuisen DJ, Cohen-Solal A, Bohm M, et al. Beta-blockade with nebivolol in elderly heart failure patients with
impaired and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction: data from SENIORS (Study of Effects of Nebivolol Intervention
on Outcomes and Rehospitalization in Seniors With Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:2150-8.
373. Cooper LB, Lippmann SJ, Greiner MA, Sharma A, Kelly JP et al. Use of Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists in
Patients With Heart Failure and Comorbid Diabetes Mellitus or Chronic Kidney Disease. JAHA 2017;6:e006540.
374. Ferreira JP, Rossello X, Eschalier R, McMurray JJV, Pocock S et al. MRAs in Elderly HF Patients: Individual
Patient-Data Meta-Analysis of RALES, EMPHASIS-HF, and TOPCAT. JACC Heart Fail. 2019;7(12):1012-1021
375. Filippatos G, Anker SD, Pitt B, Rossing P, Joseph A et al. Finerenone and Heart Failure Outcomes by Kidney
Function/Albuminuria in Chronic Kidney Disease and Diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol HF. 2022 Nov, 10 (11) 860-870
376. Pitt B., Filippatos G., Agarwal R., et al. "Cardiovascular events with finerenone in kidney disease and type 2
diabetes". N Engl J Med 2021;385:24: 2252-2263.
377. Filippatos G., Anker S.D., Agarwal R., et al. "Finerenone reduces risk of incident heart failure in patients with chronic
kidney disease and type 2 diabetes: analyses from the FIGARO-DKD trial". Circulation 2022;145:6: 437-447.
378. Agarwal R., Filippatos G., Pitt B., et al. "Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with finerenone in patients with type 2
diabetes and chronic kidney disease: the FIDELITY pooled analysis". Eur Heart J 2022;43:6: 474-484.
379. Kosiborod MN, Jhund PS, Docherty KF, et al. Effects of Dapagliflozin on Symptoms, Function, and Quality of Life in
Patients With Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction: Results From the DAPA-HF Trial. Circulation. 2020;141
(2):90-99.
380. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al. Cardiovascular and Renal Outcomes with Empagliflozin in Heart Failure. N Engl
J Med. 2020;383(15):1413-1424.
381. Butler J, Anker SD, Filippatos G, et al. Empagliflozin and health-related quality of life outcomes in patients with heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction: the EMPEROR-Reduced trial. Eur Heart J. 2021;42(13):1203-1212.
382. Heerspink HJL, Stefánsson BV, Correa-Rotter R, Chertow GM, Greene T et al. for the DAPA-CKD Trial Committees
and Investigators. Dapagliflozin in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease. N Engl J Med 2020; 383:1436-1446
383. Abdelnabi M, Ahmed A, Almaghraby A, Saleh Y, Badran H. Ivabradine and AF: Coincidence, Correlation or a New
Treatment? Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev. 2020 Feb 12;8(4):300-303.
384. Martin RIR, Pogoryelova O, Koref MS, Bourke JP, Teare MD, Keavney BD. Atrial fibrillation associated with
ivabradine treatment: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Heart 2014;100:1506-1510
385. Swedberg K, Komajda M, Böhm M, et al. Ivabradine and outcomes in chronic heart failure (SHIFT): a randomised
placebo-controlled study. Lancet. 2010;376(9744):875-885.
386. Swedberg K, Komajda M, Böhm M, et al. Effects on outcomes of heart rate reduction by ivabradine in patients with
congestive heart failure: is there an influence of beta-blocker dose?: findings from the SHIFT (Systolic Heart failure
treatment with the I(f) inhibitor ivabradine Trial) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(22):1938-1945.
387. Böhm M, Borer J, Ford I, et al. Heart rate at baseline influences the effect of ivabradine on cardiovascular outcomes
in chronic heart failure: analysis from the SHIFT study. Clin Res Cardiol. 2013;102(1):11-22.
388. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, et al. Ivabradine for patients with stable coronary artery disease and left-ventricular systolic
dysfunction (BEAUTIFUL): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2008;372:807
389. Armstrong PW, Pieske B, Anstrom KJ, et al. Vericiguat in Patients with Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction.
N Engl J Med. 2020;382(20):1883-1893.
390. Thadani U. Challenges with nitrate therapy and nitrate tolerance: prevalence, prevention, and clinical relevance. Am
J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2014;14(4):287-301.
391. Cohn JN, Archibald DG, Ziesche S, et al. Effect of vasodilator therapy on mortality in chronic congestive heart
failure. Results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. N Engl J Med. 1986;314(24):1547-1552.
392. Taylor AL, Ziesche S, Yancy C, et al. Combination of isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine in blacks with heart failure.
N Engl J Med. 2004;351(20):2049-2057.
393. The Digitalis Investigation Group. The Effect of Digoxin on Mortality and Morbidity in Patients with Heart Failure. N
Engl J Med. 1997;336(8):525-533.
394. Uretsky BF, Young JB, Shahidi FE, Yellen LG, Harrison MC, Jolly MK. Randomized study assessing the effect of
digoxin withdrawal in patients with mild to moderate chronic congestive heart failure: results of the PROVED trial.
PROVED Investigative Group. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22(4):955-962.
395. Packer M, Gheorghiade M, Young JB, et al. Withdrawal of digoxin from patients with chronic heart failure treated
with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors. RADIANCE Study. N Engl J Med. 1993;329(1):1-7.
396. Fauchier L, Grimard C, Pierre B, et al. Comparison of beta blocker and digoxin alone and in combination for
management of patients with atrial fibrillation and heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103(2):248-254.
397. Kotecha D, Bunting KV, Gill SK, et al; for the Rate Control Therapy Evaluation in Permanent Atrial Fibrillation
(RATE-AF) Team. Effect of digoxin vs bisoprolol for heart rate control in atrial fibrillation on patient-reported quality
of life: the RATE-AF randomized clinical trial. JAMA. JAMA. 2020;324(24):2497-2508.
398. Fauchier L, Laborie G, Clementy N, Babuty D. Beta-blockers or Digoxin for Atrial Fibrillation and Heart Failure? Card
Fail Rev. 2016 May;2(1):35-39
399. Kim D, Yang PS, You SC. Treatment timing and the effects of rhythm control strategy in patients with atrial
fibrillation: nationwide cohort study. BMJ. 2021;373:n991.
400. Bavishi, C., Khan, A. R., & Ather, S. Digoxin in patients with atrial fibrillation and heart failure: A meta-analysis. Int J
Cardiol 2015: 188: 99-101.
401. Lopes RD, Rordorf R, De Ferrari GM, et al. Digoxin and Mortality in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2018;71(10):1063-1074
402. Rathore SS, Curtis JP, Wang Y, Bristow MR, Krumholz HM. Association of serum digoxin concentration and
outcomes in patients with heart failure. JAMA. 2003;289(7):871-878.
403. Adams KF, Jr., Patterson JH, Gattis WA, et al. Relationship of serum digoxin concentration to mortality and morbidity
in women in the digitalis investigation group trial: a retrospective analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46(3):497-504.
404. Madelaire C, Gislason G, Kristensen SL, et al. Low-Dose Aspirin in Heart Failure Not Complicated by Atrial
Fibrillation: A Nationwide Propensity-Matched Study. JACC Heart Fail. 2018;6(2):156-167.
405. Cokkinos DV, Haralabopoulos GC, Kostis JB, Toutouzas PK. Efficacy of antithrombotic therapy in chronic heart
failure: the HELAS study. Eur J Heart Fail. 2006;8(4):428-432.
406. Cleland JG, Findlay I, Jafri S, et al. The Warfarin/Aspirin Study in Heart failure (WASH): a randomized trial comparing
antithrombotic strategies for patients with heart failure. Am Heart J. 2004;148(1):157-164.
407. Lip GY, Shantsila E. Anticoagulation versus placebo for heart failure in sinus rhythm. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2014;2014(3):Cd003336.
408. Zannad F, Anker SD, Byra WM, et al. Rivaroxaban in Patients with Heart Failure, Sinus Rhythm, and Coronary
Disease. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(14):1332-1342
409. Homma S, Thompson JL, Pullicino PM, et al. Warfarin and aspirin in patients with heart failure and sinus rhythm. N
Engl J Med. 2012;366(20):1859-1869.
410. Massie BM, Collins JF, Ammon SE, et al. Randomized trial of warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel in patients with
chronic heart failure: the Warfarin and Antiplatelet Therapy in Chronic Heart Failure (WATCH) trial. Circulation.
2009;119(12):1616-1624.
411. Mehra MR, Vaduganathan M, Fu M, et al. A comprehensive analysis of the effects of rivaroxaban on stroke or
transient ischaemic attack in patients with heart failure, coronary artery disease, and sinus rhythm: the COMMAND
ER HF trial. Eur Heart J. 2019;40(44):3593-3602.
412. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline
for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2019;74(1):104-132.
413. Shantsila E, Lip GYH. Antiplatelet versus anticoagulation treatment for patients with heart failure in sinus rhythm.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD003333.
414. Steffel J, Collins R, Antz M, et al. 2021 European Heart Rhythm Association Practical Guide on the Use of Non-Vita min
K Antagonist Oral Anticoagulants in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Europace. 2021;23(10):1612-1676.
415. Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of new oral anticoagulants with
warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet. 2014;383(9921):955-962.
416. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et al. 2020 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation
developed in collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS): The Task Force for
the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Developed with the
special contribution of the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J.2021;42(5):373-498.
417. Lattuca B, Bouziri N, Kerneis M, et al., on behalf of the ACTION Study Group. Antithrombotic Therapy for Patients
With Left Ventricular Mural Thrombus. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;75:1676-1685.
418. Ali, Z., Isom, N., Dalia, T. et al. Direct oral anticoagulant use in left ventricular thrombus.2020: Thrombosis J :18: 29
419. Dalia, T., Lahan, S., Ranka, S. et al. Warfarin versus direct oral anticoagulants for treating left ventricular thrombus:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Thrombosis J 2021: 19: 7
420. Camaj A, Fuster V, Giustino G, Bienstock SW, Sternheim D, Mehran R, Dangas GD, Kini A, Sharma SK, Halperin
J, Dweck MR, Goldman ME. Left Ventricular Thrombus Following Acute Myocardial Infarction: JACC State-of-the-Art
Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Mar 15;79(10):1010-1022
421. Swedberg K, Olsson LG, Charlesworth A, et al. Prognostic relevance of atrial fibrillation in patients with chronic heart
failure on long-term treatment with beta-blockers: results from COMET. Eur Heart J. 2005;26(13):1303-1308.
422. Mogensen UM, Jhund PS, Abraham WT, et al. Type of Atrial Fibrillation and Outcomes in Patients With Heart Failure
and Reduced Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70(20):2490-2500.
423. Smit MD, Moes ML, Maass AH, et al. The importance of whether atrial fibrillation or heart failure develops first. Eur
J Heart Fail. 2012;14(9):1030-1040.
424. Wang TJ, Larson MG, Levy D, et al. Temporal relations of atrial fibrillation and congestive heart failure and their joint
influence on mortality: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2003;107(23):2920-2925.
425. Kirchhof, P, Camm, AJ, Goette, A, . EAST-AFNET 4 Trial Investigators. Early rhythm-control therapy in patients with
atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1305-1316
426. Olshansky B, Rosenfeld CE, Warner AL, et al. The Atrial Fibrillation Follow Up Investigation of Rhythm Management
(AFFIRM) Study; Approaches to control rate in atrial fibrillation. J Am Col Cardiol 2004;43:1201-8.
427. Van Gelder IC, Wyse DG, Chandler ML, Cooper HA, Olshansky B et al. RACE and AFFIRM Investigators. Does
intensity of rate-control influence outcome in atrial fibrillation? An analysis of pooled data from the RACE and
AFFIRM studies. Europace 2006;8:935942.
428. Nikolaidou T, Channer KS. Chronic atrial fibrillation: a systematic review of medical heart rate control management.
Postgrad Med J. 2009;85(1004):303-312.
429. Kotecha D, Holmes J, Krum H, et al. Efficacy of β blockers in patients with heart failure plus atrial fibrillation: an
individual-patient data meta-analysis. Lancet. 2014;384(9961):2235-2243.
430. Khand AU, Rankin AC, Martin W, Taylor J, Gemmell I, Cleland JG. Carvedilol alone or in combination with digoxin
for the management of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart failure? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42(11):1944-1951.
431. Ziff OJ, Lane DA, Samra M, et al. Safety and efficacy of digoxin: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational
and controlled trial data. BMJ. 2015;351:h4451.
432. Mulder BA, Van Veldhuisen DJ, Crijns HJ, et al. Digoxin in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation: data from the
RACE II study. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11(9):1543-1550.
433. Hofmann R, Steinwender C, Kammler J, Kypta A, Leisch F. Effects of a high dose intravenous bolus amiodarone in
patients with atrial fibrillation and a rapid ventricular rate. Int J Cardiol 2006;110:27-32.
434. Hofmann R, Wimmer G, Leisch F. Intravenous amiodarone bolus immediately controls heart rate in patients with
atrial fibrillation accompanied by severe congestive heart failure. Heart 2000;84:635.
435. Roy D, Talajic M, Nattel S, et al. Rhythm control versus rate control for atrial fibrillation and heart failure. N Engl J
Med. 2008;358(25):2667-2677.
436. Parkash R, Wells GA, Rouleau J, Talajic M, Essebag V et al. Randomized Ablation-Based Rhythm-Control Versus
Rate-Control Trial in Patients With Heart Failure and Atrial Fibrillation: Results from the RAFT-AF trial. Circulation.
2022;145:1693-1704
437. K.M. Trulock, S.M. Narayan, J.P. Piccini.Rhythm control in heart failure patients with atrial fibrillation: contemporary
challenges including the role of ablation.J Am Coll Cardiol 2014: 64: 710-721
438. Echt DS, Liebson PR, Mitchell LB, et al. Mortality and morbidity in patients receiving encainide, flecainide, or
placebo. The Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial. N Engl J Med. 1991;324(12):781-788.
439. Hayashi M, Shimizu W, Albert CM. The spectrum of epidemiology underlying sudden cardiac death. Circ Res.
2015;116(12):1887-1906.
440. Wellens HJ, Schwartz PJ, Lindemans FW, et al. Risk stratification for sudden cardiac death: current status and
challenges for the future. Eur Heart J. 2014;35(25):1642-1651.
441. Luu M, Stevenson WG, Stevenson LW, Baron K, Walden J. Diverse mechanisms of unexpected cardiac arrest in
advanced heart failure. Circulation. 1989;80(6):1675-1680.
442. Wang YS, Scheinman MM, Chien WW, Cohen TJ, Lesh MD, Griffin JC. Patients with supraventricular tachycardia
presenting with aborted sudden death: incidence, mechanism and long-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol.1991;18(7):
1711-1719.
443. Al-Gobari M, El Khatib C, Pillon F, Gueyffier F. β-Blockers for the prevention of sudden cardiac death in heart failure
patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2013;13:52.
444. Domanski MJ, Exner DV, Borkowf CB, Geller NL, Rosenberg Y, Pfeffer MA. Effect of angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibition on sudden cardiac death in patients following acute myocardial infarction. A meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33(3):598-604.
445. Cleland JG, Erhardt L, Murray G, Hall AS, Ball SG. Effect of ramipril on morbidity and mode of death among
survivors of acute myocardial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. A report from the AIRE Study
Investigators. Eur Heart J. 1997;18(1):41-51.
446. Teo KK, Mitchell LB, Pogue J, Bosch J, Dagenais G, Yusuf S. Effect of ramipril in reducing sudden deaths and
nonfatal cardiac arrests in high-risk individuals without heart failure or left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation.
2004;110(11):1413-1417.
447. Solomon SD, Wang D, Finn P, et al. Effect of candesartan on cause-specific mortality in heart failure patients: the
Candesartan in Heart failure Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM) program. Circulation.
2004;110(15):2180-2183.
448. Pitt B, Poole-Wilson PA, Segal R, et al. Effect of losartan compared with captopril on mortality in patients with
symptomatic heart failure: randomised trial--the Losartan Heart Failure Survival Study ELITE II. Lancet.
2000;355(9215):1582-1587.
449. Naccarella F, Naccarelli GV, Maranga SS, et al. Do ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists reduce total
mortality and arrhythmic mortality? A critical review of controlled clinical trials. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2002;17(1):6-18.
450. Rohde LE, Chatterjee NA, Vaduganathan M, et al. Sacubitril/Valsartan and Sudden Cardiac Death According to
Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator Use and Heart Failure Cause: A PARADIGM-HF Analysis. JACC Heart Fail.
2020;8(10):844-855.
451. Desai AS, McMurray JJ, Packer M, et al. Effect of the angiotensin-receptor-neprilysin inhibitor LCZ696 compared
with enalapril on mode of death in heart failure patients. Eur Heart J. 2015;36(30):1990-1997.
452. Bapoje SR, Bahia A, Hokanson JE, et al. Effects of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists on the risk of sudden
cardiac death in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6(2):166-173.
453. Rossello X, Ariti C, Pocock SJ, et al. Impact of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists on the risk of sudden cardiac
death in patients with heart failure and left-ventricular systolic dysfunction: an individual patient-level meta-analysis
of three randomized-controlled trials. Clin Res Cardiol. 2019;108(5):477-486.
454. Al-Gobari M, Le H-H, Fall M, Gueyffier F, Burnand B. No benefits of statins for sudden cardiac death prevention in
patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One.
2017;12(2):e0171168-e0171168.
455. Rahimi K, Majoni W, Merhi A, Emberson J. Effect of statins on ventricular tachyarrhythmia, cardiac arrest, and
sudden cardiac death: a meta-analysis of published and unpublished evidence from randomized trials. Eur Heart J.
2012;33(13):1571-1581.
456. Zeppenfeld K, Tfelt-Hansen J, de Riva M, Winkel BG, Behr ER et al. ESC Scientific Document Group, 2022 ESC
Guidelines for the management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death:
Developed by the task force for the management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of
sudden cardiac death of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Endorsed by the Association for European
Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology (AEPC), Eur Heart J 2022: 43(40): 3997-4126,
457. Connolly SJ, Hallstrom AP, Cappato R, Schron EB, Kuck KH, Zipes DP, et al. Meta-analysis of the implantable
cardioverter defibrillator secondary prevention trials. AVID, CASH and CIDS studies. Antiarrhythmics vs Implantable
Defibrillator study. Cardiac Arrest Study Hamburg. Canadian Implantable Defibrillator Study. Eur Heart J 2000;21:
2071-2078.
458. Schrage B, Uijl A, Benson L, Westermann D, Ståhlberg M, Stolfo D, et al. Association between use of primary-pre
vention implantable cardioverter-defibrillators and mortality in patients with heart failure: a prospective propensity
score-matched analysis from the Swedish Heart Failure Registry. Circulation 2019;140:1530-1539
459. Zabel M, Willems R, Lubinski A, Bauer A, Brugada J, Conen D, et al. Clinical effectiveness of primary prevention
implantable cardioverter-defibrillators: results of the EU-CERT-ICD controlled multicentre cohort study. Eur Heart J
2020;41:3437-3447.
460. Poole JE, Olshansky B, Mark DB, et al. Long-Term Outcomes of Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator Therapy in
the SCD-HeFT. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76(4):405-415.
461. Steinberg JS, Martins J, Sadanandan S, et al. Antiarrhythmic drug use in the implantable defibrillator arm of the
Antiarrhythmics Versus Implantable Defibrillators (AVID) Study. Am Heart J. 2001;142(3):520-529.
462. Santangeli P, Muser D, Maeda S, et al. Comparative effectiveness of antiarrhythmic drugs and catheter ablation for
the prevention of recurrent ventricular tachycardia in patients with implantable cardioverter-defibrillators: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Heart Rhythm. 2016;13(7):1552-1559.
463. Vergara P, Tung R, Vaseghi M, Brombin C, Frankel DS, Di Biase L, et al. Successful ventricular tachycardia
ablation in patients with electrical storm reduces recurrences and improves survival. Heart Rhythm 2018;15:48-55
464. Elkayam U, Amin J, Mehra A, Vasquez J, Weber L, Rahimtoola SH. A prospective, randomized, double-blind,
crossover study to compare the efficacy and safety of chronic nifedipine therapy with that of isosorbide dinitrate and
their combination in the treatment of chronic congestive heart failure. Circulation. 1990;82(6):1954-1961.
465. Littler WA, Sheridan DJ. Placebo controlled trial of felodipine in patients with mild to moderate heart failure. UK
Study Group. Br Heart J. 1995;73(5):428-433.
466. Goldstein RE, Boccuzzi SJ, Cruess D, Nattel S. Diltiazem increases late-onset congestive heart failure in postinfarction
patients with early reduction in ejection fraction. The Adverse Experience Committee; and the Multicenter Diltiazem
Postinfarction Research Group. Circulation. 1991;83(1):52-60.
467. Danish Study Group on Verapamil in Myocardial Infarction. Effect of verapamil on mortality and major events after
acute myocardial infarction (The Danish Verapamil Infarction Trial II-DAVIT II). Am J Cardiol. 1990;66(10):779-785.
468. Packer M, O'Connor CM, Ghali JK, et al. Effect of amlodipine on morbidity and mortality in severe chronic heart
failure. Prospective Randomized Amlodipine Survival Evaluation Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;335(15):1107-1114.
469. Packer M, Carson P, Elkayam U, et al. Effect of amlodipine on the survival of patients with severe chronic heart
failure due to a nonischemic cardiomyopathy: results of the PRAISE-2 study (prospective randomized amlodipine
survival evaluation 2). JACC Heart Fail. 2013;1(4):308-314.
470. Cohn JN, Ziesche S, Smith R, et al. Effect of the calcium antagonist felodipine as supplementary vasodilator therapy
in patients with chronic heart failure treated with enalapril: V-HeFT III. Vasodilator-Heart Failure Trial (V-HeFT)
Study Group. Circulation. 1997;96(3):856-863.
471. Chapman N, Dobson J, Wilson S, Dahlöf B, Sever PS et al. on behalf of the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes
Trial Investigators. Effect of Spironolactone on Blood Pressure in Subjects With Resistant Hypertension. Hypertension.
2007;49:839-845
472. Kotecha D, Flather MD, Altman DG, et al. Heart Rate and Rhythm and the Benefit of Beta-Blockers in Patients With
Heart Failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69(24):2885-2896.
473. Abraham WT, Fisher WG, Smith AL, et al. Cardiac resynchronization in chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med
2002;346:1845-53.
474. Bristow MR, Saxon LA, Boehmer J, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy with or without an implantable defibrillator
in advanced chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2140-50.
475. Cleland JG, Daubert JC, Erdmann E, et al. The effect of cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and mortality in heart
failure. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1539-49.
476. Goldenberg I, Kutyifa V, Moss AJ. Survival with cardiac-resynchronization therapy. N Engl J Med 2014;371:477-478.
477. Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DS, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy for the prevention of heart-failure events.
N Engl J Med 2009;361:1329-38.
478. Abraham WT, Young JB, Leon AR, et al. Effects of cardiac resynchronization on disease progression in patients with
left ventricular systolic dysfunction, an indication for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, and mildly symptomatic
chronic heart failure. Circulation 2004;110:2864-8.
479. Glikson M, Nielsen JC, Kronborg MB, et al. 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiac pacing and cardiac resynchronization
therapy: Developed by the Task Force on cardiac pacing and cardiac resynchronization therapy of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) With the special contribution of the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA). Eur
Heart J. 2021;42(35):3427-3520.
480. Birnie DH, Ha A, Higginson L, Sidhu K, Green M, Philippon F, Thibault B, Wells G, Tang A. Impact of QRS morphology
and duration on outcomes after cardiac resynchronization therapy: results from the Resynchronization-Defibrillation
for Ambulatory Heart Failure Trial (RAFT). Circ Heart Fail 2013;6:1190-1198.
481. Linde C, Leclercq C, Rex S, Garrigue S, Lavergne T et al. Long-term benefits of biventricular pacing in congestive
heart failure: results from the MUltisite STimulation in cardiomyopathy (MUSTIC) study. J Am Coll Cardiol
2002;40:111-118.
482. Linde C, Abraham WT, Gold MR, St John Sutton M, Ghio S, Daubert C. Randomized trial of cardiac resynchronization
in mildly symptomatic heart failure patients and in asymptomatic patients with left ventricular dysfunction and
previous heart failure symptoms. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:1834-43.
483. Auricchio A, Stellbrink C, Butter C, Sack S, Vogt Jet al. Clinical efficacy of cardiac resynchronization therapy using
left ventricular pacing in heart failure patients stratified by severity of ventricular conduction delay. J Am Coll Cardiol
2003;42:2109-2116.
484. Tang A, Wells G, Talajic M, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy for mild-to-moderate heart failure. N Engl J Med
2010;363:2385-95.
485. Ruschitzka F, Abraham WT, Singh JP, et al for the EchoCRT Study Group. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy in
heart failure with a narrow QRS complex. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1395-405.
486. Beshai JF, Grimm RA, Nagueh SF, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy in heart failure with narrow QRS
complexes. N Engl J Med 2007;357(24):2461-71.
487. Donahue T, Niazi I, Leon A, et al. One year follow-up of CRT in narrow QRS patients with mechanical dyssynchronie.
Circulation 2008:118:949
488. Gasparini M, Auricchio A, Metra M, et al. Long-term survival in patients undergoing cardiac resynchronization
therapy: the importance of performing atrio-ventricular junction ablation in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation.
Eur Heart J 2008;29:1644-52.
489. Khadjooi K, Foley PW, Chalil S, et al. Long-term effects of cardiac resynchronisation therapy in patients with atrial
fibrillation. Heart 2008;94:879-83.
490. Brignole M, Pokushalov E, Pentimalli F, et al; APAF-CRT Investigators. A randomized controlled trial of atrioven
tricular junction ablation and cardiac resynchronization therapy in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation and
narrow QRS. Eur Heart J 2018:39:3999-4008.
491. Padala SK, Master VM, Terricabras M, et al. Initial experience, safety, and feasibility of left bundle branch area
pacing: a multicenter prospective study. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2020;6(14):1773-1782
492. Vijayaraman P, Ponnusamy S, Cano Ó, et al. Left bundle branch area pacing for cardiac resynchronization therapy:
results from the International LBBAP Collaborative Study Group. J Am Coll Cardiol EP. 2021;7(2):135-147
493. Pujol-Lopez M, Jiménez-Arjona R, Garre P, Guasch E, Borràs R et al. Conduction System Pacing vs Biventricular
Pacing in Heart Failure and Wide QRS Patients: LEVEL-AT Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol EP. 2022 Nov, 8 (11) 1431-1445
494. Vijayaraman P, Zalavadia D, Haseeb A, Dye C, Madan N et al. Clinical outcomes of conduction system pacing
compared to biventricular pacing in patients requiring cardiac resynchronization therapy. Heart Rhythm 2022: 19:
1263-1271
495. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al. Prophylactic implantation of a defibrillator in patients with myocardial infarction
and reduced ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2002; 346:877-83.
496. Bardy GH, Lee KL, Mark DB, et al. Amiodarone or an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for congestive heart
failure. N Engl J Med 2005;352:225-37.
497. Kadish A, Dyer A, Daubert JP, et al for the Defibrillators in Non-Ischemic Cardiomyopathy Treatment Evaluation
(DEFINITE) Investigators. Prophylactic defibrillator implantation in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy.
N Engl J Med 2004;350:2151-8.
498. Desai AS, Fang JC, Maisel WH, Baughman KL. Implantable deﬁbrillators for the prevention of mortality in patients
with nonischemic cardiomyopathy: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2004;292:2874-9.
499. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, Jain A, Sopko G et al. STICH Investigators. Coronary-artery bypass surgery in
patients with left ventricular dysfunction. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1607-1616.
500. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al for the STICH Investigators. Coronary artery bypass surgery in patients with
ischemic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 2016;374:1511-20.
501. Perera D, Clayton T, O’Kane PD, Greenwood JP, Weerackody R eat al for the REVIVED-BCIS2 Investigators.
Percutaneous Revascularization for Ischemic Left Ventricular Dysfunction. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206606
502. Jones RH, Velazquez EJ, Michler RE, et al. Coronary bypass surgery with or without surgical ventricular reconstruction.
N Engl J Med. 2009;360(17):1705-17.
503. Dor V, Civaia F, Alexandrescu C, et al. Favorable effects of left ventricular reconstruction in patients excluded from
the Surgical Treatments for Ischemic Heart Failure (STICH) trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141:905-916,
916e1-4.
504. Holley CT, Harvey L, John R. Left ventricular assist devices as a bridge to cardiac transplantation. J Thorac Dis.
2014;6(8):1110-1119.
505. Jakovljevic DG, Yacoub MH, Schueler S, et al. Left Ventricular assist device as a bridge to recovery for patients with
advanced heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:1924-1933.
506. Rogers JG, Butler J, Lansman SL, et al. Chronic mechanical circulatory support for inotrope-dependent heart failure
patients who are not transplant candidates: results of the INTrEPID Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:741-747.
507. Baras Shreibati J, Goldhaber-Fiebert JD, Banerjee D, Owens DK, Hlatky MA. Cost-Effectiveness of Left Ventricular
Assist Devices in Ambulatory Patients With Advanced Heart Failure. JACC Heart Fail. 2017 Feb;5(2):110-119.
508. Starling RC, Estep JD, Horstmanshof DA, et al. Risk assessment and comparative effectiveness of left ventricular
assist device and medical management in ambulatory heart failure patients: the ROADMAP study 2-year results. J
Am Coll Cardiol HF. 2017;5:518-527.
509. Health Quality Ontario. Left Ventricular Assist Devices for Destination Therapy: A Health Technology Assessment.
Ont Health Technol Assess Ser. 2016 Feb 8;16(3):1-60. PMID: 27026798; PMCID: PMC4761917.
510. Tsuji K, Sabata Y, Nochioka K et al. Characterization of heart failure patients with mid-range left ventricular function
- a report from the CHART-2 study. EJHF 2017:19;1258-69.
511. Packer M, Butler J, Zannad F et al. Effect of Empagliflozin on worsening heart failure in patients with heart failure
and preserved ejection fraction: the EMPEROR-Preserved Trial. Circ 2021:144;1284-1294
512. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, Ferreira JP, Bocchi E et al . Empagliflozin in heart failure with a preserved ejection
fraction. N Engl J Med 2021; 385:1451-1461
513. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Claggett B, de Boer RA, DeMets D et al for the DELIVER Trial Committees and
Investigators. Dapagliflozin in Heart Failure with Mildly Reduced or Preserved Ejection Fraction. Published on line
27th August 2022. N Engl J Med 2022: DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206286
514. Ellison DH, Felker GM. Diuretics treatment in heart failure. NEJM 2017:377;1964-1975.
515. Faselis C, Arundel C, Patel S et al. Loop diuretic prescription and 30-day outcomes in older patients with heart
failure. JACC 2020:76;669-679.
516. Cleland JGF, Bunting KV, Flather MD et al. Beta blockers for heart failure with reduced, mid-range and preserved
HF: an individual patient level analysis of double-blind randomized trial. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:26-35.
517. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Anand IS et al, Angiotensin-neprilysin inhibition in heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction. NEJM 2019:381;1609-1620.
518. Lund L. Heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction. Lessons from CHARM. Card Fail Rev 2018:4(2);70-72.
519. Savarese G, Stolfo D, Sinagra G et al. Heart failure with mid-range or mildly reduced ejection fraction. Nature Rev
Card 2022:19:100-116.
520. Wilcox JE, Fang JC, Margulies KB et al. Heart failure with recovered left ventricular ejection fraction: JACC scientific
Expert Panel. JACC 2020:70:719-734.
521. Shah SJ, Katz DH, Deo RC. Phenotypic spectrum of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Heart Fail Clin.
2014;10(3):407-418.
522. Shah SJ, Kitzman DW, Borlaug BA, van Heerebeek L, Zile MR, Kass DA, Paulus WJ. Phenotype-specific treatment
of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a multiorgan roadmap.Circulation. 2016; 134:73-90
523. Roh J, Hill JA, Singh A, Valero-Muñoz M, Sam F. Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: Heterogeneous
Syndrome, Diverse Preclinical Models. Circulation Research. 2022;130:1906-1925
524. Mentz RJ, Kelly JP, von Lueder TG, et al. Noncardiac comorbidities in heart failure with reduced versus preserved
ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64: 2281-2293.
525. Tromp J, Teng TH, Tay WT, Hung CL, Narasimhan C, Shimizu W, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
in Asia. Eur J Heart Fail 2019;21:23-36.
526. Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction. N Engl J Med 2006;355:251
527. Wehner GJ, Jing L, Haggerty CM, Suever JD, Leader JB, Hartzel DN, Kirchner HL, Manus JNA, James N, Ayar Z,
Gladding P, Good CW, Cleland JGF, Fornwalt BK. Routinely reported ejection fraction and mortality in clinical
practice: where does the nadir of risk lie? Eur Heart J 2020;41:12491257.
528. Stewart S, Playford D, Scalia GM, Currie P, Celermajer DS, Prior D, Codde J, Strange G, NEDA Investigators.
Ejection fraction and mortality: a nationwide register-based cohort study of 499 153 women and men. Eur J Heart
Fail 2021;23:406-416.
529. Borlaug BA. Evaluation and management of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Nat Rev Cardiol
2020;17:559-573
530. Henry, A., C. Y. Lee, W. Y. Haniff, W. Isa, et al. “Malaysian Heart Failure (MYHF) Registry Substantiates High
Burden of Comorbidities across the Continuum of Ejection Fraction in Malaysian HF Patients.” Int J Cardiology 2021:
345 : 12. Available at : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2021.10.055
531. Borlaug BA, Kane GC, Melenovsky V, Olson TP. Abnormal right ventricular-pulmonary artery coupling with exercise
in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.Eur Heart J. 2016; 37:3293-3302
532. Iwanaga Y, Nishi I, Furuichi S, Noguchi T, Sase K, Kihara Y, Goto Y, Nonogi H. B-type natriuretic peptide strongly
reflects diastolic wall stress in patients with chronic heart failure: comparison between systolic and diastolic heart
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:742-748
533. Buckley LF, Canada JM, Del Buono MG, Carbone S, Trankle CR, Billingsley H, Kadariya D, Arena R, Van Tassell
BW, Abbate A. Low NT-proBNP levels in overweight and obese patients do not rule out a diagnosis of heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction. ESC Heart Fail. 2018 Apr;5(2):372-378.
534. Meijers WC, Hoekstra T, Jaarsma T, van Veldhuisen DJ, de Boer RA. Patients with heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction and low levels of natriuretic peptides. Neth Heart J. 2016 Apr;24(4):287-95.
535. Richards M, Di Somma S, Mueller C, Nowak R, Peacock WF, Ponikowski P, Möckel M, Hogan C, Wu AH, Clopton
P, Filippatos GS, Anand I, Ng L, Daniels LB, Neath SX, Shah K, Christenson R, Hartmann O, Anker SD, Maisel A.
Atrial fibrillation impairs the diagnostic performance of cardiac natriuretic peptides in dyspneic patients. JACC Heart
Fail 2013;1:192-199
536. Pieske B, Tschöpe C, De Boer RA, Fraser AG, Anker SD, Donal E, et al. How to diagnose heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: The HFA-PEFF diagnostic algorithm: A consensus recommendation from the Heart
Failure Association (HFA) of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2019;40:3297-3317
537. Reddy YNV, Carter RE, Obokata M, Redfield MM, Borlaug BA. A Simple, Evidence-Based Approach to Help Guide
Diagnosis of Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction. Circulation. 2018;138:861-870
538. Sanders-van Wijk S, Barandiarán Aizpurua A, Brunner-La Rocca HP, Henkens MTHM, Weerts J, Knackstedt C,
Uszko-Lencer N, Heymans S, van Empel V. The HFA-PEFF and H2 FPEF scores largely disagree in classifying
patients with suspected heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail. 2021 May;23(5):838-840.
539. Adamczak, D.M., Oduah, MT., Kiebalo, T. et al. Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction-a Concise Review.
Curr Cardiol Rep 200: 22: 82
540. Lee DS, Gona P, Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, Wang TJ, et al. Relation of disease pathogenesis and risk
factors to heart failure with preserved or reduced ejection fraction: insights from the Framingham Heart Study of the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Circulation. 2009;119:3070-7.
541. Maréchaux S, Six-Carpentier MM, Bouabdallaoui N, Montaigne D, Bauchart JJ, Mouquet F, Auffray JL, Le Tourneau
T, Asseman P, LeJemtel TH, Ennezat PV. Prognostic importance of comorbidities in heart failure with preserved left
ventricular ejection fraction. Heart Vessels. 2011 May;26(3):313-20
542. CW, Lopatin M, Stevenson LW, De Marco T, Fonarow GC, Committee ASA, et al. Clinical presentation, management,
and in-hospital outcomes of patients admitted with acute decompensated heart failure with preserved systolic
function: a report from the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry (ADHERE) Database. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2006;47:76-84
543. Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL, Redfield MM. Trends in prevalence and outcome of
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(3):251-9
544. Fonarow GC, Stough WG, Abraham WT, Albert NM, Gheorghiade M, Greenberg BH, et al. Characteristics,
treatments, and outcomes of patients with preserved systolic function hospitalized for heart failure: a report from the
OPTIMIZE-HF Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50(8):768-77
545. Tadic M, Cuspidi C. Obesity and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a paradox or something else? Heart
Fail Rev. 2019 May;24(3):379-385
546. Lee DS, Gona P, Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, Wang TJ, et al. Relation of Disease Pathogenesis and Risk
Factors to Heart Failure With Preserved or Reduced Ejection Fraction: Insights From the Framingham Heart Study
of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Circulation. 2009;119(24):3070-7
547. Kitzman DW, Brubaker P, Morgan T, Haykowsky M, Hundley G, Kraus WE, Eggebeen J, Nicklas BJ. Effect of
Caloric Restriction or Aerobic Exercise Training on Peak Oxygen Consumption and Quality of Life in Obese Older
Patients With Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2016;315:36-46.
548. Kitzman DW, Brubaker PH, Morgan TM, Stewart KP, Little WC. Exercise training in older patients with heart failure
and preserved ejection fraction: a randomized, controlled, single-blind trial. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:659-67.
549. W.R. Miranda, J.A. Batsis, M.G. Sarr, et al.Impact of bariatric surgery on quality of life, functional capacity, and
symptoms in patients with heart failure. Obes Surg, 2013:23: 1011-1015
550. Y.J. Shimada, Y. Tsugawa, D.F. Brown, K. Hasegawa. Bariatric surgery and emergency department visits and
hospitalizations for heart failure exacerbation: population-based, self-controlled series. J Am Coll Cardiol, 2016: 67
: 895-903
551. Fukuta H, Goto T, Wakami K, et al. Effects of drug and exercise intervention on functional capacity and quality of life
in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur J Prev Cardiol
2016;23:78-85.
552. Taylor RS, Davies EJ, Dalal HM, Davis R, Doherty P, Cooper C, Holland DJ, Jolly K, Smart NA. Effects of exercise
training for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative
studies. Int J Cardiol. 2012 Dec 15;162(1):6-13.
553. Xie X, Atkins E, Lv J, Bennett A, Neal B, Ninomiya T, Woodward M, MacMahon S, Turnbull F, Hillis GS, Chalmers
J, Mant J, Salam A, Rahimi K, Perkovic V, Rodgers A. Effects of intensive blood pressure lowering on cardiovascular
and renal outcomes: updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016 Jan 30;387(10017):435-43.
554. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, Anderson SG, Callender T, Emberson J, Chalmers J, Rodgers A, Rahimi K. Blood
pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet. 2016;387:957-967.
555. Piller LB, Baraniuk S, Simpson LM, et al. Long-term follow-up of participants with heart failure in the antihypertensive
and lipid-lowering treatment to prevent heart attack trial (ALLHAT). Circulation. 2011;124: 1811-1818.
556. Williamson JD, Supiano MA, Applegate WB, et al. Intensive vs standard blood pressure control and cardiovascular
disease outcomes in adults aged >75 years: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315: 2673-2682.
557. SPRINT Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al. A randomized trial of intensive versus standard
blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2103-2116.
558. Bavishi C, Chatterjee S, Ather S, Patel D, Messerli FH. Beta-blockers in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction:
a meta-analysis. Heart Fail Rev. 2015 Mar;20(2):193-201.
559. Gevaert AB, Kataria R, Zannad F, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: recent concepts in diagnosis,
mechanisms and management. Heart 2022;Jan 12
560. Palau P, Seller J, Domínguez E, Sastre C, Ramón JM et al. Effect of β-Blocker Withdrawal on Functional Capacity
in Heart Failure and Preserved Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Nov, 78 (21) 2042-2056
561. Lumbers RT, Martin N, Manoharan K, et al. Do beta-blockers and inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin aldosterone
system improve outcomes in patients with heart failure and left ventricular ejection fraction > 40%. Heart. 2019;105
:1533-1535.
562. Martin N, Manoharan K, Davies C, Lumbers RT. Beta-blockers and inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin aldosterone
system for chronic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 May 22;5(5):
CD012721.
563. Yusuf S,Pfeffer MA , Swedberg K et al. Effects of candesartan in patients with CHF and preserved left-ventricular
ejection fraction: the CHARM – Preserved Trial.Lancet 2003; 362 : 777-81.
564. Cleland JG, Tendera M, Adamus J, Freemantle N, Polonski L, Taylor J, PEP-CHF Investigators. The Perindopril in
Elderly People with Chronic Heart Failure (PEP-CHF) study. Eur Heart J 2006;27(19):2338-45
565. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, et al. Angiotensin–neprilysin inhibition in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
N Eng J Med 2019;381:1609-20.
566. McMurray JJV, Jackson AM, Lam CSP, et al. Effects of sacubitril-valsartan versus valsartan in women compared
with men with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: insights from PARAGON-HF. Circulation. 2020;141:338-351.
567. Edelmann F, Wachter R, Schmidt AG, et al. Effect of spironolactone on diastolic function and exercise capacity in
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: the Aldo-DHF randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2013;309:781-791
568. Pitt B, Pfeffer MA, Assmann SF, et al. TOPCAT Investigators. Spironolactone for heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1383-92.
569. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Assmann SF, et al. Regional variation in patients and outcomes in the Treatment of
Preserved Cardiac Function Heart Failure With an Aldosterone Antagonist (TOPCAT) trial. Circulation
570. Cohen JB, Schrauben SJ, Zhao L, Basso MD, Cvijic ME, Li Z, Yarde M, Wang Z, Bhattacharya PT, Chirinos DA,
Prenner S, Zamani P, Seiffert DA, Car BD, Gordon DA, Margulies K, Cappola T, Chirinos JA. Clinical Phenogroups
in Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: Detailed Phenotypes, Prognosis, and Response to Spironolactone.
JACC Heart Fail. 2020 Mar;8(3):172-184
571. MacDonald MR, Petrie MC, Hawkins NM, Petrie JR, Fisher M et al. Diabetes, left ventricular systolic dysfunction,
and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2008 May;29(10):1224-40.
572. Nichols GA, Gullion CM, Koro CE, Ephross SA, Brown JB. The incidence of congestive heart failure in type 2
diabetes: an update. Diabetes Care . 2004;27:1879-1884.
573. Andersson C, Norgaard ML, Hansen PR, et al. Heart failure severity, as determined by loop diuretic dosages,
predicts the risk of developing diabetes after myocardial infarction: a nationwide cohort study. Eur J Heart Fail
2010;12:1333-8.
574. Kristensen SL, Jhund PS, Lee MMY, Kober L, Solomon SD et al for the CHARM Investigators and Committees.
Prevalence of prediabetes and undiagnosed diabetes in patients with HFpEF and HFrEF and associated clinical
outcomes. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 2017;31:545-549.
575. Vermes E, Ducharme A, Bourassa MG, Lessard M, White M et al. Enalapril reduces the incidence of diabetes in
patients with chronic heart failure: insight from the studies of left ventricular dysfunction (SOLVD). Circulation
2003;107:1291-1296.
576. Yusuf S, Ostergren JB, Gerstein HC, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg K et al. Candesartan in Heart Failure-Assessment of
Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity Program Investigators. Effects of candesartan on the development of a new
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in patients with heart failure. Circulation. 2005 Jul 5;112(1):48-53.
577. Demant MN, Gislason GH, Kober L, Vaag A, Torp-Pedersen C, Andersson C. Association of heart failure severity
with risk of diabetes: a Danish nationwide cohort study. Diabetologia 2014;57:1595-1600.
578. Preiss D, Zetterstrand S, McMurray JJ, Ostergren J, Michelson EL et al. Candesartan in Heart Failure Assessment
of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity Investigators. Predictors of development of diabetes in patients with chronic
heart failure in the Candesartan in Heart Failure Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity (CHARM)
program. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:915-920
579. Preiss D, van Veldhuisen DJ, Sattar N, Krum H, Swedberg K et al. Eplerenone and new-onset diabetes in patients
with mild heart failure: results from the Eplerenone in Mild Patients Hospitalization and Survival Study in Heart
Failure (EMPHA- SIS-HF). Eur J Heart Fail. 2012;14:909-915.
580. Torp-Pedersen C, Metra M, Charlesworth A, Spark P, Lukas MA et al. COMET Investigators. Effects of metoprolol
and carvedilol on pre-existing and new onset diabetes in patients with chronic heart failure: data from the Carvedilol
Or Metoprolol European Trial (COMET). Heart. 2007;93:968-973.
581. Tenenbaum A, Motro M, Fisman EZ, Leor J, Freimark D et al. Functional class in patients with heart failure is
associated with the development of diabetes. Am J Med. 2003;114:271-275
582. McMurray JJ, Gerstein HC, Holman RR, Pfeffer MA. Heart failure: a cardiovascular outcome in diabetes that can no
longer be ignored. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:843-51.
583. Birkeland KI, Bodegard J, Eriksson JW, Norhammar A, Haller H et al. Heart failure and chronic kidney disease
manifestation and mortality risk associations in type 2 diabetes: a large multinational cohort study. Diabetes Obes
Metab. 2020;22(9):1607-18.
584. Cosentino F, Grant PJ, Aboyans V, Bailey CJ, Ceriello A et al. 2019 ESC Guidelines on diabetes, pre-diabetes, and
cardiovascular diseases developed in collaboration with the EASD. Eur Heart J. 2020;41(2):255-323.
585. Cai X, Liu X, Sun L, He Y, Zheng S, Zhang Y, et al. Prediabetes and the risk of heart failure: A meta-analysis. Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2021;23(8):1746-53.
586. Ohkuma T, Komorita Y, Peters SAE, Woodward M. Diabetes as a risk factor for heart failure in women and men: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of 47 cohorts including 12 million individuals. Diabetologia. 2019;62(9):1550-1560.
587. Wang Y, Negishi T, Negishi K, Marwick TH. Prediction of heart failure in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus - a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2015;108:55-66.
588. Nichols GA, Gullion CM, Koro CE, Ephross SA, Brown JB. The incidence of congestive heart failure in type 2
diabetes: an update. Diabetes Care. 2004 ; 27(8):1879-84
589. Bertoni AG, Hundley WG, Massing MW, Bonds DE, Burke GL et al. Heart failure prevalence, incidence, and
mortality in the elderly with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2004; 27(3):699-703
590. Crespo-Leiro MG, Anker SD, Maggioni AP, Coats AJ, Filippatos G et al. Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the
European Society of Cardiology. 1-year follow-up outcomes and differences across regions. Eur J Heart Fail
2016;18:613-625.
591. Dauriz M, Targher G, Laroche C, Temporelli PL, Ferrari R et al. for the ESC-HFA Heart Failure Long-Term Registry.
Association between diabetes and 1-year adverse clinical outcomes in a multinational cohort of ambulatory patients
with chronic heart failure: results from the ESC-HFA Heart Failure Long-Term Registry. Diabetes Care. 2017;40:671-678.
592. Johansson I, Dahlström U, Edner M, Näsman P, Rydén L, Norhammar A. Prognostic implications of type 2 diabetes
mellitus in ischemic and non- ischemic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1404-1416.
593. Targher G, Dauriz M, Laroche C, Temporelli PL, Hassanein M et al. on behalf of the ESC-HFA HF Long-Term
Registry Investigators. In-hospital and 1-year mortality as- sociated with diabetes in patients with acute heart failure:
results from the ESC-HFA Heart Failure Long-Term Registry. Eur J Heart Fail. 2017;19:54-65.
594. Sandesara PB, O’Neal WT, Kelli HM, et al. The prognostic significance of diabetes and microvascular complications
in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Diabetes Care 2018;41:150-15.
595. Lawson CA, Jones PW, Teece L, Dunbar SB, Seferovic PM et al. Association between type 2 diabetes and all-cause
hospitalization and mortality in the UK general heart failure population: stratification by diabetic glycemic control and
medication intensification. JACC Heart Fail. 2018;6:18-26.
596. Cavender MA, Steg PG, Smith SC Jr, Eagle K, Ohman EM, Goto S, Kuder J, Im K, Wilson PW, Bhatt DL; REACH
REGISTRY Investigators. Impact of diabetes mellitus on hospitalization for heart failure, cardiovascular events, and
death: outcomes at 4 years from the Reduction of Atherothrombosis for Continued Health (REACH) Registry.
Circulation 2015;132:923-931.
597. McAllister DA, Read SH, Kerssens J, et al. Incidence of hospitalization for heart failure and case-fatality among 3.25
million people with and without diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2018;138: 2774-2786
598. Kong MG, Jang SY, Jang J, Cho HJ, Lee S et al. Impact of diabetes mellitus on mortality in patients with acute heart
failure: a prospective cohort study. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2020;19(1):49.
599. Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, Byington RP, Chalmers . JP et al. Intensive glucose control and macrovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2009;52:2288-2298.
600. Krumholz HM, Chen YT, Wang Y, et al., Predictors of readmission among elderly survivors of admission with heart
failure. Am Heart J 2000;139:72-7.
601. Shindler DM, Kostis JB, Yusuf S, et al. Diabetes mellitus, a predictor of morbidity and mortality in the Studies of Left
Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD) Trials and Registry, Am J Cardiol 1996;77:1017-20.
602. Kishimoto I, Makino H, Ohata Y, et al., Hemoglobin A1c predicts heart failure hospitalization independent of baseline
cardiac function or B-type natriuretic peptide level, Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2014;104(2):257-65.
603. Wang Y, Negishi T, Negishi K, Marwick TH. Prediction of heart failure in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus - a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2015;108:55-66.
604. Rawshani A, Rawshani A, Franzén S, Sattar N, Eliasson B et al. Risk factors, mortality, and cardiovascular outcomes
in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(7):633-44
605. Dunlay SM, Givertz MM, Aguilar D, Allen LA, Chan M et al. American Heart Association Heart Failure and
Transplantation Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing;
and the Heart Failure Society of America. Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Heart Failure: A Scientific Statement From
the American Heart Association and the Heart Failure Society of America: This statement does not represent an
update of the 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA heart failure guideline update. Circulation. 2019 Aug 13;140(7):e294-e324.
606. Jia G, Hill MA, Sowers JR. Diabetic cardiomyopathy: an update of mechanisms contributing to this clinical entity.
Circ Res. 2018;122(4):624-38.
607. Zaveri MP, Perry JC, Schuetz TM, Memon MD, Faiz S, Cancarevic I. Diabetic cardiomyopathy as a clinical entity: is
it a myth? Cureus.2020;12(10):e11100.
608. Pandey A, Patel KV, Bahnson JL, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of intensive lifestyle intervention,
fitness, and body mass index with risk of heart failure in overweight or obese adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: an
analysis from the Look AHEAD trial. Circulation 2020;141:1295-1306
609. Sabuncu T, Sonmez A, Eren MA, Sahin I, Çorapçioğlu D et al. Characteristics of patients with hypertension in a
population with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Results from the Turkish Nationwide SurvEy of Glycemic and Other
Metabolic Parameters of Patients with Diabetes Mellitus (TEMD Hypertension Study). Primary Care Diabetes.
2021;15(2):332-9.
610. Boussageon R, Bejan-Angoulvant T, Saadatian-Elahi M, et al. Effect of intensive glucose lowering treatment on
all-cause mortality, cardiovascular death, and microvascular events in type 2 diabetes:meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. BMJ 2011;343:d4169.
611. Elder DH, Singh JS, Levin D, et al. Mean HbA1c and mortality in diabetic individuals with heart failure: a population
cohort study. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:94-102.
612. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Genuth S, et al. for the ACCORD Study Group. Long-term effects of intensive glucose
lowering on cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med 2011;364:818-28.
613. Ukena C, Dobre D, Mahfoud F, et al. Hypo- and hyperglycemia predict outcome in patients with left ventricular
dysfunction after acute myocardial infarction: data from EPHESUS. J Card Fail 2012;18:439-45.
614. Ceriello, A., Lucisano, G., Prattichizzo, F. et al. HbA1c variability predicts cardiovascular complications in type 2
diabetes regardless of being at glycemic target. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2022: 21, 13
615. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al. Association of SGLT2 Inhibitors With Cardiovascular and Kidney
Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6(2):148-158. doi:10.1001/ja
macardio.2020.4511
616. Zannad F, Ferreira JP, Pocock SJ, Anker SD, Butler J et al. SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction: a meta-analysis of the EMPEROR-Reduced and DAPA-HF trials. The Lancet. 2020;396
(10254):819-29.
617. American Diabetes Association. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2020 Abridged for Primary Care Providers.
Clin Diabetes. 2020 Jan;38(1):10-38
618. Sattar N, Lee MMY, Kristensen SL, Branch KRH, Del Prato S et al.. Cardiovascular, mortality, and kidney outcomes
with GLP-1 receptor agonists in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised
trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2021 Oct;9(10):653-662.
619. Kristensen SL, Rorth R, Jhund PS, Docherty KF, Sattar N et al. Cardiovascular, mortality, and kidney outcomes with
GLP-1 receptor agonists in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cardiovascular
outcome trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinology. 2019;7(10):776-85.
620. Gerstein HC, Sattar N, Rosenstock J, et al.; AMPLITUDE-O Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular and renal outcomes
with efpeglenatide in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:896-907
621. Ceriello A, Prattichizzo F, Phillip M, Hirsch IB, Mathieu C, Battelino T. Glycaemic management in diabetes: old and
new approaches. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2022 Jan;10(1):75-84.
622. Scirica BM, Braunwald E, Raz I, Cavender MA, Morrow DA et al. SAVOR-TIMI 53 Steering Committee and
Investigators*. Heart failure, saxagliptin, and diabetes mellitus: observations from the SAVOR-TIMI 53 randomized
trial. Circulation. 2014 Oct 28;130(18):1579-88
623. Eurich DT, Majumdar SR, McAlister FA, Tsuyuki RT, Johnson JA. Improved clinical outcomes associated with
metformin in patients with diabetes and heart failure. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2345-2351
624. Richardson TL Jr, Hackstadt AJ, Hung AM, Greevy RA, Grijalva CG et al. Hospitalization for Heart Failure Among
Patients With Diabetes Mellitus and Reduced Kidney Function Treated With Metformin Versus Sulfonylureas: A
Retrospective Cohort Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Apr 6;10(8):e019211
625. Chu PY, Hackstadt AJ, Chipman J, et al. Hospitalization for lactic acidosis among patients with reduced kidney
function treated with metformin or sulfonylureas. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1462-1470
626. Khan MS, Solomon N, DeVore A, Sharma A, Felker GM et al. Clinical Outcomes With Metformin and Sulfonylurea
Therapies Among Patients With Heart Failure and Diabetes. Clinical Research. J Am Coll Cardiol HF. 2022 Mar, 10
(3) 198-210.
627. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA drug safety communication: FDA revises warnings regarding use of the
diabetes medicine metformin in certain patients with reduced kidney function, 2016. Accessed 10 June 2022.
Available from https://www.fda.gov/media/96771/download
628. Packer M. Are physicians neglecting the risk of heart failure in diabetic patients who are receiving sulfonylureas?
Lessons from the TOSCA.IT trial. European Journal of Heart Failure (2018) 20, 49-51.
629. Tzoulaki I, Molokhia M, Curcin V, Little MP, Millett CJ et al. Risk of cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality
among patients with type 2 diabetes prescribed oral antidiabetes drugs: retrospective cohort study using UK general
practice research database. BMJ 2009;339:b4731.
630. Varas-Lorenzo C, Margulis AV, Pladevall M, Riera-Guardia N et al. The risk of heart failure associated with the use
of noninsulin blood glucose-lowering drugs: systematic review and meta-analysis of published observational studies.
BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2014;14:129.
631. McAlister FA, Eurich DT, Majumdar SR, Johnson JA. The risk of heart failure in patients with type 2 diabetes treated
with oral agent monotherapy. Eur J Heart Fail 2008;10:7035-708.
632. Jeon WK, Kang J, Kim HS, Park KW. Cardiovascular Outcomes Comparison of Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 Inhibitors
versus Sulfonylurea as Add-on Therapy for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: a Meta-Analysis. J Lipid Atheroscler. 2021
May;10(2):210-222.
633. Bazo-Alvarez, J.C., Pal, K., Pham, T.M. et al. Cardiovascular outcomes of type 2 diabetic patients treated with
DPP-4 inhibitors versus sulphonylureas as add-on to metformin in clinical practice. Sci Rep 2021: 11, 23826
634. Rosenstock J, Kahn SE, Johansen OE et al. Effect of Linagliptin vs Glimepiride on Major Adverse Cardiovascular
Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. The CAROLINA Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2019;322(12):
1155-1166
635. He W, Yuan G, Han Y, Yan Y, Li G et al. Glimepiride Use is Associated with Reduced Cardiovascular Mortality in
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Chronic Heart Failure: A Prospective Cohort Study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2022 Dec
27:zwac312.
636. Cosmi F, Shen L, Magnoli M, Abraham WT, Anand IS et al. Treatment with insulin is associated with worse outcome
in patients with chronic heart failure and diabetes. Eur J Heart Fail. 2018 May;20(5):888-895
637. Jang, S.Y., Jang, J., Yang, D.H. et al. Impact of insulin therapy on the mortality of acute heart failure patients with
diabetes mellitus. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2021: 20, 180
638. Hernandez AV, Usmani A, Rajamanickam A, Moheet A. Thiazolidinediones and risk of heart failure in patients with
or at high risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis of placebo-controlled
randomized clinical trials. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs 2011;11:115-128.
639. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, Curtis PS, Gomis R, Hanefeld M, Jones NP, Komajda M, McMurray JJ;
RECORD Study Team. Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular outcomes in oral agent combination therapy for
type 2 diabetes (RECORD): a multicentre, randomised, open-label trial. Lancet 2009;373:2125-2135.
640. Foo JH, Chong WL , Abdullah MA , Yen CH et al. Rheumatic heart diseases screening in Bornean Malaysia: a pilot
echocardiography study. Eur Heart J 2019: 40 ( Supplement ), 1899
641. Vahanian, A., Beyersdorf, F., Praz, F., Milojevic, M., Baldus, S.et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS Guidelines for the management
of valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J 2022; 43(7), 561-632.
642. Otto CM. Timing of surgery in mitral regurgitation. Heart 2003;89(1):100-5.
643. Fattouch K, Guccione F, Sampognaro R, et al. Efficacy of adding mitral valve restrictive annuloplasty to coronary
artery bypass grafting in patients with moderate ischemic mitral valve regurgitation: a randomized trial. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2009;138:278-85.
644. Chan KMJ, Punjabi PP, Flather M, et al for the RIME Investigators. Coronary artery bypass surgery with or without
mitral valve annuloplasty in moderate functional ischemic mitral regurgitation. Final results of the Randomized
Ischemic Mitral Evaluation (RIME) Trial. Circulation 2012;126:2502–10.
645. Stone GW, Lindenfeld J, Abraham WT, et al for the COAPT Investigators. Transcatheter mitral-valve repair in
patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med 2018 379:230718.
646. Marmagkiolis K, Hakeem A, Ebersole DG, Iliescu C, Ates I, Cilingiroglu M. Clinical outcomes of percutaneous mitral
valve repair with MitraClip for the management of functional mitral regurgitation. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2019
Nov 15;94(6):820-826
647. Gorav Ailawadi G, Lim DS, Mack MJ, Trento A, Kar S et al.On behalf of the EVEREST II Investigators. One-Year
Outcomes After MitraClip for Functional Mitral Regurgitation. Circulation. 2019;139:37-47
648. Giustino G, Camaj A, Kapadia SR, et al. Hospitalizations and Mortality in Patients With Secondary Mitral Regurgitation
and Heart Failure: COAPT Trial. J Am Coll Ca.rdiol 2022;80:1857-68
649. Oh NA, Kampaktsis PN, Gallo M, Guariento A et al. An updated meta-analysis of MitraClip versus surgery for mitral
regurgitation. Ann Cardiothoracic Surgery 2021; 10: 1
650. Obadia J-F, Messika-Zeitoun D, Leurent G, et al for the MITRA-FR Investigators. Percutaneous repair or medical
treatment for secondary mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2297-306.
651. Leurent G, Auffret V; Donal E; Corbineau H, Grinberg D et al. Delayed hospitalisation for heart failure after
transcatheter repair or medical treatment for secondary mitral regurgitation: a landmark analysis of the MITRA-FR
trial. EuroIntervention 2022;18:514-523
652. GentryJ. L, Phelan D, Desai MY, Griffin B P. The Role of Stress Echocardiography in Valvular Heart Disease: A
Current Appraisal. Cardiology 2017: 137(3), 137-150.
653. Leon MB , Mack MJ, Hahn RT, Thourani VH, Makkar R et al. PARTNER 3 Investigators. Outcomes 2 years after
transcatheter aortic valve replacement in patients at low surgical risk. J Am Coll Cardiol2021;77:1149-1161.
654. Makkar RR, Thourani VH, Mack MJ, Kodali SK et al.for the PARTNER 2 Investigators* Five-Year Outcomes of
Transcatheter or Surgical Aortic-Valve Replacement. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:799-809
655. Chakos A, Wilson-Smith A, Arora S, Nguyen TC, Dhoble A, Tarantini G, Thielmann M, Vavalle JP, Wendt D, Yan
TD, Tian DH. Long term outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI): a systematic review of 5-year
survival and beyond. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2017 Sep;6(5):432-443
656. Popma JJ , Deeb GM, Yakubov SJ, Mumtaz M, Gada H et al. Evolut Low Risk Trial Investigators. Transcatheter
aortic-valve replacement with a self-expanding valve in low-risk patients. N Engl J Med2019;380:1706-1715.
657. The UK TAVI Trial Investigators. Effect of Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation vs Surgical Aortic Valve Replacement
on All-Cause Mortality in Patients With Aortic Stenosis: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2022;327(19):1875-1887.
658. Siontis GCM , Overtchouk P, Cahill TJ, Modine T, Prendergast B et al. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation vs.
surgical aortic valve replacement for treatment of symptomatic severe aortic stenosis: an updated meta-analysis.
Eur Heart J2019;40:3143-3153.
659. Pinto YM, Elliott PM, Arbustini E, Adler Y, Anastasakis A et al. Proposal for a revised definition of dilated cardiomyopathy,
hypokinetic non-dilated cardiomyopathy, and its implications for clinical practice: a position statement of the ESC
Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J 2016;37:1850-1858
660. Arbustini E, Narula N, Dec GW, Reddy KS, Greenberg B et al. The MOGE(S) classification for a phenotypegenotype
nomenclature of cardiomyopathy: endorsed by the World Heart Federation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:20462072. 893.
661. Hazebroek MR, Kemna MJ, Schalla S, Sanders-van Wijk S, Gerretsen SC et al. Prevalence and prognostic
relevance of cardiac involvement in ANCA-associated vasculitis: eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis and
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Int J Cardiol 2015;199:170179. 894.
662. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ et al. MB. Heart disease and stroke statistics-2016 update:
a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133:e38-e360.
663. Richardson P, McKenna W, Bristow M, Maisch B, Mautner B et al. Report of the 1995 World Health Organization/In
ternational Society and Federation of Cardiology Task Force on the definition and classification of cardiomyopathies.
Circulation 1996;93:841-842.
664. Jefferies JL, Towbin JA. Dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet 2010;375:752 -762
665. Japp AG, Gulati A, Cook SA, Cowie MR, Prasad SK. The diagnosis and evaluation of dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2016;67:2996-3010.
666. Wilcox JE, Fonarow GC, Ardehali H, Bonow RO, Butler J et al.‘Targeting the Heart’ in heart failure: myocardial
recovery in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. JACC Heart Fail 2015;3:661-669.
667. Thorvaldsen T, Benson L, Dahlstrom U, Edner M, Lund LH. Use of evidence-based therapy and survival in heart
failure in Sweden 2003–2012. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:503-511.
668. Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, Borggrefe M, Cecchi F et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on diagnosis and management
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: The Task Force for the diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2014;35:2733-2779
669. Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, Bilinska Z, Cecchi F et al. Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position
statement from the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur
Heart J 2008;29:270-276.
670. Maron BJ, Rowin EJ, Udelson JE, Maron MS. Clinical spectrum and management of heart failure in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. JACC Heart Fail 2018;6:353-363
671. Maron BJ, Desai MY, Nishimura RA, Spirito P, Rakowski H et al. Management of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy:
JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 : 79 (4): 390-414
672. Ommen S.R., Maron B.J., Olivotto I., et al. "Long-term effects of surgical septal myectomy on survival in patients
with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy". J Am Coll Cardiol 2005;46:470-476.
673. Melacini P, Basso C, Angelini A, Calore C, Bobbo F et al. Clinicopathological profiles of progressive heart failure in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 2010;31:2111-2123.
674. Olivotto I, Cecchi F, Poggesi C, Yacoub MH. Patterns of disease progression in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an
individualized approach to clinical staging. Circ Heart Fail 2012;5:535-546.
675. Thaman R, Gimeno JR, Murphy RT, Kubo T, Sachdev B et al. Prevalence and clinical significance of systolic
impairment in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart 2005;91:920-925.
676. Harris KM, Spirito P, Maron MS, Zenovich AG, Formisano F et al. Prevalence, clinical profile, and significance of left
ventricular remodeling in the end-stage phase of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 2006;114:216 - 225.
677. Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, Day SM, Deswal A et al. 2020 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Diagnosis and Treatment
of Patients With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2020;142:e558-e631
678. Maron B.J., Shen W.-K., Link M.S., et al. "Efficacy of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators for the prevention of
sudden death in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy". N Engl J Med 2000;342:365-373.
679. Olivotto I, Oreziak A, Barriales-Villa R, Abraham TP, Masri A et al. Mavacamten for treatment of symptomatic
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (EXPLORER-HCM): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet 2020; 396 (10253): 759-769
680. Spertus JA, Fine JT, Elliott P, Ho CY, Olivotto I et al. Mavacamten for treatment of symptomatic obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (EXPLORER-HCM): health status analysis of a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2021: 397(10293); 2467-2475
681. Geske JB, Anavekar NS, Nishimura RA, Oh JK, Gersh BJ. Differentiation of constriction and restriction: complex
cardiovascular hemodynamics. J Am Coll Cardiol 2016;68:2329-2347.
682. Charron P, Elliott PM, Gimeno JR, Caforio AL, Kaski JP et al. The cardiomyopathy registry of the EURObservational
Research Programme of the European Society of Cardiology: baseline data and contemporary management of
adult patients with cardiomyopathies. Eur Heart J 2018;39:1784-1793.
683. Pereira NL, Grogan M, Dec GW. Spectrum of restrictive and infiltrative car- diomyopathies: Part 1 of a 2-Part Series.
J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:1130-1148. 187.
684. Murphy CJ, Oudit GY. Iron-overload cardiomyopathy: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. J Card Fail
2010;16:888-900.
685. Maurer MS, Elliott P, Comenzo R, Semigran M, Rapezzi C. Addressing common questions encountered in the
diagnosis and management of cardiac amyloidosis. Circulation 2017;135:1357-1377
686. Mogensen J, Arbustini E. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. Curr Opin Cardiol 2009;24:214-220.
687. Huizar JF, Ellenbogen KA, Tan AY, Kaszala K. Arrhythmia-Induced Cardiomyopathy: JACC State-of-the-Art
Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 May, 73 (18) 2328-2344
688. Bozkurt B., Colvin M., Cook J.et al. Current diagnostic and treatment strategies for specific dilated cardiomyopa
thies: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association". Circulation 2016; 134: e579.
689. Watanabe H., Okamura K., Chinushi M.et al. : "Clinical characteristics, treatment, and outcome of tachycardia
induced cardiomyopathy". Int Heart J 2008; 49: 39.
690. Medi C., Kalman J.M., Haqqani H.et al. : "Tachycardia-mediated cardiomyopathy secondary to focal atrial tachycardia:
long-term outcome after catheter ablation". J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 53: 1791
691. Steven A. Lubitz et al. Atrial Fibrillation in Congestive Heart Failure. Heart Fail Clin. 2010 Apr; 6(2): 187-200.
692. Rillig A, Magnussen C, Ozga AK, Suling A, Brandes A, Breithardt G, Camm AJ, Crijns HJGM, Eckardt L, Elvan A,
Goette A, Gulizia M, Haegeli L, Heidbuchel H, Kuck KH, Ng A, Szumowski L, van Gelder I, Wegscheider K, Kirchhof
P. Early Rhythm Control Therapy in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation and Heart Failure. Circulation. 2021 Sep
14;144(11):845-858
693. Nassir F. Marrouche et al. Catheter Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation with Heart Failure. N Engl J Med 2018;378:417-427.
694. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ et al 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for Management of Patients With
Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death. Circulation. 2018;138:e272-e391
695. Callans DJ. Premature Ventricular Contraction-induced Cardiomyopathy. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev. 2017
Dec;6(4):153-155
696. Baman TS, Lange DC, Ilg KJ, et al. Relationship between burden of premature ventricular complexes and left
ventricular function. Heart Rhythm, 2010; 7: 865-869
697. Hasdemir, C. Ulucan, O. Yavuzgil, et al. Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy in patients with idiopathic ventricular
arrhythmias: the incidence, clinical and electrophysiologic characteristics, and the predictors.J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 2011: 22: 663-668
698. Huizar F, Fisher SG, Kaszala,F et al. Amiodarone is an effective treatment of PVC-cardiomyopathy in the veteran
population (abstr). Circulation, 136 (Suppl 1) (2017), p. 14667
699. Latchamsetty R. et al. Multicenter Outcomes for Catheter Ablation of Idiopathic Premature Ventricular Complexes.
JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2015 Jun;1(3):116-123.
700. Yokokawa M et al. Recovery from left ventricular dysfunction after ablation of frequent premature ventricular
complexes. Heart Rhythm. 2013 Feb;10(2):172-5
701. Khurshid S, Liang JJ, Owens A, et al. Longer paced QRS duration is associated with increased prevalence of right
ventricular pacing-induced cardiomyopathy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2016;27(10):1174-9
702. Dreger H, Maethner K, Bondke H, et al. Pacing-induced cardiomyopathy in patients with right ventricular stimulation
for >15 years. Europace. 2012;14(2):238-242
703. Cicchitti V, Radico F, Bianco F, Gallina S, Tonti G, De Caterina R. Heart failure due to right ventricular apical pacing:
the importance of flow patterns. EP Europace, 2016: 18: 1679-1688,
704. Sharma AD, Rizo-Patron C, Hallstrom AP, O'Neill GP, Rothbart S et al. DAVID Investigators. Percent right
ventricular pacing predicts outcomes in the DAVID trial. Heart Rhythm. 2005 Aug;2(8):830-4
705. Schwerg M, Dreger H, Stangl K, Leonhardt V, Melzer C. Prevalence of left ventricular systolic dysfunction in a typical
outpatient pacemaker cohort. Herzschrittmachertherapie & Elektrophysiologie. 2020 Jun;31(2):219-223.
706. Tantengco MV, Thomas RL, Karpawich PP, Left ventricular dysfunction after long-term right ventricular apical
pacing in the young , J Am Coll Cardiol (2001);37(8): pp. 2093-2100.
707. McGavigan AD, Mond HG, Selective site ventricular pacing , Curr Opin Cardiol (2006);21(1): pp. 7-14.
708. Wilkoff BL, Cook JR, Epstein AE, Greene HL, Hallstrom AP, Hsia H, Kutalek SP, Sharma A; Dual Chamber and VVI
Implantable Defibrillator Trial Investigators. Dual-chamber pacing or ventricular backup pacing in patients with an
implantable defibrillator: the Dual Chamber and VVI Implantable Defibrillator (DAVID) Trial. JAMA. 2002 Dec
25;288(24):3115-23.
709. Wilkoff BL, Kudenchuk PJ, Buxton AE, Sharma A, Cook JR, Bhandari AK, Biehl M, Tomassoni G, Leonen A, Klevan
LR, Hallstrom AP; DAVID II Investigators. The DAVID (Dual Chamber and VVI Implantable Defibrillator) II trial. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2009 Mar 10;53(10):872-80
710. Curtis AB, Worley SJ, Chung ES, Li P, Christman SA, St John Sutton M. Improvement in Clinical Outcomes With
Biventricular Versus Right Ventricular Pacing: The BLOCK HF Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 May 0;67(18):2148-2157
711. Shakir DK, Rasul KI. Chemotherapy induced cardiomyopathy: pathogenesis, monitoring and management. J Clin
Med Res 2009:1(1), 8-12.
712. Albini A, Pennesi G, Donatelli F, Cammarota R, De Flora S, Noonan DM. Cardiotoxicity of anticancer drugs: the
need for cardio-oncology and cardio-oncology prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 2010:102(1):14-25.
713. Swain SM, Whaley FS, Ewer MS. Congestive heart failure in patients treated with doxorubicin: a retrospective
analysis of three trials. Cancer 2003:97:2869-79.
714. Fraley C, Milgrom SA, Kondapalli L et al. Mechanism and insights for the development of heart failure associated
with cancer therapy. Children 2021,8,829.
715. Zamorano JL, Lancellotti P, Rodriguez-Munoz D et al. 2016 ESC Position paper on cancer treatments and
cardiovascular toxicity developed under the auspices of the ESC Committee for practice guidelines: The Task Force
for cancer treatments and cardiovascular toxicity of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC), EHJ 2016;37:2768-2801.
716. Lyon AR, Dent S, Stanway S et al. Baseline cardiovascular risk assessment in cancer patients scheduled to receive
cardiotoxic cancer therapies: a position statement and new risk assessment tools from the cardio-oncology study
group of the heart failure association of the European society of cardiology in collaboration with the international
cardio-oncology society. EJHF 2020;22(11):1945-1960
717. Curigliano G, Cardinale D, Suter T, et al. Annals of oncology : official journal of the European Society for Medical
Oncology / ESMO. Vol. 23. Suppl 7: 2012. Cardiovascular toxicity induced by chemotherapy, targeted agents and
radiotherapy: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. pp. vii155-16
718. Seidman A, Hudis C, Pierri MK, et al. Cardiac dysfunction in the trastuzumab clinical trials experience. J Clin Oncol.
2002;20(5):1215-1221
719. Cardinale D, Colombo A, Lamantia G, et al. Anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy: clinical relevance and response
to pharmacologic therapy. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2010;55:213-220
720. Ewer MS, Vooletich MT, Durand JB et al. Reversibility of Trastuzumab-related cardiotoxicity: new insights based on
clinical course and response to medical treatment. J Clin Oncol 2005:23:7820-6.
721. Braveman AC, Antin JH, Plappert MT, Plappert MT, Cook EF, Lee RT. Cyclophosphamide cardiotoxicity in bone
marrow transplantation: a prospective evaluation of new dosing regimens. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1215-23.
722. Cardinale D, Sandri MT, Colombo A, et al. Prognostic value of Trop I in cardiac risk stratification of cancer patients
undergoing high dose chemotherapy. Circ 2004;109:2749-54.
723. Cardinale D, Sandri MT, Martinoni A, et al. Myocardial injury revealed by plasma troponin I in breast cancer treated
with high dose chemotherapy. Ann Oncol 2002;13:710-5.
724. Plana JC, Galderisi M, Barac A, et al. Expert consensus for multimodality imaging evaluation of adult patients during
and after cancer therapy: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of
Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2014;27(9):911-39.
725. Armenian SH, Laccheti C, Barac A, et al. Prevention and monitoring of cardiac dysfunction in survivors of adult
cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Clin Oncol 2017;35:893-911.
726. Yeh ET, Tong AT, Lenihan DJ, Yusuf SW, Swafford J et al. Cardiovascular complications of cancer therapy:
diagnosis, pathogenesis, and management. Circulation. 2004 Jun 29;109(25):3122-31.
727. Thavendiranathan P, Grant AD, Negishi T et al. Reproducibility of echocardiography techniques for sequential
assessment of left ventricular ejection fraction and volumes: application to patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy.
JACC 2013;61(1):77-84.
728. Thavendiranathan P. Poullin F, Lim KD et al. Use of myocardial strain imaging by echocardiography for the early
detection of cardiotoxicity in patients during and after cancer chemotherapy: a systemic review. JACC 2014;63:2751-68.
729. Semeraro GC, Cipolla CM, Cardinale DM. Role of cardiac biomarkers in cancer patients. Cancers 2021,13, 5426
730. Cardinale DM, Colombo A, Sandri MT et al. Prevention of high dose chemotherapy induced cardiotoxicity in high risk
patients by angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition. Circulation 2006;114(23):2474-81.
731. Gulati G, Heck SL, Ree AH et al. Prevention of cardiac dysfunction during adjuvant breast cancer therapy (PRADA):
A 2x2 factorial, randomized, placebo-controlled, double blind clinical trial of candesartan and metoprolol. EHJ
2016;37:1671-80.
732. Boekhout AH, Gietama JA, Milojkovic KB et al. Angiotensin II-receptor inhibition with candesartan to prevent
trastuzumab related cardiotoxic effects in patients with early breast cancer: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol
2016;2:1030-7,
733. Cardinale DM, Colombo A, Bacchini G et al. Early detection of anthracycline cardiotoxicity and improvement with
heart failure therapy. Circulation 2015;131:1981-8.
734. Tromp J, Tay WT, Ouwerkerk W, et al for ASIAN-HF authors. Correction: Multimorbidity in patients with heart failure
from 11 Asian regions: a prospective cohort study using the ASIAN-HF registry. PloS Med 2018;15(5):e1002583.
735. Heywood JT, Fonarow GC, Costanzo MR, et al. High prevalence of renal dysfunction and its impact on outcome in
118,465 patients hospitalized with acute decompensated heart failure: a report from the ADHERE database. J Card
Fail 2007;13:422-30.
736. Ronco C, McCullough P, Anker SD, et al for the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) consensus group. Cardio-renal
syndromes: report from the consensus conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative. Eur Heart J 2010;31(6):703-11.
737. Forman DE, Butler J, Wang Y, et al. Incidence, predictors at admission, and impact of worsening renal function
among patients hospitalized with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004:43(1):61-7.
738. Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, et al. Importance of venous congestion for worsening of renal function in
advanced decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:589-96.
739. Haynes R, Judge PK, Staplin N, Herrington WG, Storey BC et al. Effects of Sacubitril/Valsartan Versus Irbesartan
in Patients With Chronic Kidney Disease. Circulation. 2018 :138(15):1505-1514
740. Heerspink HJL, Stefánsson BV, Correa-Rotter R, Chertow GM, Greene Tet al DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and
Investigators. Dapagliflozin in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;383(15):1436-1446
741. The EMPA-KIDNEY Collaborative Group. Empagliflozin in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease. N Engl J Med
2023; 388:117-127
742. Kidney Disease Improving Outcomes (KDIGO ) CKD Work Group.KDIGO 2012 clinical practice guideline for the
evaluation and management of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int Suppl.2013;3(1):134-5 )
743. Testani JM, Kimmel SE, Dries DL, Coca SG. Prognostic importance of early worsening renal function following
initiation of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor therapy in patients with cardiac dysfunction. Circ Heart Fail
2011;4(6):685-91.
744. Metra M, Davison B, Bettari L, et al. Is worsening renal function an ominous prognostic sign in patients with acute
heart failure? The role of congestion and its interaction with renal function. Circ Heart Fail 2012;5:54-62.
745. Greene SJ, Gheorghiade M, Vaduganathan M, et al. Hemoconcentration, renal function, and post-discharge
outcomes among patients hospitalized for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: insights from the EVEREST
trial. Eur J Heart Fail 2013;15:1401-11.
746. Testani JM, Chen J, McCauley BD, Kimmel SE, Shannon RP. Potential effects of aggressive decongestion during
the treatment of decompensated heart failure on renal function and survival. Circulation 2010;122:265-72.
747. Ezekowitz JA, O’Meara E, McDonald AM, et al. 2017 Comprehensive Update of the Canadian Cardiovascular
Society Guidelines for the Management of Heart Failure. Can J Cardiol 2017;33:1342-433.
748. Dormans TP, Gerlag PG, Russel FG, et al. Combination diuretic therapy in severe congestive cardiac failure. Drugs
1998;55:165-72.
749. Mullens W, Martens P, Testani JM, et tal. Renal effects of guideline-directed medical therapies in heart faiure: a
consensus document from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. European J of Heart
Failure 2022;24: 603-619
750. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines. 2nd Ed Management of Chronic Kidney Disease .2018. Available at
www.acadmed.org
751. Bhandari S, Ives N, Brettell EA, et al. Multicentre randomized controlled trial of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker withdrawal in advanced renal disease: the STOP-ACEi trial. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2016;31(2):255-61.
752. Bhandari S, Mehta S, Khwaja A et al . Renin-Angiotensin System Inhibition in Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease. N
Engl J Med 2022 : 387(22):2021-2032 )
753. Constanzo MR, Ronco C, Abraham WT, et al. Extracorporeal ultrafiltration for fluid overload in heart failure: current
status and prospects for further research. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;69(19):2428-45.
754. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the management of
cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy. The Task Force for the Management of Cardiovascular Diseases during
Pregnancy of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2018:39:3165-241.
755. Ruys TP, Roos‐Hesselink JW, Hall R, Subirana‐Domènech MT, Grando‐Ting J, Estensen M, Crepaz R, Fesslova V,
Gurvitz M, De Backer J, Johnson MR, Pieper PG. Heart failure in pregnant women with cardiac disease: data from t
he ROPAC. Heart. 2014; 100:231-238
756. Maternal mortality ratio in Malaysia 2011- 2020: Published by Statista Research Department, Oct 5, 2022.Available
at//www.statista.com/statistics/642032/malaysia-maternal-mortality-ratio. Accessed on 13th December 2022.
757. Billebeau G, Etienne M, Cheikh-Khelifa R, et al. Pregnancy in women with a cardiomyopathy: outcomes and
predictors from a retrospective cohort. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2018;111:199-209.
758. Lima F, Nie L, Yang J, et al. Postpartum cardiovascular outcomes among women with heart disease from a nation
wide study. Am J Cardiol. 2019;123: 2006-2014.
759. Krul SP, van der Smagt JJ, van den Berg MP, et al. Systematic review of pregnancy in women with inherited
cardiomyopathies. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011;13: 584-594.
760. Ng AT, Duan L, Win T, et al. Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with heart failure. Heart. 2018;104:1949-1954.
761. Elkayam U, Goland S, Pieper PG, et al. High-risk cardiac disease in pregnancy: part I. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2016;68:396-410.
762. Roos-Hesselink JW, Ruys TP, Stein JI, et al. Outcome of pregnancy in patients with structural or ischaemic heart
disease: results of a registry of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:657-665.
763. Ruys TP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Hall R, et al. Heart failure in pregnant women with cardiac disease: data from the
ROPAC. Heart. 2014;100:231-238
764. Sliwa K, van der Meer P, Petrie MC, Frogoudaki A, Johnson MR et al.Risk stratification and management of women
with cardiomyopathy/heart failure planning pregnancy or presenting during/after pregnancy: a position statement
from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Study Group on Peripartum Cardiomyopathy.
Eur J Heart Fail 2021;23:527-540
765. van Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, Posafalvi A, van den Berg MP, et al. Titin gene mutations are common in families with
both peripartum cardiomyopathy and dilated cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 2014;35:2165-73.
766. van Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, van Tintelen JP, van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Peripartum cardiomyopathy as a part of
familial dilated cardiomyopathy. Circulation 2010;121:2169-75.
767. van Tintelen JP, Pieper PG, van Spaendonck-Zwarts KY, van den Berg MP. Pregnancy, cardiomyopathies and
genetics. Cardiovasc Res 2014;101:571-8.
768. Silversides CK, Grewal J, Mason J, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in women with heart disease. The CARPREG II
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:2419-30.
769. Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Sliwa K. Pathophysiology and epidemiology of peripartum cardiomyopathy. Nat Rev Cardiol
2014;11:364-70.
770. Sliwa K, Fett J, Elkayam U. Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Lancet 2006;368:687-93.
771. Sliwa K, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Petrie MC, et al. Current state of knowledge on etiology, diagnosis, management, and
therapy of peripartum cardiomyopathy: A Position Statement from the Heart Failure Association of the European
Society of Cardiology Working Group on Peripartum Cardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail 2010;12:767-78.
772. Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, et al. Prospective multicenter study of pregnancy outcomes in women with heart
disease. Circulation 2001;104(5):515-21.
773. National Library of Medicine. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) [Internet]. Bethesda (MD). Accessed
October 2, 2020. https:// wwwncbinlmnihgov/books/NBK501922
774. National Health Service, UK . Pregnancy, breastfeeding and fertility while taking metoprolol. Available at https://ww
w.nhs.uk/medicines/metoprolol/pregnancy-breastfeeding-and-fertility-while-taking-metoprolol/
775. Halpern DG, Weinberg CR, Pinnelas R, et al. Use of medication for cardiovascular disease during pregnancy: JACC
state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:457-476
776. Kearney L, Wright P, Fhadil S, Thomas M. Postpartum Cardiomyopathy and Considerations for Breastfeeding. Card
Fail Rev. 2018 Aug;4(2):112-118.
777. Kampman MA, Balci A, van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. N terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide predicts cardiovascular
complications in pregnant women with congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:708-715.
778. Tanous D, Siu SC, Mason J, et al. B-type natriuretic peptide in pregnant women with heart disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2010;56:1247-1253.
779. Sliwa K, Petrie MC, van der Meer P, Mebazaa A, Hilfiker-Kleiner D et al. Clinical presentation, management, and
6-month outcomes in women with peripartum cardiomyopathy: an ESC EORP registry. Eur Heart J 2020;41:3787-3797.
780. Davis MB, Arany Z, McNamara DM, Goland S, Elkayam U. Peripartum cardiomyopathy: JACC state-of-the-art
review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;75:207- 221
781. McNamara DM, Elkayam U, Alharethi R, et al. Clinical outcomes for peripartum cardiomyopathy in North America:
results of the IPAC study (Investigations of Pregnancy-Associated Cardiomyopathy). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:905-914
782. Elkayam U. "Risk of subsequent pregnancy in women with a history of peripartum cardiomyopathy". J Am Coll
Cardiol 2014;64:1629-1636.
783. Ahmad WA, Khanom M, Yaakob ZH. Heart failure in pregnancy: an overview. Int J Clin Pract 2011;65(8):848-51.
784. John KJ, Mishra AK, Ramasamy C, George AA, Selvaraj V, Lal A. Heart failure in COVID-19 patients: Critical care
experience. World J Virol. 2022 Jan 25;11(1):1-19.
785. Mehra MR, Desai SS, Kuy S, Henry TD, Patel AN. Cardiovascular disease, drug therapy, and mortality in Covid-19.
N Engl J Med 2020: 382(25):e102.
786. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19
in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 2020: 395(10229):1054-1062.
787. Bader F, Manla Y, Atallah B, Starling RC. Heart failure and COVID-19. Heart Fail Rev. 2021 Jan;26(1):1-10.
788. Writing Committee, Gluckman TJ, Bhave NM, Allen LA, Chung EH, Spatz ES, et al. 2022 ACC Expert Consensus
Decision Pathway on Cardiovascular Sequelae of COVID-19 in Adults: Myocarditis and Other Myocardial
Involvement, Post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 Infection, and Return to Play: A Report of the American College
of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 May 3;79(17):1717-1756
789. Italia L, Tomasoni D, Bisegna S, Pancaldi E, Stretti L et al. COVID-19 and Heart Failure: From Epidemiology During
the Pandemic to Myocardial Injury, Myocarditis, and Heart Failure Sequelae. Front Cardiovasc. Med., 10 August
2021.Sec. General Cardiovascular Medicine https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2021.713560
790. Block JP, Boehmer TK, Forrest CB, et al. Cardiac Complications After SARS-CoV-2 Infection and mRNA COVID-19
Vaccination - PCORnet, United States, January 2021-January 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:517-523.
791. Ammirati E, Lupi L, Palazzini M, Hendren NS, Grodin JL et al. Prevalence, Characteristics, and Outcomes of
COVID-19-Associated Acute Myocarditis. Circulation. 2022 Apr 12;145(15):1123-1139Ammirat et al, Prevalence,
Characteristics, and Outcomes of COVID-19–Associated Acute Myocarditis. Circulation. 2022;145:1123-1139
792. Lai FTT, Chan EWW, Huang L, Cheung CL et al. Prognosis of Myocarditis Developing After mRNA COVID-19
Vaccination Compared With Viral Myocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022:80: 2255-2265
793. Xie Y, Xu E, Bowe B, Al-Aly Z. Long-term cardiovascular outcomes of COVID-19. Nat Med. 2022 Mar;28(3):583-590.
794. T. van der Bom, B.J. Bouma, F.J. Meijboom, et al., The prevalence of adult congenital heart disease, results from a
systematic review and evidence based calculation, Am. Heart J. 164 (4) (2012) 568-575.
795. Marelli AJ, Ionescu-Ittu R, Mackie AS, Guo L, Dendukuri N, Kaouache M. Lifetime prevalence of congenital heart
disease in the general population from 2000 to 2010. Circulation. 2014;130(9):749-56.
796. Stout KK, Broberg CS, Book WM, et al., American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology CoFG,
Translational B, council on cardiovascular R and imaging. Chronic heart failure in congenital heart disease: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133: 770-801
797. Book WM, Gerardin J, Saraf A, Marie Valente A, Rodriguez F 3rd. Clinical Phenotypes of Fontan Failure:
Implications for Management. Congenit Heart Dis. 2016 Jul;11(4):296-308. doi: 10.1111/chd.12368.
798. Gilljam T, Mandalenakis Z, Dellborg M, Lappas G, Eriksson P, Skoglund K, Rosengren A. Development of heart
failure in young patients with congenital heart disease: A nation-wide cohort study. Open Hear 2019; 6: e000858.
799. Arnaert S, De Meester P, Troost E, Droogne W, Van Aelst L, Van Cleemput J, Voros G, Gewillig M, Cools B, Moons
P, Rega F, Meyns B, Zhang Z, Budts W, Van De Bruaene A. Heart failure related to adult congenital heart disease:
prevalence, outcome and risk factors. ESC Heart Fail. 2021 Aug;8(4):2940-2950..
800. Yu C, Moore BM, Kotchetkova I, et al. Causes of death in a contemporary adult congenital heart disease cohort.
Heart. 2018;104(20):1678-1682.
801. Oechslin EN, Harrison DA, Connelly MS, et al. Mode of death in adults with congenital heart disease. Am J Cardiol.
2000 Sep 15;86 (10):1111-1116.
802. Verheugt CL, Uiterwaal CSPM, van der Velde ET, et al. Mortality in adult congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J
2010;31(10):1220-9.
803. Diller GP, Kempny A, Alonso-Gonzalez R, et al. Survival prospects and circumstances of death in contemporary
adult congenital heart disease patients under follow-up at a large tertiary centre. Circulation. 2015 Dec 1;132(22):
2118-2125.
804. Zomer AC, Vaartjes I, Uiterwaal CSPM, et al. Circumstances of death in adult congenital heart disease. Int J Cardiol.
2012 Jan 26;154 (2):168-172.
805. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults with congenital
heart disease. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association TaskForce on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiolo 2019;73(12):e81-192.
806. Rodriguez Iii FH, Moodie DS, Parekh DR, et al. Outcomes of heart failure–related hospitalization in adults with
congenital heart dis- ease in the United States. Congenit Heart Dis. 2013;8(6):513-0519. 19.
807. Agarwal S, Sud K, Menon V. Nationwide hospitalization trends in adult congenital heart disease across 2003-2012.
J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5(1):e002330
808. Zomer AC, Vaartjes I, van der Velde ET, et al. Heart failure admissions in adults with congenital heart disease; risk
factors and prognosis. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168(3):2487-93.
809. Budts W, Roos-Hesselink J, Radle-Hurst T, Eicken A, McDonagh TA et al. Treatment of heart failure in adult
congenital heart disease: a position paper of the Working Group of Grown-Up Congenital Heart Disease and the
Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 2016;37:1419-1427.
810. Brida M, Lovrić D, Griselli M, Riesgo Gil F, Gatzoulis MA. Heart failure in adults with congenital heart disease. Int J
Cardiol. 2022 Jun 15;357:39-45
811. Gratz A, Hess J, Hager A. Self-estimated physical functioning poorly predicts actual exercise capacity in adolescents
and adults with congenital heart disease, Eur. Heart J. 2009:30;) 497-504.
812. Leusveld EM, Kauling RM, Geenen LW, Roos-Hesselink JW. Heart failure in congenital heart disease: management
options and clinical challenges, Expert Review of Cardiovascular Therapy 2020: 18:8, 503-516
813. Negishi J, Ohuchi H, Miyazaki A, et al. Clinical characteristics of adult patients with congenital heart disease
hospitalized for acute heart failure. Circ J. 2018;82(3):840-846
814. Perrin N, Dore A, van de Bruaene A, Mongeon FP, Mondésert B, Poirier N, Miró J, Khairy P, Ibrahim R, Chaix MA.
The Fontan Circulation: From Ideal to Failing Hemodynamics and Drug Therapies for Optimization. Can J Cardiol.
2022 Jul;38(7):1059-1071
815. Baumgartner H, De Backer J, Babu-Narayan SV, Budts W, Chessa M, et al., 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management
of adult congenital heart disease, Eur. Heart J. 2021; 42 (6) (2021) 563-645.
816. Cunningham JW, Nathan AS, Rhodes J, Shafer K, Landzberg MJ, Opotowsky AR. Decline in peak oxygen
consumption over time predicts death or transplantation in adults with a Fontan circulation. Am Heart J. 2017:
189:184-192
817. Diller GP, Dimopoulos K, Okonko D, Li W, Babu-Narayan SV et al., Exercise intolerance in adult congenital heart
disease: comparative severity, correlates, and prognostic implication, Circulation 2005: 112 (6) : 828-835.
818. Menachem JN, Reza N, Mazurek JA, Burstein D, Birati EY, et al . Cardiopulmonary exercise testing-a valuable
tool, not gatekeeper when referring patients with adult congenital heart disease for transplant evaluation. World J
Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2019;10(3):286-291
819. Dimopoulos K, Okonko DO, Diller GP, Broberg CS, Salukhe TV et al Abnormal ventilatory response to exercise in
adults with congenital heart disease relates to cyanosis and predicts survival. Circulation. 2006:113(24):2796-2802
820. Suradi HS, Hijazi ZM. Adult Congenital Interventions in Heart Failure. Interv Cardiol Clin. 2017 Jul;6(3):427-443..
821. Bouchardy J, Therrien J, Pilote L, et al. Atrial arrhythmias in adults with congenital heart disease. Circulation
2009;120:1679-86.
822. Konstam MA, Kiernan MS, Bernstein D, Bozkurt B, Jacob M . Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart
Failure: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association, Circulation 2018: 137 (20): e578-e622.
823. Humbert M, Kovacs G, Hoeper MM, Badagliacca R, Berger RMF, et al ESC/ERS Scientific Document Group. 2022
ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension. Eur Respir J. 2023 Jan 6;61(1):
2200879.
824. Dos L, Pujadas S, Estruch M, Mas A, Ferreira-González I, Pijuan A, Serra R, Ordóñez-Llanos J, Subirana M,
Pons-Lladó G, Marsal JR, García-Dorado D, Casaldàliga J. Eplerenone in systemic right ventricle: double blind
randomized clinical trial. The evedes study. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 15;168(6):5167-73
825. Ladouceur M, Segura de la Cal T, Gaye B, Valentin E, Ly R, Iserin L, Legendre A, Mousseaux E, Li W, Rafiq I,
Kempny A, Barradas-Pires A, Babu-Narayan SV, Gatzoulis MA, Dimopoulos K. Effect of medical treatment on heart
failure incidence in patients with a systemic right ventricle. Heart. 2021 Sep;107(17):1384-1389.
826. Perrin N, Dore A, van de Bruaene A, Mongeon FP, Mondésert B, Poirier N, Miró J, Khairy P, Ibrahim R, Chaix MA.
The Fontan Circulation: From Ideal to Failing Hemodynamics and Drug Therapies for Optimization. Can J Cardiol.
2022 Jul;38(7):1059-1071.
827. Rychik, J., Atz, A. M., Celermajer, D. S., Deal, B. J., Gatzoulis, M. A et al. American Heart Association Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young and Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing. Evaluation and management
of the child and adult with Fontan circulation: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation
2019;, 140(6), e234-e284.
828. Cheung YF, Penny DJ, Redington AN. Serial assessment of left ventricular diastolic function after Fontan procedure.
Heart Br Card Soc 2000:3:420-424.
829. Hern´andez-Madrid A, Paul T, Abrams D, Aziz PF , Blom NA Chen, et al., Arrhythmias in congenital heart disease:
a position paper of the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), Association for European Paediatric and
Congenital Cardiology (AEPC), and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Working Group on Grown-up
Congenital heart disease, endorsed by HRS, PACES, APHRS, and SOLAECE, Europace 2018: 20 (11): 1719-1753.
830. Khairy P, Van Hare GF, Balaji S, et al. PACES/HRS expert consensus statement on the recognition and management
of arrhythmias in adult congenital heart disease: developed in partnership between the Pediatric and Congenital
Electrophysiology Society (PACES) and the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS).Endorsed by the governing bodies of
PACES, HRS, the American College of Cardiology (ACC), theAmerican Heart Association (AHA), the European
Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), the Canadian Heart Rhythm Society (CHRS), and the International Society for
Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ISACHD). Can J Cardiol 2014;30(10):e1-63.
831. Epstein AE, DiMarco JP, Ellenbogen KA, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update incorporated into the ACCF/
AHA/HRS 2008 guidelines for devicebased therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: a report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart
Rhythm Society Circulation 2013;127:e283-352.
832. Chubb H, O’Neill M, Rosenthal E. Pacing and defibrillators in complex congenital heart disease. Arrhythm
Electrophysiol Rev. 2016 5;May(1):57-64. PubMed PMID: 27403295.
833. Dubin, A. M., Janousek, J., Rhee, E., Strieper, M. J., Cecchin, Fet al. Resynchronization Therapy in Pediatric and
Congenital Heart Disease Patients. J Am Coll Cardio 2005: 46(12), 2277-2283.
834. Janousek J, Gebauer A. Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy in Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease. Pacing
and Clinical Electrophysiology 2008: 31, S21-S23. doi:10.1111/j.1540-8159.2008.00949
835. Givertz MM, DeFilippis EM, Landzberg MJ, Pinney SP, Woods RK, Valente AM. Advanced Heart Failure Therapies
for Adults With Congenital Heart Disease: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 Nov 5;74(18):2295-2312.
836. Menachem JN, Schlendorf KH, Mazurek JA, Bichell DP, Brinkley DM et al.. Advanced Heart Failure in Adults With
Congenital Heart Disease. JACC Heart Fail. 2020 Feb;8(2):87-99.
837. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guidelines for Prevention, Diagnosis and Management of
Infective Endocarditis,1st Ed 2017 (Internet).Available at www.acadmed.org.my
838. Budts W, Börjesson M, Chessa M, et al. Physical activity in adolescents and adults with congenital heart defects:
individualized exercise prescription. Eur Heart J 2013;34:3669-74.
839. Sarno LA, Misra A, Siddeek H, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation for adults and adolescents with congenital heart disease:
extending beyond the typical patient population. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2020;40 (1):E1-E4.
840. Troost, E., Roggen, L., Goossens, E., Moons, P., De Meester, P.et al. Advanced care planning in adult congenital
heart disease: Transitioning from repair to palliation and end-of-life care. Int J Cardiol 2019; 279:57-61
841. Kovacs AH, Kaufman TM, Broberg CS. Cardiac rehabilitation for adults with congenital heart disease: physical and
psychosocial considerations.Can J Cardiol. 2018 Oct 01;34(10, Supplement 2):S270-S277.
842. Khush KK, Cherikh WS, Chambers DC, Goldfarb S, Hayes D, Kucheryavaya AY, Levvey BJ, Meiser B, Rossano JW,
Stehlik J. The International Thoracic Organ Transplant Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation: thirty-fifth adult heart transplantation report-2018; focus theme: multiorgan transplantation.J Heart
Lung Transplant. 2018; 37:1155-1168
843. Crespo-Leiro MG, Costanzo MR, Gustafsson F, Khush KK, Macdonald PS, Potena L, Stehlik J, Zuckermann A,
Mehra MR. Heart transplantation: focus on donor recovery strategies, left ventricular assist devices, and novel
therapies. Eur Heart J. 2022 Jun 14;43(23):2237-2246.
844. Goldstein DJ, Naka Y, Horstmanshof D, et al. Association of Clinical Outcomes With Left Ventricular Assist Device
Use by Bridge to Transplant or Destination Therapy Intent.The Multicenter Study of MagLev Technology in Patients
Undergoing Mechanical Circulatory Support Therapy With HeartMate 3 (MOMENTUM 3) Randomized Clinical Trial.
JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5(4):411-419
845. Patel S, Nicholson L, Cassidy CJ, Wong K Y-K. Left ventricular assist device: a bridge to transplant or destination
therapy? . Postgrad Med J 2016;92:271-281
846. Estep JD, Starling RC, Horstmanshof DA, et al; ROADMAP Study Investigators. Risk assessment and comparative
effectiveness of left ventricular assist device and medical management in ambulatory heart failure patients: Results
from the ROADMAP study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:1747-61.
847. Pagani FD, Milano CA, Tatooles AJ, et al. HeartWare HVAD for the treatment of patients with advanced heart failure
ineligible for cardiac transplantation: results of the ENDURANCE destination therapy trial. J Heart Lung Transplant
2015;34:S9.
848. Health Quality Ontario. Left ventricular assist devices for destination therapy: a health technology assessment. Ont
Health Technol Assess Ser 2016;16(3):1-60.
849. Adler ED, Goldfinger JZ, Kalman J, et al. Palliative care in the treatment of advanced heart failure. Circulation 2009;
120(25): 2597-606.
850. Jaarsma T, Beattie JM, Ryder M, et al for the Advanced Heart Failure Study Group of the HFA of the ESC. Palliative
care in heart failure: a position statement from the palliative care workshop of the Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail 2009;11:433-43.
851. Chang YK, Allen LA, McClung JA, et al. Criteria for Referral of Patients With Advanced Heart Failure for Specialized
Palliative Care. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022; 80(4): 332-344.
852. Whellan DJ, Goodlin SJ, Dickinson MG, et al for Quality of Care Committee, Heart Failure Society of America.
End-of-life care in patients with heart failure. J Card Fail 2013;20:121-34.
853. Sobanski PZ, Alt-Epping B, Currow DC, et al. Palliative care for people living with heart failure: European
Association for Palliative Care Task Force expert position statement. Cardiovasc Res 2020 ;116(1): 12-27.
854. Gillilan R, Puchalski C. Spiritual issues in heart failure. In: Supportive Care in Heart Failure, Beattie J, Goodlin S
(Eds), Oxford University Press, Oxford 2008. p.299.
855. Stewart S, Carrington MJ, Marwick TH, et al. The WHICH trial: Impact of home versus clinic-based management of
chronic heart failure. JACC 2012;60(14):1239-48.
856. Sunnerhagen KS, C. A., Schaufelberger M, Hedberg M, Grimby G. Muscular performance in heart failure. J Card
Fail 1998: 4(2): 97-104.
857. Wilson JR, M. D. Factors contributing to the exercise limitation of heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993: 22(4 Suppl
A): 93A-98A.
858. Piña IL, A. C., Balady GJ, Belardinelli R, Chaitman BR, Duscha BD et al. American Heart Association Committee on
exercise, rehabilitation, and prevention. Exercise and heart failure: A statement from the American Heart
Association Committee on exercise, rehabilitation, and prevention. Circulation 2003:107(8): 1210-1225.
859. Belardinelli R, G. D., Cianci G, Purcaro A. 10-year exercise training in chronic heart failure: a randomized controlled
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012: 60(16): 1521-1528.
860. Leggio M. F. A., Loreti C, Limongelli G, Bendini MG, Mazza A et al. Effects of exercise training in heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: an updated systematic literature review. Heart Fail Rev 2020: 25(5): 703-711.
861. Edwards, J. J., O’Driscoll, J.M. Exercise Training in Heart failure with Preserved and Reduced Ejection Fraction: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med 2022: Open 8(76).
862. Piepoli MF, C. V., Corrà U, Dickstein K, Francis DP, Jaarsma T et al. Exercise training in heart failure: from theory
to practice. A consensus document of the Heart Failure Association and the European Association for Cardiovascular
Prevention and Rehabilitation. Eur J Heart Fail 2011; 13(4): 347-357.
863. O'Connor CM, W. D., Lee KL, Keteyian SJ, Cooper LS, Ellis SJ et al. HF-ACTION Investigators. Efficacy and safety
of exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure: HF-ACTION randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2009:
301(14): 1439-1450.
864. Long L, M. I., Bridges C, Sagar VA, Davies EJ, Coats AJ et al.Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation for adults with
heart failure. Cochrane Database 2019; Syst Rev. 1(1): CD003331.
865. Bjarnason-Wehrens B, N. R., Jensen K, Hackbusch M, Grilli M, Gielen S et al. German Society of Cardiovascular
Prevention and Rehabilitation (DGPR). Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation in patients with reduced left ventricular
ejection fraction: The Cardiac Rehabilitation Outcome Study in Heart Failure (CROS-HF): A systematic review and
meta-analysis. ." Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2020; 27(9): 929-952.
866. Forman DE, S. B., Josephson RA, Raikhelkar J, Bittner V; American College of Cardiology’s Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease Section. Heart Failure as a Newly Approved Diagnosis for Cardiac Rehabilitation: Challenges
and Opportunities. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015: 65. 2652-2659.
867. Meng Y, Z. W., Huang H, Zhang T, Ge X. The effects of early exercise on cardiac rehabilitation-related outcome in
acute heart failure patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. . Int J Nurs Stud 2022: 130(104237).
868. Izawa H, Yoshida T, Ikegame T, Izawa KP, Ito Y et al. Japanese Association of Cardiac Rehabilitation Standard
Cardiac Rehabilitation Program Planning Committee. Standard Cardiac Rehabilitation Program for Heart Failure.
Circ J. 2019 Nov 25;83(12):2394-2398.
869. Adsett JA, M. A., Morris N, Kuys S, Paratz JD. Aquatic exercise training and stable heart failure: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol 2015:186: 22-28.
870. Cornelis J, B. P., Taeymans J, Vrints C, Vissers D. Comparing exercise training modalities in heart failure: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol 2016: 221: 867-876.
871. Palmer K, B. K., Paton M, Jepson M, Lane R. Chronic Heart Failure and Exercise Rehabilitation: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2018: 99(12): 2570-2582.
872. Chun, K-H., Kang S-M. Cardiac Rehabilitation in Heart Failure. Int J Heart Fail 2021: 3(1): 1-14.
873. Nichols S, M. G., Breckon J, Ingle L. Current Insights into Exercise-based Cardiac Rehabilitation in Patients with
Coronary Heart Disease and Chronic Heart Failure. Int J Sports Med 2021: 42(1): 19-26.
874. Tegegne TK, R. J., Nourse RA, Kibret KT, Ahmed KY, Maddison R. Effects of exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation
delivery modes on exercise capacity and health-related quality of life in heart failure: a systematic review and
network meta-analysis. Open Heart 2022: 9(1): e001949.
875. Imran HM, B. M., Erqou S, Taveira TH, Shah NR, Morrison A et al. Home-Based Cardiac Rehabilitation Alone and
Hybrid With Center-Based Cardiac Rehabilitation in Heart Failure: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Am
Heart Assoc 2019: 8(16): e012779.
876. Indraratna P, T. D., Yu J, Delbaere K, Brodie M, Lovell N, Ooi SY. Mobile Phone Technologies in the Management
of Ischemic Heart Disease, Heart Failure, and Hypertension: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth 2020: 8(7): e16695.
877. Velayati F, A. H., Hemmat M. A Systematic Review of the Effectiveness of Telerehabilitation Interventions for
Therapeutic Purposes in the Elderly. Methods Inf Med 2020; 59(2-03): 104-109.
878. Cavalheiro AH, S. C. J., Rocha A, Moreira E, Azevedo LF. Effectiveness of Tele-rehabilitation Programs in Heart
Failure: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Health Serv Insights 2021: 14: 11786329211021668.
879. Chen, Z. B., Fan, L. B., Liu, Y. J., & Zheng, Y. R. Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Cardiac Rehabilitation on Exercise
Tolerance and Cardiac Function in Heart Failure Patients Undergoing Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy. Biomed
Res Int. 2019: 3202838.
880. Ye LF, W. S., Wang LH. Efficacy and Safety of Exercise Rehabilitation for Heart Failure Patients With Cardiac
Resynchronization Therapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Physiol 2020: 21(11): 980.
881. Guo R, W. Y., Xu Y, Jia R, Zou S, Lu S et al. The impact of exercise training for chronic heart failure patients with
cardiac resynchronization therapy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2021: 100(13):
e25128.
882. Pandey A, S. M., Singh S, Reeves GR, O'Connor C, Piña I et al. Frailty Status Modifies the Efficacy of Exercise
Training Among Patients With Chronic Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction: An Analysis From the
HF-ACTION Trial. ." Circulation 2022: 146(2): 80-90.
883. Aili SR, Lo P, Villanueva JE, Joshi Y, Emmanuel S, Macdonald PS. Prevention and Reversal of Frailty in Heart
Failure　- A Systematic Review. Circ J. 2021 Dec 24;86(1):14-22
884. Daw, P., Withers, T.M., van Zanten, J.J.C.S.V. et al. A systematic review of provider-and system-level factors
influencing the delivery of cardiac rehabilitation for heart failure. BMC Health Serv Res 2021: 21, 1267
885. McAlister FA, Stewart S, Ferrua S, McMurray JJ. Multidisciplinary strategies for the management of heart failure
patients at high risk for admission: a systematic review of randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:810-19.
886. Feltner C, Jones CD, Cené CW, et al. Transitional care interventions to prevent readmissions for persons with heart
failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2014;160:774-84.
887. Hauptman PJ, Rich MW, Heidenreich PA, et al; Heart Failure Society of America. The Heart Failure Clinic: a
consensus statement of the Heart Failure Society of America. J Card Fail 2008;14:801-15.
888. Gustafsson F, J. Arnold MO. Heart failure clinics and outpatient management: review of the evidence and call for
quality assurance. Eur Heart J 2004;25:1596-1604.
889. Ministry of Health Malaysia (Pharmacy Practice and Development Division). Protocol Medication Therapy
Adherence Clinic (MTAC): Heart Failure 2018, 1st Ed.
890. Pufulete M, Maishman R, Dabner L, et al. B-type natriuretic peptide-guided therapy for heart failure (HF): a systemat
ic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data (IPD) and aggregate data. Systematic Reviews. 2018:7:112.
891. Mark DB, Cowper PA, Anstrom KJ, et al. Economic and quality of life outcomes as natriuretic peptide guided therapy
for heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018; 72:2551-2562.
892. Tersalvi G, Winterton D, Cioffi GM, Ghidini S, Roberto M et al.Telemedicine in Heart Failure During COVID-19: A
Step Into the Future. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine. 2020: Vol 7, Article 612818
893. Soran O, Kennard ED, Kfoury AG, Kelsey SF,IEPR Investigators Two year clinical outcomes after Enhanced
External Counterpulsation (EECP) therapy in patients with refractory angina pectoris and left ventricular dysfunction
(report from the international EECP Patient Registry). Am J Cardiol 2006; 97: 17-20.
894. McKenna C, McDaid C, Suekarran S, Hawkins N, Claxton K, Light K, Chester M, Cleland J, Woolacott N, Sculpher
M. Enhanced external counterpulsation for the treatment of stable angina and heart failure: a systematic review and
economic analysis. Health Technol Assess. 2009 Apr;13(24):iii-iv, ix-xi, 1-90.
895. Tecson KM, Silver MA, Brune SD, et al. Impact of EECP on heart failure rehospitalization in patients with ischemic
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 2016;117:901-5.
896. Zhou ZF, Wang Dj, Li XM, Zhang CL, Wu CY. Effects of enhanced external counterpulsation on exercise capacity
and quality of life in patients with chronic heart failure: A meta-analysis. Medicine. 2021;100:27(e26536).
897. Feldman AM, Silver MA, Francis GS, et al.. Enhanced external counterpulsation improves exercise tolerance in
patients with chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48:1198-205
898. Lawson WE, Kennard ED, Holubkov R, et al; IEPR investigators. Benefit and safety of enhanced external
counterpulsation in treating coronary artery disease patients with a history of congestive heart failure. Cardiology
2001;96:78-84.
899. Madonna R, Van Laake LW, Davidson SM, et al. Position Paper of the European Society of Cardiology Working
Group Cellular Biology of the Heart: cell-based therapies for myocardial repair and regeneration in ischemic heart
disease and heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2016;37(23):1789-1798.505.
900. Fernandez-Aviles F, Sanz-Ruiz R, Climent AM, et al for TACTICS (Transnational Alliance for Regenerative
Therapies in Cardiovascular Syndromes) Writing Group; Authors/Task Force Members. Chairpersons; Basic
Research Subcommittee; Translational Research Subcommittee; Challenges of Cardiovascular Regenerative
Medicine Subcommittee; Tissue Engineering Subcommittee; Delivery, Navigation, Tracking and Assessment
Subcommittee; Clinical Trials Subcommittee; Regulatory and funding strategies subcommittee; Delivery, Navigation,
Tracking and Assessment Subcommittee. Global position paper on cardiovascular regenerative medicine. Eur Heart
J 2017;38:2532-46.
901. Rheault-Henry M, White I, Grover D, Atoui R. Stem cell therapy for heart failure: Medical breakthrough, or dead end?
World J Stem Cells. 2021 Apr 26;13(4):236-259.
902. Tavazzi L, Maggioni AP, Marchioli R, et al; Gissi-HF Investigators. Effect of n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in patients
with chronic heart failure (the GISSI-HF Trial): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
2008;372:1223-30.
903. Siscovick DS, Barringer TA, Fretts AM, et al. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (fish oil) supplementation and the
prevention of cardiovascular disease. A Science Advisory From the American Heart Association. Circulation
2017;135:(15):e867-84.
904. Abdelhamid AS, Brown TJ, Brainard JS, Biswas P, Thorpe GC et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for the primary and
secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2020, Issue 3. Art. No.:
CD003177. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003177.pub5
905. Kojuri J, Ostovan MA, Rezaian GR, Archin Dialameh P, Zamiri N et al. Effect of omega-3 on brain natriuretic peptide
and echocardiographic findings in heart failure: Double-blind placebo-controlled randomized trial. J Cardiovasc Dis
Res. 2013 Mar;4(1):20-4
906. Djoussé L, Cook NR, Kim E, Walter J, Al-Ramady OT et al. Diabetes Mellitus, Race, and Effects of Omega-3 Fatty
Acids on Incidence of Heart Failure Hospitalization. JACC: Heart Failure 2022; 10 (4): 235-237
907. Block RC, Liu L, Herrington DM, Huang S, Tsai MY et al. Predicting Risk for Incident Heart Failure With Omega-3
Fatty Acids: From MESA. J Am Coll Cardiol HF. 2019 Aug, 7 (8) 651-661
908. Al Saadi T, Assaf Y, Farwati M, Turkmani K, Al-Mouakeh A et al. Coenzyme Q10 for heart failure. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2021, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD008684. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008684.pub3.
909. Di Lorenzo A, Iannuzzo G, Parlato A, Cuomo G, Testa C et al. Clinical Evidence for Q10 Coenzyme Supplementation
in Heart Failure: From Energetics to Functional Improvement. J Clin Med. 2020 Apr 27;9(5):1266
910. Raizner AE, Quiñones MA. Coenzyme Q10 for Patients With Cardiovascular Disease: JACC Focus Seminar. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2021: 77 (5): 609-619
911. Yeh GY, McCarthy EP, Wayne PM, Stevenson LW, Wood MJ, Forman D, Davis RB, Phillips RS. Tai chi exercise in
patients with chronic heart failure: a randomized clinical trial. Arch Intern Med. 2011: 171(8):750-7
912. Gu Q, Wu SJ, Zheng Y, et al. Tai Chi exercise for patients with chronic heart failure. Am J Phys Med Rehabil
2017;96(10):706-16.
913. Ren X, Li Y, Yang X, Li J, Li H, Yuan Z, Sun Y, Shang H, Xing Y, Gao Y. The Effects of Tai Chi Training in Patients
with Heart Failure: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Physiol. 2017 Dec 7;8:989.
914. Chen X, Savarese G, Cai Y, Ma L, Lundborg CS et al. Tai Chi and Qigong Practices for Chronic Heart Failure: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Hindawi Volume 2020 | Article ID 2034625
| https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2034625
915. Gomes-Neto M, Rodrigues ES Jr, Silva WM Jr, Carvalho VO. Effects of Yoga in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure:
A Meta-Analysis. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2014 Nov;103(5):433-439.
916. Guddeti, Raviteja R. MD; Dang, Geetanjali MD; Williams, Mark A. PhD; Alla, Venkata Mahesh MD. Role of Yoga in
Cardiac Disease and Rehabilitation. Journal of Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation and Prevention 2019; 39(3):p 146-152.
917. Fonarow GC, Albert NM, Curtis AB, et al. Improving evidence-based care for heart failure in outpatient cardiology
practices: primary results of the Registry to Improve the Use of Evidence-Based Heart Failure Therapies in the
Outpatient Setting (IMPROVE HF). Circulation 2010;122:585-96.
918. Nakaoab K, Yasudaac S, Noguchia T, Sumitaa Y, Nakao YM et al. Association of hospital performance measures
with readmissions for patients with heart failure: A report from JROAD-DPC study. Int J Cardiology 2021: 340 : 48-54.
919. Nakano A, Vinter N, Egstrup K, Svendsen ML, Schjødt I et al. Association between process performance measures
and 1-year mortality among patients with incident heart failure: a Danish nationwide study, European Heart Journal
- Quality of Care and Clinical Outcomes, Volume 5, Issue 1, January 2019, Pages 28-34
The committee would like to thank the following for all their assistance:

MAHTaS Unit, Division of Ministry of Health.

Panel of experts who reviewed the draft.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members have no potential conflict of interest to disclose.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
This CPG was made possible by an educational grant from National Heart association of
Malaysia. Views and interests of the funding body have not influenced the final recommendation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
= le)