2022 MOH/P/PAK/502.22(GU)-e
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES:
enw
MANAGEMENT OF
CHRONIC HEPATITIS B
IN ADULTS
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, not sold, or used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN: 978-967-2887-55-3
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platforms: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2022 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2026) or sooner if there is a need to do so. When
it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of
the related specialty will be informed about it. A discussion will be done
on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A
multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review
methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed. Every care is taken
to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of
publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections
will be published in the web version of this document, which is the
definitive version at all times. This version can be found on the websites
mentioned above.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm on Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
x
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
2
3.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
4
3.1
Screening Test
4
3.2
Serological Markers
5
4.
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
8
4.1
Clinical Assessment
8
4.2
Biochemical Assessment
8
4.3
Fibrosis Assessment in Patient with Chronic Hepatitis B 10
5.
TREATMENT
12
5.1
Non-pharmacological Treatment
12
5.2
Pharmacological Treatment
12
6.
SPECIAL GROUPS
16
6.1
Acute Hepatitis B
16
6.2
Acute Liver Failure/Acute-on-chronic Liver Failure
17
6.3
Hepatitis B Flare
17
6.4
Co-infection with Human Immunodeficiency Virus
18
6.5
Co-infection with Hepatitis C Virus
20
6.6
Pregnancy and Lactation
21
6.7
Immunosuppression or Cytotoxic Therapy
22
6.8
Renal Diseases
24
6.9
Solid Organ Transplant
26
6.10 Occult Hepatitis B
26
6.11 Healthcare Workers
27
7.
MONITORING & FOLLOW-UP
28
7.1
Monitoring
28
7.2
Complications
30
7.3
Treatment Discontinuation
31
7.4
Treatment Options for Virological Failure
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
PREVENTION
37
8.1
Mother-to-Child Transmission
37
8.2
Post-Exposure Prophylaxis
39
8.3
Healthcare Workers
40
8.4
Contact Tracing
41
8.5
Vaccination
42
8.6
Counselling
42
9.
REFERRAL
43
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
43
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
43
10.2 Potential Resource Implication
44
REFERENCES
45
Appendix 1
Example of Search Strategy
50
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
51
Appendix 3
Laboratory Workflow for Diagnosis of Chronic
52
Hepatitis B Infection
Appendix 4
Dosage Form, Administration and Common
53
Side Effects of Hepatitis B Antiviral
in Malaysia
Appendix 5
Prophylaxis and Treatment of Mother-to-Child
55
Hepatitis B Virus Transmission
Appendix 6
Antiviral Prophylaxis Before
56
Immunosuppression
Appendix 7
Post-exposure Prophylaxis Workflow
57
List of Abbreviations
58
Acknowledgement
60
Disclosure Statement
60
Source of Funding
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
i
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE 2001
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
In line with current development in CPG methodology, the CPG Unit of
MaHTAS is in the process of adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its work
process. The quality of each retrieved evidence and its effect size
is carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG Development Group.
In formulating the recommendations, overall balances of the
following aspects are considered in determining the strength of the
recommendations:-
• overall quality of evidence
• balance of benefits versus harms
• values and preferences
• resource implications
• equity, feasibility and acceptability
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention;
dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were highlighted by the CPG
Development Group (DG) as the key clinical recommendations that
should be recognised for implementation.
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
• Targeted screening for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection should be
done in the following groups of people:
 family members of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive
persons
 household contacts of HBsAg-positive persons
 blood donors
 healthcare workers
 people who inject drugs participating in harm reduction
programmes
 foreign workers
 pregnant women
• Other high-risk groups should be offered to screen for HBV infection.
• Screening of HBV infection should be done using either a rapid
diagnostic test or laboratory-based immunoassay.
• HBV infection should be notified under the Prevention and Control on
Infectious Disease Act 1988 within seven days of diagnosis.
• Hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) should be ideally done
before initiation of treatment and for assessment of its response.
TREATMENT
• Initial assessment of patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) should
include:
 phase of infection
 degree of liver fibrosis or cirrhosis
 presence of co-infection
• Nucleos(t)ide analogues with high genetic barrier resistance should
be used as first-line therapy in CHB i.e.
 entecavir (ETV)
 tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF)
 tenofovir alafenamide (TAF)
• ETV or TAF is preferred in CHB patients with age >60 years, bone
disease or impaired renal function.
• Treatment should be initiated in patients with:
 non-cirrhotic liver
-
hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-positive with HBV DNA >20,000
IU/ml and alanine transaminase (ALT) twice the upper limit of
normal (ULN)
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
iii
-
HBeAg-negative with HBV DNA >2,000 IU/ml and ALT twice
ULN
 cirrhotic liver
-
any detectable level of HBV DNA regardless of ALT and
HBeAg status
SPECIAL GROUPS
• Human Immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/HBV co-infected patients
should be treated simultaneously with dual active HBV treatment
(tenofovir in combination with lamivudine or emtricitabine) plus
another third agent of antiretroviral therapy.
• All patients with hepatitis B/hepatitis C virus co-infection should be
treated as per indication of hepatitis B and hepatitis C mono-infection.
• Antiviral agents should be considered in pregnant CHB women with
TDF with high viral load (>200,000 IU/ml) as the preferred choice.
• All candidates for chemotherapy and immunosuppressive treatment
should be tested for HBV markers prior to immunosuppression e.g.
HBsAg. If HBsAg-negative, antibody to hepatitis B core antigen
should be tested.
• Antiviral dose should be adjusted according to the estimated
glomerular filtration rate of CHB patients with chronic kidney disease.
MONITORING
• CHB patients who are not on treatment should be monitored for:
 ALT
 HBV DNA
 liver fibrosis or cirrhosis
PREVENTION
• First dose hepatitis B vaccination should be given to all newborns
within 24 hours of life.
• Hepatitis B immunoglobulin should be given to all newborns of CHB
mothers within 12 hours of life.
• Antiviral prophylaxis should be initiated at 28 - 32 weeks of gestation
in HBeAg-positive mothers with viral load >200,000 IU/ml.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the DG for these CPG were from the Ministry of
Health (MoH) and the Ministry of Higher Education. There was active
involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee during the process
of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platforms: mainly Medline via Ovid and Embase.
Refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy. The inclusion
criteria are all adults at risk and with hepatitis B infection regardless of
study design. The first search was limited to literature published in the
last 10 years (2010 - 2020) for majority of the clinical questions and on
adults aged 19 to 44 years old and in English. In addition, the reference
lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched and experts
in the field were contacted to identify relevant studies. All searches were
conducted from 24 July 2020 to 30 September 2020. The literature
search was repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG
development process allowing any relevant papers published before 31
July 2022 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence
published after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can
be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other guidelines on chronic hepatitis B
in adults as listed below:
• EASL 2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines on The Management of
Hepatitis B Virus Infection
• Update on Prevention, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Chronic
Hepatitis B: AASLD 2018 Hepatitis B Guidance
• Asian-Pacific Clinical Practice Guidelines on The Management of
Hepatitis B: A 2015 Update
A total of 17 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions. The DG
members met 24 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meeting. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and review committee (RC). Where evidence was insufficient,
the recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC.
Any differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was
based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001)
while the grading of recommendation was done using the principles of
GRADE (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the CPG follows
strictly the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE II).
On completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers.
It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback
from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to
the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and, the Health Technology
Assessment (HTA) and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia, for review and
approval. Details on the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained
from Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidencebased Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
vi
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of chronic hepatitis B in adults
on the following aspects:
• diagnosis
• treatment
• monitoring & follow-up
• prevention
• referral
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Adults at risk and with hepatitis B infection
TARGET GROUP/USER
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care of the
management of chronic hepatitis B in adults including:
• doctors
• allied health professionals
• trainees and medical students
• policymakers
• patients and their advocates
• professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
vii
Dr. Ahneez Abdul Hameed
Pathologist (Medical Microbiology)
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Chuah Teik Beng
Radiologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Hamiza Shahar
Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Ms. Khoo Hui Fen
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Kiew Kuang Kiat
Consultant Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Kedah
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of CPG Unit & Public Health
Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health (MoH), Putrajaya
Dr. Ng Tiang Koi
Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Tuanku Ja’afar,
Negeri Sembilan
Ms. Poh Wei Yoon
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Pravind Narayanan
Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Hjh. Rosaida Hj. Md Said
Senior Consultant
Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Roshalina Rosli
Pathologist (Medical Microbiology)
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Pn. Siti Aisah Fadzilah
Senior Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Siti Aminah Akbar Merican
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Dr. Syuhada Dan Adnan
Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist
Hospital Sultanah Nur Zahirah
Terengganu
Dr. Wan Noor Azlin Wan Idris
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Putrajaya Presint 9
Putrajaya
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Haniza Omar
Consultant Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Members (in alphabetical order)
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
viii
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dato’ Dr. Muhammad Radzi Abu Hassan
Deputy Director-General of Health (Research & Technical Support) &
Senior Consultant Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Ganesalingam A/L Kanagasabai
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre,
Selangor
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Nazrila Hairizan Nasir
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Associate Prof. Dr. Nurjasmin Aida
Jamani
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
International Islamic University
Malaysia, Pahang
Dr. Rozainanee Mohd Zain
Consultant Pathologist (Virology)
Institute for Medical Research,
Selangor
Puan Rozita Mohamad
Deputy Director (Pharmacy)
Jabatan Kesihatan Negeri Pahang,
Pahang
Prof. Dr. Sanjiv Mahadeva
Senior Consultant Gastroenterologist
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Tan Soek Siam
Senior Consultant Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Yoon Chee Kin
Medical Specialist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Yun Sii Ing
Senior Consultant Radiologist
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
ix
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
Dr. Fatiha Hana Shabaruddin
Pharmacy Lecturer
Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hamimah Saad
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Hamizah Razlan
Consultant Gastroenterologist & Physician
KPJ Ampang Puteri Specialist Hospital
Selangor
Dr. Hanif Zailani (BKP)
Head of Section & Public Health Physician
Disease Control Division, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Lee Heng Gee
Consultant Infectious Disease
Hospital Queen Elizabeth, Sabah
Professor Dr. Lee Yeong Yeh
Consultant Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Kelantan
Dr. Lim Giok Kiat
General Practitioner
Klinik Ng & Lim, Selangor
Dr. Mohd. Shamsul Amri Ismail
Consultant Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
KPJ Damansara Specialist Hospital
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Noor Aliza Mutalib
Consultant Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rawa anak Bau
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Bintulu, Sarawak
Professor Dr. Rosmawati Mohamed
Senior Consultant Hepatologist
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Salmah Idris
Consultant Medical Microbiologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Shaheeda Mohd Sallehuddin
General Practitioner
Poliklinik Juara Medic, Selangor
Associate Prof. Dr. Suraya Abdul Razak
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Hospital Al-Sultan Abdullah
Universiti Teknologi Mara, Selangor
Dr. Syamhanin Adnan
Head of Pharmacy Department
Hospital Sungai Buloh, Selangor
Professor Dr. Yasmin A. Malik
Consultant Medical Microbiologist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yasmin Mohamed Gani
Infectious Disease Physician
Hospital Sg. Buloh, Selangor
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
x
ALGORITHM ON MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC HEPATITIS B IN ADULTS
HBsAg positive
Non-cirrhotic
HBeAg positive
HBeAg negative
Compensated
Decompensated
ALT >2x ULN
ALT <2x ULN
ALT >2x ULN
ALT <2x ULN
HBV DNA
>20,000*
HBV DNA
<20,000*
HBV DNA
>2,000*
HBV DNA
<2,000*
HBV DNA
>2,000*
HBV DNA
<2,000*
Start
treatment
Investigate
for other
causes &
treat
accordingly
Monitor
6-monthly
Start
treatment
Investigate
for other
causes &
treat
accordingly
Assess
fibrosis noninvasively &
to start
treatment if
indicated
Monitor
6-monthly
Start
treatment
Start
treatment
Cirrhotic
HBsAg: hepatitis B surface antigen
HBeAg: hepatitis B e antigen
ALT: alanine aminotransferase
ULN: upper limit normal
HBV: hepatitis B virus
DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid
*IU/ml
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
1. INTRODUCTION
Chronic Hepatitis B (CHB) is defined by the presence of hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) for at least six months.1; 2, level III It is a global
public health problem. In Malaysia, the incidence rate is approximately
12.64 in 100,000 population.3, level III The prevalence is decreasing due to
improvements in socioeconomic status, universal vaccination programs
and perhaps effective antiviral treatments.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is transmitted by perinatal or horizontal
transmission, percutaneous, and sexual exposure and exposure to
infected blood and body fluids. HBV can progress to fibrosis, cirrhosis
and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Screening is important, especially
for those at high risk.
Non-invasive methods to assess liver fibrosis and cirrhosis e.g. the use
of aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio (APRI) and fibrosis-4
index (FIB-4) testing have been validated in hepatitis B and are easily
performed.
The induction of long-term suppression of HBV replication represents
the main endpoint of current treatment strategies. Functional cure
of hepatitis B is an optimal endpoint which is defined as sustained
undetectable circulating HBsAg and HBV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
Additional indications for treatment include the prevention of motherto-child transmission in pregnant women with high viremia and the
prevention of HBV reactivation in patients requiring immunosuppression
or chemotherapy.
The long-term administration of a potent nucleos(t)ide analogue (NA)
with a high barrier to resistance, such as entecavir (ETV), tenofovir
disoproxil (TDF) or tenofovir alafenamide (TAF), represents the
treatment of choice.
In view of high disease burden, variation in practice and non-existence
of local guidelines, as well as the aim of elimination of viral hepatitis by
2030 in line with World Health Organization’s (WHO) goal, an evidencebased CPG is required to guide healthcare providers locally in the
management of CHB in adults.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
2. RISK FACTORS
The following groups of people below are listed as high-risk for HBV
infection and thus should be screened for the infection: 1; 4 ; 5 - 6, level III
• family members, household and sexual contacts of HBsAgpositive persons
• persons who have ever injected drugs
• men who have sex with men
• persons with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
• persons seeking evaluation or treatment for sexually-transmitted
disease
• healthcare workers (HCW)
• persons in prison/correctional facilities
• indigenous populations
• sex workers
• transgenders
• individuals with elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of unknown aetiology
• infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers
• persons with chronic liver disease (CLD)
• persons with end-stage renal disease including those receiving
haemodialysis
• persons with multiple sexual partners
• persons exposed in healthcare setting
Other groups of people that should be screened for HBV infection
are:1; 4; 5 - 6, level III
• persons requiring immunosuppressive therapy
• donors of blood, plasma, organ, tissue or semen
• residents and staff of facilities for developmentally disabled
persons
• pregnant women
Based on National Strategic Plan for Hepatitis B and C Malaysia,
targeted screening is recommended for the following groups of
people:7, level III
• blood donors
• HCW
• persons who inject drugs participating in harm reduction
programmes
• foreign workers
In a local pilot study of four states in 2019, the incidence of hepatitis
B during antenatal screening ranged from 0.40% to 0.47% in Pahang,
Kedah and Terengganu, whereas it was 0.95% in Sabah.8, level III
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
A technology review by MaHTAS revealed that there was a high level of
evidence on antenatal screening for HBV infection being effective and
cost-effective in reducing perinatal transmission of HBV.94
Recommendation 1
• Targeted screening for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection should be
done in the following groups of people:
 family members of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive
persons
 household contacts of HBsAg-positive persons
 blood donors
 healthcare workers
 people who inject drugs participating in harm reduction
programmes
 foreign workers
 pregnant women
• Other high-risk groups should be offered to screen for HBV infection*.
*Refer to the preceding text.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
3. LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
3.1 Screening Test
Screening for HBV infection in adults, adolescents and children (>12
months of age) is by detection of HBsAg using either rapid diagnostic
test (RDT) or laboratory-based immunoassays. CHB is defined as
persistent HBV infection (the presence of detectable HBsAg in the
blood for ≥6 months).1; 2, level III In Malaysia, HBV infection is a notifiable
disease under Prevention and Control on Infectious Disease Act 1988
and should be notified within seven days of diagnosis.9, level III For those
in high-risk group who are HBsAg-negative are advised to check for
antibody to hepatitis B surface protein (anti-HBs) and considered for
vaccination if anti-HBs is negative.
Quality-assured RDT for HBsAg is recommended in settings where
there is limited access to laboratory testing and/or in populations
where access to rapid testing would facilitate care and treatment. A
meta-analysis on the diagnostic accuracy of tests in HBsAg detection
demonstrated that RDT had pooled sensitivity of 90% (95% CI 89 to 91)
and specificity of 99% (95% CI 99 to 100) with enzyme immunoassays
(EIA) as the reference standard. The sensitivity varies widely overall
and within brands of RDT and it was lower (72.3%, 95% CI 67.9 to 76.4)
in HIV-positive individuals.10, level III
Screening tests should meet the minimum acceptance criteria of
WHO prequalification of in vitro diagnostics (IVDs) or a stringent
regulatory review for IVDs. All IVDs should be used in accordance with
manufacturers’ instructions for use.1 Test kits should be in the WHO
list of prequalified in vitro diagnostic tests and the Malaysian medical
device authority register.
• RDT of HBsAg
 accurate and affordable point-of-care testing
• Laboratory-based Immunoassays
 high throughput testing using an automated analyser and
normally available in the hospital
 include
EIA,
chemoluminescence
immunoassay
and
electrochemoluminescence assay
Recommendation 2
• Screening of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection with hepatitis B
surface antigen should be done using either a rapid diagnostic test
or laboratory-based immunoassay.
• HBV infection should be notified under the Prevention and Control
on Infectious Disease Act 1988 within seven days of diagnosis.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
3.2 Serological Markers
Diagnosis of HBV infection is accomplished by HBsAg. It can be further
categorised by a series of serological markers.
Serological tests are used to distinguish acute from chronic HBV
infections and to monitor vaccine-induced immunity. Molecular testing
for HBV DNA is increasingly being used to quantify HBV viral load
and monitor treatment response. Test selection should be based on
the person’s risk factors, vaccination history and findings of previous
tests.2, level III Table 1 shows various diagnostics and monitoring panels
for hepatitis B interpretation.
Table 1. Tests to Diagnose and Monitor Hepatitis B Virus Infection
HBsAg = Hepatitis B surface antigen; Anti-HBc = Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen;
IgM anti-HBc = Immunoglobulin M antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; Anti-HBs =
Antibody to hepatitis B surface protein; HBeAg = Hepatitis B e antigen; HBeAb =
Hepatitis B e antibody; HBV DNA = Hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid
+ implies positive; - implies negative; ± may be positive or negative
Adapted:
1. Krajden M, McNabb G, Petric M. The laboratory diagnosis of hepatitis B virus. Can
J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2005 Mar;16(2):65-72.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus
Infection in the United States: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/rr/
rr6701a1.htm#T1_down).
Not infected nor protected,
suggest vaccination
Transient (up to 52 days) after
vaccination
Early acute infection
Acute infection
Chronic infection
Acute resolving infection
Recovered from past infection
and immune
False-positive; past infection;
‘low level’ chronic infection; or
passive transfer of anti-HBc
to an infant born to HBsAgpositive mother
Immune if the anti-HBs
concentration is ≥10 IU/ml after
vaccine series completion; passive
transfer after hepatitis B immune
globulin administration
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
±
-
-
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
+
+
±
-
±
±
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
±
-
-
-
+
+
-
-
±
±
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
±
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
HBsAg
HBeAg HBeAb
Interpretation
AntiHBc
IgM
antiHBc
AntiHBs
HBV
DNA
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Figure 1 represents a typical serology course of hepatitis B progression
from acute to chronic overtime
Figure 1. Progression to Chronic HBV Infection -
Typical Serology Course
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for
Identification and Public Health Management of Persons with Chronic
Hepatitis B Virus Infection (Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/rr5708a1.htm)
• HBV DNA molecular test
HBV DNA molecular test is used to detect the presence of the virus
which reflects the level of viral replication and correlates with disease
progression.1
Quantitative molecular (viral load) test for detection of HBV DNA
following a reactive HBsAg serological test is an essential component
in:1; 5, level III
• evaluation for the need of treatment
• assessment of the effectiveness of antiviral treatment
A real-time polymerase chain reaction has become the standard assay
to detect and quantify HBV DNA due to its ability in detection of low viral
loads (10 - 15 IU/ml) and highest up to 1.0x109 IU/ml.11
Advance serological and molecular markers e.g. HBsAg quantification
and HBV genotype can be considered to assess the prognosis of CHB
and treatment selection.12, level III However, these are not widely available
in Malaysia.
HBV DNA
HBeAg
HBsAg
anti-HBe
Acute
(6 months)
Chronic
(Years)
Relative concentration
Total anti-HBc
IgM anti-HBc
Years
0 4
8
16 20 24 28 32 36
52
Weeks after Exposure
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Refer to Appendix 3 on Laboratory Workflow for Diagnosis of
Chronic Hepatitis B Infection.
Recommendation 3
• Quantitative hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid should be
ideally done before initiation of treatment and for assessment of its
response.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
4.
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
4.1 Clinical Assessment
All patients diagnosed with HBV infection should be assessed for:5, level III; 13 - 14
• detailed history
• physical examination for stigmata of CLD
4.2 Biochemical Assessment
The natural course of HBV infection consists of four phases as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Natural History and Assessment of Patients with
Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection
Source: European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-398.
The following investigations may be helpful in the assessment of CHB
patients:5, level III; 13 - 14
• hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B e antibody (HBeAb)
• biochemical
markers,
including
AST
and
ALT,
alkaline
phosphatase, bilirubin and serum creatinine (Cr)
• serum albumin
• full blood count (FBC) and prothrombin time/international
normalisation ratio (INR)
• HBV DNA detection and level measurement
• co-infections with HIV and hepatitis C
• co-morbidities and other liver-related diseases based on clinical
judgement
For those with cirrhosis, assessment for compensated and
decompensated cirrhosis is done using Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score
(CPS) as shown below.
HBeAg-positive
HBeAg-negative
Investigation/
Terminology
Chronic
infection
Chronic
hepatitis
Chronic
infection
Chronic
hepatitis
High
Positive
>107 IU/ml
Normal
None/minimal
Immune
tolerant
High/intermediate
Positive
104 - 107 IU/ml
Elevated
Moderate/severe
Immune reactive
HBeAg-positive
Low
Negative
<2,000 IU/ml
Normal
None
Inactive carrier
Intermediate
Negative
>2,000 IU/ml
Elevated
Moderate/severe
HBeAg-negative
chronic hepatitis
HBsAg
HBeAg
HBV DNA
ALT
Liver disease
Old terminology
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Table 3. Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score for Grading Severity of Liver
Disease
*Grade I: alteration of sleep pattern, Grade II: asterixis, Grade III: somnolence, Grade
IV: coma
Modified: Ministry of Health Malaysia, Clinical Practice Guidelines Management of
Chronic Hepatitis C in Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2019.
• A total Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score (CPS) of:
 5 - 6 is class A
 7 - 9 is class B
 10 - 15 is class C
• CPS classes B and C are considered decompensated stages.
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score is a scoring
system ranging from 6 - 40 to evaluate the severity of liver disease.
Incorporation of serum sodium into MELD (MELD-Na) may further
increase its prognostic ability. It uses values e.g. bilirubin, serum Cr,
INR and serum sodium. The higher score indicates a poorer prognosis
and warrant for tertiary care.
Formula
• MELD score = 3.8 [Ln serum bilirubin (mg/dL)] + 11.2 [Ln INR]
+ 9.6 [Ln serum creatinine (mg/dL)] + 6.4
• MELD-Na score = MELD + 1.32 x (137 - Na) - [0.033 x MELD*(137- Na)]
Variable
Score
1
2
3
Ascites
Encephalopathy
Bilirubin (mmol/L)
Albumin (g/L)
Prothrombin time
• seconds over normal
• INR
None
None
<34
>35
<4
<1.7
Mild/
on diuretics
Grade I - II*
34 - 50
28 - 35
4 - 6
1.7 - 2.3
Moderate/
severe
Grade III - IV*
>50
<28
>6
>2.3
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Table 4. Interpretation of MELD-Na Score
Score
Mortality (%)
MELD-Na score ≥40
71.3
MELD-Na score 30 - 39
52.6
MELD-Na score 20 - 29
19.6
MELD-Na score 10 - 19
6.0
MELD-Na score ≤9
1.9
Accurate assessments on the severity of liver fibrosis are prudent
for prognostication and planning the management of HBV patients.
Non-invasive methods of assessing fibrosis have been developed to
reduce the need for liver biopsy which is deemed risky and may lead
to complications.
4.3 Fibrosis Assessment in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B
i.
Non-invasive methods
• Aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio (APRI) score
This is a simple test whereby it uses two cut-off points for diagnosing
specific fibrosis stages. Reported cut-off values for APRI for the
detection of significant fibrosis and cirrhosis are as follows:13
 for significant fibrosis, low and high cut-offs for APRI are 0.5 and
1.5
 for cirrhosis, low and high cut-offs for APRI are 1.0 and 2.0
• Fibrosis-4 index
FIB-4 is a non-invasive tool with good diagnostic accuracy. In a
diagnostic study on hepatitis C, a FIB-4 index <1.45 had a negative
predictive value (NPV) of 94.7% to exclude advanced fibrosis or
cirrhosis (F3 - F4) while a FIB-4 index >3.25 had a PPV of 82.1% to
confirm the existence of advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis (F3 - F4). The
FIB-4 index efficiently identified cirrhosis with an area under the curve
(AUC) of 0.91 (95% CI 0.86 to 0.95).15, level III The CPG DG opines that
the results of this study can be extrapolated on hepatitis B patients.
Formula
• APRI score = AST (IU/L) / AST (upper limit of normal) (IU/L) x 100
platelet (109 /L)
• FIB-4 index = age [(year) x AST (IU/L)]
platelet (109 /L) x ALT (IU/L)
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
• Imaging
Cirrhosis is a high-risk factor for developing HCC and other
complications caused by portal hypertension, therefore early detection
of cirrhosis can help identify high-risk patients earlier. Besides laboratory
testing, imaging e.g. ultrasonography (US), computed tomography and
magnetic resonance imaging can be used to look for evidence of cirrhosis.
In a diagnostic study, transient elastography (TE) was superior to US
in assessing liver cirrhosis in patients with CHB. TE has significantly
increased the accuracy of detecting cirrhosis compared with US with an
AUC of 0.96 vs 0.71.16, level III
Another diagnostic study showed that magnetic resonance elastography
(MRE) was superior to TE and point shear-wave elastography in the
detection of early stages of liver fibrosis with a high AUC of 0.88.17, level III
Although MRE and TE have shown high accuracy, US is an acceptable
option for liver cirrhosis assessment in a local setting due to its wide
availability.
Assessment of liver cirrhosis/fibrosis using an APRI, FIB-4 and TE is
shown in the following table.
Table 5. Evaluation of APRI, FIB-4 and TE
Test
Non-cirrhotic/fibrosis liver
Cirrhotic liver APRI
low cut-off
0.5
1.0
APRI high cut-off
1.0
2.0
FIB-4
<3.25
≥3.25
TE
<8.0
≥12.5
Treatment decisions can be based on non-invasive tests of significant
fibrosis (e.g. APRI ≥1.5, FIB-4 ≥3.25, liver stiffness ≥8 kPa by
TE).18, level III
ii.
Invasive method
Liver biopsy place a central role in treatment algorithm in hepatitis B
and remains the gold standard for evaluation of hepatic pathology and
should be considered when non-invasive assessments are inconclusive.
Recommendation 4
• Initial assessment of patients with chronic hepatitis B should include:
 phase of infection
 degree of liver fibrosis or cirrhosis
 presence of co-infection
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
5.
TREATMENT
5.1 Non-pharmacological Treatment
Phyllanthus (dukung anak) has long been used in Chinese medicine to
treat CLD.
In two Cochrane systematic reviews, many clinical trials were done
on Phyllanthus with no consensus on its effectiveness and safety.
Phyllanthus was:
• not effective in HBsAg seroconversion compared with placebo19, level I
• showed no difference in HBsAg clearance or HBV DNA level
compared with antiviral alone19 - 20, level I
• more effective in HBV DNA clearance when combined with
antiviral compared with antiviral alone (RR=0.69, 95% CI 0.52 to
0.91)19, level I
There was no significant difference in adverse events (AEs) between
Phyllanthus and placebo.19, level I
As all primary papers in both reviews had a high risk of bias, there was
insufficient evidence to support the use of Phyllanthus in the treatment
of CHB.19 - 20, level I
In another Cochrane systematic review, selenium was not effective in
preventing primary liver cancer in CHB patients. However, vitamin E
supplements showed a sustained biochemical and virological response
at end of treatment (RR=0.55, 95 % CI 0.34 to 0.87 and RR=0.55, 95%
CI 0.34 to 0.86 respectively). The quality of primary papers was highly
biased due to significant role of chance.21, level I
• There is insufficient evidence to support the use of traditional and
complementary medicine in the treatment of CHB.
5.2 Pharmacological Treatment
The mainstay of CHB treatment consists of immunomodulators and
NA. The NAs can be classified according to HBV resistance barrier as
shown below.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Table 6. Pharmacological Treatment
*deregistered in Malaysia in 2022
#discontinued worldwide in 2020 (important for drug-resistance assessment in view of
preferred antiviral choice)
In a large, multi-centre randomised controlled trial (RCT), both ETV and
TDF were equally effective in HBV DNA suppression (p=0.807) and a
comparable side effect profile among NA-naive CHB patients at longterm follow-up of 144 weeks.22, level I
Another large, multi-centre RCT showed TAF was non-inferior to TDF
in HBV suppression (<29 IU/ml) among HBeAg-negative CHB patients
at week 48. TAF had a significantly smaller reduction in bone mineral
density and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) compared with
TDF. Apart from that, most AEs were mild to moderate in severity in the
two treatment groups.23, level I
In a prospective cohort study on both treatment-naïve and treatmentexperienced CHB patients, TDF and TAF were equally effective in the
reduction of HBV DNA and HBsAg levels. Apart from that, switching
from TDF to TAF therapy contributed to the maintenance of the antiviral
effect and significant recovery of renal dysfunction.24, level II-2
Treatment with TAF was also associated with significant improvement
in the renal and bone safety profiles.25, level I
In a meta-analysis on CHB, interferon (IFN) monotherapy or combined
with NA was compared with NA monotherapy. The regimen using
IFN had a small but significant increase in HBsAg loss over NA
monotherapy:26, level I
• combination vs NA monotherapy with RD of 5% (95% CI 3 to 7)
• IFN monotherapy vs NA monotherapy with RD of 3% (95% CI 2 to 5)
The impact of IFN could be modulated by its discontinuation rate due
to AEs at 5.9%.
Telbivudine*
Adefovir#
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Long-term administration of a potent NA with a high barrier to
resistance is the treatment of choice regardless of the severity of liver
disease in CHB.13 The preferred first-line therapies are TDF, ETV and
TAF.5, level III; 13 - 14
ETV or TAF is preferred over TDF in:13
• age >60 years
• bone disease
• renal impairment
Treatment options and the recommended doses are featured in
Appendix 4.
Recommendation 5
• Nucleos(t)ide analogues with high genetic barrier resistance should
be used as first-line therapy in chronic hepatitis B (CHB) i.e.
 entecavir (ETV)
 tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
 tenofovir alafenamide (TAF)
• ETV or TAF is preferred in CHB patients with age >60 years, bone
disease or impaired renal function*.
*TAF is not recommended in patients with eGFR <15 ml/min/m2.
• Treatment initiation
Not all CHB patients require antiviral treatment. Treatment is generally
recommended for individuals at a high risk of disease progression i.e.
those with high ALT levels, active viral replication and advanced fibrosis
or cirrhosis.27, level III
A review of four important CPGs for CHB; European Association for the
Study of the Liver (EASL), American Association for the Study of Liver
Diseases (AASLD), Asia Pacific Association for the Study of the Liver
(APASL) and WHO summarised treatment initiation as shown in the
table below:27, level III
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Table 7. Comparison of Different Guidelines in Initiation of
Hepatitis B Treatment
The four existing CPGs for CHB on treatment initiation criteria for
non-cirrhotic HBeAg-positive and negative individuals and cirrhotic
individuals are almost similar in their recommendations, with minor
differences. Other predictors of advanced disease should be considered
for treatment initiation including gender, age, hepatitis B genotype and
family history.18, level III; 27, level III
The management of CHB in adults is summarised in the Algorithm on
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults (page x).
• Hepatitis B patients should be considered for antiviral treatment if
they meet treatment indications based on three main parameters as
stated below:27, level III
 HBV DNA level should be above a designated threshold
 ALT levels should be elevated and/or
 evidence of significant fibrosis
Recommendation 6
• Treatment should be initiated in patients with:
 non-cirrhotic liver
- hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-positive with hepatitis B virus
deoxyribonucleic acid (HBV DNA) >20,000 IU/ml and alanine
transaminase (ALT) twice upper limit normal (ULN)
- HBeAg-negative with HBV DNA >2,000 IU/ml and ALT twice
ULN
 cirrhotic liver
- any detectable level of HBV DNA regardless of ALT and
HBeAg status
EASL 2017
AASLD 2016
APASL 2015
WHO 2015
HBeAg
Positive
>2,000
>20,000
>2,000
>20,000
>2,000
>20,000
Negative Positive Negative Positive Negative Positive Negative
HBV DNA
(IU/ml)
ALT (U/L)
HBV DNA
(IU/ml)
ALT (U/L)
HBV DNA
(IU/ml)
ALT (U/L)
>ULN
2x ULN
2x ULN
Abnormal
Histological
changes
Moderate liver
necroinflammation
/fibrosis
Moderate-to-severe liver
necroinflammation/fibrosis
-
Compensated Cirrhosis
Decompensated Cirrhosis
Any detectable level
>2,000
Any detectable
level
Any level
Any detectable level
Any level
Non-cirrhotic
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
6.
SPECIAL GROUPS
6.1 Acute Hepatitis B
Acute hepatitis B is a short-term illness that occurs within the first six
months after exposure to HBV. The diagnosis of acute HBV infection is
based upon the detection of HBsAg and immunoglobulin M antibody to
hepatitis B core antigen (IgM anti-HBc).
• More than 95% of adults with acute HBV hepatitis do not require
specific treatment as they will fully recover spontaneously unless in
severe infection.13
• Only patients with severe acute hepatitis B should be treated with
NAs and considered for liver transplantation.13
• Characteristics of severe acute hepatitis B are:13
 coagulopathy INR >1.5
 protracted course i.e. persistent symptoms or marked jaundice
>4 weeks
 sign(s) of acute liver failure
In a meta-analysis of pharmacological interventions for acute hepatitis
B infection, the risk of progression to chronic HBV infection was higher
in lamivudine (3TC) group compared with placebo or no intervention
group (OR=1.99, 95% CI 1.05 to 3.77) and ETV group (OR=3.64, 95%
CI 1.31 to 10.13). However, there was no difference in the risk between
ETV and no intervention groups. The rate of seroconversion was higher
in ETV compared with 3TC (OR=0.15, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.48) although
there was no significant difference in the time taken.28, level I
Apart from that, there was no difference in short-term mortality (<1
year) in any of the comparisons between hepatitis B immunoglobulin
(HBIG) vs placebo, 3TC vs placebo or no intervention, 3TC vs ETV and
ETV vs no intervention. The proportion of people with AEs was higher
in interferon group than placebo group but there was no difference
between 3TC and placebo or no intervention groups. No serious AEs
were reported in all groups. None of the trials reported progression
to fulminant HBV infection. The quality of primary papers used in the
meta-analysis was generally low.28, level I
In a small retrospective cohort study involving 32 patients with fulminant
acute hepatitis B who started on NAs; transaminases, bilirubin and INR
values returned to normal range within three months. The therapy was
well tolerated with no observed side effects. Of the 32 patients, the
remaining 22 (68.8%) who were followed further lost their HBsAg in a
median of 108 days (range 40 - 366) and 72.7% of them experienced
a seroconversion to anti-HBs in a median of 137 days. None of the
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
patients developed CHB. The risk of not achieving seroconversion
was independent of transaminases, bilirubin, INR, antiviral drug and
days from diagnosis to treatment initiation. The patients who developed
seroconversion lost their HBsAg earlier than those who did not (median
97.5 days vs 229.5 days; p=0.0219).29, level II-2
6.2 Acute Liver Failure/Acute-on-chronic Liver Failure
Acute liver failure (ALF) is a medical emergency. It is defined as severe
liver injury, leading to coagulopathy (usually with an INR ≥1.5) and
any degree of mental alteration (encephalopathy) in a patient without
pre-existing liver disease. On the other hand, acute-on-chronic liver
failure applies to any patient who has an underlying chronic liver
disease with superimposed acute insult which leads to a poorer
outcome.30, level III
Treating all hepatitis B patients with ALF is indicated given its safety and
the ultimate need for liver transplantation in many of them. Lowering
HBV DNA levels are important to reduce the risk of recurrent hepatitis
B after a liver transplant.
• Antiviral treatment is indicated only for those patients with acute
hepatitis B who have ALF or who have a protracted, severe course,
as indicated by total bilirubin >3 mg/dL (or direct bilirubin >1.5 mg/
dL), INR >1.5, encephalopathy or ascites.5, level III
 ETV, TDF or TAF are the preferred antiviral drugs.
6.3 Hepatitis B Flare
Hepatitis B flare, defined as an event with an abrupt rise of ALT levels
to >5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) in CHB, is considered to
be the result of a human leukocyte antigen-I restricted, cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-mediated immune response against HBV and its
downstream mechanisms. It may occur spontaneously, during or after
antiviral treatment and in the setting of immunosuppression and/or
chemotherapy.
The clinical spectrum of hepatitis B flares varies from asymptomatic
to symptomatic and typical overt acute hepatitis, even with hepatic
decompensation or failure. Flares may also occur in viraemic cirrhotic
patients with a higher incidence of decompensation/mortality compared
with those without cirrhosis, hence requiring immediate antiviral
treatment for prevention or rescue.31, level III
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
• While flares in cirrhotic patients always require immediate antiviral
treatment, those occurring in non-cirrhotic patients with decreasing
HBV DNA may be followed by HBV and/or HBeAg loss with
remission, and therefore may be observed for 3 - 6 months for real
indication of antiviral treatment.31, level III
6.4 Co-infection with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
Prevalence of HBV co-infection among people living with HIV
was found to be 13% in a study on tertiary care hospitals in
Malaysia.32, level III TREAT Asia HIV Observational Database (TAHOD)
study from Asia-Pacific Region reported 10.4% of subjects were
HBsAg-positive, 15.2% were positive for antibody to hepatitis C virus
(anti-HCV) while 1.8% were positive for both markers.33, level II-2 Thus, all
hepatitis B patients should be screened for HIV and hepatitis C virus
(HCV).13
A cohort study showed the hazard ratio (HR) for an acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or death event was almost double
for those with HIV/HBV co-infected compared with HIV mono-infected
patients (adjusted-HR=1.80, 95% CI 1.20 to 2.69).34, level II-2 In another
multicentre cohort study showed that HIV/HBV co-infected patients,
especially those with low cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4) nadir count,
were at increased risk for liver-related mortality.35, level II-2 HIV/HBV coinfected patients may have faster progression of hepatic fibrosis and
higher risk of cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease and HCC than HBVmono-infected persons.13 - 14 Hence, antiretroviral therapy (ART) should
be initiated in HIV/HBV co-infected patients irrespective of CD4 cell
count.5, level III; 13 - 14
An RCT in African HIV/HBV co-infected adults with high HBV replication
showed that they remained at heightened risk of mortality in the early
ART era. The 60-month probability of death was 11.8% (95% CI 5.4 to
24.5) in co-infected patients with HBV DNA ≥2000 IU/ml, 4.4% (95%
CI 1.9 to 10.4) in co-infected patients with HBV DNA <2000 IU/ml and
4.2% (95% CI 3.3 to 5.4) in HIV mono-infected patients. Mortality riskadjusted for ART strategy (immediate vs deferred) was higher in coinfected patients with HBV DNA ≥2,000 IU/ml in comparison with HIV
mono-infected patients (HR=2.74, 95% CI 1.26 to 5.97).36, level I
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
• HIV/HBV co-infected patients should be treated simultaneously for
both HIV and HBV with TDF in combination with 3TC or emtricitabine
(FTC) plus another third agent that is active against HIV in the form
of lifelong ART.5, level III; 13 - 14
• Entecavir is an alternative treatment for HBV in patients who have
contraindications to tenofovir. However, due to weak activity against
HIV, it must be administered in conjunction with a fully active HIV
ART regimen.13
• When antiretroviral therapy regimens are altered (e.g., due to HIV
resistance or intolerance), drugs that are effective against HBV
should not be discontinued unless it is substituted with another drug
that has activity against HBV.37, level III
A meta-analysis showed that 3TC plus TDF combination therapy was
more effective than 3TC monotherapy in HBV/HIV co-infected patients,
in terms of rate of undetectable HBV DNA (RR=1.57, 95% CI 1.23 to
2.00) and undetectable HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) (RR=1.26, 95% CI
1.11 to 1.42).38, level I
In a small open labelled RCT, TDF/FTC combination therapy compared
with FTC monotherapy in antiretroviral-naive HIV/HBV co-infected
patients at 48 weeks resulted in:39, level I
• a greater decrease in median HBV DNA level [-5.32 log10 copies/
ml (IQR -6.19, -5.13) vs -3.25 log10 copies/ml (IQR -5.43, -2.66);
p=0.03]
• a greater proportion of patients with undetectable HBV DNA i.e.
<30 IU/ml (90% vs 33%; p=0.036)
A retrospective cohort study revealed that TDF in combination with
3TC or FTC was more effective than 3TC alone in durable HBV viral
suppression among HIV/HBV co-infected patients (HR=2.635, 95%
CI 1.720 to 4.037). HBeAg positivity at baseline was associated with
failure to achieve HBV suppression despite long-term TDF-containing
ART (HR=0.293, 95% CI 0.178 to 0.482).40, level II-2
Another cohort study also supported the effectiveness of TDF-based
dual HBV-active ART compared with mono HBV-active (3TC or FTC)
ART in achieving HBV DNA <200 IU/ml at 144 weeks (p=0.02) when
adjusted for baseline HBV DNA and HBeAg among HIV/HBV co-infected
patients. However, the effectiveness was not at short-term review (24
weeks). The failures in the monotherapy group to maintain durability
of HBV DNA suppression were primarily seen in those with HBV DNA
>20,000 IU/ml. This study also showed that pre-treatment HBeAg
status demonstrated that a greater proportion of HBeAg-negative
subjects achieved HBV DNA <200 IU/ml at week 24 than HBeAgpositive subjects, with difference increased over time (p=0.04).35, level II-2
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Limited data from a multicentre observational study supported the
switch of TDF to TAF in HIV/HBV co-infected patients with renal
impairment. After one year of switching, there were improvements in
eGFR of 3.2 ml/min/1.73 m2 (95% CI 1.2 to 5.2) and 6.2 ml/min/1.73
m2 (95% CI 2.4 to 10.0) in individuals with eGFR of 60 - 89 ml/min/1.73
m2 and <60 ml/min/1.73 m2, respectively. Apart from that, there was a
reduction in urine protein-to-creatinine ratio of -6.3 mg/mmol (95% CI
-10.0 to -2) for the whole group.41, level II-3
Recommendation 7
• All hepatitis B patients should be screened for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus.
• HIV/hepatitis B virus (HBV) co-infected patients should be treated
simultaneously with dual active HBV treatment (tenofovir in
combination with lamivudine or emtricitabine) plus another third
agent of lifelong antiretroviral therapy (ART).
• Pre-treatment hepatitis B e antigen and/or HBV deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) viral load should be used for prognosis markers of
sustained HBV DNA suppression with ART in co-infected patients.
6.5 Co-infection with Hepatitis C Virus
Patients with HBV/HCV co-infection have accelerated liver progression
to cirrhosis and decompensation, and have an increased risk of HCC
i.e. 45% in HBV/HCV co-infected patients compared with 16% in HBV
and 28% in HCV mono-infected patients.42, level III
In HBV/HCV co-infected patients, the virus responsible for liver disease
should be determined by measuring HBV DNA and HCV RNA. With
effective direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) therapy, sustained virological
response rates for HCV in HBV and HCV co-infected patients are
comparable with those in HCV mono-infected patients. There is a
potential risk of HBV reactivation during DAAs therapy or after clearance
of HCV.13 However, there is no known drug-drug interaction between
DAAs and preferred hepatitis B therapy.
Patients with HBV/HCV co-infection who fulfil the indication for HBV
treatment should receive NA treatment. Those with HCV treated with
DAA are at risk of HBV DNA and ALT flares. Monitoring of HBV DNA
levels during treatment and for three months post-treatment is indicated
in those who do not meet treatment criteria for mono-infected patients.
In patients with HBsAg-negative and antibody to hepatitis B core
antigen (anti-HBc)-positive, the risk of HBV reactivation is low. ALT
monitoring should be done at baseline, end of treatment and during
follow-up. HBV DNA and HBsAg are testing reserved for those whose
ALT levels increase or fail to normalise during treatment or posttreatment.13
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Recommendation 8
• All patients with hepatitis B/hepatitis C virus co-infection should
be treated as per indication of hepatitis B and hepatitis C monoinfection*.
*Refer to Algorithm on Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in
Adults (page x)
6.6 Pregnancy and Lactation
Screening for HBsAg at the first antenatal visit is prudent to identify
pregnant mothers at high-risk of transmitting the virus to their babies
perinatally. This is further discussed in Subchapter 8.1. Antiviral agents
e.g. 3TC, telbivudine (LdT), TDF or TAF have been used to reduce
high viraemia in CHB mothers during the second and third trimesters
of pregnancy. Breastfeeding is generally safe as the common use TDF
has minimal bioavailability in breast milk.
In a cohort study, TAF and TDF were effective in reducing viral load at
delivery compared with baseline. The mean decreases in serum HBV
DNA levels in TAF-treated and TDF-treated mothers were 4.3 (±0.6)
and 4.4 (±0.7) log10 IU/ml, leading to mean viral loads of 3.5 (±0.9) and
3.4 (±1.0) log10 IU/ml at delivery respectively. Upon delivery, all mothers
achieved HBV DNA levels <200,000 IU/ml in both treatment groups.
Generally, both antiviral agents were well tolerated and safe during the
second and third trimesters of pregnancy. They were also safe in their
infants at seven months of follow-up.43, level II-2
A meta-analysis showed that TDF was more effective than control
(3TC, LdT and no treatment) in reducing maternal HBV DNA level
(WMD=2.33 log10 IU/ml, 95% CI 1.01 to 3.64) and infant HBsAg positivity
(RR=0.15, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.31). Maternal and infant safety profiles,
including ALT, creatine kinase (CK) and Cr, were comparable between
TDF and other treatment groups. The quality of included cohort studies
was moderate to high.44, level I
Studies have shown that there was no association between
breastfeeding and CHB in vaccinated infants. In a meta-analysis,
breastfeeding was not associated with an additional risk of infantile
CHB infection compared with formula feeding.45, level I Two cohort
studies showed no significant difference in CHB between breastfed and
formula-fed children.46 - 47, level II-2
Indication of treatment in pregnant CHB is similar to the normal CHB
population (refer to Algorithm on Management of Chronic Hepatitis
B in Adults). A summary of prophylaxis and treatment in pregnant CHB
patients can be seen in Appendix 5.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Recommendation 9
• Antiviral agents should be considered in pregnant women with
chronic hepatitis B (CHB) with high viral load (>200,000 IU/ml).
 Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is the preferred choice.
• Breastfeeding may be continued in women with CHB.
6.7 Immunosuppression or Cytotoxic Therapy
• All candidates for chemotherapy and immunosuppressive therapy
should be tested for HBV markers prior to immunosuppression.13
• HBsAg-positive patients
All HBsAg-positive patients should receive either ETV, TDF or TAF for
treatment or prophylaxis. The prophylaxis should continue for at least
12 months (18 months for rituximab-based regimens) after cessation of
the immunosuppressive treatment.13
Liver function test (LFT) and HBV DNA should be tested every 3
- 6 months during prophylaxis and for at least 12 months after NA
withdrawal as a large proportion of HBV reactivation (HBV-R) develops
after NA discontinuation.13
• HBsAg-negative, anti-HBc-positive patients
A meta-analysis showed that HBV-R occurred in 6.5% of HBsAgnegative,
anti-HBc-total-positive
patients
who
were
receiving
immunosuppressive therapy. The risk of HBV-R was higher but nonsignificant in rituximab-containing regimens compared with rituximabfree regimens. Further analysis also showed HBV-R rate in the
rituximab-free regimen was higher in patients with detectable HBV
DNA compared with those without (RR=12.67, 95% CI 2.39 to 67.04).
Apart from that, HBV-R risk was lower in anti-HBs-positive vs anti-HBsnegative at baseline in all patient subgroups:48, level I
 hematological diseases (RR=0.29, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.46)
 non-haematological diseases (RR=0.28, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.76)
 rituximab-containing regimens (RR=0.32, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.69)
 rituximab-free regimens (RR=0.36, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.96)
After cessation of immunosuppression, HBV-R developed in 42% of
the rituximab-containing regimens group and 32% of rituximab-free
regimens group.
In another meta-analysis, the median time for HBV-R from the last
rituximab dose was three months; it was at one month in anti-HBcpositive and five months in HBsAg-positive (p=0.021). Apart from that,
55% of patients experienced fulminant liver failure.49, level III
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
In HBsAg-negative, anti-HBc-positive subjects, the risk of HBV-R can
be classified as high (>10%), moderate (1 - 10%) or low (<1%). Patients
are classified based on their immunosuppression risk of reactivation as
shown in Table 8.50
Table 8. Types and duration of prophylaxis according to risk
of reactivation
Source:
1. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-398.
2. Reddy KR, Beavers KL, Hammond SP et al. American Gastroenterological
Association Institute guideline on the prevention and treatment of hepatitis B virus
reactivation during immunosuppressive drug therapy. Gastroenterology. 2015
Jan;148(1):215-9; quiz e16-7.
3. Hwang JP, Feld JJ, Hammond SP et al. Hepatitis B Virus Screening and
Management for Patients with Cancer Prior to Therapy: ASCO Provisional Clinical
Opinion Update. J Clin Oncol. 2020 Nov 1;38(31):3698-3715.
Refer to Appendix 6 on Antiviral Prophylaxis Before
Immunosuppression.
• Traditional
immunosuppressive
agents
(e.g. azathioprine,
6-mercaptopurine,
methotrexate)
• Intra-articular
corticosteroids
• Any dose of oral
corticosteroids daily
for <1 week
• Low dose (<10 mg
prednisolone or
equivalent)
corticosteroids for
>4 weeks
Low-risk group
• Tumour necrosis
factor-α inhibitors
(e.g. etanercept,
adalimumab,
certolizumab,
infliximab)
• Other cytokine or
integrin inhibitors
(e.g. abatacept,
ustekinumab,
natalizumab,
vedolizumab)
• Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors
(e.g. imatinib,
nilotinib)
• >10 mg
prednisolone daily
or equivalent for
>4 weeks
• Anthracycline
derivatives (e.g.
doxorubicin,
epirubicin
Moderate-risk
group
• B-cell depleting
agents (e.g.
rituximab,
ofatumumab)
High-risk group
Immunosuppressive
treatment
Monitoring HBsAg and/
or HBV DNA every
1 - 3 months
6 - 12 months
12 months
18 months
12 months
Duration of
prophylaxis
Monitoring after
cessation of
prophylaxis
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Recommendation 10
• All candidates for chemotherapy and immunosuppressive treatment
should be tested for HBV markers prior to immunosuppression e.g.
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). If HBsAg-negative, antibody to
hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) should be tested.
• All HBsAg-positive patients should receive either entecavir,
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate or tenofovir alafenamide as treatment
or prophylaxis.
• In HBsAg-positive patients, prophylaxis should be continued for at
least 12 months (18 months for rituximab-based regimens) after
cessation of the immunosuppressive treatment.
• In HBsAg-negative patients, anti-HBc-positive patients should
receive anti-HBV prophylaxis if they are at high-risk. Prophylaxis
should be continued for at least 18 months after stopping
immunosuppression and close monitoring for at least 12 months
after prophylaxis withdrawal.
• In HBsAg-negative, anti-HBc-positive patients should receive
anti-HBV prophylaxis if they are at moderate risk. Prophylaxis
should be continued for 6 - 12 months after discontinuation of
immunosuppressive treatment.
6.8 Renal Diseases
HBV infection in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) are prone
to increase liver-related complications, accelerated progression to endstage renal disease, and risk of increased mortality and morbidity.
In a cohort study, TDF-treated CHB patients had a higher risk of CKD
progression compared with ETV-treated and untreated patients. The
5-year cumulative incidences of CKD progression were:51, level II-2
• 48% (95 % CI 45 to 51) in TDF-treated group
• 43% (95% CI 40 to 46) in ETV-treated group
• 43% (95% CI 39 to 47) in untreated group
There was a reduction in eGFR >20% in TDF-treated group compared
with ETV-treated and untreated groups (p=0.023).
Another cohort study showed that both LdT and ETV significantly
improved eGFR while TDF significantly worsened it among NA-naive
CHB patients with impaired renal function.52, level II-2
• Renal safety monitoring with serum Cr, phosphorus, and urine
glucose and protein should be assessed before treatment initiation
and periodically thereafter (e.g. at least annually and more frequently
if the patient is at high risk for renal dysfunction or has a pre-existing
renal dysfunction) for CHB patients on TDF.5, level III
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
In dialysis patients with HBsAg-positive, ETV or TAF is recommended
for treatment.13 WHO mentions that TAF is not recommended if eGFR
is <15ml/min.64 Dose reduction or interval for NAs can be elicited in the
table below.
Table 9. Recommended Dose Reduction or Dosing Interval
for Tenofovir and Entecavir
eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate; HD: haemodialysis; CAPD: Continuous
Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis
Source: World Health Organization. Guidelines for the Prevention, Care and
Treatment of Persons with Chronic Hepatitis B Infection. WHO; Geneva:
2015
The incidence of HBV-related glomerulonephritis is from 0.1 to 25
% and may present clinically in three forms, i.e., membranous,
membranoproliferative,
and
IgA
nephropathy.
Membranous
glomerulonephritis (MGN) is the most common type, especially in
areas endemic for HBV infection, and usually presents as nephrotic
syndrome, with proteinuria, oedema and hypertension. Remission of
clinical and laboratory manifestations of nephropathy with successful
antiviral treatment has been demonstrated.14, level III
A meta-analysis showed that remission of the nephrotic syndrome is
accompanied by clearance of HBV replication, supporting the role of the
virus in the pathogenesis of the disease hence the need for treatment
for those in this group.53, level III
Recommendation 11
• All dialysis and renal transplant patients should be screened for
hepatitis B virus infection.
• Antiviral dose should be adjusted according to the estimated
glomerular filtration rate of a chronic hepatitis B with chronic kidney
disease patients.
 Renal function should be monitored during antiviral treatment.
Every seven days or
one 300 mg tablet following
completion of approximately
every 12 hours of dialysis
Not recommended if eGFR
<15 ml/min
0.5 mg every 7 days
300 mg
every 72 hours
0.5 mg every
72 hours
300 mg
every 48 hours
0.5 mg every
48 hours
300 mg
once daily
0.5 mg once
daily
25 mg once daily
eGFR (ml/min)
<10, HD/CAPD
10 - 29
30 - 49
≥50
Drug
TDF
TAF
ETV
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
6.9 Solid Organ Transplant
TDF therapy was safe and effective in HBV-positive organ transplant
patients in a cross-sectional study as there was no occurrence
of rejection during treatment. The HBV DNA viral load decreased
significantly at different time points within a year post-TDF initiation.
However, there were no differences:54, level III
• in creatinine, eGFR, serum phosphorus and daily microalbuminuria
levels compared with baseline
• in AST, ALT, ALP and GGT levels compared with baseline
In a cohort study with a median 26 months follow-up, ETV monotherapy
was effective in suppressing HBV after liver transplantation:55, level II-2
• 91% of patients had loss HBsAg after two years of follow-up
• 98.8% of patients achieved undetectable HBV DNA levels
• HBsAg seroclearance was 86% and 91% after the first and second
years respectively
• relapse rate after initial HBsAg seroclearance was:
 8.6% at six months
 11.6% at one year
 13.7% at second and third year
There was no significant difference in baseline HBV DNA levels between
patients with or without HBV recurrence/persistence.
• Long-term antiviral therapy use is safe in patients with organ
transplants.
6.10 Occult Hepatitis B
Occult HBV infection (OBI) is defined as the presence of HBV DNA in
the blood of people who tested negative for HBsAg. It can be divided
into:56, level III
• seropositive OBI - anti-HBc and/or anti-HBs-positive
• seronegative OBI - anti-HBc and anti-HBs-negative
There are a few scenarios in which OBI is of clinical importance
i.e:57, level III
• after acute hepatitis B
• blood donation
• organ transplantation
• immunosuppression
• cryptogenic CLD
• HCC
The initiation of HBV antiviral therapy prior to chemotherapy in patients
with OBI (especially in the absence of anti-HBs) is a prudent therapeutic
approach. Refer to Table 8 on the recommended treatment.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
6.11 Healthcare Workers
The risk of transmission from patients with CHB to a susceptible
individual following a single hollow bore needle stick injury is high,
around 30 - 62% in HBeAg-positive and 6 - 37% in HBeAg-negative
patients.
• The Malaysia Medical Council (MMC) guideline recommends:58, level III
 HBV-infected HCW is to be treated with effective antiviral regardless
of HBeAg status if the HCW intends to perform exposure-prone
procedures (EPPs)
 criteria for the HBV-infected HCW to perform EPPs -
- HBV DNA viral load undetectable or very low (<50 IU/ml)
- regular HBV DNA monitoring every 12 - 24 weeks
- the HCW agrees to inform MMC if there is any change in the work
scope
Refer to the MMC guideline document for details of description and
definition of the EPPs.58, level III
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
7.
MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP
7.1 Monitoring
i.
CHB patients not on treatment
CHB patients with HBeAg-positive chronic infection (immune tolerance)
or HBeAg-negative chronic infection (inactive carrier) do not need
pharmacological treatment. However, they are at risk of developing
complications and thus require regular monitoring.
In a small prospective cohort study on patients with CHB in immune
tolerance phase, 15.8% developed elevated serum ALT and these
patients were significantly more likely to have disease progression on
follow-up liver biopsy.59, level II-2
A prospective cohort study of 283 CHB patients with nine years of
follow-up and well-documented spontaneous HBeAg seroconversion to
HBeAb showed that:60, level II-2
• 66.8% remained in sustained remission while 33.2% developed
hepatitis (elevated ALT)
• 7.8% developed cirrhosis with an annual incidence of 0.9%; the
cumulative incidence was highest in the HBeAg reversion, followed
by HBeAg-negative hepatitis and sustained remission groups
(p=0.0129)
• 2.2% developed HCC with an annual risk of 0.2%; the cumulative
incidence was higher in patients with HBeAg-negative hepatitis than
those with sustained remission (p<0.005)
• 4.8% achieved sustained remission in HBsAg seroclearance of
which 4.4% are those with HBeAg-negative
The aim of monitoring patients with CHB is to identify those who need
intervention to reduce their risk of progression to liver cirrhosis and
HCC.
• In a large prospective cohort of CHB patients, liver-related mortality
increased proportionally with elevated serum ALT. The best cutoff serum ALT level for identification of patients with CHB at risk of
mortality was estimated at 34 U/L in men (AUC=0.691, p<0.0001)
and 30 U/L in women (AUC=0.783, p<0.0001).61, level II-2
• A cohort study on long-term outcomes in CHB patients showed that
the risk of liver cirrhosis and HCC increased with elevated HBV DNA
levels.62, level II-2
• A cross-sectional study showed that both APRI and FIB-4 index
was useful non-invasive methods to evaluate the severity of hepatic
fibrosis and cirrhosis in CHB patients.63, level III
For recommendations on monitoring, refer to Algorithm on
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults (page x).
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
ii.
CHB patients on treatment
Monitoring CHB patients while on treatment are required to assess
adherence, viral suppression and progression of liver disease. It is also
important to review indications for discontinuation of treatment.64
The following parameters are recommended to monitor patients with
hepatitis B who were started on treatment:5, level III; 65
• FBC
• LFT
• renal profile (RP)
• thyroid function tests (only for pegylated interferon)
• HBsAg
• HBeAg
• HBV DNA
• phosphate level (only for TDF)
These tests are recommended to be tested before the commencement
of treatment and the frequency of testing would depend on the antiviral
treatment started as per Table 10.
Table 10. Recommended Frequency of Laboratory Monitoring in
Patients with Hepatitis B on Treatment
Modified:
1. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hepatitis B (chronic): diagnosis
and management. United Kingdom: NICE; 2013
2. Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ, et al. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of chronic hepatitis B: AASLD 2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology.
2018;67(4):1560-1599.
Treatment
Lamivudine
Entecavir
Investigation
Pegylated
interferon
Tenofovir
disoproxil
Tenofovir
alafenamide
Frequency of testing
Full Blood Count
Liver Function
Test
Renal Profile
Thyroid Function
Test
HBeAg
HBV DNA
HBsAg
Others
2, 4, 12,
24, 36 and
48 weeks1
Every
12 weeks
-
4 weeks after starting and then every 24 weeks
4 weeks after starting and then every 12 weeks1
during first year and subsequently every 24 weeks4
12 and 24
weeks
of therapy and
then every
12 - 24
weeks3
Ideally once a year, preferably after HBeAg seroconversion
Phosphate
level every
12 weeks3
-
-
-
-
24 - 48
weeks3, 5
24 - 48
weeks3, 5
24 - 48
weeks3, 5
24 - 48
weeks3, 5
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
3. Sarin SK, Kumar M, Lau GK, et al. Asian-Pacific clinical practice guidelines on the
management of hepatitis B: a 2015 update. Hepatol Int. 2016;10(1):1-98.
4. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-398.
5. World Health Organization. Guidelines on Hepatitis B and C Testing. Geneva:
WHO; 2017
For CHB patients with HBeAg-negative status taking 3TC for ≥5 years,
it is recommended to monitor HBV DNA levels every 12 weeks.65
For patients who are decompensated, it is recommended to monitor
FBC, LFT, RP, coagulation profile, HBsAg, HBeAg and HBV DNA
level before and during treatment at a more frequent basis to assess
treatment response and adverse reactions. Additional phosphate
monitoring is needed for those on TDF. When the person is no longer
decompensated, the recommended frequency of testing would be as
per Table 10.65
7.2 Complications
Liver cirrhosis and HCC are the main complications of CHB. Liver
cirrhosis causes portal hypertension which can lead to ascites,
varices and hepatic encephalopathy. Furthermore, liver cirrhosis will
significantly increase the risk of HCC development.
In a cohort study on cirrhosis-related complications in CHB, 5.3% of the
patients developed at least one complication i.e.:66, level II-2
• ascites
• spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
• oesophageal varices
• hepatic encephalopathy
• hepatoma
Factors that increased the risk of complications were:
• older age
• ALT at entry 1 - 2x ULN and at follow-up 1 - 2x ULN
• low albumin
• peak alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) >100 ng/ml during or after exacerbation
Among patients with complications, 29% of them had HBV DNA level of
<200 copies/ml. There was no significant difference in cumulative risk
of liver-related complications between HBeAg-positive and negative
patients.
Patients with liver stiffness by TE (20 - 25 kPa) alone or combined with
platelets and spleen size, or imaging showing collateral circulation
are at risk of having endoscopic signs of portal hypertension, should
undergo screening esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Patients with a liver
stiffness <20 kPa and platelet count of >150,000 109/L have a very low
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
risk of having varices requiring treatment and can avoid the screening
endoscopy. These patients can be followed-up with yearly TE and
platelet count.67, level III
Risk Estimation for Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Chronic Hepatitis B
(REACH-B) study developed and validated a predictive score for the
risk of development of HCC in 3,584 non-cirrhotic chronic HBV patients
and validated it in a cohort with 1,050 patients with chronic HBV. The
17-point risk score was composed of five predictors of HCC which
were male sex, age, serum ALT level, HBeAg status and serum HBV
DNA level. The risk score could precisely estimate the risk of HCC
development at three, five and ten years of follow-up.68, level II-2
Regular surveillance of CHB patients with US and AFP analysis every
six months are recommended and show a low HCC detection failure
rate (0.8% per person or 0.1% per test). Significant predictors of HCC
detection failure are liver cirrhosis, AFP level >9 ng/ml and diabetes
mellitus.69, level II-2
Surveillance for HCC with US ± AFP every six months should be done
in the following group of HBsAg-positive patients with:5, level III; 70
• liver cirrhosis
• high-risk for HCC (men over 40 years and women over 50 years of
age)
• first-degree family member with a history of HCC
• hepatitis D virus
In a diagnostic study, magnetic resonance imaging had better accuracy
compared with computed tomography with higher sensitivity (78.82%
vs 62.35%) and specificity (78.46% vs 73.85%) in the diagnosis of
small HCC among CHB patients.71, level III
Recommendation 12
• Surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with ultrasound and
alpha-fetoprotein every six months should be done in the following
group of hepatitis B surface antigen-positive patients with:
 liver cirrhosis
 high-risk for HCC (men over 40 years and women over 50 years of
age)
 first-degree family member with a history of HCC
7.3 Treatment Discontinuation
Hepatitis B patients who are receiving antiviral treatment routinely
continue their treatment indefinitely to ensure sustained viral
suppression and improve clinical outcomes. However, prolonged
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
antiviral treatment raises concerns about increased treatment cost and,
risks of treatment non-adherence and AEs e.g. renal impairment, bone
loss and virological resistance. In recent years, many studies have
shown that antiviral treatment discontinuation may lead to a functional
cure but contradicting results are seen in the following recent evidence.
In an open-label RCT, NA discontinuation before HBsAg loss was
shown to have limited benefits, especially for pre-treatment HBeAgpositive patients. HBV DNA <2000 IU/ml at week 48 was observed in
27% NA discontinuation group vs 95% continuation group (p<0.005).
Similarly, sustained disease remission was observed in 29% NA
discontinuation group vs 82% continuation group. In NA discontinuation
group, 33% had a virological or biochemical relapse and 38% required
re-treatment. Re-treatment was higher in pre-treatment HBeAg-positive
than HBeAg-negative (61% vs 22%; p=0.01). HBeAg-positive at start of
treatment was the only independent predictor of relapse (OR=7.4, 95%
CI 1.3 to 42.6).72, level I
A systematic review showed that cessation of long-term NAs therapy
before HBsAg seroclearance in Asian patients with CHB was a feasible
alternative to indefinite treatment. At ≥12 months off-therapy regardless
of HBeAg status, the virological and clinical relapse rate was lower
when HBsAg <100 IU/ml at the end of treatment (EoT) compared
with HBsAg >100 IU/ml (9.1% - 19.2% vs 31.4% - 86.8% and 15.4% -
29.4% vs 48.1% - 63.6% respectively). For HBsAg loss at ≥39 months
off-therapy in HBeAg-negative patients, a higher rate was found with
HBsAg <100 IU/ml at EoT compared with HBsAg >100 IU/ml (21.1% -
58.8% vs 3.3% - 7.4%).73, level II-2
In a cohort study, TDF cessation group had higher HBV relapse rates
and earlier median time of relapse (p<0.001) than ETV cessation group
in non-cirrhotic patients regardless of HBeAg status. The TDF group
also had significantly higher cumulative virological and clinical relapse
rates at each follow-up interval irrespective of HBeAg status. TDF
cessation was an independent factor of virological (HR=2.04, 95% CI
1.49 to 2.80) and clinical relapse (HR=1.72, 95% CI 1.22 to 2.43) in
patients with total bilirubin <2 mg/dL. There was no difference in HBsAg
loss for both TDF and ETV cessation groups after 24- to 36-month
follow-up. TDF cessation group had a higher rate of re-treatment than
the ETV cessation group in HBeAg-positive patients (p=0.001). Overall,
TDF cessation showed sooner and more severe HBV relapse than after
ETV cessation.74, level II-2
A multicentre cohort that looked into association between serum level
of HBsAg at end of ETV therapy and risk of relapse in HBeAg-negative
patients showed no clinical hepatitis relapse in those with EoT HBsAg
<10 IU/ml but 29.4% relapses occurred in those with HBsAg 10 - 100
IU/ml, 28.4% in those with HBsAg 100 - 1000 IU/ml and 49.7% in those
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
with HBsAg >1000 IU/ml. Virological relapse rates were 9.5%, 63.2%,
81.1% and 93.1% with HBsAg <10 IU/ml, 10 - 100 IU/ml,100 - 1000 IU/
ml and 1000 IU/ml respectively. All individuals with HBsAg <10 IU/ml
maintained clinical remission through follow-up.75, level II-2
Various international practice guidelines show that treatment may
be discontinued in selected CHB patients with close monitoring. A
review paper on treatment discontinuation based on the guidelines are
summarised in Table 11.76, level III
Table 11. Patients Selection Criteria for Treatment
Discontinuation
Adapted:
1. Kaewdech A, Sripongpun P. Challenges in the discontinuation of chronic hepatitis
B antiviral agents. World J Hepatol. 2021 Sep 27;13(9):1042-1057.
2. Kao JH, Jeng WJ, Ning Q et al. APASL guidance on stopping nucleos(t)ide
analogues in chronic hepatitis B patients. Hepatol Int. 2021 Aug;15(4):833-851.
In local setting, based on the above evidence, the CPG DG opines that
HBV antiviral treatment may be considered for discontinuation when
HBsAg loss occurs and is sustained for at least one-year duration.
Monitoring with HBV DNA and LFT should be more frequent once
treatment is discontinued.
Recommendation 13
• In cirrhotic patients, hepatitis B antiviral treatment should be
continued indefinitely.
• In non-cirrhotic patients, hepatitis B antiviral treatment may be
discontinued when the optimal endpoint of hepatitis B surface
antigen loss consolidated over 12 months is achieved.
HBeAg-positive
HBeAg-negative
Guidelines
HBeAg
seroconversion
(HBeAg-
negative and anti-HBe-positive for at
least two consecutive measurements
at
least
six
months
apart)
+
undetectable
HBV
DNA
(two
consecutive measurements at least
six
months
apart)
+
treatment
duration of at least three years. Not
recommended in cirrhosis.
Undetectable
HBV
DNA
(two
consecutive measurements at least
six
months
apart)
+
treatment
duration of at least three years. Not
recommended in cirrhosis.
HBeAg
seroconversion
+
undetectable HBV DNA + normal ALT
for ≥12 months. Not recommended in
cirrhosis.
HBsAg clearance. Not recommended
in cirrhosis.
HBeAg
seroconversion
+
undetectable HBV DNA for ≥12
months.
Not
recommended
in
cirrhosis.
HBsAg
clearance.
Or
selected
non-cirrhotic with undetectable HBV
DNA ≥3 years. Not recommended in
cirrhosis.
APASL
Guidance,
2021
AASLD, 2018
EASL, 2017
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
7.4 Treatment Options for Virological Failure
In circumstances where patients with hepatitis B show inadequate
treatment response in terms of virological, biochemical or serological
failure to antiviral treatment, the patient’s compliance towards antiviral
treatment and/or possible viral resistance emergence should be
investigated. Rescue treatment needs to be carefully selected based
on the pre-existing choice of antiviral treatment, type of viral resistance
and patient’s underlying co-morbidities.
i.
Lamivudine-resistance
In an RCT, TDF monotherapy was effective and well tolerated in
3TC-resistance CHB patients compared with baseline for up to 240
weeks. There was no significant difference between TDF monotherapy
and combination therapy of emtricitabine/tenofovir (FTC/TDF) in terms
of:77, level I
• virological response (HBV DNA <69 IU/ml)
• biochemical response (rates of normal ALT and normalised ALT)
• serological response (HBeAg loss and seroconversion)
• resistance surveillance - no development of resistance
• safety
 overall incidence of adverse events was similar
 overall renal events were mild and infrequent (8.6%)
 overall mean change in bone mineral density was 0.98% and
2.54% at the spine and hip respectively
In another multicentre non-inferiority trial, stable switching to TDF
monotherapy yielded non-inferior results at 96 weeks compared with
3TC+adefovir (ADV) combination therapy in CHB patients with 3TCresistant and undetectable HBV DNA.78, level I
• Viral reactivation - 6.8% 3TC+ADV vs 4.5% TDF by using ITT
analysis (percentage difference of -2.3%, 95% CI -9.84 to 5.24)
• No significant differences in serological (HBsAg seroconversion,
HBeAg loss and HBeAg seroconversion) and biochemical responses
(ALT, serum bilirubin, albumin, Cr and INR)
• Safety -
 eGFR at week 96 significantly decreased in the TDF group (87.93
vs 84.47 ml/min/1.73 m2, p=0.008) and a higher percentage in
those with cirrhosis (85.22 vs 79.83 ml/min/1.73 m2; p=0.000)
 no difference in serious adverse reactions (SAR)
 no difference in number of HCC cases
ii.
Entecavir-resistance
In a retrospective cohort study, four rescue therapies (TDF, 0.5 mg
ETV+ADV, 1 mg ETV, 0.5 mg ETV+TDF) were compared in patients
with ETV-resistance mutation:79, level II-2
• Virological response -
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
 reduction in serum HBV DNA in all four groups (p=0.011)
 undetectable HBV DNA rate at week 48 was highest in 0.5 mg
ETV+TDF (78.57%), followed by TDF (76.19%), 0.5 mg ETV+ADV
(63.16%) and 1 mg ETV (18.18%)
• Biochemical and serological response -
 higher percentages of ALT normalisation from baseline to week
48 were detected in TDF, ETV+TDF and ETV+ADV groups
compared with 1 mg ETV group (p=0.039)
 no difference in HBeAg seroclearance and seroconversion
 none of the treated patients achieved HBsAg loss or seroconversion
• Safety - no SAR and deterioration of renal function
iii.
Multidrug-resistance
In a retrospective cohort study, rescue therapy with ETV+TDF
combination was safe and effective in patients with multidrug-resistant
(MDR) HBV strains (e.g. 3TC/ETV-R, 3TC/ADV-R, and 3TC/ETV/
ADV-R):80, level II-2
• Virological response -
 79.6% had complete virologic suppression in all groups
 median time of 4.5 months to reach undetectable HBV DNA (95%
CI 3 to 6)
• Biochemical response
 65.5% achieved biochemical response
 lower baseline HBV DNA level was independently associated
with complete virological suppression (HR=0.565, 95% CI 0.461
to 0.692)
• Safety - no renal dysfunction
A recent RCT showed that TAF was non-inferior to TDF in HBV DNA
suppression (<60 IU/ml) among CHB patients with drug resistance
to 3TC, ETV and/or ADV at week 48. Treatment with TAF was also
associated with significant improvement in the renal and bone safety
profiles.25, level I
The management of treatment failure should be based on crossresistance data as shown in Table 12.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Table 12. Cross-Resistance Data for The Most Frequent
Nucleos(t)ide Analogues-Resistant Hepatitis B Virus Variants
*In vitro data for tenofovir, in vivo data for TDF, no clinical data for TAF
The amino acid substitution profiles are shown in the left column and the level
of susceptibility is given for each drug: S (sensitive), I (intermediate/reduced
susceptibility), R (resistant) 3TC - lamivudine; LdT - telbivudine; ETV - entecavir; ADV
- adefovir; TDF - tenofovir disoproxil fumarate; TAF - tenofovir alafenamide
Source: European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-398.
Recommended rescue treatments for patients who developed antiviral
treatment resistance are summarised in Table 13.
Table 13. Management of Patients Who Developed Antiviral
Treatment Resistance
3TC - lamivudine; LdT - telbivudine; ETV - entecavir; ADV - adefovir; TDF - tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate; TAF - tenofovir alafenamide; MDR - multidrug-resistance
*Long-term safety of these combinations is unknown.
**Not seen clinically so far; do genotyping and phenotyping in an expert laboratory to
determine cross-resistance profile.
***Especially in patients with ADV-resistant mutations (rA181T/V and/or rN236T) and
high viral load, response to TDF can be protracted.
Source: European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-398.
HBV variant
Wild-type
M204V
M204I
L180M + M204V
A181T/V
N236T
L180M+M204V/
I±I169T±V173L±M250V
L180M+M204V/
I±T184G±S202I/G
3TC
S
R
R
R
I
S
R
R
Ldt
S
S
R
R
I
S
R
R
ETV
S
I
I
I
S
S
R
R
ADV
S
I
I
I
R
R
S
S
TDF/TAF*
S
S
S
S
I
I
S
S
Resistance Pattern
Recommended Rescue Strategies
3TC-resistance
LdT-resistance
ETV-resistance
ADV-resistance
TDF/TAF-resistance**
MDR
Switch to TDF or TAF
Switch to TDF or TAF
Switch to TDF or TAF
• If 3TC-naïve: switch to ETV or TDF or TAF
• If 3TC-resistance: switch to TDF or TAF
• If HBV DNA plateaus: add ETV*** or switch to ETV
• If 3TC-naïve: switch to ETV
• If 3TC-resistance: add ETV*
Switch to ETV plus TDF or TAF combination
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
8.
PREVENTION
8.1 Mother-to-Child Transmission
Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HBV is the commonest mode
of transmission worldwide; it may occur either in utero or perinatally.
MTCT of HBV is associated with a very high rate of chronicity.
In a meta-analysis on the effect of hepatitis B immunisation in newborn
infants of HBsAg-positive mothers, hepatitis B vaccination and/or HBIG
were effective in the prevention of MTCT:81, level I
• hepatitis B vaccination vs placebo or no intervention (RR=0.28, 95%
CI 0.20 to 0.40)
• HBIG alone vs placebo or no intervention (RR=0.50, 95% CI 0.41 to
0.60)
• vaccination (plasma-derived or recombinant) plus HBIG vs
vaccination alone (RR=0.54, 95% CI 0.41 to 0.73)
• plasma-derived vaccine (PDV) plus HBIG vs placebo or no
intervention (RR=0.08, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.17)
There were no differences in AEs between the infants in vaccination
and control groups. The quality of included RCTs was low to moderate.
In a meta-analysis on peripartum antiviral prophylaxis among HBeAgpositive CHB mothers, all three antivirals were more effective than
control in the prevention of MTCT:82, level I
• TDF (OR=0.16, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.25)
• 3TC (OR=0.17, 95% CI 0.13 to 0.22)
• LdT (OR=0.10, 95% CI 0.08 to 0.13)
There were no significant differences in effectiveness at different times
of antiviral prophylaxis initiation (i.e. <28 weeks, 28 weeks or >28
weeks) or maternal viral load at baseline. The quality of primary papers
was moderate to high.
In another meta-analysis, 3TC treatment was more effective than
comparator (placebo or no intervention or HBIG) in preventing MTCT
among HBeAg-positive mothers if:83, level I
• at baseline maternal HBV DNA of 106 - 108 copies/ml, the risk of
HBsAg-positive in infants reduced by 70% (RR=0.30, 95% CI 0.15
to 0.57)
• after treatment maternal HBV DNA <106 copies/ml, the risk of
HBsAg-positive in infants was reduced by 67% (RR=0.33, 95% CI
0.21 to 0.53)
• initiation of treatment at week 28 of gestation compared with week
32 (RR=0.34, 95% CI 0.22 to 0.52)
There were no differences in the AEs reported among mothers and
only one related-to-drug with symptoms of jaundice in a newborn. The
quality of the primary papers was low to moderate.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
In a cohort study, antiviral prophylaxis with TAF and TDF reduced the
MTCT rate to 0% in combination with standard immunoprophylaxis.
Infants’ blood at seven months showed:43, level II-2
• HBsAg: not detected in both groups
• anti-HBs: TAF (98.3%) vs TDF (99.1%)
In the third meta-analysis on HBeAg-positive pregnant women with high
viral load, additional antiviral treatment (3TC, LdT or TDF) in second
or third trimester of pregnancy was more effective than HBIG alone in
preventing MTCT at 6 - 12 months post-hepatitis vaccination given at
birth:84, level I
• RR of infant HBsAg seropositivity=0.3, 95% CI 0.2 to 0.4
• RR of infant HBV DNA positivity=0.3, 95% CI 0.2 to 0.5
• no significant difference in reduction in infant HBsAg seropositivity
between antivirals
There were no safety issues for maternal (postpartum haemorrhage,
caesarean section and elevated CK) or foetal outcomes (congenital
malformation, prematurity and Apgar scores) reported. The quality of
primary papers was however low.
In a multicentre non-randomised study, initiation of TDF at 30 - 32
weeks of pregnancy until one-month post-partum in high viral load
HBeAg-positive pregnant women was more effective than standard
care in decreasing infant HBsAg positivity at six months (p=0.0481). In
terms of safety, TDF had less incidence of:85, level II-1
• maternal ALT level >5 x ULN at two months post-partum (p=0.0135)
• maternal ALT level >2 x ULN for ≥3 months (p=0.0455)
There were no significant differences in maternal Cr and CK levels,
rates of congenital anomaly, premature birth and growth parameters of
infants in both TDF with standard of care and standard of care alone.
In a multicentre, open-label, RCT, MTCT rate at post-partum week 28
for those who received TDF was lower than those without for HBeAgpositive mothers with an HBV DNA level of >200,000 IU/ml during
the third trimester [ITT analysis (p=0.007)]. The maternal and infant
safety profiles were similar between TDF and control groups. After the
discontinuation of TDF (four weeks post-partum), ALT elevations above
the normal range occurred more frequently in mothers in TDF group
than in those in control group (p=0.03).86, level I
In a meta-analysis of 66 studies, the optimal threshold of maternal HBV
DNA causing MTCT was ≥5.30 log10 IU/ml (≥200,000 IU/ml). HBeAg
was an accurate marker to identify women with HBV DNA levels above
this threshold with a pooled sensitivity of 88.25% (95% CI 83.91 to
91.53). In predicting MTCT, the pooled sensitivity of HBeAg testing was
99.5% (95% CI 91.7 to 100). Thus, in healthcare facilities where HBV
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
DNA assays were unavailable, HBeAg can be used as an alternative to
assess eligibility for antiviral prophylaxis.87, level III
According to Malaysian National Immunisation Programme (NIP), first
dose hepatitis B vaccination should be given to all newborns within
24 hours of life.88 In addition, HBIG is given to all newborns of CHB
mothers within 12 hours of life.4
A summary of prophylaxis and treatment of mother-to-child HBV
transmission can be seen in Appendix 5.
Recommendation 14
• First dose hepatitis B vaccination should be given to all newborns within
24 hours of life.
• Hepatitis B immunoglobulin should be given to all newborns of chronic
hepatitis B mothers within 12 hours of life.
• Antiviral prophylaxis should be initiated at 28 - 32 weeks of gestation in
hepatitis B e antigen-positive mothers or viral load >200,000 IU/ml.
 Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is the preferred antiviral.
8.2 Post-Exposure Prophylaxis
This subchapter on post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) is adapted
from guidelines on Occupational Exposures to HIV, HBV, HCV and
Recommendations for PEP89, level III and CDC Guidance for Evaluating
Health-Care Personnel for HBV Protection and for Administering
Post Exposure Management.90, level III PEP management of healthcare
provider (HCP) with possible exposure to HBV depends on the immune
status of the HCP and HBsAg status of the source patient. Serological
markers, i.e. baseline anti-HBs and HBsAg, are important in deciding
the requirement for PEP.
The PEP management is as follows:
i.
Evidence of prior HBV infection
No PEP management is required because the HCP is protected
against HBV infection.
ii. Vaccine responders (anti-HBs level ≥10 mIU/ml)
No PEP management is required if the HCP has received and
adequately responded to the three-dose hepatitis B vaccine series.
iii. Vaccine non-responders (anti-HBs level <10 mIU/ml)
Non-responder is defined as a person who failed to respond after
completing two vaccination series. The source patient should be
tested for HBsAg. If the HBsAg is positive or if it cannot be obtained,
the HCP should receive two doses of HBIG. The first dose should be
administered as soon as possible within seven days after the exposure,
and the second dose should be administered one month later.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
iv. Unknown vaccine response
The source patient should be tested for HBsAg and the HCP should be
tested for anti-HBs. These tests should be done as soon as possible
after the exposure and done simultaneously:
• if the anti-HBs titer is ≥10 mIU/ml, no PEP management is needed
• if the anti-HBs titer is <10 mIU/ml, PEP management depends upon
the HBsAg status of the source patient:
 if the source patient is HBsAg-positive or cannot be obtained -
 the HCP should receive one dose of HBIG and a dose of hepatitis
B vaccine given simultaneously but at different injection sites,
the HCP should then complete two more doses of hepatitis B
vaccine.
 to determine immunity, the HCP should have anti-HBs testing
performed one to two months after the last dose of the hepatitis B
vaccine series
 if the source patient is HBsAg-negative -
 the HCP should receive one dose of the hepatitis B vaccine
followed by repeat anti-HBs testing one to two months later; if the
anti-HBs remain <10 mIU/ml, then the HCP should complete the
vaccine series followed by anti-HBs testing one to two months
after the last dose
v. Follow-up testing after exposure
If the source patient is HBsAg-positive or unknown status, the HCP
should have follow-up testing with anti-HBc and HBsAg six months
after the exposure to assess for HBV transmission.
Refer to Appendix 7 on Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Workflow.
Recommendation 15
• If the hepatitis B virus status of the healthcare provider (HCP) is unknown,
baseline antibody to hepatitis B surface protein and hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg) status should be obtained before determining postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) management to the HCP.
• If the HBsAg status of a source patient is unknown, the HCP should
have PEP management as if the source is HBsAg-positive.
8.3 Healthcare Workers
Occupational exposure of HBV infection to HCW can occur through
accidental sharp injury, mucocutaneous contact or blood contact with
non-intact skin.
In a Cochrane systematic review, hepatitis B vaccination in HCW
showed:91, level I
• PDV was effective in reducing hepatitis B events (RR=0.51, 95% CI
0.35 to 0.71)
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
• recombinant vaccine (RV) was as effective as PDV in terms of
protective anti-HBs level and AEs
In terms of protective anti-HBs level, vaccine administration:
• intramuscular (IM) injection was more effective than intradermal
injection for both PDV and RV [RR=2.33 (95% CI 1.47 to 3.68) and
1.41 (95% CI 1.13 to 1.76) respectively]
• IM deltoid was more effective than IM gluteal injection (RR=1.13,
95% CI 2.91 to 153.32)
• standard vaccination schedule (0, 1 and 6 months) was more effective
than rapid vaccination schedule (0, 1 and 2 months) (RR=3.45, 95%
CI 1.47 to 8.07)
• in non-responder, there was no difference in protective anti-HBs
level between low-dose and high-dose vaccines
8.4 Contact Tracing
At present, limited data exists on the safe and effective strategies
for contact tracing for hepatitis B. Household and/or sexually closed
contacts should be traced and tested. They may either be referred for
follow-up if tested hepatitis B positive or vaccinated if tested negative
but not immunised before for hepatitis B.
A prospective cohort study showed that nurse-delivered home Dry
Blood Spot service was more effective than conventional primary care
follow-up (control) in household contact tracing of hepatitis B-infected
pregnant women in terms of:92, level II-2
• more identified contacts (100% vs 55.7%; p<0.001)
• improved in HBV screening (96.6% vs 39.4%; p<0.001)
• increased in vaccination rate of non-infected household closed
contact (74.1% vs 36.4%; p<0.001)
A study showed that nurse-led enhanced management improved
contact tracing of CHB patients.93, level II-3
• identification: 86% (pre-intervention) vs 99.7% (post-intervention)
• testing: 34% (pre-intervention) vs 94% (post-intervention)
• vaccination rate of at least three doses: 77% (pre-intervention) vs
93% (post-intervention)
This evidence showed that paramedics can be trained for dedicated
tasks to improve current contact tracing policies, e.g. home visits and
household contact tracing for HBV-infected post-partum women. A
similar strategy can be expanded to all HBV-infected patients later once
the programme is more established.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
Recommendation 16
• Household contacts of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infected patients should
be identified and screened.
8.5 Vaccination
Hepatitis B vaccination is advised to all adults who are high-risk,
immunocompromised or seeking protection from HBV infection. The
latest adult immunisation guidelines can be used as a reference.
8.6 Counselling
Medical providers should counsel patients regarding:5, level III
• risk for HBV transmission
• need for evaluation of family members, sexual contacts and
household members for HBV
• need for barrier protection when sexual partners have not been fully
vaccinated
• not sharing of toothbrushes or razors
• covering open cuts and scratches
• cleaning any blood spills with bleach solution
In contrast, the sharing of food and utensils, as well as close physical
contact, including kissing, is not contraindicated.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
9.
REFERRAL
There is no retrievable evidence on referral criteria for patients with
HBV. Based on the consensus of CPG DG, patients with the following
features should be referred to centres with Gastroenterologists and
Hepatologists for further management:
• decompensated cirrhosis
• transplant candidates
• hepatitis B resistance
• pregnancy with indication for antiviral treatment
• immunosuppression
• hepatitis B flare
• discontinuation of antiviral treatment
10. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Hepatitis B is an infectious disease and the infected patients may need
life-long treatment. It is important to implement this CPG as guidance
in providing quality healthcare services based on the best and latest
evidence and expertise suited for local scenarios.
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing the CPG are:
i. availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and
softcopies)
ii. conferences and updates on the management of hepatitis B
which may involve professional societies e.g. Malaysian Society
of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Malaysian Association of
HIV Medicine, Obstetrical & Gynaecological Society of Malaysia,
Malaysian Family Medicine Specialist Association, Malaysian
Pharmaceutical Society, etc.
iii. hepatitis B programmes by MoH e.g. Elimination of Mother-to-Child
Transmission (EMTCT) programme
iv. public awareness hepatitis campaign which may involve other
government agencies and non-governmental organisations e.g.
World Hepatitis Day
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
i. limited awareness and knowledge in the management of hepatitis B
among healthcare providers
ii. different levels of hepatitis B care due to expertise, drugs, laboratory
and radiology facilities
iii. challenges in managing hepatitis B patients with/in:
• renal failure
• immunosuppression
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
• on-going risk factors
• antiviral resistance
iv. lack of surveillance programmes which includes a national registry,
etc.
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitments to:
i. ensure widespread distribution of CPG to healthcare providers via
printed copies and online accessibility
ii. reinforce training of healthcare providers via regular seminars and
workshops
iii. involve multidisciplinary teams at all levels of healthcare
iv. improve the diagnostic and therapeutic facilities
v. train more experts in the field of hepatitis B
vi. strengthen the hepatitis B registry
The Regional Framework for Triple EMTCT of HIV, HBV and Syphilis in
Asia and the Pacific 2018-30 was endorsed by the Regional Committee
of WHO Western Pacific in October 2017. It involves an integrated and
coordinated approach to achieve elimination in an efficient, coordinated
and sustainable manner. Malaysia has been certified as the first country
in the region in EMTCT of HIV and syphilis. This is possible due to
universal screening among pregnant mothers.
The CPG recommends pregnant mothers in a high-risk group be
screened for hepatitis B. It also addresses the treatment of CHB mothers
to prevent MTCT. Thus, in order to achieve triple elimination in EMTCT,
it is important to screen universally pregnant mothers and treat them
accordingly as recommended in the CPG. This would cause resource
implications in the health service but it has to be strongly considered to
achieve the aim of EMTCT by 2030.
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following are proposed
as clinical audit indicators for quality management:
*Target ≥70%
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of the
CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module (Available
at: https://www.moh.gov.my/index.php/pages/view/3962?mid=1570).
• Percentage of
pregnant mothers
being screened for
HBV within a year*
Total number of pregnant mothers
in the same year
Number of pregnant mothers being
screened within a year
=
x100%
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
References
1.
World Health Organization. Guidelines on Hepatitis B and C Testing. Geneva:
WHO; 2017.
2.
Krajden M, McNabb G, Petric M. The Laboratory Diagnosis of Hepatitis B Virus.
Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2005;16(2):65-72.
3.
Malaysia Ministry of Health. Health Facts 2021. Putrajaya: MoH; 2021.
4.
Krist AH, Davidson KW, Mangione CM et al. Screening for Hepatitis B Virus
Infection in Adolescents and Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2020;324(23):2415-22.
5.
Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ et al. Update on Prevention, Diagnosis, and
Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B: AASLD 2018 Hepatitis B Guidance. Clin Liver
Dis (Hoboken). 2018;12(1):33-4.
6.
Abara WE, Qaseem A, Schillie S et al. High Value Care Task Force of the
American College of Physicians and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Hepatitis B Vaccination, Screening, and Linkage to Care: Best
Practice Advice from the American College of Physicians and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med. 2017;167(11):794-804.
7.
Malaysia Ministry of Health. National Strategic Plan for Hepatitis B and C 2019 -
2023. Putrajaya: MoH; 2019.
8.
Malaysia Ministry of Health. Pilot Project for Introduction of EMTCT of Hepatitis
B Interventions in 4 States in Malaysia. 2019.
9.
Malaysia Ministry of Health. Case Definitions for Infectious Diseases in Malaysia.
Putrajaya: MoH; 2016.
10. Amini A, Varsaneux O, Kelly H et al. Diagnostic accuracy of tests to detect
hepatitis B surface antigen: a systematic review of the literature and metaanalysis. BMC Infect Dis. 2017;17(Suppl 1):698.
11. Coffin CS, Fung SK, Alvarez F et al. Management of Hepatitis B Virus Infection:
2018 Guidelines from the Canadian Association for the Study of Liver Disease
and Association of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Disease Canada. Can
Liver J. 2018;1(4):156-217.
12. Karra VK, Chowdhury SJ, Ruttala R et al. Clinical Significance of Quantitative
HBsAg Titres and its Correlation with HBV DNA Levels in the Natural History of
Hepatitis B Virus Infection. J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2016;6(3):209-15.
13. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice
Guidelines on The Management of Hepatitis B Virus Infection. J Hepatol.
2017;67(2):370-98.
14. Sarin SK, Kumar M, Lau GK et al. Asian-Pacific Clinical Practice Guidelines on
The Management of Hepatitis B: A 2015 Update. Hepatol Int. 2016;10(1):1-98.
15. Vallet-Pichard A, Mallet V, Nalpas B et al. FIB-4: An Inexpensive and Accurate
Marker of Fibrosis in HCV Infection. Comparison with Liver Biopsy and Fibro
Test. Hepatology. 2007;46(1):32-6.
16. Zhang GL, Zhao QY, Lin CS et al. Transient Elastography and Ultrasonography:
Optimal Evaluation of Liver Fibrosis and Cirrhosis in Patients with Chronic
Hepatitis B Concurrent with Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Biomed Res Int.
2019;2019:3951574.
17. Lefebvre T, Wartelle-Bladou C, Wong P et al. Prospective Comparison of
Transient, Point Shear Wave, and Magnetic Resonance Elastography for
Staging Liver Fibrosis. Eur Radiol. 2019;29(12):6477-88.
18. Kao JH, Hu TH, Jia J et al. East Asia Expert Opinion on Treatment Initiation for
Chronic Hepatitis B. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2020;52(10):1540-50.
19. Xia Y, Luo H, Liu JP et al. Phyllanthus Species for Chronic Hepatitis B Virus
Infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(4):CD008960.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
20. Xia Y, Luo H, Liu JP et al. Phyllanthus Species Versus Antiviral Drugs for Chronic
Hepatitis B Virus Infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013(4):CD009004.
21. Bjelakovic G, Gluud LL, Nikolova D et al. Antioxidant Supplements for Liver
Diseases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;3:CD007749.
22. Cai D, Pan C, Yu W et al. Comparison of The Long-Term Efficacy of Tenofovir
and Entecavir in Nucleos(T)Ide Analogue-Naïve HBeAg-Positive Patients
with Chronic Hepatitis B: A Large, Multicentre, Randomized Controlled Trials.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2019;98(1):e13983.
23. Buti M, Gane E, Seto WK et al. Tenofovir Alafenamide Versus Tenofovir Disoproxil
Fumarate for The Treatment of Patients with HBeAg-negative Chronic Hepatitis
B Virus Infection: A Randomised, Double-Blind, Phase 3, Non-Inferiority Trial.
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;1(3):196-206.
24. Kaneko S, Kurosaki M, Tamaki N et al. Tenofovir Alafenamide for Hepatitis B
Virus Infection Including Switching Therapy from Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;34(11):2004-10.
25. Byun KS, Choi J, Kim JH et al. Tenofovir Alafenamide for Drug-Resistant Hepatitis
B: A Randomized Trial for Switching from Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;20(2):427-37 e5.
26. Fonseca MA, Ling JZJ, Al-Siyabi O et al. The Efficacy of Hepatitis B Treatments
in Achieving HBsAg Seroclearance: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J
Viral Hepat. 2020;27(7):650-62.
27. Huang DQ, Lim SG. Hepatitis B: Who to treat? A critical review of international
guidelines. Liver Int. 2020;40 Suppl 1:5-14.
28. Mantzoukis K, Rodriguez-Peralvarez M, Buzzetti E et al. Pharmacological
Interventions for Acute Hepatitis B Infection: An Attempted Network MetaAnalysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;3(3):CD011645.
29. Jochum C, Maischack F, Anastasiou OE et al. Treatment of Fulminant Acute
Hepatitis B with Nucles(t)id Analogues Is Safe and Does Not Lead to Secondary
Chronification of Hepatitis B. Z Gastroenterol. 2016;54(12):1306-11.
30. Sarin SK, Kedarisetty CK, Abbas Z et al. Acute-on-Chronic Liver Failure:
Consensus Recommendations of The Asian Pacific Association for The Study of
The Liver (APASL) 2014. Hepatol Int. 2014;8(4):453-71.
31. Chang ML, Liaw YF. Hepatitis B Flares in Chronic Hepatitis B: Pathogenesis,
Natural Course, And Management. J Hepatol. 2014;61(6):1407-17.
32. Akhtar A, Khan AH, Sulaiman SA et al. HBV and HIV Co-infection: Prevalence
and Clinical Outcomes in Tertiary Care Hospital Malaysia. J Med Virol.
2016;88(3):455-60.
33. Chen M, Wong WW, Law MG et al. Hepatitis B and C Co-Infection in HIV Patients
from The TREAT Asia HIV Observational Database: Analysis of Risk Factors and
Survival. PLoS One. 2016;11(3): e0150512.
34. Chun HM, Roediger MP, Hullsiek KH et al. Hepatitis B Virus Coinfection Negatively
Impacts HIV Outcomes in HIV Seroconverters. J Infect Dis. 2012;205(2):185-93.
35. Thio CL, Smeaton L, Hollabaugh K et al. Comparison of HBV-active HAART
Regimens in an HIV-HBV Multinational Cohort: Outcomes Through 144 Weeks.
AIDS. 2015;29(10):1173-82.
36. Kouame GM, Boyd A, Moh R et al. Higher Mortality Despite Early Antiretroviral
Therapy in Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV)-
Coinfected Patients with High HBV Replication. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;66(1):112-20.
37. Malaysia Ministry of Health. Malaysian Consensus Guidelines on Antiretroviral
Therapy 2022. Selangor: MoH; 2022.
38. Luo A, Jiang X, Ren H. Lamivudine Plus Tenofovir Combination Therapy Versus
Lamivudine Monotherapy For HBV/HIV Coinfection: A Meta-Analysis. Virol J.
2018;15(1):139.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
39. Avihingsanon A, Lewin SR, Kerr S et al. Efficacy of Tenofovir Disoproxil
Fumarate/Emtricitabine Compared with Emtricitabine Alone in AntiretroviralNaive HIV-HBV Coinfection in Thailand. Antivir Ther. 2010;15(6):917-22.
40. Huang YS, Sun HY, Chang SY et al. Long-Term Virological and Serologic
Responses of Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection to Tenofovir Disoproxil
Fumarate-Containing Regimens in Patients with HIV and Hepatitis B Coinfection.
Hepatol Int. 2019;13(4):431-9.
41. Surial B, Beguelin C, Chave JP et al. Brief Report: Switching from TDF to TAF
in HIV/HBV-Coinfected Individuals with Renal Dysfunction-A Prospective Cohort
Study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2020;85(2):227-32.
42. Chiaramonte M, Stroffolini T, Vian A et al. Rate of Incidence of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma
in
Patients
with
Compensated
Viral
Cirrhosis.
Cancer.
1999;85(10):2132-7.
43. Zeng QL, Yu ZJ, Ji F et al. Tenofovir Alafenamide to Prevent Perinatal Hepatitis
B Transmission: A Multicenter, Prospective, Observational Study. Clin Infect Dis.
2021;73(9): e3324-e32.
44. Li W, Jia L, Zhao X et al. Efficacy and Safety of Tenofovir in Preventing MotherTo-Infant Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus: A Meta-Analysis Based On 6
Studies from China and 3 Studies from Other Countries. BMC Gastroenterol.
2018;18(1):121.
45. Zheng Y, Lu Y, Ye Q et al. Should Chronic Hepatitis B Mothers Breastfeed? A
Meta-Analysis. BMC Public Health. 2011 11:502.
46. Zhou M, Li L, Han L et al. Breast-Feeding is Not a Risk Factor of Mother-to-Child
Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus. Int J Gen Med. 2021; 14:1819-27.
47. Chen X, Chen J, Wen J et al. Breastfeeding is Not a Risk Factor for Mother-ToChild Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus. PLoS One. 2013;8(1): e55303.
48. Cholongitas E, Haidich AB, Apostolidou-Kiouti F et al. Hepatitis B Virus
Reactivation
in
HBsAg-negative,
Anti-Hbc-Positive
Patients
Receiving
Immunosuppressive Therapy: A Systematic Review. Ann Gastroenterol.
2018;31(4):480-90.
49. Evens AM, Jovanovic BD, Su YC et al. Rituximab-Associated Hepatitis B
Virus (HBV) Reactivation in Lymphoproliferative Diseases: Meta-Analysis and
Examination of FDA Safety Reports. Ann Oncol. 2011;22(5):1170-80.
50. Reddy KR, Beavers KL, Hammond SP et al. American Gastroenterological
Association Institute Guideline on The Prevention and Treatment of Hepatitis B
Virus Reactivation During Immunosuppressive Drug Therapy. Gastroenterology.
2015;148(1):215-9; quiz e16-7.
51. Wong GL, Chan HL, Tse YK et al. Chronic Kidney Disease Progression in
Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B on Tenofovir, Entecavir, or No Treatment.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2018 48(9):984-92.
52. Tsai MC, Chen CH, Tseng PL et al. Does Nucleos(t)ide Analogues Treatment
Affect Renal Function in Chronic Hepatitis B Patients Who Have Already
Decreased eGFR? A Longitudinal Study. PLoS One. 2016;11(3): e0149761.
53. Fabrizi F, Dixit V, Martin P. Meta-Analysis: Anti-Viral Therapy of Hepatitis B VirusAssociated Glomerulonephritis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2006;24(5):781-8.
54. Daude M, Rostaing L, Saune K et al. Tenofovir Therapy in Hepatitis B VirusPositive Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients. Transplantation. 2011;91(8):916-20.
55. Fung J, Cheung C, Chan SC et al. Entecavir Monotherapy Is Effective in
Suppressing Hepatitis B Virus After Liver Transplantation. Gastroenterology.
2011;141(4):1212-9.
56. Raimondo G, Locarnini S, Pollicino T et al. Update of The Statements on
Biology and Clinical Impact of Occult Hepatitis B Virus Infection. J Hepatol.
2019;71(2):397-408.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
57. Lledo JL, Fernandez C, Gutierrez ML et al. Management of Occult Hepatitis
B Virus Infection: An Update for The Clinician. World J Gastroenterol.
2011;17(12):1563-8.
58. Malaysia Medical Council. Guideline on Blood Borne Viral Infections. Kuala
Lumpur: MMC; 2020.
59. Hui CK, Leung N, Yuen ST et al. Natural History and Disease Progression in
Chinese Chronic Hepatitis B Patients in Immune-Tolerant Phase. Hepatology.
2007;46(2):395-401.
60. Hsu YS, Chien RN, Yeh CT et al. Long-Term Outcome After Spontaneous
HBeAg Seroconversion in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B. Hepatology.
2002;35(6):1522-7.
61. Shim JJ, Kim JW, Oh CH et al. Serum Alanine Aminotransferase Level and LiverRelated Mortality in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B: A Large National Cohort
Study. Liver Int. 2018;38(10):1751-9.
62. Chen CJ, Iloeje UH, Yang HI. Long-Term Outcomes in Hepatitis B: The REVEALHBV Study. Clin Liver Dis. 2007;11(4):797-816, viii.
63. Lin CL, Liu CH, Wang CC et al. Serum Biomarkers Predictive of Significant Fibrosis
and Cirrhosis in Chronic Hepatitis B. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2015;49(8):705-13.
64. World Health Organization. Guidelines for The Prevention, Care and Treatment
of Persons with Chronic Hepatitis B Infection. Geneva: WHO; 2015.
65. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hepatitis B (Chronic):
Diagnosis and Management. London: NICE; 2013.
66. Yuen MF, Yuan HJ, Wong DK et al. Prognostic Determinants for Chronic Hepatitis
B in Asians: Therapeutic Implications. Gut. 2005;54(11):1610-4.
67. de Franchis R. Expanding Consensus in Portal Hypertension: Report of The
Baveno VI Consensus Workshop: Stratifying Risk and Individualizing Care for
Portal Hypertension. J Hepatol. 2015;63(3):743-52.
68. Yang HI, Yuen MF, Chan HL et al. Risk Estimation for Hepatocellular Carcinoma
in Chronic Hepatitis B (REACH-B): Development and Validation of a Predictive
Score. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(6):568-74.
69. Chon YE, Jung KS, Kim MJ et al. Predictors of Failure to Detect Early
Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B Who Received
Regular Surveillance. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2018;47(8):1201-12.
70. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines:
Management of Hepatocellular Carcinoma. J Hepatol. 2018;69(1):182-236.
71. Wang G, Zhu S, Li X. Comparison of Values of CT and MRI Imaging in The
Diagnosis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Analysis of Prognostic Factors.
Oncol Lett. 2019;17(1):1184-8.
72. Liem KS, Fung S, Wong DK et al. Limited Sustained Response After Stopping
Nucleos(t)ide Analogues in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B: Results from a
Randomised Controlled Trial (Toronto STOP Study). Gut. 2019;68(12):2206-13.
73. Liu J, Li T, Zhang L, et al. The Role of Hepatitis B Surface Antigen in Nucleos(t)
ide Analogues Cessation Among Asian Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B: A
Systematic Review. Hepatology. 2019;70(3):1045-55.
74. Kuo MT, Hu TH, Hung CH et al. Hepatitis B Virus Relapse Rates in Chronic
Hepatitis B Patients Who Discontinue Either Entecavir or Tenofovir. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2019; 49:218-28.
75. Hsu YC, Mo LR, Chang CY et al. Association Between Serum Level of Hepatitis
B Surface Antigen at End of Entecavir Therapy and Risk of Relapse in E AntigenNegative Patients. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;14(10):1490-8.
76. Kaewdech A, Sripongpun P. Challenges in The Discontinuation of Chronic
Hepatitis B Antiviral Agents. World J Hepatol. 2021;13(9):1042-57.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
77. Fung S, Kwan P, Fabri M et al. Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate (TDF) vs.
Emtricitabine (FTC)/TDF in Lamivudine Resistant Hepatitis B: a 5-Year
Randomised Study. J Hepatol. 2017;66(1):11-8.
78. Lee HJ, Kim SJ, Kweon YO et al. Evaluating the Efficacy of Switching from
Lamivudine Plus Adefovir to Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate Monotherapy in
Lamivudine-Resistant Stable Hepatitis B Patients. PLoS One. 2018;13(1):
e0190581.
79. Yuan G, Hu C, Zhou Y et al. A Different Inhibitor Is Required for Overcoming
Entecavir Resistance: A Comparison of Four Rescue Therapies in A Retrospective
Study. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2017;83(10):2259-65.
80. Lee YB, Lee JH, Lee DH et al. Efficacy of Entecavir-Tenofovir Combination
Therapy for Chronic Hepatitis B Patients with Multidrug-Resistant Strains.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(11):6710-6.
81. Lee C, Gong Y, Brok J et al. Effect of Hepatitis B Immunisation in Newborn
Infants of Mothers Positive for Hepatitis B Surface Antigen: Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis. BMJ. 2006;332(7537):328-36.
82. Funk AL, Lu Y, Yoshida K et al. Efficacy and Safety of Antiviral Prophylaxis
During Pregnancy to Prevent Mother-To-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2021;21(1):70-84.
83. Han L, Zhang HW, Xie JX et al. A Meta-Analysis of Lamivudine for Interruption
of Mother-To-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus. World J Gastroenterol.
2011;17(38):4321-33.
84. Brown RS Jr, McMahon BJ, Lok AS et al. Antiviral Therapy in Chronic Hepatitis
B Viral Infection During Pregnancy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
Hepatology. 2016;63(1):319-33.
85. Chen HL, Lee CN, Chang CH et al. Efficacy of Maternal Tenofovir Disoproxil
Fumarate in Interrupting Mother-To-Infant Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus.
Hepatology. 2015;62(2):375-86.
86. Pan CQ, Duan Z, Dai E et al. Tenofovir to Prevent Hepatitis B Transmission in
Mothers with High Viral Load. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(24):2324-34.
87. Boucheron P, Lu Y, Yoshida K et al. Accuracy of HBeAg to Identify Pregnant
Women at Risk of Transmitting Hepatitis B Virus to Their Neonates: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2021;21(1):85-96.
88. Malaysian Paediatric Association. The National Immunisation Programme.
Kuala Lumpur: MPA; 2021.
89. Malaysia Ministry of Health. Guidelines on Occupational Exposures. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2007.
90. Schillie S, Murphy TV, Sawyer M et al. CDC Guidance for Evaluating Health-care
Personnel for Hepatitis B Virus Protection and for Administering Post-exposure
Management. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2013;62(RR-10):1-19.
91. Chen W, Gluud C. Vaccines for Preventing Hepatitis B in Health-care Workers.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005(4):CD000100.
92. Keel P, Edwards G, Flood J et al. Assessing the Impact of a Nurse-Delivered
Home Dried Blood Spot Service on Uptake of Testing for Household Contacts
of Hepatitis B-Infected Pregnant Women Across Two London Trusts. Epidemiol
Infect. 2016;144(10):2087-97.
93. Beebeejaun K, Amin-Chowdhury Z, Letley L et al. Impact of A Nurse-Led
Enhanced Monitoring, Management and Contact Tracing Intervention for
Chronic Hepatitis B in England, 2015-2017. J Viral Hepat. 2021;28(1):72-9.
94. Syaqirah A, Izzuna MMG. Strategies to Eliminate Mother to Child Transmission
of Hepatitis B. Technology Review. Ministry of Health Malaysia: Malaysian
Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS); 2020. 67 p.
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective pharmacological
treatments for hepatitis B infection?
1.
HEPATITIS B/
2.
hepatitis b.tw.
3.
hepatitis b virus infection.tw.
4.
1 or 2 or 3
5.
DRUG THERAPY/
6.
chemotherap*.tw.
7.
(drug adj1 therap*).tw.
8.
pharmacotherap*.tw.
9.
THERAPEUTICS/
10. therap*.tw.
11. treatment*.tw.
12. PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATIONS/
13. drug*.tw.
14. pharmaceutical*.tw.
15. (pharmaceutic* adj1 (preparation* or product*)).tw.
16. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS/
17. (antiviral adj1 (agent* or drug*)).tw.
18. antiviral*.tw.
19. entecavir.tw.
20. baraclude.tw.
21. TENOFOVIR/
22. (tenofovir adj2 disoproxil fumarate).tw.
23. (tenofovir adj1 disoproxil).tw.
24. tenofovir.tw.
25. viread.tw.
26. LAMIVUDINE/
27. lamivudine.tw.
28. TELBIVUDINE/
29. telbivudin*.tw.
30. adefovir.tw.
31. tenofovir alafenamide.tw.
32. INTERFERONS/
33. interferon*.tw.
34. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 or 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17
or 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27 or 28 or
29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33
35. 4 and 34
36. limit 35 to (english language and humans and “adult (19 to 44
years)” and last 10 years)
37. limit 36 to randomized controlled trial (396)
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the risk factors for hepatitis B infection?
2.
What are the accurate screening tools for diagnosing hepatitis B
infection?
3.
What are the accurate serological markers for hepatitis B patients?
4.
What are the safe and effective tools for pre-treatment assessment
in patients with hepatitis B infection?
5.
What are the safe and effective imaging modalities for pretreatment assessment in patients with hepatitis B infection?
6.
What is the safe and effective non-pharmacological management
of hepatitis B infection? (education)
7.
What are the safe and effective pharmacological treatments for
hepatitis B infection?
8.
When is the appropriate time to initiate treatment in patients with
hepatitis B infection?
9.
What are the safe and effective treatments in special populations
with hepatitis b?
• acute hepatitis B
• acute liver failure/chronic liver failure
• hepatitis B flare
• co-infection with HIV
• co-infection with HCV
• pregnancy and lactation
• immunosuppression or cytotoxic therapy
• renal diseases
• solid organ transplant
• occult hepatitis B (anti-Hep B core positive)
• healthcare workers
10. What are the parameters to be monitored in patients with hepatitis B?
11. What are the parameters to be monitored in patients with hepatitis
B on treatment?
12. What are the treatment options for virological failure in patients
with hepatitis B?
13. What are the complications of hepatitis B?
14. What is the effective hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) surveillance
in patients with hepatitis B?
15. What are the criteria for treatment discontinuation in patients with
hepatitis B?
16. What are the criteria to refer patients with hepatitis B?
17. What are the safe and effective prevention strategies for hepatitis B?
• Mother-to-child transmission
• Post-exposure prophylaxis
• Healthcare workers
• Contact tracing
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 3
LABORATORY WORKFLOW FOR DIAGNOSIS OF CHRONIC
HEPATITIS B INFECTION
HBsAg: hepatitis B surface antigen; RDT: rapid diagnostic test; EIA: enzyme
immunoassays; HBeAg: hepatitis B e antigen; HBeAb: hepatitis B e antibody; HBV:
hepatitis B virus; DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid
HBsAg screening
Report as HBsAg
non-reactive
RDT/EIA
Report as
HBsAg reactive
HBeAg/
HBeAb
HBV DNA
viral load
Refer to Table 1
and Table 2 for
interpretation
of results
Non-reactive
Reactive
Reactive/
Non-reactive
If clinically indicated
after consultation
with Hepatologist/
Gastroenterologist
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 4
DOSAGE FORM, ADMINISTRATION AND COMMON SIDE EFFECTS OF HEPATITIS B ANTIVIRAL IN MALAYSIA
Drug
30 - <50
10 - <30
Potential Side effects
Administration
Renal Adjustment
(based on Creatinine Clearance, CrCl)* (ml/min)
Standard
dosage
<10/
Hemodialysis (HD)
Preferred (high barrier to HBV resistance)
Pegylated
Interferon-α 2a
180 mcg
once weekly
Subcutaneous
Injection
No dosage
adjustment
135 mcg
once weekly
90 - 135 mcg
once weekly
Flu-like symptoms,
fatigue, mood
disturbances, cytopenia,
autoimmune disorders
300 mg
once daily
Oral tablet,
take with or
without food
300 mg
every 48 hours
300 mg every
72 to 96 hours
Avoid use.
If no alternative,
300 mg
every 7 days
Nephropathy, Fanconi
syndrome
osteomalacia,
lactic acidosis
Entecavira
0.5 mg
once daily
Oral tablet, take on
empty stomach,
2 hours apart
from food
50% of
usual dose
OR
0.5 mg every
48 hours
30% of
usual dose
OR
0.5 mg every
72 hours
10% of
usual dose
OR
0.5 mg every
7 days
Lactic acidosis
Tenofovir
Disoproxil
Fumarate
Tenofovir
Alafenamide
25 mg
once daily
Oral tablet,
after food
CrCl >15 ml/min: No dose adjustment
CrCl <15 ml/min: Use is not recommended
Lactic acidosis
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
*Creatinine clearance (CrCl) calculated by Cockcroft-Gault formula
aEntecavir dose is 1 mg once daily if the patient has decompensated cirrhosis
bProduct discontinued
cDeregistered in Malaysia in 2022
Source:
1. Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ, Chang KM, Hwang JP, Jonas MM, Brown RS Jr, Bzowej NH, Wong JB. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of chronic hepatitis B: AASLD 2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology. 2018 Apr;67(4):1560-1599.
2. European Association for the Study of the Liver. Electronic address: easloffice@easloffice.eu; European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL
2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol. 2017 Aug;67(2):370-398.
3. Product inserts of the respective antiviral.
Drug
30 - <50
10 - <30
Potential Side effects
Administration
Renal Adjustment
(based on Creatinine Clearance, CrCl)* (ml/min)
Standard
dosage
<10/
Hemodialysis (HD)
Lamivudine
100 mg
once daily
Oral tablet, take
with or without food
CrCl 30 - ≤50 ml/min: 50 mg once daily
CrCl <5 - <15 ml/min: 15 mg once daily
CrCl <5 ml/min: 10 mg once daily
Pancreatitis, lactic
acidosis
Non-Preferred (low barrier to HBV resistance)
Adefovirb
Dipivoxil
10 mg
once daily
Oral tablet, take
with or without
food
Non-HD: No data
HD: 10 mg every day
Acute renal failure,
Fanconi syndrome,
lactic acidosis
10 mg every
48 hours
10 mg every
72 hours
Telbivudinec
600 mg
once daily
Oral tablet, take
with or without
food
600 mg every
96 hours
Creatine kinase
elevations and
myopathy, peripheral
neuropathy, lactic
acidosis
600 mg every
48 hours
600 mg every
72 hours
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 5
PROPHYLAXIS AND TREATMENT OF MOTHER-TO-CHILD
HEPATITIS B VIRUS TRANSMISSION
*Based on recommended methods of assessment for fibrosis in CPG
ALT: alanine aminotransferase; DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid; HBeAg: hepatitis B e
antigen; HBIG: hepatitis B immune globulin; HBsAg: hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV:
hepatitis B virus; IU/ml; international unit/millilitre; RDT: rapid diagnostic test; NIP:
National Immunisation Programme
HBsAg positive
HBsAg negative
HBV DNA load OR HBeAg (if HBV DNA is unavailable)
HBV DNA
<200,000 IU/ml
OR HBeAg negative
HBV DNA
>200,000 IU/ml
OR HBeAg positive
• No maternal
prophylaxis
• Defer long-term
treatment with
monitoring &
reassessment
• Start maternal prophylaxis
(from 28 weeks of pregnancy
until four weeks post-partum)
• Reassess long-term
treatment after delivery &
monitor
• Start long-term
treatment & monitor
(refer to management
algorithm in page x)
Give HBIG to newborn at birth (within 12 hours)
Give hepatitis B vaccination to newborn at birth (within 24 hours)
followed by two or three doses of hepatitis B vaccination
Follow
NIP**
Monitor maternal post-partum flare (ALT and/or HBV DNA) up to three
months & infant’s HBV positivity (HBsAg) after six months of life
Serology testing
Assessment on maternal
prophylaxis or long-term treatment
Maternal
Interventions
Newborn
Interventions
Follow-up
NO
YES
HBsAg screening on pregnant women
(use rapid diagnostic test or laboratory-based Immunoassay)
Presence
of cirrhosis*
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 6
ANTIVIRAL PROPHYLAXIS BEFORE IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
HBsAg: hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBc: antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; HBV: hepatitis B virus
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
APPENDIX 7
POST-EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS WORKFLOW
Exposure to Source HBsAg
Vaccine known
responder
anti-HBs level ≥10
mIU/ml
Vaccine known nonresponder
anti-HBs level <10
mIU/ml
Unknown vaccine
response
Incomplete vaccine
/unvaccinated
Test anti-HBs level
≥10 mIU/ml
<10 mIU/ml
HBIG x 2
(0 & 1 month later)
HBIG x 1 &
complete
revaccination
HBIG x 1 &
initiate
revaccination
No treatment
Follow-up
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
AASLD
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases
ADV
adefovir
AE (s)
adverse event (s)
AFP
alpha-fetoprotein
AIDS
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
ALF
acute liver failure
ALT
alanine transaminase
Anti-HBc
antibody to hepatitis B core antigen
Anti-HBc-total
antibody to hepatitis B core total protein
Anti-HBs
antibody to hepatitis B surface protein
Anti-HCV
antibody to hepatitis C virus
APASL
Asia Pacific Association for the Study of the Liver
APRI
aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio
ART
antiretroviral therapy
AST
aspartate transaminase
AUC
area under curve
CAPD
Continuous Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis
CHB
chronic hepatitis B
CK
creatine kinase
CKD
chronic kidney disease
CLD
chronic liver disease
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CPS
Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score
Cr
creatinine
DAA (s)
direct-acting antiviral (s)
dL
decilitre
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DG
Development Group
EASL
European Association for the Study of the Liver
ECG
electrocardiogramme
eGFR
estimated glomerular filtration rate
EIA
enzyme immunoassays
EMTCT
Elimination of Mother-to-Child Transmission
EoT
end of treatment
EPP (s)
exposure prone procedure (s)
ETV
entecavir
FBC
full blood count
FIB-4
Fibrosis-4
FTC
emtricitabine
GGT
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
Hb
haemoglobin
HBeAb
hepatitis B e antibody
HBeAg
hepatitis B e antigen
HBIG
hepatitis B immunoglobulin
HBsAg
hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV
hepatitis B virus
HBV-R
HBV-reactivation
HCC
hepatocellular carcinoma
HCP
healthcare provider
HCV
hepatitis C virus
HCW
healthcare workers
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
HD
hemodialysis
HIV
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HR
hazard ratio
IFN
interferon
IgG
immunoglobulin G
IgM
immunoglobulin M
IgM anti-HBc
immunoglobulin M antibody to hepatitis B core antigen
IM
intramuscular
INR
international normalisation ratio
IU
international unit
IV
intravenous
IVD (s)
in vitro diagnostic (s)
LdT
telbivudine
LFT
liver function test
MaHTAS
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section
mcg
microgramme
MDR
multidrug-resistant
mg
milligramme
min
minutes
mIU
milli-international unit
ml
millilitre
MMC
Malaysia Medical Council
mmol
millimoles
MoH
Ministry of Health
mosmol
milliosmole
MRE
magnetic resonance elastography
MTCT
mother-to-child transmission
NA
nucleos(t)ide analogue
ng
nanogramme
NPV
negative predictive value
OBI
occult hepatitis B virus infection
PDV
plasma-derived vaccine
PEP
post-exposure prophylaxis
PPV
positive predictive value
RC
Review Committee
RD
risk difference
RDT
rapid diagnostic test
RNA
ribonucleic acid
RP
renal profile
RV
recombinant vaccine
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RN
registered number
SAR
serious adverse reactions
TAF
tenofovir alafenamide
TAHOD
TREAT Asia HIV Observational Database
TDF
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
TE
transient elastography
ULN
upper limit of normal
US
ultrasonography
WHO
World Health Organization
3TC
lamivudine
µmol
micromoles
WMD
Weighted Mean Difference
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in Adults
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft technically
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approval of the CPG
• Ms. Zamilah Mat Jusoh @ Yusof on retrieval of evidence
• Dr. Farah Malik on the design of CPG cover
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None hold shares in pharmaceutical
firms or act as consultants to such firms. Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Chronic Hepatitis B in
Adults was supported financially in its entirety by the MoH.
‘ety oem is