y 2024 MOH/P/PAK/567.24(GU}-2
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Management of
OY manag in Adults
Va (Second Edition)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre 62590
Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
eISBN: 978-967-2887-83-6
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
https://mymahtas.moh.gov.my
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guidelines should not override the responsibility of
the practitioners to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of
the individual. This should be done in consultation with the patients and
their families or guardians, taking into account the management options
available locally.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2024 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2028) or sooner if new evidence warrants earlier
revision. When it is due for updating, the Chairperson of the CPG or
National Advisor of the related specialty will be informed about it. A
discussion will be done on the need for a revision including the scope of
the revised CPG. A multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest
systematic review methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed.
Every care is taken to ensure that this publication is correct in every
detail at the time of publication. However, in the event of errors or
omissions, corrections will be published in the web version of this
document, which will be the definitive version at all time. This version
can be found on the websites mentioned above.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
viii
Review Committee
ix
External Reviewers
x
Algorithm 1: Initiation of Asthma Treatment
xi
Algorithm 2: Step Up and Step Down Options in
xii
Management of Stable Asthma
Algorithm 3: Management of Asthma Exacerbation
xiii
in Primary Care
Algorithm 4: Management of Asthma Exacerbation in
xiv
Emergency Department
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
3
3
DIAGNOSIS
4
4.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
8
4.1 Treatment Goals
8
4.2 Initiating and Optimising Asthma Treatment
8
5.
PATIENT EDUCATION AND SKILLS TRAINING
12
5.1 Asthma Information
12
5.2 Guided Self-Management
13
5.3 Skills Training on Effective Use of Inhaler Device
15
5.4 Adherence Improvement
17
5.5 Patient Education Modality
19
6.
STABLE ASTHMA
20
6.1 Assessment of Stable Asthma
20
6.2 Treatment
23
6.2.1 Pharmacological Treatment
24
6.2.2 Non-pharmacological Treatment
31
7.
ASTHMA EXACERBATION
36
7.1 Assessment
36
7.2 Treatment
38
7.3 Monitoring and Evaluation
41
7.4 Criteria for Admission
42
7.5 Criteria for Discharge
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
8.
SPECIAL GROUPS
44
8.1 Severe Asthma
44
8.2 Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
49
8.3 Occupational Asthma
51
8.4 Exercise-induced Bronchoconstriction
53
8.5 Asthma with comorbidities
54
8.6 Asthma and COVID-19
56
9.
REFERRAL
58
10.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
58
10.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
58
10.2 Potential Resource Implications
59
REFERENCES
61
Appendix 1. Example of Search Strategy
66
Appendix 2. Clinical Questions
67
Appendix 3. Peak Expiratory Flow Rate Variability
69
Appendix 4
Peak Expiratory Flow Nomogram
70
Appendix 5. a. Suggested Asthma Action Plan Template
73
b. Suggested Asthma Action Plan Template - 72
MART (Maintenance-And-Reliever
Therapy)
Appendix 6. Inhaler Devices and Techniques
73
Appendix 7. Test of Adherence to Inhalers (TAI)
77
- Soalan Ujian Pematuhan Alat Sedut
Appendix 8. Asthma Control Test
78
Appendix 9. Common Medications in Asthma
79
Appendix 10. Algorithm for Biologic Therapy Selection
87
in Severe Asthma
Appendix 11. Example of PEFR Calculation for
88
Occupational Asthma
List of Abbreviations
90
Acknowledgement
92
Disclosure Statement
92
Source of Funding
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies or case reports; reports of expert committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure
Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of body of evidence and related effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG DG.
• Recommendations are formulated based on certainty of
evidence and the wording used denotes the strength of
recommendations. This takes into account:
 quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 relevancy and applicability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s) in
the management while a blue box contains evidence-based
recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group as the key recommendations that answer the
main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
Diagnosis
• Diagnosis of asthma should be made based on typical clinical
history, physical examination and evidence of airway obstruction
variability. Spirometry is the preferred tool to demonstrate airway
obstruction variability or reversibility.
General Principles
• The assessment of asthma control should be performed before
considering stepping up or down the treatment.
Patient Education
• Regular medical reviews in asthma patients are preferred over
self-adjustment of medications aided by asthma action plan.
Stable Asthma
• Assessment of asthma should include:
 evaluating current asthma symptoms control using validated
tools
 identifying future exacerbation risk factors and co-morbidities
 checking adherence, inhaler techniques and other treatment
related issues
• In the treatment of asthma:
 inhaled short-acting β2-agonists (SABA) should not be used as
monotherapy
 inhaled SABA may be used as reliever therapy with regular
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
• All asthma patients should be on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)-
containing therapy.
• Asthma patients who smoke or vape should be strongly encouraged
to quit at every clinic visit.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
iii
Asthma Exacerbation
• Treatment should be initiated immediately based on severity of
asthma exacerbation.
• Systemic corticosteroids should be given in all patients with asthma
exacerbation.
• Following asthma exacerbation, all patients should be given a followup plan upon discharge.
Special Groups
Severe Asthma
• Biologics should be considered as add-on treatment for severe
asthma after optimising therapy. Phenotype assessment should be
conducted prior to this.
• Long-term oral corticosteroids should be reserved for severe
asthma when no alternative treatments are available.
Pregnancy
• Inhaled corticosteroids-containing therapy should be initiated in
pregnant asthma patients and continued if already in use.
Occupational Asthma
• All working-age adults with new or worsening asthma symptoms,
reappearance of childhood asthma or unexplained airflow
obstruction should be asked about their occupation.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
iv
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for this CPG were from
the Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Higher Education and private
healthcare. There was active involvement of a multidisciplinary Review
Committee (RC) during the process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases: mainly Medline via Ovid and Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews and others e.g. PubMed and Guidelines
International Network (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published on humans,
publication from year “2017 to Current” and English language. In
addition, the reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were
searched, and experts in the field contacted to identify relevant studies.
All searches were conducted from 17 January 2023 to 5 March 2023.
Literature searches were repeated for all clinical questions at the end of
the CPG development process allowing any relevant papers published
before 31 July 2024 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider
evidence published after this cut-off date. The details of the search
strategy can be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
References were also made to other CPGs on Asthma which included:
• Global Initiative for Asthma – Global Strategy for Asthma
Management and Prevention (2024)
• Spanish Society of Pulmonology and Thoracic Surgery (SEPAR)]
– GEMA 5.3. Spanish Guideline on the Management of Asthma
(2023)
• British Thoracic Society/Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network – British Guideline on the Management of Asthma (2019)
These CPGs were evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as
references.
A total of 21 clinical questions (CQ) were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions within
these sections (refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions). The DG
members met 23 times throughout the development of these guidelines.
All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG members using
Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented in evidence
tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All statements and
recommendations formulated after that were agreed upon by both the
DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the recommendations
were made by consensus of the two groups. This CPG was developed
largely based on the findings of systematic reviews, meta-analyses and
clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
v
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2015), while the
grading of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE
(refer to page i). The writing of the CPG follows strictly the requirement
of AGREE II.
On completion, the draft of the CPG was reviewed by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG and, the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval. Details on the CPG
development methodology by MaHTAS can be obtained from Manual
on Development and Implementation of Evidence-based Clinical
Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at https://www.moh.
gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
vii
OBJECTIVES
The objective of the CPG is to provide evidence-based recommendations
on the management of asthma in adults on the following aspects:
• diagnosis
• assessment
• treatment
• follow-up
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2.
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• Adults (≥18 years old) with asthma
Exclusion Criteria
• Asthma-COPD overlap syndrome
• In-patient asthma care
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders involved in the management of asthma in adults.
This includes:
i. doctors
ii. allied health professionals
iii. trainees and medical students
iv. patients and their advocates
v. professional societies
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary, secondary and tertiary care settings
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
viii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Andrea Ban Yu-Lin
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Faculty of Medicine, Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Members (alphabetical order)
Dr. Aisya Natasya Musa
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Al Sultan Abdullah
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Azza Omar
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Ms. Chong Li Yin
Pharmacist
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Hema Yamini Devi Ramarmuty
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Queen Elizabeth, Sabah
Dr. Ida Zaliza Zainol Abidin
Consultant Emergency Physician
Hospital Tuanku Fauziah, Perlis
Dr. Leong Swee Wei
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Serdang, Selangor
Dr. Mazapuspavina Md. Yasin
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Hospital Al Sultan Abdullah,
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Mohd Aminuddin Mohd Yusoff
Head of CPG Unit
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section (MaHTAS), MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Nida’ Ul-Huda Adznan
Acute Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Noor Ayuni Bazura Muhamad
Senior Principal Assistant Director
MaHTAS, MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor Azila Mohd Isa
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Nilai, Negeri Sembilan
Ms. Pang Siow Fen
Pharmacist
Hospital Tampin, Negeri Sembilan
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Shamsuriani Md Jamal
Consultant Emergency Physician
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Pusat
Perubatan Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Yoon Chee Kin
Consultant Acute Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Zul Imran Malek Abdol Hamid
Consultant Emergency Physician
Hospital Pakar Sultanah Fatimah, Johor
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ix
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts. They were
asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy
of the interpretation of evidence supporting the recommendations in the
guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Irfhan Ali Hyder Ali
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Hilmi Lockman
Consultant Respiratory Physician
Prince Court Medical Centre, Kuala
Lumpur
Dr. Izzuna Mudia Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director
Malaysian Health Technology
Assessment
Section (MaHTAS), MoH, Putrajaya
Dr. Iskandar Firzada Osman
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jaya Gading, Pahang
Dr. Jaya Muneswarao
Clinical Pharmacist
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
Dr. Mohd Arif Mohd Zim
Consultant Respiratory Physician
KPJ Damansara Specialist Hospital 2
Kuala Lumpur
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Pang Yong Kek
Senior Consultant Respiratory Physician
Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Prof. Dr. Sabariah Faizah Jamaluddin
Consultant Emergency Physician
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi
MARA, Selangor
Prof. Dr. Sajaratulnisah Othman
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya
Kuala Lumpur
Siti Farhana Abdul Rahim
Patient Advocate
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
x
Prof. Dr. Ahmad Izuanuddin Ismail
Deputy Director, Hospital Al Sultan Abdullah
Shah Alam & Consultant Respiratory
Physician
Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi
MARA Selangor
Dr. Azainorsuzila Mohd Ahad
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Port Dickson,
Negeri Sembilan
Prof. Dr. Bandana Saini
Professor of Pharmacy
Faculty of Medicine and Health
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Assoc. Prof. Dr Cheong Ai Theng
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Dr. Gan Chye Lee
Consultant Acute Medicine Physician
Hospital Melaka, Melaka
Mr. Haji Izhan Mohd Soffian
Assistant Medical Officer
Klinik Kesihatan Putrajaya Presint 18,
Putrajaya
Prof. Dr. Kamarul Aryffin Baharuddin
Consultant Emergency Physician
School of Medical Sciences
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan
Dr. Lim Chuan Leong
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Lim, Taman Rasah Jaya,
Negeri Sembilan
Datuk Dr. Mahathar Abd. Wahab
Senior Consultant Emergency Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Mary Annie a/p Anthony Pereira
Patient Advocate
Dato’ Dr. Mat Zuki Mat Jaeb
Head of MoH Respiratory Medicine
Subspecialty & Consultant Respiratory Physician
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kelantan
Dr. Nur Asyikin Mohd Yunus
Internal Medicine Physician
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah, Selangor
Dr. Shamsath Abdul Gafoor
General Practitioner
Poliklinik Dinar Subang Pelangi, Selangor
Dr. Siti Norfaseha Azwa Khirudin
Patient Advocate
Dr Simon Couillard-Castonguay
Assistant Professor in Medicine, University of
Sherbrooke & Research Chair in Respiratory
Medicine Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Canada
Dr. Toby Capstick
Consultant Pharmacist - Respiratory Medicine
St James’s University Hospital, Leeds
United Kingdom
Dr. Wong Ping Foo
Family Medicine Specialist (Subspecialty NCD
in Primary Care)
Klinik Kesihatan Cheras Baru, Kuala Lumpur
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 1: INITIATION OF ASTHMA TREATMENT
xi
Confirmed asthma
Assess for asthma control*
Assess for risk factors* for
asthma exacerbation and
address modifiable risk factors
Yes
No
Maintenance low-dose ICS + PRN SABA
OR
PRN ICS-formoterol
OR
PRN ICS-SABA
Reassess asthma symptoms
at 3 - 6 months#
Yes
No
Escalate as per
Algorithm 2
Continue current
therapy or deescalate
as per Algorithm 2
Symptoms most days
OR
Night-time awakening
≥ 1 a week
OR
FEV1 <80% of predicted
or LLN
Daily Symptoms
OR
Night-time awakening
≥ 1 a week
OR
FEV1 <80% of predicted
or LLN
Maintenance low-dose
ICS-LABA
OR
Low-to-medium-dose ICS
Maintenance medium-tohigh-dose ICS-LABA
OR
Medium-dose ICS-LABA
with add-on LAMA
Reliever: SABA OR ICS-SABA OR ICS-formoterol$
(if maintenance includes ICS-formoterol)
Refer to Table 7 for ICS dosing category
LTRA may be added to maintenance therapy if the patient has concurrent allergic rhinitis.
#Inhaler technique and adherence to treatment should be assessed at every clinic/hospital visit and
before escalating treatment
^Well-controlled asthma as defined by ACT ≥20 or ‘NO’ to all GINA questionnaire
$e.g. budesonide-formoterol or beclometasone diproprionate-formoterol
Abbreviations ACT=Asthma Control Test questionnaire; FeNO=fractionated nitric oxide; FEV1=forced
expiratory volume in first 1 second; GERD=gastroesophageal reflux disease; ICS=inhaled corticosteroids; LABA=long-acting β-agonists; LLN=lower limit normal; PRN=as needed; SABA=short-acting
β-agonists; T2=Type 2 inflammatory marker; LTRA=leukotriene receptor antagonist
*Assess the presence of risk factors for asthma exacerbation and address them accordingly:
• Previous history of severe asthma exacerbation
requiring systemic steroids or hospitalisation within
the past year (consider initiating medium dose ICS)
• Overuse of SABA (≥3 cannisters per year)
• Inadequate ICS use or not on ICS
• Poor adherence to maintenance therapy
• Incorrect inhaler technique
• Current smoker including e-cigarette or vape user
• Co-morbidities: obesity, GERD
• Pregnancy
• T2-high inflammation: high FeNO, blood
eosinophilia
• Lung function: Low FEV1 especially <60%
predicted, high bronchodilator responsiveness
Well-controlled
asthma^
Well-controlled
asthma^
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 2: STEP UP AND STEP DOWN OPTIONS IN
MANAGEMENT OF STABLE ASTHMA
xii
Reliever
Maintenance Therapy
Refer respiratory physician and discuss within MDT for
consideration of biologics
Alternative treatment: add-on low-dose azithromycin or OCS
High-dose ICS-LABA+LAMA
Consider single inhaler high-dose ICS-LABA-LAMA
Phenotypic assessment#
ICS-formoterol*
(if maintenance
contains
ICS-formoterol)
OR
ICS-SABA
OR
SABA
*maximum total
dose 12 puffs/day
Medium-dose ICSLABA+LAMA
Phenotypic assessment#
High-dose ICS-LABA
OR
Phenotypic assessment#
Medium-dose ICS-LABA
Low-dose ICS-LABA or
Medium-dose ICS
PRN ICS-formoterol or
Low-dose ICS with PRN SABA or
Low-dose ICS with PRN ICS-SABA or
PRN ICS-SABA
Note: LTRA may be added to maintenance therapy if the patient has concurrent allergic rhinitis.
Refer to Table 7 for ICS dosing category
#phenotypic assessment should be done at this stage upon stepping up
Abbreviations: ICS=inhaled corticosteroids; ICS-LABA+LAMA=fixed dose combination ICS-LABA with
separate inhaler LAMA; ICS-LABA-LAMA=single inhaler of ICS-LABA-LAMA; LABA=long-acting
β-agonists; LAMA=long-acting muscarinic antagonists; MDT=multidisciplinary team; OCS=oral
corticosteroids; PRN=as needed; SABA=short-acting β-agonists; LTRA=leukotriene receptor antagonist
Step-up
Step-down
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 3: MANAGEMENT OF ASTHMA EXACERBATION
IN PRIMARY CARE
xiii
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Risk assessment for asthma-related death performed with clinical evaluation concurrently
SEVERITY
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
LIFE-THREATENING
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
LIFE-THREATENING
Confused/drowsy/coma
Unable to speak
<12/min
Bradycardia/cardiac arrest
Hypotension
Paradoxical chest
movement/absent
Silent chest
<90%
<60 mmHg
>45 mmHg
Alert/confused/drowsy
Speaks in words
>25/min
>120/min
Normal or hypotension
Very evident
Wheezing
<90%
<60 mmHg
<40 mmHg or normal
Alert
Speaks in phrases
>20/min
100 – 120/min
Normal
Present
Wheezing
90 – 95%
<80 mmHg
<40 mmHg or normal
Alert
Normal
Normal
<100/min
Normal
Present
Wheezing
<95%
Normal
Normal
Conscious level
Speech
Respiratory rate (RR)
Pulse rate (PR)
Blood pressure (BP)
Accessory muscle
use
Breath sounds
SpO2
ABG: PaO2
ABG: PaCO2
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
• SABA 4 - 10 puffs by pMDI + spacer (preferably
patient’s own) or via nebuliser, repeat every
20 minutes for 1 hour
• Prednisolone: 0.5 - 1 mg/kg with a maximum
of 50 mg stat
• Controlled oxygen: target saturation 93 to 95%
• SABA via oxygen
driven nebuliser,
repeat every
20 minutes for
1 hour
• Ipratropium
bromide nebuliser
0.5 mg stat
• Controlled oxygen:
target saturation
93 to 95%
• IV hydrocortisone
100 mg stat
• IV magnesium
sulphate 2 g
infusion over
20 minutes
(single dose)
TRANSFER TO
NEAREST HOSPITAL
IMMEDIATELY
While waiting for
transfer, do the
following:
• SABA via oxygen
driven nebuliser,
repeat every
20 minutes for
1 hour
• Ipratropium bromide
nebuliser 0.5 mg
stat
• Controlled oxygen:
target saturation
93 to 95%
• IV hydrocortisone
100 mg stat
(if not given earlier)
• IV magnesium
sulphate 2 g infusion
over 20 minutes
(single dose) (if not
given earlier)
• Consider intubation
if patient’s condition
deteriorates
DISCHARGE
• Assess inhaler technique and adherence
• Continue prednisolone (5 - 7 days)
• Step-up treatment if indicated
• AAP
• Ensure follow up within 1 - 2 weeks
REFER TO
HOSPITAL FOR
ADMISSION
Continue treatment
during transfer and
monitor progress
CONTINUE TREATMENT
AND MONITOR
PROGRESS
throughout transport
(SpO2, RR, PR
and BP)
MONITOR PROGRESS
○ Symptoms
○ Conscious level, SpO2, PR, BP
○ CXR when indicated (if available)
*Improvement of symptoms (not needing continuous SABA)
and SpO2 >94% under room air
Abbreviations: AAP=asthma action plan; ABG=arterial blood
gas; BP=blood pressure; CXR=chest x-ray; IV=intravenous;
pMDI=pressurised metered-dose-inhaler; PR=pulse rate;
RR=respiratory rate; SABA=short-acting β2-agonist;
SpO2=oxygen saturationt
No clinical improvement
Clinical
improvement
Clinical
improvement No clinical
improvement
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ALGORITHM 4: MANAGEMENT OF ASTHMA EXACERBATION IN
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
xiv
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Risk assessment for asthma-related death performed with clinical evaluation concurrently
SEVERITY
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
LIFE-THREATENING
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
LIFE-THREATENING
Confused/drowsy/coma
Unable to speak
<12/min
Bradycardia/cardiac arrest
Hypotension
Paradoxical chest
movement/absent
Silent chest
<90%
<60 mmHg
>45 mmHg
Alert/confused/drowsy
Speaks in words
>25/min
>120/min
Normal or hypotension
Very evident
Wheezing
<90%
<60 mmHg
<40 mmHg or normal
Alert
Speaks in phrases
>20/min
100 – 120/min
Normal
Present
Wheezing
90 – 95%
<80 mmHg
<40 mmHg
Alert
Normal
Normal
<100/min
Normal
Present
Wheezing
<95%
Normal
Normal
Conscious level
Speech
Respiratory rate (RR)
Pulse rate (PR)
Blood pressure (BP)
Accessory muscle
use
Breath sounds
SpO2
ABG: PaO2
ABG: PaCO2
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
• SABA 4 - 10 puffs by pMDI + spacer (preferable
patient’s own) or via nebuliser, repeat every
20 minutes for 1 hour
• Prednisolone: 0.5 - 1 mg/kg with a maximum
of 50 mg stat
• Controlled oxygen (if available): target saturation
93 to 95%
*Improvement of symptoms (not needing continuous SABA)
and SpO2 >94% under room air
#Refer to Subchapter 7.3 on Monitoring and Evaluation
^Patients with signs of respiratory distress, worsening
hypoxaemia, hypercapnia or altered mental status or also
failure to respond to maximal medical therapy
Abbreviations: AAP=asthma action plan; ABG=arterial blood
gas; BP=blood pressure; CXR=chest x-ray; HFNC=high-flow
nasal cannula; IV=intravenous; pMDI=pressurised metereddose-inhaler; PR=pulse rate; RR=respiratory rate;
SABA=short-acting β2-agonist; SpO2=oxygen saturation
No clinical improvement
clinical
improvement
clinical
improvement
No clinical
improvement
• SABA via oxygen
driven nebuliser,
repeat every
20 minutes for
1 hour
• Ipratropium
bromide
nebuliser 0.5 mg
every 4 - 6 hours
• Controlled oxygen:
target saturation
93 to 95%
• Consider HFNC
• IV hydrocortisone
100 mg stat
• IV magnesium
sulphate 2 g infusion
over 20 minutes
(single dose)
• SABA via oxygen
driven nebuliser,
repeat every
20 minutes for
1 hour
• Ipratropium bromide
nebulizer 0.5 mg
every 4 - 6 hours
• Controlled oxygen:
target saturation
93 to 95%
• Consider early
intubation^
• IV hydrocortisone
100 mg stat (if not
given earlier)
• IV magnesium
sulphate 2 g infusion
over 20 minutes
(single dose) (if not
given earlier)
• Early referral to
critical care
DISCHARGE
• Continue prednisolone (5 - 7 days)
• Continue usual treatment
• AAP
• Ensure follow-up at primary care clinic
within 1 - 2 weeks
MONITORING AND EVALUATION#
• Conscious level, SpO2, PR, BP
• PaO2 and PaCO2
• CXR for complication and alternative diagnosis
REFER FOR ADMISSION
AND/OR CRITICAL CARE
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
1.
INTRODUCTION
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory lung disease characterised by
airway inflammation and narrowing, and bronchial hyperreactivity.
These pathophysiological changes lead to episodic symptoms, e.g.
shortness of breath, which can range from mild to severe in severity.
However, asthma symptoms are often subtle and may be overlooked
or misdiagnosed as other conditions, contributing to delays in proper
management. Recognising and addressing this diagnostic challenge is
a key focus of this CPG, which aims to improve asthma care through
evidence-based recommendations.
Asthma continues to pose significant public health challenges, affecting
millions globally and thousands in Malaysia. Despite advances in
disease understanding and treatment, asthma remains frequently
misdiagnosed or poorly managed, resulting in avoidable suffering,
hospitalisations and even deaths.
The inaugural CPG for asthma in adults, introduced in 2017, was a
landmark achievement in standardising asthma care. It set a strong
foundation for evidence-based practice and improved patient outcomes.
Since then, the rapidly evolving landscape of asthma management -
including the advent of biologics for severe asthma e.g. omalizumab,
benralizumab and dupilumab - has necessitated a comprehensive
update. With two additional biologics currently in the pipeline, i.e.
tezepelumab and mepolizumab, this updated CPG aims to provide
clinicians with the latest evidence-based resource to deliver the highest
standard of care for asthma patients.
The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the need for innovative
and adaptable healthcare solutions. Recognising this, the MoH is
actively exploring the development of online inhaler technique tutorials,
with plans for their release in the near future. These resources, once
available, will complement the appendix of inhalers provided in this
updated CPG. Together, they aim to enhance inhaler technique,
empower patients and improve treatment adherence for better asthma
management.
For those with severe asthma, the availability of cutting-edge biologic
therapies has transformed the management paradigm. The CPG
Development Group takes pride in the locally developed algorithm for
selecting biologics in severe asthma management. Designed by the
group, this tool is comprehensive and user-friendly, providing a practical
resource for clinicians.
Tailored to the Malaysian context, this CPG acknowledges the
challenges of local healthcare system, cultural nuances and prevalent
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
misconceptions about asthma. It aims to dispel myths, address gaps in
understanding, and provide clear, actionable guidance for healthcare
providers and patients. This updated CPG aspires to be more than just a
reference - it’s a tool to elevate asthma care in Malaysia. By empowering
healthcare professionals with the latest knowledge and strategies, the
burden of asthma can be reduced leading to transformation of the lives
of those affected.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
2.
RISK FACTORS
• Asthma is a multifaceted respiratory disease resulting from interactions
between various risk factors.
• Understanding these risk factors is crucial for effective prevention and
treatment of asthma.
Refer to Table 1 on risk factors for developing asthma.
Table 1: Risk Factors for Developing Asthma
Source:
1. Global Initiative for Asthma. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and
Prevention, 2024. Updated May 2024 (Available at: www.ginasthma.org)
2. Plaza Moral V, Alobid I, Álvarez Rodríguez C, et al. GEMA 5.3. Spanish Guideline
on the Management of Asthma. Open Respir Arch. 2023;5(4):100277.
3. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network & British Thoracic Society. British
Guideline on the Management of Asthma. SIGN-BTS;2019
Pre-menstrual asthma refers to worsening of asthma symptoms in
females in days leading up to their menstrual period. This is influenced
by hormonal changes during the menstrual cycle. A meta-analysis
found that risk factors for pre-menstrual asthma includes increasing
age (SMD=0.42, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.82) and longer duration of asthma
(SMD=0.81, 95% CI 0.41 to 1.20).1
Category
Risk Factors
• Female
• Atopy
• Bronchial hyperresponsiveness
• Parental asthma
• Exposure to allergens (e.g. house-dust mite,
pollen, cockroach)
• Tobacco smoke
• Air pollution
• Occupational irritants (e.g. nitrogen dioxide, carbon
monoxide, sulphur dioxide, fine particulate matter)
• Younger maternal age
• Maternal pre-eclampsia
• Maternal tobacco consumption during pregnancy
• Born via caesarean section
• History of not receiving breastmilk
• Lower pulmonary function of neonates
• Obesity
• Allergic rhinitis
• Chronic rhinosinusitis
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease
• Limited access to education and/or health care
Host/Genetic
Environmental
Perinatal/
Childhood
Co-morbidities
Socioeconomic
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
3.
DIAGNOSIS
Asthma is a heterogeneous disease with distinct inflammatory patterns.
In Type 2 (T2)-high asthma, inflammation is driven by T2 cytokines
[interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and IL-13], leading to eosinophilic inflammation,
elevated IgE and increased fractionated exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO)
levels. This phenotype is typically responsive to inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS) and biologics targeting T2 pathways. In contrast, neutrophilic
asthma is associated with low or absent T2 inflammation and may
involve IL-17 and other non-T2 cytokines, with neutrophilic inflammation
and steroid resistance often observed.
• There is no gold standard test in diagnosing asthma. The diagnosis
is based on a combination of clinical history, physical examination
findings and lung function test with evidence of variable and
reversible airway obstruction.
A thorough history taking to identify asthma symptoms is important
for accurate diagnosis. Physical examination may appear normal
particularly when the patient is not experiencing an asthma exacerbation.
Physical examination is important to rule out other conditions with
similar symptoms. Typical clinical signs of asthma include tachypnoea,
rhonchi, prolonged expiratory phase and decreased breath sounds.
Spirometry should be used to diagnose asthma whenever possible.
Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity
(FVC) are parameters obtained from spirometry. These parameters are
used to show evidence of obstructive lung disease and reversibility
(refer to Table 3). When spirometry is not available, peak expiratory
flow meter may be used instead. These tests should be performed
before treatment, at 3 – 6 months after treatment and periodically (1
– 2-yearly) to establish patient’s personal best FEV1 and monitor for
lung function decline. A low FEV1 indicates underlying untreated airway
inflammation and is a risk factor for future exacerbation.2
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) can be measured using both peak
flow meter and spirometry machine. Peak flow meter is used primarily
for home monitoring. Whereas, spirometry is performed in a clinical
setting under supervision of a healthcare provider. Whenever possible,
PEFR should be recorded before treatment is initiated. It should be
monitored at 1-hour post treatment and at regular intervals until a clear
response has occurred or a plateau is reached.2
If a patient has already started on treatment, the response to the
treatment (bronchodilator or corticosteroids) may aid in the diagnosis
but lack of response may not exclude asthma.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Clinical History and Symptoms
Wheeze
Cough
Chest tightness
Shortness of breath
Episodic symptoms
Diurnal symptoms
Symptoms after/during exercise
Common colds (viral infection)
Allergen e.g house dust mites, pets
Cold weather
Irritants:
• smoke
• haze
• strong smell i.e. perfumes, cleaning
solutions
• exhaust fumes
Allergic rhinitis
Eczema
Asthma
Allergic rhinitis
Eczema
Common symptoms
Symptoms variability
Triggers
History of atopy
Family history of atopy
Use of accessory muscles
Audible wheeze
Rhonchi on auscultation
Physical Examination
Respiratory
examination
FeNO is not a definitive test for diagnosing asthma. Although it tends to
be high in asthma with T2 airway inflammation, it can also be elevated
in non-asthmatic conditions e.g. eosinophilic bronchitis, allergic rhinitis
and eczema. In patients with suspected asthma, a high FeNO level
of >50 ppb predicts better response to ICS therapy than low level.
However, a low FeNO level should not be used as a reason to withhold
ICS treatment as in non-T2 inflammation asthma, FeNO levels are not
typically elevated.2
Refer to Table 2, Table 3 and Figure 1.
Table 2. Clinical Features Suggestive of Asthma
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Demonstration of airway obstruction
A FEV1/FVC <0.7 or <lower limit normal (LLN)
Demonstration of airway obstruction variability or reversibility
Spirometry
An improvement in FEV1 or FVC ≥12% AND
≥200 ml following bronchodilator treatment
An improvement in FEV1 or FVC ≥12% AND
≥200 ml from baseline after four weeks on ICS
A ≥20% improvement in PEFR following
bronchodilator treatment
A ≥20% improvement in PEFR from baseline
after four weeks on ICS
Diurnal Variation
• PEFR measured and recorded at least twice
daily (morning and evening) over two weeks.
• PEFR variability of ≥20% is suggestive of
asthma.
Refer to Appendix 3 on Peak Expiratory
Flow Rate Variability and Appendix 4 on
Peak Expiratory Flow Normogram.
Methacholine challenge test
• A PC20 value of ≤ 8 mg/ml is a positive test
Mannitol challenge test
• Decrease in FEV1 of ≥15% from baseline at
cumulative dose of ≤ 635 mg is a positive test
Exercise challenge test
• Decrease in FEV1 of ≥10% from baseline
Threshold for blood eosinophils is ≥150 cells/µL or >4%
Total serum IgE >100 kU/L
Any allergen-specific IgE >0.35 kU/L
Elevated FeNO level (≥50 ppb)
Blood eosinophils
IgE**
FeNO**
Detection of T2-high inflammation
Spirometry
Peak Expiratory
Flow Rate (PEFR)
Bronchoprovocation
Test*
Investigation
Description
Table 3: Investigations for Asthma
*Not routinely performed in clinical practice
**To be performed when resources are available
Adapted:
1. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Management of Asthma in Adults Putrajaya: MoH;
2017.
2. Global Initiative for Asthma. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and
Prevention, 2024. Updated May 2024 (Available at: www.ginasthma.org)
3. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network & British Thoracic Society. British
Guideline on the Management of Asthma. SIGN-BTS;2019
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
*Refer to Table 3.
Figure 1: Diagnosis of Asthma in Treatment Naïve Patients
For patients who are on ICS treatment, improvement of symptoms
supports an asthma diagnosis. For patients on treatment who do not
show airflow variability, consider repeating spirometry after withholding
bronchodilator [four hours for short-acting β2-agonists (SABA), 24 - 48
hours for long-acting β2-agonists (LABA)] or during symptoms.
Recommendation 1
• Diagnosis of asthma should be made based on typical clinical history,
physical examination and evidence of airway obstruction variability.
 Spirometry is the preferred tool to demonstrate airway obstruction
variability or reversibility.
FEV1/FVC <0.7 / <LLN
and
Positive Bronchodilator
Reversibility Test
Perform spirometry* with bronchodilator
reversibility test
Typical history and
physical examination
consistent with asthma
Consider further history,
investigations* and alternative
diagnosis
Diagnose as asthma
Yes
No
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
4.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
4.1. Treatment Goals
The goals of asthma management encompass both long-term objectives
and patient-centred considerations.2
• The asthma treatment goals include:
 achieving optimal symptom control
 minimising risk of future exacerbations
 reducing treatment side effects
 preventing persistent airflow limitation
 lowering asthma-related mortality
It is also essential to identify and incorporate patient’s personal goals
for asthma management into the care plan.
Effective asthma management requires a collaborative partnership
between the patients and their healthcare teams. This partnership
involves agreeing on management goals and following a cyclical
process of ongoing assessment, treatment adjustment and review of
responses as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: The Control-based Asthma Management Cycle
4.2. Initiating and Optimising Asthma Treatment
• The assessment of asthma control is mandatory before considering
stepping up or down the treatment algorithm.
• Assessment of asthma should include:
 symptom control by using a validated numerical test (e.g. ACT
score), GINA or RCP questionnaire
 future exacerbation risk
 adherence to current therapy (insufficient use of ICS and overreliance of SABA)
 inhaler techniques
 spirometry readings – FEV1
 FeNO (if available)
 other medical co-morbidities e.g. allergic rhinitis, gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD) etc.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Based on the reviewed evidence, the consensus of the CPG DG for the
management of stable asthma are presented below.
Modifiable risk factors, poor adherence and incorrect inhaler techniques
should be addressed and rectified prior to changing the current
treatment plans. Once the assessment is completed, treatment can
then be initiated (refer to Algorithm 1) or adjusted (refer to Algorithm
2). The choice of inhalers should be based on its availability, patient’s
preference, inhaler technique and shared decision making.
a.
Treatment Initiation
The initiation of asthma treatment should be guided by the asthma
control (severity and frequency of symptoms) and lung function.
For patients with well-controlled asthma (ACT score of ≥20 or ‘NO’ to
all GINA questionnaire or RCP questionnaire) and normal lung function:
• prescribe a regular low-dose ICS and as-needed SABA as a
reliever
• alternatively, as-needed ICS-formoterol or as-needed ICS-SABA
(either as separate devices or a combined single device) may be
prescribed
• Monotherapy with SABA is not recommended as its excessive use is
associated with risk of asthma exacerbation and mortality.
 Thus, it is vital to use ICS together with SABA or regimen without
SABA [ICS-formoterol anti-inflammatory reliever (AIR)]
For patients with not well controlled asthma (ACT score of <20 or ‘YES’
to ≥1 GINA questionnaire or RCP questionnaire) with symptoms on
most days OR night-time awakening of ≥1 night per week OR FEV1
<80% of predicted or LLN, the followings are recommended.
• Prescribe either low-dose ICS-LABA or low-to-medium-dose ICS
as maintenance therapy. In patients with concomitant allergic
rhinitis, low-dose ICS with leukotriene receptor antagonists
(LTRA) may be used.
• For reliever therapy, SABA or ICS-SABA may be used. If ICSformoterol is used as maintenance, it can also be used as the
reliever.
In those patients with not well controlled asthma (ACT score of <20
or ‘YES’ to ≥1 GINA questionnaire or RCP questionnaire) with daily
symptoms OR night-time awakening of ≥1 night per week AND FEV1
<80% of predicted or LLN, the followings are recommended.
• Prescribe medium-to-high-dose ICS-LABA as maintenance
therapy.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
• Alternatively, medium-dose ICS-LABA with add-on LAMA or LTRA
(concomitant allergic rhinitis) may also be used as maintenance
therapy.
• For reliever therapy, SABA or ICS-SABA may be used. If ICSformoterol is used as maintenance, it can also be used as the
reliever.
Patients on maintenance therapy, as per Algorithm 1 on Initiation of
Asthma Treatment, should be assessed for control at 3 - 6 months. If
they are well controlled, current therapy could be continued or stepped
down with regular assessments. If symptoms remain uncontrolled,
management should be adjusted according to Algorithm 2 on Step Up
and Step Down Options in Management of Stable Asthma.
b.
Treatment Step Up
Patients with initial asthma symptoms <2 per month and no risk factors
for exacerbation should be prescribed on maintenance low-dose ICS
[with as needed (PRN) SABA] OR PRN ICS-formoterol OR PRN ICSSABA.
In patients who remain uncontrolled despite on low dose ICS (with PRN
SABA) OR PRN ICS-formoterol OR PRN ICS-SABA, treatment may be
stepped up to maintenance low-dose ICS-LABA OR medium-dose ICS.
In patients who remain uncontrolled despite on low-dose ICS-LABA OR
medium-dose ICS, increasing ICS to high-dose is not recommended
due to potential systemic adverse effects (AEs) which may occur with
high doses and long-term use of ICS. Treatment may be stepped up to
medium OR high-dose ICS-LABA
In patients who remain uncontrolled despite on medium OR high-dose
ICS-LABA, a phenotypic assessment should be done. Treatment may
be stepped up to either:
• medium-to-high-dose ICS-LABA with LAMA
• single inhaler high-dose ICS-LABA-LAMA if available
Early referral to respiratory physicians should be considered in
patients with high-risk of exacerbation or has history of severe asthma
exacerbation.
LTRA may be added to maintenance therapy if the patient has
concurrent allergic rhinitis. Refer to Subsection 6.2.1.b (iv) on LTRA
and 8.5.c on Allergic Rhinitis.
Patients with persistent uncontrolled asthma despite on high-dose
ICS-LABA-LAMA triple therapy should be referred to a respiratory
physician and discuss within a multi-disciplinary team (MDT) for
thorough evaluation and optimal treatment including consideration of
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
biologics use. Other add-on treatments e.g. low-dose azithromycin
or oral corticosteroids (OCS) may be offered. An MDT for severe
asthma typically includes chest physician, allergist, respiratory nurse,
pharmacist and sometimes a psychologist or physiotherapist to provide
comprehensive care and management.
The choice of reliever therapy depends on the patient’s maintenance
therapy. For those on ICS-formoterol, the preferred reliever is ICSformoterol (maximum doses of 12 puffs/day) to avoid confusion and
improve adherence. For those on ICS-LABA or ICS monotherapy as
maintenance, the choice of reliever can be either SABA or ICS-SABA.
The treatment should be continued until reassessment at 3 - 6 months.
Consider a short-term step up (for 1 - 2 weeks) with Asthma Action Plan
(AAP) in situations with identifiable triggers e.g. during viral infection or
allergen exposure.3
c.
Treatment Step Down
If good asthma control is achieved at 3 - 6 months’ re-assessment,
consider stepping down treatment to find the lowest effective dose and
minimal side effects. Choose an appropriate time for treatment step
down (e.g. no respiratory infection, not travelling, not pregnant, etc.).
Exercise caution before stepping down treatment in those with history of
severe exacerbations. Ensure a follow-up for assessment of symptoms.
Recommendation 2
• The assessment of asthma control should be performed before
considering stepping up or down the treatment algorithm.
• Short-acting β2-agonist should always be taken together with inhaled
corticosteroids.
• Treatment should be stepped up to achieve good asthma control.
• If good asthma control is achieved at 3 – 6 months re-assessment,
consider stepping down treatment to find the lowest effective dose.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
5.
PATIENT EDUCATION AND SKILLS TRAINING
The main goal of education is to provide patients and their family/other
carers with suitable information and training on asthma management in
partnership with their healthcare providers.2 Patient education should
include:
• asthma information
• guided self-management
• skills training on effective inhaler use
• adherence improvement
5.1. Asthma Information
The key topics of asthma information are provided in Table 4.
Table 4: Information to be Included in Asthma Education
Basic information about asthma
• Pathophysiology and symptoms
• Recognising early signs of exacerbation
• Treatment goal
• Identifying and avoidance of asthma triggers
• Impact of co-morbidities on asthma control
Pharmacotherapy
• The difference between reliever and maintenance
• Dosages of medication
• Information of inhalation devices and importance of correct
inhaler technique
• Possible drug adverse reactions
Non-pharmacotherapy
• Smoking cessation
• Allergen exposure
• Vaccination
• Weight reduction
• Pulmonary rehabilitation
• Physical activity
• Yoga
• Breathing exercise
• Dietary modifications
• Vitamin D
Importance of adherence behaviours
• Medication adherence
• Regular follow-up appointments
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Limited asthma education, focusing solely on providing information,
does not enhance health outcomes in adults with asthma unless
complemented by other essential components.3
5.2. Guided Self-Management
Guided self-management is the active process by which healthcare
providers guide and support patients to develop self-management
competencies.
• It is essential for patients to understand their asthma, actively
engage in shared decision-making and take charge of managing
their condition.
• The components of guided asthma self-management include:
 self-monitoring of symptoms and/or PEFR
 AAP
 regular medical review by healthcare providers
a.
Self-monitoring of symptoms and/or PEF
Self-monitoring by either symptoms or PEF with regular medical review
and an AAP has been shown to reduce both emergency department
(ED) visits and hospitalisation rates compared with usual care in
asthma.3
b.
Asthma action plan
AAP contains action (decision) points which guide patients in making
short-term adjustments to their treatment based on their symptoms
and/or PEFR. Refer to Appendix 5 on Asthma Action Plan. The AAP
should be completed and explained to the patient by the attending
healthcare provider to ensure patients understand how to manage their
asthma effectively.
Individualised AAP based on PEFR is equivalent to the plan based on
symptoms in hospitalisation and ED visit.3
An effective AAP may contain two to four action points. In PEFR-based
plans, personal best PEFR should be used for the action point. The
treatment instruction should include reliever therapy, ICS and oral
OCS.3 The best PEFR is the patient’s known personal best under
stable conditions i.e. not measured during an exacerbation. In patients
without known personal best, the predicted value may be used. Refer
to Appendix 4 on Peak Expiratory Flow Nomogram.
In an RCT on mild to moderate asthma patients, increasing a patient’s
ICS dose at the first sign of an exacerbation compared with maintaining
stable dose of ICS showed no difference in the following outcomes:4, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
• treatment failure (need for systemic corticosteroids)
• unscheduled physician visits
• unscheduled acute care, ED visit or hospital admission
However, in patients with poorer asthma control, an open label RCT
found temporarily increasing ICS dose by four-fold prolonged the time
to a first severe exacerbation with HR of 0.81 (95% CI 0.71 to 0.92)
compared with stable dose group.5, level I
Increasing the dose of ICS does not benefit all patients during
exacerbation. Patients are advised to seek further medical assistance if
symptoms persist despite following the AAP.
c.
Regular medical review by healthcare providers
Optimisation of asthma control by adjustment of medications may be
conducted by either self-adjustment with the aid of an AAP or by regular
medical review.3 In a local cross-sectional study, 47.7% of patients
were overprescribed with SABA, with 9% receiving prescriptions
without appropriate assessment.6, level III Patients who are unable
to manage their asthma using AAP will benefit from regular medical
review.2 Therefore, the CPG DG opines that regular medical reviews
are preferred in local setting.
d.
Strategies to implement guided self-management
Behaviour change techniques (BCTs) are methods used to facilitate the
adoption of new desirable behaviours or the cessation of undesirable
ones by targeting various psychological, social and environmental
factors. BCTs can range from:
• providing information and education
• using rewards or incentives
• goal-setting
• social support
• cognitive-behavioural strategies
A network meta-analysis (NMA) found that BCTs were important
elements to effective self-management. Low-intensity BCTs (≤1 per
month) delivered by healthcare providers had the highest SUCRA
values of 89.1% for hospitalizations and 84.2% for ED visits, suggesting
they are the most likely to be effective compared to usual care.7, level I.
Most primary studies used had an unclear risk of bias.
In an RCT on asthma patients >60 years old, tailoring interventions
to screen and target specific self-management barriers compared
with usual care significantly improved asthma control, medication
adherence, inhaler technique and quality of life (QoL).8, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
In local settings, BCTs have been shown to be useful in the management
of asthma.
Recommendation 3
• Regular medical reviews in asthma patients are preferred over selfadjustment of medications aided by asthma action plan.
• Behavioural change techniques should be considered in selfmanagement strategy of asthma.
5.3. Skills Training on Effective Use of Inhaler Device
The three main categories of inhalers are dry powder inhaler (DPI),
pressurised metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) and soft-mist inhaler (SMI).
They require different inhalation and operating techniques for effective
use.
Inhaler technique errors are a common challenge faced by patients
with asthma. Improper use can lead to inadequate medication
delivery, resulting in poor asthma control and an increased risk of
exacerbations.9, level I; 10, level II-2
Inhaler errors include failing to exhale completely to empty lungs before
inhalation, not holding breath or holding it for less than 3 seconds, not
tilting the head slightly back and improperly loading the dose before
administering the second dose.9, level I
A cross-sectional study on asthma patients using pMDI found the
following errors were associated with uncontrolled asthma:10, level II-2
• actuation before inhalation
• incorrect preparation of second dose inhalation
• exhaling into the inhaler device
• not holding the device upright
It also found that in patients using DPI, insufficient inspiratory effort was
significantly associated with an increased likelihood of uncontrolled
asthma and exacerbations.10, level II-2
The CPG DG opines that factors contributing to the above errors
include lack of proper training, misunderstanding of inhaler instructions
and complexity of multiple inhaler devices prescribed. Addressing these
issues through education and training is essential to improve inhaler
technique, enhance patient outcomes and ensure effective asthma
management.
Refer to Appendix 6 on Inhaler Devices and Techniques.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
a.
Principles of effective inhaler technique education
The following principles provide a framework for healthcare professionals
to effectively educate patients on proper inhaler techniques.
• Training of healthcare professionals –
 Healthcare professionals must be knowledgeable about inhalers
including the correct technique and be able to identify any issues
patients may have in using a device.9, level I; 11, level I; 12, level I
• Select appropriate inhaler device for the patients –
 Consider patients’ specific needs, preferences, ability to use
the device correctly and availability of the device.12, level I
• Visual demonstration –
 Physical and/or video demonstration by trained professionals
to provide clear visual guidance of the correct inhaler
technique.13, level I; 9, level I; 12, level I
• Teach-to-Goal (TTG) approach –
 TTG involves cycles of demonstration and assessment of
patients’ inhaler techniques until they master the correct
techniques. This ensures patients receive the necessary
support and feedback to improve the techniques.13, level I
• Continuous monitoring and periodic reinforcement –
 Regular reinforcement of inhalation instructions is necessary
due to waning effect of the interventions over time.12, level I
b.
Factors to consider when selecting an inhaler for a patient
A systematic review of nine published algorithms identified five key
factors for device selection:11, level I
Ability to perform the required inspiratory manoeuvre
• Patients’ ability to inhale –
 slowly and deeply for pMDI and SMI
 forcefully and deeply for DPI
This ability depends on cognitive function and inspiratory muscle
function. For patients with difficulty performing these manoeuvres
and/or having cognitive impairment, a pMDI with a valved holding
chamber (VHC) is recommended.
Ability to handle the device correctly
• Assess patients’ ability to perform the steps of using the inhaler
device, which depends on their manual dexterity and hand
strength.
Sufficient inspiratory flow for DPI
• Assess inspiratory flow and effort to estimate the patient’s
ability to generate turbulent energy needed to disaggregate the
powder into fine particles. For individuals with insufficient or
suboptimal inspiratory flow and effort, a pMDI with VHC or SMI is
recommended.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Availability of molecules in the device
• It is important to consider which molecules are available in each
type of device.
Continuity of the device
• When the patients are using the inhaler correctly, it is advisable to
choose the same device for any new therapy.
• Using the same inhaler device for multiple-inhaler regimens
improves clinical outcomes and reduced healthcare use in patients
with asthma.14, level I
Environmental impact
• The environmental impact of inhalers, including manufacturing
and recycling, and pMDI propellants, should be considered when
selecting devices.
5.4. Adherence Improvement
In general, adherence to inhalers in asthma is sub-optimal. This issue
is common across all inhalers particularly in inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS). Reliable and objective measures are needed to assess the
adherence.15, level III
Patient-reported outcome instruments (PROs) are simple, timely and
inexpensive tools that can be used in clinical practice. PROs that
have been validated to assess adherence to inhaled maintenance
medications in adults with asthma include:16, level III
• Test of Adherence to Inhalers (TAI)
• Medication Adherence Report Scale for Asthma
• Adherence Questionnaire
The 10-item TAI questionnaire has been translated into the Malay
language and validated to assess inhalers adherence among Malaysian
patients with asthma (refer to Appendix 7).17, level III
Records on prescribed medications from electronic health records can
also be used to indirectly estimate adherence. Two of the most widely
used adherence measures are the medication possession ratio and
proportion of days covered.18, level II-2
The World Health Organization (WHO) distinguishes three types of
non-adherence which are:19, level I
• erratic non-adherence – unintentional non-adherence due to
sporadic forgetfulness (e.g. caused by a busy lifestyle)
• unwitting non-adherence – unintentional non-adherence, usually
due to misunderstanding instructions or poor inhaler technique
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Reminders and/or counselling
• Caregiver support
• Link to daily habits (e.g. brushing teeth)
• Use daily reminders (e.g. alarm clock, text/audio/
visual messages, smart inhaler)
• Use
motivational
strategies
to
encourage
continuous use to remain symptoms control
• Discuss causes and frequency of anxiety (diseaserelated or not) and, counselling on coping strategies
Medication plan
• Simplify medication regimen (frequency or
number of devices)
• Provide personalised AAP
• Caregiver support – educating the caregivers on
correct medication use
Inhaler technique education
• Provide written or visual inhaler instructions for
home use
• Physical and/or video demonstration with TTG
approach
Education and/or counselling
• Counselling on likelihood, severity and prevention
of possible side effects
• Educate on the chronic nature of the disease and
long-term benefits of maintenance treatment
• Apply motivational strategies for setting goals and
managing expectations
• Emphasise importance of following prescribed
regimen
for
continuous
effectiveness
of
medication
• Educate on positive impact of medication use on
daily life and work.
• Engage in shared decision-making when selecting
an inhaler
Erratic
Unwitting
Intelligent
Adherence improvement strategies
Types on nonadherence
• intelligent non-adherence – intentional non-adherence as a result
of a reasoned decision to reject therapy which include lack of
confidence in treatment, denial of diagnosis, embarrassment
about using inhalers in social situations, peer-group pressures,
concern about adverse effects and false beliefs that treatment can
be stopped because symptoms have improved
Adherence improvement strategies matched to the type of nonadherence are shown below.19, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
5.5. Patient Education Modality
Asthma education can be provided by any healthcare providers,
including pharmacists and nurses.
In asthma patients, self-management support service provided by
community pharmacists compared with usual care improved the
following:20, level I
• symptom control (SMD=0.46, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.82)
• QoL (SMD=0.23, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.34)
• medication adherence (SMD=0.44, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.61)
In Malaysia, the Respiratory Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic
(RMTAC) has been conducted by pharmacists in collaboration with
other healthcare providers. This programme manages asthma by
providing education, monitoring adherence and resolving medicationrelated problems.3
In a local study, compared with standard care, RMTAC significantly
improved asthma control. After a 6-month intervention, 51.9% of
subjects in the RMTAC group achieved well-controlled status compared
with 20.9% of those in control group (p<0.001). The majority of RMTAC
patients mastered good inhalation technique compared with control
group (75.3% vs 31.9%, p<0.001).21, level II-1
Guided self-management provided by trained asthma educators in
an RCT had been shown to improve patient outcomes compared with
usual care in terms of:22, level I
• QoL based on AQLQ score (MD=0.52, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.83)
• asthma control based on ACQ score (MD= -0.68, 95% CI -0.99 to
-0.38)
• asthma-related exacerbations:
 mean number of moderate to severe exacerbations per patient
(SMD= -0.25, 95%CI -0.47 to -0.03)
 total number of exacerbations (RR=0.51, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.95)
• PEF (SMD=31.42, 95% CI 13.21 to 49.62)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Well controlled asthma on low-intensity
treatment e.g. as needed low-dose ICSformoterol or maintenance low-dose ICS plus
as-needed SABA
Well controlled asthma on low or medium
dose ICS-LABA
Controlled asthma on high-dose ICS-LABA
treatment that worsens when high-dose
treatment is reduced
OR
Uncontrolled asthma despite adherence to
maximal optimised high-dose ICS-LABA and
management of contributory factors.
Severe asthma is a subset type of difficultto-treat asthma (refer to Subchapter 8.1 for
further explanation)
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Definition
Severity of asthma
6.
STABLE ASTHMA
6.1. Assessment of Stable Asthma
Severity of stable asthma is categorised based on the level of treatment
needed to control the symptoms. It can be categorised as below.2
• In stable asthma, assessment of severity should be performed at
every medical review especially before escalating (stepping-up) or
de-escalating (stepping-down) treatment. The assessment should
include:
 assessment of asthma control using validated tools
 identifying future exacerbation risk factors and co-morbidities
 checking adherence, inhaler techniques and other treatment
related issues e.g. adverse effects
a.
Assessment of asthma control
The validated verified tools that can be used in assessment of asthma
symptoms include Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) Assessment (refer
to Table 5), ACT (refer to Appendix 8), Asthma Control Questionnaire
(ACQ) and the Royal College of Physicians ‘3 Questions’ (RCP 3).
The GINA Assessment is filled-up by the physicians while the rest
are patient-reported tools. The choice of assessment tool should be
the same at every medical review to ensure consistency in assessing
asthma control.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
In the past four
weeks, has the
patient had:
Daytime asthma
symptoms more
than twice/week?
Any night waking
due to asthma?
SABA* reliever for
symptoms more
than twice/week?
Any activity limitation
due to asthma?
Yes
Well
controlled
Partly
controlled
Uncontrolled
No
None of
these
1 – 2
of these
3 – 4
of these
ACT Score
Asthma control
20 - 25
Well-controlled
16 - 19
Not well controlled
5 - 15
Very poorly controlled
The GINA questionnaire assesses symptom control based on frequency
of daytime asthma symptoms, night waking, activity limitation and
frequency of SABA reliever use.2 It can be used as a quick screening
tool in primary care setting to identify patients who need more detailed
assessment.
Table 5: GINA Assessment of Asthma Control
*Based on SABA (as-needed ICS-formoterol reliever not included);
excludes reliever taken before exercise
ACT is a validated and preferred objective assessment on degree of
current control of asthma in adults for the past four weeks (refer to
Appendix 8). The scores indicating asthma control are as follows:2
Other symptom control assessment tools include the use of 5-item
ACQ (ACQ-5), which is preferred over other versions primarily due to
its simplicity.2 The ACQ-5 includes five questions that focus on the core
symptoms of asthma over the past one week:
• waking at night due to asthma
• waking in the morning with asthma symptoms
• activity limitation
• shortness of breath
• need for rescue inhaler use
Each question has a score from 0 to 6, with 0 indicating no symptoms
and 6 indicating severe symptoms. The final score is the average of
the five responses with lower scores reflecting better asthma control as
shown below.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ACT Score
Asthma control
0 – 0.75
Well-controlled
0.75 – 1.50
Very poorly controlled
>1.50
Not well controlled
The RCP 3 may be used as an initial screening tool of asthma control.
It consists of three questions focused on recent sleep disturbances due
to asthma, daytime symptoms and limitations in daily activities caused
by the condition. Responding “Yes” to any of these questions indicates
suboptimal asthma control.
Different asthma assessment tools have their own unique strengths
and these should be considered when selecting the most appropriate
tool for each patient. Table 6 outlines the key features of each tool,
helping healthcare professionals choose the best option based on the
clinical context, patient needs and asthma severity.
Table 6: Comparison of Asthma Control Assessment Tools
Patients with well-controlled asthma for 3 - 6 months can be considered
for de-escalation of treatment. Other factors that need to be assessed
before making this decision include FEV1 percentage predicted ≥80%,
post-bronchodilatation FEV1/FVC ≥70% and absence of asthma
exacerbations in the last 12 months.23, level III
The reduction of FeNO levels following treatment with ICS can be used
to monitor effectiveness of therapy and suppression of T2 inflammation.
Persistent elevation of FeNO after initiation of ICS may indicate either
poor adherence to ICS or inadequate ICS dosage.
b.
Assessment of future exacerbation risks
Patients with well-controlled asthma can still be at risk for future
exacerbations. By identifying modifiable risk factors and evaluating
the frequency of past exacerbations, healthcare providers can tailor
treatment plans to prevent future exacerbations. Screening for risk
Assessor
No. of items
Recall
duration
Physician
4 items
4 weeks
Patient selfadministered
5 items
4 weeks
Patient selfadministered
5 items
1 weeks
Patient selfadministered
3 items
4 weeks
GINA
Questionnaire
ACT
ACQ-5
RCP
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
factors of future exacerbations should be conducted at every medical
review.
• Risk factors for future exacerbation include:
 previous history of severe asthma exacerbation requiring systemic
corticosteroids or hospitalisation within the past year
 overuse of SABA (≥3 cannisters per year)
 inadequate ICS use or not on ICS
 poor adherence to maintenance therapy
 incorrect inhaler technique
 current smoker, e-cigarette or vape user
 co-morbidities: obesity, GERD, chronic rhinosinusitis, confirmed
food allergy
 pregnancy
 type-2 inflammatory markers: high FeNO, blood eosinophilia
 lung function: low FEV1 especially <60% predicted, high
bronchodilator responsiveness
c.
Assessment of treatment adherence, inhaler techniques and
medication adverse effects
Effective patient compliance relies greatly on discussing treatment
goals with patients and understanding patients’ treatment preferences.
Inhaler techniques should be demonstrated by patients and evaluated at
every medical review to correct any improper use. Healthcare providers
should take time to listen to patients’ feedback and experiences with
their inhalers and address any issues that arise.
Although asthma medications are generally safe, adverse effects must
be assessed and addressed. For example, local side effects of ICS
e.g. oral thrush and dysphonia can be managed by improving inhaler
technique and rinsing the mouth after each use.2
Recommendation 4
• Assessment of asthma should include:
 evaluating current asthma symptoms control using validated tools
 identifying future exacerbation risk factors and co-morbidities
 checking adherence, inhaler techniques and other treatment
related issues
6.2. Treatment
The treatment strategy for asthma involves both pharmacological and
non-pharmacological interventions to effectively manage symptoms,
reduce risk of exacerbations and improve QoL.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
6.2.1. Pharmacological treatment
Effective
pharmacological
treatment
is
essential
in
asthma
management. This includes using reliever therapy for relief of symptoms
and maintenance therapy to reduce inflammation. Treatment should be
tailored to disease severity, patient’s preferences and response.
a.
Reliever therapy
Reliever therapy is taken as needed for quick relief of asthma symptoms.
It includes SABAs, ICS-formoterol and ICS-SABA.
i.
Short-acting β2-agonists
There is limited new evidence on safety and effectiveness of SABA
monotherapy. Regular SABA monotherapy is associated with
decreased in bronchodilator response and, increased in airway
hyperresponsiveness and airway inflammation. Excessive SABA
monotherapy use (≥3 of 200-dose canisters a year) is associated with
risk of asthma exacerbation and mortality.2
A local study also showed that patients prescribed with ≥3 canisters of
SABA/year, either as monotherapy or combination, were more likely
to have severe exacerbations (OR=2.04, 95% CI 1.44 to 2.89) and
less likely to have controlled asthma (OR=0.42, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.67)
compared with those with 1 – 2 canisters of SABA/year.6, level III
In chronic asthma, a combination of short-acting muscarinic antagonists
(SAMA) and SABA does not offer any additional advantage.3
Oral SABA is not recommended due to its higher risk of side effects
compared with inhaled SABA.2
ii.
Anti-inflammatory reliever
Anti-inflammatory reliever (AIR) is a reliever inhaler that contains both a
low-dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and a fast-acting bronchodilator.2
A Cochrane systematic review of four RCTs on mild asthma showed
that as needed single combined budesonide-formoterol inhaler
reduced asthma-related hospital admission or emergency department/
urgent care visit (OR=0.63, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.91) compared with regular
budesonide plus as needed SABA (salbutamol or terbutaline) at 52
weeks. There were NS differences in exacerbations requiring systemic
corticosteroids and annual severe exacerbation rate. However, asthma
control assessed by ACQ-5 favoured regular budesonide plus as needed
SABA (MD=0.12, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.15) although it did not reach minimal
clinically important difference (MCID) of 0.5 points. For secondary
outcome, as needed single combined budesonide-formoterol inhaler
had higher FeNO level at 52 weeks (geometric mean=1.13, 95% CI
1.06 to 1.20) indicating increased airway inflammation. Safety profile
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
showed NS differences in any/severe AEs or mortality.24, level I The
quality of evidence for these outcomes were mixed based on GRADE.
An RCT on patients with uncontrolled moderate to severe asthma
who were on ICS maintenance therapies compared as needed pMDI
budesonide-salbutamol with salbutamol alone. It showed that risk of
severe exacerbation was lower in high-dose budesonide-salbutamol
160/180 µg (HR=0.74, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.89) but NS difference in
moderate dose budesonide-salbutamol 80/180 µg. The percentage of
patients with any AEs was similar between the groups.25, level I
iii.
Long-acting β2-agonists
The inhaled rapid-onset LABA i.e. formoterol is as effective as SABA
as a reliever medication in asthma, but its use without ICS is strongly
discouraged because of the risk of fatal and non-fatal adverse events.3
This is supported by a recommendation in SIGN-BTS guidelines where
LABA should only be started in patients who are already on ICS and the
ICS should be continued.26
Recommendation 5
• In the treatment of asthma:
 inhaled short-acting β2-agonists (SABA) should not be used as
monotherapy
 inhaled SABA may be used as reliever therapy with regular
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
 inhaled SABA overuse (≥3 canisters/year) should be avoided
 oral SABA should not be used
 anti-inflammatory reliever (AIR) therapy (either ICS with formoterol
or ICS with SABA) may be used as a reliever therapy
 inhaled long-acting β2-agonists (LABA) without ICS should not be
used as reliever monotherapy
b.
Maintenance therapy
Maintenance is defined as medication targeting both domains of
asthma symptom control and prevention of future exacerbation risk. It
is intended to be used on a regular basis, even when asthma symptoms
are absent.
i.
Inhaled corticosteroids
Regular daily low-dose ICS is indicated for asthma patients on as
needed ICS and SABA who either are unable to adhere to treatment or
remain symptomatic.
It significantly reduces asthma symptoms, risk of asthma-related
exacerbations, hospitalisation and death. However, patients with mild
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
asthma often have poor adherence to ICS, resulting in them relying on
SABA alone and thus increasing risk of exacerbations.2
ICS dosage can be categorised into low-, medium- or high-dose as
shown in Table 7. Different ICS within the same category may differ in
potency. Switching of ICS within a category may change the asthma
control. Therefore, patients need to be monitored and ICS dose
adjusted accordingly.
Systemic side effects may occur with high doses and long-term use of
ICS. These include easy bruising, an increased risk of osteoporosis
and fragility fractures beyond the usual age-related risks, cataracts,
glaucoma, and adrenal suppression.2
ii.
Combination of ICS and long-acting β2-agonists
Regular daily ICS-LABA is indicated for asthma patients on regular daily
low-dose ICS or as-needed ICS/formoterol who remain symptomatic
despite good adherence and inhaler technique.
Combination of ICS-LABA is more effective in reducing risk of
exacerbations compared with a higher dose of ICS alone in asthma
with sub-optimal control on low-dose ICS monotherapy.3
Proactive regular dosing (PRD) is a treatment strategy where
medication is taken at scheduled consistent interval. It also referred
to as regular maintenance dosing. A local retrospective study on
patients with uncontrolled asthma despite using either as-needed
budesonide-formoterol or ICS and SABA PRN, PRD of fluticasone/
salmeterol was shown as an effective and safe treatment approach.
It significantly improved symptom control (mean ACT scores), and
reduced hospitalisations and systemic corticosteroids use.27, level III
A recent Cochrane systematic review found no evidence on safety
concerns that would affect the choice between salmeterol/ICS and
formoterol/ICS combination inhalers used for regular maintenance
therapy. GRADE assessment showed low to moderate certainty of the
evidence.28, level I
A meta-analysis demonstrated that extra-fine hydrofluoroalkane (HFA)-
beclomethasone-formoterol (BDP-F) showed NS difference compared
with non-extrafine ICS-LABA in pulmonary function concerning central
and peripheral airways, as well as in ACT scores and exacerbation
rates. Risk of bias of primary papers was generally low.29, level I
iii.
Maintenance and reliever therapy
Maintenance and Reliever Therapy (MART) is a treatment regimen
involving the daily use of an ICS-formoterol (e.g. budesonide-formoterol
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
or beclomethasone diproprionate-formoterol) inhaler for asthma
maintenance and as-needed for symptom relief.
An NMA on single inhaler as MART and other as-needed therapies
in preventing the risk of severe asthma exacerbation found the
following:30, level I
• in mild to moderate asthma patients –
 low-dose MART and as-needed ICS-LABA were equally
effective
 low-dose MART was significantly more effective than ICSLABA with as-needed SABA and ICS with as-needed SABA
• in moderate to severe asthma patients –
 low-to-medium-dose MART and high-dose ICS-LABA with asneeded SABA were equally effective
 low-to-medium-dose MART was significantly more effective
than low-to-medium-dose ICS-LABA with as-needed SABA
and ICS with as-needed SABA
NS differences were found across the treatments on risk of SAEs.
Overall, the quality of evidence was moderate to high based on GRADE.
Table 7: Categorisation of ICS Doses (Alone or in Combination
with LABA) into Low, Medium and High Levels
Source: Global Initiative for Asthma. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and
Prevention, 2024. Updated May 2024 (Available at: www.ginasthma.org)
Beclometasone dipropionate
(pMDI, standard particle, HFA)
Beclometasone dipropionate
(DPI or pMDI, extrafine particle, HFA)
Budesonide
(DPI, or pMDI, standard particle, HFA)
Ciclesonide (pMDI, extrafine
particle, HFA)
Fluticasone furoate (DPI)
Fluticasone propionate (DPI)
200 - 500
>500 - 1000
>1000
100 - 200
>200 - 400
>400
200 - 400
>400 - 800
>800
80 - 160
>160 - 320
>320
200
100 - 250
>250 - 500
>500
100 - 250
>250 - 500
>500
100
Inhaled corticosteroids (alone
or in combination with LABA)
Total daily ICS dose (µg)
Low
Medium
High
Fluticasone propionate
(pMDI, standard particle, HFA)
Mometasone furoate (DPI)
Mometasone furoate
(pMDI, standard particle, HFA)
>400
Depends on DPI device -
refer to product information
200 - 400
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
iv.
Leukotriene receptor antagonists
Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) as monotherapy is less
effective than ICS in terms of symptom control and lung function
improvement,3 as well as exacerbations.2
A Cochrane systematic review of patients with suboptimal asthma
control on daily ICS found:31, level I
• addition of LTRAs compared with using the same dose of ICS
alone reduced the risk of asthma exacerbations requiring rescue
OCS (RR = 0.50, 95% CI 0.29 to 0.86) and, improved lung function
and asthma control. There was no increase in AEs.
• combination therapy of LTRAs and ICS compared with a higher
dose of ICS alone showed NS difference in the number of
participants who experienced ≥1 exacerbations requiring OCS.
Overall, the quality of evidence was low to moderate based on GRADE.
According to various guidelines, LTRA is mentioned to be particularly
useful in patients with allergic asthma.2; 26
It is essential to advise patients, parents, and caregivers about the
potential neuropsychiatric adverse effects of montelukast including
new-onset nightmares, behavioural changes, and, in some cases,
suicidal ideation.32
v.
Methylxanthine
Treatment with theophylline is no longer recommended as it has limited
effectiveness and often causes side effects especially at higher doses
which can be life-threatening.2; 33
A newer immediate-released methylxanthine, doxofylline, has been
shown to have better effectiveness and fewer side-effects than
theophylline as stated below.
An NMA comparing doxofylline, theophylline and placebo in adolescent
and adult asthmatic patients found the following:34, level I
• doxofylline reduced the daily asthma events (RE= -0.33, 95% CrI
-0.62 to -0.04) compared with placebo
• doxofylline was more effective than theophylline in reducing daily
asthma events (MD= -0.14, 95% CI -0.27 to -0.00)
• doxofylline was safer than theophylline with lower risk of AEs
(RE=0.53, 95% CrI 0.27 to 0.87)
The primary papers were of mixed quality.
In a pre-post multicentre study on adults with poorly controlled asthma,
oral doxofylline 400 mg three times daily was effective and well-tolerated
at 1-year follow-up based on:35, level II-3
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
• improvement in FEV1 from baseline (+16.90% ± 1.81, p<0.001)
• reduced rate of asthma events (-0.57 events/day ± 0.18, p<0.05)
The most common AEs were nausea (14.56%), headache (14.24%),
insomnia (10.68%) and dyspepsia (10.03%). They were mild or
moderate in severity.
vi.
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs) may be considered
as add-on therapy if asthma remains uncontrolled despite medium
or high-dose ICS-LABA, either in separate inhaler (tiotropium)
or in a combination (‘triple’) inhaler (beclomethasone-formoterolglycopyrronium; mometasone-indacaterol-glycopyrronium; fluticasone
furoate-vilanterol-umeclidinium).2 The latter is currently not registered
in Malaysia.
A meta-analysis on patients with moderate to severe asthma showed
that triple therapy (ICS+LABA+LAMA) compared with medium-to-high
dose dual therapy (ICS+LABA):36, level I
• reduced risk of severe exacerbation (RR=0.83, 95% CI 0.77 to
0.90)
• improved asthma control scores (SMD= -0.06 SD units, 95% CI
-0.10 to -0.02)
• showed NS difference in asthma-related quality of life (QoL), allcause mortality, treatment-related AEs and serious AEs
• increased dry mouth and dysphonia (RR=1.65, 95% CI 1.14 to
2.38).
Overall, the quality of evidence was moderate to high based on GRADE.
This is supported by another NMA on uncontrolled asthma patients
comparing treatment of medium-dose or high-dose triple therapies
and medium-dose ICS-LABA where the former reduced steroidrequiring asthma exacerbations (HR=0.84, 95% Crl 0.71 to 0.99 and
HR=0.69, 95% Crl 0.58 to 0.82 respectively) but not asthma-related
hospitalisations. Triple therapy resulted in NS difference in all-cause or
asthma-related SAEs compared with the control.37, level I
A retrospective cohort study on asthma patients treated with ICS-LABA
showed that adding tiotropium to ICS-LABA was more effective in
reducing exacerbations compared with increasing the dose of ICS in
ICS-LABA therapy (HR=0.65, 95% CI 0.43 to 0.99).38, level II-2
However, there is insufficient evidence to support substituting LAMA for
LABA as add-on therapy for patients on ICS.2; 3
vii.
Macrolides
Macrolides is an antibacterial with immunomodulatory properties which
can reduce airway hyperactivity and eosinophilic inflammation.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
A Cochrane systematic review of patients with chronic asthma
comparing macrolides with placebo showed:39, level I
• reduced exacerbations requiring ED visits and/or treatment with
systemic corticosteroids (RR=0.65, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.80)
• reduced symptoms (SMD= -0.46, 95% CI -0.81 to -0.11)
• NS
difference
in
reduction
of
exacerbations
requiring
hospitalisations
• NS difference in severe AEs (including mortality)
GRADE assessment showed low to moderate certainty of the evidence.
Long-term macrolides should be part of a comprehensive asthma
management plan tailored to individual patient needs. It should only be
started after consultation with a specialist.
viii. Oral corticosteroids
The use of OCS at the minimum necessary dose and for the shortest
time possible may be considered as a last resort for patients with severe
asthma. Refer to Subchapter 8.1 on Severe Asthma.
The Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand position paper
recommends practicing OCS stewardship in asthma to minimise the
use of OCS and mitigate the harm associated with its use.40, level III
ix.
Sublingual immunotherapy
Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) involves administering allergen
extracts, typically in tablet or liquid drops to desensitise and decrease
sensitivity to specific allergen trigger in patients with allergy. The
duration varies depending on the specific allergens targeted e.g. house
dust mite (HDM) or grass pollen.
A systematic review of RCTs in well-managed mild-to-moderate
allergic asthma patients showed that SLIT tablets targeting HDM were
effective in reducing ICS dosage (MD=81 mg, 95% CI 27 to 136) while
maintaining adequate asthma control.41, level I The primary papers used
were of mixed quality based on ROB assessment.
In cases of allergic asthma, allergen immunotherapy is advised when
there is clinical evidence of IgE-mediated sensitisation to common
airborne allergens. It is recommended that allergen immunotherapy be
administered by experienced specialists.33
The role of SLIT as therapeutic options for asthma is not yet clearly
established in most guidelines.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Recommendation 6
• All asthma patients should be on inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)-
containing therapy.
• Combination of ICS/long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) is preferred to
high-dose ICS during stepping-up of asthma treatment.
• In moderate to severe asthma, either low-to-medium-dose
maintenance and reliever therapy (MART) or high-dose ICS/LABA
plus as-needed SABA may be used.
• Triple therapy (ICS/LABA/long-acting muscarinic antagonist) should
be used in patients with uncontrolled asthma despite treatment with
medium-to-high-dose ICS/LABA.
• Theophylline should not be used for treatment of asthma.
Refer to Appendix 9 on Common Medications in Asthma.
6.2.2.
Non-pharmacological treatment
Non-pharmacological treatments for asthma include a range of
interventions that complement pharmacological approaches. These
methods focus on reducing symptoms and improving QoL through
strategies e.g. smoking cessation, allergen avoidance, dietary
modification, exercise and vitamin D supplementation.
a.
Smoking cessation
Smokers have higher risk of adult-onset asthma compared with nonsmokers.3 Smoking in asthma affects airway inflammation, reduces
response to corticosteroid therapy and is associated with poor
disease control, decline in lung function, and increased healthcare
utilisation.2; 42, level III
Asthma patients who smoke or vape should be strongly encouraged to
quit at every clinic visit. They should be provided access to counselling
and smoking cessation programmes. They should also be advised to
avoid environmental smoke exposure.2 For smoking cessation, refer
to the Malaysian CPG on Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder (Second
Edition).
b.
Vitamin D
Vitamin D has been suggested to improve asthma control in patients
with vitamin D deficiency.2; 43, level I; 44, level , However, a Cochrane review
found that vitamin D supplementation did not significantly reduce the
risk of asthma exacerbations or improve overall asthma control in mild
to moderate asthma.45, level I Most of the primary papers used had low
risk of bias.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
c.
Physical activity
Physical activities improve cardiopulmonary effectiveness by improving
oxygen consumption, maximum heart rate and work capacity. There
is limited evidence that they cause significant airway narrowing and
worsening of asthma symptoms. Therefore, they should be promoted
as part of the general approach to improving lifestyle and rehabilitation
in people with asthma.26
Patients
with
exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction
(EIB)
may
experience symptoms if their condition is not well-controlled. However,
with proper treatment, they can exercise without triggering asthma
symptoms and thus avoiding physical activity is not necessary.
There is no specific type of exercise recommended exclusively for
individuals with asthma.2 A cohort study in middle-aged adults showed
that lighter physical activity 3-times per week reduced current asthma
(asthma attacks, need for asthma medicine or wheezing in the past
12 months) by 56% (OR=0.44, 95% CI 0.22 to 0.89) compared with
vigorous physical activity. It also showed that vigorous physical activity
≤1 hour per week reduced current asthma and asthma symptoms by
43% (OR=0.57, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.91) and 8% (OR=0.92, 95% CI 0.86
to 0.98) respectively.46, level II-2 Swimming is well tolerated among young
individuals with asthma and, has been associated with increased lung
function and improved cardiopulmonary fitness.2
Encouraging regular physical activity is important to enhance
cardiopulmonary fitness leading to improved asthma control and QoL. It
should be incorporated into the overall strategy for lifestyle improvement
and rehabilitation, with careful consideration of the potential for EIB.2; 26
d.
Breathing exercise
Breathing exercise programmes, which may involve techniques taught
by physiotherapists in person as well as through audiovisual resources,
can be offered as a complementary approach to medication. It can
reduce respiratory rate, decrease breathing volume, promote the use
of abdominal and lateral chest muscles, encourage nasal breathing and
facilitate relaxation.47, level III These programmes aim to reduce asthma
symptoms and improve QoL.26
A multicentre RCT showed that breathing exercise added to usual care
was better than usual care alone in improving QoL in asthma patients
at six months as measured by mini-AQLQ (MD=0.35, 95% CI 0.07 to
0.62). This effect was maintained at 12 months (MD=0.38, 95% CI 0.12
to 0.65). There was no improvement in anxiety score and although
there was improvement in depression score, it did not reach clinical
significance. There was NS difference in asthma-related AEs.48, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Evidence has shown that breathing exercise can alleviate dyspnoea,
reduce emotional stress and enhance QoL.2; 47, level III However, it does
not reduce the risk of asthma exacerbations or has an impact on lung
function.2
e.
Yoga
Yoga, an ancient Indian practice that includes physical postures,
breathing exercises, meditation and relaxation techniques, may offer
benefits for pulmonary function tests, asthma control tests and healthrelated QoL in patients with asthma. A meta-analysis found that yoga
added to standard care conducted over a period of 8 – 10 weeks when
compared with standard care alone resulted in improvement of:49, level I
• PEFR (SMD=0.38, CI 0.18 to 0.58)
• FEV1 (SMD=0.96, CI 0.77 to 1.14)
• FVC (SMD=0.35, CI 0.14 to 0.55)
• overall pulmonary function (SMD=0.41, CI 0.30 to 0.53)
• health-related QoL (SMD=0.26, CI 0.18 to 0.34)
GRADE assessment indicated generally moderate quality of evidence.
Yoga may be considered as a supplementary therapy or an alternative
to other types of breathing exercises.2
f.
Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation is a comprehensive multifaceted patient
assessment and personalised therapy. This includes supervised
exercise training, educational sessions and behaviour modification
strategies. The primary goal of pulmonary rehabilitation is to improve
both the physical and psychological conditions and foster long-term
adherence to health-promoting behaviours.
A Cochrane systematic review showed that a pulmonary rehabilitation
programme, compared with usual care, for adults with asthma resulted
in improvements on:50, level I
• exercise performance
 percentage predicted maximal rate of oxygen consumption
with MD of 14.88% (95% CI 9.66 to 20.10) at end-intervention
and 10.37% (95% CI 1.6 to 22.34) at 12 months follow-up
 peak oxygen uptake with MD of 3.63 ml/kg/min (95% CI 1.48 to
5.77) at end-intervention and 0.69 mL/kg/min (95% CI 4.79 to
3.42) at 9 – 12 months follow-up
• asthma control
 Asthma Control Questionnaire Score with MD -0.50 (95% CI
-0.80 to -0.20) at end-intervention
GRADE assessment indicated generally low quality of evidence.
Structured pulmonary rehabilitation programmes of 4 – 12 weeks have
demonstrated effectiveness in enhancing functional exercise capacity
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
(6-minute walk) and QoL. Referral to a pulmonary rehabilitation
programme, if available, has been recommended.2, 26
g.
Dietary modifications
The GINA guidelines advocate the consumption of a diet high in fruits
and vegetables as it can significantly reduce risk of lung function
decline which lead to improved asthma control and reduce risk of
exacerbations.2
Increased dietary sodium has been linked to geographical differences
in asthma mortality with high sodium intake being associated with
increased bronchial hyper-responsiveness. However, reducing salt
intake cannot be recommended as a strategy for asthma management
due to paucity of evidence.26
Omega-3 found in fish oils may reduce inflammation and lessen the
severity of exacerbations. However, there is insufficient evidence to
support the recommendation of fish oil supplementation for asthma
treatment.26
h.
Weight reduction
Weight loss interventions, including dietary and exercise programmes,
should be recommended for overweight and obese adults with asthma
to enhance asthma control.26 Refer to Subchapter 8.5 (a) on Obesity.
i.
Allergen exposure
Specific recommendations for managing allergic asthma should be
made after confirming sensitisations to various allergens in a patient.2
Implementing a combination of specific measures of multifaceted
allergen avoidance to decrease allergen exposure results in improved
clinical outcomes.33; 26 Examples of effective strategies involve avoiding
exposure to these allergens e.g. avoidance of outdoor activities when
air quality is poor/air pollution, removing pets from the home for
those allergic to animal dander and addressing dampness for mold at
home.2; 33; 26
j.
Vaccination
Vaccination plays a vital role in protecting individuals against respiratory
infections. Influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations are commonly
available.
In a meta-analysis on children and adults with asthma, influenza
vaccination reduced influenza infections as well as asthma attacks
that resulted in emergency department visits and/or hospitalisations.
GRADE assessment indicated generally very low quality of
evidence.51, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Patients with asthma are encouraged to receive influenza vaccination.2
The Malaysian Society of Infectious Diseases and Chemotherapy
recommends influenza vaccination in all persons aged ≥18 with one or
more medical problems.52
There is inadequate evidence to recommend the routine use of
pneumococcal vaccination in patients with asthma.2; 3 However, in
asthma patients who require maintenance corticosteroids or frequently
repeated systemic corticosteroids, pneumococcal vaccination is
recommended.52
GINA guidelines advocate vaccination in adults with asthma to follow
local immunisation schedule including those for respiratory syncytial
virus infection.2
k.
Medication to be used with caution
•
Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are
generally not contraindicated in asthma unless there is a history of
adverse reactions to these medications. Patients should be asked on
any previous reactions to these agents. Where NSAIDs is indicated for
other medical indications, a selective COX2 inhibitors (e.g. celecoxib or
etoricoxib) and paracetamol may be used as an alternative.2; 3
•
β-blockers
Non-selective β-blockers including eyedrops can exacerbate asthma
symptoms by inducing bronchospasm. If indicated, initiation of oral or
eyedrops β-blockers should be done with caution, on a case by case
basis and under close monitoring. However, cardio-selective β-blockers
are not absolutely contraindicated as it has not been shown to affect
FEV1 or asthma exacerbation in mild to moderate asthma.2; 26; 3
Recommendation 7
• Asthma patients who smoke or vape should be strongly encouraged
to quit at every clinic visit.
• Regular physical activity should be encouraged in asthma patients.
• Weight-loss interventions should be considered to improve asthma
control.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
7.
ASTHMA EXACERBATION
Exacerbation of asthma is defined as progressive or sudden deterioration
in baseline clinical status of a patient and characterised by worsening
respiratory symptoms e.g. increased shortness of breath, wheezing,
coughing and chest tightness.2, 33 Exacerbations can be triggered by
various factors e.g. respiratory infection, environmental pollutants or
stress. Prompt recognition and treatment is important.2
7.1. Assessment
Assessment of an exacerbation involves a focused history and
relevant physical examination with prompt initiation of treatment. A
focused history should include time of onset, trigger factors, severity of
symptoms, risk factors for asthma-related death, allergies and current
asthma medications including doses, adherence pattern and response
to treatment.2; 3 Although the history should be detailed, it should not
compromise the assessment and treatment.
The presence of any asthma-related death risk factors should be
identified during exacerbations. Table 8 shows the factors associated
with increased risk of asthma-related deaths.
Table 8: Factors Associated with Increased Risk of
Asthma-Related Deaths
Related to asthma exacerbation:
• previous exacerbations requiring mechanical ventilation and
intubation2; 33
• frequency of hospitalisation or emergency visits in the past
year 2; 33
Related to asthma control:
• currently
using
or
having
recently
stopped
using
oral
corticosteroids2
• not currently using ICS2
• poor adherence to ICS-containing medications2
• over-use of SABAs2; 33
• poor adherence to a written asthma action plan2
• lack of a written asthma action plan2
Related to co-morbidity e.g. pneumonia, diabetes and arrhythmias2; 33
Others:
• Psychological, psychiatric and social conditions that cause difficult
treatment adherence.2; 33
• Confirmed food allergy or anaphylaxis2
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
The physical examination includes vital signs assessment, evaluation
of severity and, consideration of complications (e.g. pneumothorax)
and differential diagnoses (e.g. heart failure). Chest X-ray (CXR) is not
routinely indicated in all patients with asthma exacerbation. It should be
considered in patients with atypical symptoms, suspected complications
or diagnostic uncertainty in asthma management.
Symptoms, signs and lung function measurements (PEF/FEV1)
are used to classify asthma exacerbations into categories of mild,
moderate, severe and life-threatening (refer to Table 9).33 While PEF
or FEV1 are useful and valid measures of airway calibre, it may not be
applicable to be used in acute asthma exacerbation. Treatment should
be initiated immediately based on the severity of asthma exacerbation.
Table 9: Classification of Severity of Asthma Exacerbation
Note: Not all parameters need to be met to classify the severity. Classify using the
most severe parameters.
Adapted: Plaza Moral V, Alobid I, Álvarez Rodríguez C, et al. GEMA 5.3.
Spanish Guideline on the Management of Asthma. Open Respir Arch.
2023;5(4):100277.
Level of
consciousness
Speech
Respiratory rate
Pulse rate
Blood
pressure
Use of
accessory
muscles
Breath sounds
Oxygen
saturation (SpO2)
PaO2
PaCO2
Alert
Normal
Normal/
<100/min
Normal
Absent
Wheezing
≥95%
Normal
Normal
Alert
Speaks in
phrases
>20/min
100 – 120/min
Normal
Present
Wheezing
90 – 95%
<80 mmHg
<40 mmHg
Alert/confused/
drowsy
Speaks in
words
>25/min
>120/min
Normal/
hypotension
Very evident
Wheezing
<90%
<60 mmHg
<40 mmHg
or normal
Confused/
drowsy/coma
Unable
to speak
<12/min
Bradycardia/
cardiac arrest
Hypotension
Paradoxical
chest
movement/
absent
Silent chest
<90%
< 60 mmHg
>45 mmHg
Clinical
Parameters
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Lifethreatening
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Recommendation 8
• Rapid clinical assessment of severity* should be performed for all
asthma exacerbation.
• Treatment should be initiated immediately based on severity of
asthma exacerbation.
*Refer to Table 9.
7.2. Treatment
i.
Oxygen therapy
Patients with asthma exacerbation are often hypoxaemic and may
require oxygen therapy. Oxygen saturation of ≥94% should be
maintained in all hypoxic asthma patients.3
An RCT on severe asthma exacerbation complicated by respiratory
failure showed that high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) led to significantly
higher pO2 and, lower heart rate and respiratory rate at 24 and 48
hours after admission compared with conventional oxygen therapy
(COT). However, overall clinical response was NS between the two
groups.53, level I
Another RCT on severe asthma exacerbation with hypoxaemia in the
ED setting found that HFNC gave higher comfort scale (MD=3, 95%
CI 2 to 4) and reduction in dyspnoea (MD=4.7, 95% CI 1.5 to 7.8) than
COT.54, level I
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) involves the delivery of oxygen into the
lungs via positive pressure without the need for endotracheal intubation.
In a retrospective cohort study on patients admitted to ICU with asthma
exacerbation, NIV reduced the risk of intubation (OR=0.36, 95% CI
0.32 to 0.40) and in-hospital mortality (OR=0.48, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.58)
compared with no NIV.55, level II-2
A cohort study of adults with asthma exacerbation-related hospitalisation
found that history of 1 - 2 asthmatic exacerbation in the past 12
months was a strong independent predictor for requirement of invasive
mechanical ventilation with OR of 3.12 (95% CI 1.19 to 8.21).56, level II-2
• Patients who are having life-threatening asthma exacerbations with
signs of respiratory distress, worsening hypoxaemia, hypercapnia,
altered mental status, or failure to respond to maximal medical
therapy should be considered for early intubation and referral to
critical care.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Recommendation 9
• Oxygen saturation of ≥94% should be maintained in all hypoxic
asthma patients.
• In asthma exacerbation in emergency department, high flow nasal
cannula should be considered over conventional oxygen therapy.
ii.
β2-Agonists
Inhaled β2-agonists is the first-line treatment in asthma exacerbation.2; 3
In mild to moderate asthma exacerbations, pressurised metered dose
inhaler via spacer is the preferred method of delivery. In severe and lifethreatening exacerbations, continuous delivery of nebulised oxygendriven β2-agonists should be used.3
There is no new evidence on the effectiveness and safety of nebulised
β2-agonists in acute asthma.
• Oral SABA should not be used in asthma exacerbation due to their
systemic side effects.3
• pMDI with spacer should not be used in life-threatening asthma.3
• There is no current evidence supporting the routine use of parenteral
β2-agonists in patients with asthma exacerbation. It should only
be reserved for ventilated patients or those with life-threatening
asthma in critical care settings who do not respond to other
treatments.2; 3; 26; 33
Recommendation 10
• In asthma exacerbation, inhaled β2-agonist is the first-line treatment.
• Oral short-acting β2-agonist (SABA) should not be used in asthma
exacerbation.
iii.
Ipratropium bromide
A Cochrane systematic review demonstrated that combined inhaled
therapy (ipratropium bromide + SABA) was more effective than SABA
alone in adult patients with asthma exacerbation presenting to ED in
terms of:57, level I
• lower risk of hospitalisation (RR=0.72, 95% CI 0.59 to 0.87)
• improved FEV1 (MD=0.25 L, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.48)
• improved PEF (MD=36.58 L/min, 95% CI 23.07 to 50.09) and
higher percent improvement in PEF (MD=24.88%, 95% CI 14.83
to 34.93)
iv.
Systemic corticosteroids
Systemic corticosteroids reduce inflammation, hasten resolution
of exacerbations and prevent subsequent relapses in asthma. The
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
medication should always be administered as early as possible. This is
important especially in patients not responding to initial treatment with
SABA, develop exacerbation while on OCS or has history of previous
exacerbations requiring OCS.2
The suggested daily dose of prednisolone ranges from 0.5 to 1 mg/
kg of the ideal body weight with a maximum of 50 mg daily or 200
mg of intravenous hydrocortisone in divided doses. This dosage should
be maintained for 5 to 7 days and can be stopped without gradual
reduction.2; 33
Administration of corticosteroids by oral, intramuscular (IM) or IV route
provides similar biological results, but oral route is less invasive and
cheaper.2 A Cochrane systematic review on acute asthma patients
showed similar effectiveness between a single dose of IM corticosteroids
and OCS prior to discharge of from ED in proportion of relapse and risk
of AEs.58, level I
v.
Inhaled corticosteroids
Asthma
patients
should
continue
their
maintenance
inhaled
corticosteroids (via pMDI or DPI) when prescribed with systemic
corticosteroids.3
A cross-sectional study showed that additional budesonide inhalation
suspension to a combination of LABA and IV systemic corticosteroids
reduced length of hospital stay (OR=2.99, 95% CI 1.11 to 8.06) and
shortened recovery time from symptoms (OR=6.58, 95% CI 2.03 to
21.3).59, level III
However, in a meta-analysis, there was NS difference between ICS
vs systemic corticosteroids in admission to hospital among adults with
asthma exacerbation. The included evidence comprised of both ICS
delivered through pMDI and nebuliser.60, level I Data was drawn from
studies beyond the scope of the CPG.
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of nebulised
corticosteroids in asthma exacerbation in emergency department.
Recommendation 11
• Systemic corticosteroids should be given in all patients with asthma
exacerbation.
 These patients should continue their maintenance inhaled
corticosteroids.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
vi.
Magnesium sulphate
A single dose of IV magnesium sulphate has been recommended for
severe and life-threatening asthma.2; 26 In acute exacerbation of asthma
not responding to initial treatments and have persistent hypoxaemia, a
single 2 g infusion of the medication over 20 minutes reduces hospital
admissions in patients with FEV1 <25 – 30% predicted at presentation.2
A single dose of IV magnesium sulphate is safe and may improve
lung function and reduce intubation rates in patients with acute severe
asthma.26
There is no retrievable evidence of benefit from repeated dosing of
magnesium sulphate in asthma exacerbation. Repeated doses could
cause hypermagnesemia with muscle weakness and respiratory
fatigue.26
Nebulised magnesium sulphate is not recommended for treatment in
adults with acute asthma. Its addition to nebulised β2-agonist (with
or without nebulised ipratropium) provides no benefit in terms of lung
function or need for hospital admission.26
Recommendation 12
• A single dose of 2 g intravenous magnesium sulphate infusion over
20 minutes should be considered in acute severe and life-threatening
asthma.
vii.
Aminophylline
IV aminophylline has limited effectiveness apart from unfavourable AEs
compared with standard therapy. Therefore, it should not be routinely
used in asthma exacerbation. Consultation with a senior physician is
advisable if its use is required.3
7.3. Monitoring and Evaluation
Monitoring and evaluation of severity of asthma exacerbation include
mental status, vital signs and clinical examination. Restlessness is
an early sign of hypoxia. It is essential to closely monitor patients and
adjust their treatment as needed.
Oxygen saturation levels of <90% indicates the need for aggressive
management. Saturation should be assessed before oxygen is
commenced or five minutes after oxygen is removed or when saturation
stabilises.2
Arterial blood gas (ABG) measurement is not routinely required. It
should be considered for patients with PEFR <50% or those who do
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
not respond to initial treatment or are deteriorating. A PaO2<60 mmHg
and a normal or increased PaCO2 (especially >45 mmHg) indicates
respiratory failure. Chest X-ray should be considered in patients who do
not respond to treatment or if an alternative diagnosis or complication
e.g. pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum or pneumonia is suspected.2
• The CPG DG opines that patients with severe or life-threatening
asthma exacerbation should be monitored frequently to assess their
response to treatment and ensure they do not deteriorate. Monitoring
includes:
 Vital signs - Monitor continuously or at least every 15 – 30 minutes,
including SpO2, respiratory rate, heart rate and blood pressure.
 Mental status - Monitor for any signs of lethargy, restlessness or
other changes indicating hypoxia or hypercapnia, or confusion.
 Auscultation - Regularly check for changes in breath sounds,
rhonchi or silent chest.
 ABG - Monitor hypercapnia or hypoxaemia. A rising or normal
PaCO2 may indicate impending respiratory arrest.
The specific frequency of monitoring might vary based on the severity
of the exacerbation, response to treatment, and institutional protocols.
Patients with severe exacerbations often require close, continuous
observation until they stabilize.
Recommendation 13
• Monitoring and evaluation of severity of asthma exacerbation should
include mental status, vital signs and respiratory assessment.
• In severe and life-threatening asthma arterial blood gases should be
done
7.4. Criteria for Admission
All patients with progressive deterioration following initial treatment and
those with severe or life-threatening asthma should be admitted.2 Other
factors that may be considered for admission are:
• older age2
• use of more than eight SABA puffs in previous 24 hours2
• past history of severe exacerbations (e.g. intubations, asthma
admissions)2
• past history of unscheduled clinic and emergency department
visits requiring use of OCS2
• living alone/socially isolated3
• psychological problems3
• physical disability3
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Patients with asthma exacerbation who respond poorly to optimal
treatment and are at-risk of respiratory failure should be considered for
early referral to critical care team.3
7.5. Criteria for Discharge
There are no specific parameters that assure safe discharge of
patients with exacerbation.33 The decision is usually the result of the
doctor’s clinical observation of the patient’s condition. Patients may be
discharged from hospital if they can follow their prescribed treatment at
home, have few symptoms or need less reliever medications.
Arrangements should be made for a follow-up appointment prior to
discharge from the emergency department. Additionally, it is important
to discuss strategies to improve asthma management, including
medications adherence, proper inhaler techniques and an asthma
action plan.2 The follow-up plan should include a referral letter to a clinic
for the patient to be seen within seven days.
Recommendation 14
• All patients with severe, life-threatening asthma should be admitted.
• Early referral to critical care team should be considered for patients
with asthma exacerbation who respond poorly to optimal treatment.
• Patients with asthma may be discharged with asthma action plan if
they:
 have resolution of symptoms after treatment and
 are able to follow their prescribed treatment at home
• Following asthma exacerbation, all patients should be given a followup plan upon discharge.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
8.
SPECIAL GROUPS
8.1. Severe Asthma
Severe asthma affects about 5 - 10% of asthma patients. These patients
experience poor QoL, increased morbidity and mortality, and increased
healthcare utilisation. Up to 40% of these patients rely on maintenance
or frequent use of systemic corticosteroids which leads to serious AEs.
Asthma is heterogeneous, with various clinical phenotypes driven by
complex biologic endotypes including type-2 (T2) high, T2 low and
mixed endotypes. Patients with severe asthma should be evaluated by
the respiratory physicians, discussed in MDTs and be considered for
biologic therapy to improve outcomes.
In managing severe asthma, it is crucial to understand the definition of
difficult-to-treat and severe asthma as follows:
Classification
Criteria
Includes one or both of the following:
• poor symptom control in the past four weeks (≥3
of the following)
- daytime asthma symptoms more than twice/
week
- reliever use more than twice/week
- activity limitation due to asthma
- night waking due to asthma
• frequent exacerbations*
- ≥2/year requiring OCS and/or
- serious
exacerbations
(≥1/year)
requiring
hospitalisation
Uncontrolled
asthma
Defined by any of the following:
• uncontrolled
asthma
despite
medium-
or
high-dose ICS with a second maintenance
(usually LABA) or maintenance OCS
• requires high-dose treatment to maintain good
symptom control and reduce exacerbation risk
The condition may be influenced by modifiable
factors:
• incorrect inhaler technique
• poor adherence
• smoking
• co-morbidities
It may be due to an incorrect diagnosis or asthma
mimickers e.g. vocal cord dysfunction or COPD
Difficult-totreat asthma
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
* also consider frequent nebuliser use in the local settings
**medium- or high-dose ICS with a second controller or maintenance
OCS
Figure 3: Relationship of asthma, uncontrolled asthma, difficult
to treat asthma and severe asthma.
The above figure shows different asthma types with overlapping circles
indicating shared features.
a.
Risk Factors
Several risk factors can contribute to the development of severe
asthma. A large cohort study on asthma patients found the following
were significantly more prevalent in severe asthma than non-severe
asthma:61, level II-2
• incompletely reversible airflow limitation
• being prone to exacerbation
• neutrophilic airway inflammation
• obesity
• vocal cord dysfunction
• obstructive sleep apnoea
• depression
A subset type of difficult-to-treat asthma. It is
characterised either by:
• uncontrolled asthma despite adherence to
maximal optimised high-dose ICS-LABA and
management of contributory factors
OR
• worsening asthma control when high-dose
treatment** is reduced
Inhaler technique and other modifiable factors
should be addressed before considering the
diagnosis of severe asthma.
Severe
asthma
UA = uncontrolled asthma
DTA = difficult-to-treat asthma
SA = severe asthma
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
• systemic inflammation
• gastrooesophageal reflux disease
• inhaler device polypharmacy
• Aspergillus sensitisation
Identifying and addressing these risk factors through early intervention,
comprehensive asthma management strategies, patient education and
multidisciplinary care can help reduce the risk of developing severe
asthma and improve overall asthma outcomes.
T2 inflammation is present in 95% of patients with severe asthma and
can be readily identified using biomarkers. It reflects the underlying
pathobiology of asthma, which is directly involved in the causal
pathway of asthma exacerbations. It also represents actionable targets
for anti-inflammatory therapy, including ICS, OCS and biologics.
An RCT demonstrated that the use of composite biomarkers of T2
inflammation is important and may support biomarker-adjusted steroid
reduction.62, level I
b.
Treatment
i.
Systemic corticosteroids
Long-term treatment with OCS has been recognised as adjunct therapy
in uncontrolled asthma. Systemic corticosteroids are considered the
last therapeutic option and should be used at the lowest effective dose
and for the shortest duration possible.2; 33
Exposure to both long-term and repeated acute courses of systemic
corticosteroids (>4 courses of OCS in a lifetime) is associated with a high
risk of serious AEs e.g. osteoporosis, fracture, pneumonia, heart failure,
cardio-/cerebrovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, depression/
anxiety, cataract, renal impairment and weight gain, especially when
prescribed onto a background of other corticosteroids.63, level III; 64, level II-2
ii.
Biologics
Biologics are add-on treatments for severe asthma after optimising
therapy. Phenotype assessment is mandatory prior to biologics
selection. Currently, the approved biologics are anti-IgE (omalizumab),
anti-IL5/5R (mepolizumab, reslizumab, benralizumab), anti-IL4Rα
(dupilumab) and anti-Thymic Stromal Lymphopoietin (tezepelumab).
A recent local Health Technology Assessment showed mepolizumab,
benralizumab, dupilumab and tezepelumab significantly reduced the
exacerbations and hospitalisation/ED visit, improved lung function,
asthma control and QoL, and reduced the use of oral corticosteroids
especially among patients with high level of BEC (≥300 cells/µL)
and unresponsive to the optimal therapy with acceptable safety
profile.65, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
A systematic review based on real-world evidence on omalizumab as
an add-on therapy in patients with uncontrolled moderate-to-severe
allergic asthma showed it:66, level II-3
• improved lung function: FEV1 improved by 12.4% after one year of
omalizumab therapy, by 23%, 29% and 48% after 3, 4 and 9 years
respectively.
• reduced corticosteroids use
 70.8% of patients either stopped corticosteroids or were able to
reduce the dose of OCS by 40% or more after one year
 34% reduction in mean total annual quantity of OCS prescribed
between the 12 months pre- and post-omalizumab initiation
 all patients stopped OCS after four and nine years
The primary papers used were of fairly good quality.
A Cochrane systematic review showed that dupilumab (anti-IL4Rα)
compared with placebo in moderate to severe asthma improved the
following:67, level I
• FEV1 at 12 weeks (MD=0.14, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.16) and 24 weeks
(MD=0.13, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.16)
• ACQ score at 12 weeks (MD= -0.74, 95% CI -1.20 to -0.28) and 24
weeks (MD= -0.43, 95% CI -0.67 to -0.19)
• FeNO at 12 weeks (MD= -17.58, 95% CI -21.87 to -13.29) and 24
weeks (MD= -19.50, 95% CI -24.74 to -14.25)
• immunoglobulin E level at 12 weeks (MD= -149.27, 95% CI
-176.39 to -122.16) and 24 weeks (MD= -210.28, 95% CI -365.02
to -55.55)
However, it was associated with increased blood eosinophils at 12 and
24 weeks. There was NS difference in most adverse events. All primary
papers were of low risk of bias.
Another Cochrane systematic review supported the use of antiIL5/5R treatments as an adjunct to standard care in people with
severe eosinophilic asthma and poor symptom as they reduced
the rates of ‘clinically significant’ asthma exacerbation except for
SC reslizumab:68, level I
• mepolizumab (anti-IL5) SC with RR=0.45 (95% CI 0.36 to 0.55
• mepolizumab IV with RR=0.53 (95% CI 0.44 to 0.64)
• reslizumab (anti-IL5) IV with RR=0.43 (95% CI 0.33 to 0.55)
• benralizumab (anti-IL5R) SC with RR=0.59 (95% CI 0.52 to 0.66)
There is limited evidence for improved health-related quality of life
(HRQoL) scores and lung function, which may not meet clinically
detectable levels. There were no excess serious adverse events with
any anti-IL5/5R treatments. The majority of primary papers had low risk
of bias.
A third Cochrane systematic review assessing the use anti-IL-13 or
anti-IL-4 agents in patients with asthma showed:69, level I
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
• lower rate of exacerbations requiring hospitalisation or emergency
department (ED) visit with tralokinumab vs placebo (RR=0.68,
95% CI 0.47 to 0.98)
• improved in adjusted asthma quality of life questionnaire score
with anti-IL-13/-4 vs placebo (MD=0.18 units, 95% CI 0.12 to
0.24); however, it was not a clinically relevant improvement
• NS difference in all-cause serious AEs between interleukin-13/-4
agents and placebo
Factors to consider for biologics therapy include age, number of
exacerbations in previous year, regular OCS use, asthma control, QoL,
lung function, biomarkers (blood eosinophil count, FeNO and, serum
total and allergen-specific IgE) and co-morbidities (e.g. nasal polyposis,
atopic dermatitis) along with cost. A guide to targeted biologics selection
is shown in Appendix 10.
iii.
Macrolides
The addition of azithromycin in severe asthma patients, particularly
those with eosinophilic phenotype, had been demonstrated to reduce
exacerbations compared with placebo (overall: IRR=0.61, 95% CI
0.49 to 0.78; eosinophilic phenotype: IRR=0.63, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.92).
However, its addition to the treatment regimen of severe asthma
patients already receiving OCS showed no additional benefit.70, level I
A meta-analysis of five RCTs on uncontrolled asthma patients showed
an improvement in FEV1 with the use of azithromycin compared with
placebo (MD=0.06, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.12). However, no significant
reduction in exacerbations was observed. This data was derived from
three trials, which varied in dosage and duration from 12 weeks to 48
weeks.71, level I Primary papers of mixed quality were included.
For non-T2 asthma, treatment with azithromycin, bronchial thermoplasty
or systemic glucocorticoids may be considered as treatment options.33
The CPG DG recommends the following:
• dosing of azithromycin for asthma is 500 mg per dose, 3 times per
week or 250 mg daily
• up to one-year duration of azithromycin therapy
However, some patients may require a longer course of therapy
based on specialist care. Prior to initiating the therapy, it is essential
to investigate for potential non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection. In
cases with long QTc medications or risk factors for hearing loss, an
ECG and/or an audiogram should be considered.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Recommendation 15
• Biologics should be considered as add-on treatment for severe
asthma after optimising therapy. Phenotype assessment should be
conducted prior to this.
• Long-term oral corticosteroids should be reserved for severe asthma
when no alternative treatments are available. They should be tapered
off or to the lowest effective dose with side effects closely monitored.
• Azithromycin may be considered as an add-on treatment in
asthma patients who remained uncontrolled on high-dose inhaled
corticosteroids.
8.2. Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
During pregnancy, asthma may worsen, improve or remain unchanged.
However, in patients with pre-existing severe asthma, the asthma
control is more likely to worsen during pregnancy.3
a.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of asthma in pregnancy is made similar to non-pregnant
woman.3 However, bronchoprovocation tests are contraindicated.2
In patients where clinical history is consistent with asthma and no
alternative diagnosis is found, asthma treatment may be initiated and
the confirmatory diagnostic investigations can be postponed until after
delivery.2
b.
Assessment and monitoring
A cross-sectional study on asthma in pregnancy showed that both
GINA classification and ACT had significant association with spirometry
values (FEV1 and FVC) indicating that these tools can be effectively
used to assess asthma control.72, level III
Two RCTs on pregnant asthma patients showed that FeNO was
useful in guiding treatment and identifying the need of ICS (p=0.0002).
FeNO-guided treatment demonstrated significantly better ACQ score
and reduction in exacerbation rate compared with non-FeNO guided
treatment.73, level I; 74, level I However, in a recent larger RCT found that
FeNO-guided treatment in pregnant woman did not show any significant
difference in perinatal outcomes or exacerbations compared with nonFeNO guided treatment.75, level I
During pregnancy, patients with asthma should be monitored every 4
to 6 weeks.2; 3
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
c.
Treatment
Treatment of asthma during pregnancy provides more benefits than the
potential risks associated with commonly used asthma medications.2
The treatment of asthma in pregnancy is the same as in non-pregnant
patients as listed below.2; 26; 3
• ICS is safe and remains the preferred long-term maintenance and
should be continued.
• Inhaled β2-agonists and LTRA are safe and should be continued.
• Step-down treatment should be deferred until after delivery.
• Biologics for asthma should be considered only when benefits
outweigh risks after consultation with a specialist.
Pregnant women are particularly susceptible to asthma exacerbation
especially during the second trimester. Poor symptom control and
exacerbations are associated with worse outcomes for both mother and
foetus including an increased risk of pre-eclampsia, pre-term delivery,
low birth weight and perinatal mortality.2
The treatment of asthma exacerbations is the same as in non-pregnant
patients.2; 26; 3
• Prompt treatment with bronchodilators, oxygen and systemic
corticosteroids is needed to avoid foetal hypoxia.
• Magnesium sulphate can be administered if indicated.
• Oxygen saturation should be maintained between 94 and 98%.
• Continuous foetal monitoring should be considered.
• Early referral to critical care is recommended for moderate to
severe asthma exacerbations.
During labour, asthma treatment remains the same.2; 26
• The maintenance inhaler should be continued with reliever used
as needed.
• For patients requiring anaesthesia, regional blockade is preferred.
• In patients who are on prednisolone exceeding 7.5 mg/day for
more than 2 weeks prior to delivery, IV hydrocortisone 100 mg
every 6 to 8 hours should be administered during labour to prevent
adrenal insufficiency.
• Prostaglandin F2α should be used with caution due to the risk of
bronchoconstriction.
Asthma patients should be encouraged to breastfeed and their asthma
medications should be continued during lactation.26
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Recommendation 16
• Pregnant asthma patients should be treated the same as nonpregnant patients, both during stable state and exacerbation.
• Inhaled corticosteroids-containing therapy should be initiated in
pregnant asthma patients and continued if already being used.
• Stepping-down of asthma treatment in pregnancy should be delayed
until after delivery.
8.3. Occupational Asthma
Occupational asthma (OA) is a form of work-related asthma caused by
specific workplace exposures and triggered by immunologic or nonimmunologic airborne stimuli present in the workplace.76 Workplace
exposures account for an estimated 5 – 20% of new cases of adult
onset asthma.2 Patients with pre-existing asthma or new adult-onset
asthma whose symptoms worsen due to non-specific factors in the
workplace are considered to have work-aggravated asthma and not
OA.76
a.
Risk factors
Over 400 causes of OA have been described. Individual susceptibility
and level of workplace allergen exposure are key risk factors for
developing OA.76
In a systematic review, a cross-sectional study showed that
inhalable particulate dust was a risk factor for occupational asthma.
A cohort study identified atopy to be a predictive risk of occupational
asthma.77, level III
Common occupational groups and workplace agents identified to be at
risk for OA are shown in Table 10.76
Table 10: Frequently Reported Causes of Occupational Asthma
Occupational Groups
- Animal handlers
- Bakers
- Carpenters
- Chemical workers
- Cleaners
- Dental workers
- Electrical/electronic
production workers
- Farm workers
- Food processors
- Forestry workers
- Hairdressers
- Laboratory
technicians
- Metal workers
- Painters
- Plastics/rubber
workers
- Storage workers
- Textile workers
- Waiters
- Welders
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Workplace Agents
- Animal’s and
insects’ protein
(animal dander,
urine, saliva,
serum proteins)
- Chemicals and
solvents
(aldehydes, acids
and alkalis)
- Colophony and
fluxes
- Drugs (antibiotics,
others)
- Dyes (used in
textile)
- Henna and
persulphates
- Isocyanates
- Metals (e.g.
chromium,
cobalt, nickel,
zinc)
- Plant protein
(flour and grain
dust, latex)
- Wood dust
• Patients with OA exhibit typical asthma symptoms and are often
employed in high-risk occupations. They experience a significant
improvement in symptoms when away from work or on vacation.
b.
Diagnosis and assessment
The diagnosis of OA is based on recognising characteristic symptoms
and ruling out other possible explanations. A detailed occupational
history should cover the nature of the patient’s work, possible exposure
to irritants, patterns of symptoms in relation to work and presence of
improvement in symptoms on days off work.
• All working-age adults with new or worsening asthma symptoms,
reappearance of childhood asthma or unexplained airflow obstruction
should be asked about their occupation.
PEFR is an important tool in diagnosing and monitoring OA. An
objective diagnosis of OA should be made using serial peak-flow
measurements.76
• PEFR should be done as per Appendix 3.
• Minimum of four readings should be recorded per day, preferably
before taking bronchodilator.
• The readings should be done two hours apart during waking
hours.
• The duration of recording should be at least three weeks which
ideally includes three series of workdays with three periods away
from work.
• Work times, task exposures and medication should be recorded
with timing specified.
A variability of ≥20% on workdays compared to off days is suggestive
of work-related asthma.3 Refer to Appendix 11 on example of
measurement.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Other diagnostic modalities for OA include specific IgE assays, skin
prick tests for causative factors and specific inhalation challenge tests.76
c.
Treatment
Early diagnosis and identification of occupational sensitisers, along
with worker relocation or hazard substitution, are crucial aspects of OA
management. Relocating away from exposure as soon as the diagnosis
is confirmed, ideally within 12 months of experiencing the first workrelated symptoms of asthma is recommended.76
A Cochrane systematic review on patients with OA showed that:78, level II-1
• removal from occupational exposure vs continued exposure
resulted in –
 increased likelihood of reporting absence of asthma symptoms
(RR=4.80, 95% CI 1.67 to 13.86)
 improved asthma symptoms (RR=2.47, 95% CI 1.26 to 4.84)
 improvement in FEV1 (MD=4.23, 95% CI 1.14 to 7.31)
 improvement in non-specific bronchial hyperresponsiveness
(SMD=0.43, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.82)
• reduced exposure vs continued exposure resulted in –
 increased likelihood of reporting absence of symptoms
(RR=2.65, 95% CI 1.24 to 5.68)
 NS difference in FEV1
• Patients with suspected OA should be referred to a specialist for
further evaluation. Confirmed cases of OA should be notified using
WEHU-L1 (JKKP7) form to the Department of Occupational Safety
and Health.
Recommendation 17
• All working-age adults with new or worsening asthma symptoms,
reappearance of childhood asthma or unexplained airflow obstruction
should be asked about their occupation.
• Patients with suspected OA should be referred to a specialist for
further evaluation and confirmed cases should be notified to the
Department of Occupational Safety and Health.
8.4. Exercise-induced Bronchoconstriction
Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) is deﬁned as acute airway
narrowing (which is transient and reversible) that occurs during or after
exercise and can be observed in both patients who have and those who
do not have chronic asthma.79, level III
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Diagnosis of EIB in adults relies on typical clinical symptoms and
demonstration of reversible airflow limitation, primarily through
exercise or surrogate challenges.3 Diagnostic test involves measuring
a post-exercise fall in FEV1 of >10% measured 30 minutes after
exercise cessation.33 The recommended assessment for EIB is a
decrease in FEV1 post-challenge through exercise testing or indirect
bronchoprovocation tests (e.g. mannitol challenge).80
Patients with well-controlled EIB can exercise safely with proper
management. They are advised to perform gradual increase intensity
of warm-up exercises before engaging in sports activities which can
help reduce the severity of bronchoconstriction.33 Patients can use
SABA (in non-asthmatic EIB) or ICS-SABA or low-dose ICS-formoterol
for reliever as needed, prior to exercise, with regular daily ICS regimen
to help reduce EIB.2 The recommendations on the use of LTRA in EIB
are not consistent.2; 26
8.5. Asthma with Co-morbidities
Co-morbidity is a common problem in patients with asthma and
associated with increased risk of AEs to treatment, poorer quality of
life and increased healthcare utilisation compared with those without
co-morbidities. Patients with multiple co-morbidities often have difficultto-treat or severe asthma. Active management of co-morbidities is
important to improve asthma control and asthma-related outcomes.
a.
Obesity
Obesity is defined as BMI >27.5 kg/m2.81 Patients with asthma who
are obese tend to have poor asthma control and do not respond well
to standard asthma treatment. Thus, BMI should be recorded in all
asthma patients.2
The treatment of obese asthma patients is no different from that of other
asthma patients. ICS remains the mainstay of treatment. However,
the response to ICS may be reduced due to activation of alternative
pathways of inflammation (non-type-2 inflammation).2
Weight loss is important in managing these patients and should be
advocated.81 Weight reduction in obese adults with asthma improves
symptoms, lung function, morbidity and health status.26 A weight loss of
at least 5% can lead to an improvement in FEV1.2; 81
b.
Obstructive sleep apnoea
The majority of obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) patients are overweight
but non-obese patients can also have OSA. For those who are obese,
treatments are similar as outlined in the above section. Continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy is the recommended treatment
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
for OSA patients.2; 82 CPAP therapy has been shown to reduce risk of
asthma exacerbation.2
c.
Allergic rhinitis
Most patients with asthma have allergic rhinitis while 10 – 40% of
patients with allergic rhinitis have asthma.3 Rhinitis is defined as irritation
and inflammation of the mucous membranes of the nose and can be
either allergic or non-allergic. Symptoms may vary with environmental
and/or occupational exposure (e.g. furred pets, house dust mite, molds,
pollens).2 Intranasal corticosteroids is the most effective therapy for
allergic rhinitis.26 LTRA as an add-on therapy can be beneficial in
patients with concomitant seasonal allergic rhinitis and asthma.3
d.
Chronic rhinosinusitis
Rhinosinusitis is defined as inflammation of the nose and paranasal
sinuses and, characterised by more than two symptoms including
nasal blockage/obstruction and/or nasal discharge (anterior/posterior
nasal drip). Other symptoms may include facial pain/pressure and/or a
reduction or loss of smell. Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is defined when
symptoms occur on most days for at least 12 weeks without complete
resolution. It can be further classified into CRS with nasal polyps and
without nasal polyps.2
CRS is associated with more severe asthma, especially in patients with
nasal polyps. The treatment of CRS should follow the local guidelines.83
The presence of nasal polyps may guide the selection of biologic
treatment in severe asthma.2
e.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
GERD causes symptoms e.g. heartburn, epigastric or chest pain and
dry cough. Patients with asthma are more likely to experience GERD
compared with general population due to relaxation of lower sphincter
caused by β2-agonists. Treatment of GERD has no clear effect on
symptoms, lung function or airway responsiveness. Proton-pump
inhibitors has shown benefits in asthma patients with GERD who have
symptomatic reflux and nocturnal respiratory symptoms.2
f.
Anxiety and depression
Psychiatric co-morbidities e.g. anxiety and depression are linked to
poor asthma control, reduced medication adherence and poor QoL.
Patients with these co-morbidities have more frequent exacerbations
and emergency department visits.2 Referring to psychiatry services is
important to aid proper assessment and effective management of these
patients.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
8.6. Asthma and COVID-19
Patients with asthma are not at increased risk of COVID-19. The risk
of COVID-19-related death is only increased in patients with severe
asthma or those on long-term OCS. During COVID-19 infection, patients
with asthma should continue their ICS-containing medications.2
While nebulisers can transmit respiratory viral particles, most
published literature was either inconclusive or did not substantiate a
direct relationship between nebulised therapy and transmission of an
infection. Therefore, if clinically indicated, nebuliser use should not be
discouraged especially in life-threatening asthma and adherence to
recommended safety measures should be emphasised.84, level III
The use of pMDI with spacer is an alternative to nebulisers. It should
be either single patient use or autoclaved if manufacturer permits.2 If
a commercial spacer is not available or unaffordable, homemade or
custom-made spacers e.g. plastic bottles may be used but should not
be regarded as equivalent replacements due to their variable sizes,
shapes and existing electrostatic charge on the devices’ wall.85
A study evaluating the effectiveness of four accessory devices
(homemade spacer, Dolphin spacer, DispozABLE paper spacer and
AeroChamber Plus VHC) in delivering aerosolised drugs from a pMDI
showed that homemade and Dolphin spacers had the lowest emitted
dose fractions with large amounts of salbutamol remaining in these
spacers (p<0.05) compared with the pMDI alone or the other accessory
devices.86, level III
Asthma in patients with COVID-19 is treated similarly to those without
COVID-19. During COVID-19 infection, patients with asthma should
continue their ICS-containing medications. Potential interactions of
COVID-19 and asthma medications should be assessed in particular
ritonavir-boosted nirmatrelvir (paxlovid) with ICS-salmeterol or ICSvilanterol which can cause increased cardiac toxicity of LABA.2
A cross-sectional study of patients who had recovered from COVID-19
(at least 7 days after COVID-19 infection) found that 1.5% of the patients
were confirmed to have asthma. COVID-19 patients had higher odds of
developing new-onset asthma (OR=4.55, 95% CI 1.29 to 17.89) with
time between COVID-19 and asthma diagnosis ranged from 27 – 271
days. In the population who were confirmed asthma:87, level III
• most common clinical presentations were coughing (100%),
sputum production (83.3%), wheezing (83.3%) and dyspnoea
(50.0%)
• all patients had elevated blood eosinophils (291 – 1219 cells/μL)
and four patients had increased FeNO (>20 ppb)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
• all patients who were treated with medium or high-dose ICS and
LABA with or without systemic corticosteroids had symptoms
improvement
The Post-COVID-19 Management Protocol 2021 states that COVID-19
patients should be followed-up according to their COVID-19 category at
12 weeks after discharge. Symptomatic patients should have CXR and
exertional test done. Patients with abnormalities should be referred for
further management.88
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
9.
REFERRAL
Asthma management can be challenging especially in cases where the
condition is severe or complex. To ensure optimal patient care, timely
referral to a respiratory physician or physicians experienced in asthma
management is essential as they can offer advanced diagnostic and
therapeutic strategies that go beyond standard care.
The indications for asthma referral include:
• difficulty in confirming the diagnosis of asthma
• severe or uncontrolled asthma
• severe or life-threatening asthma exacerbations
• asthma in pregnancy
• frequent unscheduled healthcare visits for exacerbations
• frequent bursts or ongoing use of OCS
• asthma with multiple co-morbidities
• asthma with concurrent food allergy or anaphylaxis
• suspected occupational asthma
10.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
The management of asthma should be guided by an evidence-based
approach, in order to provide quality care to the patients. Several
factors may affect the implementation of recommendations in the CPG.
10.1. Facilitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facilitating factors for application of the recommendations in
the CPG include:
• wide online dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers
nationwide
• regular respiratory scientific meetings/congress and trainings
nationally where updates on asthma management are delivered
• Malaysian Thoracic Society Adults Severe Asthma Registry Steering
Committee that oversees the programme on asthma and severe
asthma registry
• Respiratory Pharmacy Protocol developed by the Clinical Pharmacy
Working Committee (Respiratory Subspecialty) of MoH to optimise
pharmacists’ management of asthma in hospitals and clinics
• Asthma Malaysia website where reliable and credible information on
asthma is provided to public
• World Asthma Day celebration and educational activities at various
hospital level across country to raise awareness on asthma and its
management
• Malaysian Thoracic Society Spirometry Certification Workshop,
Inhaler Steering Committee
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:
• insufficient knowledge on asthma diagnosis and its management
among healthcare providers
• inadequate accessibility to asthma training at all levels of healthcare
• inadequate accessibility to diagnostic tools in asthma e.g. spirometry,
etc.
• inadequate resources to manage asthma e.g. inhalers, biologics,
sub-specialty clinic, etc.
• lack of proper subspecialty or post-basic training in respiratory
medicine including asthma for allied healthcare
• lack of awareness, knowledge and understanding on asthma among
patients and caregivers
10.2. Potential Resource Implications
The recommendations in this CPG require additional resources in terms
of funds, healthcare infrastructures and human resources/expertise for
their successful implementation as discussed below.
Training programmes for healthcare providers are needed to ensure
they are equipped with the latest knowledge and skills in asthma
management. These include ongoing education and certification
programmes to keep healthcare providers updated on best practices
and emerging treatments. Apart from that, educational resources
in multiple languages and platforms should be made available and
accessible to patients, caregivers and public. These will improve
treatment adherence and asthma management which will prevent
frequent and severe exacerbations.
In the diagnosis of asthma, spirometry is essential to confirm
obstructive lung disease and reversibility. However, this vital tool
is not readily available especially at primary care. On another note,
inhalers are the primary method for delivering treatment for asthma.
The issues related to the use of inhalers have been emphasised and
addressed in length in this new edition of CPG. Numerous inhaler types
are available in market to match different patients need. Unfortunately,
these are not always accessible in healthcare facilities as well. These
are dampened by commonly encounter incorrect inhaler techniques
due to confusion and lack of training of the different devices in both
patients and healthcare providers. It is important to emphasised that
SABA inhalers are available without a prescription which allow patients
to purchase them over-the-counter and this may lead to overreliance
on SABA medications. Thus, healthcare providers should be educated
on the harmful effects of SABA monotherapy which should be avoided
in the clinical practice.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Biologics for treatment of severe asthma incurs a high cost and may not
be accessible to many patients who may require them. This situation
often leads to the need for long-term OCS and expose patients to risk
to many AEs. There are also limited accessibility to specialised severe
asthma clinics with trained personnel to manage these patients.
Several key performance indexes on asthma management being
monitored by MOH is in line with the CPG recommendations. Thus, the
following are proposed as clinical audit indicators for the CPG:
Target 80%
Target 100%
Target 100%
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage
of newly
diagnosed
asthma patients
who undergo
spirometry for
diagnosis
=
Number of newly diagnosed asthma patients
in the same period
Number of newly diagnosed asthma patients
who undergo spirometry for diagnosis
in a period
x100%
Percentage
of adults with
newly diagnosed
asthma
prescribed
with inhaled
ICS-containing
therapy
=
Number of adults with newly diagnosed
asthma in the same period
Number of adults with newly diagnosed
asthma prescribed with inhaled
ICS-containing therapy in a period
x100%
Percentage of
patients given
a follow-up plan
upon discharged
following
treatment
for asthma
exacerbations
=
Number of patients discharged
following treatment for asthma
exacerbations in the same period
Number of patients given a follow-up plan
upon discharged following treatment
for asthma exacerbations in a period
x100%
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
REFERENCES
1.
Sánchez-Ramos J, Pereira-Vega A, Alvarado-Gómez F, et al. Risk factors for
Premenstrual Asthma. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Expert review of
respiratory medicine. 2016;11.
2.
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA). Global Strategy for Asthma Management
and Prevention (2024 update). 2024 (Available at: https://ginasthma.org/2024report/)
3.
Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines Management of Asthma
in Adults. Putrajaya: MoH; 2017.
4.
Kew KM, Flemyng E, Quon BS, et al. Increased versus stable doses of inhaled
corticosteroids for exacerbations of chronic asthma in adults and children.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022;9(9):CD007524.
5.
McKeever T, Mortimer K, Wilson A, et al. Quadrupling Inhaled Glucocorticoid
Dose to Abort Asthma Exacerbations. N Engl J Med. 2018;378(10):902-10.
6.
Ban AY, Vengadasalam P, Taher SW, et al. Short-acting β(2)-agonist prescription
patterns and clinical outcomes in Malaysia: A nationwide cohort of the SABINA
III study. Malays Fam Physician. 2023;18:32.
7.
Dhippayom T, Wateemongkollert A, Mueangfa K, et al. Comparative Efficacy
of Strategies to Support Self-Management in Patients with Asthma: A
Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2022;10(3):803-14.
8.
Federman AD, O’Conor R, Mindlis I, et al. Effect of a Self-management
Support Intervention on Asthma Outcomes in Older Adults: The SAMBA Study
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2019;179(8):1113-21.
9.
Roche N, Aggarwal B, Boucot I, et al. The impact of inhaler technique on clinical
outcomes in adolescents and adults with asthma: A systematic review. Respir
Med. 2022;202:106949.
10. Price DB, Román-Rodríguez M, McQueen RB, et al. Inhaler Errors in the
CRITIKAL Study: Type, Frequency, and Association with Asthma Outcomes. J
Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017;5(4):1071-81.e9.
11. Halpin DMG, Mahler DA. A Systematic Review of Published Algorithms for
Selecting an Inhaled Delivery System in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2022;19(7):1213-20.
12. Klijn SL, Hiligsmann M, Evers S, et al. Effectiveness and success factors of
educational inhaler technique interventions in asthma & COPD patients: a
systematic review. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2017;27(1):24.
13. Al-Kharouf MS, Abdeljalil MH, Obeidat NM, et al. Video-based teach-togoal intervention on inhaler technique on adults with asthma and COPD: A
randomized controlled trial. PloS one. 2023;18(6):e0286870.
14. Usmani OS, Hickey AJ, Guranlioglu D, et al. The Impact of Inhaler Device
Regimen in Patients with Asthma or COPD. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2021;9(8):3033-40.e1.
15. Murphy J, McSharry J, Hynes L, et al. Prevalence and predictors of adherence to
inhaled corticosteroids in young adults (15-30 years) with asthma: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Asthma. 2021;58(5):683-705.
16. Gagné M, Boulet LP, Pérez N, et al. Patient-reported outcome instruments that
evaluate adherence behaviours in adults with asthma: a systematic review of
measurement properties. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2018;84(9):1928-40.
17. Muneswarao J, Hassali MA, Ibrahim B, et al. Translation and validation of the
Test of Adherence to Inhalers (TAI) questionnaire among adult patients with
asthma in Malaysia. J Asthma. 2021;58(9):1229-36.
18. Asamoah-Boaheng M, Osei Bonsu K, Farrell J, et al. Measuring Medication
Adherence in a Population-Based Asthma Administrative Pharmacy Database:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Clin Epidemiol. 2021;13:981-1010.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
19. van de Hei SJ, Dierick BJH, Aarts JEP, et al. Personalized Medication Adherence
Management in Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Review
of Effective Interventions and Development of a Practical Adherence Toolkit. J
Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2021;9(11):3979-94.
20. Dokbua S, Dilokthornsakul P, Chaiyakunapruk N, et al. Effects of an Asthma
Self-Management Support Service Provided by Community Pharmacists:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Manag Care Spec Pharm.
2018;24(11):1184-96.
21. Chiew S, Ibrahim H, Choon C, et al. Cost-Effectiveness of Respiratory Medication
Therapy Adherence Clinic (RMTAC) Among Government Health Clinics In Kuala
Lumpur & Putrajaya. Perak Medical Journal. 2019;1(Supp 01).
22. Babineau-Therrien J, Boulet LP, Gagné M. Self-management support provided
by trained asthma educators result in improved quality of life and asthma control
compared to usual care: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Patient Educ
Couns. 2020;103(8):1498-506.
23. Pérez de Llano L, García-Rivero JL, Urrutia I, et al. A Simple Score for Future
Risk Prediction in Patients with Controlled Asthma Who Undergo a GuidelinesBased Step-Down Strategy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2019;7(4):1214-21.e3.
24. Crossingham I, Turner S, Ramakrishnan S, et al. Combination fixed-dose beta
agonist and steroid inhaler as required for adults or children with mild asthma.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;5(5):CD013518.
25. Papi A, Chipps BE, Beasley R, et al. Albuterol-Budesonide Fixed-Dose
Combination Rescue Inhaler for Asthma. N Engl J Med. 2022;386(22):2071-83.
26. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network & British Thoracic Society. British
guideline on the management of asthma. UK: SIGN-BTS; 2019.
27. Ismail AI, Hyder Ali IA, Wong CK, et al. A Retrospective Study Evaluating Asthma
Control in Patients on Fluticasone Propionate/Salmeterol Proactive Regular
Dosing with a History of Uncontrolled Asthma. Pulm Ther. 2025;11(1):25-40.
28. O’Shea O, Stovold E, Cates CJ. Regular treatment with formoterol and an
inhaled corticosteroid versus regular treatment with salmeterol and an inhaled
corticosteroid for chronic asthma: serious adverse events. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2021;4(4):CD007694.
29. Liu T, Yang D, Liu C. Extrafine HFA-beclomethasone-formoterol vs. nonextrafine
combination of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long acting β2-agonist in patients
with persistent asthma: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS one.
2021;16(9):e0257075.
30. Rogliani P, Ritondo BL, Ora J, et al. SMART and as-needed therapies in mild-tosevere asthma: a network meta-analysis. Eur Respir J. 2020;56(3).
31. Chauhan BF, Jeyaraman MM, Singh Mann A, et al. Addition of anti-leukotriene
agents to inhaled corticosteroids for adults and adolescents with persistent
asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;3(3):CD010347.
32. US Food and Drug Administration. Drug Safety Communications – FDA requires
Boxed Warning about serious mental health side effects for asthma and allergy
drug montelukast (Singulair); advises restricting use for allergic rhinitis (Available
at: https://www.fda.gov/media/135840/download?attachment).
33. Plaza Moral V, Alobid I, Álvarez Rodríguez C, et al. GEMA 5.3. Spanish Guideline
on the Management of Asthma. Open Respir Arch. 2023;5(4):100277.
34. Rogliani P, Calzetta L, Ora J, et al. Efficacy and safety profile of doxofylline
compared to theophylline in asthma: A meta-analysis. Multidiscip Respir Med.
2019;14:25.
35. Calzetta L, Matera MG, Goldstein MF, et al. A long-term clinical trial on the
efficacy and safety profile of doxofylline in Asthma: The LESDA study. Pulm
Pharmacol Ther. 2020;60:101883.
36. Kim LHY, Saleh C, Whalen-Browne A, et al. Triple vs Dual Inhaler Therapy and
Asthma Outcomes in Moderate to Severe Asthma: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. JAMA. 2021;325(24):2466-79.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
37. Oba Y, Anwer S, Maduke T, et al. Effectiveness and tolerability of dual and
triple combination inhaler therapies compared with each other and varying
doses of inhaled corticosteroids in adolescents and adults with asthma: a
systematic review and network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2022;12(12):CA013799.
38. Chipps B, Mosnaim G, Mathur SK, et al. Add-on tiotropium versus step-up
inhaled corticosteroid plus long-acting beta-2-agonist in real-world patients with
asthma. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2020;41(4):248-55.
39. Undela K, Goldsmith L, Kew KM, et al. Macrolides versus placebo for chronic
asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;11(11):CD002997.
40. Blakey J, Chung LP, McDonald VM, et al. Oral corticosteroids stewardship for
asthma in adults and adolescents: A position paper from the Thoracic Society of
Australia and New Zealand. Respirology. 2021;26(12):1112-30.
41. Wongsa C, Phinyo P, Sompornrattanaphan M, et al. Efficacy and Safety of
House Dust Mite Sublingual Immunotherapy Tablet in Allergic Asthma: A
Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract. 2022;10(5):1342-55.e24.
42. Thomson NC, Polosa R, Sin DD. Cigarette Smoking and Asthma. J Allergy Clin
Immunol Pract. 2022;10(11):2783-97.
43. Andújar-Espinosa R, Salinero-González L, Illán-Gómez F, et al. Effect of vitamin
D supplementation on asthma control in patients with vitamin D deficiency: the
ACVID randomised clinical trial. Thorax. 2021;76(2):126-33.
44. Camargo CA, Jr., Toop L, Sluyter J, et al. Effect of Monthly Vitamin D
Supplementation on Preventing Exacerbations of Asthma or Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease in Older Adults: Post Hoc Analysis of a Randomized
Controlled Trial. Nutrients. 2021;13(2).
45. Williamson A, Martineau AR, Sheikh A, et al. Vitamin D for the management of
asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023;2(2):CD011511.
46. Russell MA, Janson C, Real FG, et al. Physical activity and asthma: A longitudinal
and multi-country study. J Asthma. 2017;54(9):938-45.
47. Kawamatawong T, Sangasapaviriya A, Saiphoklang N, et al. Guidelines for the
management of asthma in adults: Evidence and recommendations. Asian Pac J
Allergy Immunol. 2022;40(1):1-21.
48. Andreasson KH, Skou ST, Ulrik CS, et al. Breathing Exercises for Patients with
Asthma in Specialist Care: A Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial. Ann Am
Thorac Soc. 2022;19(9):1498-506.
49. Anshu, Singh N, Deka S, et al. The effect of yoga on pulmonary function in patients
with asthma: A meta-analysis. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2023;50:101682.
50. Osadnik CR, Gleeson C, McDonald VM, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation
versus usual care for adults with asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2022;8(8):CD013485.
51. Vasileiou E, Sheikh A, Butler C, et al. Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccines
in Asthma: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Clin Infect Dis.
2017;65(8):1388-95.
52. The
Malaysian
Thoracic
Society.
The
Malaysian
Thoracic
Society
Recommendations on Inhalational Therapy During the COVID-19 Pandemic.
2020 (Available at: https://mts.org.my/download/MTS_Recommendations_on_
Inhalational_Therapy_During_COVID19_Pandemic.pdf)
53. Geng W, Batu W, You S, et al. High-Flow Nasal Cannula: A Promising Oxygen
Therapy for Patients with Severe Bronchial Asthma Complicated with Respiratory
Failure. Can Respir J. 2020;2020:2301712.
54. Ruangsomboon O, Limsuwat C, Praphruetkit N, et al. Nasal High-flow Oxygen
Versus Conventional Oxygen Therapy for Acute Severe Asthma Patients: A Pilot
Randomized Controlled Trial. Acad Emerg Med. 2021;28(5):530-41.
55. Althoff MD, Holguin F, Yang F, et al. Noninvasive Ventilation Use in Critically
Ill Patients with Acute Asthma Exacerbations. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2020;202(11):1520-30.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
56. Nakwan N, Prateepchaiboon T. Predicting the requiring intubation and invasive
mechanical ventilation among asthmatic exacerbation-related hospitalizations. J
Asthma. 2022;59(3):507-13.
57. Kirkland SW, Vandenberghe C, Voaklander B, et al. Combined inhaled betaagonist and anticholinergic agents for emergency management in adults with
asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;1(1):CD001284.
58. Kirkland SW, Cross E, Campbell S, et al. Intramuscular versus oral corticosteroids
to reduce relapses following discharge from the emergency department for acute
asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;6(6):CD012629.
59. Ito K, Kanemitsu Y, Fukumitsu K, et al. The impact of budesonide inhalation
suspension for asthma hospitalization: In terms of length of stay, recovery time
from symptoms, and hospitalization costs. Allergol Int. 2020;69(4):571-7.
60. Kearns N, Maijers I, Harper J, et al. Inhaled Corticosteroids in Acute Asthma:
A Systemic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2020;8(2):605-17.e6.
61. McDonald VM, Hiles SA, Godbout K, et al. Treatable traits can be identified
in a severe asthma registry and predict future exacerbations. Respirology.
2019;24(1):37-47.
62. Heaney LG, Busby J, Hanratty CE, et al. Composite type-2 biomarker strategy
versus a symptom-risk-based algorithm to adjust corticosteroid dose in patients
with severe asthma: a multicentre, single-blind, parallel group, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2021;9(1):57-68.
63. Bleecker ER, Menzies-Gow AN, Price DB, et al. Systematic Literature Review
of Systemic Corticosteroid Use for Asthma Management. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med. 2020;201(3):276-93.
64. Price DB, Carter V, Martin J, et al. Comparative Safety Profile of the FixedDose Combination Corticosteroid and Long-acting β(2)-Agonist Fluticasone
Propionate/Formoterol Fumarate: A 36-Month Longitudinal Cohort Study in UK
Primary Care. Drugs. 2020;80(1):47-60.
65. Maharita AR, Khairil Idham I, Baihaqi M, et al. Biologics in Severe Asthma: Health
Technology Assessment. Malaysia: Malaysian Health Technology Assessment
Section (MaHTAS); 2024. 100p. Report No.: 01/2024.
66. Colombo GL, Di Matteo S, Martinotti C, et al. Omalizumab and long-term
quality of life outcomes in patients with moderate-to-severe allergic asthma: A
systematic review. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2019;13:1753466619841350.
67. Zaazouee MS, Alwarraqi AG, Mohammed YA, et al. Dupilumab efficacy and
safety in patients with moderate to severe asthma: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Front Pharmacol. 2022;13:992731.
68. Farne HA, Wilson A, Milan S, et al. Anti-IL-5 therapies for asthma. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2022;7(7):CD010834.
69. Gallagher A, Edwards M, Nair P, et al. Anti-interleukin-13 and anti-interleukin-4
agents versus placebo, anti-interleukin-5 or anti-immunoglobulin-E agents, for
people with asthma. The Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;10(10):CD012929.
70. Hiles SA, McDonald VM, Guilhermino M, et al. Does maintenance azithromycin
reduce asthma exacerbations? An individual participant data meta-analysis. Eur
Respir J. 2019;54(5).
71. Wang X, Luo J, Wang D, et al. The efficacy and safety of long-term add-on
treatment of azithromycin in asthma: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Medicine. 2019;98(38):e17190.
72. de Araujo GV, Leite DF, Rizzo JA, et al. Asthma in pregnancy: association between
the Asthma Control Test and the Global Initiative for Asthma classification and
comparisons with spirometry. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2016;203:25-9.
73. Murphy VE, Porsbjerg CM, Robijn AL, et al. Biomarker-guided management
reduces exacerbations in non-eosinophilic asthma in pregnancy: A secondary
analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Respirology (Carlton, Vic).
2020;25(7):719-25.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
74. Powell H, Murphy VE, Taylor DR, et al. Management of asthma in pregnancy
guided by measurement of fraction of exhaled nitric oxide: A double-blind,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011;378(9795):983-90.
75. Murphy VE, Jensen ME, Holliday EG, et al. Effect of asthma management with
exhaled nitric oxide versus usual care on perinatal outcomes. Eur Respir J.
2022;60(5).
76. Barber CM, Cullinan P, Feary J, et al. British Thoracic Society Clinical Statement
on occupational asthma. Thorax. 2022;77(5):433-42.
77. Md Zamri ASS, Saruddin MZ, Harun A, et al. Factors associated with
occupational asthma among food industry workers: A systematic review. PloS
one. 2023;18(6):e0287040.
78. Henneberger PK, Patel JR, de Groene GJ, et al. Workplace interventions
for treatment of occupational asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2019;10(10):CD006308.
79. Aggarwal B, Mulgirigama A, Berend N. Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction:
prevalence, pathophysiology, patient impact, diagnosis and management. NPJ
Prim Care Respir Med. 2018;28(1):31.
80. Hull JH, Burns P, Carre J, et al. BTS clinical statement for the assessment
and management of respiratory problems in athletic individuals. Thorax.
2022;77(6):540-51.
81. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines Management of
Obesity (Second Edition). Putrajaya: MoH; 2023.
82. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines Management of
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea. Putrajaya: MoH; 2022.
83. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines Management of
Chronic Rhinosinusitis. Putrajaya: MoH; 2017.
84. Biney IN, Ari A, Barjaktarevic IZ, et al. Guidance on Mitigating the Risk of
Transmitting Respiratory Infections During Nebulization by the COPD Foundation
Nebulizer Consortium. Chest. 2024;165(3):653-68.
85. The
Malaysian
Thoracic
Society.
The
Malaysian
Thoracic
Society
Recommendations on Inhalational Therapy During the COVID-19 Pandemic.
2020 (Available at: https://mts.org.my/download/MTS_Recommendations_on_
Inhalational_Therapy_During_COVID19_Pandemic.pdf)
86. Saeed H, Abdelrahim ME, Rabea H, et al. Evaluation of Disposable and
Traditional Accessory Devices for Use With a Pressurized Metered-Dose Inhaler.
Respir Care. 2020;65(3):320-5.
87. Lee H, Kim BG, Chung SJ, et al. New-onset asthma following COVID-19 in
adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2023;11(7):2228-31.
88. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Post COVID-19 Management Protocol. Putrajaya:
MoH; 2021.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the effective and safe treatments for
severe asthma?
Database: Ovid MEDLINE® ALL <1946 to February 28, 2023>
Search Strategy:
1.
ASTHMA/
2.
asthma*.tw.
3.
(asthma adj1 bronchial).tw.
4.
1 or 2 or 3
5.
Uncontrol*.tw.
6.
severe.tw.
7.
difficult to treat.tw.
8.
(poorly adj1 controlled).tw.
9.
5 or 6 or 7 or 8
10. 4 and 9
11. THERAPEUTICS/
12. therap*.tw.
13. treat*.tw.
14. 11 or 12 or 13
15. 10 and 14
16. limit 15 to (English language and humans and yr=”2017 -Current”
and “all adult (19 plus years)”)
17. limit 16 to “systematic review”
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the risk factors of asthma in adults?
2.
What are the diagnostic criteria of asthma in adults?
3.
What are the treatment goals of asthma in adults?
4.
What should be included in patient education for adults with
asthma?
• general information and modality of delivery
• inhaler information and techniques
• adherence improvement
• self-management
- self-monitoring
- Asthma Action Plan
5.
What is the accuracy of assessment tools in asthma in adults?
6.
What are the criteria to step-up or step-down treatment for asthma
in adults?
7.
What are the effectiveness and safety of the following nonpharmacological interventions for asthma in adults:
• smoking cessation
• vaccination
• allergen (indoor/outdoor) avoidance
• lifestyle modification (exercise, diet, supplement)
• complementary therapy
• bronchothermoplasty
8.
What are the effectiveness and safety of the following
pharmacological interventions for asthma in adults:
• short-acting bronchodilators (SABA)
• inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
• combination of ICS/long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA)
• maintenance and reliever therapy (MART)
• long-acting muscarinic-antagonist (LAMA)
• triple therapy of ICS/LABA/LAMA
• leukotriene receptor antagonists
• theophylline
• macrolides
• oral corticosteroids
• biologic therapy
• sublingual immunotherapy
• combination ICS/SABA
• emerging therapies
9.
How should acute asthma be assessed?
10. How should severity of acute asthma in adults be graded?
• mild, moderate, life-threatening, near fatal
• life-threatening features
• referral criteria to secondary care
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
11. What are the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions
for acute asthma in adults:
• oxygen
• bronchodilators
• corticosteroids
• magnesium
• ipratropium bromide
• aminophylline
• antibiotics/antiviral therapy
12. What are the parameters to monitor in acute asthma in adults?
• clinical features (physical signs e.g. respiratory rate, cyanosis,
PEFR)
• investigations (SaO2, arterial blood gases ABG)
13. When should mechanical ventilation be considered in acute
asthma?
14. What are the discharge plans in acute asthma?
15. COVID-19 and asthma
• What are the effective and safe therapies in COVID-19 with
asthma?
• What is the effectiveness and safety of homemade spacers in
COVID-19 with asthma?
• What is the effectiveness and safety of reusable spacers in
COVID-19 with asthma?
• What are the effective and safe treatment of post-COVID-19
persistent asthma-like symptoms?
16. Uncontrolled asthma, difficult to treat asthma and severe asthma
• How should uncontrolled asthma, difficult to treat asthma and
severe asthma be diagnosed and assessed?
• What are the risk factors for severe asthma?
• What are the effective and safe treatments for severe asthma?
17. Asthma in pregnancy
• How should asthma in pregnancy be diagnosed and assessed?
• What are the effective and safe pharmacological treatments of
asthma in pregnancy?
• What are the effective and safe pharmacological treatments of
asthma in breastfeeding?
18. Occupational asthma (OA)
• How should OA be diagnosed and assessed?
• What are the risk factors for OA?
• What are effective and safe treatments in OA?
19. Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB)
• How should EIB be diagnosed and assessed?
• What are effective and safe treatments in EIB?
20. What are effective and safe treatments of asthma with comorbidity?
21. What are the referral criteria of patients with asthma to respiratory
physicians?
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 3
PEAK EXPIRATORY FLOW RATE VARIABILITY
Peak expiratory flow (PEF) rate variability is an alternative way to
diagnose patients with asthma.
Firstly, patient need to be educated on the use the PEF meter at home.
Preferably the correct technique and reading being done in the clinic
before asking patient to do (record) it at home.
Patient is asked to use the same PEF meter (to reduce bias) to record
his peak expiratory meter in the morning and evening preferably at the
same time of the day. They need to be advised to do PEF reading three
times and record the highest reading in a given table.
Diurnal PEF variability is calculated from twice daily readings as below:
Day’s highest – Day’s lowest
x 100
(Mean of day’s highest and lowest)
Then the average of each day is calculated over 1 to 2 weeks.
Example:
Total diurnal PEF Variability = (11.3 + 23.0 + 25.7 + 22.2 + 23.0
+ 19.6 + 18.5) = 143.3%
Mean Diurnal PEF Variability = 143.3 % ÷ 7 days
= 20.47 %
Diurnal PEF Variability is significant if the reading is >20% in adults
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 4
PEAK EXPIRATORY FLOW NOMOGRAM
Mark the patient’s height and age on the respective lines. Draw a straight
line connecting the two points and extend this line to the corresponding
gender line to get the expected PEF value.
Source: Da Costa JL, Goh BK. Peak expiratory flow rate in normal adult Chinese in
Singapore. Singapore Med J. 1973;14(4):511-4
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 5
A. SUGGESTED ASTHMA ACTION PLAN TEMPLATE
Name:
Doctor:
IC. No.:
Hospital/Clinic:
Best PEF:
Date:
This asthma action plan helps you to recognise and respond to
worsening asthma
Note: The use of pMDI with spacer is encouraged
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
B. SUGGESTED ASTHMA ACTION PLAN TEMPLATE –
MART (MAINTENANCE-AND-RELIEVER THERAPY)
Name:
Doctor:
IC. No.:
Hospital/Clinic:
Best PEF:
Date:
This asthma action plan helps you to recognise and respond to
worsening asthma
Note: The use of pMDI with spacer is encouraged
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 6
INHALER DEVICES AND TECHNIQUES
• Inhaler techniques must be checked and corrected, if necessary, at every single opportunity.
• Ensure no foreign object in the mouthpiece and the inhaler is not empty or expired.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
6.
*Shaking pMDI well immediately before each actuation is important for delivering the correct dose. While only suspension formulations require shaking,
to avoid confusion, it is recommended that all pMDI is to be shaken before use.
**Varies from product to product. Refer to manufacturer’s recommendations.
***VHC are spacers that incorporate a one-way-valve. Tidal breathing can only be performed with VHCs.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
DRY POWDER INHALERS (DPIs)
• DPIs are breath-actuated. Patients do not have to coordinate actuation with inhalation.
• Forceful and deep inhalation is needed to create turbulent energy within the device, which de-agglomerates the powder into fine particles.
Sufficient inspiratory flow is needed for optimal drug delivery.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
References:
1. Usmani OS. Choosing the right inhaler for your asthma or COPD patient. Therapeutics and clinical risk management. 2019 Mar 14:461-72.
2. Ohar JA, Ferguson GT, Mahler DA, Drummond MB, Dhand R, Pleasants RA, Anzueto A, Halpin DM, Price DB, Drescher GS, Hoy HM. Measuring peak
inspiratory flow in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. International journal of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 2022 Jan 6:7992.
3. The electronic Medicine Compendium (eMC) (Available at http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/)
4. Usmani O, Capstick T, Saleem A et. Scullion J (Development Group). Choosing an appropriate inhaler device for the treatment of adults with asthma
or COPD. MGP Guidelines. 2020 (Available at: https://www.guidelines.co.uk/respiratory/inhaler-choice-guideline/455503.article)
5. Asthma UK. How to use your inhaler (Available at https://www.asthmaandlung.org.uk/living-with/inhaler-videos)
6. National Asthma Council Australia. Inhaler technique for people with asthma or COPD (Available at: https://extranet.who.int/ncdccs/Data/AUS_D1_
Inhaler_Technique_Infopaper-FULL- UPDATED-11-1.pdf)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 7
TEST OF ADHERENCE TO INHALERS (TAI)
SOALAN UJIAN PEMATUHAN ALAT SEDUT (TAI)
1. Berapa kalikah anda lupa mengambil alat sedut anda dalam tempoh 7 hari yang lalu?
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 8
ASTHMA CONTROL TESTTM
Asthma Control Test provides a numerical score to determine the
control of asthma symptoms.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 9
COMMON MEDICATIONS IN ASTHMA
A. INHALED SHORT-ACTING β2-AGONISTS (SABA)
B. INHALED CORTICOSTEROIDS (ICS)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
C. INHALED CORTICOSTEROIDS/LONG-ACTING β2-AGONISTS COMBINATION (ICS/LABA)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
D. LONG-ACTING MUSCARINIC ANTAGONISTS (LAMA)
E. ICS/LABA/LAMA
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
F. LEUKOTRIENE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS (LTRA)
G. METHYLXANTHINE
H. NEBULISER
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 10
ALGORITHM FOR BIOLOGIC THERAPY SELECTION IN SEVERE ASTHMA
3.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Appendix 11
EXAMPLE OF PEFR CALCULATION FOR OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
This is an example of the serial peak flow record of an employee (marked with a red cross) who works in a chemical lab.
The record shown is for week 1. (Due to space constraints, the charts for week 2 and week 3 are not included; however, the readings were taken in the
same manner as in week 1)
Symptoms must be tracked for 3 weeks and must include three series of workdays along with three periods away from work. The daily variability is plotted
by the physician (marked with a yellow cross) after calculation.
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
Calculating Variability in PEFR for Occupational Asthma
1. Record PEFR readings
2. Calculate daily variability:
• For each day, find the highest and lowest PEFR readings
• Calculate the daily variability using the formula
Daily variability (%)
=
Mean PEFR of the day
431.25
(Highest PEFR – Lowest PEFR) x 100%
Number of workdays
Sum of daily variability on workdays
e.g. Variability for Day 1 (%)
=
500 – 375
x 100%
=
29.0%
=
3. Calculate mean workday variability and mean non-workday variability:
Mean workday variability (%)
=
28.5% - 5.3%
23.2%
Mean workday variability − Mean non-workday variability
4. Calculate work-related variability:
Work related variability (%)
=
=
Number of non-workdays
Sum of daily variability on workdays
Mean non-workday
=
variability (%)
29.0 + 29.0 + 28.5 + 27.5 + 29.0 + 29.0 + 28.5 + 27.5 + 29.0 + 29.0 + 28.5 + 27.5
=
12
28.5 %
=
5.5 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 5.5 + 5.2 + 5.1
=
9
5.3 %
A variability of ≥20% on workdays compared to off days is suggestive of work-related asthma
The PEFR Monitoring Form for Occupational Asthma can be accessed from: Occupational Asthma PEFR Tracking Chart
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAP
asthma action plan
ABG
arterial blood gas
ACQ
Asthma Control Questionnaire
ACT
Asthma Control Test
AE(s)
adverse event(s)/effect(s)
AGREE II
Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation II
AIR
anti-inflammatory reliever
AQLQ
Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire
AUC
area under the curve
BCT
behaviour change techniques
BTS
British Thoracic Society
CI
confidence interval
COPD
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COT
conventional oxygen therapy
COX2
cyclooxygenase-2
CPAP
continuous positive airway pressure
CrI
credible interval
CRS
chronic rhinosinusitis
CXR
chest x-ray
DG
Development Group
DPI
dry powder inhaler
ECG
electrocardiogramme
ED
Emergency Department
e.g.
example
EIB
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction
FDA
(United States) Food and Drug Administration
FeNO
fractional exhaled nitric oxide
FVC
forced vital capacity
FEV1
forced expiratory volume in first one second
FMS
Family Medicine Specialist
GERD
gastroesophageal reflux disease
GINA
Global Initiative for Asthma
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluations
HDM
house dust mite
HFA
hydrofluoroalkane
HFNC
high flow nasal cannula
HR
hazard ratio
HRQoL
health-related quality of life
ICS
inhaled corticosteroids
IgE
immunoglobulin E
IL
interleukin
IM
intramuscular
IRR
incident rate ratio
IV
intravenous
kU/L
kilo unit per litre
LABA
long-acting β2-agonists
LAMA
long-acting muscarinic antagonists
LLN
lower limit normal
LTRA
leukotriene receptor antagonists
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
MART
maintenance and reliever therapy
MCID
minimal clinically important difference
MD
mean difference
MDT
multidisciplinary team
µg
microgramme
mg
milligramme
ml
millilitre
mmHg
millimetres of mercury
MoH
Ministry of Health
NIV
non-invasive ventilation
NMA
network meta-analysis
NS
non-significant
OA
occupational asthma
OCS
oral corticosteroids
OR
odds ratio
OSA
obstructive sleep apnoea
p
p-value
PaO2
partial pressure of arterial oxygen
PaCO2
partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide
PEF
peak expiratory flow
PEFR
peak expiratory flow rate
PIFR
peak inspiratory flow rate
pMDI
pressurised metered dose inhaler
ppb
parts per billion
PRN
as needed
PRO(s)
patient-reported outcome(s)
QoL
quality of life
RC
Review Committee
RCP
Royal College of Physicians
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RE
relative effect
RMTAC
Respiratory Medication Therapy Adherence Clinic
RoB
Risk of Bias
RR
relative risk
SABA
short-acting β2-agonists
SAE(s)
serious adverse event(s)/effect(s)
SD
standard deviation
SIGN
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
SLIT
sublingual immunotherapy
SMD
standardised mean difference
SMI
soft-mist inhaler
SUCRA
surface under the cumulative ranking curve
T2
type-2
TAI
Test of the Adherence to Inhalers
TTG
teach-to-goal
VHC
valved holding chamber
WHO
World Health Organization
WMD
weighted mean difference
Management of Asthma In Adults (Second Edition)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of CPG DG would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• Health Technology Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines
Council for approving the CPG
• Ms. Norharlina Che Zakaria on retrieval of evidence
• All those who have contributed, directly or indirectly, to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure
forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical firms or acts as consultants
to such firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG
Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Asthma in Adults
(Second Edition) was supported mainly by the MoH Malaysia and partly
by the Malaysian Thoracic Society.
MALAYSIAN HEALTH TECHNOLOGY
‘on Pury aay