CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Management Of
Osteoarthritis
(Second Edition)
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1 Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590, Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included and
the content is not changed, not sold, nor used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
ISBN: 978-967-0399-86-7
Available on the following websites:
http://www.moh.gov.my
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.msr.my
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These clinical practice guidelines (CPG) are meant to be guides for
clinical practice, based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. Adherence to these guidelines may not necessarily
guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare provider is
responsible for the management of his/her unique patient based on the
clinical picture presented by the patient and the management options
available locally.
These guidelines were issued in 2013 and will be reviewed in 2017 or
sooner if new evidence becomes available.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Grades of Recommendation
i
Guidelines Development and Objectives
ii
Guidelines Development Group
iv
Review Committee
v
External Reviewers
vi
Algorithm on Management of Osteoarthritis
vii
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
EPIDEMIOLOGY & RISK FACTORS
2
2.1 Epidemiology
2
2.2 Risk Factors
3
3.
CLASSIFICATION
5
4.
DIAGNOSIS
6
4.1 Clinical Features
6
4.2 Diagnostic Criteria
7
5.
INVESTIGATIONS
10
5.1 Laboratory Investigations
10
5.2 Imaging
11
6.
MANAGEMENT
14
6.1 Non-Pharmacological Treatment
14
a. Education
14
b. Lifestyle Modification
14
c. Physiotherapy
15
d. Occupational Therapy
17
e. Orthoses
18
6.2 Pharmacological Treatment
19
a. Oral Treatment
19
i. Paracetamol
19
ii. Tramadol
20
iii. Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs &
20
Cyclo-oxygenase-2 Inhibitors
iv. Glucosamine & Chondroitin
22
v. Diacerein
24
b. Intra-articular Treatment
24
i. Corticosteroids
24
ii. Viscosupplementation
25
c. Topical Treatment
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
No.
Title
Page
7.
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT
27
8.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
28
8.1 Arthroscopic Surgery
28
8.2 High Tibial Osteotomy
28
8.3 Total Joint Replacement
29
8.4 Partial Joint Replacement
29
8.5 Arthrodesis
30
8.6 Recent Advances in Osteoarthritis
30
9.
REFERRAL
32
9.1 Rheumatology Referral
32
9.2 Orthopaedic Referral
32
10.
PRIMARY PREVENTION
32
11.
IMPEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
33
11.1 Facilitating & Limiting Factors
33
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
33
REFERENCES
35
Appendix 1 Example of Search Strategy
41
Appendix 2 Clinical Questions
42
Appendix 3 Relationship between Anatomical Site and
43
Possible Physiological Mechanism for
Pain in Osteoarthritis
Appendix 4 Quadriceps Strengthening Exercise
44
Appendix 5 Hip Strengthening Exercise
45
Appendix 6 Appropriate Measurement for Walking Stick
46
Appendix 7 Joint Protection Principles
47
Activity Modification in Performing ADL
Appendix 8 Suggested Medication Dosages and Side Effects 48
Appendix 9 Checklist of OA Management
51
List of Abbreviations
52
Acknowledgement
53
Disclosure Statement
53
Source of Funding
53
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: US / CANADIAN PREVENTIVE SERVICES TASK FORCE
SOURCE: MODIFIED FROM THE SCOTTISH INTERCOLLEGIATE GUIDELINES NETWORK
(SIGN)
Note: The grades of recommendation relates to the strength of the
evidence on which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect the
clinical importance of the recommendation.
A
B
C
At least one meta analysis, systematic review, or RCT, or
evidence rated as good and directly applicable to the target
population
Evidence from well conducted clinical trials, directly applicable
to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency
of results; or evidence extrapolated from meta analysis,
systematic review, or RCT
Evidence from expert committee reports, or opinions and /or
clinical experiences of respected authorities; indicates absence
of directly applicable clinical studies of good quality
Level
I
II -1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Evidence from at least one properly randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without
randomisation
Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control
analytic studies, preferably from more than one centre or
group
Evidence from multiple time series with or without intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the
results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s)
could also be regarded as this type of evidence
Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert
committees
i
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
ii
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the Development Group (DG) for these Clinical
Practice Guidelines (CPG) were from the Ministry of Health (MoH)
and Ministry of Higher Education. There was active involvement of a
multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the process of the
CPG development.
The previous CPG entitled Management of Osteoarthritis 2002 was
used as the basis for the development of the present guidelines.
A literature search was carried out using the following electronic
databases: Guidelines International Network (G-I-N); World Health
Organization (WHO), Medline via Ovid, Pubmed, Cochrane Database
of Systemic Reviews (CDSR) and International Health Technology
Assessment websites (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search
Strategy). The search was limited to literature published in the last ten
years, on humans and in English. If the evidence was insufficient, the
period of publication was extended for another ten years. In addition, the
reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to
further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted
to identify further studies. All searches were conducted from 27 October
2011 to 27 September 2012. Literature searches were repeated for all
clinical questions at the end of the CPG development process allowing
any relevant papers published before 31 July 2013 to be included.
Future CPG updates will consider evidence published after this cut-off
date. The details of the search strategy can be obtained upon request
from the CPG Secretariat.
Reference was also made to other CPG on Osteoarthritis such as The
National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions (2008) & National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2008) – Osteoarthritis:
National Clinical Guideline for Care and Management in Adults. The
CPG was evaluated using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II prior to them being used as references.
A total of 14 clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. (Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions)
The DG members met 28 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literature retrieved were appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meetings. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC.These
CPG are based largely on the findings of systematic reviews, metaanalyses and clinical trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literature used in these guidelines were graded using the US/
Canadian Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2001),
while the grading of recommendation was modified from grades of
recommendation of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network.
On completion, the draft guidelines were sent for review by external
reviewers. It was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for
feedback from any interested parties. The draft was finally presented
to the Technical Advisory Committee for CPG, and the HTA and CPG
Council MoH Malaysia for review and approval.
OBJECTIVES
The aim of these guidelines is to assist clinicians and other healthcare
providers in making evidence-based decisions about appropriate
management and treatment of Osteoarthritis (OA) specifically:-
i.
Early recognition and diagnosis,
ii.
Management,
iii.
Prevention and referral.
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Adults with OA
TARGET GROUP/USER
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders in all healthcare settings including:-
i.
Doctors
ii. Pharmacists
iii. Allied health
professionals
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Outpatient, inpatient and community settings
iii
iv. Medical students and healthcare trainees
v. Professional societies
vi. Patients and carers/non-governmental
organisations
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Azmillah Rosman
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang
Members (alphabetical order)
iv
Datin Dr. Asmahan Mohamed Ismail
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II,
Kota Bharu
Dr. Asyraf Wong Abdullah
Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon
Hospital Kuala Pilah
Professor Dr. Esha Das Gupta
Consultant Rheumatologist
International Medical University (IMU),
Seremban
Dato’ Dr. Gun Suk Chyn
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar, Seremban
Dr. Habibah Mohamed Yusoof
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang
Dr. Hanin Farhana Kamaruzaman
Principal Assistant Director
Health Technology Assessment Section,
MoH
Dr. Heselynn Hussein
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Putrajaya
Dr. Lau Ing Soo
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang
Mdm. Lim Khee Li
Physiotherapist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head, CPG Unit,
Health Technology Assessment Section,
MoH
Dr. Mohd. Yusof Ibrahim
Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II,
Kota Bharu
Dr. Mollyza Mohd. Zain
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang
Dr. Muhaini Othman
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Serdang
Dr. Norhayati Hussein
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
Ms. Nurhafiza Md. Hamzah
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang
Dr. Ong Swee Gaik
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Rosaida Hj. Md. Said
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Hospital Ampang
Dr. Sheela Theivanthiran
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Rehabilitasi Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Siti Aminah Akbar Merican
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Seberang Takir,
Terengganu
Dr. Tan Bee Eng
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Pulau Pinang
Mr. Thillainathan a/l Krishnan
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Selayang
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft guidelines were reviewed by a panel of experts from both
public and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on
the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the guidelines.
Chairperson
Dr. Yeap Swan Sim
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre
Members (alphabetical order)
Datin Hjh. Asiah Mohd. Hashim
Head of Physiotherapy Department
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Bahanordin Jaafar
Consultant Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah,
Klang
Dr. Chow Sook Khuan
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Sunway Medical Centre
Dr. Noorlaili Mohd. Tauhid
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Pusat Perubatan Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Lee Fatt Soon
Senior Consultant Geriatrician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Loh Yet Lin
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Sultan Ismail, Johor Bahru
Dato’ Dr. N Premchandran
Senior Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan,
Kuantan
Mdm. Rokiah Alias
Occupational Therapist
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Mdm. Rosminah Mohd. Din
Deputy Director Pharmacy Practice &
Development Division, MoH
Dr. Sabri Mustaffa Afifi
Patient Representative
Dato’ Dr. Suresh Chopra
Senior Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Alor Setar
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
vi
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:-
Professor Dr. Geoffrey Littlejohn
Emeritus Director of Rheumatology, Monash Health, Victoria &
Associate Professor of Medicine, Monash University, Australia
Associate Professor Dr. Keith Lim Kee Tat
Director of Rheumatology
University of Melbourne, Australia
Dr. Kong Kok Ooi
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore
Dr. Mohammed Shahdan Shahid
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Prince Court Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dato’ Dr. Muhammad Radzi Abu Hassan
Senior Consultant Physician & Gastroenterologist
Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Alor Setar
Dr. Nik Azhan Nik Mohamed
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Jeli, Kelantan
Dato’ Dr. Ramli Baba
Consultant Orthopedic Surgeon
Hospital Selayang
Associate Professor Dr. Wong Kok Thong
Lecturer, School of Pharmacy
University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus, Semenyih
Dr. Yusniza Mohd. Yusof
Rehabilitation Physician
Hospital Kuala Lumpur
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
ALGORITHM ON MANAGEMENT OF KNEE & HIP
OSTEOARTHRITIS
Refer to Appendix 9 for checklist on management of OA.
vii
Paracetamol ± Topical NSAIDs
Persistent symptoms
Persistent symptoms
Persistent symptoms
• Tramadol
• NSAIDs (lowest effective dose,
for the shortest duration)
• Selective NSAIDs ± PPI in
patient with high GI risk
Consider intra-articular corticosteroids
(especially if knee joint effusion present)
Referral to orthopaedics for
evaluation of arthroplasty
Other considerations at any time:-
• Glucosamine sulfate
• Diacerein
• Alternative treatments
Education
Weight loss
Exercise
Physiotherapy
Occupational therapy
± Orthoses/assistive devices
Symptomatic osteoarthritis
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
1
1. INTRODUCTION
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a progressive joint disease due to failure in
repair of joint damage. This may arise as a result of biomechanical,
biochemical and/or genetic factors. The process may involve one or
multiple joints.
In the Global Burden of Disease 2010 Study, it was estimated that
251 million people suffered from knee OA worldwide. Musculoskeletal
diseases which included OA was the second greatest cause of disability
as measured by years lived with disability.1
OA is prevalent in the ageing population. In 2010, WHO estimated that
524 million people were aged 65 or older and this number is expected
to triple which represents 16% of the world’s population by 2050.2
In view of its potential public health burden and emergence of more
recent advances in the management of OA, it is timely to update the
CPG on Management of OA 2002 using evidence-based methodology.
It is hoped that this CPG serves as a useful guide in the daily practice
of health care providers in various disciplines from the public, academic
and private sectors.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
2
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY & RISK FACTORS
2.1 Epidemiology
There is wide variability of OA prevalence depending on age, gender of
population studied and case definition used. The most commonly used
case definition is radiographic OA, symptomatic OA and self-reported
OA. Symptomatic OA is defined as the presence of the radiographic
features of OA in combination with symptoms attributable to it. Not all
individuals with radiographic OA have concomitant symptoms; thus
radiographic OA has the highest prevalence.3, level III
a. Hand OA
In the Framingham Osteoarthritis Hand OA study, the mean baseline
age was 58.9 years. The age-standardised prevalence of hand OA was
higher in women (44.2%) than men (37.7%). The prevalence was even
higher in erosive (9.9% vs 3.3%) and symptomatic (15.9% vs 8.2%)
hand OA. Majority of women (96.4%) and men (91.4%) with hand OA
at baseline showed progression at 9-year follow up.4, level II-2
b. Hip OA
The prevalence of symptomatic hip OA in United States of America
(USA) was 9.2% among adults age >45 with a slight female
preponderance.5, level III In another study, the crude prevalence of
radiographic hip OA in Chinese aged 60 - 89 years was 0.9% in women
and 1.1% in men. Hip OA was 80 - 90% less frequent in the Chinese
than white persons in the USA.6, level III
c. Knee OA
In the Johnston County OA Project of USA, the lifetime risk of developing
symptomatic knee OA in at least one knee was 44.7% (95% CI 40.0%
to 49.3%) by age 85 years. The lifetime risk is higher in those with
history of knee injury and increased BMI.7, level II-2
The prevalence of symptomatic knee OA was 4.9% among adults age
>26 years in the Framingham study,5, level III 16.7% among adults age
>45 in the Johnston County study,7, level II-2 and 12.1% among adults
aged >60 in the NHANES III study.5, level III
In the Beijing Osteoarthritis Study of persons aged 60 years and above,
the prevalence of radiographic knee OA was 42.8% in women and
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
3
21.5% in men. Symptomatic knee OA occurred in 15.0% of women and
5.6% of men. Compared with women of the same age in Framingham,
women in Beijing had a higher prevalence of radiographic knee OA
(prevalence ratio=1.45, 95% CI 1.31 to 1.60) and of symptomatic knee
OA (prevalence ratio=1.43, 95% CI 1.16 to 1.75). The prevalence of knee
OA in Chinese men was similar to that in their white USA counterparts
(prevalence ratio of 0.90 for radiographic OA and 1.02 for symptomatic
OA). Possible explanations for these differences range from genetic
differences to heavy physical activity among Chinese.8, level III
In the Community Orientated Program for the control of Rheumatic
Disease (COPCORD) study in Malaysia which was initiated by ILAR
and WHO, 9.3% of adult Malaysians had knee pain and more than half
of those examined had clinical evidence of OA. The prevalence ranged
from 1.1% to 5.6% in the various ethnic groups. This prevalence is likely
to be an underestimate as the study only included those with pain in the
past week and not all subjects with knee pain attended the subsequent
medical examination. Hip pain was less common, with only 2.2% of the
study population affected.9, level III
To better understand the burden of disease, further epidemiological
studies are needed to obtain the prevalence and incidence of OA in
Malaysia.
2.2 Risk Factors
Multiple risk factors have been associated with the development and
progression of OA. The risk factors can be categorised as the following:-
a. Non-modifiable
• Advancing age10, level II-2
• Female [OR=1.8, 95% CI 1.3 to 2.5 (case-control studies),
OR=1.9, 95% CI 1.6 to 2.3 (cohort studies)]10, level II-2
• Genetic influence on hand and knee OA in women ranges from
39% to 65% (p<0.001)11, level II-2
• Presence of Heberden’s nodes in hand OA increase the risk for
future knee OA, OR=1.4, 95% CI 1.1 to 1.810, level II-2
b. Modifiable
• Body mass index (BMI)10, level II-2
 overweight (BMI 25 to 30 kg/m2) [OR=2.6, 95% CI 2.2 to 3.0
(case-control studies), OR=2.0, 95% CI 1.8 to 2.1 (cohort
studies)]
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
4
 obese (BMI >30 kg/m2) [OR=5.5, 95% CI 4.3 to 7.1 (casecontrol studies), OR=2.4, 95% CI 2.1 to 2.6 (cohort studies)]
• Previous knee injury [OR=4.7, 95% CI 3.5 to 6.4 (case-control
studies), OR=2.8, 95% CI 1.8 to 4.2 (cohort studies)]10, level II-2
• Malalignment contributes to the progression of knee OA, however
the results are mixed on whether it contributes to the incidence of
the disease12, level II-2
Identifying the modifiable risk factors mentioned above may help in
prevention of OA and its progression.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
5
3. CLASSIFICATION
There are various methods of classifying OA. The disease can be
classified by the joint involved such as hand, hip and knee. It can also
be classified by aetiology as shown below:-
a. Primary or Idiopathic
Primary OA includes generalised OA, a condition associated with
Heberden’s nodes and polyarticular disease. It occurs especially in the
hand, with a female preponderance and has a high prevalence in first
degree relatives.13
b. Secondary
i. Metabolic such as acromegaly, haemachromatosis and
chondrocalcinosis
ii. Anatomic such as slipped femoral epiphysis, Legg-Perthes
disease, congenital dislocation of the hip, leg length inequality,
hypermobility syndromes and avascular necrosis
iii. Trauma such as joint injury and fracture through a joint or
osteonecrosis
iv. Inflammatory such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthropathy
and septic arthritis
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
6
4. DIAGNOSIS
OA is frequently diagnosed by an overall clinical impression. However,
there are diagnostic criteria by American College of Rheumatology and
European League Against Rheumatism which can be used as a guide.
4.1 Clinical Features
Clinical features of OA depend on the extent of the disease. Patients
may have radiological evidence of OA without clinical symptoms.
Symptoms of OA include:-
i.
Joint pain - Pain is the most common presenting complaint. It is
usually insidious in onset, of variable intensity through the day,
may be intermittent and relapsing, increased by joint use and
impact and relieved by rest. Night pain may occur in severe OA.
Refer to Appendix 3 for possible mechanisms of pain in OA.
ii.
Stiffness - Stiffness may be defined as a sensation of tightening
of the involved joint that usually occurs after inactivity, such as in
the morning or when arising after sitting for a prolonged period.
In contrast to inflammatory arthritis such as rheumatoid arthritis,
stiffness in OA usually lasts only a few minutes and almost always
less than 30 minutes.
iii. Swelling - There may be fullness and swelling of the joint with or
without associated warmth and loss of function.
iv. Gait disturbance - OA of weight-bearing joints if significant is
associated with gait disturbance, increased muscle spasm and
a reduced quality of life. An affected knee or hip can produce a
prominent limp. Impaired function of a weight-bearing joint will
cause added stress on the contralateral weight-bearing joints, for
example a patient with impaired right knee function and pain will
have difficulty with the left hip and vice versa.
v.
Bony swelling - In hand OA, hypertrophic bone formation in the
interphalangeal joint may result in reduced dexterity and difficulty
in performing fine movements such as sewing. OA of the first
carpometacarpal (CMC) joint may result in writing difficulties.
vi. Loss of muscle bulk - Inactivity secondary to pain, for example in
knee OA, may lead to significant weakness and loss of quadriceps
muscle bulk.
vii. Limb deformity - Enlargement of the knee joints may occur resulting
in increasing deformity of the knees, such as ‘knock knees’ (valgus)
or ‘bowing’ (varus).
viii. Clicking or grinding sensation - There may be a clicking or grinding
sensation with joint motion resulting in discomfort or pain.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
7
ix. Instability - The sensation of instability in the knee or hip may cause
the patient to seek assistance in ambulation, such as using a cane
or crutch.
Signs of OA include:-
i.
Gait - OA of weight-bearing joints, for example the hip, knee, ankle
and/or foot leads to altered gait patterns.
ii.
Tenderness - Tenderness of soft tissues such as synovium,
capsule, bursae and periarticular muscles, or periosteum at the
insertion of capsule or ligaments may be present.
iii. Joint swelling - Enlargement of the joint may be due to synovitis,
synovial effusion or bone enlargement.
iv. Crepitus - Grinding, crunching or cracking may be present over a
joint with OA.
v.
Limitation of motion - There may be loss of function with reduced motion
as a result of synovitis/effusion or periarticular soft tissue contractures.
vi. Deformity - Deformity may be present in any of the peripheral joints
with OA. However, it is most notable in the interphalangeal joints
of the hands with enlargement and subluxation, the first CMC
joint, the knees (varus/valgus) or the hips (shortened extremity).
Deformity may be associated with joint fusion or instability.
4.2 Diagnostic Criteria
The diagnostic criteria for classification of OA are based on the American
College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria. These criteria were formulated
according to the affected anatomic areas which include the knee, hand
and hip as below:-
a. Hand OA
Table 1. The Diagnostic Criteria for Classification of Idiopathic
OA of the Hand Based on the American College
of Rheumatology 1990 Criteria14, level III
DIP=distal interphalangeal MCP=metacarpophalangeal PIP=proximal interphalangeal CMC=carpometacarpal
1
Hand pain, aching or stiffness
2
Hard tissue enlargement of ≥2 of 10 selected joints ( 2nd and 3rd DIP,
2nd and 3rd PIP, 1st CMC joints of both hands)
3
Fewer than 3 swollen MCP joints
4a
Hard tissue enlargement of ≥2 of DIP joints
OR
4b
Deformity of ≥2 of 10 selected joints
Sensitivity
92%
Specificity
98%
Diagnosis
Criteria
Clinical only
1,2,3 + 4a or 4b
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
8
b. Hip OA
Table 2. The Diagnostic Criteria for Classification of Idiopathic
OA of the Hip Based on the American College
of Rheumatology 1991 Criteria15, level III
c. Knee OA
Table 3. The Diagnostic Criteria for Classification of Idiopathic
OA of the Knee Based on the American College
of Rheumatology 1986 Criteria16, level III
ESR=erythrocyte sedimentation rate RF=rheumatoid factor
SF OA=synovial fluid signs of OA (clear, viscous, or white blood cell count <2,000/mm³)
Must have
Knee pain +
Knee pain +
Knee pain +
At least 5 of 9
Osteophytes on
At least 3 of 6
of the following
x-ray +
of the following
At least 1 of 3 of
the following
1
Age >50 years
Age >50 years
Age >50 years
2
Stiffness <30 min
Stiffness <30 min
Stiffness <30 min
3
Crepitus
Crepitus
Crepitus
4
Bony tenderness
Bony tenderness
5
Bony enlargement
Bony enlargement
6
No palpable
No palpable
warmth
warmth
7
ESR <40
8
RF <1: 40
9
SF OA
Sensitivity
92%
91%
95%
84%
Specificity
75%
86%
69%
89%
(if 3/6)
(if 4/6)
Diagnosis
Criteria
Clinical and
laboratory
Clinical and
radiographic
Clinical
only
Must have hip pain + at least 2 from 3 of the following
1
ESR <20 mm/hr
2
Femoral and acetabular osteophytes on X-ray
3
Axial joint space narrowing on X-ray
Sensitivity
89%
Specificity
91%
Diagnosis
Criteria
Clinical, Laboratory and Radiographic
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
9
Knee OA can also be diagnosed using evidence-based recommendations
by European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) as shown in
Figure 1:-17, level III
a. background risk (the population prevalence of knee OA)
b. risk factors (such as age, gender, BMI and occupation)
c. symptoms (persistent knee pain, brief morning stiffness and
functional limitation)
d. physical examination (crepitus, restricted movement and bony
enlargement
e. plain radiographs as an adjunct
Knee OA
Figure 1. Diagnosis of Knee OA
Background risk
Symptoms
Knee pain
Brief morning stiffness
Functional limitation
Signs
Crepitus
Restricted movement
Bony enlargement
Risk factors
Age
Gender
BMI
Occupation
Family history of OA
History of knee injury
Radiographic changes
Osteophyte
Joint space narrowing
Subchondral sclerosis
Subchondral cysts
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
10
5. INVESTIGATIONS
Diagnosis of OA is mainly clinical. Blood investigations and synovial
fluid analysis are seldom required except to exclude other diagnosis
such as septic, inflammatory and crystal arthropathy. There are various
imaging techniques available now; however plain radiography is still the
standard imaging for assessment of OA.
5.1 Laboratory Investigations
There are no specific laboratory investigations for diagnosis of OA.
Inflammatory markers (ESR, CRP) are likely to be normal or only mildly
elevated. Synovial fluid analysis is essentially normal in OA. Refer to
Table 4 for interpretation of synovial fluid analysis.
Table 4. Categories of Synovial Fluid Based upon Clinical
and Laboratory Findings
Adapted: 2013 UpToDate, Graphic 76506 version 2069.0 (available at http://www.uptodate.com)
Normal
Noninflammatory
Inflammatory
Septic
Often >3.5
Translucent
opaque
Yellow to
opalescent
Low
3
2,000-10,000
≥50
Negative
3-5
High
Nearly equal
to blood
Haemorrhagic
Measure
<3.5
Transparent
Clear
High
<200
<25
Negative
1-2
Very low
Yellow
High
200-2,000
<25
Negative
1-3
Very low
Often >3.5
Transparent
Often >3.5
Opaque
Yellow to
Variable
>100,000*
≥75
Often positive
3-5
Variable
Usually >3.5
Bloody
Red
Variable
200-2,000
50-75
Negative
4-6
Similar
Nearly equal
to blood
Nearly equal
to blood
>25, much lower
than blood
>25, much lower
than blood
Volume, mL
(knee)
Clarity
Colour
Viscosity
WBC, per mm
PMNs, percent
Culture
Total protein,
g/dL
LDH (compared
to levels in
blood)
Glucose, mg/dL
green
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
11
5.2 Imaging
Plain radiography of the affected joint may be useful to support the
diagnosis and assess severity of OA. When radiography is required
in hip and knee OA, it should be done in weight bearing position (AP,
standing). Figure 2 and 3 shows an example of an osteoarthritic knee
and hip respectively.
Figure 2. Knee Osteoarthritis - Anteroposterior (AP) Standing View
Figure 3. Hip Osteoarthritis - Anteroposterior (AP) Standing View
Subchondral
sclerosis
Joint
space
narrowing
Osteophyte
Subchondral
sclerosis
Joint
space
narrowing
Osteophyte
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
12
The Kellgren-Lawrence grading system is the most widely used
radiological classification to identify and grade OA (refer to Table 5).
Table 5. Kellgren-Lawrence Grading System
Grade
Description
Grade I
Doubtful narrowing of the joint space, possible osteophytic lipping
Grade II
Definite osteophytes, possible narrowing of the joint space
Grade III
Moderate multiple osteophytes, definite joint space narrowing,
some sclerosis, possible deformity of bone ends
Grade IV
Large osteophytes, marked joint space narrowing, severe
sclerosis and definite bony end deformity.
Adapted: KELLGREN JH, LAWRENCE JS.Radiological assessment of osteo-arthrosis. Ann
Rheum Dis. 1957 Dec; 16(4):494-502.
In hand OA, plain radiography may also be useful to distinguish
between various types of arthritis as shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Radiographic Changes of Interphalangeal Joints and
Target Sites Involvement of OA and Other Arthritis
Classical features of OA on plain radiograph includes:-
• narrowed joint space
• osteophytes
• subchondral bone sclerosis
• subchondral cysts
Focal narrowing,
marginal
osteophyte,
sclerosis,
osteochondral
bodies
Subchondral
erosion
Proliferative
marginal erosion,
retained or
increase bone
density
Non-proliferative
marginal erosion,
osteopenia
Target
sites
Osteoarthritis
Erosive OA
Psoriatic
Arthritis
Rheumatoid
Arthritis
X-Ray
changes
Common
Uncommon
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
13
In addition to the above findings, centrally located erosions with
osteophyte formation in the interphalangeal joints of the hand (gull-wing
appearance) may occur (refer to Figure 4 and Figure 5).
Figure 4. Gull-wing Appearance Figure 5. Erosion with Osteophytes
Other imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging
and musculoskeletal ultrasonography (US) are seldom indicated
for diagnosis of OA. However, US may be useful in early arthritis of
the hands as it allows direct visualisation and quantification of
cartilage.18, level III In addition, US may demonstrate synovial inflammation
in symptomatic OA of the hands and knees.19, level III; 20, level II-2; 21, level III
Recommendation 1
• Osteoarthritis should be diagnosed clinically. (Grade C)
 Plain radiographs may be used to support the diagnosis. (Grade C)
 Laboratory investigations may be done to exclude other
inflammatory joint diseases. (Grade C)
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
14
6. MANAGEMENT
The management of OA involves a multidisciplinary approach with the
aim to relieve symptoms and improve joint function. It involves nonpharmacological and pharmacological treatment. Refer to Appendix 9
for checklist on management of OA.
6.1 Non-Pharmacological Treatment
a. Education
Patient education is an important non-pharmacological approach in
the management of OA. There are various types of patient education
programmes and they have to be tailored according to the individual
needs, goals and functional capabilities. It should include information
of the diagnosis, nature of the disease, therapeutic options and
the importance of ongoing patient participation in the disease
management.22 - 25, level I Patients who have an understanding of the
disease tend to cope better and report less pain.26 The most important
goal is to instill a positive attitude.
Recommendation 2
• Patient education should form an integral part of osteoarthritis
management. (Grade A)
b. Lifestyle Modification
Lifestyle medicine is defined as the application of environmental,
behavioural, medical and motivational principles to the management of
lifestyle related health problems.27, level III
Lifestyle modification involves initiating and maintaining lifestyle
changes. In hip and knee OA, behavioural changes focus on weight
reduction and physical activity or exercise.
i. Weight Reduction
Obesity is an important modifiable risk factor for the development and
progression of knee OA. Weight reduction is beneficial in pain reduction
and improvement of function.28 - 30, level I In a RCT done by Messier et
al., each unit of weight loss will result in 4-fold reduction in the load
exerted on the knee per step during daily activities.31, level I There is no
evidence available to support the effect of weight loss in hip OA.32
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
15
Recommendation 3
• Weight reduction should be emphasised in the management of
patients with knee osteoarthritis and who are overweight. (Grade A)
ii. Physical Activity
Exercise is effective in reducing pain in hip and knee OA. The frequency,
intensity, duration and rate of progression of exercise can vary. The
amount and intensity of exercise required is uncertain. In order to
improve adherence, the following are suggested:-
i. Individualised exercise programme
ii. Graded type activity
iii. Amount of activity based on personal goal setting
iv. Feedback on progress
v. Appropriate positive reinforcement
vi. Problem solving skills incorporated
The EULAR 2013 Recommendations on the Non-Pharmacologic
Treatment for Hip and Knee OA recommends that the intensity and
duration of exercise should increase over time.32
In hip and knee OA, pacing of activities and/or integrating Activities of
Daily Living (ADL) as part of the exercise regime is more effective than
usual care but not comparable to standardised exercise.32
In knee OA, aerobic training (walking) is effective in reducing pain
(ES=0.48, 95% CI 01.13 to 0.43) and improving physical function
(ES=0.35, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.58).33, level I The evidence for mixed
exercise programmes, including strengthening, aerobic and flexibility
components, in patients with knee OA is conflicting. One type of
exercise has not been shown to be better than another (strength,
aerobic or mixed exercises).32
Regular non-competitive exercise does not exacerbate OA nor increase
the likelihood of requiring joint replacement.
c. Physiotherapy
Physiotherapy can improve muscle strength, balance, coordination and
joint mobility. It should be started as soon as possible to improve pain
and physical capacity.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
16
i. Exercise
Exercise programmes should be individualised while taking into
consideration patient’s preference and ability to perform the activities.
Land-based exercises include joint range of movement (ROM), muscle
strengthening and low impact aerobic exercises. They should be
supervised and done regularly (refer to Appendix 4 and Appendix 5).
Such exercise has short term benefits in reducing pain (SMD= -0.40,
95% CI -0.50 to -0.30) and improving physical function (SMD= -0.37,
95% CI -0.49 to -0.25) in knee OA.33, level I However in hip OA, the benefit
is only seen in pain reduction (SMD= -0.38, 95% CI -0.67 to -0.09) but
not in physical function (SMD= -0.10, 95% CI -0.51 to 0.32).34, level I
Aquatic exercise may be advantageous for OA patients. A Cochrane
SR showed improvement in pain (SMD=0.19, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.35)
and quality of life (SMD=0.32, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.61) for three months
only in hip and knee OA. However, there was no statistically significant
difference on walking ability.35, level I
In the same review, aquatic exercise was better than land-based
exercises in reducing pain in knee OA (SMD=0.86, 95% CI 0.25 to 1.47).
However, there was no effect on walking ability and stiffness.35, level I
ii. Transcutaneous Electrostimulation (TENS)
There is a lack of evidence to support the use of transcutaneous
electrostimulation for knee OA from the most recent Cochrane
SR.36, level I However, the ACR 2012 recommends the use of TENS for
patients with chronic moderate to severe pain who are not suitable for
total knee arthroplasty.37
iii. Thermotherapy
Thermotherapy is commonly used in physical rehabilitation for OA
patients. ACR recommends the use of thermal agents for hip and knee
OA in combination with exercise supervised by a physiotherapist.37
A SR showed that cold pack usage did not show a significant effect in
pain reduction in knee OA (WMD= -1.60, 95% CI -4.53 to1.33).38, level I
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
17
iv. Therapeutic Ultrasound
Therapeutic ultrasound with high frequency vibrations is a modality
used for pain relief in patients with hip and knee OA. However, in a
Cochrane SR, the effectiveness of this modality in pain reduction and
function was inconclusive.39, level I
Recommendation 4
• Exercise programmes in hip and knee osteoarthritis must be
individualised, supervised and done regularly. (Grade C)
• Land-based or aquatic exercise may be used for short-term benefit in
osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
d. Occupational Therapy
Occupational therapy aims to improve health, prevent disability and help
individuals to achieve their optimum functional level and independence
in performing ADL.
The evidence suggests that people with pain, difficulty and frustration
in performing daily activities and work tasks should be referred early
to an occupational therapist for splinting, joint protection training and
assistive device provision.40
A NICE-commissioned CPG recommends that assistive devices such
as walking sticks and tap turners should be considered as adjuncts to
core treatment in OA patients with specific ADL problems.40 The height
of the walking stick handle should be at the wrist level when the user is
standing. It is important to prescribe appropriate assistive device with
proper training to the patients (refer to Appendix 6).
Joint protection and home exercises (JPE) are used in the treatment of
hand OA. JPE increases grip strength significantly by 25% (p<0.0005)
and global hand function by 65% (p<0.05).41, level I Refer to Appendix 7 for
Joint Protection Principles. Thumb splints can help to reduce pain in
the thumb and improve hand function.40 Splinting and Joint Protection
programme in hand OA can give significant decreases in pain and
stiffness, and improvements in daily activities (p<0.05).42, level I However,
there is no evidence to support splinting in knee OA.
In a RCT, activity modification or instruction in ADL improved pain (MD=
-3.21, 95 % CI -3.45 to -0.70) at 6 weeks.43, level I Activity modification in
performing ADL may be helpful in maintaining proper posture and thus
reduce pain and disability (refer to Appendix 7).
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
18
Rest and relaxation may help in pain control. The beneficial therapies
are:-
• Jacobson relaxation: improves pain at end of 8-week treatment
(p<0.05) but the benefit is not sustained.44, level I Jacobson’s training
procedure involves tensing and relaxing of muscles alternately, with
the intent of developing awareness of the difference. The technique
starts from the arm to face working downwards to the shoulders,
chest, abdomen, legs and ends with the whole body in complete
relaxation. The whole cycle can be performed under 20 minutes.
• Music therapy: improves pain at day 1, day 7 and at 2 weeks (end
of treatment) (all p=0.001)45, level I
• Guided Imagery Relaxation (GIR): increases Health Related Quality
of Life in women with OA (p=0.023)46, level I
Recommendation 5
• Early referral to occupational therapy may be considered for pain
relief and improvement in activities of daily living in osteoarthritis.
(Grade A)
e. Orthoses
Orthoses are defined as any medical device added to a person’s body to
support, align, position, immobilise, prevent or correct deformity, assist
weak muscles or improve function. In knee OA, the general purpose is
to decrease pain and improve physical function.
Walking shoes with neutral, contoured orthoses reduce pain and
stiffness, and improve function in knee OA at one year (p<0.001).47, level I
Knee braces for medial, lateral or patella-femoral OA have not been
shown to reduce pain, improve function or quality of life, even though
they are widely used.48 - 49, level I
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of orthoses in hip
OA.
Recommendation 6
• Walking shoes with neutral, contoured orthoses may be offered in:-
 knee osteoarthritis (Grade A)
 hip osteoarthritis (Grade C)
• Knee braces should not be offered in knee osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
19
6.2. Pharmacological Treatment
Pharmacological treatments are available in the form of oral, intraarticular and topical.
a. Oral Treatment
Oral treatment consists of:-
i. Simple analgesics - paracetamol
ii. Weak opioid analgesics - tramadol
iii. Analgesics with anti-inflammatory properties - Non-steroidal
Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) and Cyclo-oxygenase-2
(COX-2) Inhibitors
iv. Nutraceutical - glucosamine, chondroitin, diacerein
i. Paracetamol
Paracetamol or acetaminophen is classified as a mild analgesic. In a
SR of RCTs, paracetamol was superior to placebo in reduction of overall
pain [SMD= -0.13 (95% CI -0.22 to -0.04), NNT=16]. However, NSAIDs
were more efficacious than paracetamol in total WOMAC score (SMD=
-0.25, 95% CI -0.39 to -0.11).50, level I
Similarly, a meta-analysis showed that paracetamol was less efficacious
than NSAIDs in overall pain using VAS at rest (WMD= -6.33mm, 95%
CI -9.24 to -3.41) and on walking (WMD= -5.76mm, 95% CI -8.99 to
-2.52).51, level I
Paracetamol in the extended release formulation is significantly superior
to placebo in reducing pain (p=0.012) and improving physical function
(p=0.016).52, level I Paracetamol in all formulations is well tolerated and
safe.50 - 54, level I
A combination tablet of ibuprofen/paracetamol confers no additional
benefit to ibuprofen alone.53, level I
Recommendation 7
• Paracetamol can be used in patients with osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
 It should be used as first-line analgesic in mild to moderate pain.
(Grade C)
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
20
ii. Tramadol
Tramadol is a synthetic opioid analgesic. In a meta-analysis, tramadol
was more efficacious compared to placebo in reducing pain (WMD=
-8mm, 95% CI -12.0 to -5.0), and improving stiffness and function
(WMD= -0.3, 95% CI -0.5 to -0.2).55, level I
Similarly, oral controlled-release tramadol is also more efficacious in
reducing pain (p=0.0009) and improving physical function (p=0.0205)
compared to placebo.56, level I However, it is as efficacious as sustainedrelease diclofenac.57, level I
In patients already on NSAIDs for at least 30 days, addition of
tramadol/paracetamol combination tablets for 10 days duration is
significantly efficacious in managing painful OA compared to those on
placebo.58 - 59, level I
Tramadol in all formulations show no major or significant adverse
events.55 - 59, level I Common side effects are dizziness, nausea, vomiting,
constipation and drowsiness. This medication has to be used with
caution in the elderly.
Recommendation 8
• Tramadol may be used alone or in combination with paracetamol in
patients with osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
iii. NSAIDs and COX-2 Inhibitors
NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors reduce production of prostaglandin by
inhibiting the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase. They vary in their selectivity for
inhibiting different types of cyclo-oxygenase. They are a class of drugs
that provide analgesic and anti-pyretic effects and in higher doses, antiinflammatory effects. COX-2 inhibitors selectively inhibit COX-2 and
thus improve gastro-intestinal tolerance.
In a meta-analysis, NSAIDs including COX-2 inhibitors were more
efficacious than placebo in reducing short-term (2 - 13 weeks) pain
intensity (WMD=0.30, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.39) and functional disability
(WMD=0.29, 95% CI 0.18 to 0.40).60, level I
Celecoxib 100 mg and 200 mg BID are as efficacious as diclofenac
50 mg BID and naproxen 500 mg BID in the treatment of hip, knee, or
hand OA.61, level I
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
21
In a study using OMERACT-OARSI responder criteria, those who
responded within two weeks to etoricoxib 30 mg OD and celecoxib 200
mg OD are highly predictive of later response at 12 weeks.62, level I
• Gastrointestinal (GI) Safety
The relative risks of upper GI complications of several NSAIDs and
celecoxib compared to placebo analysed in a meta-analysis ranged
from 1.45 to 4.14.63, level II-2
Ulcer complications are seen significantly less frequent in COX-2
inhibitors compared to NSAIDs.61, level I; 64 - 66, level I Comparing concomitant
aspirin and non-aspirin users, the GI complications are significantly less
in non-aspirin users (p=0.007).61, level I
Proton pump inhibitors are effective in the prevention of NSAID-induced
endoscopic duodenal (RR=0.19, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.37) and gastric
ulcers (RR=0.40, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.51) at ≥12 weeks when compared
to placebo.67, level I
Lansoprazole significantly reduce the risk of gastroduodenal ulcers
recurrence in patients with a definite history of GI ulcers requiring longterm NSAIDs therapy (HR=0.25, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.45)68, level I or longterm low dose aspirin therapy (HR=0.10, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.23).69, level I
The risk of GI events is lower in patients receiving celecoxib compared
to diclofenac slow release plus omeprazole with HR of 4.3 (95% CI 2.6
to 7.0).70, level I The risk of recurrent ulcer bleeding is also lower in the
celecoxib 200 mg BD plus esomeprozole 20 mg BD group compared to
the celecoxib 200 mg BD plus placebo group (p=0·0004).71, level I
• Cardiovascular (CV) Safety
One of the main concerns among patients on long-term use of NSAIDs
and COX-2 inhibitors is the increased risk of thrombotic CV events.
A meta-analysis showed that naproxen seemed to have the lowest
Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration composite outcome of non-fatal
myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke or CV death among users of
NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors (rate ratio=1.22, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.93).72, level I
The numbers of CV thromboembolic events are low in both celecoxib
and diclofenac or naproxen groups at 12 weeks.61, level I Long-term
etoricoxib use (20 months) is also associated with comparable CV
events with that of diclofenac.73, level I
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
22
• Renal Safety
In the Malaysian CPG on Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) in Adults,
there was conflicting evidence in the association between chronic
NSAIDs usage and the development of CKD.74 However, renal function
should be monitored regularly in patients on chronic NSAIDs or COX-2
inhibitors treatment.
Recommendation 9
• Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory
drugs
(NSAIDs)
or
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors can be used in the treatment of
osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
 In patients with high risk of gastrointestinal (GI) complications,
COX-2 inhibitors are preferred to non-selective NSAIDs with proton
pump inhibitor (PPI) for primary ulcer prevention. (Grade A)
 In patients with previous GI complications:-
- NSAIDs or COX-2 inhibitors should be avoided. (Grade C)
- combination of COX-2 inhibitors and PPI may be offered for GI
protection if indicated. (Grade A)
 In patients with renal impairment, NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors
should be used with caution. (Grade C)
• Combination therapy with more than one NSAID/COX-2 inhibitor
should never be used. There is no benefit in combination therapy
and the incidence of side effects may be additive.
• Caution is required when prescribing NSAIDs in the elderly and
those with hypertension, cardiovascular disease, renal or hepatic
impairment.
• Those who are allergic to one NSAID may also be allergic to others.
iv. Glucosamine and Chondroitin
Glucosamine is an amino sugar and a prominent precursor in the
biochemical synthesis of glycosylated proteins and lipids, including
glycosaminoglycans (GAG) which is a component of cartilage.
Chondroitin sulfate is a sulfated GAG which is usually found attached to
proteins as part of a proteoglycan. Glucosamine or chondroitin sulfate
is required in the synthesis of the GAG component of cartilage, which
provides the rationale for oral supplementation of these compounds in
OA.
The glucosamine and chondroitin preparations available in Malaysia
are in various combinations, strengths and purities which may affect
their efficacy.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
23
• Glucosamine
Glucosamine, in general, is not consistent in its effect as a
structure modifier for OA. In terms of pain reduction, it is statistically
more efficacious than placebo and can have similar efficacy with
NSAIDs.75 - 77, level I
Glucosamine hydrochloride or its combination with chondroitin sulfate is
not efficacious as a structure or symptom modifier.75 - 76, level I; 78 - 79, level I
Glucosamine sulfate 1500 mg per day was statistically more efficacious
in pain reduction when compared to placebo.76 - 77, level I Pain relieving
effect of glucosamine sulfate can be seen by three months after its
initiation.80, level I However, the evidence was from pharmaceuticalsponsored studies.
In terms of safety profile, glucosamine is well-tolerated and safe.75 - 78, level I
However, the effect of glucosamine on glucose metabolism needs
further research.81, level I
Recommendation 10
• Glucosamine sulfate 1500 mg per day may be used as pain relief for
knee osteoarthritis. (Grade C)
 Evaluation on pain reduction should be done at three months after
initiation of treatment before deciding on its continuation. (Grade C)
• Chondroitin
The evidence on efficacy of chondroitin sulfate in hip and
knee OA for pain relief and its structure modifying effect is
inconsistent.75 - 82, level I
Chondroitin sulfate 800 mg as a single dose is more efficacious than
placebo in pain reduction, improving hand function and morning
stiffness in patients with hand OA.83, level I However, its efficacy as a
structural modifier is still debatable.84 - 86, level I
In terms of safety profile, chondroitin sulfate is well-tolerated and
safe.83, level I
The efficacy of chondroitin in the treatment of hip or knee OA is
inconclusive. It may be beneficial for symptomatic relief in hand OA.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
24
v. Diacerein
Diacerein, a purified anthraquinone derivative, is a drug which inhibits
production of interleukin (IL)-1beta, the major proinflammatory cytokine
involved in articular cartilage destruction.
In a meta-analysis, diacerein was slightly more efficacious compared
to placebo in reduction of pain [n-wtd pooled Glass score=1.31 (95%
CI 0.49 to 2.14)] and improvement of joint function [n-wtd pooled Glass
score=1.08 (95% CI 0.26 to 1.91)] in knee OA. In addition, diacerein
had similar efficacy with NSAIDs in the reduction of pain in knee OA for
duration of 16 weeks [(n-wtd pooled Glass score= -0.01 (95% CI -0.76
to 0.74)].87, level I
Besides these, diacerein had significant carry-over effect in pain
reduction in knee OA compared to placebo [(n-wtd pooled Glass
score=2.71 (95% CI 1.32 to 4.10)] and NSAIDs [(n-wtd pooled Glass
score=2.27 (95% CI 1.42 to 3.11)] for 16 weeks duration.87, level I
In general, diacerein had an acceptable safety profile.87 - 90, level I The
incidence of adverse events such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea
and vomiting was higher compared to placebo (p<0.01), most were mild
to moderate91, level I
In view of modest efficacy and common adverse events, more studies
are warranted to support the use of diacerein in OA.
Recommendation 11
• Diacerein may be used in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis.
(Grade C)
b. Intra-articular Treatment
i. Corticosteroids
In a Cochrane systematic review of single/double blinded of 12
randomised controlled trials (n=653), the efficacy and safety of various
preparations of intra-articular (IA) corticosteroid in the treatment of knee
OA was evaluated.92, level I
IA corticosteroid offered short-term pain relief at one week post-injection
in patients with knee OA (WMD in VAS= -21.9 mm, 95% CI -29.9 to
-13.9). The NNT calculated was three to four. The effect continued
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
25
to be seen at two weeks (RR=1.8, 95% CI 1.1 to 3.0) and three
weeks (RR=3.1, 95% CI 1.6 to 6.0). However, it did not demonstrate
improvement in function.92, level I
There were no statistically significant differences detected in the total
number of overall withdrawals including lack of efficacy, post-injection
flare and local discomfort.92, level I
Recommendation 12
• Intra-articular corticosteroid may be used for short-term pain relief in
an acute exacerbation of knee osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
Oral corticosteroid have no role in the treatment of osteoarthritis.
ii. Viscosupplementation
Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a naturally occurring polysaccharide in the
synovial fluid and is responsible for the elastoviscosity of synovial
fluid. The quantity of HA in the synovial fluid is reduced in the patients
who have OA. To improve biomechanical function, different hyaluronic
acids were devised for intra-articular injection, commonly called
viscosupplementation.There are now several different formulations
of viscosupplements (hyaluronan and hylan) produced by different
manufacturers and of widely differing molecular weights.
Two SRs showed that HA intra-articular injection may be beneficial
in reducing pain, but the effect sizes were small when compared to
placebo. In terms of improvement in physical function, the results were
conflicting.93 - 94, level I However, the pooled estimates in both SRs have
to be interpreted cautiously because of different molecular weights of
HA, different injection schedules and poor trial design despite large
numbers of studies.
In a pharmacoeconomics analysis by NICE, the above benefits may
be offset by the frequency of the HA injections and other indirect costs.
Thus, NICE does not recommend the use of viscosupplementation in
treatment of knee OA.40
Viscosupplementation is generally well-tolerated and with no significant
difference in safety profile between it and placebo.94, level I The risk of
overall adverse events is insignificant.93, level I
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
26
Due to a lack of supporting evidence, the CPG is unable to recommend
the use of viscosupplementation in the treatment of osteoarthritis.
c. Topical Treatment
Topical treatment is an adjunct or alternative to oral NSAIDs for
treatment of OA. The commonly used topical treatment includes
NSAIDs, capsaicin and methylsalicylate. Topical analgesics can be in
the form of gels, creams and transdermal patches.
Topical NSAIDs reduce knee OA pain at week 2 (p<0.0001), week 3
(p<0.0002)95, level I and at week 4 to 12 (SMD= -0.33, 95% CI -0.48 to
-0.18)96, level I compared to placebo.
It is also more efficacious than placebo in reducing stiffness of knee
OA (SMD in WOMAC stiffness at week 4 to 12= -0.30, 95% CI -0.45 to
-0.15).96, level I
Besides reducing pain and stiffness, physical function is also significantly
improved with topical NSAIDs.95 - 97, level I
Generally, topical NSAIDs were found to be safe in adults with OA in
a SR of RCTs. The risk of minor skin dryness was higher in topical
diclofenac compared to placebo (RR=1.74, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.22). Fewer
severe gastrointestinal adverse events were reported in topical NSAIDs
compared with oral NSAIDs.98, level I
There were no recent studies found with regards to the usage of
capsaicin and methylsalicylate in OA. However, the NICE CPG 2008
recommends that topical capsaicin should be considered as an adjunct
to core treatment for knee or hand OA but does not recommend the use
of topical methylsalicylate (rubefacients).40
Recommendation 13
• Topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be offered in the
treatment of osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
 It may be used as adjunct therapy in mild to moderate pain.
(Grade C)
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
27
7. ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT
Alternative treatments are extensively used in the treatment of OA
however it is not based on evidence gathered using scientific methods.
Common alternative treatments that have shown positive results include
acupuncture, avocado soybean unsaponifiables (ASU) and ginger.
•
Acupuncture
Acupuncture is a traditional treatment which involves inserting needles
into meridian points with the intention of influencing energy flow.
In a Cochrane SR, acupuncture significantly improved pain and function
(as assessed by the WOMAC scale) in patients with knee OA compared
to sham acupuncture:-99, level I
• SMD= -0.29 (95% CI -0.48 to -0.10) for pain at three months and
SMD= -0.10 (95% CI -0.21 to – 0.01) for pain at 26 weeks
• SMD= -0.29 (95% CI -0.49 to -0.08) for function at three months
• SMD= -0.29 (95% CI -0.50 to -0.09) for total score at three months
No serious adverse events were reported to be associated with
acupuncture. Minor side effects were bruising and haematoma.
•
Avocado Soybean Unsaponifiables (ASU)
ASU provided pain relief and improvement of function compared
to placebo in chronic stable OA of the hip and knee in a Cochrane
SR:-100, level I
• SMD= -8.06 (95% CI -11.3 to -4.60) for VAS pain score
• SMD= -1.69 (95% CI -2.41 to -0.98) for Lequesne index
• SMD=0.71 (95% CI 0.57 to 0.89) for resumption of NSAIDs
ASU had minimal gastrointestinal disturbances and no other serious
side effect.
Another meta-analysis supported the above findings with improvement
in pain in OMERACT III scale (SMD=0.39, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.76) and
function in Lequesne index (SMD=45, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.70).101, level I
•
Ginger
In a small RCT of short duration, ginger extract was significantly more
efficacious than placebo but less than ibuprofen (p<0.005) in improving
pain and function. It was safe without serious side effects.102, level I
Recommendation 14
• Acupuncture and avocado soybean unsaponifiables may be used as
an adjunct short-term therapy in osteoarthritis. (Grade A)
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
28
8. SURGICAL TREATMENT
Surgery is considered if the symptoms of the affected joints significantly
affect the quality of patients’ life and interfere with ADL. There are five
identified key areas which surgeons use to assess the need for surgery:-
• pain (sleep interruption and while resting)
• limitations to ADL (walking and self-care)
• psychosocial health (psychological well-being)
• economic impact and
• recent deterioration
The types of surgery that can be offered are:-
• Arthroscopic Surgery
• High Tibial Osteotomy
• Total Joint Replacement
• Partial Joint Replacement
• Arthrodesis
8.1 Arthroscopic Surgery
Arthroscopic lavage with or without debridement has been used in the
treatment of knee OA. Studies showed no additional benefit in terms
of pain relief and improvement in joint function compared to optimised
physical and medical therapy.103 - 104, level I However, it is indicated in
patients with OA associated with mechanical symptoms such as
locking, catching or giving way of the joint caused by presence of loose
bodies or flaps of meniscus or cartilage.
8.2 High Tibial Osteotomy (HTO)
HTO works best in patients with isolated medial compartment arthritis,
particularly if they are younger than 50 years old and have at least
120 degrees of knee flexion. It is an operation where the tibial bone is
osteotomised at its upper end and repositioned in order to realign the
mechanical axis of the limb away from the diseased area. This allows
the knee to glide freely and distribute weight evenly on a more normal
compartment.
HTO relieves pain and may delay the progression of OA. However,
the disadvantages of this procedure are that the knee may look
asymmetrical and may pose a more technically challenging procedure
if Total Knee Replacement (TKR) is eventually required.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
29
8.3 Total Joint Replacement
Total Joint Replacement is indicated in patients with severe OA who
have failed to respond to all other therapies. This may result in a
dramatic reduction in pain and a significant improvement in ADL.105, level l
However, patients are still advised to avoid certain activities, including
jogging and high-impact sports for the rest of their life following surgery
to ensure longevity of the implant.
a. Total Knee Replacement (TKR)
In the Canadian Joint Replacement Registry, 94% of TKR was due to
degenerative OA.106, level III Active infection is an absolute contraindication
whereas young age <55 years, poor compliance, regional pain disorders
and unrealistic expectations are relative contraindications. The rate of
joint revision ranged between 0% and 13% in studies that reported
more than five years follow-up.105, level I
b. Total Hip Replacement (THR)
Indication for THR is similar to TKR. In the Canadian Joint Replacement
Registry, 81% of THR was due to degenerative OA.106, level III However,
with the advancement in implant design, metallurgy and surgical
techniques, THR is also advocated for the younger patient with severe
hip OA.
8.4 Partial Joint Replacement
The advantages of partial knee replacement over total knee replacement
are less blood loss intraoperatively and less pain post-surgery with
faster recovery and better range of motion. The disadvantages include
slightly less predictable pain relief and the potential need for subsequent
surgery.
a. Unicondylar Knee Replacement (UKR)
UKR differs from TKR in that only a portion of the knee is replaced. It
is indicated for patients with knee OA that affect either the medial or
lateral compartment and have significant pain on weight bearing. The
survival of UKR at 10 years is about 85%.107, level I; 108
b. Patellofemoral Knee Arthroplasty
This surgery is an alternative to TKR for elderly patients with isolated
advanced patellofemoral OA.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
30
c. Bicompartmental Knee Arthroplasty
This type of surgery is an alternative to TKR when advanced medial
or lateral compartment OA is associated with significant patellofemoral
OA.
8.5 Arthrodesis
The aim of arthrodesis or joint fusion is to fuse the diseased joint in
an optimal position. This would make the joint stiff but stable. The
most common indication for knee arthrodesis is pain and significant
ligamentous instability in an unreconstructable knee following an
infection at the site of a knee arthroplasty. Arthrodesis of the knee can
provide a stable, painless extremity for young active patients.
In general, arthrodesis is not the preferred surgical option in OA.
Recommendation 15
• Arthroscopic lavage and debridement should not be offered as
a treatment in osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee except in selected
conditions*. (Grade A)
• Joint Replacement should be offered to patients with severe OA.
(Grade A)
*Refer to 8.1
8.6 Recent Advances in Osteoarthritis
a. Intra-articular Stem Cells
Stem cells have the capacity to produce all cell types in an unlimited
fashion. Emerging evidence indicates that direct intra-articular injection
of stem cells may boost the normally limited reparative process and
limit the destructive process.
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
technology review showed that there was limited evidence on the
benefits of stem cells in articular cartilage repair.109
More evidence-based studies are needed before its recommendation
as a standard treatment for OA.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
31
b. Autologous Chondrocyte Implantation (ACI)
Autologous chondrocyte implantation is an approach that has been
used to treat symptomatic knee cartilage defects. The aim of this
treatment is to replenish cartilage through the recruitment of progenitor
cells as potential cartilage precursors, allowing the development into
chondrogenic cells and finally cartilage.110, level I
Most of the studies on usage of ACI were done on younger age patients
with articular cartilage damage due to secondary causes of OA such as
sports injury or trauma. Hence, there is a lack of evidence presently to
recommend the use of ACI in the treatment of primary OA.
c. Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP)
Platelet rich plasma (PRP) is a natural concentrate of autologous blood
growth factors studied in different fields of medicine in order to test its
potential to enhance tissue regeneration.
The preliminary short-term results within 3 to 6 months indicate that
treatment with autologous PRP intra-articular injections may be useful
for early OA, aiming to reduce pain and improve knee function and
quality of life.111, level III However, there is no further improvement after 6
months.111, level III; 112, level II-2
Due to a lack of available evidence, the CPG is unable to recommend the
use of intra-articular stem cells, autologous chondrocyte implantation or
platelet-rich plasma in the treatment of osteoarthritis.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
32
9. REFERRAL
9.1 Rheumatology Referral
Osteoarthritis is one of the major causes of disability in adults. Early
diagnosis and intervention are important to minimise the impact of
short-term and long-term morbidity. Rheumatology opinion should be
sought for evaluation of arthritis with unclear diagnosis.
9.2 Orthopaedic Referral
Referral to the orthopaedic surgeon should be made when the patient
does not experience satisfactory improvement in terms of pain, stability
or function despite adequate pharmacological and non-pharmacological
treatment. The patients should be made to understand the reason for
referral.
Recommendation 16
• Referral of osteoarthritis cases to either rheumatology or orthopaedic
clinic should provide the following information:-
 Diagnosis
 Severity and its impact on activity of daily living
 Co-morbidities that might require further medical assessment
 Relevant investigation results and current medications (Grade C)
10. PRIMARY PREVENTION
Identifying and modifying the risk factors can help in preventing OA and
its progression. Many of these risk factors are of particular importance
in weight-bearing joints. Prevention of obesity, weight reduction in the
obese and health education pertaining to joint protection techniques
including avoidance of trauma to the joints are recommended as
measures for primary prevention. Currently, there is no evidence
available to recommend the intake of any medication to prevent OA. An
important aspect of primary prevention is to identify those individuals
at risk.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
33
11. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
It is important to standardise the management of OA at all healthcare
levels in Malaysia using an evidence-based CPG in order to manage
OA appropriately. It is therefore crucial for healthcare providers to
understand the disease as it is a common disease which may result in
significant disabilities.
11.1 Facilitating & Limiting Factors
Existing facilitators for application of the recommendations in the CPG
include:-
1. Wide dissemination of the CPG to healthcare providers (hard
and soft copies)
2. Regular rheumatology update for healthcare providers
Existing barriers for application of the recommendations of the CPG
are:-
1. Poor understanding/limited knowledge of OA
2. Insufficient resources in the management of OA particularly in
rehabilitation
3. Variation in treatment practice and preferences
11.2 Potential Resource Implications
To implement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to:-
1. Ensure widespread distribution of the CPG to healthcare
providers via printed and electronic copies.
2. Re-enforce training (with adequate funding) of healthcare
providers by regular seminars or workshops to ensure
information is up-to-date
3. Availability of rehabilitation services and trained manpower in
OA management including multidisciplinary team at different
levels of healthcare
4. Ensure availability of recommended drugs in primary care
setting
5. Ensure patient empowerment via patient education materials
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
34
To assist in the implementation of the CPG, the following is proposed as
clinical audit indicator for quality management:-
*Those at high risk of GI complications (such as ulceration, bleeding,
perforation and obstruction) are:-
i. age more than 65 years old or
ii. on high dose of NSAIDs, aspirin, corticosteroid or anticoagulant or
iii. previous history of upper GI complications
Percentage of OA
patients referred
to rheumatology
or orthopaedic
clinic with proper
documentation
Number of OA patients referred to
rheumatology or orthopaedic clinic with proper
documentation within a period of time
X 100%
Number of OA patients referred to
rheumatology or orthopaedic clinic
in the same period of time
=
Percentage of
patients with
symptomatic
OA at risk of GI
complications*
prescribed with
NSAIDs alone
X 100%
Number of patients with symptomatic OA
at risk of GI complications
in the same period of time
=
Number of patients with symptomatic OA
at risk of GI complications prescribed with
NSAIDs alone within a period of time
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
35
REFERENCES
1.
Vos T, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, et al. Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289
diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2010.[Erratum appears in Lancet. 2013 Feb 23;381(9867):628 Note: AlMazroa, Mohammad A
[added]; Memish, Ziad A [added]]. Lancet. 2012 Dec 15;380(9859):2163-96.
2.
National Institutes of Health, World Health Organization. Global Health and Aging, NIH, Techn.
Rep, NIH Publication no. 11-77372011 Contract No.: NIH Publication no. 11-7737.
3.
Pereira D, Peleteiro B, Araujo J, et al. The effect of osteoarthritis definition on prevalence and
incidence estimates: a systematic review. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2011 Nov;19(11):1270-85.
4.
Haugen IK, Englund M, Aliabadi P, et al. Prevalence, incidence and progression of hand
osteoarthritis in the general population: the Framingham Osteoarthritis Study. Ann Rheum Dis.
2011 Sep;70(9):1581-6.
5.
Lawrence RC, Felson DT, Helmick CG, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other
rheumatic conditions in the United States. Part II. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Jan;58(1):26-35.
6.
Nevitt MC, Xu L, Zhang Y, et al. Very low prevalence of hip osteoarthritis among Chinese elderly
in Beijing, China, compared with whites in the United States: the Beijing osteoarthritis study.
Arthritis Rheum. 2002 Jul;46(7):1773-9.
7.
Murphy L, Schwartz TA, Helmick CG, et al. Lifetime risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis.
Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Sep 15;59(9):1207-13.
8.
Zhang Y, Xu L, Nevitt MC, et al. Comparison of the prevalence of knee osteoarthritis between the
elderly Chinese population in Beijing and whites in the United States: The Beijing Osteoarthritis
Study. Arthritis Rheum. 2001 Sep;44(9):2065-71.
9.
Veerapen K, Wigley RD, Valkenburg H. Musculoskeletal pain in Malaysia: a COPCORD survey.
J Rheumatol. 2007 Jan;34(1):207-13.
10.
Blagojevic M, Jink, C, Jeffery A, et al. Risk factors for onset of osteoarthritis of the knee in older
adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2010 Jan;18(1):24-33.
11.
Spector TD, Cicuttini F, Baker J, et al. Genetic influences on osteoarthritis in women: a twin
study. BMJ. 1996 Apr 13;312(7036):940-3.
12.
Tanamas S, Hanna, FS, Cicuttini FM, et al. Does knee malalignment increase the risk of
development and progression of knee osteoarthritis? A systematic review. Arthritis Rheum. 2009
Apr 15;61(4):459-67.
13.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Osteoarthritis. Kuala Lumpur: MoH; 2002.
14.
Altman R, Alarcon G, Appelrouth D, et al. The American College of Rheumatology criteria for the
classification and reporting of osteoarthritis of the hand. Arthritis Rheum. 1990 Nov;33(11):1601-10.
15.
Altman R, Alarcon G, Appelrouth D, et al. The American College of Rheumatology criteria for the
classification and reporting of osteoarthritis of the hip. Arthritis Rheum. 1991 May;34(5):505-14.
16.
Altman R, Asch E, Bloch D, et al. Development of criteria for the classification and reporting of
osteoarthritis. Classification of osteoarthritis of the knee. Diagnostic and Therapeutic Criteria
Committee of the American Rheumatism Association. Arthritis Rheum. 1986 Aug;29(8):1039-49.
17.
Zhang W, Doherty M, Peat G, et al. EULAR evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis
of knee osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Mar;69(3):483-9.
18.
Moller B, Bonel H, Rotzetter M, et al. Measuring finger joint cartilage by ultrasound as a promising
alternative to conventional radiograph imaging. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Apr 15;61(4):435-41.
19.
Keen HI, Wakefield RJ, Grainger AJ, et al. An ultrasonographic study of osteoarthritis of the
hand: synovitis and its relationship to structural pathology and symptoms. Arthritis Rheum. 2008
Dec 15;59(12):1756-63.
20.
D’Agostino MA, Conaghan P, Le Bars M, et al. EULAR report on the use of ultrasonography in
painful knee osteoarthritis. Part 1: prevalence of inflammation in osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis.
2005 Dec;64(12):1703-9.
21.
Conaghan P, D’Agostino MA, Ravaud P, et al. EULAR report on the use of ultrasonography in
painful knee osteoarthritis. Part 2: exploring decision rules for clinical utility. Ann Rheum Dis.
2005 Dec;64(12):1710-4.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
36
22.
Kao M-J, Wu M-P, Tsai M-W, et al. The effectiveness of a self-management program on quality
of life for knee osteoarthritis (OA) patients. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2012 Mar-Apr;54(2):317-24.
23.
Coleman S, Briffa NK, Carroll G, et al. A randomised controlled trial of a self-management
education program for osteoarthritis of the knee delivered by health care professionals. Arthritis
Res Ther. 2012;14(1):R21.
24.
Hansson EE, Jonsson-Lundgren M, Ronnheden AM, et al. Effect of an education programme
for patients with osteoarthritis in primary care--a randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet
Disord. 2010;11:244.
25.
Ravaud P, Flipo RM, Boutron I, et al. ARTIST (osteoarthritis intervention standardized) study of
standardised consultation versus usual care for patients with osteoarthritis of the knee in primary
care in France: pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;338:b421.
26.
Pendleton A, Arden N, Dougados M, et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of
knee osteoarthritis: report of a task force of the Standing Committee for International Clinical
Studies Including Therapeutic Trials (ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis. 2000 Dec;59(12):936-44.
27.
Egger GJ, Binns AF, Rössner SR. Lifestyle Medicine. Sydney: McGraw-Hill; 2007.
28.
Bliddal H, Leeds AR, Stigsgaard L, et al. Weight loss as treatment for knee osteoarthritis
symptoms in obese patients: 1-year results from a randomised controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis.
2011 Oct;70(10):1798-803.
29.
Christensen R, Bartels EM, Astrup A, et al. Effect of weight reduction in obese patients
diagnosed with knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Rheum Dis.
2007 Apr;66(4):433-9.
30.
Messier SP, Loeser RF, Miller GD, et al. Exercise and dietary weight loss in overweight and
obese older adults with knee osteoarthritis: the Arthritis, Diet, and Activity Promotion Trial.
Arthritis Rheum. 2004 May;50(5):1501-10.
31.
Messier SP, Gutekunst DJ, Davis C, et al. Weight loss reduces knee-joint loads in overweight
and obese older adults with knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Jul;52(7):2026-32.
32.
Fernandes L, Hagen KB, Bijlsma JW, et al. EULAR recommendations for the non-pharmacological
core management of hip and knee osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Jul;72(7):1125-35.
33.
Fransen M, McConnell S Exercise for osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 4 Art No: CD004376.
34.
Fransen M, McConnell S, Hernandez-Molina G, et al. Exercise for osteoarthritis of the hip.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 3 Art No: CD007912.
35.
Bartels EM, Lund H, Hagen KB, et al Aquatic exercise for the treatment of knee and hip
osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 4 Art No: CD005523.
36.
Rutjes AWS, Nüesch E, Sterchi R, et al Transcutaneous electrostimulation for osteoarthritis of
the knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 4 Art No: CD002823.
37.
Hochberg MC, Altman RD, April KT, et al. American College of Rheumatology 2012
recommendations for the use of nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic therapies in osteoarthritis
of the hand, hip, and knee. Arthritis Care Res. 2012 Apr;64(4):465-74.
38.
Brosseau L, Yonge KA, Welch V, et al. Thermotherapy for treatment of osteoarthritis. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2003, Issue 4 Art No: CD004522.
39.
Rutjes AWS, Nüesch E, Sterchi R, et al Therapeutic ultrasound for osteoarthritis of the knee or
hip. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 1 Art No: CD003132.
40.
National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Osteoarthritis: national clinical guideline for
care and management in adults. London Royal College of Physicians; 2008.
41.
Stamm TA, Machold KP, Smolen JS, et al. Joint protection and home hand exercises improve
hand function in patients with hand osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum.
2002 Feb;47(1):44-9.
42.
Boustedt C, Nordenskiold U, Lundgren Nilsson A. Effects of a hand-joint protection programme
with an addition of splinting and exercise: one year follow-up. Clin Rheumatol. 2009 Jul;28(7):793-9.
43.
Shakoor MA, Taslim MA, Hossain MS. Effects of activity modification on the patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee. Bangladesh Med Res Counc Bull. 2007 Aug;33(2):55-9.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
37
44.
Gay MC, Philippot P, Luminet O. Differential effectiveness of psychological interventions for
reducing osteoarthritis pain: a comparison of Erikson [correction of Erickson] hypnosis and
Jacobson relaxation. Eur J Pain. 2002;6(1):1-16.
45.
McCaffrey R, Freeman E. Effect of music on chronic osteoarthritis pain in older people. J Adv
Nurs. 2003 Dec;44(5):517-24.
46.
Baird CL, Sands LP. Effect of guided imagery with relaxation on health-related quality of life in
older women with osteoarthritis. Res Nurs Health. 2006 Oct;29(5):442-51.
47.
Barrios JA, Crenshaw JR, Royer TD, et al. Walking shoes and laterally wedged orthoses in the
clinical management of medial tibiofemoral osteoarthritis: a one-year prospective controlled trial.
Knee. 2009 Mar;16(2):136-42.
48.
Hunter DJ, Harvey W, Gross KD, et al. A randomized trial of patellofemoral bracing for treatment
of patellofemoral osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2011 Jul;19(7):792-800.
49.
Brouwer RW, van Raaij TM, Verhaar JAN, et al. Brace treatment for osteoarthritis of the knee: a
prospective randomized multi-centre trial. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2006 Aug;14(8):777-83.
50.
Towheed T, Maxwell L, Judd M, et al. Acetaminophen for osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 1 Art No: CD004257.
51.
Lee C, Straus WL, Balshaw R, et al A comparison of the efficacy and safety of nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents versus acetaminophen in the treatment of osteoarthritis: a metaanalysis. Arthritis Rheum 2004 Oct 15;51(5):746-54.
52.
Altman RD, Zinsenheim JR, Temple AR, et al. Three-month efficacy and safety of acetaminophen
extended-release for osteoarthritis pain of the hip or knee: a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2007 Apr;15(4):454-61.
53.
Doherty M, Hawkey C, Goulder M, et al. A randomised controlled trial of ibuprofen, paracetamol
or a combination tablet of ibuprofen/paracetamol in community-derived people with knee pain.
Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Sep;70(9):1534-41.
54.
Temple AR, Benson GD, Zinsenheim JR, et al. Multicenter, randomized, double-blind, activecontrolled, parallel-group trial of the long-term (6-12 months) safety of acetaminophen in adult
patients with osteoarthritis. Clin Ther. 2006 Feb;28(2):222-35.
55.
Cepeda MS, Camargo F, Zea C, et al. Tramadol for osteoarthritis: a systematic review and
metaanalysis. J Rheumatol. 2007 Mar;34(3):543-55.
56.
Thorne C, Beaulieu AD, Callaghan DJ, et al. A randomized, double-blind, crossover comparison
of the efficacy and safety of oral controlled-release tramadol and placebo in patients with painful
osteoarthritis. Pain Res Manag. 2008 Mar-Apr;13(2):93-102.
57.
Beaulieu AD, Peloso PM, Haraoui B, et al. Once-daily, controlled-release tramadol and
sustained-release diclofenac relieve chronic pain due to osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled
trial. Pain Res Manag. 2008 Mar-Apr;13(2):103-10.
58.
Rosenthal NR, Silverfield JC, Wu SC, et al. Tramadol/acetaminophen combination tablets for the
treatment of pain associated with osteoarthritis flare in an elderly patient population. J Am Geriatr
Soc. 2004 Mar;52(3):374-80.
59.
Silverfield JC, Kamin M, Wu SC, et al. Tramadol/acetaminophen combination tablets for the
treatment of osteoarthritis flare pain: a multicenter, outpatient, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group, add-on study. Clin Ther. 2002 Feb;24(2):282-97.
60.
Bjordal JM, Ljunggren AE, Klovning A, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including
cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors, in osteoarthritic knee pain: meta-analysis of randomised placebo
controlled trials. BMJ. 2004 Dec 4;329(7478):1317.
61.
Singh G, Fort JG, Goldstein JL, et al. Celecoxib versus naproxen and diclofenac in osteoarthritis
patients: SUCCESS-I Study.[Erratum appears in Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9):801]. Am J Med.
2006 Mar;119(3):255-66.
62.
Bingham CO 3rd, Smugar SS, Wang H, et al. Early response to COX-2 inhibitors as a predictor
of overall response in osteoarthritis: pooled results from two identical trials comparing etoricoxib,
celecoxib and placebo. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009 Sep;48(9):1122-7.
63.
Castellsague J, Riera-Guardia N, Calingaert B, et al. Individual NSAIDs and upper gastrointestinal
complications: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies (the SOS project).
Drug Saf. 2012 Dec 1;35(12):1127-46.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
38
64.
Laine L, Curtis SP, Cryer B, et al. Assessment of upper gastrointestinal safety of etoricoxib and
diclofenac in patients with osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis in the Multinational Etoricoxib
and Diclofenac Arthritis Long-term (MEDAL) programme: a randomised comparison. Lancet.
2007 Feb 10;369(9560):465-73.
65.
Hunt RH, Harper S, Callegari P, et al. Complementary studies of the gastrointestinal safety of the
cyclo-oxygenase-2-selective inhibitor etoricoxib. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003 Jan;17(2):201-10.
66.
Hunt RH, Harper S, Watson DJ, et al. The gastrointestinal safety of the COX-2 selective inhibitor
etoricoxib assessed by both endoscopy and analysis of upper gastrointestinal events. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2003 Aug;98(8):1725-33.
67.
Rostom A, Dube C, Wells GA, et al Prevention of NSAID-induced gastroduodenal ulcers.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2002, Issue 4 Art No: CD002296.
68.
Sugano K, Kontani T, Katsuo S, et al. Lansoprazole for secondary prevention of gastric or
duodenal ulcers associated with long-term non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
therapy: results of a prospective, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, double-dummy, activecontrolled trial. J Gastroenterol. 2012 May;47(5):540-52.
69.
Sugano K, Matsumoto Y, Itabashi T, et al. Lansoprazole for secondary prevention of gastric or
duodenal ulcers associated with long-term low-dose aspirin therapy: results of a prospective,
multicenter, double-blind, randomized, double-dummy, active-controlled trial. J Gastroenterol.
2011 Jun;46(6):724-35.
70.
Chan FKL, Lanas A, Scheiman J, et al. Celecoxib versus omeprazole and diclofenac in patients
with osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis (CONDOR): a randomised trial.[Erratum appears in
Lancet. 2011 Jul 16;378(9787):228]. Lancet. 2010 Jul 17;376(9736):173-9.
71.
Chan FK, Wong VW, Suen BY, et al. Combination of a cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor and a protonpump inhibitor for prevention of recurrent ulcer bleeding in patients at very high risk: a doubleblind, randomised trial. Lancet. 2007 May 12;369(9573):1621-6.
72.
Trelle S, Reichenbach S, Wandel S, et al. Cardiovascular safety of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs: network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2011;342:c7086.
73.
Combe B, Swergold G, McLay J, et al. Cardiovascular safety and gastrointestinal tolerability
of etoricoxib vs diclofenac in a randomized controlled clinical trial (The MEDAL study).
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009 Apr;48(4):425-32.
74.
Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Putrajaya: MoH; June
2011.
75.
Wandel S, Juni P, Tendal B, et al. Effects of glucosamine, chondroitin, or placebo in patients with
osteoarthritis of hip or knee: network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2010;341:c4675.
76.
Black C, Clar C, Henderson R, et al. The clinical effectiveness of glucosamine and chondroitin
supplements in slowing or arresting progression of osteoarthritis of the knee: a systematic review
and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2009 Nov;13(52):1-148.
77.
Towheed T, Maxwell L, Anastassiades TP, et al. Glucosamine therapy for treating osteoarthritis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 2 Art No: CD002946.
78.
Sawitzke AD, Shi H, Finco MF, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of glucosamine, chondroitin
sulphate, their combination, celecoxib or placebo taken to treat osteoarthritis of the knee: 2-year
results from GAIT. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Aug;69(8):1459-64.
79.
Sawitzke AD, Shi H, Finco MF, et al. The effect of glucosamine and/or chondroitin sulfate on the
progression of knee osteoarthritis: a report from the glucosamine/chondroitin arthritis intervention
trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Oct;58(10):3183-91.
80.
Pavelka K, Gatterova J, Olejarova M, et al. Glucosamine sulfate use and delay of progression
of knee osteoarthritis: a 3-year, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study. Arch Intern
Med. 2002 Oct 14;162(18):2113-23.
81.
Dostrovsky NR, Towheed TE, Hudson RW, et al. The effect of glucosamine on glucose
metabolism in humans: a systematic review of the literature. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2011
Apr;19(4):375-80.
82.
Kahan A, Uebelhart D, De Vathaire F, et al. Long-term effects of chondroitins 4 and 6 sulfate on
knee osteoarthritis: the study on osteoarthritis progression prevention, a two-year, randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Feb;60(2):524-33.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
39
83.
Gabay C, Medinger-Sadowski C, Gascon D, et al. Symptomatic effects of chondroitin 4 and
chondroitin 6 sulfate on hand osteoarthritis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
clinical trial at a single center. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Nov;63(11):3383-91.
84.
Rovetta G, Monteforte P, Molfetta G, et al. A two-year study of chondroitin sulfate in erosive
osteoarthritis of the hands: behavior of erosions, osteophytes, pain and hand dysfunction. Drugs
Exp Clin Res. 2004;30(1):11-6.
85.
Rovetta G, Monteforte P, Molfetta G, et al. Chondroitin sulfate in erosive osteoarthritis of the
hands. Int J Tissue React. 2002;24(1):29-32.
86.
Verbruggen G, Goemaere S, Veys EM. Systems to assess the progression of finger joint
osteoarthritis and the effects of disease modifying osteoarthritis drugs. Clin Rheumatol. 2002
Jun;21(3):231-43.
87.
Rintelen B, Neumann K, Leeb BF. A meta-analysis of controlled clinical studies with diacerein in
the treatment of osteoarthritis.[Erratum appears in Arch Intern Med. 2007 Mar 12;167(5):444].
Arc Intern Med. 2006 Sep 25;166(17):1899-906.
88.
Pavelka K, Trc T, Karpas K, et al. The efficacy and safety of diacerein in the treatment of painful
osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled study with
primary end points at two months after the end of a three-month treatment period. Arthritis Rheum.
2007 Dec;56(12):4055-64.
89.
Louthrenoo W, Nilganuwong S, Aksaranugraha S, et al. The efficacy, safety and carry-over effect
of diacerein in the treatment of painful knee osteoarthritis: a randomised, double-blind, NSAIDcontrolled study. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2007 Jun;15(6):605-14.
90.
Dougados M, Nguyen M, Berdah L, et al. Evaluation of the structure-modifying effects of
diacerein in hip osteoarthritis: ECHODIAH, a three-year, placebo-controlled trial. Evaluation of the
Chondromodulating Effect of Diacerein in OA of the Hip. Arthritis Rheum. 2001 Nov;44(11):2539-47.
91.
Brahmachari B, Chatterjee S, Ghosh A. Efficacy and safety of diacerein in early knee
osteoarthritis: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Clin Rheumatol. 2009 Oct;28(10):1193-8.
92.
Bellamy N, Campbell J,Welch V, et al. Intraarticular corticosteroid for treatment of osteoarthritis
of the knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 2 Art No: CD005328.
93.
Rutjes AWS, Juni P, da Costa BR, et al. Viscosupplementation for osteoarthritis of the knee: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2012 Aug 7;157(3):180-91.
94.
Bellamy N CJ, Welch V, et al. Viscosupplementation for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the
knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 2 Art No: CD005321.
95.
Niethard FU, Gold MS, Solomon GS, et al. Efficacy of topical diclofenac diethylamine gel in
osteoarthritis of the knee. J Rheumatol. 2005 Dec;32(12):2384-92.
96.
Towheed TE. Pennsaid therapy for osteoarthritis of the knee: a systematic review and
metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. J Rheumatol. 2006 Mar;33(3):567-73.
97.
Trnavsky K, Fischer M, Vogtle-Junkert U, et al. Efficacy and safety of 5% ibuprofen cream
treatment in knee osteoarthritis. Results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
J Rheumatol. 2004 Mar;31(3):565-72.
98.
Makris UE, Kohler MJ, Fraenkel L. Adverse effects of topical nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs in older adults with osteoarthritis: a systematic literature review. J Rheumatol. 2010
Jun;37(6):1236-43.
99.
Manheimer E, Cheng K, Linde K, et al. Acupuncture for peripheral joint osteoarthritis. . Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 1 Art No: CD001977.
100. Little CV, Parsons T, Logan S. Herbal therapy for treating osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2000, Issue 4 Art No: CD002947.
101. Christensen R, Bartels EM, Astrup A, et al. Symptomatic efficacy of avocado-soybean
unsaponifiables (ASU) in osteoarthritis (OA) patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2008 Apr;16(4):399-408.
102. Bliddal H, Rosetzsky A, Schlichting P, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over study
of ginger extracts and ibuprofen in osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2000 Jan;8(1):9-12.
103. Moseley B. Arthroscopic surgery did not provide additional benefit to physical and medical
therapy for osteoarthritis of the knee. J Bone Joint Surg Am. [Comment]. 2009 May;91(5):1281.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
40
104. Kirkley A, Birmingham TB, Litchfield RB, et al. A randomized trial of arthroscopic surgery for
osteoarthritis of the knee.[Erratum appears in N Engl J Med. 2009 Nov 12;361(20):2004]. N Engl
J Med. 2008 Sep 11;359(11):1097-107.
105. Health Quality Ontario. Total knee replacement: an evidence-based analysis. Ontario Health
Technol Assess Ser. 2005;5(9):1-51.
106. Canadian Institute for Health Information. Hip and Knee Replacements in Canada 2008-2009
Annual Report.
107. Spahn G, Hofmann GO, von Engelhardt LV, et al. The impact of a high tibial valgus osteotomy
and unicondylar medial arthroplasty on the treatment for knee osteoarthritis: a meta-analysis.
Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2013 Jan;21(1):96-112.
108. Ministry of Health Singapore. Osteoarthritis of the Knees. Singapore: MoH; 2007.
109. Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS) MDD, Ministry of Health Malaysia.
Autologous Peripheral Blood Stem Cells for Articular Cartilage Repair. Serial No. 006/2013.2013.
110. Vasiliadis HS, Wasiak J. Autologous chondrocyte implantation for full thickness articular
cartilage defects of the knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 10 Art No:
CD003323.
111. Spakova T, Rosocha J, Lacko M, et al. Treatment of knee joint osteoarthritis with autologous
platelet-rich plasma in comparison with hyaluronic acid. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2012
May;91(5):411-7.
112. Kon E, Buda R, Filardo G, et al. Platelet-rich plasma: intra-articular knee injections produced
favorable results on degenerative cartilage lesions. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2010
Apr;18(4):472-9.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
41
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
The following MeSH terms or free text terms were used either singly
or in combination, search was limit to English, human and 2001 to current:-
Paracetamol
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 4.1 or 2 or 3
5. acetaminophen/
6. acetaminophen.tw.
7. paracetamol.tw.
8. 5 or 6 or 7
9. 4 and 8
10. limit 9
Tramadol
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. tramadol/
6. tramadol.tw.
7. tramadol hydrochloride.tw.
8. 5 or 6 or 7
9. 4 and 8
10. limit 9
Diacerein
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. diacerein.mp.
6. diacerein.tw.
7. 5 or 6
8. 4 and 7
9. limit 8
Intra-articular corticosteroids
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. corticosteroid/
6. corticosteroid*.tw.
7. glucocorticoid*.tw.
8. 5 or 6 or 7
9. 4 and 8
10. limit 9
NSAIDs & COX-2 inhibitor
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents/
6. non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agent*.tw.
7. NSAID*.tw.
8. 5 or 6 or 7
9. cyclooxygenase 2
inhibitors/
10. cyclooxygenase 2
inhibitor*.tw.
11. COX-2 inhibitor*.tw.
12. 9 or.10 or 11
13. 8 or 12
14. 4 and 13
15. limit 14
Glucosamine and Chondroitin
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. glucosamine/
6. glucosamine.tw.
7. glucosamine sulphate.tw.
8. glucosamine
hydrochloride.tw.
9. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8
10. chondroitin/
11. chondroitin.tw.
12. chondroitin sulphate.tw.
13. 10 or 11 or 12
14. 9 or 13
15. 4 and 14
16. limit 15
Viscosupplementation
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. hyaluronic acid/
6. (hyaluronic adj1 acid).tw.
7. (sodium adj1 hyaluron*).tw.
8. viscosupplementation/
9. viscosupplement*.tw.
10. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9
11. 4 and 10
12. limit 11
Topical therapy
1. osteoarthritis/
2. osteoarthritis.tw.
3. degenerative arthritis.tw.
4. 1 or 2 or 3
5. topical NSAIDS.mp.
6. capsaicin.tw.
7. methylsalicylate.tw.
8. 5 or 6 or 7
9. 4 and 8
10. limit 9
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
42
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1.
What is the epidemiology of OA?
2.
What are the risk factors of OA?
3.
What are the signs and symptoms of OA?
4.
How is OA diagnosed and classified?
5.
What are the effective diagnostic tests in OA?
6.
What are the effective & safe non-pharmacological modalities/
lifestyle modifications in OA?
7.
What are the effective & safe pharmacological treatments in OA?
8.
What are the effective & safe alternative treatments in OA?
9.
What are the effective & safe surgical modalities in OA?
10. What is the role of intra-articular stem cells, autologous chondrocyte
implantation and platelet-rich plasma in OA?
11. When should OA patients be referred for rheumatology/orthopaedic
services?
12. What are the primary preventive measures for OA?
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
43
Cartilage
(defective or
loss)
Menisci
Synovial cavity
Synovium
Subchondral
bone
Osteophytes
Joint capsule
Ligaments
Bursae
Muscle
Central nervous
system
Appendix 3
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ANATOMICAL SITE AND POSSIBLE
PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISM FOR PAIN IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
Anatomical
Mechanism
site
Synovial: inflammation induced by cartilage
‘char’ fragments, cartilage crystal shedding,
cartilage release of cytokines (e.g. interleukin-1),
enzymes (e.g. metalloproteinases)
Subchondral bone: mechanical stress (see
below)
Instability: stress on capsule
Tear or degeneration: stretch at insertion to the
joint capsule, catch between surfaces
Stretch of joint capsule, transport of inflammatory
mediators between synovium and cartilage
Inflammation
Ischemia with increased pressure, decreased
oxygen tension and increased pH
Avascular necrosis
Regeneration or repair of infarcted bone
Periosteal elevation
Neural impingement
Stretch from joint distension
Stress at insertion to periosteum and bone
Stress at insertion to periosteum and bone
Inflammation, with or without calcification
Spasm
Nocturnal myoclonus
Mild chronic depression, mild mood fluctuation,
fibromyalgia
Ethnic, cultural, coping skills
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
44
Appendix 4
QUADRICEPS STRENGTHENING EXERCISE
Figure A
Lie flat in bed with your legs
straight. Bend your ankles and
push the back of your knees down
firmly against the bed. Hold for
five seconds, then return to the
original position and relax.
Figure B
Sit on a firm flat surface with one
leg bend and keep the other leg
straight. Bend your ankle and
push the back of your knees down
firmly against the bed. Hold for
five seconds, then return to the
original position and relax.
Figure C
Lie flat in bed with a rolled towel/
small cushion under your knee.
Bend your ankle and push the
back of your knee down firmly
against the rolled towel/small
cushion (keep knee on the towel/
cushion). Hold for five seconds,
then return to the original position
and relax.
Figure D
Sit on a chair. Straighten your
knee and bend your ankle. Hold
for five seconds, then return to the
original position and relax.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
45
Appendix 5
HIP STRENGTHENING EXERCISE
Figure A
Stand straight holding to a chair.
Bring your leg backwards, keeping
your knee straight (do not lean
forwards). Hold for five seconds,
then return to the original position
and relax.
Figure B
Lie on your back with both knees
bent. Then, lift your hips up and
straighten one leg while shifting
the weight over to the bent leg.
Hold for five seconds, then return
to the original position and relax.
Figure C
Lie on your back with knees bent.
Squeeze your buttocks together
and lift your bottom off the floor.
Hold for five seconds, then
return to the original position and
relax.
Figure D
Lie face down. Lift one leg up while
keeping the other leg straight on
the floor. Hold for five seconds,
then return to the original position
and relax.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
46
Appendix 6
APPROPRIATE MEASUREMENT FOR WALKING STICK
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
47
Appendix 7
JOINT PROTECTION PRINCIPLES
Joint protection principles include:-
• Resting inflamed joints by reducing load, duration of use and
repetitive movement
• Using the largest unaffected muscles and joints to perform a task
• Using proper movement techniques for lifting, sitting, standing,
bending and reaching
• Using assistive devices and modifications for home equipment to
minimise stress on joints
• Plan and organise activities ahead
• Using biomechanics and ergonomics to best effect
• Simplifying tasks
• Recruiting others to help
• Making exercise a part of everyday life including exercises which
improve joint range of movement, stamina and strength
• Exercise should also be for cardiovascular fitness and to maintain
or improve balance
Source: National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Osteoarthritis: national
clinical guideline for care and management in adults. London: Royal College of
Physicians; 2008
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION IN PERFORMING ADL
• To use walking stick on the opposite hand of the affected knee /
more painful knee joint during walking
• To climb stairs, use the railing of the stairs, climb slowly and
the body weight should be transferred to the railing by the hand
opposite to the affected knee
• To bathe in standing or sitting position with a shower and use
high commode in bathroom
• To cook in standing position and if necessary to sit on a chair for
a while and use dining table for eating
• To avoid high heeled shoes, sitting on low stool and prolonged
walking/sitting/running
• To avoid performing activity in squatting position
Source: Shakoor MA, Taslim MA, Hossain MS. Effects of activity modification on the
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee. Bangladesh Med Res Counc Bull. 2007
Aug;33(2):55-9
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
48
Appendix 8
SUGGESTED MEDICATION DOSAGES AND SIDE EFFECTS
Drug Class
Drug
Recommended Dosages
Side Effects
Caution and
Contraindications
Comments
Simple
analgesic
Paracetamol
0.5 – 1 gm, 6 – 8-hourly
Max: 4 gm/day
Rare but hypersensitivity
including skin rash may occur
Hepatic impairment
Alcohol dependence
Preferred drug particularly
elderly patients
Nonselective
NSAIDs
Ibuprofen
400 – 800 mg, 6 – 8-hourly
Max: 3200 mg/day
Peptic ulcer
GI bleed
Platelet dysfunction
Renal impairment
Hypertension
Allergic reaction in
susceptible individuals
Increase in CVS events
Gastroduodenal ulcer
Asthma
Bleeding disorder
Renal dysfunction
Ischaemic heart disease
Cerebro vascular disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Physicians and patients should
weigh the benefits and risks
of NSAIDs therapy
Mefenamic acid
250 – 500 mg, 6 – 8-hourly
Max: 1500 mg/day
Diclofenac sodium
50 – 150 mg daily,
8 – 12-hourly
Max: 150 mg/day
Meloxicam
7.5 – 15 mg daily
Max: 15 mg/day
Naproxen
250 – 500 mg, 12-hourly
Max: 1500 mg/day
Naproxen sodium
275 -– 550 mg, 12-hourly
Max: 1650 mg/day
Piroxicam
10 – 20 mg daily, in single or
divided doses
Max: 20 mg/day
Selective
COX-2
inhibitors
Celecoxib
200 mg daily
Max: 200 mg/day
(Recommended daily
maximum dose is 200 mg
for OA and 400 mg for
inflammatory arthritis)
Renal impairment
Allergic reaction in
susceptible individuals
Increase in CVS events
Ischaemic heart disease
Cerebrovascular disease
Contraindicated in
hypersensitivity to
sulfonamides
Associated with a lower risk
of serious upper GI side effects
Current data suggest that
increased CV risk may be an
effect of the NSAIDs/coxib class
Physicians and patients should
weigh the benefits and risks
of coxib therapy
Etoricoxib
60 mg daily
Max: 90 mg/day
Hypertension
Renal impairment
Increase in CVS events
Uncontrolled hypertension
Ischaemic heart
Cerebrovascular disease
disease
Meloxicam is a selective
COX-2 inhibitor at 7.5 mg
daily but not 15 mg daily
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
49
Drug Class
Drug
Recommended Dosages
Side Effects
Caution and
Contraindications
Comments
Weak opioid Tramadol
50 – 100 mg, 6 – 8-hourly
Max: 400 mg/day
Dizziness
Nausea
Vomiting
Constipation
Drowsiness
Risk of seizures in patients
with history of seizures and
with high doses
In elderly, start at lowest dose
(50 mg) and maximum of 300
lowest dose (50 mg) and
maximum of 300 mg daily
Interaction with Tricyclic
Antidepressant,
Selective Serotonin Reuptake
Inhibitor and Serotonin
Norepinephrine Receptor
Inhibitor
Combination
of opioid and
paracetamol
Paracetamol 325
mg + tramadol
37.5 mg
(Ultracet®)
1 – 2 tablets, 6 – 8-hourly
Max: 8 tablets/day
Nausea
Vomiting
Drowsiness
Hepatic impairment
Renal impairment
Alcohol dependence
Epilepsy
Nutraceuticals
Drug
Recommended
Dosages
Side Effects
Caution and Contraindications
Comments
Glucosamine
sulfate
1500 mg in single or
divided doses
Max: 1500 mg/day
Nausea
Dyspepsia
Heartburn
Vomiting
Constipation
Diarrhoea
Headache
Skin erythema
Pruritus
Contraindicated in patients with
• allergy and hypersensitivity to
shellfish or its products
• phenylketonuria
Asthmatic patients may be at risk for
an asthma exacerbation when taking
the combination of glucosamine and
chondroitin
Special precaution in diabetes
Chondroitin
sulfate
800 – 1200 mg daily
or divided doses
Max: 1200 mg
Dyspepsia
Nausea
Vomiting
Asthmatic patients may be at risk for
an asthma exacerbation when taking
chondroitin
Avoid in patients with prostate cancer
-
-
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
50
Sources:
i.
Sunthornsaj N, Fun LW, Evangelista LF et al. (Ed). MIMS.com. 117th Edition 2009. Hong Kong: CMPMedica; 2009
ii.
Thomson Reuters. Micromedex® 1.0 (Healthcare Series). Greenwood Village Thomson Reuters; 2009
iii. Pharmaceutical Services Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Drug Formulary No. 2/2013. (available at http://www.pharmacy.gov.my)
iv. Summary of Product Characteristics, PIASCLEDINE®300. ExpanscienceTMLaboratoires.
v.
Ping NH, Lim C, Francisco JC et al. (Ed). MIMS Malaysia, 133rd Edition 2013. Hong Kong: MIMS (Hong Kong); 2013
Drug
Recommended
Dosages
Side Effects
Caution and Contraindications
Comments
or are at high risk for developing
prostate cancer
Special precaution in diabetes when
used in combination with glucosamine
sulfate
Diacerein
50 mg 12-hourly
Diarrhoea
Epigastric pain
Nausea
Vomiting
Intense yellow colouring of urine
Skin reactions
Hypersensitivity to anthraquinone
derivatives
Inflammatory bowel disease
(ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease),
intestinal obstruction or partial
obstruction, severe liver failure
Creatinine clearance <30 ml/min,
dosage recommendation is 25 mg
daily
Antacid use may decrease diacerein
absorption, so it is advised to take
antacids after an interval of two
hours
Avocado
soybean
unsaponifiables
300 mg daily
Diarrhoea
Epigastric pain
Extremely rare cases of liver
disorders including increased
transaminases, alkaline
phosphatases, bilirubin and gammaglutamyl transpeptidase
Previous history of allergic reaction to
any of the ingredients
Infrequent lipid-scented regurgitation
which may be avoided by taking the
capsule during a meal
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
51
Appendix 9
CHECKLIST OF OA MANAGEMENT
1. Education
• Nature of OA
Yes No
• Prognosis
Yes No
• Treatment option - medication & side effects
Yes No
• Self-management
Yes No
2. Lifestyle modification
• Weight loss
Yes No
• Dietary advice
Yes No
• Exercise
Yes No
• Footwear
Yes No
• Pacing activity
Yes No
3. Referral where applicable
Yes No
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
52
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACI
autologous chondrocyte implantation
ACR
American College of Rheumatology
ADL
activities of daily living
AP
anteroposterior
ASU
avocado soybean unsaponifiable
BMI
body mass index
CI
confidence interval
CKD
choronic kidney disease
CMC
carpometacarpal
COPCORD Community Oriented Program for the Control of Rheumatic Disease
COX-2
cyclo-oxygenase-2
CPG(s)
clinical practice guidelines
CRP
C-reactive protein
CV
cardiovascular
DG
Development Group
DIP
distal interphalangeal
ESR
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
EULAR
The European League Against Rheumatism
g
gram
GAG
glycosaminoglycans
GI
gastrointestinal
HA
hyaluronic acid
HR
hazard ratio
HTO
high tibial osteotomy
IA
intra-articular
JPE
Joint Protection Exercise
LDH
lactate dehydrogenase
MCP
metacarpophalangeal
max
maximum
MD
mean difference
mg
miligram
mL
mililiter
mm
milimeter
MoH
Ministry of Health
NICE
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
NNT
number needed to treat
NSAIDs
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
n-wtd
non-weighted
OA
osteoarthritis
OD
once daily
OR
odds ratio
PIP
proximal interphalangeal
PMN
polymorphonucleocytes
PPI
proton pump inhibitor
PRP
platelet-rich plasma
RC
Review Committee
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)
53
RCT(s)
randomised controlled trial(s)
RF
rheumatoid factor
ROM
range of movement
RR
relative risk
SF
synovial fluid
SMD
standardised mean difference
SR
systematic review
TENS
transcutaneous electrostimulation
THR
total hip replacement
TKR
total knee replacement
UKR
unicondylar knee replacement
VAS
Visual Analogue Scale
WBC
white blood cells
WHO
World Health Organization
WMD
weighted mean difference
WOMAC
The Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The members of development group of these guidelines would like
to express their gratitude and appreciation to the following for their
contributions:-
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft
• Ms. Zalina Ahmad and Ms. Loong Ah Moi (Nursing Sisters)
• Technical Advisory Committee for CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the development
of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both Development Group and Review Committee
had completed disclosure forms. None held shares in pharmaceutical
firms or acts as consultants to such firms. (Details are available upon
request from the CPG Secretariat)
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Osteoarthritis (Second
Edition) was supported financially in its entirety by the Ministry of Health
Malaysia and Malaysian Society of Rheumatology.
Management of Osteoarthritis ( Second Edition)