CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES.
2023 MOH/P/PAK/S31.23(GU)-e
MANAGEMENT OF
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Published by:
Malaysia Health Technology Assessment Section (MaHTAS)
Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
Federal Government Administrative Centre
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
Copyright
The copyright owner of this publication is MaHTAS. Content may be
reproduced in any number of copies and in any format or medium
provided that a copyright acknowledgement to MaHTAS is included
and the content is not changed, not sold, or used to promote or endorse
any product or service, and not used in an inappropriate or misleading
context.
e ISBN: 978-967-2887-68-3
Available on the following websites:
https://www.moh.gov.my
https://www.acadmed.org.my
https://msr.my
Also available as an app for Android and IOS platform: MyMaHTAS
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This clinical practice guidelines (CPG) is meant to be a guide for
clinical practice based on the best available evidence at the time of
development. The guideline should not override the responsibility of
the practitioners to make decision appropriate to the circumstances of
the individual. This should be done in consultation with the patients and
their families or guardians, taking into account the management options
available locally.
UPDATING THE CPG
These guidelines were issued in 2023 and will be reviewed in a minimum
period of four years (2027) or sooner if there is a need to do so. When
it is due for updating, the Chairman of the CPG or National Advisor of
the related specialty will be informed about it. A discussion will be done
on the need for a revision including the scope of the revised CPG. A
multidisciplinary team will be formed and the latest systematic review
methodology used by MaHTAS will be employed. Every care is taken
to ensure that this publication is correct in every detail at the time of
publication. However, in the event of errors or omissions, corrections
will be published in the web version of this document, which is the
definitive version at all times. This version can be found on the websites
mentioned above.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
Levels of Evidence and Formulation of Recommendation
i
Key Recommendations
ii
Guidelines Development and Objectives
iv
Development Group
vii
Review Committee
viii
External Reviewers
ix
Algorithm 1: Diagnosis of SLE
x
Algorithm 2: Treatment of Non-Renal SLE
xi
1.
INTRODUCTION
1
2.
RISK FACTORS
2
3.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
3
4.
INVESTIGATIONS
5
5.
DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA
9
6.
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
11
6.1
Disease Assessment
11
7.
TREATMENT
15
7.1
Non-Pharmacological Treatment
15
7.2
Pharmacological Treatment
16
a. Corticosteroids
16
b. Antimalarial (Hydroxychloroquine)
17
c.
Immunosuppressants (Azathioprine,
19
Methotrexate, Calcineurin Inhibitors,
Cyclophosphamide, Leflunomide,
Mycophenolate mofetil)
d. Biologics (Belimumab, Rituximab, Anifrolumab)
22
e. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
24
f.
Others (Plasma exchange/Plasmapheresis,
24
Intravenous immunoglobulin)
8.
SPECIFIC CLINICAL MANIFESTATION
27
8.1
Lupus Nephritis
27
8.2
Mucocutaneous
28
8.3
Neuropsychiatry
28
8.4
Haematology
28
8.5
Cardiorespiratory
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Title
Page
9.
MONITORING
30
9.1
Clinical Features
30
9.2
Laboratory Investigations
30
9.3
Co-morbidities
31
9.4
Drug Adverse Events
33
9.5
Frequency and Interval
34
10. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
35
10.1 Antiphospholipid Syndrome
35
10.2 Pregnancy
36
10.3 Lactation
40
10.4 Adolescents
40
10.5 Vaccination
41
11. REFERRAL
43
12. IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
44
12.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
44
12.2 Potential Resource Implication
44
REFERENCES
46
Appendix 1
Example of Search Strategy
54
Appendix 2
Clinical Questions
55
Appendix 3
2012 SLICC Classification Criteria for SLE
57
Appendix 4
2019 EULAR/ACR Classification Criteria
59
for SLE
Appendix 5
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease
60
Activity Index - 2000 (SLEDAI-2K)
Appendix 6
British Isles Lupus Activity Group (BILAG)
62
Index - 2004
Appendix 7
Medication in SLE
64
Appendix 8
Frequency of Monitoring Patients with SLE
70
Appendix 9
Sapporo Classification Criteria
72
Appendix 10 Recommendations on Types of
74
Contraception for Patients with SLE
List of Abbreviations
79
Acknowledgement
79
Disclosure Statement
79
Source of Funding
i
Level
I
II-1
II-2
II-3
III
Study design
Properly powered and conducted randomised controlled
trial; well-conducted systematic review or meta-analysis of
homogeneous randomised controlled trials
Well-designed controlled trial without randomisation
Well-designed cohort or case-control analysis study
Multiple time series, with or without the intervention; results
from uncontrolled studies that yield results of large magnitude
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience;
descriptive studies or case reports; reports of expert committees
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
SOURCE: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Procedure
Manual. Rockville, MD: USPSTF; 2015.
FORMULATION OF RECOMMENDATION
• In line with the new development in CPG methodology, the
CPG Unit of MaHTAS is adapting Grading Recommendations,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) in its
work process. The quality of body of evidence and related effect
size are carefully assessed/reviewed by the CPG DG.
• Recommendations are formulated based on certainty of
evidence and the wording used denotes the strength of
recommendations. This takes into account:
 quality and level of the evidence
 balance of benefits and harms of the options
 patient’s preference and values
 resource implications
 relevancy and applicability to the local target population
• The more criteria being fulfilled, the more certain is the evidence
leading to strong recommendations using the word “should”
being considered. Otherwise, weak recommendations use the
word “may” in proposing an action to be made.
• In the CPG, a yellow box highlights important message(s) in
the management while a blue box contains evidence-based
recommendation(s) for the particular condition.
ii
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations are highlighted by the CPG
Development Group (DG) as the key recommendations that answer
the main questions addressed in the CPG and should be prioritised for
implementation.
DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA
• Diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus should be based on
clinical manifestations supported by laboratory findings following
exclusion of alternative diagnoses.
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
• All patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should have
clinical assessment of disease activity; this may be done using the
validated assessment tools for SLE.
TREATMENT
• Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should practise
sun avoidance, use protective clothing and broad-spectrum
sunscreen with at least sun protection factor (SPF) 50.
• Corticosteroids should be used for acute flare in SLE; the dose should
be minimised accordingly and discontinued whenever possible.
• All patients with SLE should be on hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) unless
intolerant or contraindicated.
• Immunosuppressants should be considered as add-on therapy to
patients with SLE not responding to HCQ alone or in combination with
corticosteroids, or when corticosteroids doses cannot be tapered.
• Cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate mofetil may be used as
induction therapy in certain major organ involvement in SLE.
• Biologics may be used as an adjunct therapy in active SLE despite
standard therapy with corticosteroids and immunosuppressants.
MONITORING
• All patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should be
monitored based on clinical and laboratory parameters.
• Patients with SLE should be screened for cardiovascular risk factors
and osteoporosis.
• Infection in patients with SLE should be identified early and treated
accordingly.
iii
SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
• All women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in the
reproductive age group should receive pre-pregnancy counselling.
• In SLE with pregnancy, hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, calcineurin
inhibitors and low dose corticosteroids should be continued.
• Low dose aspirin should be initiated in all pregnant SLE patients
unless intolerance or contraindicated.
• Vaccination status and indications for further vaccinations of patients
with SLE should be assessed yearly.
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
The members of the DG for these CPG were from the Ministry of
Health (MoH) and the Ministry of Higher Education. There was active
involvement of a multidisciplinary Review Committee (RC) during the
process of the CPG development.
A systematic literature search was carried out using the following
electronic databases/platforms: mainly Medline via Ovid and others
e.g. Pubmed (refer to Appendix 1 for Example of Search Strategy).
The inclusion criteria are all adults at risk and with systemic lupus
erythematous (SLE) regardless of study design. The first search was
limited to literature published in the last 13 years (2009 until 2022)
for all clinical questions, on humans and in English. In addition, the
reference lists of all retrieved literature and guidelines were searched to
further identify relevant studies. Experts in the field were also contacted
for studies related to the issues addressed. All searches were
conducted from 21 February 2022 to 21 October 2022. The literature
search was repeated for all clinical questions at the end of the CPG
development process allowing any relevant papers published before 1
July 2023 to be included. Future CPG updates will consider evidence
published after this cut-off date. The details of the search strategy can
be obtained upon request from the CPG Secretariat. The DG members
take note that new documents on SLE by EULAR and Antiphospholipid
Syndrome Classification Criteria by ACR/EULAR have been published
recently after the cut-off date for retrieval of evidence of this MoH CPG.
References were also made to other guidelines on SLE as listed below:
• European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology - 2019
update of the EULAR recommendations for the management of
systemic lupus erythematosus (2019 update)
• British Society for Rheumatology - The British Society for
Rheumatology guideline for the management of systemic lupus
erythematosus in adults (2018)
• van Vollenhoven RF, Mosca M, Bertsias G, et al. - Treat-to-target
in systemic lupus erythematosus: recommendations from an
international task force (2014)
A total of 11 main clinical questions were developed under different
sections. Members of the DG were assigned individual questions
within these sections. Refer to Appendix 2 for Clinical Questions.
The DG members met 24 times throughout the development of these
guidelines. All literature retrieved was appraised by at least two DG
members using Critical Appraisal Skill Programme checklist, presented
in evidence tables and further discussed in each DG meeting. All
statements and recommendations formulated after that were agreed
upon by both the DG and RC. Where evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were made by consensus of the DG and RC. Any
differences in opinion are resolved consensually. The CPG was based
largely on the findings of systematic reviews/meta-analyses and clinical
trials, with local practices taken into consideration.
The literatures used in these guidelines were graded using the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Level of Evidence (2015) while the
grading of recommendation was done using the principles of GRADE
as much as possible (refer to the preceding page). The writing of the
CPG followed strictly the requirement of Appraisal of Guidelines for
Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II.
Upon completion, the draft CPG was reviewed by external reviewers. It
was also posted on the MoH Malaysia official website for feedback from
any interested parties. The draft was finally presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for CPG and, the Health Technology Assessment
(HTA) and CPG Council, MoH Malaysia, for review and approval.
Details on the CPG development by MaHTAS can be obtained from
Manual on Development and Implementation of Evidencebased Clinical Practice Guidelines published in 2015 (available at
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/CPG_MANUAL_MAHTAS.pdf).).
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the CPG are to provide evidence-based
recommendations on the management of SLE on the following aspects:
• diagnosis and assessment
• treatment
• monitoring
• referral
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
Refer to Appendix 2
TARGET POPULATION
Inclusion Criteria
• All adult patients suspected or diagnosed with SLE
Exclusion Criteria
• Drug-induced lupus
• Overlap syndrome
• Mixed connective tissue disease
TARGET GROUP/USERS
This document is intended to guide healthcare professionals and
relevant stakeholders in primary and secondary/tertiary care of the
management of SLE in adults including:
• healthcare professionals (doctors, pharmacists and allied health
professionals)
• medical students and trainees
• policymakers
• professional organisations
• patients, caregivers and their advocates
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and secondary/tertiary care settings
vii
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Chairperson
Dr. Habibah Mohd Yusoof
Head of Department & Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Members (in alphabetical order)
Dr. Chitra Suluraju
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Petaling Bahagia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Dayang Masyrinartie Suahilai
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan
Pahang
Dr. Khor Chiew Gek
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Raja Permaisuri Bainun, Perak
Dr. Liza Mohd Isa
Head of Service &
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Dr. Mohd. Aminuddin Mohd. Yusof
Head of Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Dr. Nor Shuhaila Shahril
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya
Ms. Noornazli Zahirah Abdullah
Pharmacist
Klinik Kesihatan Putrajaya, Presint 9
Putrajaya
Dr. Norazlah Bahari
Consultant Pathologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Rosnah Mohd Tahir
Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Maharani, Johor
Professor Dr. Sakthiswary Rajalingham
Lecturer &
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Shereen Ch’ng Suyin
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Dr. Siti Zulfa Zulkifli
Consultant Acute Internal Medicine
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Suhaida Ahmad Maulana
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah
Selangor
Dr. Tengku Noor Farhana Tengku Khalid
Public Health Physician
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
REVIEW COMMITTEE
The draft CPG was reviewed by a panel of experts from both public
and private sectors. They were asked to comment primarily on the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the interpretation of evidence
supporting the recommendations in the CPG.
Chairperson
Dr. Mollyza Mohd. Zain
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Members (alphabetical order)
viii
Datin Dr. Asmahan Mohamed Ismail
Head of Department &
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II
Kelantan
Dr. Carol Lim Kar Koong
Head of Department &
Consultant Maternal Fetal Medicine
Hospital Ampang, Selangor
Ms. Chee Siew Lian
Patient Advocate &
Honorary Secretary
Malaysian SLE Association
Dr. Hamimah Saad
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Klinik Kesihatan Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur
Associate Professor Dr. Hazlyna
Baharuddin
Lecturer & Consultant Rheumatologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Selangor
Dr. Heselynn Hussein
Consultant Rheumatologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre
Selangor
Dr. Izzuna Mudla Mohamed Ghazali
Deputy Director
Health Technology Assessment Section
Ministry of Health, Putrajaya
Associate Professor Dr. Malehah Mohd Noh
Consultant Rheumatologist
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Sabah
Dr. Masita Arip
Head of Allergy & Immunology Research
Centre
Institute for Medical Research, Selangor
Ms. Norfaiezah Abdul Rahman
Rheumatology Specialised Nurse
Hospital Tengku Ampuan Afzan, Pahang
Dr. Salmi Abdul Razak
Pharmacist
Hospital Tuanku Jaafar, Negeri Sembilan
Dr. Yoon Chee Kin
Consultant Acute Internal Medicine
Hospital Pulau Pinang, Pulau Pinang
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS (in alphabetical order)
The following external reviewers provided feedback on the draft:
ix
Mr. Ang Yu Joe
Pharmacist
Hospital Selayang, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Asrul Abdul Wahab
Senior Lecturer & Consultant Pathologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Foo Meng How
General Practitioner
Klinik Foo Sdn. Bhd., Kelantan
Associate Professor Dr. Leong Khai Pang
Senior Consultant Rheumatologist
Department of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology
Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore
Professor Dr. Sazlina Shariff Ghazali
Medical Lecturer &
Consultant in Family Medicine
Hospital Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor
Associate Professor Dr. Syahrul Sazliyana Shaharir
Lecturer & Consultant Rheumatologist
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
Dr. Teh Cheng Lay
Consultant Rheumatologist
Hospital Umum Sarawak, Sarawak
Dr. Yeap Swan Sim
Consultant Rheumatologist
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor
Dr. Zainura Che Isa
Consultant in Acute Medicine
Hospital Sultan Abdul Halim, Kedah
ALGORITHM 1: DIAGNOSIS OF SLE
ALGORITHM 2: TREATMENT OF NON-RENAL SLE
1. INTRODUCTION
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune
multisystem disorder with diverse and complex clinical manifestations
characterised by inflammation in a variety of organs. The exact aetiology
is unknown but genetic, hormonal and environmental factors have been
implicated. This disease has a relapsing-remitting course with a very
unpredictable prognosis and considerable morbidity.
The survival rates of patients with SLE have increased over the past
few decades.1, level II-2 These may be due to early disease detection,
advancements in medical treatment and improved management of comorbidities.
There was considerable variation in survival rates across the countries
in Asia-Pacific region. The 5-year survival rates ranged from 60%
among the Aborigines in Australia, 80% in Malaysia, 94% in South
Korea and 98% in China (Shanghai), while 10-year survival rates
ranged from 64% in Japan to 94% in Hong Kong.2, level II-2 The leading
causes of death among patients with SLE were infections and active
disease predominantly in lupus nephritis (LN).3, level II-2
Patients with SLE commonly experience flares during the disease
course which may have adverse impacts on the short- and long-term
outcomes. The treat-to-target recommendations for SLE emphasises
on targeting remission, preventing organ damage, minimising comorbidities and drug toxicity, and improving health-related quality of
life.4
Management of SLE in the Asian population remains a challenge due
to limited access to health care, delayed diagnosis and poor treatment
adherence.5 The goal of this first national CPG on Management of
SLE is to raise awareness among healthcare providers on early SLE
detection, prompt referral to rheumatology services and initiation of
treatment, mainly for non-renal SLE. The purpose of this CPG is to
reduce the variation in practices and address resource implications
in the management of SLE. This will encourage close cooperation
between various stakeholders to enhance quality of life and outcomes
of the affected patients through evidence-based management.
2. RISK FACTORS
Although the aetiology of SLE is multifactorial and not fully understood,
identifying the risk factors associated with the development of SLE can
help in predicting the probability of the disease in a patient.
a.
Gender
SLE is more commonly diagnosed in women than men worldwide, with
an incidence ranging from 1.4 to 5.4 cases per 100,000 population
vs 0.4 to 0.8 cases per 100,000 population in men. The prevalence
rate of SLE is also higher in women, ranging from 7.7 to 68.4 cases
per 100,000 population vs 0.8 to 7.0 cases per 100,000 population in
men.2, level II-2
In the Asia-Pacific region, a similar female preponderance of patients
with SLE is consistently observed across different countries ranging
from 83% to 97%.2, level II-2; 6, level III
b.
Genetic factors
In a large cross-sectional study in Taiwan, a family history of SLE was
found to be a strong risk factor for developing SLE:7, level III
• twins with RR of 315.94 (95% CI 210.66 to 473.82)
• siblings with RR of 23.68 (95% CI 20.13 to 27.84)
• parents with RR of 11.44 (95% CI 9.74 to 13.43)
• offspring with RR of 14.42 (95% CI 12.45 to 16.70)
Two case-control studies involving a Malay SLE cohort in Malaysia
revealed that multiple alleles were associated with an increased risk of
SLE, including HLA-A11 (OR=1.65, 95% CI 1.18 to 2.31), DQB105:01
(OR=1.84, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.48), HLA-DRB1*0405 (OR=3.493, 95%
CI 2.103 to 5.801) and HLA-DRB1*1502 (OR=1.586, 95% CI 1.132 to
2.221).8 - 9, level II-2
c.
Atopic disease
A meta-analysis showed that asthma was associated with SLE, with
a pooled OR of 1.58 (95% CI 1.14 to 2.18).10, level II-2 An earlier casecontrol study found SLE was associated with the following atopic
diseases:11, level II-2
• asthma (OR=1.43, 95% CI 1.20 to 1.71)
• allergic rhinitis (OR=1.52, 95% CI 1.34 to 1.73)
• allergic conjunctivitis (OR=1.53, 95% CI 1.37 to 1.72)
• atopic dermatitis (OR=2.31, 95% CI 1.83 to 2.93)
d.
Environmental
i.
Smoking
In a large meta-analysis of moderate quality primary papers on the risk
of developing SLE:12, level II-2
• current smokers had higher risk compared with never smokers
(OR=1.49, 95% CI 1.06 to 2.08)
• ever smokers had higher risk compared with never smokers
(OR=1.54, 95% CI 1.06 to 2.23)
ii.
Silica exposure
A meta-analysis showed that the risk of SLE increased with
occupational exposure to free crystalline silica (OR=9.72, 95% CI 1.13
to 83.58).13, level II-2 An exposure-response effect was also seen for
longer duration of exposure to silica (p for trend=0.01) in a case-control
study:14, level II-2
• OR for exposure to silica for 1 - 5 years was 4.0 (95% CI 1.2 to
12.9)
• OR for exposure to silica for >5 years was 4.9 (95% CI 1.1 to 21.9)
e.
Hormonal (contraceptive and hormone replacement therapy)
A meta-analysis showed an association between hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) exposure and SLE development (RR=1.96, 95%, CI
1.51 to 2.56). However, there was no significant association between
oral contraceptives and SLE.15, level I There was no mention of the quality
assessment of the observational study used in the meta-analysis.
3. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The diagnosis of SLE is based on a combination of clinical and
laboratory findings indicative of immune reactivity or inflammation in
various organs. There are many mimickers for SLE that should be
excluded before arriving at the diagnosis of the disease.
In a retrospective cohort study on SLE, the most frequent initial presenting
symptoms were musculoskeletal, followed by mucocutaneous and
neurological. The median time from first musculoskeletal symptom to
SLE diagnosis was 26.4 months (IQR 9.3, 43.6). Sub-group analysis
showed that the younger patients <30 years with severe disease had
the shortest time to the diagnosis.16, level II-2
Common presentations include mucocutaneous, musculoskeletal,
haematological and renal manifestations. The clinical manifestations of
SLE are illustrated in Figure 1.
AIHA = autoimmune haemolytic anaemia; APS = antiphospholipid
syndrome; ILD = interstitial lung disease; PAH = pulmonary arterial
hypertension
Figure 1: Clinical manifestations of SLE
Source:
1. Jasmin R, Sockalingam S, Cheah T, et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus in the
multiethnic Malaysian population: disease expression and ethnic differences
revisited. Lupus. 2013;22(9):967-971.
2. Shaharir SS, Hussein H, Rajalingham S, et al. Damage in the Multiethnic Malaysian
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) Cohort: Comparison with Other Cohorts
Worldwide. PLoS One. 2016;11(11):e0166270.
4. INVESTIGATIONS
Detailed history taking, physical examination and laboratory evaluation
are important to differentiate patients with SLE from those with lupus
mimickers (e.g. infection, malignancy, medications or vaccine-related
reactions). If SLE is suspected based on clinical findings, laboratory
testing can be done to support the diagnosis.
Standard laboratory tests that are diagnostically useful when SLE is
suspected include the following:
i. full blood count (FBC) with differential count
ii. renal parameters: renal profile (RP), urinalysis with microscopy
for sediments, spot urine protein/creatinine ratio (UPCR) or
24-hour urine protein (24hUP)
iii. liver function tests
iv. acute phase reactants: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
and C-reactive protein (CRP)
v. autoantibodies: antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double
stranded
deoxyribonucleic
acid
(anti-dsDNA)
antibodies,
extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) and antiphospholipid
antibodies (aPL)
vi. complement 3 (C3) and complement 4 (C4)
•
Full blood count
A standard or differential blood count may reveal cytopenia e.g.
thrombocytopenia and/or leukopenia and lymphopenia, as well as
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA). Anaemia is a common finding
in patients with active lupus, either due to chronicity of the disease or
iron deficiency.17, level II-2
•
Renal parameters
Renal parameters should include RP and urine full examination and
microscopic examination (UFEME) for sediments to screen for kidney
involvement. The spot urine UPCR or 24hUP may be used to quantify
proteinuria.
The 2012 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) guidelines state
that findings for LN are:18
 persistent proteinuria >0.5 in UPCR or >0.5 g/day in 24hUP or
urine dipstick ≥3+
 active urinary sediment (defined as >5 red blood cells [RBCs]
per high power field [hpf]; >5 white blood cells [WBCs]/hpf in
the absence of infection or cellular casts limited to RBC or WBC
casts)
•
Liver function tests
The standard liver function test (LFT) includes measurement of
transaminases and serum albumin. Liver involvement in SLE is relatively
rare and deranged LFTs can be due to a wide variety of aetiologies
including lupus hepatitis or secondary to co-morbidities e.g. fatty liver
or viral hepatitis.19, level II-2 Hypoalbuminemia in SLE is associated with
disease activity e.g. LN, protein-losing enteropathy and chronic lupus
peritonitis with ascites.20, level III
•
Acute phase reactants
ESR and CRP levels are the most widely used indicators of the acute
phase response to inflammation. ESR is often raised in active SLE but
is not a reliable marker of disease activity as it does not differentiate
between active lupus and infection. CRP is usually normal or slightly
elevated in the presence of serositis or arthritis. A significantly raised
CRP often indicates infection, therefore patients need to be screened
thoroughly for it.21
•
Antinuclear antibodies
Autoantibodies to intracellular antigens, historically known as ANA, are
serological biomarkers that have a central role in the diagnosis and
classification of systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases.
Testing for ANA should be performed only when there is a high clinical
suspicion of SLE.22 ANA is present in 95% of SLE patients. Negative
test of ANA suggests a low clinical probability of the patients having
SLE.21
ANA detection can be performed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA), indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) and other techniques.
The IIF using HEp-2 substrate is the “gold standard” for primary ANA
detection because of its overall high sensitivity.22 ELISA technique is
less sensitive than IIF, but it has the advantages of being less laborious,
less subjectivity in its interpretation and can be automated. For these
reasons, ELISA technique is widely used locally; however IIF may be
used for confirmation when indicated.
The 2019 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology/
American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) classification criteria
for SLE include a positive ANA ≥1:80 by HEp-2 IIF at least once, as an
obligatory entry criterion.23
•
Anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibodies
Anti-dsDNA antibodies react against antigenic determining factors
present in the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). It is highly specific for
the diagnosis of SLE with ≥90% specificity.23; 24, level III Anti-dsDNA
antibodies are identified in 60 - 80% of SLE patients and only <2.5% in
healthy controls.23
•
Extractable nuclear antigen autoantibodies
Autoantibodies to ENA are important diagnostic markers for several
systemic autoimmune diseases including SLE. Among ENA antibodies
for SLE are anti-Smith (anti-Sm), anti-Sjögren’s-syndrome-related
antigen A (anti-SSA), anti-Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen B (antiSSB) and antibodies to ribonucleoprotein (anti-RNP).
Anti-Sm antibodies are highly specific and predictive but less sensitive
compared with ANA in the diagnosis of SLE. They are never found in
healthy individuals and rarely identified in patients with other rheumatic
disease.21; 23
Anti-SSA and anti-SSB are also known as anti-Ro and anti-La
autoantibodies respectively. Both have the highest prevalence
in Sjögren’s syndrome where the presence of anti-Ro antibodies
constitutes a classification criterion. The prevalence of anti-Ro and
anti-La antibodies in SLE patients is around 25 - 30% and 10 - 15%
respectively.25, level III
Anti-RNP are antibodies against small ribonucleic acid (RNA)
component of nuclear riboproteins and have structural similarities
with anti-Sm antibodies. They are present in 25 - 40% of SLE
patients.25, level III
Anti-SSA/SSB and anti-RNP antibodies are less-specific markers
of SLE as they are found in other autoimmune rheumatic disorders as
well as SLE.21; 23 However, these antibodies were associated with
pulmonary arterial hypertension in a case-control study on patients with
SLE:26, level II-2
 anti-RNP (OR=12.399, 95% CI 3.581 to 42.934)
 anti-SSA (OR=4.836, 95% CI 1.675 to 13.598)
•
Antiphospholipid antibodies
aPL are autoantibodies directed against phospholipid-binding proteins.
The common clinical assays for aPL include lupus anticoagulant (LA)
test and ELISA tests for anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) and anti-beta2-glycoprotein 1 (anti-β2GP1). In SLE, 30 - 40% of patients are positive
for aPL.27, level II-2; 28, level III
The presence of aPL is incorporated as an immunologic domain for
classification of SLE. The aPL includes:23; 29, level III
 aCL antibodies (immunoglobulin A [IgA], immunoglobulin G
[IgG] or immunoglobulin M [IgM]) at medium or high titre (>40 A
phospholipids [APL], G phospholipids [GPL] or M phospholipids
[MPL] units, or >99th percentile)
 anti-β2GP1 (IgA, IgG or IgM)
 LA
In antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), two tests with a minimum interval
of 12 weeks are necessary in order to exclude short-term IgM antibodies
following a vascular event or an infection.30, level III
•
Complements
Complement activation is a key event in the pathogenesis of tissue
inflammation and injury in SLE patients where decreased levels of
C3 and C4 are detected along with disease activity. However, serum
complement levels can be affected by various physiological conditions
e.g. infections, traumatic damage or immunosuppressants, and not
only in patients with autoimmune diseases but healthy individuals.31,
level III; 32, level III
Apart from above, further investigations will depend on the symptoms
of SLE that are present.33, level III
Recommendation 1
• The following tests should be done to assist in the diagnosis of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE):
 full blood count with differential counts
 renal profile
 liver function test
 urinalysis
 erythrocyte sedimentation rate with/without C-reactive protein
 antinuclear antibodies and anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic
acid
 complement 3 and complement 4
• All patients with SLE should be screened for antiphospholipid
antibodies at diagnosis.
5. DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA
There is no diagnostic criteria for SLE. Classification criteria has been
used as a guide to identify several salient clinical features in establishing
the diagnosis.
Four classification criteria that have been used are:
• 1982 revised American Rheumatism Association (ARA) SLE
classification criteria34, level III
• 1997 ACR classification criteria revision35, level III
• 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC)
classification criteria36, level III
• 2019 EULAR/ACR classification criteria23
ANA or other positive immunologic parameters (autoantibodies or
hypocomplementemia) are required for classification of SLE according to
the SLICC-2012 and EULAR/ACR-2019 but not the ACR-1997 criteria.23
The EULAR/ACR-2019 criteria for SLE include positive ANA (a titer
of ≥1:80 on Hep-2 cells) at least once as an obligatory entry criterion.
It is followed by additive weighted criteria grouped in seven clinical
and three immunological domains. Each criterion in both domains is
weighted from 2 to 10. Patients accumulating ≥10 points are classified
as SLE. In the validation cohort, the sensitivity of EULAR/ACR-2019 is
comparable with SLICC-2012 but higher than ACR-1997. Meanwhile,
the specificity of EULAR/ACR-2019 is similar with ACR-1997 but higher
than SLICC-2012 (refer to Table 1).23
Table 1: Sensitivity and specificity of three classification
criteria for SLE
In a local cross-sectional study on Malaysian SLE patients, EULAR/
ACR-2019 and SLICC-2012 criteria had higher sensitivities than ACR1997. The EULAR/ACR-2019 showed comparable specificity to the
ACR-1997 and SLICC-2012 as shown below (refer to Table 2).37, level III
Parameter EULAR/ACR-2019 SLICC-2012
ACR-1997
Sensitivity
96.1%
(95% CI 95 to 98)
96.7%
(95% CI 95 to 98)
82.8%
(95% CI 80 to 85)
Specificity
93.4%
(95% CI 91 to 95)
83.7%
(95% CI 80 to 87)
93.4%
(95% CI 91 to 95)
Table 2: Sensitivity and specificity of three classification criteria
for SLE in a Malaysian study
Refer to Appendix 3 for 2012 SLICC Classification Criteria for SLE
and Appendix 4 for 2019 EULAR/ACR Classification Criteria for
SLE.
• Classification criteria are not diagnostic criteria. It is used to identify a
relatively homogeneous groups of patients for inclusion in research.
Recommendation 2
• Diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should be based
on clinical manifestations supported by laboratory findings following
exclusion of alternative diagnoses.
• Classification criteria should not be used for the diagnosis of SLE.
Parameter EULAR/ACR-2019 SLICC-2012
ACR-1997
Sensitivity
90.8%
(95% CI 85 to 94)
96.1%
(95% CI 92 to 98)
82.0%
(95% CI 75 to 86)
Specificity
94.0%
(95% CI 87 to 97.5)
94.0%
(95% CI 86 to 97)
96.0%
(95% CI 89 to 98)
6. PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
Due to its multisystem involvement, SLE may present with a myriad of
possible clinical manifestations, making it a challenge to diagnose and
treat.
• Principles of SLE treatment are to achieve:
 disease remission
 disease flare prevention
 organ damage prevention
 quality of life improvement
 minimisation of drug side effects
• If complete remission cannot be achieved, the lowest possible
disease activity in all organs involved should be targeted.
6.1 Disease Assessment
Patients with SLE may have a fluctuating disease course or persistently
active disease despite being on medications. Both persistent disease
activity and disease flares can contribute to irreversible damage and
impact health-related quality of life. The principal goal of SLE treatment
according to the ‘treat-to-target’ approach emphasises minimisation of
disease activity.4 Achieving remission in SLE is desirable but not always
attainable, hence low disease activity state is an acceptable alternative.
SLE flare is generally defined as any increase in disease activity
leading to intensification of therapy. It refers to a measurable
increase in disease activity in one or more organ systems involving
new or worsening clinical signs and symptoms and/or laboratory
measurements. It must also be considered clinically significant to
warrant adjustment of treatment.38, level III
Disease activity in SLE can be measured as clinical activity (inflammation
of organs) or serological activity (elevated anti-dsDNA antibodies or
low complements levels). In clinical practice, disease activity in SLE
can be evaluated by assessment of symptoms, signs and laboratory
tests including serology. There are many disease activity assessment
tools in SLE, however these were created mainly for clinical trials. The
commonly used and validated tools are (Table 3):
• Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI)
in its original version or improved versions which are Safety
of Estrogens in Lupus Erythematosus National Assessment
(SELENA)-SLEDAI or SLEDAI 2000 (SLEDAI-2K)
• British Isles Lupus Activity Group index (BILAG)-2004
All three SLEDAIs have the same items (24 clinical presentations within
a period of 10 days) and weightage (1 to 8 [range 0 - 105]) with some
variations for the definition of certain items. The items are scored if
present and attributed to active lupus. Increment of SLEDAI-2K or
SELENA-SLEDAI score ≥3 indicates mild or moderate lupus flare. A
severe flare is indicated by SELENA-SLEDAI score >12.39, level I; 40, level III
BILAG-2004 differs from SLEDAI because it evaluates activity for
each organ whereas SLEDAI only describes disease activity by the
total score. The classic BILAG index was revised several times and
BILAG-2004 (which was also revised in 2009) is currently used. There
are 97 items in nine domains and each item is scored 0 (not present) to
4 (new) by evaluating activity in the last four weeks compared with the
previous four weeks. Each organ domain also has severity assessment
from A (severe) to E (no evidence).
Refer to Appendix 5 for SLEDAI-2K and Appendix 6 for BILAG-2004.
Table 3: Disease Activity Assessment Tools for SLE
*SLEDAI/SLEDAI-2K score of 0 is categorised as remission
Source:
1. Gordon C, Amissah-Arthur MB, Gayed M, et al. The British Society for
Rheumatology guideline for the management of systemic lupus erythematosus in
adults. Rheumatology. 2018;57(1):e1-45.
2. Gladman DD, Ibañez D, Urowitz MB. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease
Activity Index 2000. J Rheumatol. 2002;29(2):288-291.
The 2021 Definition of Remission in SLE (DORIS) is defined as clinical
SLEDAI score of 0 and Physician Global Assessment (PGA) <0.5
irrespective of serological status. The patient may be on antimalarials,
low dose corticosteroids (prednisolone <5 mg/day), and/or stable
immunosuppressants including biologics.41, level III
Lupus low disease activity state (LLDAS) is an alternative goal for
patients. The definition must include the following components:42, level III
• SLEDAI-2K ≤4 points (with no activity in major organ systems and
no new features of activity compared with previous assessment)
• PGA ≤1.0 point
Disease activity
Assessment tool
BILAG1
SLEDAI
SLEDAI-2K2
Assessment tool
Mild
BILAG C scores or
single B score
<6
1 - 4
Low
5 - 10
Moderate
BILAG 2 or more
systems with B scores
6 - 12
Disease activity
Moderate
Severe
(Non-renal)
BILAG 1 or
more A scores
>12
>10
High
• minimal prednisolone dose of ≤7.5 mg/day
• on standard maintenance doses of immunosuppressive drugs
and/or approved biological agents
It is estimated that 20 - 25% of SLE patients will flare within 1 - 2 years
and 40 - 66% within 5 - 10 years after achievement of a low disease
activity or remission. The risk factors for SLE flare include:43, level III
• male gender
• age of SLE onset ≤25 years
• major organ involvement (cytopenias, neuropsychiatric, nephritis,
vasculitis)
• persistent clinical disease activity
• low serum C3/C4
• high anti-dsDNA antibodies
• poor compliance to treatment
• discontinuation or have never been on HCQ
• rapid tapering or withdrawal of maintenance immunosuppressive
treatment
Smoking
and
ultraviolet
radiation
have
been
shown
to
trigger
or
aggravate
cutaneous
lupus
erythematosus
(CLE)
manifestations.44 - 45, level III There is a small increase in risk of mild to
moderate lupus flares with use of oral HRT.46
In a meta-analysis of moderate quality primary studies on the effect
of disease activity and damage of patients with SLE, it was found that
there were:47, level I
• greater risk of mortality in patients with higher SLEDAI disease
activity (HR=1.14, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.22)
• greater risk of damage in patients with higher SLEDAI scores as
measured by SLICC/ACR Damage Index (SDI) (HR=1.18, 95% CI
1.02 to 1.37)
• higher risk of mortality in patients with worse damage as measured
by SDI (HR=1.44, 95% CI 1.29 to 1.61)
The above findings were supported by a large meta-analysis that
showed organ damage with greater SDI in SLE was consistently
associated with increased mortality (HR=1.34, 95% CI 1.24 to 1.44).
Most of the primary studies were of high-quality.48, level II-2
There is no standard definition of refractory disease in SLE. The
CPG DG opines that it may be defined as persistent disease activity
despite optimal standard therapy. However, it is important to ensure the
diagnosis is accurate and, persistent symptoms and signs are derived
primarily from SLE activity and not from concomitant diseases (e.g.
infections, atherosclerosis or other autoimmune diseases) or adverse
events (AEs) of drugs.49, level III
Recommendation 3
• All patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should have
clinical assessment of disease activity.
 This may be done using the validated assessment tools for SLE.
7.
TREATMENT
7.1 Non-Pharmacological Treatment
There is limited evidence on the non-pharmacological treatment of SLE.
a.
Sun protection
Sunlight can induce or exacerbate SLE in a wide variety of cutaneous
manifestations including discoid lupus erythematosus and acute CLE.
These conditions may lead to physical and psychological burden to
patients.
Two guidelines recommend the use of broad-spectrum sunscreen for
effective protection against ultraviolet exposure.21; 50 This is supported
by a systematic review that showed application of sunscreen with sun
protection factor (SPF) 50 - 75 reduced lesion development in the
setting of photo-provocation among patients with CLE.51, level I
In addition, patient should be advised on sun avoidance and the use of
protective clothing.21
b.
Nurse-led care
Patients with SLE face a unique set of challenges due to the variability of
the symptoms experienced. Nurses play an important role in addressing
these challenges by providing a multitude of nurse-led interventions such
as patient educational sessions, counselling, exercise and transitional
care programs. A randomised controlled trial (RCT) among patients
with SLE showed that transitional care programmes led by specialist
nurses compared with usual care group had significant improvement in
patient self-care and quality of life as well as reduction in readmission
rate up to 90 days.52, level I
c.
Physiotherapy/exercise and psychological therapy
In a systematic review on patients with SLE, combination of
physical activity (aerobic exercise) or psychological interventions
(psychoeducation,
mindfulness-based
cognitive
therapy
and
biofeedback-assisted cognitive behaviour therapy with relaxation
techniques) with usual medical care was compared with usual medical
care alone. The combined treatment was more effective in improving
fatigue, psychological function, pain and quality of life.53, level I However,
quality assessment of primary studies was not reported.
A recent Cochrane systematic review assessed the effectiveness of
exercise as an adjunct to pharmacological treatment. The intervention
was only more effective compared with other non-pharmacological
treatments adjunct to pharmacological treatment in fatigue, functional
capacity and pain. The quality of primary papers used was generally
low to very low.54, level I
A wellness program providing social support, lifestyle and stress
management training among patients with SLE led by a lupus
foundation showed improved self-care knowledge, health behaviours,
mental health status and quality of life.55, level II-3
Recommendation 4
• Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus should practise
sun avoidance and, use protective clothing and broad-spectrum
sunscreen with at least sun protection factor (SPF) 50.
7.2 Pharmacological Treatment
Pharmacological treatment in SLE aims to suppress the disease activity.
Drug treatment is individualised according to the clinical presentation of
the disease and the varying disease activity. Corticosteroids are the
cornerstone treatment in SLE, with immunosuppressants being the
gold standard treatment for major organ involvement. The initial period
of intensive immunosuppressive treatment, also known as induction
therapy, aims at halting immunological activity especially when there
is high disease activity or major organ involvement. This is followed
by a less aggressive maintenance treatment to consolidate remission
and reduce risk of disease flare. Drugs used in the treatment of SLE
may have AEs which require close monitoring for toxicity. Minimum
long-term treatment is necessary to maintain remission or low disease
activity. Treatment should be based on a shared decision-making
process between the patient and the clinician.
Refer to Appendix 7 for Medication in SLE.
a.
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory properties with rapid onset of
action that is useful in mild to severe SLE. Although there is no new
retrievable evidence on its effectiveness, it remains the cornerstone
of SLE treatment despite advances in immunosuppressive drugs and
therapeutic protocols, and development of new drugs.56, level III
Long-term use of corticosteroids may lead to various AEs. In a large
cohort of SLE patients in Taiwan, the common AEs and their incidence
rate are shown below.57, level II-2
A meta-analysis of eight small RCTs looked into rate of AEs related
to medium to high dose of corticosteroids in patients with SLE. The
pooled rates were 25/100 patients/year for infections, 12/100 patients/
year for avascular necrosis of the hip and 9/100 patients/year for
hyperglycaemia/diabetes.58, level I However, quality assessment for
primary studies was not mentioned.
The risk of any new organ damage significantly increases with higher
corticosteroids dosage.59, level II-2
• The doses and routes of corticosteroids administration should
be based on the severity of organ involvement. The dose should
be minimised during long-term treatment and discontinued when
possible.21; 50
Recommendation 5
• Corticosteroids should be used for acute flare in systemic lupus
erythematosus.
 The dose should be minimised accordingly and discontinued
whenever possible.
b.
Antimalarial (Hydroxychloroquine)
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is an anti-malarial drug with antiinflammatory and immunomodulator effects. Long-term use of HCQ
has been shown to ameliorate active SLE manifestations, improve
immunologic parameters and disease activity scores, prevent
disease flares and sustain remission. HCQ is the mainstay of lupus
treatment and is recommended to be used in SLE unless intolerant or
contraindicated.18; 21; 50
In a large systematic review of RCTs and observational studies, HCQ
use was shown to reduce the rate of flares, achieve higher remission
rate of membranous LN and protect against irreversible organ damage,
Adverse event
Peptic ulcer
Bacterial infection
Fungal infection
Hypertension
Osteoporosis
Fracture
Tuberculosis
Incidence rate (per 1000 person-years)
147.84
136.42
42.26
37.67
28.17
23.77
7.85
thrombosis and bone mass loss compared with control in SLE.60, level I
However, the quality assessment of primary studies was not reported.
A prospective cohort study showed that the use of HCQ reduced the risk
of death (HR=0.46, 95% CI 0.29 to 0.72) and renal damage (HR=0.30,
95% CI 0.13 to 0.68) compared with non-HCQ use in patients with
SLE.61, level II-2
In a retrospective cohort study among patients in the maintenance
phase of SLE, there were no significant difference between usual dose
HCQ (5 mg/kg) and low dose HCQ (200 mg) in SLEDAI, Cutaneous
Lupus Erythematous Disease Area and Severity Index (CLASI) and
serum levels of anti-dsDNA antibodies at 6-month.62, level II-2
A systematic review of mixed study designs in SLE showed higher
odds of flare in patients with low HCQ levels (<1000 ng/mL) compared
with high levels (OR=5.89, 95% CI 1.38 to 25.08). The overall risk
of bias assessment of primary studies in the review showed the
eight observational studies were of fair to good quality while the
three interventional studies were of unclear to low risk.63, level II-2 HCQ
adherence can be assessed using drug levels in the blood but it has not
been recommended in routine clinical practice at present.
Long-term use of HCQ treatment is safe. Toxicity related to HCQ is
infrequent, mild and usually reversible.60, level I
Specifically, retinal toxicity related to HCQ is uncommon. A retrospective
cohort study on newly diagnosed SLE patients showed an incidence of
HCQ retinal toxicity at one in 1000 person-years.64, level II-2 However, the
incidence increased in SLE patients with risk factors (e.g. long duration
and high dose of HCQ) for toxic retinopathy.65 In a case-control study
on SLE, a small proportion (5.5%) of patients developed antimalarialinduced retinal complications over an average usage of 12.8 years. No
retinal toxicity was reported in the first five years of exposure.66, level II-2
The American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends HCQ dose of
no more than 5 mg/kg actual body weight to reduce the occurrence of
retinopathy.65
Recommendation 6
• All patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should be on
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) unless intolerant or contraindicated.
• Ophthalmologic assessment should be done for patients with SLE on
HCQ at baseline, and then:
 yearly in the presence of known retinopathy risk factors*
 after five years and yearly thereafter in the absence of retinopathy
risk factors*
*The major risk factors for toxic retinopathy include long-term use and/
or use of high dose HCQ, concomitant hepatic and renal disease,
concomitant tamoxifen, history of retinal and macular disease and
advanced age.65; 67
HCQ use during pregnancy and breast-feeding is considered safe.46
Refer to Subchapter 9.2 for HCQ Effectiveness and Safety in Pregnant
Patients with SLE.
c.
Immunosuppressants
Immunosuppressants are used in the treatment of lupus when there
is involvement of major organ or life-threatening manifestations. They
are also used to control active disease with inadequate response to
corticosteroids alone, to prevent lupus flare and as steroid-sparing
agents. The selection of immunosuppressants is guided by the organ
involvement, disease severity, pregnancy and lactation compatibility,
co-morbidities, safety concerns and cost.
i)
Azathioprine
Azathioprine (AZA) causes immunosuppression by inhibiting the
synthesis of purines that are needed in the DNA and RNA sequencing
for the production of WBCs. It is used as a steroid-sparing agent in
non-renal SLE and maintenance treatment in renal SLE (refer to
Subchapter 7.1).
An RCT in a systematic review on patients with non-renal SLE showed
both AZA and ciclosporin significantly reduced the mean dose of
corticosteroids by >50% at 12 months compared with baseline. There
was no significant difference between the two drugs at end point.
The reported AEs included leukopenia, respiratory tract infection and
rash.68, level I
European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR) 2019 and
British Society for Rheumatology (BSR) 2018 guidelines recommend
that AZA should be considered as add on therapy in non-renal lupus
e.g. arthritis and cutaneous disease if HCQ is unable to control disease
activity or when corticosteroids doses cannot be tapered.21; 50
ii)
Methotrexate
Methotrexate (MTX) is an antimetabolite which is commonly used in
the treatment of autoimmune diseases. It can be administered in oral
or subcutaneous form. MTX is often used to treat musculoskeletal
and cutaneous manifestations inadequately controlled with HCQ and
corticosteroids. Folate supplementation is used to ameliorate MTXassociated AEs and toxicity (minimum dose of 5 mg/week).
In a systematic review of SLE treatment, two good quality RCTs showed
that MTX was more effective than placebo based on:68, level I
• reduction in SLEDAI and Visual Analogue Scales (VAS) score at
six months (p<0.05)
• reduction in Systemic Lupus Activity Measure-Revised (SLAM-R)
at 12 months (MD= -0.86, 95% CI -1.7 to -0.02)
• reduction in SLAM-R in patients with SDI=0 at 12 months (MD=
-1.41, 96% CI -2.42 to -0.39)
• reduction in corticosteroids dose in 65% of patients at six months
(p<0.001)
• reduction in mean corticosteroids daily dose at 12 months (MD=
-22.3, 96% CI -36.2 to -5.4)
• reduction in lupus flare at three and six months of treatment
duration (p=0.02)
• improvement in arthralgia/arthritis and discoid SLE/malar rash at
six months (p<0.001)
A non-randomised, open-labelled, control study among patients with
SLE on prednisolone taper showed MTX compared with non-MTX
group was more effective in improving serological abnormalities in
terms of:69, level II-1
• increment of complement levels at three, six and 12 months
(p<0.01) and normalisation or elevation in C3 and/or C4 levels at
18 months (p=0.0001)
• reduction in dsDNA levels at three, six and 12 months (p<0.01)
and normalisation or reduction of anti-dsDNA antibodies at 18
months (p=0.0022)
It was also more effective in reducing the following outcomes:
• SLEDAI score at six, 12 and 18 months (p<0.01)
• prednisolone dose at 12 and 18 months (p<0.05)
MTX was reported to have good safety profile with gastrointestinal
(GI) symptoms and hepatotoxicity being the most frequent
AEs.68, level I; 69, level II-1
iii) Calcineurin inhibitors
Ciclosporin and tacrolimus are calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) that
inhibit calcineurin phosphatase, which is involved in the production
of interleukin-2, a molecule that promotes the development and
proliferation of T-lymphocytes as part of the body’s adaptive immune
response.
•
Ciclosporin
In a systematic review on immunosuppressants, an RCT showed that
ciclosporin in combination with corticosteroids reduced SLEDAI scores
(p<0.05) and cumulative corticosteroids dose (p<0.005) compared with
corticosteroids alone in patients with moderate non-renal SLE at 12
months. The second RCT demonstrated that ciclosporin also reduced
the mean dose of corticosteroids by >50% compared with baseline
(p<0.001) in patients with severe non-renal SLE at 12 months. The first
RCT had a score of 1 while the second had a score of 3 based on Jadad
scale.68, level I
The reported AEs in the review included hypertension, respiratory tract
infection and anaemia.68, level I Additionally, other common AEs include
hypertrichosis, gum hypertrophy, paraesthesia, tremor, GI symptoms
and impaired renal function, especially at higher doses (>3 mg/kg/
day).21
•
Tacrolimus
In a systematic review, a cohort study demonstrated that tacrolimus
1 - 3 mg/day significantly reduced mean SLEDAI scores and dose of
prednisolone in SLE patients without active nephritis after one year.
Non-serious AEs were observed in 40% of the cohort. However, quality
assessment of the study was not reported.68, level I
iv) Cyclophosphamide
Cyclophosphamide (CYC) is a non-specific alkylating agent that
prevents cell division by forming cross-linkages in DNA, which leads to
inhibition of T and B lymphocytes proliferation.
A small, low quality RCT in a Cochrane systematic review studied
neuropsychiatric SLE (NPSLE). The patients had IV induction of
methylprednisolone and tapering oral prednisolone. Comparison
between CYC and continuation of methylprednisolone showed the
former was more effective in achieving 20% improvement in clinical,
serological and specific neurological measures, improvement of
SLEDAI score and reduction of prednisolone requirements. There was
no significant differences in AEs and deaths.70, level I
Another systematic review that included two small RCTs on NPSLE
showed that CYC in combination with corticosteroids was more effective
than corticosteroids alone in the following outcomes:68, level I
• clinical improvement at six months (p=0.005)
• reduction of relapses at three months (p=0.005)
• electroencephalogram improvement (p=0.003)
• ≥20% improvement in clinical, serological and neurological
measures at two years (p<0.03)
There was no difference in AE in one of the RCTs. Both RCTs scored
1 - 3 on Jadad scale.
The use of CYC in renal SLE is mentioned in Subchapter 7.1.
v)
Leflunomide
Leflunomide is a pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor with anti-inflammatory
properties.
In a systematic review on mild to moderate active SLE, leflunomide
was more effective than placebo in reducing SLEDAI at 24 weeks
(11.0±6.1 vs 4.5±2.4; p=0.02) but there were no significant differences
in proteinuria, complement, anti-dsDNA antibodies and corticosteroids
dose. There were also no difference in AEs between the two
groups.68, level I
Leflunomide may be considered in moderate lupus refractory/intolerant/
not suitable for other immunosuppressants. It may also be considered
when CYC and biological agents are not suitable or not available.21
vi) Mycophenolate mofetil
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is an immunosuppressant used for SLE
patients with both renal and non-renal involvement.
The use of MMF in renal involvement of SLE is well established.
A systematic review included a report on the secondary non-renal
outcomes of the Aspreva Lupus Management Study (ALMS), a large
RCT on induction treatment for LN. The RCT showed MMF (0.5 g/12 h
and increased to 1.5 g/12 h) had comparable effectiveness with CYC
0.5 - 1 g/m2/month in improving BILAG scores, inducing remission
in the mucocutaneous, musculoskeletal and cardiovascular (CV)/
respiratory systems as well as reducing SELENA-SLEDAI flares at six
months.68, level I
Recommendation 7
• Immunosuppressants should be considered as add-on therapy to
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) not responding
to hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) alone or in combination with
corticosteroids, or when corticosteroids doses cannot be tapered.
• Immunosuppressants may be considered in active SLE patients with
HCQ intolerance.
• Cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate mofetil may be used as
induction therapy in certain major organ involvement in SLE.
d.
Biologics
Biologics are used as adjunct therapy in active SLE despite optimal
treatment with corticosteroids and immunosuppressants. They may also
be considered in refractory diseases and/or when there is intolerance
or contraindication to standard treatment.
i)
Belimumab
Belimumab is a recombinant, fully human monoclonal antibody that
inhibits the biologic activity of B-lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS), also
known as B-cell activating factor (BAFF). This agent is indicated as an
adjunct therapy in patients with active SLE who are receiving standard
therapy and for the treatment of LN.71, level III
In a Cochrane systematic review of six RCTs on SLE, belimumab was
more effective than placebo in terms of:72, level I
• reduction of at least 4-point in SELENA-SLEDAI score (RR=1.33,
95% CI 1.22 to 1.45)
• improvement in quality of life based on 36-item short-form (SF-36)
(MD=1.60, 95% CI 0.30 to 2.90)
• reduction in corticosteroids dose by at least 50% (RR=1.59, 95%
CI 1.17 to 2.15)
In another systematic review of 12 studies which included seven RCTs,
belimumab was more effective than placebo in SLE patients based on
SLE Responder Index (SRI).73, level I
Belimumab was reported to have a good safety profile.72 - 73, level I
ii)
Anifrolumab
Anifrolumab is a human monoclonal antibody to type I interferon
receptor subunit 1. It is a newly approved adjunct therapy for patients
with moderate to severe SLE.
In a landmark RCT among patients with moderate to severe SLE
(Treatment of Uncontrolled Lupus via the Interferon Pathway [TULIP]-2),
anifrolumab was more effective than placebo in terms of:74, level I
• higher percentage of British Isles Lupus Assessment Groupbased Composite Lupus Assessment (BICLA) responder at week
52 (difference=16.3%, 95% CI 6.3 to 26.3)
• reduction of corticosteroids dose (difference=21.2%, 95% CI 6.8
to 35.7)
• reduction of CLASI by ≥50% at week 12 (difference=24.0%, 95%
CI 4.3 to 43.6)
The most frequent AEs among patients on anifrolumab reported in this
trial were upper respiratory tract infection, nasopharyngitis, infusionrelated reaction, bronchitis and herpes zoster.
iii) Rituximab
Rituximab is a chimeric anti-CD20 antibody that induces peripheral
B-cells depletion.
In a landmark study on non-renal SLE (The Exploratory Phase II/III
SLE Evaluation of Rituximab [EXPLORER] trial), rituximab showed no
significant difference with placebo in major or partial clinical response
via the BILAG at week 52.75, level I However a systematic review of mainly
moderate quality observational studies showed that rituximab had a
steroid-sparing effect, in addition to improvement in disease activity and
immunologic parameters.76, level I
Two guidelines support the use of rituximab in organ threatening,
refractory moderate and severe lupus, intolerance/contraindications
to standard immunosuppressive agents and as steroid sparing
therapy.21; 50
Rituximab also had good safety profile where most frequent AEs were
infusion reactions and infections.76, level I
Recommendation 8
• Biologics may be used as an adjunct therapy in active systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) despite standard therapy with corticosteroids
and immunosuppressants.
• Biologics may be considered in refractory disease of SLE, intolerance
or contraindication to standard treatment.
e.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly used to
relieve pain and reduce inflammation due to their analgesic and antiinflammatory effects. There is no retrievable latest evidence on its
effectiveness as its use has been established and well-tolerated for
short-term symptomatic relief. NSAIDs may be used cautiously in nonrenal mild SLE (e.g. inflammatory arthralgia or myalgia) when there is
intolerance or poor response to paracetamol. There is also potential
increased risk of renal, hepatic and CV toxicity when NSAIDs are used
in SLE patients.21; 61, level II-2
f.
Others
i)
Plasma exchange/Plasmapheresis
Plasma exchange (PE) or plasmapheresis is a therapeutic intervention
that involves extracorporeal removal of high molecular weight
substances (e.g. circulating immune complexes, autoantibodies and
other immune reactants) involved in the pathogenesis of SLE with
subsequent return or exchange of blood plasma or components. It has
been utilised as an alternative therapeutic modality in selected patients
with acute life-threatening manifestations, rare complications and
severe treatment-refractory disease, in particular LN.
In a retrospective cohort study of renal biopsy-proven thrombotic
microangiopathy LN, plasmapheresis treatment had higher rate of
complete/partial remission compared with control (non-plasmapheresis)
(77.8 vs 11.1%, p=0.018). No AEs were observed.77, level II-2
In a pre-post study of refractory SLE patients with sub-phenotypes of
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), myasthenia gravis and
APS, PE as add-on treatment to corticosteroids and immunosuppressive
agents significantly decreased SLEDAI. However, 21% patients
experienced PE-related major AEs (catheter infections, bleeding and
hypotension).78, level II-3
The BSR 2018 guidelines recommends the use of PE in SLE with
TTP.21 Meanwhile in the 2020 Chinese Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Treatment of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, PE can be
considered in patients with severe or refractory SLE.67
• PE is considered in patients with severe or refractory SLE, in
particular those with TTP.
ii)
Intravenous immunoglobulin
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is a blood product derived from
the plasma of a large pool of healthy donors. The indication of its use
as immunomodulator has expanded to treat various autoimmune and
inflammatory diseases. There is limited evidence on IVIG treatment in
SLE.
In a non-randomised controlled trial in LN patients, IVIG was not
significantly different to CYC or AZA in achieving partial or complete
renal remission following induction therapy. However, it had lower
infection rate. No leukopenia, amenorrhoea or osteoporosis were
observed.79, level II-1
• In SLE, the use of IVIG maybe considered in:21; 50; 67
 severe refractory SLE including haematological flare, TTP and the
catastrophic variant of APS
 active SLE with concomitant infection
Thromboembolic events are delayed AEs of immunoglobulin treatment
with incidence rate up to 2% when given in high dose.80, level III It
occurs because of hyperviscosity especially in patients having risk
factors including advanced age, previous thromboembolic diseases,
bedridden, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidaemia and those
receiving IVIG in high dose or by rapid infusion.81, level III It has therefore
been suggested that a slow infusion rate of low concentration of IVIG
products may reduce the thromboembolic events.80, level III
8.
SPECIFIC CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
SLE is a multisystemic disease requiring comprehensive treatment
which is determined by the disease severity and organ/system involved.
8.1 Lupus Nephritis
LN is classified according to the International Society of Nephrology
and the Renal Pathology Society in 2003 as shown below:82, level III
For class l LN, treatment should be guided by symptoms whereas for
class ll, low dose prednisolone should be initiated and followed by an
immunosuppressant if there is persistent proteinuria for more than
three months or prednisolone dependency.
Treatment of class III and class IV LN includes an initial induction
phase, followed by a more prolonged maintenance phase. MMF and
CYC are the agents of choice for induction treatment. MMF or AZA
may be used as maintenance treatment, with the former associated
with fewer relapses. CNIs may be considered as second-line agents for
induction or maintenance treatment mainly in membranous LN (class
V) or in proliferative disease with refractory nephrotic syndrome despite
standard treatment within 3 - 6 months.50 For class VI LN, treatment is
as per advanced chronic kidney disease (refer to CPG Management of
Chronic Kidney Disease [Second Edition]).83
A landmark RCT (Lupus Nephritis Assessment with Rituximab
[LUNAR] trial) on class lll and class lV LN patients treated with MMF
and corticosteroids showed that rituximab led to more responders and
greater reductions in anti-dsDNA antibodies and C3/C4 levels. However,
it did not improve clinical outcomes after one year of treatment.84, level l
According to the Belimumab in Subjects with Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus (BLISS)-LN trial, IV belimumab was superior to placebo
as an add-on therapy during induction phase of active LN (class III
- V) in achieving primary renal response (ratio of urinary protein to
creatinine of ≤0.7 and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
Class
l
Il
lll
lV
V
Vl
Incidence rate (per 1000 person-years)
Minimal mesangial LN
Mesangial proliferative LN
Focal LN (active and chronic; proliferative and sclerosing)
Diffuse LN (active and chronic; proliferative and sclerosing;
segmental and global)
Membranous LN
Advanced sclerosis LN
that is no worse than 20% below the pre-flare value or ≤60 mL/min/
1.73 m2 and no rescue therapy for treatment failure) at week 104.85, level I
8.2 Mucocutaneous
Topical agents (corticosteroids or CNIs) and HCQ are the mainstay
of treatment in CLE. Systemic corticosteroids may be considered in
moderate to severe CLE or when topical treatment is insufficient or not
practical.23
In a Cochrane systematic review of 61 RCTs with interventions for CLE
showed:86, level I
• HCQ was more effective than placebo in achieving partial clinical
response at 12 months although the difference was not significant
• HCQ was superior to placebo on reducing clinical flares at six
months (RR=0.49, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.89)
• MTX was superior to placebo in achieving complete clinical
response at six months (RR=3.57, 95% CI 1.63 to 7.84)
• MTX led to fewer flares compared with placebo at 12 months,
however it was not significant
• no difference between AZA and ciclosporin in complete clinical
response at 12 months
Based on GRADE, the body of evidence was of moderate to low quality.
8.3 Neuropsychiatry
Treatment of NPSLE is determined by the underlying pathophysiology i.e.
inflammatory or thrombotic. Corticosteroids and/or immunosuppressive
agents should be considered in the former, while anticoagulant/
antithrombotic treatment is favoured in the latter especially when aPLs
are present.50
As mentioned earlier in Subchapter 6.2, two systematic reviews
showed that CYC in combination with corticosteroids was more effective
compared with corticosteroids alone in NPSLE. The treatments also
had a good safety profile.68, level I; 70, level I
Anti-epileptics and anti-psychotics may be considered as adjunct
therapy when indicated.
8.4 Haematology
Haematological manifestations frequently requiring immunosuppressants
in SLE include thrombocytopenia and AIHA. First-line treatment of
significant lupus thrombocytopenia (platelet count below 30,000/
mm3) and AIHA consist of moderate/high doses of corticosteroids in
combination with immunosuppressants (AZA, MMF or ciclosporin).50
8.5 Cardiorespiratory
There is limited evidence on the management of cardiorespiratory
manifestations in SLE. A small retrospective cohort study on lupus
myocarditis showed no significant difference with the addition of CYC
to corticosteroids on intensive care unit (ICU) stay, length of hospital
stay and median left ventricular ejection fraction.87, level II-2
• The management of organ/system specific SLE is complex and a
multidisciplinary team (MDT) approach consisting of rheumatologist(s)
and other relevant specialists may be considered.
9.
MONITORING
Assessment and monitoring in SLE are essential as the disease is
often complicated by flares of varying severity. Few guidelines provide
recommendations on monitoring disease activity, disease damage and
quality of life.21; 50; 88 - 89
The clinical manifestations of SLE may be related to disease activity,
organ damage, drug toxicity and quality of life. The monitoring includes
new clinical manifestations, laboratory investigations, disease activity,
organ damage, co-morbidities and drug AEs.
9.1 Clinical Features
SLE can present in various clinical manifestations (refer to Figure 1).
Thus, a thorough history and physical examination must be undertaken
at each clinic visit. Any new onset or changes in clinical manifestation
would require further evaluation.
9.2 Laboratory Investigations
Laboratory tests that are commonly done for monitoring are FBC,
RP, LFT, acute phase reactants (ESR and CRP), complements and
urinalysis.
•
Full blood count
FBC should be assessed at every visit to detect cytopenia which is
associated with SLE flare or concomitant drug treatment.
The haematological flares during monitoring of patients with SLE are
indicated by the following parameters:21; 23
 haemolytic anaemia with reticulocytosis
 leukopenia <4000/mm3 total on >2 occasions*
 lymphopenia <1500/mm3 on >2 occasions*
 thrombocytopenia <100 000/mm3*
*in the absence of offending drugs
•
Biochemistry and urinalysis
Serum albumin and creatinine provide information on the presence and
prognosis of renal involvement. Urinalysis can be used to detect early
renal manifestations.
Renal biopsy is indicated during monitoring of patients with SLE with
the presence of these criteria:21; 23
 persistent proteinuria >0.5 g/day or >3+ if quantitation not
performed
 cellular casts: presence of red cell, haemoglobin, granular, tubular
or mixed
LFT can be deranged due to autoimmune liver disease or liver toxicity
secondary to the use of immunosuppressants. For frequency of
monitoring, refer to Appendix 8.
•
Acute phase reactants
Monitoring of ESR and CRP can be useful to distinguish SLE flare from
infection. Raised ESR with normal CRP occur in SLE flares while both
ESR and CRP are elevated in infection.21
•
Autoantibodies and complements
Anti-dsDNA antibodies and complements can fluctuate with disease
activity. In patients with clinical features of active SLE, rising anti-dsDNA
antibodies and/or falling levels of complements indicate disease flare.21
Other autoantibodies (e.g. ANA and ENA) have not been demonstrated
to be helpful in monitoring disease activity.
Refer to Appendix 8 for Frequency of Monitoring Patients in SLE.
Recommendation 9
• All patients with systemic lupus erythematosus should be monitored
based on clinical and laboratory parameters.*
*Refer to Subchapter 8.1 and 8.2.
9.3 Co-morbidities
a.
Infection
Patients with SLE are prone to infection including tuberculosis due
to their immunocompromised state contributed by both disease- and
treatment-related factors. This leads to higher risk of morbidity and
mortality.
High disease activity, severe leukopenia and presence of renal
involvement (with/without hypogammaglobulinaemia in nephrotic
syndrome) contribute independently to infection in SLE.50
In a cross-sectional study among patients with SLE, the factors
associated with bacterial, viral and fungal infections were renal
involvement, treatment with CYC and accumulated dose of
corticosteroids. Additional factors for bacterial and viral infection were
high SLEDAI score and thrombocytopenia.90, level III
The prevalence of tuberculosis among SLE patients is significantly
higher than the general population.91, level II-2 Hence, there should be a
high index of suspicion for active tuberculosis in SLE especially among
those on immunosuppressants and high doses of corticosteroids.5
A prospective cohort study of patients with SLE showed CRP and
procalcitonin levels were higher in infection than disease flare
(p<0.001). Both serum biomarkers decreased after the infections
resolved.92, level II-2
• Early detection and prompt treatment of infection is important among
patients with SLE, particularly in the setting of raised CRP and
procalcitonin levels.
b.
Osteoporosis
Risk factors for osteoporosis in patients with SLE include corticosteroids
and reduced levels of vitamin D related to the avoidance of sun
exposure. Osteoporosis is assessed by measuring bone mineral density
(BMD) using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and fracture risk
assessment tool (FRAX) in patients aged 40 - 90 years.
In a retrospective cohort study among female patients with SLE,
significant factors associated with high-risk of osteoporotic fractures
assessed using the FRAX with BMD were nephritis (OR=11.35, 95% CI
1.09 to 118.57) and cumulative dose of corticosteroids (OR=1.10, 95%
CI 1.05 to 1.15). The same study also described low complement levels
(OR=4.38, 95% CI 1.50 to 12.81), high ESR (OR=1.04, 95% CI 1.02
to 1.07) and cumulative doses of corticosteroids (OR=1.05, 95% CI
1.01 to 1.09) as significant factors associated with risk of osteoporosis
assessed using the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria.93, level II-2
c.
Cardiovascular disease
SLE is an independent risk factor for CV disease (CVD), due to both
traditional and disease-related risk factors.
In a large systematic review, the most frequently and consistently
reported predictors of CV events in SLE patients were:94, level II-2
• male gender (OR=6.2, 95% CI 1.49 to 25)
• family history of cardiac disease (OR=3.6, 95% CI 1.15 to 11.32)
• neurological disorders (OR=5.2, 95% CI 2.0 to 13.9)
• dyslipidaemia (OR=3.9, 95% CI 1.57 to 9.71)
• hypertension (OR=3.5, 95% CI 1.65 to 7.54)
• presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies (OR=5.0, 95% CI 3.28 to
7.78)
However, the quality assessment on primary studies was not reported.
• It is important to identify and manage modifiable cardiovascular
risk factors in SLE patients to reduce cardiac-related morbidity and
mortality.
d.
Malignancy
There is an increased incidence of malignancy among patients with
SLE. Evidence from two systematic reviews and one cohort study
showed association of malignancy with SLE:
• Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (SIR=4.39, 95% CI 3.46 to 5.49)95, level II-2
• leukaemia (SIR=1.75, 95% CI 1.04 to 2.76)95, level II-2
• lung cancer (RR=1.75, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.24)96, level II-2
• stomach cancer (RR=1.34, 95% CI 1.05 to 1.72)96, level II-2
• bladder cancer (HR=1.92, 95% CI 1.15 to 3.21)97, level II-2
In light of the increased risk, cancer screening should not be overlooked
in the management of SLE. However, there is no evidence that more
intense cancer screening than that applied in general population had
better outcomes for SLE patients. Therefore, routine cancer screening
should follow local recommendations for general population.21
• Surveillance for malignancy is essential as part of monitoring in
patients with SLE.
Recommendation 10
• Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should be
screened for the following:
 cardiovascular risk factors
 osteoporosis
• Infections in patients with SLE should be identified early and treated
accordingly.
9.4 Drug Adverse Events
Drugs used in the treatment of SLE may have potential AEs and require
regular monitoring.
In a large systematic review of different study designs, multiple toxicities
had been found to be associated with drugs used for the treatment of
SLE:98, level I
• corticosteroids -
 higher rate of hyperglycaemia or diabetes among patients
taking high dose corticosteroids compared with comparator drug
(OR=1.82, 95% CI 1.04 to 3.19)
• HCQ -
 the incidence of retinal toxicity was only 0.95/1000 patient-years
 majority of those with retinal toxicity were on HCQ for >5 years
and most used doses of >6.5 mg/kg
• AZA -
 incidence of leukopenia or anaemia was 5 - 20%
 abnormal LFTs requiring discontinuation of drug in 1 - 6%
• MTX -
 LFT abnormalities ranged at 10 - 50%
• CYC -
 incidence of leukopenia or anaemia was 5 - 10%
 increased incidence of cervical dysplasia in patients taking CYC
compared with corticosteroids alone
• MMF -
 incidence of haematological toxicity was 1.1 - 36.8%
• NSAIDs and salicylates -
 most powerful predictor of gastric mucosal injury (OR=26.8,
95%CI 4.9 to 148.6)
 reduced renal function by 58% and increased serum creatinine
by 163% in patients with active LN
 abnormal liver enzymes over 10-day period of use in 44.4% of
patients treated with aspirin and 20% of patients treated with
NSAIDs
Refer to Appendix 7 for Medication in SLE.
9.5 Frequency and Interval
A summary of current guidelines for laboratory monitoring as well as an
overview of laboratory abnormalities of each drug and recommendations
on frequency of monitoring are provided in the Appendix 7 and
Appendix 8.
A prospective cohort study on patients with inactive disease of SLE
showed that a clinic visit interval of 3.8 months was able to identify
silent manifestations of the disease.99, level II-2
Refer to Appendix 7 for the Medication in SLE.
10.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
10.1
Antiphospholipid Syndrome
APS is a condition characterised by the presence of aPL in the setting of
venous or arterial thrombosis and/or pregnancy morbidity (complication
or loss). Definite APS fulfilling at least one clinical and one laboratory
criteria of the Sapporo Classification Criteria can occur in association
with other autoimmune diseases mainly SLE (secondary APS) or in
its primary form (primary APS).100 Refer to Appendix 9 on Sapporo
Classification Criteria.
The aPL profile determines the risk of thrombotic and obstetric events.
The profile is defined according to:100
• aPL type
• presence of multiple (double or triple) vs single aPL
• titre (moderate to high vs low)
• persistence of aPL positivity
High-risk aPL profile refers to persistently positive medium/high titres
or multiple positivity.100 EULAR guidelines recommends that all patients
with SLE should be screened at diagnosis for aPL.23
In patients with SLE, 15 - 20% have secondary APS. Patients with
SLE who have aPL also have a higher prevalence of valve disease,
thrombocytopenia, haemolytic anaemia, renal lesions, cognitive
impairment as well as higher tissue and organ damage compared with
those without aPL.101 - 102, level III
The significant protective role of low dose aspirin (LDA) as primary
prophylaxis against thrombosis in patients with SLE who have aPL
was shown in a meta-analysis of five cohort studies (HR ranging
from 0.32 to 0.43 with adjustment of CV risk factor, aPL and HCQ
use).103, level II-2 Patients with SLE with high-risk aPL profile may
receive primary prophylaxis with antiplatelet agents, especially if other
atherosclerotic/thrombophilic factors are present, after considering the
risk of bleeding.23
There is no retrievable evidence exclusively on SLE with APS. Thus,
the management approach of patients with SLE who have APS
(secondary prevention) should follow guidelines for primary APS. Direct
oral anticoagulant (DOAC) for secondary prevention is not currently
recommended for patients with SLE who have APS.100 Management
of SLE with APS is beyond the scope of this CPG and thus should be
initiated in consultation with the rheumatologist.
Recommendation 11
• Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) who have
high-risk antiphospholipid antibody profile may receive primary
thromboprophylaxis with low dose aspirin if there are no
contraindications.
• Secondary thromboprophylaxis in patients with SLE who have
antiphospholipid syndrome should be initiated in consultation with a
rheumatologist.
10.2
Pregnancy
a.
Pre-pregnancy care and contraception
Pre-pregnancy care is the provision of biomedical, behavioural and
social health interventions to women and couples before conception. It
aims at improving their health status, as well as reducing morbidity and
mortality of both mother and child.
• It is important to ensure that patients with SLE who plan to get
pregnant achieve the following:104
 remission or low disease activity for ≥6 months
 well-controlled blood pressure
 eGFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2
 proteinuria <1 g/day (proteinuria 2+)
Counselling on contraception is important to patients with SLE who
have just started on medication. This is to ensure that patient is stable
on the pregnancy-compatible medication before conception.
A meta-analysis of six cohort studies showed that maternal adverse
pregnancy outcomes in SLE were pre-eclampsia, miscarriage,
foetal loss, risk of caesarean delivery and still birth while foetal
complication were pre-term birth, small for gestational age and low birth
weight.105, level II-2
Associated factors of adverse pregnancy outcomes in SLE are presence
of active disease, aPL positivity, abnormal uterine and umbilical artery
Doppler studies, low complement and thrombocytopenia at early
pregnancy.106 - 107, level II-2
A cross-sectional study among women with SLE found that a third of
them did not receive contraception counselling when they were started
on potentially teratogenic medications.108, level III Thus, it is crucial for
women with SLE especially those in reproductive age group to receive
a thorough pre-pregnancy counselling on contraception and combined
care of the rheumatologist and obstetrician once they are pregnant.
Oral contraceptive and intrauterine device (IUD) have no association
with thrombosis, worsening of SLEDAI score and mortality in patients
with SLE.15, level I; 109, level I Refer to Appendix 10 for the Types of
Contraception Recommended for Patients with SLE.
Recommendation 12
• All women with systemic lupus erythematosus in the reproductive
age should receive pre-pregnancy counselling.
b.
Antenatal care
The management principles for SLE during pregnancy are as follows:
• Obstetric Care: Standard pregnancy care protocols provided by
the obstetric team shall be followed.
• Rheumatological or Subspecialty Care: The rheumatologist
or a subspecialty team will co-manage any disease-related
complications and ensure optimal care for the patient.
• Combined Care: Effective communication and multidisciplinary
care among healthcare providers co-ordinated by family medicine
specialists are essential.
The management of pregnant women with SLE is tabulated below
(refer to Table 4).
Table 4: Management of Pregnant Women With SLE
• Blood pressure
• SLE clinical assessment
• Laboratory investigation*
• Foetal ultrasound to confirm
intrauterine pregnancy and
establish gestational age
First
trimester
• Start low dose aspirin
• Be vigilant for disease flares
• Review medication compatibility
and adherence
• Patients with obstetric-APS** - start
prophylactic LMWH
• Patients with thrombotic APS** -
switch from oral anticoagulants to
full dose LMWH
• For active SLE:
 medication adjustment
 MDT discussion and shared
decision-making
for continuation of pregnancy in
certain situations
• Schedule for combined care
• Blood pressure
• SLE clinical assessment
• Laboratory investigations*
with assessment for
gestational diabetes and
genetic screening
(if applicable)
• Foetal echocardiogram
between 16 - 25 weeks of
Second
trimester
• Be vigilant for disease flares
• Review medication adherence
• Calcium supplementation for
pre-eclampsia prophylaxis if not
started previously. The recommended
dose is calcium carbonate 1 g BD
commenced before 20 weeks
gestation.
• congenital heart block,
Timeline
Monitoring
Action Plan
Notes:
*Laboratory investigations to be included: full blood count (FBC), renal profile (RP),
liver function test (LFT), urinalysis and morning urine protein to creatinine ratio
(UPCR), anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies, complement levels (C3
and C4), serum uric acid.
**Refer to Appendix 9 for Sapporo Classification Criteria
***Refer to Appendix 10 for Types of Contraception Recommended for Patients
With SLE
Abbreviations: APS = antiphospholipid syndrome; BD = twice daily; HCQ =
hydroxychloroquine; g = gram; LMWH = low molecular weight heparin; MDT =
multidisciplinary team; NSAIDS = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; SLE =
systemic lupus erythematosus
Adapted from: Dao KH, Bermas BL. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Management in
Pregnancy. Int J Womens Health. 2022;14:199-211.
•
Medication
Medications in SLE patients with pregnancy should be adjusted and
reviewed accordingly even prior to conception. The goal of treatment is
to prevent SLE flare and ensure the best safety profile during pregnancy.
HCQ use in pregnancy is safe and effective in SLE. A systematic
review and an RCT support its use in reducing disease activity and
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Pregnancy Disease Activity Index
(SLEPDAI) score.110, level I; 111, level II-2 One meta-analysis and two cohort
• Blood pressure
• SLE clinical assessment
• Laboratory investigations*
• Regular ultrasound to
evaluate foetal growth,
adequacy of amniotic fluid
and placental insufficiency
Third
trimester
• Be vigilant for disease flares
• Review medication adherence
• Review preparations for labour and
delivery
• Avoid NSAIDs
• Blood pressure
• SLE clinical assessment
• Laboratory investigations*
Postpartum and
lactation
• Be vigilant for disease flares
• For APS - continue LMWH for
6 weeks
• Switch to lactation compatible
medications if breastfeeding is
desired
• For prednisolone ≥40 mg/day,
delay breastfeeding at least four
hours after consumption
• Refer neonate to paediatrician to
rule out neonatal lupus
• Advise regarding contraception***
gestation for mothers with
positive anti-Ro/SSA or
anti-La/SSB by feto-maternal
specialist
• Ultrasound to evaluate foetal
anatomy, foetal growth and
placental insufficiency
co-management with feto-maternal
specialist is required
studies also showed no significant association of HCQ use and foetal
loss, pre-term delivery and pre-eclampsia.111, level II-2; 112, level II-2; 113, level II-2
Corticosteroids is also the cornerstone treatment in pregnancy.
However, its dose should be reduced to lowest effective dose prior
to conception to ensure its safety in pregnancy. In a meta-analysis of
overall good quality primary studies, the use of corticosteroids >7.5 mg/
day was associated with risk of pre-term delivery, small gestational age
and foetal loss.114, level II-2 Nevertheless, CPG DG opines that for mild
to moderate SLE flare, a dose increment may be considered but then
tapered accordingly.
HCQ, AZA, CNIs and low dose corticosteroids are safe to be used
throughout pregnancy as recommended by guidelines.46
ACR recommends the initiation of LDA in SLE patients at the beginning
of first trimester in order to preclude or delay the onset of gestational
hypertension in pregnancy.46 LDA is also safe in pregnancy as it shows
no significant foetal outcomes e.g. small gestational age, intrauterine
growth restriction or preterm delivery in patients taking LDA compared
with those without LDA.115, level II-2
Refer to Appendix 7 for use of SLE medication in pregnancy and
lactation.
• The CPG DG opines that all SLE patients who are pregnant especially
those with positive aPL should be referred to the rheumatologist at
antenatal booking.
• All pregnant SLE patients should be under combined care of
rheumatologist/physician, feto-maternal specialist/obstetrician and
family medicine specialist.
• Calcium supplementation is essential in pregnant SLE patients for
pre-eclampsia prophylaxis.
Recommendation 13
• The following medications should be continued in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) with pregnancy:
 hydroxychloroquine
 azathioprine
 calcineurin inhibitors
 low dose corticosteroids
• Low dose aspirin should be initiated in all pregnant SLE patients
unless intolerance or contraindicated.
10.3 Lactation
Breastfeeding is encouraged and not contraindicated in patients with
SLE as long as the disease control can be maintained with medication
compatible with lactation. Refer to Appendix 7 on Medication in SLE
for medication compatible with lactation.
10.4 Adolescents
SLE is diagnosed during childhood in 15 to 20% of patients.116, level III
A co-ordinated transition from paediatric to adult care providers starting
during adolescence has been recommended to ensure the patients’
physical, psychosocial, educational and vocational needs are met.117
Two observational studies showed that a structured transition
programme or clinic was important to improve long-term outcomes.
In a cross-sectional study on childhood-onset SLE, patients who
experienced difficulty during transition compared with those without
difficulty were more likely to report ‘poor overall control’ of symptoms
(p=0.03) and involvement of multiple organ systems (p=0.05). Patients
who were directly referred to an adult physician by a paediatric
rheumatologist rather than self-referred reported ‘well controlled’
overall symptoms (p=0.01) and lower hospitalisation (p=0.04).118, level
III Another single-centre, pre-post study on childhood-onset SLE cohort
with no formal transition programme showed that 72% were lost to
follow-up.119, level II-3
Two programmes described in a systematic review of transitional
care in rheumatology showed improvements in the following
outcomes:120, level II-3
• health-related quality of life, arthritis-related knowledge and
satisfaction with rheumatic care in adolescents and parents
• vocational readiness
• physical, psychosocial and disease-specific health status
Young people with rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases which
include SLE should have access to co-ordinated transitional care,
delivered through partnership with healthcare professionals. The
transition process should start as early as possible.117
Recommendation 14
• A structured transition programme may be implemented to facilitate
transfer of care from paediatric to adult health care providers
during adolescence in patients with childhood-onset systemic lupus
erythematosus.
10.5 Vaccination
Vaccination is an important strategy in patients with SLE as they are
susceptible to infection due to the disease itself, immunosuppressive
therapy and presence of co-morbidities. EULAR recommends annual
assessment of vaccination status of patients with autoimmune
inflammatory rheumatic diseases and administration of vaccines
during quiescent disease.121
The evidence for effectiveness based on immunogenicity and safety
for vaccines in SLE patients are provided in the table below (refer to
Table 5).
Table 5: Effectiveness and safety of vaccines in SLE patients
Vaccine
Effectiveness
Non-live vaccines
Safety
Pneumococcal
122, level I
A systematic review noted increase
of IgM antibody titre in patients with
SLE vs controls.
Immunosuppressive therapy (except
belimumab) resulted in lower
seroconversion rates (43 - 77% in
patients on immunosuppression vs
52 - 90% in those without
immunosuppression).
No serious AEs were noted
while SLE flares were rarely
reported.
Disease activity scores
remained stable before and
after immunisation.
Influenza
123, level II-2
A meta-analysis showed moderate
immunogenicity in SLE patients vs
healthy controls.
A meta-analysis showed
moderate immunogenicity
in SLE patients vs healthy
controls.
Human
Papillomavirus
(HPV)
One cohort study126, level II-2 and one
pre-post study127, level II-3 showed that
the vaccine was generally
immunogenic:
Mild vaccine site reactions
occurred in 62% of patients.
No SLE flares were
reported.127, level II-3
Severe Acute
Respiratory
Syndrome
Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2)
A systematic review with metaanalysis of patients with immune
mediated inflammatory diseases
including SLE patients found that
seroconversion rates were:124, level III
• higher after a two-dose regimen vs
single dose of messenger RNA
(mRNA) vaccine
• lower than healthy controls
• lower among those exposed to
anti-CD20 therapy vs other
immunosuppressants
Humoral response was similar to
general population after the third
dose.125, level II-2
A cohort study showed that
SLE disease activity was
not affected. Vaccinebreakthrough infections,
mainly with Omicron variant,
were mild and did not require
hospitalisation.125, level II-2
• Pneumococcal, influenza, SARS-CoV-2 and HPV vaccines are
advisable to be given to patients with SLE.
• HZ vaccine is potentially beneficial in patients with SLE.
Recommendation 15
• Vaccination status and indications for further vaccinations of patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) should be assessed yearly.
• Vaccinations
should
preferably
be
administered
prior
to
commencement of immunosuppressants or during remission/low
disease activity of SLE.
• seroconversion was 100% for those
seronegative at baseline127, level II-3
• high rate of immunogenicity was
retained at five years in stable
patients126, level II-2
Live vaccines
Herpes Zoster
(HZ)128, level I
The vaccine induces humoral and
cell-mediated response in stable
SLE patients not receiving intensive
immunosuppressive therapies.
Safe and well-tolerated in
stable patients not
receiving intensive
immunosuppression. No
differences noted in AEs
except for injection site
reactions in vaccinetreated patients vs those
on placebo. Low number
of SLE flares were noted in
both groups.
11.
REFERRAL
Timely referral to or consultation with rheumatologists is of utmost
importance for confirmation of diagnosis and early initiation of
treatment for SLE. Even though rheumatologists are the specialists who
primarily care for patients with SLE, co-management with specialists
in other disciplines (e.g. primary care physicians, nephrologists and
haematologists) is equally important.
Indications for referral to rheumatologist includes to confirm diagnosis,
assess disease activity and severity, provide general disease
management, manage organ involvement or life-threatening disease
and manage/prevent treatment toxicities. Other specific circumstances
that require referral include APS, pregnancy and perioperative
management.129, level III
For moderate to severe organ involvement, patients with SLE will
require multidisciplinary care involving various subspecialties.
Indications for urgent referral are as listed below:
• for patients not diagnosed with SLE yet -
 clinical suspicion of SLE with major or multisystem organ
involvement
• for patients diagnosed with SLE -
 disease flare of major organ or multisystem organ involvement
 pregnancy (at booking)
 severe infection
Recommendation 16
• All cases with clinical suspicion of systemic lupus erythematosus
should be promptly referred to rheumatologists for confirmation of
the diagnosis and further management.
12.
IMPLEMENTING THE GUIDELINES
Implementation of this CPG is important as it helps in providing quality
healthcare services based on the best and most recent available
evidence applied to local scenario and expertise. Various factors and
resource implications should be considered for the success of the
uptake in the CPG recommendations.
12.1 Facilitating and Limiting Factors
The facilitating factors in implementing the CPG are:
i)
availability of CPG to healthcare providers (hardcopies and
softcopies)
ii)
conferences and updates on management of SLE including
those involving professional bodies (e.g. Malaysian Society of
Rheumatology)
iii) Key Performance Indicator on Rheumatology Services monitored
by MoH (i.e. number of newly presented SLE patients prescribed
HCQ in the Rheumatology Outpatient Clinic)
iv) public awareness campaigns on SLE (e.g. World Lupus Day in
collaboration with Malaysian SLE Association)
Limiting factors in the CPG implementation include:
i)
different levels of care and wide variation in practice due to
expertise, facilities and financial constraints
ii)
limited awareness and knowledge in management of SLE among
healthcare providers
iii) lack of awareness of the disease and its management by the public
iv) no local SLE registry
12.2 Potential Resource Implications
Early diagnosis of SLE may be difficult to establish as the presentations
are non-specific and it is even more challenging with the presence of
SLE mimickers. Besides that, the supporting relevant investigations
may not be easily accessible in the public primary care especially in
remote areas. The confirmation of the diagnosis and its assessment
requires the specialists’ expert opinion especially the rheumatologists,
where the service is limited nationwide. Thus, this CPG serves as a
guide for early disease recognition and referral. There is a compelling
need to increase awareness and knowledge on the evidence-based
management of SLE by ensuring widespread distribution of the CPG
and reinforcing related training to the healthcare providers.
Treatment of SLE can be a daunting task particularly in patients with
severe disease and co-morbidities. The assessment of disease severity
of SLE is thus important in deciding the best management approach as
inadequate treatment may lead to significant morbidity and mortality.
Heterogeneity of disease manifestation warrants MDT involvement.
Based on the recommendations in the CPG, the need for specialised
care and certain expensive medications has resource implications that
need to be addressed in the management of SLE.
In line with the key recommendations in this CPG, the following is
proposed as clinical audit indicator for quality management of SLE:
*Target of 90%
Implementation strategies will be developed following the approval of
the CPG by MoH which include Quick Reference and Training Module.
Percentage
of newly
diagnosed
SLE patients
prescribed
HCQ*
=
X 100%
Total number of newly diagnosed SLE
patients in the same period
Number of newly diagnosed SLE patients
prescribed HCQ in a period
REFERENCES
1.
Urowitz MB, Gladman DD, Tom BD, et al. Changing patterns in mortality and
disease outcomes for patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol.
2008;35(11):2152-2158.
2.
Jakes RW, Bae SC, Louthrenoo W, et al. Systematic review of the epidemiology of
systemic lupus erythematosus in the Asia-Pacific region: prevalence, incidence,
clinical features, and mortality. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2012;64(2):159168.
3.
Teh CL, Ling GR. Causes and predictors of mortality in hospitalized lupus patient
in Sarawak General Hospital, Malaysia. Lupus. 2013;22(1):106-111.
4.
van Vollenhoven RF, Mosca M, Bertsias G, et al. Treat-to-target in systemic
lupus erythematosus: recommendations from an international task force. Ann
Rheum Dis. 2014;73(6):958-967.
5.
Mok CC, Hamijoyo L, Kasitanon N, et al. The Asia-Pacific League of Associations
for Rheumatology consensus statements on the management of systemic lupus
erythematosus. Lancet Rheumatol. 2021;3(7):e517-e531.
6.
Malaysian SLE Association. What is SLE? Malaysian SLE Association; 2023.
[Available at: https://lupusmalaysia.org/what-is-sle/]
7.
Kuo CF, Grainge MJ, Valdes AM, et al. Familial Aggregation of Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus and Coaggregation of Autoimmune Diseases in Affected
Families. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(9):1518-1526.
8.
Selvaraja M, Too CL, Tan LK, et al. Human leucocyte antigens profiling in
Malay female patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: are we the same or
different? Lupus Sci Med. 2022;9(1):e000554.
9.
Selvaraja M, Chin VK, Abdullah M, et al. HLA-DRB1(*)04 as a Risk Allele to
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and Lupus Nephritis in the Malay Population of
Malaysia. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021;7:598665.
10. Charoenngam N, Ponvilawan B, Wongtrakul W, et al. Patients with asthma have
a higher risk of systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Clin Rheumatol. 2021;40(2):529-536.
11. Hsiao YP, Tsai JD, Muo CH, et al. Atopic diseases and systemic lupus
erythematosus: an epidemiological study of the risks and correlations. Int J
Environ Res Public Health. 2014;11(8):8112-8122.
12. Parisis D, Bernier C, Chasset F, et al. Impact of tobacco smoking upon disease
risk, activity and therapeutic response in systemic lupus erythematosus: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Autoimmun Rev. 2019;18(11):102393.
13. Morotti A, Sollaku I, Catalani S, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of
epidemiological studies on the association of occupational exposure to free
crystalline silica and systemic lupus erythematosus. Rheumatology (Oxford).
2020;60(1):81-91.
14. Finckh A, Cooper GS, Chibnik LB, et al. Occupational silica and solvent
exposures and risk of systemic lupus erythematosus in urban women. Arthritis
Rheum. 2006;54(11):3648-3654.
15. Rojas-Villarraga A, Torres-Gonzalez JV, Ruiz-Sternberg AM. Safety of hormonal
replacement therapy and oral contraceptives in systemic lupus erythematosus: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e104303.
16. Nightingale AL, Davidson JE, Molta CT, et al. Presentation of SLE in UK
primary care using the Clinical Practice Research Datalink. Lupus Sci Med.
2017;4(1):e000172.
17. Voulgarelis M, Kokori SI, Ioannidis JP, et al. Anaemia in systemic lupus
erythematosus: aetiological profile and the role of erythropoietin. Ann Rheum
Dis. 2000;59(3):217-222.
18. Hahn BH, McMahon MA, Wilkinson A, et al. American College of Rheumatology
guidelines for screening, treatment, and management of lupus nephritis. Arthritis
Care Res (Hoboken). 2012;64(6):797-808.
19. Huang D, Aghdassi E, Su J, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for liver biochemical
abnormalities in Canadian patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J
Rheumatol. 2012;39(2):254-261.
20. Yip J, Aghdassi E, Su J, et al. Serum albumin as a marker for disease activity
in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol. 2010;37(8):16671672.
21. Gordon C, Amissah-Arthur MB, Gayed M, et al. The British Society for
Rheumatology guideline for the management of systemic lupus erythematosus
in adults. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018;57(1):e1-e45.
22. American College of Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Immunologic Testing
Guidelines. Guidelines for Immunologic Laboratory Testing in the Rheumatic
Diseases: An Introduction. Arthritis Rheum. 2002;47(4):429-433.
23. Aringer M, Costenbader K, Daikh D, et al. 2019 European League Against
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology Classification Criteria for
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2019;71(9):1400-1412.
24. Pisetsky DS. Anti-DNA antibodies--quintessential biomarkers of SLE. Nat Rev
Rheumatol. 2016;12(2):102-110.
25. Irure-Ventura J, Lopez-Hoyos M. Disease criteria of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE); the potential role of non-criteria autoantibodies. J Transl
Autoimmun. 2022;5:100143.
26. Huang C, Li M, Liu Y, et al. Baseline Characteristics and Risk Factors of
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(10):e2761.
27. Tarr T, Lakos G, Bhattoa HP, et al. Analysis of risk factors for the development
of thrombotic complications in antiphospholipid antibody positive lupus patients.
Lupus. 2007;16(1):39-45.
28. Petri M. Epidemiology of the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. J Autoimmun.
2000;15(2):145-151.
29. Petri M, Orbai AM, Alarcon GS, et al. Derivation and validation of the Systemic
Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification criteria for systemic lupus
erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64(8):2677-2686.
30. Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, et al. International consensus statement on
an update of the classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome
(APS). J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4(2):295-306.
31. Mannes M, Schmidt CQ, Nilsson B, et al. Complement as driver of systemic
inflammation and organ failure in trauma, burn, and sepsis. Semin Immunopathol.
2021;43(6):773-788.
32. Lintner KE, Wu YL, Yang Y, et al. Early Components of the Complement
Classical Activation Pathway in Human Systemic Autoimmune Diseases. Front
Immunol. 2016;7:36.
33. Kuhn A, Bonsmann G, Anders HJ, et al. The Diagnosis and Treatment of
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2015;112(25):423-432.
34. Tan EM, Cohen AS, Fries JF, et al. The 1982 revised criteria for the classification
of systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 1982;25(11):1271-1277.
35. Hochberg MC. Updating the American College of Rheumatology revised
criteria for the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum.
1997;40(9):1725.
36. Inês L, Silva C, Galindo M, et al. Classification of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus:
Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics Versus American College of
Rheumatology Criteria. A Comparative Study of 2,055 Patients From a RealLife, International Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Cohort. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2015;67(8):1180-1185.
37. Selvananda S, Kan SL. Performance of the 2019 European League Against
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for
systemic lupus erythematosus in a multiethnic Malaysian cohort. Int J Rheum
Dis. 2021;25(2):131-139.
38. Ruperto N, Hanrahan LM, Alarcón GS, et al. International consensus for a
definition of disease flare in lupus. Lupus. 2011;20(5):453-462.
39. Petri M, Kim MY, Kalunian KC, et al. Combined oral contraceptives in women
with systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(24):2550-2558.
40. Gladman DD, Ibañez D, Urowitz MB. Systemic lupus erythematosus disease
activity index 2000. J Rheumatol. 2002;29(2):288-291.
41. van Vollenhoven RF, Bertsias G, Doria A, et al. 2021 DORIS definition of
remission in SLE: final recommendations from an international task force. Lupus
Sci Med. 2021;8(1):e000538.
42. Franklyn K, Lau CS, Navarra SV, et al. Definition and initial validation of a Lupus
Low Disease Activity State (LLDAS). Ann Rheum Dis. 2015;75(9):1615-1621.
43. Adamichou C, Bertsias G. Flares in systemic lupus erythematosus: diagnosis,
risk factors and preventive strategies. Mediterr J Rheumatol. 2017;28(1):4-12.
44. Szczęch J, Samotij D, Werth VP, et al. Trigger factors of cutaneous lupus
erythematosus: a review of current literature. Lupus. 2017;26(8):791-807.
45. Barbhaiya M, Costenbader KH. Ultraviolet radiation and systemic lupus
erythematosus. Lupus. 2014;23(6):588-595.
46. Sammaritano LR, Bermas BL, Chakravarty EE, et al. 2020 American College
of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Reproductive Health in
Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Diseases. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020;72(4):529556.
47. Keeling SO, Vandermeer B, Medina J, et al. Measuring Disease Activity and
Damage with Validated Metrics: A Systematic Review on Mortality and Damage
in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. J Rheumatol. 2018;45(10):1448-1461.
48. Murimi-Worstell IB, Lin DH, Nab H, et al. Association between organ damage
and mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ Open. 2020;10(5):e031850.
49. Campar A, Farinha F, Vasconcelos C. Refractory disease in systemic lupus
erythematosus. Autoimmun Rev. 2011;10(11):685-692.
50. Fanouriakis A, Kostopoulou M, Alunno A, et al. 2019 update of the EULAR
recommendations for the management of systemic lupus erythematosus. Ann
Rheum Dis. 2019;78(6):736-745.
51. Fairley JL, Oon S, Saracino AM, et al. Management of cutaneous manifestations
of lupus erythematosus: A systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum.
2019;50(1):95-127.
52. Xie X, Song Y, Yang H, et al. Effects of transitional care on self-care, readmission
rates, and quality of life in adult patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a
randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Res Ther. 2018;20(1):184.
53. Fangtham M, Kasturi S, Bannuru RR, et al. Non-pharmacologic therapies for
systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus. 2019;28(6):703-712.
54. Frade S, O’Neill S, Greene D, et al. Exercise as adjunctive therapy for systemic
lupus erythematosus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023;4(4):CD014816.
55. Ratanasiripong NT, Cahill S, Crane C, et al. The Outcomes of an e-Wellness
Program for Lupus Patients in Thailand: A Participatory Action Research
Approach. J Prev Med Public Health. 2023;56(2):154-163.
56. Mosca M, Tani C, Carli L, et al. Glucocorticoids in systemic lupus erythematosus.
Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011;29(5 Suppl 68):S126-S129.
57. Chen HL, Shen LJ, Hsu PN, et al. Cumulative Burden of Glucocorticoid-related
Adverse Events in Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Findings from
a 12-year Longitudinal Study. J Rheumatol. 2018;45(1):83-89.
58. Sciascia S, Mompean E, Radin M, et al. Rate of Adverse Effects of Medium-
to High-Dose Glucocorticoid Therapy in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus:
A Systematic Review of Randomized Control Trials. Clin Drug Investig.
2017;37(6):519-524.
59. Al Sawah S, Zhang X, Zhu B, et al. Effect of corticosteroid use by dose on the
risk of developing organ damage over time in systemic lupus erythematosus-the
Hopkins Lupus Cohort. Lupus Sci Med. 2015;2(1):e000066.
60. Ruiz-Irastorza G, Ramos-Casals M, Brito-Zeron P, et al. Clinical efficacy and
side effects of antimalarials in systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic
review. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69(1):20-28.
61. Hill DD, Eudy AM, Egger PJ, et al. Impact of systemic lupus erythematosus
disease activity, hydroxychloroquine and NSAID on the risk of subsequent organ
system damage and death: analysis in a single US medical centre. Lupus Sci
Med. 2021;8(1):e000446.
62. Wakiya R, Kameda T, Nakashima S, et al. Efficacy and Safety of
Hydroxychloroquine Therapy for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients
Depend on Administration Dose. Intern Med. 2020;59(17):2105-2112.
63. Garg S, Unnithan R, Hansen KE, et al. Clinical Significance of Monitoring
Hydroxychloroquine Levels in Patients With Systemic Lupus Erythematosus:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2021;73(5):707-716.
64. Almeida-Brasil CC, Hanly JG, Urowitz M, et al. Retinal toxicity in a multinational
inception cohort of patients with systemic lupus on hydroxychloroquine. Lupus
Sci Med. 2022;9(1):1-6.
65. Marmor MF, Kellner U, Lai TY, et al. Recommendations on Screening
for Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine Retinopathy (2016 Revision).
Ophthalmology. 2016;123(6):1386-1394.
66. Mukwikwi ER, Pineau CA, Vinet E, et al. Retinal Complications in Patients with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Treated with Antimalarial Drugs. J Rheumatol.
2020;47(4):553-556.
67. Li M, Zhao Y, Zhang Z, et al. 2020 Chinese Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
Treatment of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Rheumatol Immunol Res.
2020;1(1):5-23.
68. Pego-Reigosa JM, Cobo-Ibanez T, Calvo-Alen J, et al. Efficacy and safety
of nonbiologic immunosuppressants in the treatment of nonrenal systemic
lupus erythematosus: a systematic review. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2013;65(11):1775-1785.
69. Miyawaki S, Nishiyama S, Aita T, et al. The effect of methotrexate on improving
serological abnormalities of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Mod
Rheumatol. 2013;23(4):659-666.
70. Fernandes Moca Trevisani V, Castro AA, Ferreira Neves Neto J, et al.
Cyclophosphamide versus methylprednisolone for treating neuropsychiatric
involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2013;2013(2):CD002265.
71. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Prescribing Information: BENLYSTA
(belimumab). Rockville, MD: USFDA; 2020.
72. Singh JA, Shah NP, Mudano AS. Belimumab for systemic lupus erythematosus.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;2(2):CD010668.
73. Kaegi C, Steiner UC, Wuest B, et al. Systematic review of safety and efficacy of
belimumab in treating immune-mediated disorders. Allergy. 2021;76(9):2673-2683.
74. Morand EF, Furie R, Tanaka Y, et al. Trial of Anifrolumab in Active Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(3):211-221.
75. Merrill JT, Neuwelt CM, Wallace DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab in
moderately-to-severely active systemic lupus erythematosus: the randomized,
double-blind, phase II/III systemic lupus erythematosus evaluation of rituximab
trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2010;62(1):222-233.
76. Cobo-Ibanez T, Loza-Santamaria E, Pego-Reigosa JM, et al. Efficacy and
safety of rituximab in the treatment of non-renal systemic lupus erythematosus:
a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2014;44(2):175-185.
77. Li QY, Yu F, Zhou FD, et al. Plasmapheresis Is Associated With Better Renal
Outcomes in Lupus Nephritis Patients With Thrombotic Microangiopathy: A
Case Series Study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(18):e3595.
78. Soyuoz A, Karadag O, Karaagac T, et al. Therapeutic plasma exchange for
refractory SLE: A comparison of outcomes between different sub-phenotypes.
Eur J Rheumatol. 2018;5(1):32-36.
79. Monova D, Monov S. Treatment of active lupus nephritis: intravenous
immunoglobulin G versus cyclophosphamide or azathioprine. BANTAO J.
2006;4(2):13.
80. Mulhearn B, Bruce IN. Indications for IVIG in rheumatic diseases. Rheumatology
(Oxford). 2015;54(3):383-391.
81. Guo Y, Tian X, Wang X, et al. Adverse Effects of Immunoglobulin Therapy. Front
Immunol. 2018;9:1299.
82. Weening JJ, D’Agati VD, Schwartz MM, et al. The classification of
glomerulonephritis in systemic lupus erythematosus revisited. Kidney Int.
2004;65(2):521-530.
83. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. 2nd ed.
Putrajaya: MOH 2018.
84. Rovin BH, Furie R, Latinis K, et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab in patients
with active proliferative lupus nephritis: the Lupus Nephritis Assessment with
Rituximab study. Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64(4):1215-1226.
85. Furie R, Rovin BH, Houssiau F, et al. Two-Year, Randomized, Controlled Trial of
Belimumab in Lupus Nephritis. N Engl J Med. 2020;383(12):1117-1128.
86. Hannon CW, McCourt C, Lima HC, et al. Interventions for cutaneous
disease in systemic lupus erythematosus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2021;3(3):CD007478.
87. Thomas G, Cohen Aubart F, Chiche L, et al. Lupus Myocarditis: Initial
Presentation and Longterm Outcomes in a Multicentric Series of 29 Patients. J
Rheumatol. 2017;44(1):24-32.
88. Mosca M, Tani C, Aringer M, et al. European League Against Rheumatism
recommendations for monitoring patients with systemic lupus erythematosus in
clinical practice and in observational studies. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69(7):12691274.
89. Bertsias G, Ioannidis JP, Boletis J, et al. EULAR recommendations for the
management of systemic lupus erythematosus. Report of a Task Force of
the EULAR Standing Committee for International Clinical Studies Including
Therapeutics. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008;67(2):195-205.
90. Chen D, Xie J, Chen H, et al. Infection in Southern Chinese Patients with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Spectrum, Drug Resistance, Outcomes, and
Risk Factors. J Rheumatol. 2016;43(9):1650-1656.
91. Wu Q, Liu Y, Wang W, et al. Incidence and prevalence of tuberculosis in
systemic lupus erythematosus patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Front Immunol. 2022;13:938406.
92. Kim HA, Jeon JY, An JM, et al. C-reactive protein is a more sensitive and specific
marker for diagnosing bacterial infections in systemic lupus erythematosus
compared to S100A8/A9 and procalcitonin. J Rheumatol. 2012;39(4):728-734.
93. Jung JY, Choi ST, Park SH, et al. Prevalence of osteoporosis in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus: A multicenter comparative study of the World
Health Organization and fracture risk assessment tool criteria. Osteoporos
Sarcopenia. 2020;6(4):173-178.
94. Ballocca F, D’Ascenzo F, Moretti C, et al. Predictors of cardiovascular events
in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2015;22(11):1435-1441.
95. Bernatsky S, Ramsey-Goldman R, Labrecque J, et al. Cancer risk in systemic
lupus: an updated international multi-centre cohort study. J Autoimmun.
2013;42:130-135.
96. Clarke AE, Pooley N, Marjenberg Z, et al. Risk of malignancy in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Semin
Arthritis Rheum. 2021;51(6):1230-1241.
97. Yeo J, Seo MS, Hwang IC, et al. An Updated Meta-analysis on the Risk of
Urologic Cancer in Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Arch Iran Med.
2020;23(9):614-620.
98. Schmajuk G, Yazdany J. Drug monitoring in systemic lupus erythematosus: a
systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2011;40(6):559-575.
99. Gladman DD, Ibanez D, Ruiz I, et al. Recommendations for frequency of visits to
monitor systemic lupus erythematosus in asymptomatic patients: data from an
observational cohort study. J Rheumatol. 2013;40(5):630-633.
100. Tektonidou MG, Andreoli L, Limper M, et al. EULAR recommendations for
the management of antiphospholipid syndrome in adults. Ann Rheum Dis.
2019;78(10):1296-1304.
101. Unlu O, Zuily S, Erkan D. The clinical significance of antiphospholipid antibodies
in systemic lupus erythematosus. Eur J Rheumatol. 2016;3(2):75-84.
102. Cervera R, Piette JC, Font J, et al. Antiphospholipid syndrome: clinical and
immunologic manifestations and patterns of disease expression in a cohort of
1,000 patients. Arthritis Rheum. 2002;46(4):1019-1027.
103. Arnaud L, Mathian A, Devilliers H, et al. Patient-level analysis of five international
cohorts further confirms the efficacy of aspirin for the primary prevention of
thrombosis in patients with antiphospholipid antibodies. Autoimmun Rev.
2015;14(3):192-200.
104. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Perinatal Care Manual. 4th ed. Putrajaya: MOH;
2021.
105. He WR, Wei H. Maternal and fetal complications associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus: An updated meta-analysis of the most recent studies (20172019). Medicine (Baltimore). 2020;99(16):e19797.
106. McDonald EG, Bissonette L, Ensworth S, et al. Monitoring of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus Pregnancies: A Systematic Literature Review. J Rheumatol.
2018;45(10):1477-1490.
107. Shaharir SS, Maulana SA, Shahril NS, et al. Adverse pregnancy outcomes
among multi-ethnic systemic lupus erythematosus patients in Malaysia. Lupus.
2020;29(10):1305-1313.
108. Ferguson S, Trupin L, Yazdany J, et al. Who receives contraception counseling
when starting new lupus medications? The potential roles of race, ethnicity,
disease activity, and quality of communication. Lupus. 2016;25(1):12-17.
109. Sánchez-Guerrero J, Uribe AG, Jiménez-Santana L, et al. A trial of contraceptive
methods in women with systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med.
2005;353(24):2539-2549.
110. Levy RA, Vilela VS, Cataldo MJ, et al. Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) in lupus
pregnancy: double-blind and placebo-controlled study. Lupus. 2001;10(6):401404.
111. Clowse MEB, Eudy AM, Balevic S, et al. Hydroxychloroquine in the pregnancies
of women with lupus: a meta-analysis of individual participant data. Lupus Sci
Med. 2022;9(1):e000651.
112. Do SC, Rizk NM, Druzin ML, et al. Does Hydroxychloroquine Protect against
Preeclampsia and Preterm Delivery in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Pregnancies? Am J Perinatol. 2020;37(9):873-880.
113. Seo MR, Chae J, Kim YM, et al. Hydroxychloroquine treatment during
pregnancy in lupus patients is associated with lower risk of preeclampsia. Lupus.
2019;28(6):722-730.
114. Thaha M, Alsagaff MY, Dwi Suryantoro S, et al. High-dose vs low-dose steroid
in pregnancy patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. F1000Research. 2022;11:1-16.
115. Tani C, Zucchi D, Haase I, et al. Impact of low-dose acetylsalicylic acid on
pregnancy outcome in systemic lupus erythematosus: results from a multicentre
study. Lupus Sci Med. 2022;9(1):e000714.
116. Klein-Gittelman M, Lane JC, Lane J. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. In: Petty
R, Laxer R, Lindsley C, Wedderburn L, Cassidy J, editors. Textbook of pediatric
rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016.
117. Foster HE, Minden K, Clemente D, et al. EULAR/PReS standards and
recommendations for the transitional care of young people with juvenile-onset
rheumatic diseases. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017;76(4):639-646.
118. Felsenstein S, Reiff AO, Ramanathan A. Transition of Care and Health-Related
Outcomes in Pediatric-Onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2015;67(11):1521-1528.
119. Son MB, Sergeyenko Y, Guan H, et al. Disease activity and transition
outcomes in a childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus cohort. Lupus.
2016;25(13):1431-1439.
120. Clemente D, Leon L, Foster H, et al. Systematic review and critical appraisal
of transitional care programmes in rheumatology. Semin Arthritis Rheum.
2016;46(3):372-379.
121. Furer V, Rondaan C, Heijstek MW, et al. 2019 update of EULAR recommendations
for vaccination in adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic
diseases. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020;79(1):39-52.
122. Adawi M, Bragazzi NL, McGonagle D, et al. Immunogenicity, safety and
tolerability of anti-pneumococcal vaccination in systemic lupus erythematosus
patients: An evidence-informed and PRISMA compliant systematic review and
meta-analysis. Autoimmun Rev. 2019;18(1):73-92.
123. Liao Z, Tang H, Xu X, et al. Immunogenicity and Safety of Influenza Vaccination
in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients Compared with Healthy Controls: A
Meta-Analysis. PLoS One. 2016;11(2):e0147856.
124. Jena A, Mishra S, Deepak P, et al. Response to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in
immune mediated inflammatory diseases: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Autoimmun Rev. 2022;21(1):102927.
125. Larsen ES, Nilsson AC, Möller S, et al. Immunogenicity and risk of disease
flare after a three-dose regimen with SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus: results from the prospective cohort study
COVAC-SLE. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2023;41(3):676-684.
126. Mok CC, Ho LY, To CH. Long-term immunogenicity of a quadrivalent
human papillomavirus vaccine in systemic lupus erythematosus. Vaccine.
2018;36(23):3301-3307.
127. Dhar JP, Essenmacher L, Dhar R, et al. The safety and immunogenicity of
Quadrivalent HPV (qHPV) vaccine in systemic lupus erythematosus. Vaccine.
2017;35(20):2642-2646.
128. Mok CC, Chan KH, Ho LY, et al. Safety and immune response of a liveattenuated herpes zoster vaccine in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus:
a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis. 2019;78(12):1663-1668.
129. American College of Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus Guidelines. Guidelines for Referral and Management of Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus in Adults. . Arthritis Rheum. 1999;42(9):1785-1796.
Appendix 1
EXAMPLE OF SEARCH STRATEGY
Clinical Question: What are the safe and effective pharmacological
treatments in SLE?
•
Hydroxychloroquine
1.
LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS, SYSTEMIC/
2.
(systemic adj2 lupus erythematosus*).tw.
3.
sle.tw.
4.
1 or 2 or 3
5.
HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE/
6.
hydroxychloroquine.tw.
7.
hydroxychloroquine sulfate.tw.
8.
oxychloroquine.tw.
9.
plaquenil.tw.
10. 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9
11.
4 and 10
12. limit 11 to (english language and humans and yr=”2009 -Current”)
13. limit 12 to “systematic review”
Appendix 2
CLINICAL QUESTIONS
1. Diagnosis and assessment
• What are the risk factors for SLE?
• What are the accurate investigations to diagnose and assess
SLE?
• What are the classification criteria for SLE?
2. Treatment
• What are the principles of treatment in SLE?
• What are the safe and effective non-pharmacological treatments
in SLE?
 Patient education
 Sun protection
 Nurse-led care
• What are the safe and effective pharmacological treatments in
SLE?
 Analgesics
 Corticosteroids
 Hydroxychloroquine and other antimalarial agents
 Immunosuppressive agents
 Biologics
 Intravenous immunoglobulin
 Plasma exchange
• What are the safe and effective alternative and complementary
medicine in SLE?
• What are the safe and effective organ system-specific treatments
in SLE?
 Mucocutaneous
 Musculoskeletal
 Haematological
 Neuropsychiatric
 Cardio-respiratory
 Renal
3. Monitoring
• What are the effective and safe monitoring in SLE?
 Frequency and interval
 Parameters
 Co-morbidities
- Cardiovascular
- Infection
- Osteoporosis
- Malignancy
 Drug adverse events and complications
4. Special consideration
• What are the effective and safe management for SLE in the
following situations/groups:
 APS (Antiphospholipid syndrome)
 Pregnancy
- Pre-pregnancy counseling
- Contraception
- Combined care
- Lactation
 Adolescents
 Vaccination
5. Referral
• What are the referral criteria for SLE?
 primary to secondary/tertiary
 inter-subspecialty
 urgent referral (red flags)
Appendix 3
2012 SLICC CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA FOR SLE
Clinical Criteria
1.
Acute Cutaneous Lupus
Including lupus malar rash (do not count if malar discoid), bullous
lupus, toxic epidermal necrolysis variant of SLE, maculopapular lupus
rash, photosensitive lupus rash in the absence of dermatomyositis
OR subacute cutaneous lupus (nonindurated psoriaform
and/or annular polycyclic lesions that resolve without scarring,
although occasionally with post-inflammatory dyspigmentation or
telangiectasias)
2.
Chronic cutaneous lupus
Including classic discoid rash (localized (above the neck) or generalized
(above and below the neck)), hypertrophic (verrucous) lupus, lupus
panniculitis (profundus), mucosal lupus, lupus erythematosus
tumidus, chillblains lupus, discoid lupus/lichen planus overlap
3.
Oral ulcers
Palate, buccal, tongue
OR nasal ulcers
in the absence of other causes, such as vasculitis, Behcet’s disease,
infection (herpesvirus), inflammatory bowel disease, reactive
arthritis, and acidic foods
4.
Nonscarring alopecia
Diffuse thinning or hair fragility with visible broken hairs in the
absence of other causes such as alopecia areata, drugs, iron
deficiency, and androgenic alopecia
5.
Synovitis
Involving 2 or more joints, characterized by swelling or effusion
OR tenderness in 2 or more joints and at least 30 minutes of morning
stiffness
6.
Serositis
Typical pleurisy for more than 1 day
OR pleural effusions
OR pleural rub
Typical pericardial pain for more than 1 day (pain with recumbency
improved by sitting forward)
OR pericardial effusion
OR pericardial rub
OR pericarditis by electrocardiography in the absence of other
causes, such as infection, uremia, or Dressler’s pericarditis
7.
Renal
Urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (or 24-hour urine protein)
representing 500 mg protein/24 hours
OR red blood cell casts
Clinical Criteria
8.
Neurologic
Seizures, psychosis, mononeuritis multiplex in the absence of other
known causes such as primary vasculitis, myelitis, peripheral or cranial
neuropathy in the absence of other known causes such as primary
vasculitis, infection, and diabetes mellitus, acute confusional state in
the absence of other causes, including toxic/metabolic, uremia, drugs
9.
Haemolytic anaemia
10. Leukopenia or lymphopenia
Leukopenia: <4,000/mm3 at least once in the absence of other known
causes such as Felty’s syndrome, drugs, and portal hypertension
OR Lymphopenia <1,000/mm3 at least once in the absence of other
known causes such as corticosteroids, drugs, and infection
11. Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia <100,000/mm3) at least once in the absence
of other known causes such as drugs, portal hypertension, and
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Immunologic Criteria
1.
ANA
level above laboratory reference range
2.
Anti-dsDNA antibody
level above laboratory reference range (or 2-fold the reference
range if tested by ELISA)
3.
Anti-Sm
Presence of antibody to Sm nuclear antigen
4.
Antiphospholipid antibody
Positive test result for lupus anticoagulant, false-positive test result
for rapid plasma regain, medium- or high-titer anticardiolipin antibody
level (IgA, IgG, or IgM), positive test result for anti-β2-glycoprotein 1
(IgA, IgG, or IgM)
5.
Low complement
Low C3, low C4, low CH50
6.
Direct Coombs’ test
in the absence of hemolytic anemia
Source: Petri M, Orbai AM, Alarcón GS, et al. Derivation and validation of the
Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification criteria for
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64(8):2677-2686.
Appendix 4
2019 EULAR/ACR CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA FOR SLE
*In an assay with ≥90% specificity against relevant disease controls
§Additional criteria items within the same domain will not be counted.
ANA = antinuclear antibodies; Anti-β2GP1 = anti-beta-2-glycoprotein 1; Anti-dsDNA =
anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid; C3 = complement 3; C4 = complement 4
g = gram; h = hour; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus
Source: Aringer M, Costenbader K, Daikh D, et al. 2019 European League Against
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology Classification Criteria for
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2019;71(9):1400-1412.
Appendix 5
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS DISEASE ACTIVITY
INDEX 2000 (SLEDAI-2K)
Study No.: ________ Patient Name: _____________________Visit Date: _____________
(Enter weight in SLEDAI Score column if descriptor is present at the time of the visit or in
the preceding 10 days.)
Weight
SLEDAI
Descriptor
Definition
Score
Recent onset, exclude metabolic, infectious or
drug causes.
Altered ability to function in normal activity due
to severe disturbance in the perception of reality.
Include hallucinations, incoherence, marked
loose
associations,
impoverished
thought
content, marked illogical thinking, bizarre,
disorganized, or catatonic behavior. Exclude
uremia and drug causes.
Altered mental function with impaired orientation,
memory, or other intellectual function, with rapid
onset and fluctuating clinical features, inability to
sustain attention to environment, plus at least 2 of
the following: perceptual disturbance, incoherent
speech, insomnia or daytime drowsiness, or
increased or decreased psychomotor activity.
Exclude metabolic, infectious, or drug causes.
Retinal
changes
of
SLE.
Include
cytoid
bodies, retinal hemorrhages, serous exudate
or hemorrhages in the choroid, optic neuritis.
Exclude hypertension, infection, or drug causes.
New onset of sensory or motor neuropathy
involving cranial nerves.
Severe, persistent headache; may be migrainous,
but must be nonresponsive to narcotic analgesia.
New onset of cerebrovascular accident(s).
Exclude arteriosclerosis.
Ulceration, gangrene, tender finger nodules,
periungual infarction, splinter hemorrhages, or
biopsy or angiogram proof of vasculitis.
≥2 joints with pain and signs of inflammation (i.e.
tenderness, swelling or effusion).
Proximal muscle aching/weakness, associated
with elevated creatine phosphokinase/aldolase
or electromyogram changes or a biopsy showing
myositis.
Seizure
Pscyhosis
Organic brain
syndrome
Visual
disturbance
Cranial nerve
disorder
Lupus headache
CVA
Vasculitis
Arthritis
Myositis
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
4
4
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
Weight
SLEDAI
Descriptor
Definition
Score
TOTAL
SLEDAI
SCORE
Source: Gladman DD, Ibañez D, Urowitz MB. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Disease Activity Index 2000. J Rheumatol. 2002;29(2):288-291.
Heme-granular or red blood cell casts.
>5 red blood cells/high power field. Exclude
stone, infection or other cause.
>0.5 gram/2 hours
>5 white blood cells/high power field. Exclude
infection.
Inflammatory type rash.
Abnormal, patchy or diffuse loss of hair.
Oral or nasal ulcerations.
Pleuritic chest pain with pleural rub or effusion,
or pleural thickening.
Pericardial pain with at least 1 of the following:
rub,
effusion,
or
electrocardiogram
or
echocardiogram confirmation.
Decrease in CH50, C3, or C4 below the lower
limit of normal range for testing laboratory.
Increased DNA binding by Farr assay above
normal range for testing laboratory.
>38°C. Exclude infectious cause.
<100,000 platelets / x109/L, exclude drug
causes.
<3,000 white blood cells / x109/L, exclude drug
causes.
Urinary casts
Hematuria
Proteinuria
Pyuria
Rash
Alopecia
Mucosal ulcers
Pleurisy
Pericarditis
Low complement
Increases DNA
binding
Fever
Thrombocytopenia
Leukopenia
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
Appendix 6
BRITISH ISLES LUPUS ACTIVITY GROUP (BILAG) INDEX - 2004
Centre: Date: Initials/Hosp No:
• Only record manifestations/items due to SLE Disease Activity
• Assessment refers to manifestations occurring in the last 4 weeks (compared
with the previous 4 weeks)
• TO BE USED WITH THE GLOSSARY
Source: Yee CS, Cresswell L, Farewell V, et al. Numerical scoring for the BILAG-2004
index. Rheumatology. 2010;49:1665-1669.
Appendix 7
MEDICATION IN SLE
1.73m2
BD = bis in die (twice a day); COX-2 = cyclooxygenase-2; CrCl = creatinine clearance; FBC = full blood count; g = gram; GI = gastrointestinal; IgA =
immunoglobulin A; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M; IV = intravenous; kg = kilogram; LFT = liver function test; m2 = square metre; mg =
milligram; min = minute; mL = millilitre; NIH = National Institute of Health; OD = once a day; PO = per os (by oral); QID = quarter in die (four times a day);
RP = renal profile; TDM = therapeutic drug monitoring; TDS = ter die sumendum (three times a day); UFEME = urine full examination and microscopic
examination
Source:
1. Adams K, Bombardier C, van der Heijde DM. Safety of pain therapy during pregnancy and lactation in patients with inflammatory arthritis: a systematic
literature review. J Rheumatol Suppl. 2012;90:59-61.
2. Lam NC, Ghetu MV, Bieniek ML. Systemic lupus erythematosus: primary care approach to diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician.
2016;94(4):284-294.
3. Micromedex Drug Reference [Mobile application software]. (Version 4.4.0).
4. Petri M, Landy H, Clowse MEB, et al. Belimumab use during pregnancy: a summary of birth defects and pregnancy loss from belimumab clinical trials,
a pregnancy registry and postmarketing reports. Ann Rheum Dis. 2023;82(2):217-225.
5. Saavedra MÁ, Sánchez A, Morales S, et al. Azathioprine during pregnancy in systemic lupus erythematosus patients is not associated with poor fetal
outcome. Clin Rheumatol. 2015;34(7):1211-1216.
6. Sameh M, Elkossi M, Kim JJ, et al. Safety of Breastfeeding by Mothers on Immunosuppressive Medication for Renal Transplantation: Obsession, Myth
and Truth. JOJ Uro and Nephron. 2017;3(3):555612.
7. Sammaritano LR, Bermas BL, Chakravarty EE, et al. 2020 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Reproductive Health
in Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Diseases. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020;72(4):529-556.
8. Schmajuk G, Yazdany J. Drug monitoring in systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2011;40(6):559-575.
9. Xibillé-Friedmann D, Pérez-Rodríguez M, Carrillo-Vázquez S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus by
the Mexican College of Rheumatology. Reumatol Clin (English Edition). 2019;15(1):3-20.
Appendix 8
FREQUENCY OF MONITORING PATIENTS WITH SLE









a
a





a


a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a







a

a
-
-
a

a
a
a
a

a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a







a

a
a
-
a
a
a,p
a,p
a
a

a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
Assessments
At first
visit
Patients with
active disease
should be reviewed
at least every
1 - 3 months
Patients with stable/
low disease activity
should be reviewed
every 6 - 12 months
Clinical
History
Vital signs (blood
pressure, heart rate,
weight)
Clinical examination
Drug review
Blood tests
Full blood count
Renal profile
Liver function test
CRP
ESR
Bone profile (calcium,
phosphate, ALP)
Vitamin D3
Immunology/serology
ANA
Anti-dsDNA
C3/C4 levels
aPL (LA, aCL, aβ2GPI)
ENA (anti-Ro/La, anti-RNP,
anti-Sm antibodies)
Immunoglobulin A, G, M
Direct Coombs’ test
Urine
UFEME
Urine random protein:
creatinine ratio OR
24-hour urine protein
Other investigation
Culture
Biopsy (e.g. skin, kidney)
Neurophysiology (e.g.
nerve conduction study,
EMG)
ECG
Echocardiogram
Imaging
Chest X-ray
Others (US, CT, MRI)
 = indicated; a = when indicated; a,p = when indicated during pregnancy; - =
not indicated; aβ2GP1 = anti-beta-2-glycoprotein 1 antibodies; aCL = anticardiolipin
antibodies; ALP = alkaline phosphatase; ANA = antinuclear antibody; anti-dsDNA = antidouble stranded deoxyribonucleic acid; anti-RNP = antibodies to ribonucleoprotein;
anti-Sm antibodies = anti-Smith antibodies; aPL = antiphospholipid antibody; BMI =
body-mass index; C3 = complement 3, C4 = complement 4, CRP = C-reactive protein;
CT = computerised tomography; ECG = electrocardiogram; EMG = electromyogram;
ENA = extractable nuclear antigen; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; LA = lupus
anticoagulants; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; UFEME = urine full examination
and microscopic examination; US = ultrasound
Adapted from: Gordon C, Amissah-Arthur MB, Gayed M, et al. The British Society
for Rheumatology guidelines for the management of systemic lupus
erythematosus in adults. Rheumatology. 2018;57(1);e1-e45.






a




a



Assessments
At first
visit
Patients with
active disease
should be reviewed
at least every
1 - 3 months
Patients with stable/
low disease activity
should be reviewed
every 6 - 12 months
Modifiable cardiovascular
risk factors
Hypertension
Dyslipidaemia
Diabetes mellitus
High BMI
Smoking/vaping
Appendix 9
SAPPORO CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA
(REVISED CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA FOR THE
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME)
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is present if at least one of the clinical
criteria and one of the laboratory criteria that follow are met*
Clinical criteria
1. Vascular thrombosis†
One or more clinical episodes‡ of arterial, venous or small vessel
thrombosis§, in any tissue or organ. Thrombosis must be confirmed
by objective validated criteria (i.e. unequivocal findings of appropriate
imaging studies or histopathology). For histopathologic confirmation,
thrombosis should be present without significant evidence of
inflammation in the vessel wall.
2. Pregnancy morbidity
(a) One or more unexplained deaths of a morphologically normal
foetus at or beyond the 10th week of gestation, with normal
foetal morphology documented by ultrasound or by direct
examination of the foetus, or
(b) One or more premature births of a morphologically normal
neonate before the 34th week of gestation because of: (i)
eclampsia or severe pre-eclampsia defined according to
standard definitions, or (ii) recognised features of placental
insufficiency¶, or
(c) Three or more unexplained consecutive spontaneous
abortions before the 10th week of gestation, with maternal
anatomic or hormonal abnormalities and, paternal and
maternal chromosomal causes excluded.
In studies of populations of patients who have more than one type of
pregnancy morbidity, investigators are strongly encouraged to stratify
groups of subjects according to a, b or c above.
Laboratory criteria**
1.
Lupus anticoagulant (LA) present in plasma, on two or more
occasions at least 12 weeks apart, detected according to the
guidelines of the International Society on Thrombosis and
Haemostasis (Scientific Subcommittee on LAs/phospholipiddependent antibodies).
2.
Anticardiolipin (aCL) antibody of IgG and/or IgM isotypes in serum
or plasma, present in medium or high titre (i.e. >40 GPL or MPL, or
>the 99th percentile), on two or more occasions, at least 12 weeks
apart, measured by a standardised ELISA.
3.
Anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibody of IgG and/or IgM isotype in serum
or plasma (in titre >the 99th percentile), present on two or more
occasions, at least 12 weeks apart, measured by a standardised
ELISA, according to recommended procedures.
*Classification of APS should be avoided if less than 12 weeks or more than 5 years
separate the positive aPL test and the clinical manifestations.
†Coexisting inherited or acquired factors for thrombosis are not reasons for excluding
patients from APS trials. However, two subgroups of APS patients should be
recognised, according to: (a) the presence, and (b) the absence of additional risk
factors for thrombosis. Indicative (but not exhaustive) such cases include: age
(>55 in men and >65 in women), and the presence of any of the established risk
factors for cardiovascular disease (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, elevated LDL or
low HDL cholesterol, cigarette smoking, family history of premature cardiovascular
disease,
body-mass
index
≥30
kg/m2,
microalbuminuria,
estimated
GFR
<60 mL/min), inherited thrombophilias, oral contraceptives, nephrotic syndrome,
malignancy, immobilisation and surgery. Thus, patient who fulfil criteria should be
stratified according to contributing causes of thrombosis.
‡A thrombotic episode in the past could be considered as a clinical criterion, provided
that thrombosis is proved by appropriate diagnostic means and that no alternative
diagnosis or cause of thrombosis is found.
§Superficial venous thrombosis is not included in the clinical criteria.
¶Generally accepted features of placental insufficiency include: (i) abnormal or nonreassuring foetal surveillance test(s), e.g. a non-reactive non-stress test, suggestive
of foetal hypoxemia, (ii) abnormal Doppler flow velocimetry waveform analysis
suggestive of foetal hypoxaemia, e.g. absent end-diastolic flow in the umbilical artery,
(iii) oligohydramnios, e.g. an amniotic fluid index of 5 cm or less, or (iv) a postnatal
birth weight less than the 10th percentile for the gestational age.
**Investigators are strongly advised to classify APS patients in studies into one of the
following categories: I, more than one laboratory criteria present (any combination);
IIa, LA present along; IIb, aCL antibody present alone; IIc, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein 1
antibody present alone.
Source: Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, et al. International consensus statement
on an update of the classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid
syndrome (APS). J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:295-306.
Appendix 10
RECOMMENDATIONS ON TYPES OF CONTRACEPTION FOR
PATIENTS WITH SLE
i) ACR-2020
aPL = antiphospholipid antibody (persistent moderate-to-high-titre anticardiolipin
or anti-β2-glycoprotein 1 antibody or persistent positive LA); IUDs = intrauterine
devices (copper or progestin); SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; DMPA = depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate
Source: Sammaritano LR, Bermas BL, Chakravarty EE, et al. 2020 American
College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Reproductive
Health in Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Diseases. Arthritis Rheumatol.
2020;72(4);529-556.
ii) WHO-2015
C = continuation; CIC = combined injectable contraceptive; COC = combined oral contraceptive (pill); CU-IUD = copper-bearing intrauterine device; CVR
= combined contraceptive vaginal ring; DMPA = depot medroxyprogesterone acetate; ETG = etonogestrel; I = initiation; LNG = levonorgestrel; LNG-IUD =
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device; NET-EN = norethisterone enanthate; P = combined contraceptive patch; POP = progestogen-only pill
Source: WHO. Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use (Fifth edition). Geneva; WHO: 2015.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
24hUP
24-hour urine protein
aCL
anticardiolipin antibodies
ACR
American College of Rheumatology
AE
adverse event
AGREE
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
AIHA
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
ALMS
Aspreva Lupus Management Study
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
ANA
antinuclear antibodies
anti-β2GP1
anti-beta-2-glycoprotein 1
anti-dsDNA
anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
anti-RNP
antibodies to ribonucleoprotein
anti-Sm
anti-Smith
anti-SSA
anti-Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen A
anti-SSB
anti-Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen B
aPL
antiphospholipid antibodies
APS
antiphospholipid syndrome
ARA
American Rheumatism Association
AZA
azathioprine
BAFF
B-cell activating factor
BD
bis in die (twice a daily)
BICLA
British Isles Lupus Assessment Group-based Composite Lupus
Assessment
BILAG
British Isles Lupus Activity Group
BLISS
Belimumab in Subjects with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
BLyS
B-lymphocyte stimulator
BMD
bone mineral density
BMI
body-mass index
BSR
British Society for Rheumatology
C3
complement 3
C4
complement 4
CI
confidence interval
CLASI
Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index
CLE
cutaneous lupus erythematosus
CNI
calcineurin inhibitors
COX-2
cyclooxygenase-2
CPG
clinical practice guidelines
CrCl
creatinine clearance
CRP
C-reactive protein
CT
computed tomography
CYC
cyclophosphamide
CV
cardiovascular
CVD
cardiovascular disease
DG
development group
DMPA
depot medroxyprogesterone acetate
DOAC
direct oral anticoagulant
DORIS
Definition of Remission in SLE
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
ECG
electrocardiogram
eGFR
estimated glomerular filtration rate
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EMG
electromyogram
ENA
extractable nuclear antigens
ESR
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
EULAR
European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology
EULAR/ACR
European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology/American
College of Rheumatology
EXPLORER
Exploratory Phase II/III SLE Evaluation of Rituximab
FBC
full blood count
FRAX
fracture risk assessment tool
g
gram
GI
gastrointestinal
GRADE
Grading Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
h
hour
HCQ
hydroxychloroquine
hpf
high power field
HPV
human papillomavirus
HR
hazard ratio
HRT
hormone replacement therapy
HTA
health technology assessment
HZ
Herpes Zoster
ICU
intensive care unit
IgA
immunoglobulin A
IgG
immunoglobulin G
IgM
immunoglobulin M
IIF
indirect immunofluorescence
IQR
interquartile range
IUD
intrauterine device
IV
intravenous
IVIG
intravenous immunoglobulin
kg
kilogram
LA
lupus anticoagulant
LDA
low dose aspirin
LFT
liver function test
LLDAS
lupus low disease activity state
LN
lupus nephritis
LUNAR
Lupus Nephritis Assessment with Rituximab
m2
square metre
MaHTAS
Malaysian Health Technology Assessment Section
MD
mean difference
mg
milligram
min
minute
mL
millilitre
MMF
mycophenolate mofetil
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA
messenger RNA
MTX
methotrexate
MOH
Ministry of Health
NIH
National Institutes of Health
NPSLE
neuropsychiatric SLE
NSAID
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
OD
once a day
OR
odds ratio
PE
plasma exchange
PO
per os (by oral)
PGA
Physician Global Assessment
QID
quarter in die (four times a day)
RBC
red blood cell
RNA
ribonucleic acid
RC
review committee
RCT
randomised controlled trial
RP
renal profile
RR
risk ratio
SARS-CoV-2
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
SDI
SLICC/ACR Damage Index
SF-36
36-item Short Form Health Survey
SIR
standardised incidence ratio
SLAM-R
Systemic Lupus Activity Measure-Revised
SELENA-SLEDAI Safety of Estrogens in Lupus Erythematosus: National Assessment
- Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
SLEDAI
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index
SLEDAI-2K
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000
SLEPDAI
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Pregnancy Disease Activity Index
SLICC
Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics
SPF
sun protection factor
SRI
SLE Responder Index
TDM
therapeutic drug monitoring
TDS
ter die sumendum (three times a day)
TTP
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
TULIP
Treatment of Uncontrolled Lupus via the Interferon Pathway
U.S.
United States
UFEME
urine full examination and microscopic examination
UPCR
urine protein/creatinine ratio
US
ultrasound
USPSTF
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
VAS
Visual Analogue Scale
WBC
white blood cell
WHO
World Health Organization
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The CPG DG members would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the following for their contributions:
• Panel of external reviewers who reviewed the draft technically
• Technical Advisory Committee of CPG for their valuable input and
feedback
• HTA and CPG Council for approval of the CPG
• Mr. Latif Abqari Nazeri and Ms. Rosazaddilah Azaddin for the
retrieval of evidence
• All those who have contributed directly or indirectly to the
development of the CPG
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The panel members of both DG and RC had completed disclosure forms.
None hold shares in pharmaceutical firms or act as consultants to such
firms. Details are available upon request from the CPG Secretariat.
SOURCE OF FUNDING
The development of the CPG on Management of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus was supported mainly by the MoH Malaysia and partly
by the Malaysian Society of Rheumatology.