n
WwW
=
al
Ww
e
=)
So
Ww
2
=
S)
<
a
a
|
<
2
=
|
(e)
toh
(Oxo Heath Onision
Misty of Heath Moloyo
Management of
ACUTE OROFACIAL
INFECTION OF ODONTOGENIC
ORIGIN IN CHILDREN
l"Edition
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These dines procice quel: (C20) o neant fo be 2 ce fo cna
Docice ond cre osidon he bert avalale edence othe fine of Sevscrment
‘or nusua| pokew cae beryNeahcere onde reson fhe
onognett of fe novel pote botes en fe cca etn ond
onopencnt Spor: hl or avec
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES ae
BIBI Sear tev ederce beconer aie TE
Published by:
Chalten Tetrsoay Secton
rata dion
[eva Bat E10 Peart |
Fede Coverment kaise Cente
{2590 Paya Main
Copyright
Maya (0H0% The cote! oy be eoradiced n any utero coe dn
‘7 fomot @ medun provaed to! 9 Coorg oxiouledganer fo OD i
Fede end he corte not changed ald nied fa pamela ere
(ry frodec! vere oF even agora ied ond quoted oto corte
Thaereaan us evaiabe onthe foloung websites
‘pismo aoe
Wpdlaaaha gous
IM faocasredoramy
nso and 15 oto MTS
Management of Acute Orofacial Infection of Odontogenic
Origin in Children
22
23
24
24
WN LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
1
4
2
3
BNE GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
ae ee ee are terre
ee rae
ee
opie tpl peek
roel eerie ter eles
Ae eee
(Ia arabian
Se
"Noto: The grade of recommendation relat tothe sirengh ofthe evidence on which
{he recommendation & based I oes nl ref he cnieal importance othe
reconmanaston
GHEE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT AND OBJECTIVES,
YDELINE
‘The Development Group or these Cini! Practew Guidelines (CPG) consisted of
Paedaic Dental Specilsts, @ Cincal Micobilogst, Dental Pubic’ Heath
‘Specials, a general data practioner anda centl nurse. Review Commitee was
_actvoly volved in the development proces ofthese gudeines.
Literature search was cared oul using the folowing eleckone databases:
‘PUBHEDMEDLINE; Cochrane Database of Systomie Reviews (COSA 18! Web of
‘rouledge; Heath Technology Assessment (HTA) and fl text journal ares va
(Ovid search engine. The reorence iss ofall evant aces retived were aso
‘examines to dentty pertinent inormation tat maybe sigrifeat fr kath sides
Free text terms of MeSH terms were usod eth singly or in combination orere¥e
1 anicls (Appendix 1), Oy erature writen 9 English was reoved.
‘There wore 7 cnal questions assigned to members of he development group. The
‘g0up mombers mo ora tll of eight times throughout the dovolopment of the
uietnes, Relevant erature etieved were appaisd by leat two members and
‘resented inthe frm ot evidence table and clscussed during the group meetings. Al
Statements and reconmendstions formulated were agreed upon by bath the
evelopment group and revow commie. These CPG ae based on scenic
‘evidences and adapted according local practices, However, whore there Was alack
ol evidence, recommendations were based on consensus of group member. eal
pales’ views and preferences were also needed to be consdered in the
evelopment of OPGs, however inthis particular instance, it was not feast.
Nevertheless, paint information lait is algo considered i the ater would be
<evoloped to facitte the dissemination of important inermation othe publi inthe
‘ee.
‘Te lovls of evidence ofthe torture were graded using a the medied version
_aaped from tho United States (US) / Canadian Prevenive Sonices Task Force,
‘lo the grading of recommendations was basod onthe a mostiod version of he
‘Scotish intrcoegiate Guidlines Network (SIGN)
‘The crt guidelines were reviowed by atgam of extomal reviewers and were also
posted on the Minsty of Hoan, Malaysia and Academy of Medicine, Malaysia.
‘wobstes for comments and feedbacks. These guidlines were presented tothe
“eetnical Advisory Commitee for CPGS, and tinal tothe HTA and CPG Counc,
Mins of Heath, Malaysia for approval
gam OBJECTIVE
“Te main im ofthe guidelines sto enable practioner to make informed decisions
for indval patents in the detection and management of acute oroacia infection of
odontogenic origin in hen
1. To dissominato and reinforce knowledge on acute ertacial infection of
Cesontogoric origin in chicron among healthcare proessonas
2. To provide imely and appropiate management procedure of acute oral
Infection of edoetogenc origin (AO) in chiren by for healthcare prtessionals.
WEEN CLINICAL QUESTIONS:
‘The clinical questions addressed by these guidelines are fund in Append 2
ENE TARGET POPULATION
‘Those guidelines wil be useful when assessing a eiron below the age of 16 yor
vaho present wih signs and symptoms of acute roca inecton of odontogen
engin
WEEE TARGET GROUP/USER
36 guidelines are applicable fo al healthcare professionals who are involved in
the manegement of ADI in chen which includes: dental aie, media fers,
(genera practtoners (dental and medal), dental and medcal ston, paedac
ental specilis, and relevant medical specialists (such a5 ophinalmlogy
‘lorhinolaryngelogy and paediatrics).
WNL HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Primary and Specialist Heat cae settngs a pubte and private sectors,
BENENEEL MEMBERS OF THE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP.
ares Suen
mepcoroupen ai mesanar aon
Hoss eae ‘dom ‘How! Tun Jor
= a
= Se
== Emenee
(DR Mint SYAZLEEN BT ABD RAHMAN canes
aa aaron
ean eee
ne pote
DR NIAZLIN BT MOHD TAIB. ‘Soo
Sait rman gama cata
See ae
ee een aa,
een i geasneanoewanrnunaso
eS ems mane
Zam ae
Ene Bat
gE MEMBERS OF THE REVIEW COMMITTEE
‘A pane! of independent reviewers, both locally and itematlonalyrevewed these
‘quislnes. They were asked to comment primal on the compehenslveness and
‘couray ofthe Iterpetaton of the evdenco thal support the recommendations put
forth in the guile. The folowing intel and extomal rovewors provided
‘comments and Teeabacks on the proposed drat
2a Eee tes ie
ae seman
a= aa
che She
Seana crpmyeranases en
Se wumone Six
Eo =
a.
Saxe
FS aocen, rca
aca ome
ae a
Fic ane aa
*Indicated for
hospitalization
*Indicated for
hospitalization
Contogonicinfectons aro among the most common infections of eral cavity. The
‘auses of edontogen infections are dena pulp eros sacondary odontal care
ee dental estoratons or dental raums" "They progress tough 3 stages:
Inoculation, clus and abscess." Odontogencinfocions are usualy ecalse,
however, in acute otal infcton stage, the inlecton can spread rapidly ranging
‘rom mig buccal space inflection to a severe He threatning mut pace nection,
Early dlagnoss ane treatment are teal a pascal patents wth facial etecton
become detyratd and systemically very rapey "The management of hese
condone in chen poses greater changes to he clncan as there maybe
problems with behaviour management making examinaton, ivestigaions and
treatment ciful. Chidron may also deterate faster duo to the dilerences in
physiology and anatomy as compared to adil. Hence, a delay in teatment,
‘epacialy dvs to ignorance by eaters, or even poor acess to hosp care and/or
lack of sound clagostc skis by clricans wil futher complicates management
Furhormore, uncertainty in the management of any of such conditions by the
Cina atthe primary cre tvel, wil adtonaly pose serious rik of mevbiy and
‘motalty among hese pasate patents. Alpresent, hee ino lea etna! peactew
{uidlnes avalale on this opc and ancedoal observations conducted have shown
that heath care providers sometimes fae difouty in making appropiate cincal
|udgements and hee are variton of cna! practice.
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY
{AOlie a commen encounter nal dental eins in Malaya and atc oth dentate
children and adults. There is variation in the prevalence of odontogenic related
infction that have Been reported in tho artue, For instance, alcal sy in al
erempuan Zain Il Hospital Kota Bhar has documented a total o 1 cases over a
etiod of 2 years wih a pevatence of 2%. while Kaosiung Cheng Gung Chiron
Hosp, Taiwan reported 56 cases na year. ‘*~ =" In contast, port tom
{an urban hospital in Amara reported 63 cases ove years. =~"
a
BENE ®. CLINICAL PRESENTATION.
‘child with AOI commonty presents wih an acto infammatory process called
‘outs and this represents the intl acute phase of he infection Te features of
clus a red, warm, tender area of sin often wah dfuse sweling. Ins erty
‘tage, celts os soft and doughy opapation whereas ints advanced and sous
is fem, indurated and painful because of issue distension. =~" The paint
right also presont wth a istry oftoohacho and fever prececng the swing. ©
Upon oa examination tere may exis sweting ofthe buccal sulcus. the ifetion
Istound to be that of edontogenic on thee usualy evidence of oath or eet th
entensive cares, moby, actu, or endemess to percussion. =
‘Won thoinfction smi (Figure), the chiles body tomporatur maybe bolow 38°C
without signiant sus, sweling or pain.» Paton wh moderate o severe
Intection wife it nc letra (malaise). They generally present with an nereased
heart and respratry te and a tomparature greater than 38°C. =" They often
‘complain ofthe nabity o eat andor cn, The patent wil alsa presant wth alge
‘weling, marked tismus, and moderate to severe pain and may find ofcut fo
speak and swallow (Figure 2), Oodema ofthe floor ofthe mouth and decreased
tongue mebity may alo be seen cneally Involvement of mutipleadacent anatomic
spaces might be observed," There may be signs of lel spread to regional
Iymp nages and progression e abscess formation, When abscess fematon begins.
the sweting willbe more lcalze, uctuant and ender on palpaton long wih red
periphery and pus formation. "="
Flgue 4: is AOL Figue 2: Severe AO!
aE Ns
[AOI can spreed fom the mand ito sublingual, exdmandbular, Buccs
‘ertonslaror parapharyngeal paces whereas infection fram he maxila may epread
‘nto portal ane inatemporal spaces. Severe conditions eveh ae Ludwig = Angina
‘ad secondary ospratory ombarassment, bal peril clits, cavernous us
‘twomoss, ystomie meningitis and sepals can also coz. ==
“Inte eary stage, clits fel sof and doughy to palpation
“ins advanced and seis Tor, iis frm, indurated and aint
“then progresses te abscess formation where he sweling willbe mee localized,
uctuat an tender on palpation along with red periphery and pus fora
+ Prompt cagnosis and management i eitcal fr paca patents
BEE «DIAGNOSIS
History taking and clini! examination ate usualy sufiint to ave toa diagnos
and progression of AO) =" Simple questons suchas ahistorotothache belo
‘neln,hisory of recent ental reatment (to dentily possible cause ofinfocton) and
‘nse of swelng (to dtermin he rapness of spread of nection) shoul orm part
ofthe overad history taking, Other further investigation tat can be conalered 0
facta lagesis and management should induce:
1. Radiographs
‘Standard plan radiographs
‘Ina orl periapical radiograph
1 Simple octusal radiograph
'* Onhopantomograph (Figure 3).
Further maging tests
‘¢Utrasonography (to evaluate presence of pus clacton), =="
{© CT san to evaluate extnsin of spread, suchas nck spaces, poirtitl
‘or eases of mut space involvement), =~
‘© Electc pup test
‘+ Thermal het and cls tes.
3. Culture and antimerobil sensitivity testing
‘This is important in cen situation suchas hose in apy spreading nections,
patois not respendng to empirical therapy and in mmunacompromised patents
"=" The dal nical sample an acute abscess develops isan asprate hough
Intact mucosa disinfected by an appropriate antisptc moutwash or swab (such
‘8 horhoxidne) or purulent exudates rom wining canal, =" Tig
ul reduce contamination rom the normal oral tora. Swabs of punt matt
hhave demonstrated poor recovery of sit angerebes and low mean numbers of
|soates pr sample ange 10-168). "=="
Figue 3 :OPG wih penpical aohceney ofa grossly ears oath (96)
BEEN. CRITERIA FOR HOSPITALISATION AND REFERRAL
Flowing the Ntor aking, clinical examination and investigations performed, the
clnlan needs to make a decsion as to whether eat as outpstent Inpatient. Mla
casos of AO can be treatod at primary health cae setings as outpationt with tmely
fotowup to monitor progres of dsoace, However, the folowing condtons would
1. Compromise away (tic in esting, stor abnormal breath sounds)
2 Rated for of mouth (Figure ).
2. Sytemicaly unwell (a appearance over, maize, lthrge dehycration). =~
5. Rapid progressive lesion / mult space spread.
6. Poor compliance to oral herey.
7 Reduced oa intake.
8 Falure of outpatint therapy (orl mediation).
8. Unable to access to medial caro in a timely ation.
Flgue 4: Phot feild with raised Hor of out
“Conztions 1 and 2 shal warant urgent roforal to hospitals capable for emergency
Inubaton and ninsive Care Unt backyp
‘Apart tom the above mentoned conditions, he folowing eters also warrant eral
tothe Panda Dental Speciait,
1. Rap progression and solemn of multiple spaces an secondary anatomic
spaces."
2 Immunocompromised pation
3. No nat fcity for hospital acmission
4. Roguie fur iwestigation suchas CT sean
5. Unable to paform suri intervention,
6. Uncooperatve patents.
7 Requie comprehensive dental teatmen under genera anaestesla,
LJ
BENE. INDICATIONS FOR REFERRAL TO OTHER MEDICAL SPECIALTIES
Fetoralto oor medical specaties (Opthalmology, Otorhinolaryngelogy, Pacdiatcs,
is equired for
1. Patents wit sign of airway obstucton shall warrant urgent eferal to
Orominlarngoogis.
2, Patents with AO! whch has extended the art wth sansa ya (perioral)
swelng (Figur), double vison pop), reduced visual acuity, abnormal ight
rofiexs, protusion of tho eyeball (proptsis) or impairment of eye moveront
(optramopegia), °°"
Figue’5: Proto of cid wth perl sweting
3, Patients who appears tobe systoricallil or having fever, sever mals raven
‘resets wit sign of cena nervous system involvement suchas drowsiness,
‘etharay, vomiting, neacache, seizure, or rail nerve dtl, "0
4. Patients with doop and rapt spreading infections (such as mut space inecon,
seep neck infin), ="
15, Patients wih severe and systemic signs of sepsis (igh fever or hypothermia,
tachycarcis, hypotension. ="
6. Patients with underying dsoaso, such as diabetes molitus, oF immuno
ceystuncon, "=
(Grade © Development Group's consensus)
BEE 7. WANAGENENT OF AO!
‘The common practice inthe mansgement of AOI i removal the source of ineeton
(extacton or pulp therapy) and aamstation ot anit wih /wihoutnosion and
rainape.
74, Surgical intervention
Dierentstudes vary I thal commendation on ting of sual intervention
(evtacton of causative tootestnwihwihout incon and drainage). Ther are
generally wo modes of managemont of AO: 38
2) Pharmscoogial hrapy with mediate surge leventon.
') Pharmacological therapy with delayed sugiea intention.
LJ
“The timing of Suga intention is basedon the patents mecca stably accesso
the oxaleawtys sugiesl ste and avalabity ofthe operating theatre if general
anaesthesia s needed. Nevarhoess in c3505 of porsstont or rapid progression of
infectons despite optimal mecca therapy given susie itventon (Figure 6) must
bo instituted immecately. "in the scenario whero the chidis uncooperative and
has other carious teeth lo be managed, comprehensive dental Weatment under
‘general anaesthesia is recommended. Furthermore, he chance for eadnsson wil
be reduced “The removal othe sour of faction ether by extraction or pup
therapy (Figure 7) ofthe fending oot mainly depends on several ctor factors that
ined restortiy, cooperatives ofthe cis, mecial problems and orthadonc
conaioratons
Figue 6 Post Exra-cranceon and Fique 7 ‘Root Canal Treatment on Toth 46
Dranage wih rubber cain sit
172. Management ot pain
‘Tore are several modcation options to manage pain resulting rom facia colts
such as Paracetare, bupoen, Naproxen and Dicolenac Sodium. These
‘medications are adequate to manage mid pals; however for moderate x severe
pains equie combination wth ther aganss, most conmaniy he opi group. "=
Paracetamel she frat retmen for most mide moderate ate pain ve ots
favourable salty and oos prfies. ="
173. Types of Antibiotics
tuicous use of antbiotc for therapy in odontogenic coulis is imperative in
Preventing antbictic resistance," The antibiotics used must reach the sit of
Infection at a therapeute evel and adequate duration to produce the desied elect
‘ad shouldbe provided as Soon as possibe. "=" Most common facutatve bacteria
Isolates wore vrdans sopiococs, Nelssora and Ekonoll species. Among
‘anaerobes, Provtoa and Mcromenas (lermeryPoptostepiocaccus species) wore
‘more frequen. ="== =
Peniin remains the antbiotof choice or md o moderate odontogenic nections
‘ne fang heathy cid, However, tis nt recommendd as ntl therapy or more
sofousifectons possibly due to penciin resistant orl anaerobes. "=" Oral
a
pPhenoxymethypenilin (penn V) is the perctin of choice Yor odontogenic.
infections in comparison to berzypeiilin (penclin ). I has higher acid stably
And podices plasma loves that aro toto ve times higher han an equvaant Jose
of pencil G. =" However, penn has umes actives againt anaerobes.
Thareore, a combination of peniein with metronidazole, whichis sctve against
anaerabes, is recommended. ==
Besies porici, ampcti and amoxiciin remains the alleraive line of antbise.
‘moxie is better absorbed orl han pec V. "In cases of Beta lactam
antbti (penclin,ampicin, amoxil, epheiosprn) resistance, broad specum
amtbitics such as amoxciin J clavuanate (Augmentin) or ampclin J subactam
(Unasyn) canbe used and goneraly reserved fr more severe orcacal infections.
In ndviduals who ae aleaic tothe penn group. eindamycin remains as an
ternative, ===" ==" Candamycin is ave against Sraptoccer while methiin
is suscoptble to Staphylococci. ts spectum of activity includes nary al the lly
pathogens of edortogenic infectons, wth the notable exception of Ekenola
ogars exhibits superior pnetation int the jawbone and abscess cavites and
thas an advantage over matrondazle that tean be used as monotherapy. "=" It
is recommended that cindamyein should probably be reserved for odontogenic
infections serous enough to requrahosptalsaton The main concern inthe past was.
pseudomembranous cols 6ve to superinfection wth Clesticlum atic. Howover,
ig now known that ts condton can occur as an adverse fect of ther anibotes
too.The overall nedence of elndamyein-induced Ciostiium dice carnoea Is
probably less han 14, ="
Fstgoneraon cephalosporin antbioes (69. cophalosn, cophaothin) and
sacond-generaon cephalospor antbotis (€9. celuosime, celal, cefoxitin)
have asignieanty broader specrum of atvy than penis. "=>" andre
very active against serobic and anaerobic ram-pesive cocc! but are generally
Unpredcabo in ther atvty against anaerobe gram-negative ros, although for
somo isolates expanded: <pocrum cephalosporins willbe efocve. "2
Erytomygin remains a useful and cost elective agent forthe treatment of mild
‘odontogenic iecton in penili-alergiepatents. There's, Mowever, an ineoasein
‘erytvonyoin resistance among oal anasrbes, especialy fUsobaceria, =
rilans group septocces, Pevotala species =" and gram-postive anaerobic
ood (GPAC). “= Aathromyen has been found to be the most actve macrolide
ntbioe against oral gram-negative anaorobes, and showing acy aginst oral
‘stepococc! comparable to tat of eytiromycin, and i probably te most sutale
‘agents group of orofacial odontogenic inectons. =
[Anbicteso choice for odontogenic infection are asin Table 1.1"
Table 1: Recommandedantbites and dosage
Dosaak
Fergani at
Fa om smaee
GE oye eb ay yore
‘Ba chnone yest adhe
Peron aie 95 59
iL Ue tym: 6ana hoa, ym
‘gota’ ayers noms chat
oe Tyo tg t Suapedon
Soc Fi Soggy
Sty 125mg om
arth Stun sg non
Some Wey canrs,
cma tong
(ican ope ha
on ‘ana Capase
Ratan SOUL stig en
2 song ay meson 8
fom
on ain Merete Zi SS
Slomnoom ies | Sapuman retyan sng st 8
concen LS ome oy omy
ur a
a
ee
i. or
getPos
eae ene
Prencoeinerteernd
fant op 2 ems ina hay
‘tare: 500% 8 ty
ig ay magmas
SE Sena bettenst ot
ute 2099 Sen
(BALS"Famgita Smee
tense Sng! 10m retin
uSSporott cn Gray
at Fg oar amt oy
Seen aor)
avin a Coat 2809 fm Sy
ite ctr fay bd
Fovemcon Said oe
nas Sg & nen 9 acon
ava dng Cran toma asin
{Stray mamta enarns
‘Selb ton ame 29a thou
Saar ya Soni hoy
Anette ce ng ay
gt Ste 8 Stn Stu 2/
sour) 2 aa
ell 20m aca
Ag Ste 8 Stn St Sng
BUD ssa rn dty
AUD 2mm a Sy Secon,
(Seeger
Ch ame
US Saggy 2 ase dn pte
Somacon
atone Secu 2509 ton
Estrume Seam ingen
SU ong ny 6a er
re eco geey eae ge
Ls Snag iin nat as te
Seem
‘SSRIS nay er ap ong
‘Gita: eperay tcc chee
‘Bigot eng
horn Preapae Songe aeten
SORE pany ina duaed ss pte
RS Ser monn. 20409
“amen ong se can
EHS Si hn 2 tg Omg, 1525:
yen yma
yee enya
Ll
ng Sanson
eg om Ssenoon
—zExtrem Enc tng Tet
BUCS uy omg Py.
(Bet oben nade ne
‘Sita <2 yu omg nut
‘SALE 38cm en oy aes cae
‘Phconmentd zs bse Hy eat Medina 201642.
1 Pedan nap sh css kage ered Soe
‘8, MONITORING PROGRESS OF TREATMENT AND DISCHARGING PATIENT
‘The progess of teslment should be monitored 10 evaluate the success of the
treatment, the need for futher sural lnerention, ot detemine the naed to
change te abies. Among he signs of stsTatery progress areas flow
4: Improved oral intake.
2 Improved system (9. no epsodes of spiking temperature) and general conto.
4. Conroies pan.
44 Reduces eo tasve sweling
5. Improved mouth opeing
6, Reduces pus dcharge colecton
Itt patontis deemed ft or discharge based on he above observations, he patient
‘should be icharged wih ort antbiotis fo complete the doraon of ferapeutic
‘regime. Patients should be folowed upto ensure complet esolon of infection
WEEE 9. CONCLUSIONS
‘0! in children should be managed promptly based on adequate circa examination
And adographic investigation. Moderate to govere cases of AOI may require reer
land hospitalisation for futher management Adhering tothe proposed algonitun wal
ensure a systematic management lhe paint and timely reteal tothe spacial for
optimal eutcome.
GENE 10. INPLENENTING THE GUIDELINES
Its important to standardise the management of AOI at all heatneare levels in
'Maiaysa by using an evidence-based CPG in arder to manage RO! aporopriatly. A
Updated knowledge of appropiate management isthe key factor in a successtul
‘weatment outeome. The suzcossi teslment outcome i infusnced by factors Such
35 the ably of cinicans to diagnose AO! in chien. Taly and appropiate
‘management with thorough examination are also important factors influencing the
‘Success treatment oteome,
Fecitating and Limiting Factors
Existing facitatrs for appleation of he recommendations inthe OPG include
8) Wide dissemination othe CPG to heathcate profesional via printed
and electronic opis.
») Continuing protesiona edcation onthe management of AD fr heatncare
profesional
6) Widospreas of acts at primary care lve fr sereering and detection of AL
Existing bari or application ofthe recommendations ofthe CPG ino:
28) Poor understanding or tmted knowledge of AOI
) Insfcient resources in he management of A! particular at spacial care,
©) Variation in reatment practice and preerences.
LJ
Potential Resource Implications
‘Toimplement the CPG, there must be strong commitment to
42) Ensure widespread csrbuton ofthe CPG i heathare proessionals.
1) Reinforce training of heathcare proessionas to ensure updated information,
‘especial in ems of sreening at primary care lve and mutssciinary tam at
‘secondary care eve
«Ensure budget allocation as the cost impcaton onthe management of AO! in
<hlcren varies depending on several actors, such as sevety of the conaon,
Patient's age, the need for hospasaton and weatment under ganeral
“anaesthesia, Ea detection of th deease and appropiate management
‘wl rode the cost
Proposed Ciniel Ault naeators
“To assist inte implomentaton ofthe CPG, the folowing are proposed as clinical
act indicators fr quay management
REFERENCES
1 ddd PL, Sandor GK. Management of edontogeic orofacial fection nthe
young child. Ont Dont 1897 Oct: 748):30-49, 45.
2. Gregoire C, How are odontogenic infections best managed? J Can Dent Asse.
201076:16-116.
‘3. LinYT, Lu PW. Retrospective study of pdlaicfacal calls f odontogenic
‘otign, Pelt net Di J 2006 A254) 390-42
44. Mokhtar SM ang AbdulahN, Facial elite of odontogenic org in children.
Abstract. The Medea Journal of Malaysia, 2010 VOB ns.
5. Kuo.) Ln VT, Lin JYT. Odantogen clits in chicron requing hosptlzatin.
dowel of Dental Sciences. 2018 8 129-122.
{6 Thksurissy 8, Rains JT, Kumar AK, Evans E,Casamassino PS. Rapid
lteatmont reduces hospitalization for petri patents wth odontogenic based
colt
‘Amencan Jo Emergency Medline 2010;28.669-672.
7 Ken U, Facial Sweling and Odontogencifecons in: Chapin Bamans
Pedic Decision Making (Sh Editon). Esewar Inc: 201138:
‘8. Chamay . How do manage a patient wth extensive edertogeric infection
‘SGan Dont Asse 2014:60:015.
8. Heimdehi A, Yon Konow, Salo T, Nor CE. Cinea appearance of eoteial
Inlectens of agortogenic rig in relation to mobile tings
Jin, Mcobilogy.1985:22:290-202
10, Levreha A and Anon K. Celt skin infctins, Starship Chitren's Heath
CCinscal Guisotne. 2015: 16.
+1 Store W, Haug 8 Lich TT. The changing fae of adontogencInfectons
tounal of Oral & Maxitotadal Surgery 2001: 597): 739-748.
12, Squre BT, Fox JC, Anderson ©. Abscoss: Applies bedside sonography for
omverient evaluation of suporcial st issue intoctions. Acad Emorg Med.
2005: Vol 21760606,
+3. Yonetsu K, lumi M, Nakamura T. Deep asa intectons of odontogenic og
‘Amoncan Journal of Newevadology. 1998 Vt18123-128.
14, Panagiotis K Stelanopoules, Alexandros E. Kolokotons, The cial
“sgniicance of anaerobic bactrim acute ofan edontogenic infections.
REFERENCES
(Oral Surg Ora Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod, 2004:08308-408,
18, Roberson D and Smith A. The microbiology ofthe acute dora abscoss.
slouma of Media! Merebiology 200958 9195-162
16. Lewis MA, MacFarlane TW, McGowan DA. Amicobological and cial
review ofthe acuta dentoaiveoarsbacess Brot Ora Maniotac Sup. 1990,
Dec 28(6):259-66,
17. Fyn TR, Shai AM, Loi MH, Adar AK, Kraut RA TogorN. Severo
ontogencintctions, prt 1: prospective repo. Journal of Oral & Mailtacial
‘Surgery. 2008847): 1085-1109.
18, Hausor and Fogaras 8. Pritts and orl calls. Padtaiesn Review.
2orost242240
19, Kim 1K, Kim, Jang KS, Moon YS, Park SW. Orit abscess rom
an osontogenic infection, Oral Surg Oral Med Ora Paro ral Radiol Endo.
2007, 10336126.
20. Scot O. Orbital and presepa celts. Patent 201302543(128) 791-5.
alae rom: htp/patentifdocororbtal-andpresoptat colitis.
21, Joanne Cat & Frances Farman, Ophhaimology Referral Guidlines,
[NHS Oxtoashire. 2010; Vers; Pat-27
22. Royal Cldren’s Hosp, Melbourne, Ausvate, Cla! Practce Guldlne on
Pert! and Oral Caluit.
‘Aalale rom:htp:/nwacch org. aulsneatudeindexcim. Cited 25.10.2015
29. The Collegeof Oplomtsts. Cinisal management qudeines: Celis,
Preseptl and Orla. 2015:Veron 10: 291-9.
24, Huang TT, Liu TC eta, Deep neck infections: Analysis of 185 cases,
‘oad and Neck 2004: 26854 ~ 860.
25, NHS Leeesterstre Couny and Rutland, Primary Care Clits Pathway 2008
28. Cooge of Regstored Nurse of Brtsh Columbia. Pediatrie Clu. Remote
‘Nursing Conod races. CRNBC. Oct 20%4pu0766.
27. Powe J Clinical Review - Cela and enspeas. Published on 1.12. 20%
nips gpanine con’ clneatrevew-calults-eysipelasalere sorters!
Lurcara theralergisiartie 106149, Cited 20.9.2015.
af
REFERENCES
28. Ulubau ©, Jaunay T, Goss AN. Severe odontogenic infctns. Aust Dat J
2005; Suppl 2: $74-881
28, Vorghece ST, Hannalah AS. Acute pain managoment in hilren
J Pain Res. 2010 Ju 15;3:106-2,
30, Toms L, McQuay Hy, Deny S, Moore RA Single dave orl paracelame
(seetaminophen) or postoperative pan in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2008 Oc 8(4:C0004602. do 0. 1002/14651888 CD004602 pube
21, Panels! Pozo P, Bara. Soto MJ, Santa Eula ToistntainesE. Arbo
‘ropans in pasate odonology. update. Mad Ora Patol Oral Cr Bucal
12006 1:6952'7.
‘52 Rush DE, AbdehagN, Zhu JF. Aamar 8 Malan M. Cindamyein versus unasyn
Inthe weatmento ail elles of edontogeie origin ner
Cinical pela (Phila). 2007; 462): 1549.
£8, Unkel JH, Mekibben DM, Fenton Su, Naz MM, Mousi A, Sehut K: Comparison
of osontogenie and non odontogenie acl cats na pos hosp
population. Pact Dent 1997, 15()476-479.
‘4, Sandor GK, Low DE, Jud PL, Davidson Fu. Antimicrobial rezment options in
‘tha management of edoniogoric infections.
‘Jan Dont Aesoe. 1998 Jo Ag 63(7;509-14
35. Gime WC, Jacobus NV, Goebach SL Doku HC, Tally FPA prospective dobio-
‘ing evaluation of penn versus cindamyein in he weatment of edontogente
Infection. J Oral Maio‘ Surg. 1988; 46 1085.70.
26, Von Konow L, Kandel PA, Nord CE, Hedah A. Cindamycin versus
‘henoxymtypniciin inthe treatment of aut oolacial infections. Eur Cin
Merobil eet. D's 1992:1:112098.
‘57. MatjowéS1, Laz Z Kulié-Kapulca N, NonkovéZ Emplical antimerobil
‘therapy of acute dentoavslar abscess. Voinosant Pregl 2009 Ju66(7):544-50.
28, Achonazi Mf, Ashkenazi SJuccious use of antics in ntl pact,
FoluatlapohVenashinayin, 2004 Oot21/4)27-34, 94
a
REFERENCES
39, Kuriyama T, Karasawa T, Nakagawa K, Yamamoto E Nakamura S.lcdence of
‘lactamase preducton and antimicrobial suscep of anaerobic gram
negative rods isolated from pus specimens of eotacial odontogenic infections,
(ra! Miro Immunol 200716105.
40, iaz20 | Blandino G, Musume! R, Nicolet G, Lo Bue AM, Speciale A
‘Amtbscterial acti of moxioxacn agains peviodoral engerbic pabogens
Involved in ystemi inlectons In J Antimicrob Agents, 2002:20:451-6,
41, BraziorJ8, Hal V, Mots TE, Gal M, Dueréen BI. Arete suscoptbiies of
‘am postive anaerobic oo results of a sentinel syn England and Wes.
“JAnierob Chemoster 20093522268.
42, Banagian Perknvmatan Fama, Kementerian Kesntan. Malaysia Minty ot
Health Medicines Fomulary 2016. np:iwwa pharmacy goumyi/steseaut/
festéocumanuploadparal uth pindaan-22016-og0s-2016 pa!
48, Bonavides 8, Huynh D, Morgan J Approach tthe pasdat pescripion ina
community shamacy. J Pela Pharmac Ther 2011; Vl 16 Nb: 29807.
Appendix |
SEARCH STRATEGY
‘The allowing MeSH terms rr tet ems were wd ahr singy ori combination,
search was lito Engish, and human
Introduction and Epidemiology Diagnosis
heute daease + Diagnosis
“hnvecton| {Oral examination
“Mt * Medical Mistry Taking
Ortaca + Onhopantomosraphy
= Prevalence + Radiography
Epidemiology Panoramic
*petelesy Scrscan
Dena eares * Dental pulp tost
*Paesatics Cunt
‘incl presentations
+'Signs and symptoms
‘conus
Fever
Tan
Temas
*Oesema
Abscess
* Lodi’ Angina
‘CLINICAL QUESTIONS.
‘Te nical questions addressed by these guidlines areas flows:
1 What are the episemitogcal characterises of AOI?
2 What are te cna presentations of AO!?
53. How ta dlagnose a cid win AOI?
4. What are te inicatons for hospitalisation and fr reteral to Paediatic
Denia Specs?
5 What are incatons for eleal to ther media! species?
6. Management of A:
{2} hen shoud surgeal intervention for AO! be cated out?
What are the efoctive safe analgesics i be used in AOI?
} What are the elect safe antes tobe used in AOI?
7 What are he cra on howto assess AOI thats under contol and
fordschargng patent?
\CKNOULEDGEMENTS
‘The members ofthe development sroup of these guidelines would Ike to express their
rte and sppreciaon tothe folowing fer ei cantbtons
= Panal of external reviewers
“Technical Advisory Gorse for CPG for thir valabl input and feedback.
“Rt tase ho have contrite dct or indirect tothe doveiopment othe CPC,
“Patents who have consented forthe archiving of her nica photos
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
‘The panel members had completed disclosure forms. None eld shares in
‘dhamaosuical me or ats ae consultants to auc fms, (sta are avalible upon
equos fom tho CPG Secretaria).
SOURCE OF FUNDING
‘The development of the CPG on “MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE OROFACIAL
INFECTION OF ODONTOGENIC ORIGIN IN CHILDREN” wes supported trancialy
In ts ene by the inst of Heath Malesia and was developed without any
‘nwolvoment of the pharmaceuteal indus
‘Ora Heath Divison
Felon Goverment Offices Cte